<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981026.0365 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The death rate on the nation's roads fell to a record low last year, 
the government said on Monday, after re-calculating travel statistics. 
The total number of deaths changed hardly at all, but the death rate 
fell because of the relentless increase in traffic. Yet transportation 
experts said the traffic-death rate for the elderly is rising rapidly. 
A person older than 74 is more than twice as likely to die in a motor 
vehicle crash than a younger person, according to the National Safety 
Council, a nonprofit group sponsored mostly by the insurance industry. 
For most people, though, the risk of death or serious injury is falling. 
``There's a downward trend in all the categories,'' said Charles Hurley, 
a spokesman for the safety council. ``Fatal injuries become nonfatal, 
serious injuries become nonserious.'' Hurley said that accident rates 
usually rose during periods of economic expansion because prosperity 
stimulated more driving, but that the death rate per 100,000 people 
had been falling for the last three years because other factors were 
moving faster: an increase in seat belt use, a decline in drunken 
driving and an improvement in cars. Ricardo Martinez, administrator 
of the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, said the improvement 
came despite an increase in elderly drivers, who are more likely to 
be frail and to have trouble coping with traffic, and in teen-age 
drivers, who have high accident rates. The traffic safety agency, 
part of the Transportation Department, said there were 1.6 deaths 
per 100 million miles traveled, based on a higher estimate of total 
miles driven in 1997 than the agency had used this summer, when it 
said the death rate had not changed. The rate was 1.7 deaths per 100 
million miles traveled the year before. The 1997 figure is the lowest 
since the agency began keeping records 30 years ago. And the National 
Safety Council said on Monday that 16.1 traffic fatalities per 100,000 
people was also at a historic low, tying a record set in 1991. Even 
so, 41,967 people were killed by motor vehicles last year, including 
5,700 pedestrians and 700 bicycle riders. An additional 3.4 million 
people were injured in 2.2 million crashes. And 4.6 million crashes 
reported to police did not involve injury. The decline in deaths comes 
despite the loosening of the 55-mile-per-hour national speed limit 
11 years ago, and its elimination in 1995. Traffic congestion and 
total miles driven have gone up too, but that helps. ``Congestion 
has a positive effect on highway safety,'' Hurley said, ``because 
it drives speeds down.'' But he added that there would be more highway 
repair in the next few years, leading to new safety problems. According 
to the safety council, the number of motor-vehicle deaths per 100,000 
people is declining for all age groups except the elderly. The death 
rate for the elderly last year, measured against miles traveled, was 
just over double the rate for the population as a whole, 32.7 per 
100,000 population vs. 16.1 for all age groups. The rate for people 
75 and older is the highest since 1973. Martinez said that elderly 
people were more mobile than they used to be, but that they were much 
more fragile than other drivers. ``A side impact, with forces straight 
to pelvis and chest, can be devastating,'' said Martinez, a former 
emergency room physician. ``In a younger person wearing restraints 
in a serious crash, they may have some broken ribs, but with an elderly 
person, the chest being much more delicate, those same rib fractures 
can lead to problems with lungs, and eventually, a fatality.'' Transportation 
Secretary Rodney Slater said in a telephone interview that his department 
was looking into a number of remedies, including signs that are easier 
for older people to see. Asked whether states should be encouraged 
to re-test older drivers, Slater said: ``There is probably the need 
for all of us to have refresher courses in some way. If that occurs, 
I think it would be much better to do it across the board rather than 
to single out older drivers.'' Slater added that the budget Congress 
passed last week had a 10 percent increase for highway safety programs. 
Martinez said that the issue of screening older drivers to test their 
road competence was extremely sensitive, but that safety officials 
should frame the question differently. ``Screening for fit-to-drive 
is no different from screening for cancers or heart disease,'' he 
said. ``We have to make sure it's safe.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>