<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981026.0443 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Every day in courts across the country, witnesses take the stand in 
exchange for favorable treatment from prosecutors. Some people call 
them informers. Prosecutors call them essential. So it was a jolt 
to law-enforcement officials across the country when a three-judge 
federal appeals court ruled this summer that federal prosecutors could 
no longer use the testimony of witnesses, possibly facing criminal 
charges, who had been promised leniency. Promises of favorable treatment, 
the court said, violated the federal law prohibiting bribery. The 
decision, which some lawyers say may be the first successful challenge 
under the federal bribery law to the practice of offering witnesses 
leniency, a centerpiece of the legal system since Colonial times, 
has triggered an unprecedented national examination in the courts, 
in Congress and among legal scholars. Since the ruling, which is now 
under review by the full federal appeals court in Denver, courts in 
virtually every state have been asked to bar leniency deals, bills 
have been introduced in Congress to negate the effect of the panel's 
decision and legal scholars have been debating whether prosecutors 
have grown too reliant on the use of informers. ``In the culture of 
this country, nobody likes a snitch, yet that has become the crux 
of the criminal justice system,'' said Steven Zeidman, a professor 
of criminal law at New York University Law School. ``But nobody likes 
to think about it, and now we're being forced to think about it.'' 
The federal bribery law says that ``whoever'' offers ``anything of 
value to any person'' for testimony commits a crime. In its July 1 
ruling, the three-judge panel said that ``whoever'' includes federal 
prosecutors. ``The judicial process is tainted and justice cheapened 
when factual testimony is purchased, whether with leniency or money,'' 
the panel said in a drug case that began here. Within days, the ruling 
was annulled by the full 12-member 10th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals, 
in Denver, which decided it should review a decision with such far-reaching 
consequences. The full court is to hear the case next month. In its 
original ruling, the three-judge panel ordered a new trial for the 
defendant, Sonya Singleton, a 25-year-old mother of two children. 
At her trial in 1997 on charges of being involved in a drug conspiracy 
and money-laundering, she was identified as part of a drug distribution 
scheme by a Wichita cocaine dealer, who was then given a reduced sentence 
in exchange for his testimony. Until the full appeals court decided 
to review the case, the ruling was binding on all the federal courts 
in the six states of the 10th Circuit: Colorado, Kansas, New Mexico, 
Oklahoma, Utah and Wyoming. But because circuit courts are second 
in importance only to the Supreme Court, the ruling was seen as damaging 
to prosecutors nationally. In legal papers, the Justice Department 
said the decision by the three-judge panel to ``make a criminal out 
of nearly every federal prosecutor'' was an ``absurd result.'' Justice 
Department officials here and in Washington, who are working together 
on the appeal because of its national importance, declined to be interviewed. 
But in their legal filings, they say the panel's ruling could cripple 
prosecutors. During the short time it was in effect, the ruling ``caused 
chaos in the District Courts and U.S. attorney's offices in this circuit 
and significant disruption throughout the rest of the country,'' the 
Justice Department filing says. Justice Department lawyers said, for 
example, that the ruling paralyzed organized crime prosecutions because 
it was unclear whether prosecutors could rely on the testimony of 
crucial cooperating witnesses. Defense lawyers said the ruling was 
far from absurd and exposed a flaw in the American justice system 
that had been ignored too long. In an interview here, Ms. Singleton's 
lawyer, John Wachtel, said prosecutors everywhere had perverted the 
justice system by offering leniency to criminals so they could win 
cases, even against innocent people. In a telephone interview from 
a federal prison in Texas, Ms. Singleton said it was unfair that prosecutors 
had a tool as potent as freedom to offer witnesses. ``Who wouldn't 
testify against somebody,'' she said, ``even if it's a lie, just so 
they can go home?'' She says she is innocent; she is serving a four-year 
term while she appeals her conviction. The National Association of 
Criminal Defense Lawyers has filed a friend-of-the-court brief urging 
the court to support Ms. Singleton's appeal. And defense lawyers from 
coast to coast said that no topic had received more attention this 
fall than the Singleton ruling. Although the Singleton case deals 
only with federal prosecutors, defense lawyers have begun to file 
similar challenges in many states that have bribery statutes with 
provisions similar to the federal law. Wachtel said that if the full 
appeals court reversed the panel's decision, he would ask the Supreme 
Court to review the case. Some legal experts say that whatever the 
merits of the argument in the Singleton case, the panel's original 
ruling would tie the legal system in knots because prosecutors use 
offers of leniency so frequently. If the ruling is affirmed, said 
Roscoe Howard Jr., a professor of criminal law at the University of 
Kansas School of Law, ``the system would grind to a halt.'' Howard, 
a former federal prosecutor, said that without leniency offers, defendants 
would have no incentive to cooperate and prosecutors would be forced 
to try every case. ``If a government attorney can't make these sorts 
of deals,'' Howard said, ``physically I don't think our court system 
could handle the number of trials that would come through.'' Some 
judges across the country have been hostile to the panel's ruling. 
Since it was published on July 1, at least 16 federal courts have 
published opinions after defense lawyers asked judges to bar the testimony 
of cooperating witnesses. Of those, 13 of the judges said the panel's 
decision was a flawed challenge to a fundamental legal rule. Many 
other judges are thought to have made similar rulings informally. 
In some cases, the rulings expressed fury or amazement that a court 
would jeopardize so fundamental a tool. Judge Frederic Smalkin of 
U.S. District Court in Maryland called the panel's ruling ``amazingly 
unsound, not to mention nonsensical.'' Several judges have noted that 
in the 50-year history of the federal bribery law, no one had apparently 
suggested that prosecutors were violating the law by offering witnesses 
leniency. Several judges have also said that deals with cooperating 
witnesses were standard practice beginning before the Revolutionary 
War. In a ruling rejecting a defense request to bar a witness' testimony, 
Judge Federico Moreno of the federal court in Florida said, ``The 
holding of the Singleton panel would dangerously disable the government's 
investigatory and prosecutorial powers.'' But some federal judges 
have said that their job is to interpret the law, not create it. Congress, 
said judges in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., and Knoxville, Tenn., did not 
exclude prosecutors when it drew up the bribery law. Prosecutors, 
therefore, must be covered by the law, they ruled. Some judges have 
said that promising a defendant a reduced sentence, no matter how 
common, could encourage false testimony. ``Regardless of the good 
faith of the individual prosecutor,'' said District Court Judge Ginger 
Berrigan of Louisiana, ``any inducement is as much if not more a temptation 
to fabricate than it is to tell the truth.'' Wachtel said it was to 
be expected that some judges would be resistant to a new idea. Judges, 
he said, seem trapped in a ``Well, come on, we've been doing it forever'' 
approach. But he said major legal changes had often come from a single 
case, like the 1966 Miranda decision, which declared that all criminal 
defendants must be informed of their rights. Wachtel, 53, said he 
did not know of an earlier case in which a defense lawyer had claimed 
that a leniency deal was a violation of the federal bribery law. In 
the Singleton case, he said, the idea occurred to him as he struggled 
to defend his client against the testimony of a cocaine dealer, Napoleon 
Douglas. Douglas had been a friend of Ms. Singleton's boyfriend, who 
was also charged in a drug distribution scheme that prosecutors called 
one of the biggest in Kansas. Wachtel, a trial lawyer in one of Wichita's 
biggest law firms, was appointed to defend Ms. Singleton because she 
could not afford to hire her own lawyer. While he was working on the 
case, he said, he came across an article written by a California lawyer 
who said that it was unfair that prosecutors could offer incentives 
to witnesses but defense lawyers could not. When the trial of Ms. 
Singleton began last year, Wachtel unsuccessfully raised the issue 
of the bribery statute with the federal judge in Wichita, Frank Theis. 
From the bench, Theis issued an eight-word ruling: ``This statute 
does not apply to the government.'' Ms. Singleton was convicted and 
sent to prison. Wachtel appealed and again raised the issue of the 
bribery statute. The three-judge panel assigned to hear the case included 
the chief judge of the appeals court, Stephanie Seymour, appointed 
by President Carter, and two judges appointed by Presidents Reagan 
and Bush, David Ebel and Paul Kelly Jr. Some legal experts say the 
three-judge panel may not have fully examined the practical consequences 
of its ruling. Because the issue had not been faced by other judges, 
the panel members may have considered the case almost in scholarly 
terms, these experts say. But, faced with anxious prosecutors, federal 
district judges across the country have been forced to confront the 
consequences of such a ruling. In a densely worded 18-page opinion, 
the panel examined precedents as far back as the Magna Carta, which 
imposed limits on the exercise of sovereign power. The law prohibiting 
``whoever'' from offering a witness anything of value in exchange 
for testimony should apply, the judges said, to prosecutors as well 
as to everyone else. ``Decency, security and liberty alike,'' the 
panel said, ``demand that government officials shall be subject to 
the same rules of conduct that are commands to the citizen.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>