<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981026.0386 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
New York voters are growing increasingly critical of the caustic tone 
of the campaign for Senate, but the daily rounds of attacks between 
Sen. Alfonse D'Amato and Rep. Charles Schumer have yet to sway significant 
numbers of them, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News poll. 
The Republican senator and his Democratic challenger are each favored 
by 44 percent of likely voters, according to the poll, which was taken 
from Oct. 21 through Oct. 25. That is essentially the same finding 
as in the last Times/CBS News poll of three weeks ago. Ten percent 
of voters remain undecided. If there is consensus on anything, it 
is that the race between a nationallyknown three-term senator and 
a congressman from Brooklyn _ which has been dominated by D'Amato's 
criticism of Schumer's congressional attendance rating and Schumer's 
daily attacks on his rival's credibility _ has been extraordinarily 
negative. Voters said the candidates were spending far more time attacking 
each other than explaining what they would do in Washington. A growing 
number of voters believe that the race is harsher than the one in 
1992, when D'Amato defeated Robert Abrams in a race that many New 
York politicians still consider the benchmark for negative campaigns 
in the state over the last decade. And voters are more likely to blame 
D'Amato for the harsh tenor of this year's race, saying that D'Amato 
was spending more time attacking than explaining what he was going 
to do, and that he was more likely than Schumer to be unfair in his 
attacks. Nonetheless, given that this and almost every other public 
opinion poll since the Sept. 15 primary have found the race to be 
a statistical tie, the attacks are almost certain to continue in the 
final week, and could intensify. Victory for either Schumer or D'Amato 
now turns largely on the decision of the 10 percent of undecided voters 
who, the poll suggests, have not paid much attention to the contests 
until now and do not have particularly firm opinions of either Schumer 
or D'Amato. As a rule of thumb, undecided voters make up their minds 
in the final week of the campaign, when they first begin paying attention 
to the advertisements and newspaper coverage of the contest. The poll 
also suggests how important turnout will be in determining the outcome. 
That calculation is clearly influencing all the plans being laid by 
D'Amato and Schumer this week, from Schumer's decision to campaign 
with Hillary Rodham Clinton on Tuesday and President Clinton on Friday, 
to D'Amato's energetic schedule which will take him into a region 
where his support is strong: upstate New York. The poll suggests one 
possible opening for Schumer in the days ahead. By 46 percent to 36 
percent, voters said they would prefer having Schumer rather than 
D'Amato sitting in judgment on Clinton should there be a Senate trial 
on the charges that grew out of Clinton's relationship with Monica 
Lewinsky. Nearly half of all New Yorkers think the congressional inquiry 
into Clinton should be dropped. Schumer has said he would oppose removing 
Clinton from office, while D'Amato has declined to offer an opinion. 
The poll found Schumer doing significantly better among one segment 
of the electorate that has drawn attention from both candidates in 
recent weeks _ 58 percent of Jewish voters said they favored him. 
Nonetheless, D'Amato, who has made a strong effort to align himself 
with issues of concern to Jewish voters, drew 38 percent in this poll. 
In the last two elections, D'Amato received about 40 percent of the 
Jewish vote. The Times/CBS News poll was based on telephone interviews 
with 1,235 registered voters across New York state, conducted from 
Oct. 21 through Oct. 25. It has a margin of sampling error of plus 
or minus 3 percentage points. For all the noise of the last six weeks, 
the unceasing attacks have not produced clear dividends for either 
D'Amato or Schumer, though that will probably change in the final 
days, as undecided voters start making their decisions. In terms of 
their standing in the polls, Schumer and D'Amato remain where they 
were three weeks ago. Neither of them has seen the kind of sharp increases 
in unfavorable rating that normally accompany these kinds of negative 
campaigns. D'Amato's remained unchanged from three weeks ago, at 37 
percent, evidence that most New Yorkers' views of the 18-year incumbent 
are fairly well set. The number of voters who view Schumer unfavorably 
has edged up slightly over the past three weeks, from 18 percent to 
23 percent. But that is a relatively small increase considering the 
intensity with which D'Amato has been attacking Schumer literally 
from the night the Brooklyn Democrat won the nomination. D'Amato has 
certainly managed to capture the public's attention with his single 
line of attack on Schumer this month: that Schumer repeatedly skipped 
votes in Washington. Eighty-four percent of those polled had heard 
of the attack; 27 percent said they were bothered ``a lot'' by Schumer's 
absences, and 34 percent said they were bothered ``some.'' But again, 
it is unclear if, or how much, this line of attack is hurting Schumer: 
59 percent of respondents called the charge ``politics as usual,'' 
compared to 21 percent who viewed it as a serious issue. And half 
of those polled said Schumer worked hard in Congress. Political analysts 
from both parties said D'Amato and Schumer were equally responsible 
for the harsh tone of this race. Schumer, for example, ends his television 
advertisements with the tag line, ``Too many lies for too long.'' 
But voters clearly see D`Amato as running the more negative campaign: 
73 percent of those polled said he was spending more time attacking 
his opponent than explaining what he would do in Congress, an extraordinarily 
high figure. Only 12 percent said he was spending more time explaining. 
By contrast, 54 percent said Schumer was spending more time attacking, 
compared with 21 percent explaining. There was no sign that D'Amato 
was suffering politically because of that. Indeed, D'Amato's advisers 
have long argued that there is no political price to pay for running 
hard-edged campaigns. By a slight margin, 49 percent to 43 percent, 
voters agreed with another central contention of Schumer, that D'Amato 
has been in office too long. That is theme that frequently works against 
incumbents who have been in office for a long time _ D'Amato was elected 
in 1980 _ and it is a point that Schumer is expected to hit with increased 
intensity in the week ahead. The poll showed continued geographical 
differences in how the candidates were doing. D'Amato was running 
more strongly in the suburbs than he was three weeks ago: he now leads 
Schumer by 51 percent to 39 percent, compared with 46 percent to 41 
percent three weeks. Schumer continued to dominate in New York City, 
by a margin of 66 percent to 23 percent, while D'Amato led upstate, 
48 percent to 34 percent. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>