<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981026.0203 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Arne H.W. Larsson's last billion heart beats have made him a medical 
marvel, a pioneer in one of the great triumphs of cardiology and electronic 
engineering. Forty years ago this month, Larsson, now 83, became the 
world's first recipient of an implanted cardiac pacemaker, a battery 
powered device that electrically stimulated and regulated his dangerous 
heart rhythms. Since then, Larsson has undergone 25 operations and 
procedures to replace pacemakers that failed for one reason or another. 
Over those four decades, pacemakers have become smaller, smarter, 
safer, more durable and versatile. And implanting the device no longer 
requires chest surgery. Today, pacemakers function as microcomputers, 
detecting their own malfunctions, and they are designed in different 
sizes and forms to suit each patient. Many, like the one Larsson uses, 
``pace'' only one of the heart's four chambers. But newer models can 
pace two heart chambers. The costs range from $5,000 to $11,000, depending 
on the complexity of the model. More than two million people, about 
half in the United States, from newborns to centenarians, now use 
pacemakers. For many, like Larsson, they have been lifesavers. I met 
Larsson and his wife, Else-Marie, in 1973, when he came for a checkup 
at a hospital in Stockholm and renewed their acquaintance during their 
recent visit to New York. Larsson, who looks much the same, has sold 
his engineering business yet remains active and often strolls along 
Stockholm's rocky shore. As a frequent traveler, he often speaks out 
about how pacemaker users can lead normal lives. ``I forget I have 
a pacemaker,'' he said. In 1958, though, things were far different. 
Scarring from a viral infection had disrupted the normal electrical 
circuit that links the heart's chambers, and Larsson's heart could 
no longer contract synchronously. This problem led to potentially 
fatal fainting spells, known as Stokes-Adams attacks. During some 
periods, he had to be resuscitated 20 to 30 times a day. For six months, 
he was confined to bed at a Stockholm hospital, where he was given 
every drug and therapy known. Nothing worked. In 1958, only a few 
temporary pacemakers existed. But they were large, stationary machines. 
Once patients were hooked up, their worlds shrank to the distance 
covered by rolling tables and extension cords. Plus, they were prone 
to life-threatening infections along the wires that protruded through 
the skin. At the time, Dr. Ake Senning, a heart surgeon, and Dr. Rune 
Elmquist, an engineer at Elema-Schonander electronics company, were 
trying to use then-new silicone transistors to build a pacemaker that 
could be implanted in the body. Senning did not consider the experimental 
device ready for human use. But with each fainting spell, Mrs. Larsson 
pleaded, ``Make one.'' Senning and D Elmquist rigged a device about 
the size of a thin hockey puck, and Senning cut open Larsson's chest 
to implant it. Eight hours later, it failed. In the middle of the 
night, Larsson went back to the operating room where Senning put in 
the only backup. The batteries had to be recharged every few hours, 
but the pacemaker worked, on and off, for three years. ``He was lucky 
that he had few attacks when the pacemaker didn't work,'' Dr. Olof 
K. Edhag, a pacemaker expert who was one of Larsson's doctors, said 
in a recent interview in Stockholm. Of Larsson's 26 pacemakers, the 
most durable lasted more than six years, from October 1982 to January 
1989. Larsson's current pacemaker is a Pacesetter model implanted 
in 1996 and made by a Swedish division of St. Jude Medical in St. 
Paul, which recently brought Larsson on a promotional tour of the 
United States. Pacemakers did not gain general acceptance in the United 
States until the mid-1960s. Dr. Victor Parsonnet, an American pioneer 
in pacemakers at Newark Beth Israel Medical Center, recalled those 
days in an interview, ``In the first 10 years, we were up all night 
and weekends constantly operating to fix broken wires, leaking batteries, 
exploding pacemakers, runaway devices, you name it.'' Little by little, 
though, the technology improved. ``Wires don't break much anymore,'' 
Parsonnet said. ``We never see a leak and almost never see electronic 
failure. It is a different world.'' But pacemakers still have risks. 
Serious infections occur in about one in 200 cases, usually through 
contamination during implantation. About one in every thousand recipients 
die. An estimated 10 percent of the pacemakers implanted each year 
must be removed because of infection, product failures or recalls. 
Removal is risky, even with new laser devices, because the pacemaker 
tip usually is imbedded in scar tissue and can easily tear the heart 
as it is pulled out, Parsonnet and Edhag said. Household devices like 
microwaves and electric blankets generally do not interfere with pacemakers, 
but cellular telephones using new frequencies can reduce pacemaker 
reliability, according to the American Heart Association. Edhag, Parsonnet 
and other experts said they advise pacemaker users not to carry a 
cellular phone in the breast pocket over the device and to hold the 
phone over the ear farthest from the pacemaker. The Food and Drug 
Administration said last month that in the past 10 years it had received 
44 reports of metal detectors at airports and anti-theft systems at 
many supermarkets, shopping malls and libraries interfering with the 
routine function of pacemakers. The federal agency said that doctors 
should warn pacemaker users to be aware that many detectors are hidden 
in entrances and exits, to keep a distance from them, and to ask security 
personnel to use hand held scanners for only brief times or use other 
forms of search. Developing a pacemaker was long a medical dream. 
In 1889, for example, Dr. John McWilliam in Aberdeen, Scotland, suggested 
in the British Medical Journal that repeated electrical stimulation 
might be used to maintain the heart rhythm in patients with too slow 
a heart beat. But practical devices had to await development of transistors 
and modern electronics. In implanting a pacemaker, an insulated wire 
from the device is threaded through a vein into a heart chamber. Stronger 
wires now enable most pacemakers to be implanted beneath the skin 
below the collar bone. Some women prefer the pacemaker to be implanted 
beneath the breast against the rib cage, although such placement can 
interfere with mammograms. Today pacemakers can be implanted under 
local anesthesia by a trained doctor, not necessarily a surgeon. The 
earliest pacemakers were powered by mercury-zinc and rechargeable 
nickel-cadmium batteries. They often failed sooner than expected, 
leading to the emergency replacement procedures that kept Parsonnet 
and others operating at all hours. Some users died because of battery 
failure. So the development in 1972 of long-lasting lithium batteries 
was a boon. Now pacemakers can last from 2 to 10 years, depending 
on type, and can be monitored by telephone for battery failure and 
other glitches. Developing a way to prevent leakage of body fluids 
into the pacemaker was another crucial advance in 1972. About 10 years 
ago, manufacturers introduced another major product change: pacemakers 
that could sense the variable patterns of the heart's electrical system 
and adjust to many body demands. Newer models can automatically provide 
for a slower heart rate at rest. Now dual chamber pacemakers are used 
in treating a common abnormal heart rhythm known as atrial fibrillation. 
Studies are under way to determine whether the devices can also prevent 
that condition or moderate the symptoms of heart failure. In still 
another advance, pacemakers are being combined in one unit with other 
devices such as defibrillators. In the past, patients used two separate 
devices. The bewildering array of advances has greatly complicated 
the task of caring for patients with pacemakers. Cardiologists have 
formed subspecialty groups focusing on pacemakers. ``Pacemakers began 
as appliances,'' said Parsonnet, ``but they are becoming fully automated 
machines.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>