<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981026.0250 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Last May, climatologists noted an abrupt cooling of the water in the 
tropical Pacific Ocean, clearly signaling the end of last year's infamous 
El Nino and the beginning of this year's La Nina, the latest swing 
of the planet's climatic pendulum. They predicted correctly that the 
hurricane season that officially ends Nov. 30 would be much worse 
than last year's. Hurricane Bonnie, which sent tens of thousands packing 
when it swept across the Carolina shores in late August, proved them 
right, as did Georges, which ravaged parts of the Caribbean and the 
Gulf Coast of the United States a few weeks later. But while many 
vacations were ruined by the onset of La Nina, it looks as though 
many others will be blessed, if the long-term forecasts of climatologists 
prove reliable. New England and the northern Rockies may see more 
snow this winter: good news for skiers. The Gulf Coast and Florida 
are likely to be warmer and drier than usual: just what snowbirds 
are seeking. And some enthusiasts are expecting ``epic'' surf in Hawaii. 
California, however, is less likely this year to see the large, storm-driven 
waves that caused spectacular erosion on beaches and cliffs last year. 
Although even the increasingly reliable long-term forecasts cannot 
say exactly where and when a big blizzard, drought, deluge or heat 
wave will happen, anybody whose vacation plans are at the mercy of 
the weather may well wonder what La Nina has in store for the next 
several months. Ocean temperatures in the equatorial Pacific oscillate 
over the years, with El Nino characterized by unusually warm temperatures 
and La Nina by unusually cool temperatures. The intensity of the swings 
varies. But whichever way the pendulum swings, the effects are felt 
worldwide. In the United States, temperatures during El Nino years 
are warmer than usual in the north central states and cooler than 
usual in the southeast and southwest; during a La Nina year, winter 
temperatures are warmer than usual in the southeast and cooler than 
usual in the northwest and northeast, according to the National Oceanic 
and Atmospheric Administration. The La Nina episode that began abruptly 
last May is expected to strengthen during the rest of 1998, and to 
linger into March, April or May, according to the latest forecasts. 
But experts say that the effects of an extreme La Nina are harder 
to predict than those of El Nino, and that the wintertime effects 
are not likely to be as strongly felt. Jerry Levey, a trader at Natsource, 
a company that sells a kind of weather insurance to big companies, 
said that in recent weeks the market has been betting that the winter 
will not be as severe as previously expected. But in broad brushstrokes, 
here is what Dr. Gerry Bell, research meteorologist at the National 
Weather Service's climate prediction center, sees for the southern 
states: ``a drier, warmer and less stormy winter due to the effects 
of La Nina through the spring.'' ``Texas, New Mexico and Oklahoma 
will likely be drier and warmer,'' he said. ``Georgia and Florida 
will also likely be drier and warmer. Louisiana, Mississippi and Alabama 
will likely be warmer, but near normal precipitation is expected during 
the months of January, February and March. Arkansas and Tennessee 
will likely be wetter and warmer.'' His colleague Anthony Barnston 
said that the northeastern United States, by contrast, can expect 
a normal to slightly colder and wetter than average winter this year. 
``It represents a major change from the very mild winter experienced 
last year in association with the strong El Nino,'' he said. ``What 
we're looking at with La Nina is a tilt of the odds toward a colder 
winter in the Northeast with more snow and perhaps bigger storms than 
usual.'' Diane Konrady, a spokeswoman for the Vermont Department of 
Tourism, has her fingers crossed: ``The ski areas are aware of that, 
and of course they are hoping that wetter and colder means more snow 
_ that would be great for us.'' The weather is also likely to be cooler 
than usual in the northwest, the forecasters say. ``Deeper snowpack 
is likely this winter in the Northwest, from the Cascades to the northern 
Rockies,'' said Charles F. Kennel, director of the Scripps Institution 
of Oceanography in San Diego. Overseas, while northern Australia and 
Indonesia are prone to drought during El Nino, they are typically 
wetter than usual during La Nina. Monsoon floods are more likely in 
India. While travelers can't do much if the weather takes a turn for 
the worse, major tourism industries are now finding that they can. 
Futures traders will sell to amusement parks, airlines and the like 
what financiers call weather hedging, a form of insurance that helps 
them shed the risk of an event like a nasty La Nina winter. ``Commercial 
airlines can lose huge amounts of money when there is substantial 
snow or freezing rain,'' said Jerry Levey, a trader for Natsource 
Inc., a brokerage firm that sells the weather options. And what is 
the market betting? ``Four months ago the market was working on a 
perception that La Nina would be prevalent and we would experience 
a very heavy winter,'' he said. ``Over the past two or three weeks 
or month, you have seen a marked deviation, that there may not be 
such a heavy winter as expected.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>