<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981026.0205 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As anyone who has tried to quit smoking knows, it is much easier to 
get off an addictive drug than to stay off it. That applies to virtually 
all addicts and all types of addictions, whether to alcohol, cocaine, 
heroin, nicotine or amphetamines. Long after the drug is cleared from 
the body, it retains a powerful hold on the mind, and despite weeks, 
months or sometimes even years of abstinence, cravings can linger 
or suddenly make a shattering comeback. The usual, devastating, consequence 
is relapse. ``Prolonged drug use changes the brain in fundamental 
and lasting ways,'' said Dr. Alan Leshner, Director of the National 
Institute on Drug Abuse. Those long-term effects are not well understood, 
Leshner said, and learning more about them might lead to new treatments 
that offer lasting help to addicts. Help is certainly needed: The 
institute estimates that 4 million Americans are drug addicts, including 
2 to 3 million hooked on cocaine and 800,000 on heroin. Millions more, 
though not addicted, use illegal drugs, and 14 million are alcoholics. 
Compared with people who have other mental or physical disorders, 
addicts have few treatments to choose from. No drug treatment is available 
for cocaine addiction. Methadone helps some heroin addicts, but by 
no means all, and two other drugs are useful in only a minority of 
alcoholics. In recent years, much addiction research has focused on 
the reinforcing, or pleasure-producing properties of drugs, which 
have been traced to their ability to flood certain parts of the brain 
with dopamine, a substance that nerve cells use to communicate with 
each other. But even though the rise and fall of dopamine can alter 
brain cells in ways that contribute to craving, researchers do not 
think those alterations explain all the long-term mental effects of 
drug abuse. And there has been no payoff in terms of treatment, in 
part because the dopamine system is so fundamental to so many types 
of pleasure that tampering with it to treat addiction might take all 
the joy out of life. As a result, the emphasis in addiction research 
has begun to shift, to move beyond the dopamine pleasure centers to 
other systems in the brain. ``We've learned a lot about reinforcement,'' 
said Dr. Eric J. Nestler, an addiction researcher at Yale University. 
``But there are other aspects to an addict's life also, having to 
do with memory and conditioning. Maybe the time is ripe to examine 
those.'' Some changes in the brains of addicts resemble changes that 
take place in healthy people when certain types of memories are formed. 
In some cases, Nestler's research has shown, those changes even include 
alterations in the functioning of genes. Dr. Alcino Silva, who studies 
memory at the University of California at Los Angeles, said, ``Addiction 
may hijack natural systems used for learning and memory.'' Addiction 
researchers have begun to pay particular attention to ``emotional 
memories,'' which, as the name suggests, are the mental records of 
events that aroused intense emotions, either wonderful or terrible. 
``Emotional memories are very powerful, and they're the ones that 
remain with you the longest,'' said Dr. Jonathan Pollock, a program 
officer at the institute. ``You remember where you were when Kennedy 
was assassinated or the Challenger disaster happened. You remember 
very pleasurable events in your life, like your wedding or the first 
time you got an A in school.'' The intensity of the moment helps to 
burn emotional memories into brain circuits. The memories are encoded 
into a part of the brain that operates outside conscious control, 
and they seem to take on a life of their own, sometimes intruding 
on the mind when they are not wanted. When emotional memories are 
reactivated, touched off perhaps by a smell, a taste, a snatch of 
music, the sight of an old friend or some other signal that a person 
might not even be consciously aware of, they can evoke the same powerful 
emotions that helped form them. Many addiction researchers believe 
memories of being high on drugs fall into this category of emotional 
memories, and contribute to craving, compulsion and relapse. Although 
a relapse can occur for no apparent reason, many addicts say that 
cravings are brought on by cues or reminders of past drug use, like 
seeing a needle or crack pipe or visiting a place where they used 
to get high. Stress can also rekindle cravings. So, in many people, 
can just one hit of an addicting drug, even after a long abstinence. 
The obsessive thoughts that follow, Leshner said, are ``the very definition 
of an emotional memory.'' Last month, Pollock invited 15 researchers 
to the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md., to discuss 
the possible role of emotional memory in addiction. He said it was 
the first time that experts on addiction and experts on memory had 
been brought together, and at the start of the meeting Leshner gave 
the scientists a firm agenda: ``What I'm worried about is compulsion. 
I only care about compulsion.'' Much of the interest in emotional 
memory stems from studies by Dr. Joseph LeDoux, a researcher at New 
York University. Working with rats that have been trained by means 
of electrical shocks to fear a certain sound _ a response that qualifies 
as an emotional memory _ he has found that emotional memories are 
formed in the amygdala, an almond-shaped structure deep within the 
brain. The job of the amygdala, LeDoux said, is to react instantly 
when it detects a danger signal _ the sound, in the case of the rats 
_ sending out messages that prepare the body for fight or flight and 
that create a state of fear. The human amygdala works in much the 
same way. It reacts in a few thousandths of a second, independent 
of the cortex of the brain, which means that people may respond to 
cues that they are not consciously aware of. Although LeDoux has worked 
mainly on fear, that is not all the amygdala mediates. It includes 
13 areas, called nuclei, only two of which are known to be involved 
in fear. The other areas may process other types of emotional memory. 
``The amygdala is showing up in a lot of addiction studies,'' LeDoux 
said. When addicts who say they are in the throes of a craving are 
given brain scans, the images suggest that the amygdala is involved, 
according to studies by Dr. Hans Breiter, of the Massachusetts General 
Hospital, and Dr. Annarose Childress, of the University of Pennsylvania 
in Philadelphia. Other researchers, working with animals, have also 
found that the amygdala is important in responding to cues associated 
with rewards like cocaine and food. Dr. Barry Everitt, a psychology 
professor at the University of Cambridge in England, said that an 
``amazing property'' of stimulant drugs like cocaine and amphetamines 
is that they stimulate exceptionally powerful responses to cues that 
have been associated with them. ``They amplify the control of behavior 
by environmental events,'' Everitt said. Dr. Michaela Gallagher, of 
the Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, suggested that drug abuse 
may also affect the cortex of the brain, inhibiting a region that 
would normally help keep the amygdala in check. That, she said, might 
make the amygdala extra responsive to all sorts of environmental cues, 
including those associated with drugs. Other factors may also give 
cues more power to evoke emotional memories, according to research 
by Dr. Jane Stewart, of Concordia University in Montreal. One is stress, 
which increases levels in the brain of a hormone called CRF, or corticotropin 
releasing factor, that may act on the amygdala. ``Dr. Stewart and 
her colleagues are showing that CRF, released during stress, causes 
anxiety,'' Leshner said. ``Maybe CRF released during abstinence exaggerates 
anxiety in addicts. We're going to look at things that block CRF, 
to see if that will help. We haven't tried it in humans yet, but it 
has been done in animals. It looks good to me, and we're in negotiations 
with a pharmaceutical company about it, and we'll run clinical trials.'' 
Ultimately, Leshner said, he expected that treatment of addiction 
would combine behavioral therapy and drugs that combat craving and 
compulsion. Addicts may not be able to control their cravings, but 
therapy may teach them to control the way they respond to them. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>