<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981026.0378 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A panel of international arms experts on Monday adopted American scientific 
evidence indicating that Iraq had loaded some its missiles with a 
deadly nerve gas known as VX. But their report, to the Security Council, 
was inconclusive because it also left unchallenged French and Swiss 
tests that had far different conclusions. The Swiss who examined samples 
of Iraqi weapons in the summer said they found no evidence of poison 
gas. French scientists asserted that their tests of other samples 
showed only the possibility of a presence of poison gas in some Iraqi 
missiles. What the three countries agreed on was that at some point 
the Iraqis used detergents to wash missile fragments retrieved from 
Iraqi desert dumps, leading to suspicion Baghdad had something to 
hide. Because the report is indecisive, it is doubtful it will determine 
policy decisions on Iraq, particularly considering the heavy political 
atmosphere concerning Iraqi sanctions at the United Nations. The report 
highlights the dispute between French and American scientists on the 
methods and interpretation of the findings. French scientists said 
they found what could be traces of VX or two other deadly gases, Sarin 
or Soman. But they also said those traces could be due to detergents 
used to cleanse the missiles. The United States said its scientists 
proved beyond any doubt the existence of traces of the VX nerve gas 
in the first samples examined in May. The United States also conducted 
a second set of tests later that did not find VX; that test was ordered 
after Iraq challenged that first test conducted in a military laboratory 
in Aberdeen, Maryland. So of the four tests conducted only one was 
assertive in making the charges. Iraq charged that the United States, 
which led the gulf war to evict Iraqi troops from Kuwait in 1991, 
was biased. That led to the tests in France and Switzerland. The 21 
scientists drawn from seven countries who met here last Thursday and 
Friday sidestepped the issue of which tests are to be taken into account, 
asserting in Monday's report that `'all analytical data provided by 
the three laboratories were again considered as conclusive and valid.'' 
The report was commissioned by the U.N. Special Commission, charged 
with insuring the destruction of Baghdad's weapons. Iraq has admitted 
making a variety of chemical and biological weapons, but did not fire 
them during the gulf war and continues to insist it did not load the 
VX odorless nerve gas onto missiles. UNSCOM is interested to know 
if Iraq has hidden any missiles that may be loaded with VX, stressing 
that Iraq has still a great deal of explaining to do before it can 
be given a clean bill of health. One of the explanations needed is 
why detergents were used at all in the missiles which were then destroyed 
and buried by Iraq until they were unearthed by inspectors. ''The 
existence of VX degradation products conflicts with Iraq's declarations 
that the unilaterally destroyed special warheads had never been filled 
with any chemical weapons agents,'' the report said. Although most 
members of the organization doubt that Iraq has ever told the truth 
about its weapons of mass destruction, many here believe that it has 
gone a long way in destroying them and that some of the sanctions 
should be lifted or eased in recognition of this effort over eight 
years. In a vote highlighting widening opposition to the United States 
and its frequent use of sanctions such as those imposed on Iraq, Cuba, 
Libya and other countries, the U.N. General Assembly adopted a resolution 
calling for the repeal of unilateral laws which affect the economies 
and businesses of other countries. The resolution is non-binding, 
but it echoes a similar vote that called for an end to sanctions against 
Cuba two weeks ago. Monday's appeal was endorsed by 80 countries from 
the 185 nations, with 67 abstentions. As with the Cuban vote, only 
the United States and Israel voted against. Some Western diplomats 
here who spoke on condition of anonymity have suggested that France 
may have held back on some of the findings in order not to fan the 
flames for continued sanctions against Iraq, although French officials 
categorically deny doing so. Diplomats here said that it is not in 
dispute that Iraq had weapons of mass destruction, nor that it lied 
about this to the world community. Iraq suspended armed inspections 
by U.N. inspectors in August. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>