<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981026.0418 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A marathon negotiating session in the National Basketball Association's 
labor dispute produced some signs of progress Monday toward a belated 
start to the season. ``There has been some minor progress,'' said 
one participant in the meeting, who spoke midway through the negotiating 
session on condition of anonymity. ``But it's unclear whether we're 
going anywhere or not on the major issues.'' About 20 members of the 
union, including the players' association president, Patrick Ewing, 
and 12 other players, met with NBA commissioner David Stern, deputy 
commissioner Russ Granik and 10 other representatives from the league. 
During a session one participant called the most productive talks 
since the lockout began July 1, the sides gathered at a midtown hotel 
in negotiations that continued into the night. The meeting came one 
day before the league's labor relations committee was scheduled to 
meet in Manhattan to discuss the stalemate that has led to the cancellation 
of the first two weeks of the season. Barring a major compromise that 
would lead to the signing of a new collective bargaining agreement, 
the NBA is planning to announce more cancellations Wednesday or Thursday. 
Before Monday night, there had been no substantive negotiations since 
Oct. 13. But Stern and Granik met with the union's chief negotiators, 
the executive director Billy Hunter and Ewing, for three and one half 
hours on Saturday. The second meeting in three days is indicative 
of the growing concern over lost games and the potential for losing 
the entire season should the dispute continue. Whether the negotiating 
session represents the first step in hammering out an agreement remains 
to be seen. But the fact that both sides were talking for more than 
six hours produced some rare optimism. The chances that Stern and 
Granik would bring proposals to the nine-member ownership committee 
Tuesday seemed to grow as the session continued. But before 9 o'clock 
Monday night, neither side had agreed on a concept to bring salaries 
in line with revenues. Both sides have indicated flexibility on many 
of the key economic issues that have held up previous negotiations, 
including a salary cap without exceptions. There was also discussion 
about the feasibility of a tax system, a mechanism that has been bandied 
about by both sides in prior proposals. The owners want cost certainty, 
while the players have maintained that they want to keep their right 
to earn as much as they can through a clause known as the Larry Bird 
exception. Modifications to the clause were discussed. Also, another 
participant in the meeting said, both sides have talked openly about 
raising the minimum salary for veterans with 10 or more years of experience 
to above $750,000. The minimum salary last season was $272,500, a 
figure that 20 percent of players had to settle for after many of 
the upper-echelon salaries were doled out. Aside from the Larry Bird 
exception, the players were adamant about improving the salaries for 
middle-class players. ``You can say there is actually movement, although 
the day is not at its conclusion,'' said the participant in the meeting. 
``It's not clear whether the two sides appear to be in a back-and-forth 
session that may result a deal. But you could say this was at the 
least minor progress.'' Besides Ewing, union vice presidents Herb 
Williams, Jim McIlvaine, Mitch Richmond and Dikembe Mutombo attended 
the meeting, as did Steve Smith, Antonio Davis, Danny Schayes, Sam 
Mitchell, Ray Allen and Michael Curry. Wednesday's meeting of the 
NBA board of governors could be a key date in the negotiation process. 
Hunter said he had invited all 400-plus members of his union to attend 
the talks, which will also include owners and ownership representatives 
from the league's 29 teams. A total of 240 players convened in Las 
Vegas last Thursday to proclaim that they would not accept a hard 
salary cap under any terms and that they planned to make whatever 
provisions necessary for a long and bitter fight with the owners, 
if need be. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>