<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981026.0433 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Another season, another $20 million loss for Major League Soccer. 
The average attendance dropped by 304 from last season's 14,616, and 
the television ratings were less than 1 point in 12 ABC telecasts. 
The league did have some bright spots _ including the success of the 
Chicago Fire, the expansion team that won the championship on Sunday. 
But hurting the progress of MLS is the MetroStars, the New York-New 
Jersey franchise that has become a lackluster anchor for the league. 
The MetroStars have failed to get beyond the first round of the playoffs 
in three years, and their attendance has declined by 30 percent since 
the first year. On top of all that, the franchise has endured repeated 
changes in coaches and players. ``Not a day goes by without thinking 
how much more successful the league would be with the MetroStars doing 
better,'' said Hank Steinbrecher, the secretary general of the United 
States Soccer Federation. ``Everybody in the country is rooting for 
them to do better because they know what it means to the league.'' 
Commissioner Doug Logan said: ``A lot of how this league is perceived 
is how the MetroStars are perceived. The opportunity in New York is 
huge, and it hasn't been explored. The political connections in northern 
New Jersey are good, but not enough to sustain the team at the level 
we want to.'' League officials have been so disappointed at the MetroStars' 
efforts that some have tried to persuade John Kluge and Stuart Subotnick 
of Metromedia, the team's investor operators, to restructure the team's 
front office, especially its marketing. But despite the MetroStars' 
troubles, MLS and Metromedia are planning to add another franchise 
in the metropolitan area as early as 2000, one that might play at 
Shea Stadium. But the league's more immediate concern is the MetroStars. 
Subotnick, who is more involved than Kluge in the operation of the 
team, says he has every intention of keeping Charlie Stillitano in 
charge of all soccer matters like coaches and players. Stillitano 
has been the team's vice president and general manager since its first 
day, and Subotnick recently offered him a five-year contract extension. 
Stillitano will soon announce the signing of Bora Milutinovic, who 
last month became the team's fifth coach, to continue on the job for 
the next two years. And Stillitano is also looking at ways to improve 
the caliber of players. Logan said the management committee is encouraging 
the MetroStars to make next season their last at Giants Stadium, where 
it costs $95,000 to open the stadium for a game. He said the league 
is completing plans to build stadiums specifically for soccer in northern 
New Jersey and in Los Angeles, the way Columbus is building a stadium 
strictly for soccer that will be ready for next season. As far as 
another team in the area, Logan said, ``There will be a second team 
in New York between the year 2000 and 2002.'' Metromedia has the option 
of operating a second local team, and Stillitano said Kluge and Subotnick 
have told him that they will do so. If not, Metromedia can sell the 
rights to the team for a huge profit in today's market. For example, 
the Los Angeles Galaxy, whose investor operators paid $5 million to 
have a team, was sold for $26 million last week to Philip F. Anschutz, 
a Denver billionaire who also owns the Chicago and Colorado franchises. 
Logan added that he had told the mayor's office that MLS would prefer 
that the second team play at Shea Stadium, but that he had received 
no word from city hall regarding the proposal. Stillitano was reluctant 
to talk in detail about Metromedia's venture into New York. ``All 
I will say at this point is that we're trying to establish ourselves 
in northern New Jersey before we venture into New York,'' he said. 
A team in New York would make Metromedia the third investor operator 
to own more than one team in the single-entity league. Along with 
Anschutz, Lamar Hunt and his two sons own the Columbus Crew and the 
Kansas City Wizards. STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS 
Stillitano said he has met with Kluge and Subotnick about Metromedia's 
option for a second team in the area and about ways to improve the 
MetroStars. Among their decisions, Stillitano said, is to sign Milutinovic 
for at least two years. ``One of the things we've also talked about 
is buying a couple of impact players,'' Stillitano said. ``That's 
what separates us from the league's top teams. We have a good nucleus 
of young players, but not impact players like Nowak and Etcheverry,'' 
he said, referring to Chicago's Peter Nowak and Washington's Marco 
Etcheverry. Nowak assisted on both Chicago goals in the 2-0 victory 
over D.C. United and was named most valuable player in Sunday's championship 
game at the Rose Bowl before a crowd of 51,350. ``We're behind the 
league's top teams, the LAs and DCs,'' Stillitano said. ``We need 
to improve, and the way to do that is by getting a few stars that 
will have an impact. Except for Donadoni, we haven't had that.'' Roberto 
Donadoni of Italy left after two seasons, and the MetroStars and the 
league failed to fill his void. Tab Ramos was supposed to take over 
for Donadoni as the team's midfield general, but knee surgery and 
duty with the United States national team limited his effectiveness 
in the league. ``Maybe one of our young players will be an impact 
player,'' Stillitano said. ``Bora is delighted at some of our young 
players.'' He mentioned Brian Kelly, Billy Walsh, Ramiro Corrales, 
Mike Petke, Mike Duhaney, Miles Joseph and Tim Howard. ``But along 
with the young players, we need a good mix of veterans.'' Reducing 
the number of foreign players on each team to four from five is one 
of the changes the league has adopted for next season. Sunil Gulati, 
the league's deputy commissioner, said the change will make it difficult 
to add new foreigners, but it is good for the league. ``We've noticed 
that Americans are as good as the fifth foreigner on most teams,'' 
Gulati said. ``Most teams have four foreigners, anyway, so the reduction 
will not have an effect on the quality of the game.'' The league's 
caliber of play improved a great deal this season because of the signing 
of higher-quality foreign players, especially by Chicago. The league 
also showed that four or five of its teams are much better than the 
rest, which is common in leagues around the world. What MLS wants 
is for the MetroStars to become one of those elite teams. As Lee Stern, 
who owned the Chicago Sting of the defunct the North American Soccer 
League, put it, ``You need a successful team in New York because everybody 
uses that as a barometer.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>