<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981026.0079 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The morning of the 1997 New York City Marathon, Jerod Neas jumped 
in a car with his parents in Princeton, N.J., drove to Staten Island 
and hopped out at the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge for a 26.2-mile commute 
through the city's five boroughs. At 5 feet 9 inches and 130 pounds, 
Neas could not muscle his way up toward the elite runners on the bridge. 
It seemed as if he were fighting to get on a crowded subway train. 
So he started 15 or 20 rows back and found himself sprinting to cover 
the first mile in 5 minutes 40 seconds. After two miles, he was already 
fading into the rearview mirror of the lead pack. ``I was running 
as fast as I could,'' the 27-year-old Neas recalled. ``It's a tough 
thing to deal with.'' The best he could hope for was to find someone 
else running the same pace and willing to work together. Neas kept 
at it, and between Miles 23 and 24, when the race entered the hills 
of Central Park, he passed the favored American, Mark Coogan, who 
had been an Olympian a year earlier in Atlanta but was now drained 
and fading. Reaching the finish line in 2 hours 19 minutes 7 seconds, 
Neas finished 15th over all and first among the Americans. But there 
are few things as obscure as being first among the Americans in an 
international marathon. Neas finished nearly 11 minutes behind the 
winner, John Kagwe of Kenya. He was so little known that there was 
even confusion about his nationality. Was he American or French? By 
the time reporters caught up to him, Neas had already returned home 
to Princeton. ``The field wasn't packed with Americans,'' Neas said. 
``I was more pleased with where I finished than being the first American.'' 
On Sunday, he will return for a fourth shot at New York, hoping to 
lower his time and raise his place in the standing. Neas knows he 
cannot win, but he hopes that incremental improvement now might lead 
to a breakthrough later. He is following a solitary, unorthodox plan 
toward making the United States team for the 2000 Summer Olympics 
in Sydney, Australia. Even among American runners, Neas remains in 
the shadows, a virtual unknown. He ranks in the second half of the 
second tier of American marathoners, with a personal best of 2:16:20. 
That is 10 minutes off the world record of 2:06:05 held by Ronaldo 
da Costa of Brazil and nearly eight minutes short of the American 
record of 2:08:47 set by Bob Kempainen. Neas largely avoids the road-racing 
circuit, has no coach and does no track work. He is committed to marathons, 
six or seven a year, when most elite runners compete in only two. 
In 1996, Neas ran nine marathons because he needed the prize money 
to make ends meet. On Oct. 4, he ran the Twin Cities Marathon in Minneapolis 
(he finished sixth). New York will follow four weeks later. If he 
is going to put in all this mileage, about 120 miles a week, if he 
is going to run this hard and this fast, he figures it might as well 
be in a race. But this kind of racing regimen is likely to leave him 
watching the Olympics on television instead of in person. So Neas 
plans to reduce his races next year as he aims toward the Olympic 
trials in 2000. Eight months ago, a vitamin company began endorsing 
him, picking up his expenses. And for a year now, he has lived in 
the Denver suburbs, training in the mile-high altitude, hoping to 
increase his oxygen-carrying capacity. His wife, Julie, a controller 
for a building company, has moved to the Rockies with him, willing 
to make adjustments in her career for his. His Olympic chances are 
remote but not impossible. American marathoning is in a deep funk. 
Kempainen has retired to become a doctor, and his successors, Coogan, 
Keith Brantly and Jerry Lawson, have not converted potential into 
achievement. ``I think 10 guys have a legitimate shot if they can 
bring down their times and run more consistently,'' Neas said. In 
New York, Neas will receive no special treatment, except a chance 
to start nearer the front and a shot to win $5,000 as the first local 
runner. The race offers $100,000 to an American winner, double the 
prize money, but officials are reluctant to pay appearance fees for 
what has become repeated failure. An American man has not won in New 
York since Alberto Salazar in 1982. ``We welcome Americans, but we're 
not going to pay someone $10,000 in appearance money to run 2:20,'' 
said Allan Steinfeld, the race director. Neas said he understood. 
``I don't think we've earned very much respect,'' Neas said. ``It's 
got to be earned.'' He began running as a high school junior, when 
his family moved to Princeton from Clearwater, Fla. He ran in college 
at Penn and then at North Carolina, where Neas received a degree in 
1994. After school, he bunked at home, lived race to race, getting 
by on meager prize money and determined to live the lonely life of 
the long-distance runner. ``I just love getting out in nature and 
running,'' Neas said. ``If you don't do well, you don't have anyone 
to blame but yourself. It has nothing to do with luck. Usually, the 
best runner wins. What makes it great is that it's so difficult.'' 
In 1995, he ran his first marathon, in Atlantic City. He had planned 
to run a half-marathon, but prize money was offered only for first 
place, and Kagwe was entered in the shorter race, so Neas decided 
he had better run a full marathon. He did, and won in 2:19. Four weeks 
later, he entered New York, emboldened with victory, but he hit the 
wall at Mile 15 and struggled home in 2:27. ``That taught me never 
to be cocky going into a marathon,'' Neas said. His sister, Kiele, 
an investment banker, and his father, Harold, a certified public accountant, 
have run marathons, inspired by his own running. But his mother, Donna, 
said she thought the idea was crazy and feared that her son would 
``fall into a shamble of bones'' by the age of 32. Still, he runs, 
chasing an Olympic dream. ``New York is an opportunity to run with 
the best in the world, to compare where you really are,'' Neas said. 
``It's like an Olympic race. Everyone who is anyone runs New York 
eventually. It brings me back to reality, keeps me honest.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>