<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981026.0358 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For several years, Mattson Technology Inc. in Fremont, Calif., embodied 
the Silicon Valley dream. Sales tripled from one year to the next. 
When the company's stock was first sold to the public in 1994, about 
a dozen executives became millionaires. One year the company took 
all employees and their families to Lake Tahoe, Nev., for a Christmas 
vacation. But this year, the Christmas party will probably be potluck. 
Mattson's sales have dropped in half from their peak last year. One 
round of layoffs at the 400-person company has occurred and another 
is in the works. And the company's stock, which traded above $16 in 
July 1997, has fallen to $5.375, making employee stock options worthless. 
Mattson's travails come from across the sea. Two thirds of its sales 
_ it makes million-dollar machines used in manufacturing computer 
chips _ are to semiconductor factories in Asia, which have cut back 
sharply on their spending in the face of Asia's economic crisis. ``It's 
like a faucet,'' said Brad Mattson, the company's president. ``They 
just turned off the spigot.'' Mattson is perhaps an extreme case but 
it is not alone. Silicon Valley, the nation's cauldron of innovation, 
has suddenly been hit by a one-two punch from forces originating thousands 
of miles away. The Asian economic crisis, which began in July 1997, 
has slowed exports, causing a cascade of layoffs. And the stock market 
volatility has battered technology company shares, making it harder 
for young companies to raise money and crimping the spending of workers 
whose sense of wealth is tied to the stock options that are considered 
a birthright in Silicon Valley. The double blow has tempered the exuberance 
of a region that has witnessed an explosion of growth, prosperity 
and extravagance in the last few years, a region in which 20-something 
Internet millionaires routinely plunked down cash for fancy cars and 
near $1 million even for a relatively plain three-bedroom house. ``Panic 
has not yet set in, but reality has,'' said Paul Saffo, an analyst 
at the Institute for the Future, a Silicon Valley research center. 
The same forces are at work elsewhere, of course, but few parts of 
the country are as tied to both Asia and the stock market as is this 
area south of San Francisco. And fewer are more important to the nation's 
competitiveness. So far, the damage has been slight. The unemployment 
rate in Santa Clara County, which encompasses San Jose and much of 
Silicon Valley, has climbed in recent months but was still an enviable 
3.7 percent in September, well below the 6.9 percent rate experienced 
in 1992 after cutbacks among military contractors. The expensive restaurants 
that have sprung up amidst the burger joints near Stanford University 
are still bustling. But million-dollar homes are no longer selling 
at the same frenzied pace and vacancies are starting to grow in the 
office real estate market. The electronics and computer industries 
ranked first and second nationwide in terms of the number of job cuts 
announced this year, according to Challenger, Gray &AMP; Christmas, 
a Chicago-based outplacement firm. ``There is this noticeable crispness 
in the air, and not just because it's fall,'' said Betsy Collard, 
director of strategic development at the Career Action Center in Cupertino, 
Calif., which counsels those seeking new jobs. The Milken Institute, 
a nonprofit economic research organization in Santa Monica, Calif., 
forecasts that the San Jose area could experience a recession if the 
Asian crisis takes a turn for the worse. San Jose surged ahead of 
New York and Detroit in the last few years to become the largest exporter 
among metropolitan areas, and nearly half of those exports go to East 
Asia, according to the Milken report. No American city is as dependent 
on Asian exports for income as is San Jose. But the impacts of the 
Asian crisis vary greatly. The biggest has been on companies that, 
like Mattson, make the machinery used to manufacture chips. Applied 
Materials, the giant of this business, has cut about one quarter of 
its work force, or 4,000 jobs, this year. Companies that make the 
chips themselves are also ailing, not only because of Asia's slump 
but because of its previous boom, when companies there built so many 
factories they caused a glut that depressed semiconductor prices. 
The semiconductor business is known for its steep up and down cycles. 
But, ``I've been in the business since 1957 and this is the worst 
one,'' said Alfred Stein, chief executive of VLSI Technology in San 
Jose. Though some chip companies and analysts see signs of an upturn, 
the pain is not over yet. The LSI Logic Corp., in Milpitas, Calif., 
recently announced a 17 percent reduction in its work force. Still, 
some economists say the impact of the Asian crisis has not been as 
big as expected. For California as a whole, increased exports to Canada, 
Mexico and Europe have helped offset a decline in shipments to Asia. 
Another tempering factor is that the biggest job growth now comes 
not from silicon chip manufacturing, the business that gave the region 
its nickname, but from smaller companies in newer fields like the 
Internet and computer software, which have less exposure to Asia. 
``I don't feel we've been affected one bit by the economic turmoil,'' 
said Alex Kaplinsky, managing partner of the local office of USWeb, 
a company that designs Internet software for corporate clients. The 
26-year-old Kaplinsky, who recently paid cash for a Porsche, a Lexus 
and a house, said his office has 27 job openings. But jobs in the 
Internet economy are not always available to those from the silicon 
economy. ``I know so little about their industry that it's a difficult 
transfer,'' said Art Hall, 50, who was laid off in June from Novellus 
Systems, a semiconductor equipment manufacturer in San Jose. Even 
if small companies escape the direct effects of the Asian crisis, 
however, they are still being hit by the stock market downturn, which 
makes it harder to raise capital. Despite a strong rally in the last 
two weeks, an index of 275 technology stocks maintained by Hambrecht 
&AMP; Quist, a San Francisco investment bank, is down 14.2 percent 
from its high in July, compared with an 9.7 percent fall for the Dow 
Jones industrial average. USWeb's stock has fallen to $14.50, from 
a high of more than $38 in April. The flow of initial public stock 
offerings has ground to a halt, with dozens either postponed or canceled. 
In September, only one high technology company went public, versus 
about 10 a month in June and July, said Jim Davidson, manager of technology 
investment banking at Hambrecht &AMP; Quist. There has been none so 
far in October, though the recent market rally might change that. 
Initial offerings provide the rewards to venture capitalists and other 
early investors in companies _ and to employees, who put in back-breaking 
hours in hopes their stock will be worth a bundle when the company 
goes public. If that outlet is closed for long, the money flow can 
back up because lower rates of return can discourage future investing 
in initial offerings and thus less money for venture capitalists. 
So far, the breakfast tables at restaurants favored by the venture 
capital crowd, like the rustic Buck's in Woodside and the upscale 
Il Fornaio in Palo Alto, are still buzzing. One morning recently, 
Ben Rosen, a New York venture capitalist, was having four back-to-back 
breakfast meetings at Il Fornaio with companies seeking investment. 
Venture capitalists are now flush with cash and have a long time frame 
for their investments. Still, they acknowledge, a slumping market 
has a psychological effect, making them less willing to finance marginal 
ventures. Even solid companies will get less money than they would 
have a few months ago. ``Anyone with an Internet idea could get funding, 
and I think that's going to start to change,'' said Vinod Khosla, 
a partner at the venture capital firm Kleiner Perkins Caufield &AMP; 
Byers. Some empty office buildings are starting to appear in a region 
that has had one of the lowest vacancy rates in the nation, about 
4 percent by one estimate. Take the four-building Baytech business 
park in San Jose, built last year. It was first leased by Cisco Systems, 
a telecommunications equipment supplier, which turned out not to need 
the space. Then Applied Materials leased it, but ran into the Asian 
crisis. Now Applied is trying to sublease the never-occupied buildings. 
Several retailers of cars and jewelry said they had seen no softening 
of sales so far. But at Mattson Technology and elsewhere, employees 
who now cannot count on stock options to boost their incomes are postponing 
purchases of big items. Barak Kassar, 31, marketing director for Wink 
Communications, was shopping for a home he hoped to buy partly with 
proceeds from his company's initial public stock offering. But Wink, 
which makes interactive television technology, has put off its offering, 
and Kassar has stopped his house-hunting for now. ``It just may be 
a few months longer,'' he said. Six months ago, the housing market 
was manic. ``Even for houses up to $5 million, there were sometimes 
two or three offers _ unbelievable,'' said Wendy McPherson, manager 
of the Menlo Park office of Coldwell Banker, a real estate brokerage. 
Homes often sold for tens of thousands of dollars more than the asking 
price. Lower-paid workers had to move as far as two hours away from 
their work places to find affordable housing. Now, ``we're not getting 
10 offers on a house anymore,'' Ms. McPherson said, tooling her Mercedes 
past a three-bedroom ranch home with a narrow yard that is listed 
for $939,000 and had not sold in three weeks. Her office sold only 
two or three million-dollar homes in the last month, down from 10 
or 12 a month earlier this year. The median home price in Santa Clara 
County dropped 1.8 percent from August to September, to $366,550, 
according to the California Association of Realtors. Still, home prices 
are up a whopping 11.8 percent from a year ago. ``This is heaven still,'' 
Ms. McPherson said. ``We've lost our perspective over the last 20 
months.'' For now then, Silicon Valley's slowdown is only in comparison 
to the frenetic _ and unsustainable _ pace of the last few years. 
Many people here maintain an abiding faith in technology and their 
future prosperity. At a recent meeting on the region's future held 
by the Churchill Club, a public affairs forum, the theme was ``Buy, 
Sell or Hold?'' In a show of hands, only a smattering of people in 
the audience chose ``Sell.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>