<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981026.0266 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When she arrived here seven years ago from Kenya, looking for a coach 
and a manager, searching for someone to take her seriously as a runner, 
Tegla Loroupe found that sexism traveled without a passport. The man 
who would become her coach joked to another runner, ``Is this your 
girlfriend?'' He had never trained men and women in the same group. 
Women can be difficult to manage, he told her. What if romance interfered 
with running? ``I am a Christian,'' Loroupe replied. ``I will not 
play around. I want to show that I am able to run.'' For two weeks, 
she cleaned house for other runners from Kenya and Tanzania, cooked 
for them and washed their clothes. She was 18 and did not want to 
make trouble. She trained on her own in the farm country of western 
Germany, looping through the hardwood forests and the fields of hay 
and corn and sugar beets. ``I was fearing they might send me home,'' 
she said. After two weeks, it became apparent to Loroupe that she 
was considered more of a maid than an athlete. When a runner demanded 
that she wash his clothes, she refused. ``You left your wife at home; 
there are no wives here,'' Loroupe said. ``We are all athletes. Wash 
your own clothes.'' It was the same refusal to capitulate that had 
carried her from the village of Kapsait in western Kenya, where, like 
the other women of the Pokot ethnic group, she was expected to live 
a life of domestic servitude. Her father wanted her to work in the 
house and in the fields of the family farm. She would marry early 
and have children. He objected to her becoming a runner and did not 
even want her to attend school. But her mother had grown up as an 
orphan and taught Loroupe the value of independence. One of her aunts 
told her never to be caught crying in front of men. Her older sister, 
Albina, told her that if you don't own something of your own, like 
property, men will not respect you. ``I thought, one day I would have 
something unusual, something different from other women,'' Loroupe 
said. And she would. Last April 19, in Rotterdam, the Netherlands, 
Loroupe set a women's world record in the marathon with a time of 
2 hours 20 minutes 47 seconds. On Sunday, she will attempt to win 
her third New York City Marathon after taking back-to-back titles 
in 1994 and 1995. This year she could earn as much as $500,000, an 
extraordinary amount for a woman from a country where women are often 
treated like chattel. She has bought a farm in Kenya and several houses 
that she rents to others; she wants eventually to return home to start 
her own business. Her sister's admonition lingers. If you own something, 
men will have to respect you. Loroupe, 25, has joined the vanguard 
of African women who are dominating the sporting landscape now that 
they are being given chances similar to those given African men. Derartu 
Tulu of Ethiopia won the 10,000 meters at the 1992 Olympics in Barcelona, 
Spain. Fatuma Roba of Ethiopia won the 1996 Olympic marathon in Atlanta, 
while Chioma Ajunwa of Nigeria won the long jump. Two weeks ago, Loroupe's 
roommate and training partner, Joyce Chepchumba of Kenya, made up 
a 19-second gap in one late mile to win the Chicago Marathon. ``No 
one was expecting women from Africa to be the best in the world at 
something,'' Loroupe said. At 5 feet, and a listed weight of 88 pounds, 
which seems extravagant, Loroupe appears almost frail and birdlike. 
A year ago, her career seemed threatened by a serious back injury 
after a disappointing seventh-place finish in New York. And her world 
record has caused controversy because she was paced by two men. Still, 
she has succeeded by the sheer force of her will, by running through 
cultural stop signs, by ignoring what had been prohibited and scorned. 
``I look at her, and she's this tiny, tiny thing,'' said Anne Roberts, 
who coordinates the elite runners at the New York City Marathon and 
who has become a second mother to Loroupe. ``But on the inside, she's 
Muhammad Ali in terms of strength and guts and purpose.'' Loroupe 
lives the ascetic life of a runner in a rural village on the outskirts 
of Detmold. Four Kenyan women share a modest house; Loroupe shares 
a bedroom with Chepchumba and has decorated her corner with stuffed 
animals and photographs. The living room is a sort of trainer's room, 
with an exercise bike and a massage table. There is time for shopping, 
visiting and even helping the neighbors bring in the hay crop, but 
mostly it is an austere life of eating, sleeping and training. For 
about two months a year, Loroupe returns to Kenya. After New York, 
she said, she will meet with President Daniel arap Moi to receive 
an award for breaking the world record. But Kenya for her is not a 
place for running. She could not find a reliable coach there, she 
said. She feuded with the Kenyan track and field federation over its 
treatment of her and other women, and she overexerted herself at home, 
training three times a day with men. ``It was too much for me,'' she 
said. ``I got exhausted before competitions.'' Another problem is 
her popularity. There is little time for training when she is home 
_ too many people to see, places to visit, business matters to attend 
to. She is also concerned about contracting parasites from the food 
or water, and about rising crime, fearing that because people know 
she has money, they might try to take it away. Twice she has been 
attacked while on long runs, she said, once by a man carrying a knife. 
So she remains in Germany, coached and managed by Volker Wagner, 48, 
a pleasantly rumpled high school mathematics teacher who lives with 
his parents. He has long coached runners from Africa, and Loroupe 
said that, despite that first crude joke, she was drawn to him by 
the professional way that he treated his athletes. Unlike many Kenyan 
athletes who have been exploited by managers, Loroupe said she has 
set her relationship with Wagner on an equal footing. ``The manager 
works for you; you don't work for the manager,'' she said. Recently, 
Wagner said, Loroupe lent him money to buy a house where other Kenyan 
runners are staying. ``There is something inside that drives her,'' 
he said of her running. ``It's like she is on a mission.'' It is a 
career built on a foundation of resistance. Her father, Loroupe Losiwa, 
wanted his daughter to live a traditional life in a patriarchal society. 
From the beginning, Tegla said, she defied this subjugation. ``I did 
not want to get married,'' she said. She sneaked off to school before 
breakfast, so that no one could question where she was going. To her 
father, she said: ``I have two arms and legs and I came out of the 
same stomach as my brothers. Why can't we do the same things?'' At 
the age of 12 she was sent to boarding school in the nearest town, 
Kapenguria. There was one caveat. She could not be a runner. She was 
a promising mathematics student, and her father wanted her to concentrate 
on her studies. For six months, she stopped running. But school officials 
insisted that sports were important. She faced a punishment of having 
to run around the school track on her knees, or even expulsion, she 
said. So she relented. As she became a national high school champion 
at middle distances and cross-country, her father began to see the 
value of running, she said. ``He said it was better that I was very 
hardheaded,'' Loroupe said. ``He could have spoiled my talent. Now 
he's glad I didn't listen to him.'' After high school, Loroupe took 
college accounting classes and became an auditor for the Kenyan postal 
service. In December 1991, the postal service gave her permission 
to travel to Germany to train. Even now, seven years later, she still 
nominally represents the postal service and receives her auditor's 
salary. By 1994 she was ready to run her first marathon, in New York. 
Taking Roberts' advice not to start too quickly, Loroupe won. She 
won again in 1995. Running 26.2 miles did not seem so difficult, considering 
she had spent much of her childhood hauling loads of firewood and 
corn and younger siblings on her back for hours at a time. ``African 
women know how to live with pain,'' Loroupe said. ``When it comes 
time to struggle, they don't quit. They keep going.'' A marathon is 
no certain thing, however, and her career grew erratic. Her sister 
Albina, a guiding force in her life, died before the 1995 New York 
City Marathon. Then Loroupe suffered anemia and faded to seventh in 
New York in 1996. A year ago, she finished seventh again, bothered 
this time by menstrual cramps and back problems. Wagner began to hear 
criticism from other coaches and managers that Loroupe was wearing 
her body down by running too many races. Several days after the 1997 
race, she was treated by Dr. Lewis Maharam, a sports medicine expert 
in Manhattan, and was found to have two serious stress fractures on 
her spine. She was advised not to run for four months and not to attempt 
a marathon for eight months. If she continued to run without treatment, 
Maharam said at the time, Loroupe risked paralysis. She was fitted 
with a back brace that was to be worn 23 hours a day. Because it was 
difficult to tell whether the stress fractures were new or were healing, 
Maharam requested that Loroupe return to New York in four weeks for 
further tests. Three weeks later, however, German doctors cleared 
Loroupe to begin training again. They found no stress fractures, Wagner 
said. Saying that the back brace impinged on a nerve and sent pain 
down her leg, Loroupe quit using it. She ran another marathon last 
January, finishing seventh in Osaka, Japan. By April, though, she 
had rehabilitated her back to the point that she set the world record 
in Rotterdam. Maharam said in an interview and in a February letter 
to one of Loroupe's German doctors that, upon further examination 
of Loroupe, he believed she had suffered a chronic back problem from 
childhood that was aggravated by a fall during the 1996 Boston Marathon. 
The injury was nearly healed by the time of the 1997 New York City 
Marathon, he wrote, adding, ``She is quite lucky no serious harm came 
to her while running on this serious lesion.'' ``She's come so far 
because she's worked hard,'' Maharam said in an interview. ``If someone 
was not as focused on rehab as she was, they might not have come back 
this quickly.'' Loroupe's world record was front-page news in The 
Nation, Kenya's largest newspaper. ``She has inspired lots of other 
women, given them the feeling that, `If this sister can do it, I can 
do it,''' said Joseph Olweny, an assistant sports editor of The Nation. 
Judith Masai, a Kenyan woman who now lives in the Netherlands, said: 
``She gives us a different story. Instead of just getting married, 
you can develop.'' Not everyone was so jubilant about the record, 
though. Some runners thought it unfair that Loroupe was paced the 
entire way by two Kenyan men. (Ingrid Kristiansen of Norway, whose 
1985 record Loroupe broke by 19 seconds, was paced to the halfway 
point of her run.) Loroupe's defense was, men are paced, so why not 
women? The pacers were needed almost like bodyguards, she said, because 
male runners gather around the leading female runner during a marathon, 
hoping to get on television, and they tend to jostle her and clip 
her heels. ``I still had to run the race,'' she said. ``If you don't 
have your own energy, you won't make it.'' Loroupe's speed has had 
a slightly unnerving effect on Kenyan men, who risk losing to her 
if they are not in top form. Several years ago, in a half-marathon, 
she defeated Richard Chelimo, who finished second in the 1992 Olympic 
10,000-meter race. The night before the Rotterdam Marathon, a group 
of Kenyan men pleaded with Loroupe, half-jokingly, ``Don't do to us 
like you did to Chelimo.'' The next day she nearly caught Sammy Lelei, 
who, at the time, owned the second-fastest marathon in history. ``I 
came close to being beaten by a woman,'' Lelei said to Loroupe after 
the race. ``Next time, wait,'' she replied. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>