<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981026.0190 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Exuberance and optimism _ rare among wildlife advocates in these days 
of anti-environmental legislation _ bounced off the walls of the conference 
center at Keystone, Colo., for four days last week. Managers of the 
nation's wildlife refuges and top officials from the U.S. Fish and 
Wildlife Service, the agency in charge of the refuge system, came 
together to discuss the future of this precious network of federal 
wildlife lands and waters. Jamie Rappaport Clark, director of the 
USFWS, called the meeting historic, the first time all the refuge 
managers have ever been gathered together. ``We will be setting the 
direction of the system and unifying the 514 refuges,'' she added. 
More than 800 federal employees and nearly 100 members of conservation 
groups attended the conference. The National Wildlife Refuge System 
Improvement Act of 1997 _ one of the few congressional ``improvement 
acts'' in recent years that actually improved anything _ provided 
the impetus for the conference. The act, based upon President Clinton's 
1996 Executive Order No. 12996, states that the mission of the refuge 
system is to administer its network lands and waters ``for the conservation, 
management and where appropriate, restoration of fish, wildlife, and 
plant resources and their habitats within the United States for the 
benefit of present and future generations of Americans.'' As Clark 
expressed it, ``The act puts `critters first.''' Only the 93-million-acre 
National Wildlife Refuge System has that mandate from Congress. The 
other public lands agencies have different priorities. On our refuges, 
wildlife comes first. That's a first. According to Clark, in terms 
of legislative authority, ``the act set the goals and made the agency 
equal to all the other public land agencies.'' The act does more. 
It authorizes the Secretary of the Interior to ``ensure ... the biological 
integrity, diversity, and environmental health of the System.'' And 
for the public, the act gives a priority to ``compatible wildlife-dependent 
recreation'' like hunting, fishing, wildlife observation, photography, 
education and interpretation. Now Clark's agency and refuge managers 
must set objectives and issue regulations in order to implement the 
refuge system act. The act gives them two years to accomplish these 
goals. President Theodore Roosevelt started the refuge system in 1903 
when he set aside Florida's Pelican Island to protect nesting brown 
pelicans from plume hunters. From that tiny beginning, the system 
has spread across the nation. There are wildlife refuges in every 
state. For example, Wyoming has seven refuges on 77,000 acres; North 
Dakota has 65, accounting for nearly 300,000 acres; Washington state 
has 22 refuges on 178,000 acres; Maine has nine on 47,000 acres. According 
to recent USFWS figures, the refuge system attracts more than 32 million 
visitors each year and brings more than $400 million into surrounding 
communities. Some community leaders recognize this and form productive 
partnerships with their local refuge officials to help maintain a 
quality wildlife experience for visitors. Secretary of the Interior 
Bruce Babbitt raised that theme during his speech at the conference. 
He urged refuge managers to work with conservation groups, community 
leaders and landowners to expand good wildlife management principles 
across refuge boundaries. ``We don't want refuges to be isolated islands,'' 
he said, ``Water issues affect almost all refuges and threats to refuges 
often come from outside the refuges.'' The most significant theme 
in Babbitt's speech was his advocacy for a more inclusive ecological 
thinking, one that stretches far beyond the confines of the refuges. 
He recommended the formation of partnerships with non-governmental 
entities to help transform that ideal into reality. Babbitt used the 
occasion to take a firm but provocative stance on building new roads: 
``As long as I am secretary of the Interior, I'll see to it that no 
road goes through the Izembek wilderness (Izembek National Wildlife 
Refuge in Alaska). Roads are the single most destructive agent to 
the wilderness. We have to stop slicing and dicing the wilderness 
with roads. If Izembek gets a road, no wilderness is safe.'' This 
year the Alaska congressional delegation pushed hard for legislation 
to authorize a road through the Izembek wilderness. Nevertheless, 
the 1997 NWRS act seems to grant Babbitt the authority to halt any 
future road building in refuges. The 104th was perhaps the most anti-environmental 
Congress in recent history. Dan Ashe, USFWS assistant director for 
Refuges and Wildlife, explained how the refuge act managed to get 
enough votes to pass in that atmosphere: ``When members of the National 
Rifle Association and the Defenders of Wildlife walk into a congressional 
office together and ask for the same thing, it works.'' According 
to Ashe, hunting and fishing rights on refuges became the focus of 
the bill for members of Congress. It's a potent combination. And the 
NWRS act will make a difference to the general public. Anne Marie 
LaRosa, outgoing manager of the Seedskadee National Wildlife Refuge 
in southwest Wyoming, said the legislation will allow the agency ``to 
focus on the visitor's enjoyment of solitude and view of wildlife.'' 
Americans already know how precious wild lands are to one's spiritual 
sense of connectedness with self, with nature and with the universe. 
Let us hope the refuge system grows and fulfills its deep promise. 
We can all share the optimism. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>