<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981026.0338 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A computer glitch forced the New York Stock Exchange to halt trading 
for nearly an hour Monday afternoon, setting off a cascade of trading 
interruptions at stock and futures exchanges across the country that 
list products linked to the Big Board. Trading of the popular Standard 
&AMP; Poor's index of 500 stocks was immediately halted on the Chicago 
Mercantile Exchange. The Chicago Board Options Exchange, the American 
Stock Exchange, the Pacific Stock Exchange and the Philadelphia Stock 
Exchange halted trading of options on Big Board-listed stocks. The 
Chicago Stock Exchange, the Pacific and the Philadelphia exchanges 
also halted trading in Big Board stocks, as did private exchanges 
like Madoff Securities that deal mostly with small investors. Institutional 
investors continued trading on the Instinet, an electronic exchange. 
The breakdown was the Big Board's first major technology failure since 
an unrelated electronic communications problem delayed the opening 
of the exchange for an hour on Dec. 17, 1995. Exactly one year ago, 
trading was halted because stocks had plunged 554 points during the 
session, the maximum allowed under trading rules at the time, but 
that delay did not involve any technical failure. Traders were surprised 
and uneasy during the pause, but the interruption came on a slow trading 
day and there was no sense of panic. Many calmly engaged in paperwork 
or calls to clients. Charles Schwab &AMP; Co., the nation's largest 
discount broker, posted an online message to clients trading at its 
Internet site telling individual investors that their orders would 
be held in a queue for execution when trading resumed. ``It was much 
like taking overnight orders for execution in the mornings,'' said 
Thomas Taggart, a spokesman for Schwab. ``Investors didn't know how 
many were ahead of them in the queue and couldn't be sure of where 
the market would be when they were filled.'' The exchange said the 
disruption was caused by a malfunction in one of a group of eight 
switches that transmit orders from brokers and traders to the computer 
system that manages trading. The faulty switch began generating inaccurate 
and duplicate information, essentially ``hogging the highway,'' said 
Robert Britz, the Big Board's executive vice president who oversees 
technology. The malfunction may have ended up as more of an embarrassment 
than a disaster for the exchange. It has spent more than $1 billion 
on new technology in the past decade to immunize trading from such 
glitches. But because Monday was such a slow trading day it is not 
clear that this malfunction had much business impact. Still, the breakdown 
was a black eye for the Big Board in a era when exchanges increasingly 
rely on their technical prowess to compete. The faulty switch prevented 
traders from getting current prices and from executing orders for 
2,500 of the 3,090 stocks listed on the exchange for more than an 
hour. The problem began at 12:37, Britz said, but it took about 45 
minutes to isolate it and determine that trading should be halted 
to fix it. The problem would not have occurred had the faulty switch 
failed completely, Britz said. In that case, the system would have 
automatically plugged in a replacement. Another frustration, Britz 
said, was that the exchange was only weeks away from retiring the 
switches. Nearly 600 stocks were unaffected before the halt because 
they had already been converted to the new system, which turns the 
traffic control tasks handled by the switches over to a software program. 
Other exchanges have periodically suffered similar technical breakdowns. 
During one month in the summer of 1994, the Nasdaq, a computerized 
over-the-counter market, suffered three separate disruptions including 
on 34-minute trading halt after a squirrel chewed through a power 
line and the exchange's backup system failed to kick in. Britz said 
that the Big Board has several technical failures each day but they 
rarely cause even the slightest blip because backup systems usually 
function perfectly. The Pacific Stock Exchange, based in San Francisco, 
had an even more dismaying day. Hours before it lost business linked 
to the Big Board, the Pacific exchange was shut for 30 minutes because 
of a faulty fire alarm. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>