<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981026.0156 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A $40 million research program has proved that sound can be used to 
measure the temperature of the world's oceans and detect long-term 
climate change, scientists say. But the project has spent so much 
money meeting demands by environmental groups that its leaders expect 
to have to end the program a year from now. The experiment, called 
Acoustic Thermometry of Ocean Climate (or ``ATOC,'' pronounced ``aye-tock,'') 
is based on precise measurements of the speed of sound through oceans; 
the warmer the water, the faster sound travels. The ATOC consortium, 
comprising research teams from eight institutions in the United States 
and Australia, published a summary of its results in a recent issue 
of the journal Science. The experiment initially aroused strong opposition 
from the wildlife lobby and several environmental organizations on 
grounds that the sounds generated by underwater loudspeakers used 
in the tests would disturb wildlife, alter animal behavior and perhaps 
endanger whales and other animals. The ATOC physicists and acoustics 
experts argued that the low rumbling sound they planned to propagate 
into the water in short occasional pulses was no louder than the sound 
of passing ships and only slightly louder than the calls of blue whales. 
From the outset, ATOC scientists agreed that it was important to protect 
wildlife but would not accede to some of the demands by the various 
groups. Finally in 1995, after spending $2.9 million from its acoustic 
research budget on animal studies and legal expenses, ATOC began its 
experiment, as modified to comply with the demands of the lobbyists. 
``The loss of all that money so weakened us that we expect to have 
to end our work one year from now when our funding runs out,'' said 
Dr. Walter Munk of the Scripps Institution of Oceanography at La Jolla, 
Calif., a senior ATOC scientist. ``Because of the many delays and 
legal costs,'' he said, ``we've only been able to collect a year and 
a half's worth of data _ too little to detect global warming from 
a greenhouse effect. We would need a decade of data to see it. It's 
very sad to have to stop at this stage.'' The ATOC collaboration contends 
its experiment would have had to have run for at least 10 years to 
unequivocally detect global greenhouse warming _ a goal they say would 
have been attainable if they had been spared the expenses of meeting 
demands by lobbyists. The ATOC project has been supported since 1990 
by research institutions in eight nations and the National Academy 
of Sciences, the Office of Naval Research, the National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration and various universities. Sound can travel 
through water for enormous distances, prevented from dissipating its 
acoustic energy by boundaries in the ocean created by water layers 
of differing temperatures and densities. In the final version of the 
ATOC experiment, loudspeakers were installed at two sites: one off 
the northwest coast of Hawaii's Big Island, and the other near Pioneer 
Seamount, a volcanic island in the Pacific Ocean 55 miles from San 
Francisco. The times of arrival of the sound at thousands of underwater 
microphones spanning the Pacific Ocean were then recorded and interpreted 
as water temperatures. The advantage of the ATOC system over traditional 
arrays of thermometers on buoys and ships is that it takes an integrated 
measurement of temperature all along the path the sound takes, averaging 
the temperatures of water over hundreds or thousands of miles. Systems 
reliant on spot temperatures fail to collect enough data from regions 
of the oceans sparsely covered by sensors. Another method of measuring 
oceanic heat is used by a French-American radar satellite named Topex/Poseidon, 
which can detect changes in sea level of as little as a few inches. 
Changes in sea level result from changes in water temperature (and 
therefore its density) and from the melting of glaciers. Satellite 
measurements alone cannot distinguish between these effects. But when 
data from the ATOC array is combined with radar sea level measurements, 
it is possible to calculate how much of an increase in sea level is 
attributable to the warming of water alone, and over a period of years, 
such measurements can reveal a global warming of the seas by a warming 
atmosphere. No other technique has been discovered that can yield 
this global-scale information with such accuracy, the investigators 
say. Moreover, data combined from satellite sea level measurements 
and ATOC-type speed-of-sound measurements are expected to greatly 
improve mathematical models simulating the behavior of the earth's 
climate. Although the debate over the effects of ATOC sounds on marine 
animals persists, biologists who conducted tests reported that effects 
were apparently not injurious. Dr. Adam S. Frankel of Cornell University, 
a biologist who specializes in acoustics, was one of the scientists 
commissioned by the ATOC consortium to monitor the effects of the 
ATOC sound on humpback whales. These whales were considered especially 
sensitive to the pitch of the ATOC sound, which has a rumbling frequency 
of 75 hertz (cycles per second). Humpback whales communicate using 
sounds that low, but dolphins and many other animals can hear only 
higher-pitch sounds. Frankel and his colleagues reported the results 
of their investigation in a recent issue of the Canadian Journal of 
Zoology. From a hill on the island off San Francisco the biologists 
observed the surface behavior of the whales in 84 trials. In most 
of them, the whales were exposed to sound from the ATOC loudspeaker 
or engine noise from ships, while in others, for comparison, the whales 
were exposed to no man-made noises. ``We looked for changes in swimming 
speeds and directions, and other behavioral changes, including respiration,'' 
Frankel said. Respiration rate can be measured by the intervals between 
blowing. ``We saw no breaching or swimming in unison _ both indicators 
of distress in whales,'' he said. But some changes in diving were 
observed he said, particularly when the noise was coming from a ship's 
engines. Exposure to sound seemed to be associated with dives that 
were longer in duration and distance. ``Overall,'' Frankel said, ``I 
wouldn't call the ATOC sound benign, but its effects seem to be small 
_ perhaps an annoyance to the animals rather than a hazard.'' Dr. 
Rod Fujita, a marine biologist and spokesman for the Environmental 
Defense Fund, one of the organizations that opposed the ATOC program, 
said he was not convinced by the results that Frankel reported. ``I 
wouldn't change my mind on the basis of a single publication, and 
we have yet to hear from the advisory panel on biology convened by 
ATOC,'' he said. ``The impacts of sound on wildlife are subtle, and 
gauging them is somewhat subjective. While ATOC would be helpful in 
calibrating models of climate change, it's not the be-all and end-all 
of climate measurement. The important thing is to take immediate steps 
to curb global warming.'' If the ATOC program is to be ended anyway, 
does it matter that many biologists now regard its sound pulses as 
harmless to wildlife? ``The question is not moot,'' Frankel said. 
``ATOC may be dead, but the technique it developed and tested is very 
much alive. The world still needs to know whether greenhouse warming 
and climate change are occurring, and this is a useful indicator.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>