<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981026.0366 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Acknowledging that he had become more and more comfortable as a Met 
last season, Mike Piazza said Monday he decided to remain with the 
team because of the challenge and potential rewards of playing in 
New York. The 30-year-old catcher, who agreed to a record contract 
worth $91 million over the weekend, appeared at a news conference 
at Shea Stadium and openly proclaimed his desire to succeed amid the 
pressure that accompanies a career in this city. ``When I looked inside, 
I realized this is where I wanted to be,'' Piazza said. ``When you're 
not successful here, it's tough. But when you win here, it's twice 
as good as anyplace else. ``And if I happen to be so fortunate to 
go in the Hall of Fame, it's definitely going to be in a Mets uniform.'' 
His comments reflected a turnaround from late summer, when he appeared 
bothered and subdued after being booed by fans for not producing with 
runners on base. But he said he became convinced that the flip side 
of this reaction would be an embrace by the fans and the city that 
could not be equaled elsewhere. ``When I realized what had transpired 
with the Dodgers, I knew that no matter where I went, it would have 
been the same,'' Piazza said. ``And I just felt I might as well get 
booed by the best. Going somewhere else - with no offense to any other 
place - would be a letdown. When you come here, you get infected by 
the attitude. And you always know where you stand.'' The Mets, meanwhile, 
are convinced that they have secured the cornerstone of their franchise 
into the next century as they try to build their first World Series 
winner since 1986. They introduced Piazza on the same day they acknowledged 
they would raise ticket prices for next season - in all probability 
by more than the 20 percent they raised them before last season. Fred 
Wilpon and Nelson Doubleday _ the team's co-owners _ said the increase 
was not solely due to the new contract for Piazza. But they said they 
had given General Manager Steve Phillips the go-ahead to significantly 
expand the team's payroll beyond the $57 million figure for 1998 _ 
the sixth highest in baseball. Including Piazza's signing, the Mets 
have committed $40 million to 10 players for 1999. That list includes 
Todd Hundley, who will make $5.3 million, but who is certain to be 
traded in the wake of Piazza's signing. But it doesn't include a new 
contract for Al Leiter, the pitcher who is expected to sign a four-year 
$32 million deal in the next several days. At an average of $13 million 
a season, Piazza's contract is the richest in baseball, surpassing 
the $12.5 million the Red Sox are paying pitcher Pedro Martinez. It 
also includes a limited no-trade agreement, something the Los Angeles 
Dodgers refused to provide when Piazza turned down what his agent 
said was a six-year offer for $79 million earlier this year. The Dodgers 
traded Piazza to the Florida Marlins on May 15, and a week later the 
Mets acquired him for three minor leaguers. The 30-year-old Piazza 
is usually guarded when discussing himself. But Monday he was relaxed, 
open, even forthright when he spoke of his reasons for staying - even 
though he had been booed at Shea during a good part of the year. ``I 
know it's not going to be easy,'' Piazza said. But at least he knows 
what he is in for after signing the most lucrative contract in baseball 
history. The Mets, who have won 88 games the last two seasons, were 
eliminated from playoff contention on the final day of this past season 
after losing five consecutive games. Re-signing Piazza and Leiter, 
their top pitcher, appear to be just the beginning of a strategy in 
which the Mets could have a new/old left fielder named Bobby Bonilla 
hitting behind Piazza in the lineup (something Wilpon hinted strongly 
was going to happen); plus another power-hitting corner outfielder 
and either a new second baseman or third baseman. That means that 
Carlos Baerga is almost surely gone. Furthermore, by re-signing Piazza, 
Hundley is sure to be traded. And so the Mets are now in the market 
for some more free agents, maybe even another pitcher or two. But 
there is no question that Phillips had already pulled off perhaps 
the most important free agent signing in the team's 37-year history. 
Piazza - who has shaved his mustache for what he called an incognito 
look for the off-season - called his signing, ``an easy decision.'' 
Over his first six seasons in the majors, Piazza has already put up 
some Hall of Fame-type numbers: a .333 batting average, 200 home runs, 
644 runs batted in. He is one of the most fearsome right-handed hitters 
in the game and surely its best hitting catcher. Last season, he finished 
fourth in the National League in hitting with a .329 average. For 
the Mets, he batted .348 with 23 homers and 76 runs batted in, in 
just 109 games. That is why Phillips called Monday, ``a momentous 
day in New York Mets history.'' And with Piazza in the fold, Phillips 
said the Mets now have the identity _ and the marquee player _ they 
were sorely lacking heading into last season. Not to mention some 
renewed ``credibility in our fans' eyes.'' To show how badly the Mets 
wanted to sign Piazza, they came to an agreement with him in three 
days, beginning last Wednesday, after going nearly five months without 
having any kind of contract discussions. There is some question as 
to whether the Mets were essentially bidding against themselves, although 
Piazza's agent, Dan Lozano, said Monday that he thought he could have 
gotten Piazza more money elsewhere. But Lozano did admit that the 
Mets actually upped their initial offer from their first proposal 
last Wednesday. ``The main reason we wanted to do it as quickly as 
we did is that we didn't want him out on the market,'' Wilpon said. 
``We didn't want to take the chance.'' Said Lozano: ``I didn't expect 
it to get done as quickly as it did. Not a contract of this magnitude.'' 
Lozano went on to describe his past dealings with the Dodgers as akin 
to pulling teeth. Piazza, he said, had become disenchanted with how 
the team handled its negotiations with his best friend, Eric Karros, 
in the last off-season. Piazza said it was simply time to turn the 
page on his Dodger career. Whether he is able to catch for the next 
seven years is another question, however. And Phillips indicated Monday 
that at some point, Piazza could move to first base. ``But he's actually 
guaranteed us that he wouldn't get hurt for the seven years,'' Phillips 
said with a smile. ``There is a history with catchers that their offensive 
performances can decline. But none of those other catchers is Mike 
Piazza. So I'm not concerned about it.'' And right now, about the 
only thing Piazza is concerned about is finding a place to live in 
New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>