<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981026.0246 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As the millennium rapidly approaches, fashion is in a fix, and not 
about mundane matters like hemlines and silhouettes. There are intimations 
of a worldwide recession looming, and fears that the Y2K computer 
glitch will disrupt communication and transportation _ not to mention 
making it impossible to withdraw cab fare from a bank machine in the 
early hours of New Year's Day 2000. Amid all this uncertainty, will 
women want to spend money on expensive clothes? That is a question 
retailers are grappling with, as they place their orders for the high-fashion 
spring styles for 1999 that they just saw in Europe. It isn't just 
a matter of whether women will buy pastels or neutrals, go for romance 
or utility. It's more about anticipating women's moods in the months 
to come. Will they want to teeter on the edge of the volcano in the 
glitz and glamour of Tom Ford's collection for Gucci? Or will they 
relate to the downbeat mood of Alber Elbaz's last show for Guy Laroche, 
with the elegiac ``Annabel Lee'' read on the soundtrack? Or go the 
sweater-and-pants route of the Michael Kors collection for Celine? 
``We don't think there'll be an overabundance of frivolity at the 
buying level,'' said Kal Ruttenstein, the senior vice president for 
fashion direction of Bloomingdale's. ``We think the customer will 
have specific items she's looking for, but fashion stimulates her. 
A tough economy doesn't scare us, but this season will separate the 
men from the boys. It requires sharp editing on our part.'' Fall sales 
in many stores have been lackluster because of the shaky state of 
the economy, so retailers are bound to be concerned about spring. 
As one executive of a high-end store said _ although not for attribution 
_ ``If the stock market goes south, our customers lose millions.'' 
But being in the fashion business is rather like remarrying after 
a divorce: a triumph of optimism over experience. So, while not closing 
their eyes to reality, retailers are looking on the bright side. ``Oddly 
enough, the spring season looks good to us in a certain way,'' said 
Judy Collinson, the executive vice president and general merchandise 
manager of women's wear for Barneys New York. ``Lots of what we saw 
was really wearable. There were irresistible colors like pale yellow, 
blue, pink and red. There were many more dresses, which women say 
they can never find enough of. Women may think before they buy, but 
they'll buy what makes them feel good.'' H.W. Mullins, the executive 
vice president of Neiman Marcus, said that while he expected customers 
to be a little more cautious next spring, he still expected an increase 
in sales, but less so in the mid-priced collections known as bridge 
lines. ``We're buying more than last year,'' he said. ``Our growth 
over the last four years has been very strong. We're more enthusiastic 
about designer apparel than bridge, which has been difficult for a 
couple of years. Most of our growth comes from the designer and couture 
areas, where we can differentiate ourselves from the competition.'' 
Because the trends for spring are varied, with few easy-to-acquire 
overall looks, everyone expects that women will buy items rather than 
complete outfits. And that will affect the size of an individual sale. 
``We see that trend as somewhat of a challenge,'' Mullins said. ``When 
women buy a suit, it's a big-ticket sale. When they don't, you have 
to sell a lot more things.'' Unlike some seasons when an overriding 
trend could be encapsulated in a single word or phrase like ``romantic'' 
or ``tailored'' or ``retro,'' this spring brought no unanimity among 
designers. They went in several directions, including romantic, rock-star 
glamorous and sportive, offering choices that will no doubt please 
some while leaving others confused. There is no one look that a woman 
will feel she has to have to be at the height of fashion, and there 
is no one designer whose collection sums up the season. The sportswear 
attitude that was so strong for fall was still in evidence, even in 
spite of the wealth of dresses on the runways. Suits were almost nonexistent, 
replaced by unmatched pieces. Tops were unstructured jackets or cardigans 
or simply a shirt, a tank or a halter. Surprisingly, after years of 
being eclipsed by T-shirts and turtlenecks, the blouse has resurfaced. 
John Galliano showed full-sleeved silk blouses in white or prints 
with a retro air. Both Dries van Noten and Veronique Branquinho showed 
high-necked Victorian and Edwardian shirtwaists. And then there were 
the peasant and gypsy blouses, seen everywhere from Clements Ribeiro 
in London to Valentino in Paris. Dresses and skirts had fluidity, 
cut into A-lines or with pleats, multiple slits or gathers, and were 
generally knee length or longer. Pants ran the gamut from lean to 
as full as skirts, and came in many lengths. There were capris, pants 
that were cropped above the ankles and some that trailed on the ground. 
Hip-huggers were preferred, and there was an attempt to revive hot 
pants. All kinds of prints were shown, soft pastels as well as bold 
flower-power renditions and geometrics inspired by modern art. Pretty 
florals were seen at Emanuel Ungaro, Christian Lacroix and Chloe, 
while the biggest and brightest florals were at Gucci, where Tom Ford 
paired them with snugly zipped leather jackets that bared the midriff. 
Geometrics turned up at Clements Ribeiro, Alberta Ferretti and Herve 
Leger. Fabrics that weren't printed had surface interest in the form 
of tucking, pleating, crinkling, top stitching or glazing. And of 
course beading, which tended to be added with a light hand or veiled 
with a layer of tulle. Some of Cerruti's fabrics were decorated with 
strips of plastic, and Prada's had mirrors imbedded in them. The mirrors 
were tiny rounds or larger squares and may present a cleaning problem, 
not to mention years of bad luck should they break. Athletic-inspired 
styles came from some of the most influential designers, including 
Miuccia Prada, Jil Sander and Marc Jacobs for Louis Vuitton. Burberry 
took the hard edge off motorcycle jackets and biker pants by showing 
them in butterscotch-colored leather. There were refined versions 
of baseball jackets and warm-up jackets, but the sweatshirt was the 
most popular choice, replacing the tailored day jacket at Giorgio 
Armani and morphing into evening wear in organza and taffeta at several 
houses. There were knitted ponchos at Valentino and organza ponchos 
at Vuitton. One of the most striking sights at the shows in London, 
Paris and Milan was the contrast between the viewers clad in black 
and the models in white, off-white, beige and icy pastels. There were 
some bright pinks, blues and reds on the runways, but precious little 
black or gray. The early round of shows in New York, before those 
in Europe got under way, was also awash in color. Retailers said that 
they were pleased at the trend and that they hoped it would continue 
in next week's final round of shows in New York. Even Barneys is high 
on the idea of color. ``You have to have color for spring,'' Ms. Collinson 
said. ``You can't go around without color.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>