<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981026.0415 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Last winter, when Lois Capps decisively won a special congressional 
election to finish the term of her late husband, Walter, in this swing 
district on California's central coast, politicians of both parties 
all but wrote off her Republican opponent, Assemblyman Tom Bordonaro, 
as a hopeless case for this fall. But the ground shifted with President 
Clinton's August confession of an improper relationship with Monica 
Lewinsky, and this congressional race suddenly seemed symptomatic 
of evolving voter sentiment in a volatile election year. When the 
Capps campaign took its first poll of the fall season, just before 
the release of Kenneth Starr's report in early September, it found 
Bordonaro and Mrs. Capps in a dead heat. A Bordonaro poll two weeks 
later confirmed the trend, with Mrs. Capps holding the barest edge, 
45 percentage points to 42, and more than half the voters in the district 
viewing the president unfavorably. Then, after Congress' release of 
the second batch of Starr documents three weeks ago, including transcripts 
of conversations between Ms. Lewinsky and Linda Tripp, the ground 
shifted again, and Mrs. Capps' polling showed her with a clear, though 
not conclusive, lead. And Thursday night, when Bordonaro gently chided 
the moderator of a debate in nearby Atascadero that one question about 
the Lewinsky matter was enough, the bipartisan audience exploded in 
applause. ``It was clear for a time that this was being viewed through 
a very partisan prism, and now I think a lot of that's receded,'' 
said Mrs. Capps' media adviser, Bill Carrick. ``We've gone through 
the angry Republican period and we've gone through the angry Democratic 
period, and now we're having a normal midterm election.'' In a district 
that was viewed as a national bellwether because its special election 
was the first congressional contest of the year, the lesson now seems 
to be the oldest one of all: Lewinsky-mania notwithstanding, all politics 
is still local. The issue in the 22nd Congressional District these 
days is not impeachment so much as education, health care and Highway 
46, the heavily traveled two-lane road that connects this rural coastal 
stretch of the district with the vital inland artery Interstate 5. 
In sum, while the effect of the Beltway's drama of sex, lies and videotape 
has clearly been felt here, the 22nd District seems about what it 
usually is: a rough electoral microcosm of California, with its blend 
of suburban Santa Barbara and rural San Luis Obispo, its liberal software-crunchers 
and conservative cow-punchers, where many listeners at Thursday night's 
debate wore boots and hats and at least one young woman wore studs 
pierced through her nose, lips and cheek. This election is the fourth 
face-off in nine months between Mrs. Capps and Bordonaro, a conservative 
former grape farmer and tax preparer who upset the preferred choice 
of his party elders, the moderate Assemblyman Brooks Firestone, in 
the first round of the special election to fill the vacancy, in January. 
He then lost to Mrs. Capps in a runoff in March, before facing her 
again in the June ``blanket'' primary, in which all candidates' names 
appear on the ballot regardless of party. He is now running television 
advertisements that accuse Mrs. Capps of being soft on crime and weak 
on terrorism. Mrs. Capps, a former school nurse whose husband won 
the seat for the Democrats in 1996 for the first time in 50 years 
and then died of a heart attack last fall, is running commercials 
that note her support for school construction and styling herself 
as ``independent and mainstream'' in an effort to play down her liberal 
credentials in a district almost evenly divided between registered 
Democrats and Republicans. ``I'm having a real hard time,'' said Mary 
Chambers, a Republican who is running for the City Council in Bordonaro's 
hometown, Paso Robles, but who has also led a citizens campaign to 
``Fix 46,'' the state highway where James Dean died in a crash in 
1955. Ms. Chambers said at the debate that she was deeply grateful 
that Mrs. Capps won some $8 million in federal money to help widen 
the road. ``I'm for Tom, I'm a registered Republican. But she's been 
right there for us, too.'' Bordonaro, an upbeat campaigner who has 
been in a wheelchair since a car accident in college left him a paraplegic 
with limited use of his arms, is quick to say that Clinton's problems 
helped galvanize his cause. ``I think it helped people become a little 
more introspective, and let them focus again on what they really thought 
about our race,'' he said after the debate. ``It's kind of given Republicans 
a rallying point.'' Bordonaro needed a rallying point. His challenge 
to Firestone, who was the choice of former President Ford, Speaker 
Newt Gingrich and other national Republicans, so irked party leaders 
that they stayed away last winter, and Firestone supporters actually 
contributed names from his fund-raising rolls to Mrs. Capps in the 
March runoff. The national Republican Party was reluctant to invest 
too much more in him after Mrs. Capps defeated him with 53 percent 
of the vote to his 45. But by late summer, when Bordonaro suddenly 
seemed within striking distance, Republicans from former Vice President 
Dan Quayle to Steve Forbes to Gingrich came trooping to the district. 
And the Republican National Congressional Committee, the party's congressional 
fund-raising arm, has given him the maximum allowable contribution 
of $63,000 to help defray coordinated campaign expenses. Mrs. Capps, 
eager to emphasize her local support, has asked the Democratic National 
Campaign Committee not to make a similar contribution, though she 
tops the list of congressional recipients of contributions from labor 
political action committees, with $222,900, according to a study by 
the National Legal and Policy Center, a research group in Washington. 
Still, interest groups have stayed largely on the sidelines, in contrast 
to the special elections, when they spent hundreds of thousands of 
dollars on advertising to make their point on issues from late-term 
abortion to congressional term limits. Last winter, Bordonaro's challenge 
was to run against a grieving widow without seeming mean. Now he faces 
an incumbent who has done much to consolidate her support throughout 
the district, for example winning the endorsement of Bordonaro's hometown 
newspaper, The Telegram-Tribune of San Luis Obispo, which had backed 
him in March. Mrs. Capps said she always assumed the race would be 
competitive. ``I'm not even actually sure that it wasn't always tight,'' 
she said. ``We just happened to take that poll right before the Starr 
report came out, which turned out to be a good time to take a sounding.'' 
Mrs. Capps' campaign manager, Cathy Duvall, said the ups and downs 
of the race were understandable. ``It's easy to see why things would 
be so volatile,'' she said. ``Congress voting for impeachment hearings 
is not an everyday thing. It throws the public for a loop and then 
us, too. ``It's very clear that the national climate has made this 
race more partisan, activating a number of Republicans who want to 
make sure they can impeach the president but also activating Democrats 
who saw what the Judiciary Committee was doing as way too partisan,'' 
Ms. Duvall said. ``I think the wagons are coming home for both parties.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>