<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981026.0381 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
At this point in her race for the House two years ago, polls showed 
Anne Northup with the support of about 8 percent of her district's 
African-American vote. And though she squeaked out a victory, Ms. 
Northup, a Republican, fared so poorly in Louisville's black neighborhoods 
that in one precinct she received only 5 out of 600 votes. ``In cases 
like that you figure that five people must have voted for me by mistake,'' 
she says now with a rueful laugh. ``It was devastating.'' Despite 
the poor showing among black voters, Ms. Northup, who is white and 
has adopted two black children, worked to build bridges to the city's 
black residents. She formed a close association with two of the city's 
most powerful black ministers and directed nearly $3 million in federal 
money to self-help projects they operated. Her work seemed to be paying 
off. Recent polls showed her support among blacks who are considered 
likely to vote in this year's election has grown to 20 percent. But 
having voted with the rest of the House Republicans to authorize an 
open-ended impeachment investigation of President Clinton, Ms. Northup 
is one of several lawmakers identified as targets of a new Democratic 
get-out-the-vote campaign in black areas. She is facing the prospect 
that her efforts to woo black voters may be short-circuited by the 
continuing Washington inquiry and strong black support for the President. 
``I've heard many people say that they like Anne Northup,'' said the 
Rev. Kevin Cosby, pastor of St. Stephen Baptist Church, the largest 
black church in the state and an unabashed fan of Ms. Northup. ``They're 
only concerned about the president and how she would vote with regards 
to the impeachment of the president.'' Ms. Northup's problem is but 
one example of what Democratic strategists are hoping will be the 
pivotal role played by black voters in this year's election. The Joint 
Center for Political and Economic Studies, a nonpartisan research 
organization, has identified nine Senate races _ in Arkansas, California, 
Georgia, Illinois, Kentucky, New York, North Carolina, Ohio and South 
Carolina _ and 19 House contests where the black vote could be crucial. 
Democratic strategists are hoping that the anger expressed by blacks 
toward Republicans that has been showing up in sizable numbers in 
public opinion surveys will translate itself into strong turnout at 
the polls. The Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee has pinpointed 
at least 10 close House races with large numbers of black voters for 
special get-out-the-vote efforts. On Thursday, the Congressional Black 
Caucus will begin a five-city bus tour to encourage blacks to go to 
the polls on Nov. 3. The first stop will be in this city along the 
Ohio River to urge blacks to come to vote for Chris Gorman, the former 
Kentucky attorney general who is in a tight race with Ms. Northup. 
Rep. Charles B. Rangel, D-N.Y., organized the bus tour. ``We intend 
to energize the black vote which generally is just as low, if not 
lower, than others in an off-year election,'' Rangel said ``There 
is no question that the African-American community strongly supports 
the President and strongly opposes anything that could be perceived 
as an effort to drive him out of office.'' Kentucky's 3rd Congressional 
District, which encompasses Louisville and parts of its suburbs, is 
a classic swing district. It has shifted from Republican to Democrat 
to Republican in the last three elections. In 1996, Ms. Northup won 
by 1,299 votes, less than 1 percent of the nearly 251,000 cast, while 
Clinton carried the district overwhelmingly. With blacks making up 
16.3 percent of its population that has reached voting age, strategists 
hope that a big turnout will lead to an upset victory for Gorman. 
Unlike other Democratic candidates in Kentucky, Gorman is not shy 
about trumpeting his support for Clinton and castigating the Republicans 
for the impeachment investigation. This week he will start broadcasting 
a commercial on black radio stations in which the Rev. Jesse Jackson 
criticizes Ms. Northup on a number of issues, including her vote in 
favor of the inquiry. ``They support President Clinton and they support 
candidates like myself who have indicated that while what the president 
did was wrong and he should be punished, he should not be impeached,'' 
Gorman said of black voters. ``I've read the Starr report and there 
is nothing impeachable in there. So he needs to be punished very quickly, 
and we need to move on with it and talk about other issues. I can 
guarantee you that's the feeling of well over 95 percent of the black 
community in this area.'' For her part, Ms. Northup has tried to walk 
a fine line on the impeachment matter. She voted with the Republican 
majority for an open-ended inquiry, fearing that if an investigation 
was limited in scope and time, Clinton would ``run out the clock.'' 
But she has not, in her words, ``gotten out and railed against'' the 
president on the campaign trail. ``To be honest, when it comes to 
the impeachment question, that's one area where I feel a tremendous 
responsibility to at least understand how they feel about it and be 
very sensitive to it,'' Ms. Northup said of black voters in her district. 
The open question is how much her party's stand on impeachment has 
undercut her efforts to forge relationships with blacks. Those efforts 
began shortly after her election when she met first with the Rev. 
Walter Malone, minister of New Canaan Baptist Church, and with Cosby. 
Both ministers represent a new faction of black clergy and black leadership. 
They emphasize a self-help philosophy and are not shy to embrace Republican 
help. Cosby, whose church attracted 1,500 people to Bible study last 
Wednesday evening, said, ``African Americans have a lot of local concerns 
and Anne Northup has been very accessible to the community.'' And 
while he declines to say that he endorses her re-election, Cosby makes 
clear that he would not be dismayed if she is returned to the House. 
``I heard Jesse Jackson say something I agree with _ good political 
works result in good political consequences,'' Cosby said. ``In my 
opinion, Anne Northup has produced for our community some good political 
works.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>