<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981026.0070 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Slobodan Milosevic, Serbia's strongman, knows the playbook well. His 
first big performance was in Bosnia; his second has just been completed 
in the Serbian province of Kosovo. The plot goes like this: As a divided 
West looks the other way, create a crisis. Pursue your ends a little 
too harshly by destroying a few too many villages, permitting one 
too many massacres. Finally you catch Washington's attention. Then 
in a grand gesture grant some concessions _ like allowing monitors 
on the ground in Kosovo and NATO surveillance planes above. The climax: 
You are elevated to the position of indispensable keeper of the peace; 
U.S. and NATO officials come to consult and sometimes to scold. It 
all serves to pump you up in the eyes of your own people, to whom 
you present yourself as their champion and protector against hostile 
outsiders, namely the West, with which you have just done a deal. 
As a result, you are guaranteed more years in power as their autocratic 
ruler. In moments of candor, U.S. and European diplomats describe 
Milosevic's behavior in the last eight months in Kosovo in this neat 
sequence. They know, they say, that by offering some face-saving concessions 
to NATO _ which despite its bravado has been reluctant to carry out 
the air strikes that it continues to threaten _ Milosevic has outfoxed 
the West once again. The Yugoslav president was allowed to make a 
mess in Kosovo over the summer when the West was on vacation and when 
there was concern that getting tough with him might disturb elections 
in Bosnia. In the aftermath _ 250,000 refugees, burnt villages and 
irrevocably ruined relations between ethnic Albanians and Serbs in 
Kosovo _ the United States is left with the cleanup. Washington will 
foot a big portion of the bill for an expected 2,000 international 
monitors, and for much of the aid for refugees. Some put the total 
price at $500 million _ a lot for an underdeveloped, rural province 
about the size of Connecticut. There are many reasons, of course, 
beyond the crises he creates that make Milosevic the man to deal with 
in Belgrade. For more than a decade, he has been the master manipulator 
of Serbian politics, and his political machine remains in firm control 
of the state-run press and broadcast media. Whatever horror officials 
in Washington express about his appeals to crude nationalism, it is 
depressingly clear that he has a lot of material to work with when 
he stirs ethnic passions: a distrustful culture built on long-held 
sagas of martyrdom. But to the West, Milosevic goes out of his way 
to present himself as less extreme than some others. To prove the 
point, he has chosen as his coalition partner Vojislav Seselj, who 
is even more of a nationalist and who has led a charge against ``traitors'' 
in the independent media and universities. Still, does the West really 
have to play Milosevic's game? Is it time to think about whether _ 
and how _ he could be displaced as Serbia's leader? These questions 
are being increasingly raised in the aftermath of the Kosovo agreement. 
``There needs to be a policy review that emphasizes ways of getting 
rid of Milosevic,'' said David Phillips, the executive director of 
the International Conflict Resolution Program at Columbia University 
and who visited Kosovo last month. ``To have to go back to Belgrade 
while Milosevic holds court is no longer tenable.'' Phillips says 
the United States can shape its policies so that Milosevic is weakened, 
not strengthened, and he maintains that one of the weakest chinks 
in Milosevic's armor is the existence of a United Nations war crimes 
tribunal in The Hague. ``It is time for Louise Arbour to make a move 
against Milosevic and other Yugoslav officials,'' said Phillips, referring 
to the tribunal's chief prosecutor. ``At this juncture there should 
be plenty of evidence and eyewitnesses to crimes against humanity 
by forces under the control of Milosevic.'' Many pro-Western Serbs 
in Belgrade who oppose the Milosevic regime, like Srbobran Brankovic, 
a leading Serbian pollster, agree that the possibility of prosecution 
at The Hague could be turned to the West's advantage as it struggles 
to contain Milosevic's ambitions. He said a major motivation for Milosevic's 
agreement to sign the Dayton agreement on Bosnia three years ago was 
his calculation that, as a guarantor of the peace, he would not be 
made a target of the tribunal. ``I think he has an abnormal fear of 
the tribunal,'' the Serbian pollster said. ``People in his circle 
said that when it was first mentioned that he might be tried in The 
Hague, that he was in a panic.'' Milosevic's popularity at home is 
not quite what it is advertised abroad. His personal approval rating 
in Serbia has slid from a high of 40 percent in the early 1990s to 
20 percent today. Mr Brankovic and other pro-Western Serbs say they 
are not persuaded by the argument that the only alternative to Milosevic 
is Seselj, who enjoys about a 16 percent approval rating. There are, 
he says, substantial independent voices of moderation that need to 
be encouraged in Serbia's universities, in its independent media, 
in its trade unions and mong its few struggling entrepreneurs _ even 
in the army. Milosevic, who relies on the Interior Ministry's well-paid 
police force to protect him and to repress opponents, is not well 
liked in the Yugoslav Army; it is underpaid and has lost all the battles 
that he sent it into in the last eight years. This feeling was surprisingly 
evident in remarks last week by the army's chief of staff, Gen. Momcilo 
Perisic, who rose through the ranks during the glory days of Marshal 
Tito. ``Many leadership members have subjected everything to their 
own interests,'' Perisic said in what seemed a veiled reference to 
Milosevic. ``The Serbs have been at war since 1991 and we still don't 
have an ally. We were never this isolated and we were never without 
allies.'' How to capitalize on these signs of dissatisfaction is the 
challenge. In many quarters in the West, the notion of lightening 
the financial and investment sanctions that have been placed on Serbia 
is heresy, a sign of caving in to Milosevic. But educated Serbs who 
would like to see Milosevic disappear argue that the sanctions actually 
play into his hands by allowing him to argue that the wicked West 
is responsible for a catastrophic drop in living standards. The sanctions 
also encourage a pirate economy in which a tight circle of Milosevic 
cronies get all the spoils. And barriers to international travel fall 
especially hard on Western-oriented Serbs, rather than on Milosevic's 
rural supporters. But given the West's pattern of letting Milosevic 
play out his hand, there is not much optimism among educated Serbs 
in Belgrade that the game will change very soon. They note the three-year 
time frame for the interim political status of Kosovo agreed to during 
the negotiations with Holbrooke. ``He will say I'm the guarantor of 
the peace and security in the region, and the West will say `yes,''' 
said Brankovic. Some diplomats in the Western embassies here are more 
cynically optimistic, however. They point out that instead of operating 
on a land-for-peace concept, Milosevic operates on a land-for-power 
principle. Thus, he gave up his fight for Slovenia, then Croatia, 
then Bosnia, but retained power as leader of a truncated Yugoslavia 
dominated by Serbia. In time, given the realities in Kosovo, where 
the majority ethnic Albanians are struggling for independence, he 
will also lose Kosovo, these diplomats say. Montenegro could follow, 
if Milosevic chooses to provoke a crisis there. At that rate, Milosevic 
is likely one day to wind up king of a suburb of Belgrade, still in 
power but of no relevance to the United States. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>