<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981026.0284 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Kirsten Albrecht and Alexis Oberdorfer are both 27-year-olds born 
of one black parent and one white parent, and adopted, as infants, 
by white parents. But in their strongly opposing views, they almost 
embody the whole debate over transracial adoption. Ms. Albrecht, who 
heads the Transracial Adoption Group, a Los Angeles advocacy group 
with a roster of about 10,000 transracially adopted adults, sees cross-race 
adoptions as a way to help black children whose parents cannot raise 
them move into middle-class American society, and, by creating interracial 
families, to help that society become more accepting of diversity. 
``There's a real aspect of transracial adoption being the most successful 
affirmative action program of the 1970s, putting a large number of 
black and biracial children into middle class families in suburban 
settings,'' Ms. Albrecht said. ``I don't see it as a second-best alternative, 
but as an inherently good thing.'' Ms. Oberdorfer, a child-protection 
worker in Minneapolis, sees those same adoptions as inherently difficult. 
She vividly recalls her childhood discomfort of feeling different 
from her classmates, fantasizing about having long blond hair, asking 
her mother when she would turn white _ and a painful period in college 
when rumors spread that she was racist against African-Americans. 
``I didn't have faces that reflected who I was,'' Ms. Oberdorfer said. 
``I remember how I would slump down, embarrassed when they would talk 
about Africa or slavery in high school, and I could feel everyone 
looking at me. ``And I was in denial a lot. When people asked how 
if felt to be black, I would say I'm as much white as black, why are 
you focusing on the black.'' Ms. Oberdorfer has two white siblings 
who are her parents' biological children and a half-black, half-Vietnamese 
brother, found abandoned and starving in Vietnam, who was adopted 
at age 3 and had serious behavioral problems as a child. Ms. Oberdorfer, 
who remains close to her parents and believes they did their best 
in rearing her, rethought her racial identity when she went to Tanzania 
in her sophomore year of college. ``It was a turning point for me, 
the first time I felt part of something,'' she said. ``I felt welcomed 
to the motherland. And that experience of feeling welcomed, feeling 
part of something is one I have only when I travel, whether it's in 
Africa or in Cuba. Here, the whites don't consider me white, and the 
blacks often don't consider me black.'' Recently, Ms. Oberdorfer reached 
a more wrenching turning point, one so significant in adoption circles 
that it became the basis for a training exercise in a North American 
Council on Adoptable Children curriculum for those considering transracial 
adoption. ``When my grandfather died, the inheritance he left to my 
brother and me was only half of what he left to our two white siblings,'' 
Ms. Oberdorfer said, her voice beginning to waver and her eyes filling. 
``This is hard for me to talk about. My grandparents never wanted 
me to be adopted.'' Although Ms. Oberdorfer's family ultimately equalized 
the inheritance payments, the hurt remains, as do Ms. Oberdorfer's 
conflicting feelings about transracial placement. ``When parents think 
about transracial adoption,'' she said, ``they need to think about 
whether their child will have role models, peers in school or church, 
and whether they're willing to take active steps to make their environment 
one that will be comfortable for that child.'' Ms. Albrecht's group 
estimates that 175,000 black or biracial children have been adopted 
in the United States by white parents since 1968, but that there were 
fewer than 1,000 such adoptions nationwide last year. But the only 
real certainty is that the numbers have waxed and waned sharply in 
response to changing attitudes and laws. According to the Child Welfare 
League of America's 1994 survey of 22 state agencies, about 4 percent 
of domestic adoptions are transracial. But a 1991 study by the Council 
on Adoptable Children found that among private agencies that depend 
on fees from adopting families, half of the African-American infants 
and two-thirds of the Hispanic infants were placed in white homes. 
Agencies that specialize in placing black children have a far more 
consistent record of finding African-American homes. ``I think a lot 
depends on the agency's attitudes,'' said Toni Oliver, founder and 
executive director of Roots, an Atlanta agency that places children 
in foster care. ``I get calls from people saying they can't find an 
African-American family for an African-American child, because there 
aren't any in their state. I say, `Oh, really, then where did that 
child come from?' And then it's clear that they don't think of the 
community the child came from as a source of worthwhile families.'' 
Several studies over the last two decades have found that most children 
adopted across racial lines do well in life, in both professional 
achievement and personal satisfaction, and remain close to their families. 
But while most studies find no significant difference between the 
overall well-being of those adopted transracially and those adopted 
into families of the same race, some studies have picked up subtler 
indications that transracial adoptees are more conflicted about racial 
identity. Ms. Albrecht, adopted by two white divinity students active 
in the civil rights movement, said she had not felt that conflict. 
``I think it was really positive that my parents hadn't gone through 
the painful personal racial experiences that you go through in this 
country,'' she said. ``They taught me that I could do and be anything, 
because coming from white middle-class families, that was their perception. 
And I think it was better than making me feel, as some black parents 
do, that I'd always have to work harder in a racist world.'' Ms. Albrecht 
said that she did experience racism, ``but I came home to a family 
that was in tune with being able to talk about those things.'' ``I'm 
always a little impatient when a prep-school educated, law-school 
educated transracial adoptee working in one of the top law firms says 
it was so terrible that he never learned to deal with racism,'' Ms. 
Albrecht said. ``I think it's an advantage that he learned to function 
in the world of power.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>