<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981026.0352 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
WASHINGTON _ NATO is almost certain to extend the Tuesday deadline 
for ordering air strikes against Yugoslav military and police forces, 
NATO and Clinton administration officials said on Monday as Yugoslav 
troops and equipment rumbled out of Kosovo. Instead of setting a new 
deadline, NATO's representatives are considering issuing a more general, 
open-ended threat to use force if President Slobodan Milosevic violates 
his pledges and orders a resumption of the crackdown on the people 
of Kosovo, who are predominantly ethnic Albanian, the officials said. 
Such a threat is necessary, the officials said, to keep the pressure 
on Milosevic to abide by his agreements to end the fighting and allow 
ethnic Albanians return to the homes they fled over the summer. ``The 
challenge now is how do you do it without looking like you're extending 
the deadline forever,'' a Pentagon official said. A senior administration 
official said on Monday night that NATO has made no final decision 
about the Tuesday deadline, which clears the way for NATO's military 
commanders to launch strikes after 2 p.m., ET. The official emphasized 
NATO still needed to verify that Monday's withdrawals proved meaningful 
and was still prepared, if necessary, to order military strikes. Even 
as some of Yugoslavia's army and paramilitary forces noisily departed 
positions in Kosovo, there were indications that Milosevic continued 
to move slowly in complying with some parts of the agreement and to 
violate others outright. The international diplomats now roaming the 
province reported that the Yugoslav armed forces had been spotted 
moving around anti-aircraft missiles, in violation of the agreement 
permitting unarmed reconnaissance aircraft to fly over Kosovo. The 
observers spotted trucks carrying Soviet-era surface-to-air missiles, 
or SAMs, in ways that ``indicate the missiles have been deployed,'' 
they wrote in a cable on Sunday. But officials at the Pentagon said 
NATO had not detected any provocative deployments that could jeopardize 
the reconnaissance flights. Flights so far have been limited to unmanned 
drones and U-2 spyplanes that fly high enough to avoid missiles. In 
a marathon of meetings over the weekend in Belgrade, NATO's commanders, 
Gen. Wesley Clark of the United States and Gen. Klaus Naumann of Germany, 
extracted assurances from Milosevic and his army chief of staff, Gen. 
Momcilo Perisic, that they would begin withdrawals before Tuesday's 
deadline. Facing the threat of NATO strikes, Milosevic even signed 
a schedule for withdrawals that detailed, in writing, the names and 
numbers of units that had to pull out of Kosovo or return to their 
barracks. The NATO and administration officials, who spoke on condition 
of anonymity, said that those assurances appeared to be enough to 
avert air strikes, barring some egregious turnaround by Milosevic. 
By Monday night, the senior administration official said, it appeared 
all 4,500 paramilitary police deployed to the province during the 
peak of the crackdown had been withdrawn, most of them on Monday. 
The White House spokesman, Joe Lockhart, said that it appeared ``General 
Clark's meetings with President Milosevic may have had some impact, 
because we do see a lot of movement.'' He added, ``We want to make 
sure that that movement is real.'' NATO authorized the use of force 
against Milosevic on Oct. 12 but gave him four days to comply with 
U.N. resolutions calling for an end to the fighting. When that deadline 
neared, NATO extended the deadline to Tuesday. Some officials said 
the deadlines have been helpful, but have also raised expectations 
that NATO will act forcefully to punish Milosevic for a crackdown 
that left hundreds dead and drove tens of thousands from their homes. 
``These deadlines put NATO under as much pressure as Milosevic,'' 
a NATO official said. With the new deadline nearing, administration 
and NATO officials have been scrambling to find a way to maintain 
the threat, especially since Milosevic appears intent on playing a 
cat-and-mouse game with NATO commanders, doing just enough to avert 
strikes, but not to comply completely. One NATO official said the 
largest army battalion withdrawn so far _ the 211th Armored Brigade 
_ left Kosovo but remained just over the border. Milosevic and his 
military aides explained they would not move the division back to 
its barracks because to do so would make it an easier target for NATO. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>