<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981026.0438 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
New Jersey's voters will be asked next week to amend the state Constitution 
to give up a half-century of power to select the types of betting 
allowed on horse racing, and ultimately make it easier to introduce 
off-track betting and betting by telephone. The question on the ballot 
Nov. 3 might seem, from its legalistic wording, like a simple procedural 
change. But the dry words mask a long struggle for New Jersey's four 
race tracks and for many horse owners, breeders, and trainers who 
are seeking ways to fight competition from the state lottery, casinos 
in Atlantic City and tracks in neighboring states. The ballot does 
not mention two wagering options long coveted by New Jersey's slumping 
racing industry: off-track betting and betting by telephone. Both 
types of gambling are well entrenched in New York, Connecticut and 
Pennsylvania. But if voters approve the constitutional amendment, 
only legislative approval would be needed to approve off-track and 
telephone betting in the future and eliminate any risk of the public's 
rejecting them in the voting booth. Cliff Zukin, chairman of the department 
of public policy at the Edward J. Bloustein School of Planning and 
Public Policy at Rutgers University, said he thinks about three-quarters 
of the voters will learn about the proposed change for the first time 
when they enter the voting booth. ``And the ballot statement is so 
convoluted, people will have trouble understanding what they're being 
asked to do,'' Zukin said. ``It's terribly confusing.'' New Jersey's 
Constitution, adopted in 1947, prohibited the Legislature from adopting 
any form of gambling without the prior approval of voters. Daytime 
parimutuel wagering at state tracks predated the Constitution. But 
the creation of casinos, the lottery and various forms of bingo and 
raffles all required the passage of constitutional amendments. Traditionally, 
New Jersey voters have been chilly to liberalizing betting on horse 
races. They easily approved betting on night races in 1966 and on 
simulcast races _ televised races beamed into New Jersey tracks from 
other states' tracks _ in 1985. But in 1980, voters rejected betting 
on races on Sundays, and 10 years passed before the measure returned 
to the ballot. Sunday betting was narrowly approved then, as was betting 
on simulcasts at the Atlantic City casinos. Racing-industry officials 
reject suggestions that they purposely kept off-track and telephone 
betting off the ballot next month out of fear of rejection. Instead, 
they say, they want to focus only on eliminating future referendums 
because it is too time-consuming to wait for Election Day to seek 
relaxation of gambling restrictions. In addition, they say, the casinos 
and the lottery system no longer need voter approval to expand their 
gambling options. And, industry officials point out, tracks in New 
York and Pennsylvania need only legislative approval to broaden their 
betting options. ``The constitutional restriction is handicapping 
the horse-racing industry,'' said Leon Zimmerman, a spokesman for 
the Standardbred Breeders and Owners Association of New Jersey. ``It's 
a fairness issue.'' He said the industry is not certain now what types 
of new betting it would seek from the Legislature if the amendment 
passed, even though a study commission created by Gov. Christie Whitman 
said last winter that off-track and telephone betting were crucial 
to the future of the state's tracks. The industry's campaign has been 
modest. It has hired one of the most powerful lobbying firms in Trenton, 
Public Strategies/Impact, to direct it. But so far, the industry has 
raised only $50,000 for the campaign. All of the money came from the 
Atlantic City Race Track, which closed last spring and now wants to 
build a stylish simulcast betting parlor on its property. Officials 
at Public Strategies/Impact said they are hoping for more money in 
the coming days to broaden the campaign beyond a few radio advertisements 
and the distribution of fliers. No formal opposition has developed, 
but some members of the New Jersey Thoroughbred Horsemen's Benevolent 
Association, which represents about 6,000 owners, trainers and breeders, 
are fretting about the possibility of state tracks' emphasizing off-track 
simulcast and betting parlors over live racing. One association official 
who spoke on the condition of anonymity pointed out that the state's 
three thoroughbred tracks _ the Meadowlands, Monmouth Park, and Garden 
State Race Track _ all recently asked the New Jersey Racing Commission 
to shorten their 1999 seasons by a combined 56 days. This year, live 
racing at the three tracks totaled 207 days. ``Killing the live card 
hurts horsemen,'' the official said. Outside the industry, the New 
Jersey Council of Churches, which years ago opposed liberalizing betting 
on horse racing, has been silent. And the Council on Compulsive Gambling 
of New Jersey does not take positions on efforts to broaden forms 
of legalized gambling, said Kevin O'Neill, deputy director of the 
state chapter. Any future expansion of betting on horse races would 
create more compulsive gamblers, O'Neill said, but the racing industry 
has acknowledged its social responsibility and has promised to provide 
the chapter with money to broaden its anti-gambling education programs 
if phone and off-track betting are ever approved and industry revenues 
increase. ``We asked for one-half of 1 percent,'' O'Neill said. ``If 
we got $100,000 to $200,000, it would be fine.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>