<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981026.0176 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A millennium-old volume, defaced by mildew and scorched around the 
edges, will go on the auction block on Thursday, and scholars hope 
that expert examination of the relic will reveal nuances in the thinking 
of Archimedes _ the greatest mathematical genius of the ancient world. 
The volume, a 10th-century copy of writings by Archimedes (who died 
in 212 B.C. at the hands of a Roman soldier), is the oldest and presumably 
most authentic copy of Archimedes' major works to survive. Christie's 
of New York City, the auctioneer selling the little book, expects 
it to bring about $1 million. However, the sale of the work may face 
a challenge. The Orthodox patriarch of Jerusalem has claimed that 
the manuscript was stolen in the 1920s and belongs to him, news agencies 
reported. The Greek minister of culture, Evangelos Venizelos, told 
Agence France-Presse that he supported the patriarch's claim. Christie's 
spokesman, Vredy Lytsman, said on Monday that the auction house was 
``still satisfied that the consigner has a legal right to sell the 
document,'' and that the auction would take place as scheduled. The 
volume has been inaccessible to scholars since the early years of 
the 20th century. Technologies developed since then may extract new 
knowledge about Archimedes from the text and diagrams. The 174 pages 
of text, bound in modern times into a book 7{ by 6 inches, spent some 
1,000 years in the hands of various owners and following a trail as 
twisted as that of the fictional Maltese Falcon in the 1930 novel 
by Dashiell Hammett. Archimedes, a Greek who spent most of his life 
in the city of Syracuse in Sicily, is remembered especially for the 
mathematics he devised that prefigured the invention of calculus, 
and for his discovery of the physics of flotation. A superb inventor 
and engineer, his machines for pumping water, raising enormous weights, 
and destroying enemy ships earned him a reputation among his Roman 
foes as a kind of magician. The volume being auctioned, technically 
called a ``codex'' to distinguish it from a scroll, is a palimpsest 
(pronounced PAL-imp-sest). That is, its original inked copy of Archimedes' 
texts was washed off, probably in the 13th century, so that the expensive 
vellum on which it was written could be reused by the Byzantine church 
or monastery that owned it. The upper text, clearly legible, consists 
of commonplace instructions for conducting religious rites, like marriages 
and exorcisms. The priceless underlying 10th-century text, almost 
obliterated by washing, is the only surviving version of Archimedes' 
``Method of Mechanical Theorems'' and ``On Floating Bodies'' _ the 
great scientist's two most celebrated works. The Archimedes originals 
disappeared in the distant past, possibly destroyed in the fires and 
looting that demolished the great library of Alexandria, Egypt, in 
the third century. New techniques for reading the faint traces of 
the older text have accentuated its enormous importance. Experts commissioned 
by Christie's have revealed new detail, especially in geometric diagrams, 
by exposing pages to ultraviolet radiation. This causes the vellum, 
which is preserved animal skin, to glow, improving the legibility 
of the writing. The experts also digitized images of the writing and 
applied a computer program to suppress the 13th-century text and religious 
illustrations while enhancing the underlying writing and geometrical 
diagrams. The later religious text was written at right angles to 
the Archimedes text _ a fact that facilitated the separation of the 
two texts. Mathematicians and historians of science have been visiting 
Christie's recently to look at the treasure. ``Just seeing and touching 
the Archimedes Palimpsest was a thrilling emotional experience for 
me,'' said Dr. Sherman Stein, a professor of mathematics at the University 
of California, Davis. Like many other mathematicians, Stein is fascinated 
by Archimedes' legendary triumphs in mathematics, physics, engineering 
and weaponry. ``I recently finished writing a book about Archimedes,'' 
Stein said, ``but because this palimpsest has turned up, I'll have 
to revise one chapter. It won't change the substance, but some subtleties 
of Archimedes' methods have come to light.'' After languishing in 
obscure libraries for nine centuries, the Archimedes Palimpsest was 
rediscovered in 1907 in the Convent of the Holy Grave in Constantinople 
(renamed Istanbul in 1930). The New York Times reported the discovery 
on page 1 of its July 16, 1907, issue. The discoverer, Dr. Johan Ludvig 
Heiberg, a professor of philology at the University of Copenhagen, 
was not permitted by Turkish authorities to remove the manuscript, 
but he was allowed to copy it the best he could, and he later translated 
the legible parts. Heiberg got another look at the manuscript two 
years later _ the last scholarly inspection of the treasure. In 1918, 
the Ottoman Empire was dissolved by Turkey's defeat in World War I, 
and book collections in Constantinople were broken up. A Christie's 
manuscript expert, Dr. Felix de Maraz Oyens, said in an interview 
that some time after 1920, the palimpsest passed into the hands of 
a French family that has owned it ever since. Christie's declines 
to identify the family, which has put the document up for auction. 
From the time of Heiberg's investigations in the early 20th century 
until the document was entrusted to Christie's, it had never been 
examined by anything more sophisticated than a magnifying glass. ``That 
would be a terrible loss,'' said Dr. Chris Rorres, a mathematics professor 
at Drexel University and an amateur Archimedes scholar. ``The rigorous 
mathematical proofs devised by Archimedes have come down to us from 
various sources, but only his `Method of Mechanical Theorems,' recorded 
in this palimpsest alone, lets us see how he arrived at his proofs. 
It is a bit like a structure in which the scaffolding goes up first, 
then the building, and finally the scaffolding is taken away, leaving 
only the final result. Archimedes' `Method' is the only remnant of 
his work that lets us see the scaffolding,'' Rorres said. The Archimedes 
``method'' starts by experimenting with physical objects and then 
looking for the abstract principles that underlie their interactions. 
In his introduction to the Method, Archimedes wrote: ``It is easier 
to supply the proof when we have previously acquired, by the method, 
some knowledge of the questions than it is to find it without any 
previous knowledge.'' According to Roman writers who chronicled the 
life of Archimedes, the mathematician was a devoted subject of Hiero 
II, ruler of Syracuse, and spent part of his career designing and 
building weapons to defend Syracuse _ catapults, pulley hoists and 
levers for disabling enemy ships and siege towers. The ancient historians 
Polybius, Plutarch and Pliny the Elder all mention such inventions, 
although none was alive in Archimedes' lifetime. Some Greco-Roman 
historians also assert that during the Roman siege of Syracuse from 
214 to 212 B.C., at the height of the Second Punic War, Archimedes 
used bronze mirrors to focus sunlight on Roman ships and set them 
on fire. This anecdote, among many others about Archimedes, has been 
called into question by various scholars, although Dr. Ioannis Sakkas, 
a Greek engineer, demonstrated in 1973 that the feat is technically 
possible. With the help of 50 sailors holding 31 bronze-coated mirrors, 
he set fire to a wooden boat 160 feet offshore. Many historians believe 
that Archimedes was not the inventor of the Archimedes Screw, a rotary 
pump commonly used in Egypt for irrigation. Rorres said, however, 
that there were no references to the device in Egyptian texts prior 
to the time of Archimedes, and that he therefore might have invented 
it. But another famous anecdote _ that Archimedes leapt naked from 
his bathtub and ran through the streets of Syracuse shouting ``Eureka'' 
(``I have found it'') after solving a problem _ seems unlikely. According 
to the story by the Roman architect Vitruvius, Hiero asked Archimedes 
to examine a gold wreath intended to adorn the statue of a goddess, 
and to determine whether the goldsmith had adulterated the wreath 
with silver. In the Vitruvius version, Archimedes notices that when 
he steps into a tub full to the brim with water, some water spills 
from the tub. Vitruvius wrote that Archimedes placed a weight of pure 
gold equal to the weight of the wreath in the tub and then filled 
the tub to the brim. Archimedes then supposedly took out the gold 
and replaced it with the wreath, reasoning that a wreath adulterated 
with silver would occupy more volume than an equal weight of pure 
gold, and would cause water to spill. But Rorres challenged this version, 
saying that the amount of spillage would have been much too small 
to measure using the means at Archimedes' disposal. Instead, Archimedes 
would probably have invoked his own Law of Buoyancy and Law of the 
Lever, first balancing the gold weight against the wreath in air and 
then balancing the two objects in water. An imbalance in water would 
clearly reveal adulteration, he said. Be that as it may, Archimedes 
scorned the practical devices he designed as intellectually inferior 
to his mathematical theorems, and none of his writing refers to devices 
or engineering. In his will Archimedes asked that a cylinder circumscribing 
a sphere be placed on his tomb, illustrating what he apparently considered 
the most important geometrical relationship he had proved: that the 
volume of a sphere is two-thirds that of a circumscribed cylinder 
of the same dimensions. At the age of about 75, Archimedes was supposed 
to have been sketching a geometric proof at the moment Roman troops 
under Marcellus overran Syracuse in 212 B.C. and killed the Greek 
sage. Marcellus apologized to Archimedes' relatives, and the sphere-and-cylinder 
symbol was placed on his grave, where the Roman politician Cicero 
sought and found it 137 years later. Byzantium, the successor of the 
Roman Empire in the eastern Mediterranean, was the custodian of the 
Archimedes Palimpsest for centuries, but Archimedes' admirers give 
the Romans little credit. Dr. George F. Simmons of Colorado College, 
Colorado Springs, commented in ``Calculus Gems'' that ``the Romans 
were so uninterested in mathematics that Cicero's act in cleaning 
up Archimedes' grave was perhaps the most memorable contribution of 
any Roman to the history of mathematics.'' Mathematicians hope the 
Archimedes Palimpsest will command more respect by its new owners. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>