<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981026.0350 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The spate of closed and crippled companies spreading like a virus 
in fashion can be traced back to the late 1980s, when Bloomingdale's 
was acquired by a Canadian developer, Robert Campeau. It was not until 
Bloomingdale's was forced into bankruptcy that it became apparent 
that Campeau was playing a real estate game and knew little about 
fashion and cared less. As a bankrupt chain, and one owned by a real 
estate developer at that, Bloomingdale's was forced to think narrowly 
in terms of return on square footage, rather than focus on fashion 
merchandising. Campeau's legacy of store consolidations and bottomline-oriented 
retailing _ which has spread to other department-store chains _ is 
seeing its denouement in the present spate of troubled fashion companies. 
Each story is individual, but the troubles indicate broad structural 
adjustments afoot. Stores are increasingly putting the squeeze on 
manufacturers, demanding they accept unsold merchandise, pay for advertising 
and underwrite sales help. The virus has spread to all levels, hitting 
designer lines and bridge companies alike. Each new closing is a sad 
surprise with even the most seasoned industry watchers unable to predict 
who's next. Todd Oldham, who last week announced that he was closing 
his wholesale collection business, had looked to some like a likely 
candidate to buckle with his rollicking shows and innovative ornamentation. 
Oldham said Monday, sounding unapologetic, ``I never pretended for 
one minute that anyone needed anything I did.'' A small signature 
line will be sold in his store at 123 Wooster Street (Prince Street) 
and at another in Japan, he said. ``When you're making silver bras 
dotted with Swarovski crystals, it didn't do much to secure our name 
in the salability hall of fame,'' Oldham added. But names of wide 
appeal and sobriety have also been hit. Nautica, a powerhouse in the 
men's business, said last week it will end its two-year-old licensing 
agreement with Chaus, an American apparel company, to produce the 
Nautica women's collection after the fall 1999 season. It is not clear 
if a women's line will continue after that, the president and chief 
designer for Nautica International, David Chu, said Monday. Nautica 
has sales this year of almost $900 million, of which 10 to 15 percent 
are in women's wear. Anne Klein is on the block. Emanuel, amid heavy 
losses, earlier this year parted with Maura DeVisscher and Kim Perrone, 
its top executives. Andrea Jovine and Kenar have closed recently. 
Meanwhile, Adrienne Vittadini resigned this month from her company, 
which had become a shadow of its former self. How to explain all the 
turbulence? Not only have retailers become tougher, but women have 
become less eager to spend all their discretionary income on fashion 
_ a long-term trend that has slowed sales in the 1990s compared with 
the decade earlier. To some, the dramatic recent business failures 
may suggest the end of fashion as they have known it. But in fact, 
fashion, which historically has been a fragmented business of small 
and medium-size players, has entered the age of the mega-brand. ``Women's 
has been a very tough market this past year,'' Chu said. ``There's 
going to be a lot more potential for shake out. If you're a strong 
brand, you can survive this turmoil.'' Consolidated department stores 
are churning the waters, demanding ever bigger concessions from manufacturers. 
And bigger stores need to work with bigger vendors. The realigning 
of fashion has meant that talented designers with their own collection 
must hire themselves out to survive. As in a film about the Wild West, 
the star designer-for-hire comes to town, barrels loaded, creates 
a commotion and cleans up a dusty fashion house. And small design 
houses now find it safer and are surviving by establishing their own 
boutiques instead of relying on department stores. Oldham, whose collection 
has been carried in Bloomingdale's, Saks Fifth Avenue and Henri Bendel's, 
said he plans to open small jeans stores selling his jeans line and 
TO2, a lower-price junior collection. It is doubtful that without 
his two signature stores Oldham could have done as well as he had 
for so long. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>