<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981026.0288 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A 28-year-old Jewish security guard was shot to death by two Palestinian 
gunmen Monday afternoon, his bloody body hurled from a speeding car 
and left by the roadside in the rancorously divided West Bank city 
of Hebron. Then, in what seemed to be a gruesome tit-for-tat, a 69-year-old 
Palestinian man was found slain in his olive grove outside the Jewish 
settlement of Itamar, near Nablus, and anonymous callers to the Israeli 
police asserted that it was a revenge killing on behalf of the settlers. 
Among Israelis and Palestinians alike, the killings were linked to 
the peace agreement signed at the White House on Friday. What some 
saw as the inevitable spasms of violence that would dog the peace 
effort, others decried as evidence that there was no genuine good 
will. In Israel, right-wing critics who welcomed Prime Minister Benjamin 
Netanyahu back from Washington with threats of ouster saw the Hebron 
killing as proof that Yasser Arafat, the Palestinian leader, could 
not or would not control terrorism, no matter what had been promised 
at the Wye Plantation in Maryland. ``To believe the Palestinians would 
fight terror is to deceive the people,'' said Moshe Peled, a member 
of Tsomet, a faction of Netanyahu's Likud Party. ``And down that path 
of deception walk Bibi Netanyahu and his ministers.'' And in the West 
Bank, in a mirror image of the issue, skeptical Palestinians asserted 
that the olive-grove killing proved that Netanyahu does not want to 
control the settlers. ``In the news the Jews say that they are not 
satisfied,'' said Mayor Mohammed Abu Samra of the West Bank town of 
Beit Furik, near Itamar. ``We feel we are not secure as people who 
are surrounded by settlers who will attack an old man picking olives.'' 
Netanyahu handily survived an attempted vote of no confidence called 
by the far-right party Moledet on Monday, with not even half of Parliament 
taking part. But a coalition of leftist and rightist Israeli lawmakers 
agreed to send a direct elections bill to Parliament this week in 
the first step toward dissolving his government, and proposed that 
elections be held in March. In the marble halls of Parliament on Monday 
night, emotions ran high and rhetoric flew, linking the Hebron killing 
to the larger issues before them: the peace agreement and the fate 
of the government. News of the second killing had not yet arrived 
there. Moshe Katzav, the deputy prime minister, said he was profoundly 
depressed. ``For us, what is important is not a signed agreement but 
the security of our people,'' he said. ``An incident like this at 
such a moment _ it says that we in this agreement have made large 
compromises and received nothing in return.'' The Israeli security 
guard, Danny Vargas, was a Chilean-born Jewish immigrant, a father 
of two and a martial-arts expert who lived in a settlement on the 
outskirts of Hebron. He guarded a power plant that served the Jewish 
settlers, and he was popular as the town soccer coach. He was found 
nose down in a pool of blood about 2:30 p.m. by a group of Palestinian 
photographers who saw the assailants flee into Palestinian-controlled 
Hebron in Vargas' car. The photographers called both Palestinian and 
Israeli ambulances; Palestinian medics arrived first. In an unusual 
scene, the Palestinians worked furiously to resuscitate the settler, 
surrounded by a crowd of Israeli police officers. Since the suspects 
fled into Palestinian-controlled Hebron, it immediately put to the 
test one of the most delicate issues negotiated in Maryland: the security 
cooperation between Israeli and Palestinian forces. There has been 
a fragile working relationship between the two sides in Hebron since 
it was divided in 1997. Speaking next to a weathered hearse that contained 
Vargas' body, Brig. Gen. Yithak Eitan, the commander of the West Bank 
for the Israeli army, suggested that there was some immediate cooperation 
on Monday. ``We demanded Palestinian police to search for the car 
and the people, and minutes afterward they found the car in the Palestinian 
part of Hebron,'' he said. ``In some cases, the Palestinian police 
do enough and in others they do not. I hope that this is one where 
they will do everything in their power to apprehend those responsible.'' 
An angry crowd gathered nearby, Palestinian youths juggling rocks 
on the Palestinian side, and Jewish settlers spewing fury on the other. 
``This is the response of Arabs to the treason agreement,'' Yaron 
Adler, 23, said, with a baby on his back. ``For 10 days Bibi sat with 
him, with Arafat, and hugged with him like Chamberlain hugged with 
the Nazi Hitler. May his name be erased.'' The settlers' leadership 
first learned of the Hebron killing when they were meeting with Netanyahu 
in Jerusalem, a day after they withdrew their support for him and 
threatened to help topple his government. After they learned of the 
second killing, they issued a beeper alert to the news media, saying 
they hoped the killing would not be traced to their community. ``If 
in fact our worst fears come true, we would like to denounce the act 
of killing,'' said Aharon Domb, the settlers' leader. ``This is not 
the way of the Jews.'' Mohammad Zalmout, who was 69 and the father 
of three, was hours late in going home from picking olives, when his 
family heard radio reports that a caller to the police had boasted 
of a revenge killing. They worried, said Abu Samra, the mayor of the 
town where they live, and with reason. After a long search prompted 
by the call, the Israelis found the body near the settlement of Itamar, 
and it turned out to be Zalmout's. The Israelis closed the borders 
to Hebron and imposed a curfew on the Palestinians who live there. 
A few days after a peace agreement stressing reciprocal security was 
signed, an adviser to Arafat suggested they take the same action in 
the settlement near the olive grove. ``Why don't they put closure 
on Itamar like they have on Hebron?'' Ahmed Tibi said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>