<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981026.0437 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Four years after he attacked Sen. Alfonse M. D'Amato as a threat to 
ethics in government, Mayor Rudolph Giuliani campaigned with the senator 
in Republican strongholds across the city Monday, contending that 
D'Amato's influence within Congress' Republican majority was vital 
to the city's well-being. As the Republicans toured three boroughs, 
D'Amato's Democratic challenger, Rep. Charles E. Schumer, received 
the endorsement of William J. Bratton, the former New York City police 
commissioner, who praised Schumer's work in helping to pass a sweeping 
crime bill in 1994. The dueling events featuring officials who have 
built national reputations for fighting crime showed the importance 
of the issue to both camps, even as violent-crime rates continue to 
fall. For D'Amato, the tour of Rego Park in Queens, Little Italy in 
Manhattan and Bensonhurst and Crown Heights in Brooklyn also provided 
an opportunity to reach out to the conservative Jewish and Italian 
voters who represent his core constituencies in the city, where he 
traditionally runs well behind his Democratic rivals. The three-term 
senator's tour was his most vigorous day of campaigning in the city 
this year. In the race for governor, Gov. George Pataki, the Republican 
seeking re-election, was endorsed by State Sen. Alton R. Waldon Jr., 
a Queens Democrat. ``All across New York state, crime is down and 
citizens feel safer and more secure since Governor Pataki first took 
office,'' Waldon said at a Manhattan news conference with the governor. 
``Business leaders are much more optimistic about the direction New 
York is headed in and are providing more jobs for the working men 
and women of this state.'' In a sign of how important Pataki, who 
is enjoying high approval ratings, has become to D'Amato's political 
survival, the two Republicans are scheduled to begin four days of 
barnstorming together across the state. Their tour will start Tuesday, 
when they will hop-skip from Schenectady to Rochester, Niagara Falls, 
Buffalo, and Hicksville, Nassau County. Monday night, Pataki's Democratic 
challenger, Peter Vallone, the city council speaker, held a fund-raiser 
at the Sheraton New York Hotel in midtown Manhattan that was expected 
to raise $500,000. In his five-minute speech to the crowd, Vallone 
compared Pataki to a hologram for having refused to debate him. ``He's 
there, but you can't seem to grasp him,'' Vallone said. Monday, Bratton 
described Schumer as ``a man who is largely responsible for giving 
us many of the tools'' that helped the city reduce crime. The 1994 
crime bill provided financing for 100,000 police officers and increased 
penalties for an array of federal crimes as well as banning assault 
weapons. D'Amato voted against the bill, punctuating his criticism 
that it included unnecessary spending by singing ``Old MacDonald had 
some pork'' on the Senate floor. Monday, Schumer replayed a videotape 
recording of that 1994 performance, calling it ``probably the most 
embarrassing spectacle ever by a New York senator.'' ``Can you imagine 
Robert Wagner or Jacob Javits or Robert Kennedy or Herbert Lehman 
singing `Old MacDonald' on the Senate floor?'' Schumer asked during 
a news conference at his Manhattan campaign office. Giuliani sought 
to counter Bratton's campaign appearance by describing D'Amato as 
a strong supporter of tougher sentences for criminals. He also had 
some barbed comments for Bratton, who resigned under pressure in 1996 
after months of feuding with Giuliani over credit for the city's declining 
crime rate. ``He's from Boston,'' Giuliani said of Bratton. ``What 
would he know?'' But Monday's events clearly posed some conflicts 
for Giuliani. In 1994, he crossed party lines to endorse Gov. Mario 
Cuomo, a Democrat, in his race against Pataki, a protege of D'Amato. 
Giuliani warned then that, ``If the D'Amato-Pataki crew ever get control, 
ethics will be trashed.'' Monday, Giuliani said his 1994 remarks ``were 
based upon a mistake I made in calculating how Governor Pataki would 
act, how Senator D'Amato would act.'' Giuliani had also strongly supported 
the 1994 crime bill and is an advocate of gun control, which D'Amato 
consistently votes against. Monday, Giuliani said that Schumer ``has 
done some good things for the city.'' But he sidestepped his differences 
with D'Amato over restricting guns, saying that gun control and tougher 
sentences were both essential to reducing crime. The mayor also repeatedly 
praised D'Amato's work in directing federal aid to New York City's 
mass transit system and hospitals, adding that it would ``make no 
sense'' to replace a senior senator with a freshman. ``This is a senator 
who is among the most powerful in the United States Senate, in the 
party that is going to control the United States Senate for the next 
two years, and probably the next four or six years'' Giuliani said. 
At his events, D'Amato continued his attack on Schumer's attendance 
record this year. And in Crown Heights, where he received endorsements 
from several Lubavitcher community leaders, D'Amato suggested that 
Schumer had not done enough to help Jewish residents during the 1991 
riots in that neighborhood. ``May we all have the courage to step 
up, not just when it is politically expedient, but whenever a community 
or people are in need,'' said D'Amato, who was wearing a yarmulke 
and was surrounded by a crowd of bearded Lubavitcher men. Schumer's 
campaign said that Schumer was in close contact with Lubavitcher leaders 
throughout the riot and played an important role in pushing the Justice 
Department to continue its investigation into the murder of Yankel 
Rosenbaum, a rabbinical student killed during the disturbance. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>