<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981026.0240 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
My Marathon Blues came earlier than usual this year. Normally my guilt 
about not running the New York City Marathon comes a week before the 
event, when the excitement begins to build and runners from all over 
the world converge on the city. But this year the blues came ahead 
of schedule, a month or so ago, after workers posted the new advertisement 
on the billboard overlooking the intersection of 155th and St. Nicholas 
Place in Manhattan: ``New York City Marathon: Where the World Comes 
to Run.'' The message was set off by a drawing of five runners crossing 
the finish line, holding hands in unity and triumph. Great. Every 
November for the last 16 years, I have put the New York City Marathon 
on next year's ``to do'' list. I make the same vow to begin training, 
sometimes with more verve, sometimes with less. Each year I purchase 
some new item to get myself started: a jump rope, basketball hand 
grips, light weights. I bought a bike. I could create an exhibit with 
the artifacts of marathons never run. Something always happens. First 
it is winter, and then there are columns to write, dogs to walk, games 
to attend. Then comes the spring thaw, then summer. The next thing 
I know, fall is back and they're putting up new signs for the marathon 
and I've got the blues again. That becomes a natural state in the 
fall. Last year I actually came close, at least by association. Last 
fall I experienced marathon preparation, vicariously, through a friend 
who was running her first marathon. Ayesha Paynde, an editor at Crown 
Books, had never done anything remotely resembling a marathon. But 
she decided that she was going to make that journey. Paynde bubbled 
all over again recently as she recalled the day of the race, the high 
of heading toward the starting position and the electricity of standing 
among the multitudes. ``The feeling,'' she recalled, ``standing on 
the bridge and there's this huge crowd all around you and Mayor Giuliani's 
there, and he gives a little speech, the helicopters are hovering 
overhead, you look around you and there are people of every imaginable 
race and nationality all around you and everybody's just so psyched 
and screaming and cheering and the adrenaline is flowing.'' But for 
Paynde, there will be no sequel this year; she'll be among the spectators. 
``Running a marathon was one of the most thrilling experiences of 
my entire life,'' she said, ``and so in a way I was a little bit scared 
that if I did it again it wouldn't feel as good. And so I made a conscious 
choice not to do it. But I haven't found anything remotely equally 
exciting to replace it. So I'm missing it.'' Once again I've missed 
it, too, though what I really crave is almost everything except the 
running: the electric charge on the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge; the 
high of running through different neighborhoods; the thrill of hugging 
family and friends at the finish line; heroically wrapping the silver 
blanket around my body, and wearing it for the next week. The problem, 
of course, is all the blanks that I would have to fill in to make 
that happen. Truth be told, I hated running. Sprinting was what I 
loved. Throughout my athletic experiences _ grammar school, high school, 
college _ running was something I did to get in shape for racing. 
Paynde said that what turned her on was exactly that process of preparation. 
``It's an incredible ego boost,'' she said. ``The knowledge that at 
some point in the training you realize, `Oh, my God; I can do this.' 
Especially somebody like me who's never really pushed herself that 
hard physically. To know that I could do something so extraordinary, 
like running 26 miles. It gave me the kind of lift nothing else has 
ever given me, including getting good grades in school, because that 
always came easily to me. This was a huge physical accomplishment 
for me.'' Twenty-six miles. The number flashes in my head like the 
neon light on that billboard at 155th and St. Nick's. For the last 
few years, I've got into the habit of getting in my car and resetting 
the trip odometer to zero. As I drive, I check to see how far I've 
traveled, and then try to imagine what it would be like to run that 
distance. From my house to La Guardia is eight miles _ imagine running 
from my house to the airport. Doable. From my house to Giants Stadium 
_ 11 miles _ imagine running to the Stadium. Imagine running from 
my house to Hempstead, on Long Island. My imagine screen goes blank. 
My Times colleague Ozier Muhammad, who has run five marathons, including 
New York in 1990 and 1992, cautioned me that running a marathon is 
as much mental as it is physical. ``Not just body preparedness but 
mental preparedness,'' Muhammad said. ``Getting your mind prepared 
to run four hours is a big undertaking.'' So once again I'll begin 
my mental undertaking on Sunday, spurred by the familiar tinge of 
guilt when all the runners pass through the boroughs greeted by hundreds 
of thousands of fans and well-wishers. But I've made a pact to start 
marathon training in earnest next month. This time, for sure. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>