<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981026.0340 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After nine days of secret meetings on the tormenting issues of Israeli-Palestinian 
peace, the denouement in the East Room of the White House had its 
inherent fascination. But for me the most interesting aspect of the 
ceremony was what it said about President Clinton. Three things, really. 
First, only the president of the United States could have pushed parties 
so morbidly suspicious of each other through nine days of prickly 
talks to agreement. And only this president. Not since Jimmy Carter 
at Camp David 20 years ago has a president involved himself so deeply 
in a Middle East negotiation. No one else had the prestige, the knowledge 
of the issues and the personal commitment needed to make this negotiation 
work. That estimate of Clinton's role was a common thread in the remarks 
by Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, Chairman Yasser Arafat and King 
Hussein. Netanyahu's words were in a way surprising, because he and 
Clinton have not exactly admired each other _ not since Clinton virtually 
campaigned for Shimon Peres in the 1996 Israeli election. ``He is 
a warrior for peace,'' Netanyahu said of the president. ``I mean, 
he doesn't stop. He has this ability to maintain a tireless pace and 
to nudge and prod and suggest and use a nimble and flexible mind to 
truly explore the possibilities of both sides, and never just on one 
side. That is a great gift, I think a precious and unique one, and 
it served us well.'' The king was even warmer _ and more poignant, 
given his struggle with cancer. He had known American presidents since 
Eisenhower with respect and affection, he said, but he had never known 
one with Clinton's ``dedication, clearheadedness, focus and determination 
... the tolerance and the patience of Job.'' Second, the president's 
achievement in the Wye River negotiation put the Monica Lewinsky affair 
in perspective. How trivial it looked compared with the stakes at 
Wye River for Israelis and Palestinians, and for the peace of the 
world. The admiring comments on Clinton effectively showed what foreign 
statesmen think about the Lewinsky business. They think it is frivolous 
compared with Clinton's duties and abilities, and they regard our 
preoccupation with it as grotesque. They see the Republican attempt 
to remove Clinton from office as a piece of narrow partisanship at 
the expense of America's place in the world. The reaction of some 
Clinton-haters to the Middle East accord was telling. The Wall Street 
Journal editorial page led with another in its dreary series on ``Clinton 
Scandals.'' In the adjoining column an outside writer, Robert Satloff 
of the Washington Institute for Near East Policy, appraised the Wye 
accomplishment as substantial; the editors put a headline on his piece 
that made it sound critical. But those who are more dispassionate 
about Bill Clinton could also see, in the East Room ceremony, reason 
for disappointment in him. That was the third response the occasion 
evoked. We saw in the East Room a president at the top of his form, 
intelligent, at ease, the master of his brief. And we saw a politician 
who cared so much about this negotiation that he put off campaign 
plans for an election two weeks away. What might have been if Bill 
Clinton had had that kind of commitment on other things over the last 
six years _ if he had not so often waffled on issues and abandoned 
friends. He had exceptional leadership qualities. He understood that 
Americans wanted pragmatic solutions, not ideology. But again and 
again he did not seem to care. The area that troubles me the most 
is civil liberties. Clinton's years in office will be remembered for 
the destruction of federal habeas corpus, the stripping away of judicial 
protection of immigrants from official cruelty and other losses to 
liberty. A president who once taught constitutional law did not raise 
his voice in objection. It is only fair to add that this president 
has been under the most sustained, vicious, bountifully financed attack 
of any president in decades. He survived, and I believe he will survive 
the impeachment effort. Certainly his performance at Wye River disposes 
of the argument that because of the Lewinsky affair he cannot be an 
effective president. He can, when he cares. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>