<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981026.0293 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The themes of an elusive unity and a painful history were dominant 
on Monday as Germany's newly elected Parliament convened for its last 
inaugural session here. Meeting just months before the symbol-laden 
return to the Reichstag in Berlin next year, and on the eve of its 
formal election of Social Democrat Gerhard Schroeder as the country's 
seventh postwar chancellor on Tuesday, the 669-member chamber was 
full of the introspection that accompanies a major historical shift. 
In its initial act, Parliament for the first time elected as its president 
a politician from the former East Germany, Wolfgang Thierse, 55. Thierse, 
also a Social Democrat, immediately addressed the linked issues of 
the return to Berlin as capital and Germany's difficulties in turning 
unification into a real unity. ``If internal unity is really to come 
about, it presupposes the equality made possible only by an acknowledgment 
of differences,'' Thierse said. He added that the main issue in Berlin 
would not be ``the dangers of a new Prussian military centralism,'' 
but the fact that the city would ``as a melting pot of German-German 
problems force us, the Parliament, to face these difficulties directly.'' 
While embraced by an overwhelming majority of Germans, unification 
has been marked by a bitterness unimagined in 1990. Its huge cost 
has weighed on people in the west without spawning much gratitude 
in the east, where rampant unemployment and the arrival of what some 
see as a heartless consumerism have caused unease. Indeed, anger in 
the east was central to Schroeder's victory over Chancellor Helmut 
Kohl, and the choice of Thierse reflected the Social Democrats' debt 
to that part of the country. Active in the pro-democracy movements 
that led to the fall of the Berlin wall in 1989, Thierse worked as 
a literary researcher in the former communist state. He spoke on Monday 
in the glass-walled Parliament chamber beside the Rhine that, in its 
simple transparency, seemed to capture the modesty of the postwar 
German democracy that took root in Bonn. Above him hovered the national 
emblem of the eagle, but one so plump as almost to resemble a dove 
_ a Prussian symbol rounded to a Rhineland docility. Much discussion 
has focused here on whether the eagle should be reshaped for the move 
to the Reichstag _ some have suggested a more angular look _ but in 
the end it was decided that the bird would be unchanged as it moved 
east to Berlin. This debate, like many in Germany, has underscored 
a faint uneasiness about the return to Berlin. By drawing Germany's 
center of gravity hundreds of miles to the east, and by placing the 
capital in the city that is at once the symbol of long division and 
of unification, some, like Thierse, hope that unity will advanced. 
But fears of a new German nationalism also exist, and Thierse alluded 
to these. ``It was not Berlin that let Prussian militarism develop 
_ it was the political and military elites,'' he said, adding, ``Today 
it is our obligation to repel and restrain opponents of democracy.'' 
Those opponents were from both the left and the far right, he said, 
and should be viewed with vigilance in order that their threat be 
overcome. A vocal, if very marginal, neo-Nazi movement has grown up 
in the former east, largely in protest at 20 percent unemployment 
there. Thierse's themes were also taken up the other speaker on Monday, 
Fred Gebhardt, a 70-year-old member of the Party of Democratic Socialism, 
the successor party to the East German communists. He addressed Parliament 
as its oldest member. ``One cannot get rid of history, even if some 
people express this wish publicly,'' said Gebhardt, whose great-grandfather, 
a Social Democrat, was shot by the Nazis. ``This wish is not worth 
wishing, because we must bear the responsibility of giving an example 
by our lives, one showing we have learned the lessons of history.'' 
He suggested that the formerly communist east boasted ``considerable 
social and cultural achievements'' and that if this was not recognized, 
``we will fail mentally in solving the question of unification.'' 
His words were greeted by a stony silence among the center and center-right 
parties, whose members did not applaud the speech. About a quarter 
of the members of the new Parliament are new, and a record 207 are 
women. The Social Democrats and the environmentalist Greens hold a 
comfortable 21-seat majority, enough to insure Schroeder's election 
on an agreed program that provides for modest economic reforms aimed 
at stimulating job creation and more sweeping social reforms, including 
a new immigration law. Kohl looked jovial as he sat at the back of 
the chamber. The man who led Germany to unification was awarded the 
Grand Cross by President Roman Herzog on Monday. He was the first 
chancellor to receive the honor since Konrad Adenauer, who laid the 
foundations of the postwar state. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>