<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981026.0247 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
One of the most important things travelers buy with their vacation 
dollars is time _ the precious weeks, days or even hours in which 
they get to explore undiscovered horizons. That is why it is so annoying 
to become lost while on a driving trip: it's a particularly expensive 
waste of time. But the United States military, that swordmaker with 
the plowshare outlet store, has developed technology that can help 
keep a car trip on the right path. Since the 1970s, the military has 
used signals from its network of 24 Global Positioning Satellites 
to pinpoint targets on earth within inches. This GPS system has been 
adapted by the civilian market into computers that can guide motorists 
to their destinations turn by turn. Navigation computers _ featuring 
full-color maps on dashboard monitors and directions spoken by reassuring-sounding 
voices _ are a hot option in luxury cars, turning up in such brands 
as Lexus and Mercedes at a price of $2,000 to $2,500. But less affluent 
travelers can find their way around, too. Some car-rental companies 
offer cars equipped with these computers in selected cities. And there 
are navigation systems that can be run by laptop computers, for use 
in the family car or a rental car. Unlike CD-ROMs that print out directions 
on a home computer, these programs work in real time, showing you 
where you are within 100 yards on a road map and correcting you when 
you make a wrong turn. After road-testing eight of these systems, 
I have found my way back to tell you that although the better ones 
sharply reduce the risk of getting lost (particularly in larger cities), 
they do not completely eliminate it. There are two different sets 
of map databases in use; the most carefully researched ones _ which 
literally offer house-by-house coverage _ encompass about 3,000 cities, 
accounting for more than half the United States population. But out 
in Montana, for example, you are on your own unless your destination 
appears on a major roadway. And the lists of restaurants, banks, shopping 
centers and other points of interest that these computers include 
are not complete or fully up to date. Renting a Car With a System 
The least expensive way to try a navigation computer is to rent a 
car equipped with one. Hertz has 8,000 cars with on-board navigation 
computers in 35 cities, said Lauren E. Garvey, a spokeswoman. The 
cities include Atlanta, Chicago, New York, Washington and Los Angeles, 
in vehicles ranging from midsize to luxury cars. The cost is $6 a 
day extra. There are about 800 cars in the Avis fleet equipped with 
navigation computers, all spread among five Florida airports: in Fort 
Lauderdale, West Palm Beach, Tampa, Miami and Orlando. The computers 
are available on Buick Skylarks, Pontiac Bonnevilles or similar-size 
cars at $6 a day extra. National has had about 500 cars equipped with 
navigation computers for the last two years in Atlanta and Detroit. 
``And we really haven't had much response on them,'' said Dan Callahan 
of National. Spokesmen for Alamo, Budget and Dollar Thrifty said that 
their companies did not offer cars with navigation systems. Because 
these systems are designed for one purpose only _ guiding a motorist 
_ they are very user-friendly (not nearly as difficult to learn as 
a new program for a home computer). The address or name of a business 
is entered into the dash-mounted screen from a menu of possibilities 
by means of a button with four directional arrows, and within seconds 
the first of a complete set of turn-by-turn directions appears on 
the screen _ and is spoken by a clear, human-sounding voice. The computer's 
database includes many major landmarks, hotels, shopping centers, 
restaurants and even ATMs. The navigation computer is most effective 
if you know the street address of your destination _ so that, if you 
are looking for a hot new restaurant in Los Angeles, for example, 
the computer will get you there even if the place is not in its list 
of restaurants. If a street address is in a city of 50,000 or more, 
the navigation computer should be able to come up with directions. 
And if any confusion along the way leads to a wrong turn, the computer 
will alert you by voice and by arrows on the screen within less than 
a minute and redraw the route. Software Kits for Laptops Anyone with 
a laptop can, for a few hundred dollars extra, have a portable navigation 
computer as well. Two companies sell kits with the software and the 
car GPS antenna, about the size of a computer mouse. Travroute, a 
company in Princeton, N.J., sells Door-to-Door Copilot for $199. It 
will run on any laptop with a 75-megahertz logic chip, 16 megabytes 
of RAM and 120 megabytes of hard drive. The kit contains two CDs (one 
with the route-finding program, the other with street maps for the 
contiguous 48 states) and the GPS antenna. Or you can buy the system 
already installed in a Toshiba Libretto, a laptop slightly larger 
than a daily appointment-planner. Priced at $1,499 or $1,999 depending 
on the speed, it has voice-recognition technology that lets the driver 
speak direction requests to the computer, while keeping hands on the 
wheel. If you make a wrong turn, it lets you know by saying something 
along the lines of ``Calculating new route.'' Contact Travroute Software, 
1000 Herrontown Road, Princeton, N.J. 08540; (888) 872-8768 or www.travroute.com. 
The other kit, Street PC 98, is sold by Liikkuva Systems International. 
The software, including nine disks covering the contiguous 48 states 
and the GPS antenna, costs $399. Liikkuva (``mobile'' in Finnish) 
is at 3330 Cameron Park Drive, Suite 400, Cameron Park, Calif. 95682; 
(800) 513-9989, www.liikkuva.com. Liikkuva recommends a laptop with 
a 133-megahertz chip or faster, with 32 MB RAM and a 400-MB hard drive. 
Because both of these programs work with Windows 95 or 98, they take 
longer to start than the on-board navigation computers designed specifically 
for cars, which are ready to go a few seconds after being turned on. 
Both speak in a computer-synthesized voice that is sometimes hard 
to understand. Also, these two programs require users to do some navigating 
themselves _ through a series of commands, text input and icons that 
built-in car computers don't require. Simply put, you can learn how 
to use a purpose-built in-car navigation system in one trip, while 
Door-to-Door or Street PC 98 will take a weekend or more to get used 
to. On the other hand, you don't have to buy a Mercedes-Benz or rely 
on a rental-car company to honor your request for a computer-equipped 
car. Street PC 98, because it uses a more detailed series of street 
database disks, is more likely to come up with the right set of directions 
than Door-to-Door Copilot. The makers of Copilot have put all 48 states 
onto one CD-ROM and have primarily relied on Census Bureau maps. Street 
PC 98, on the other hand, uses map-database disks created by Navigation 
Technologies of Rosemont, Ill., whose field representatives gather 
details on all the streets, businesses and landmarks on its disks. 
Using Navigation Technology disks is comparable to having someone 
sitting next to you who has been down the same road before. Using 
Door-to-Door, by comparison, is like having a person next to you who 
is reading a street map. Door-to-Door too often acted as if it were 
new in town, instructing me to do the illegal (like going down a one-way 
street the wrong way), the impossible (like turning left onto a divided 
highway) or the incomprehensible (like taking an Interstate southbound 
when the only choices were east- or westbound). There are other such 
programs and devices on the market. Datus, part of the South Korean 
conglomerate Daewoo, sells a device about as big as a large remote 
control that I did not try. It contains an antenna and screen, and 
costs $995, plus $349 to $849 for the map data. Contact Datus, 70 
Las Colinas Lane, San Jose, Calif. 95119; (408) 360-4200. But the 
portable navigation computer that was the most fun, as well as the 
simplest, was something called the Avstar Navigator, which costs about 
$1,500. This one has no keys to press or screen to look at, so it 
is probably the safest navigation system to use while driving. About 
the size of a large loaf of bread, it works by voice recognition _ 
talk to it, and it talks back. It comes with a central processing 
unit into which the map disks are inserted, a speaker-microphone that 
you can clip onto a sun visor and a GPS antenna (with the more expensive 
AVN-2 model, which is the only one I'd recommend). You also get all 
four map disks, but only one disk is pre-activated; you must pay $89 
to activate a second disk, $79 for a third, and so on. Until you become 
truly conversant with it, the Avstar Navigator can be run off a basic 
set of voice commands. The voice-recognition technology seemed pretty 
reliable. (Just try to keep the windows closed and be sure to turn 
down the radio when you speak to it.) And you will usually not have 
to spell out the entire name of the street you are seeking _ if it 
is a distinctive name, like Broadway, you could spell as little as 
B-R-O-A, and the Avstar Navigator will figure out what you want. If 
you say ``I am lost,'' it will replan the route from wherever you 
are. It takes a little longer to make a trip request with the Avstar 
Navigator than it does with a typical in-car navigation computer (at 
least with the beginner commands), but it is faster than the Street 
PC 98 or Copilot systems. And Avstar is a truly hands-off navigation 
system. It's all done by conversation between you and the unit, which 
speaks in a clear male voice (it even hums when calculating a longer 
route to let you know it isn't ignoring you). The main drawbacks are 
twofold: it is bulkier than a laptop, and the four map disks cover 
only slightly more than half the metropolitan areas included in the 
full set of Navigation Technologies disks, which are used by most 
carmakers. I also found the Avstar system a bit balky to start; otherwise 
it ran fine. Avstar is manufactured by IVS Inc., 121 East Huntington 
Drive, Monrovia, Calif. 91016; (626) 256-3100; www. avstar.ivs.com. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>