<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981026.0268 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Until he was 3 years old, Ryan Golden had his own understanding of 
race: boys were white like him, he figured, and girls, like his African-American 
sister, Nikki, had dark skin. ``All of a sudden, one day, he was in 
the bath with Nikki and another girl and he had the realization: not 
all girls are black,'' said Ryan's mother, Kathy Golden, whose North 
Olmstead, Ohio, family has grown to include two younger Hispanic girls, 
Abby and Jenna. Now, at 15 and 16, Ryan and Nikki are far more sophisticated 
about race, but still casual about the differences between them. ``I'm 
so used to being a minority in a white school, it's not a big deal,'' 
said Nikki, the outgoing one. ``Some people make comments, like `You 
act like you're white.' And I say, `That's really dumb. You can't 
act like a color.''' ``Good answer,'' said Ryan, smiling approvingly 
at his sister. When Bernie and Kathy Golden first contacted adoption 
agencies, in 1981, they were told that the wait for a healthy white 
infant would be eight years _ but much less for a child from another 
country, or of another race. ``We started down the track for a child 
from India, expecting to get a child in February 1982, but instead, 
the agency called and told us about Nikki,'' said Ms. Golden, 40. 
``I was pregnant with Ryan when we got the call, but I didn't tell 
them, because I knew we wanted Nikki. Race was never an issue for 
us. I don't know why, given that we're both Irish Catholics brought 
up in a very white world. But we just thought, yeah, we can do this. 
My parents were less comfortable with the idea, but that vanished 
the minute we stopped by their house on the way home with Nikki and 
opened up the baby blanket.'' While multiracial living is almost a 
hallmark of the Tiger Woods generation, it is families like the Goldens, 
with children of a different heritage from their parents, that play 
it out on the most intimate level. Such families are both a measure 
of, and a response to, a changing social climate that has begun to 
melt some of the boundaries that define racial territory. The proportion 
of interracial and interethnic marriages has been rising steadily 
for decades, according to the Census Bureau, and in a test of new 
forms allowing people to check more than one race, many people under 
18 used that option. ``Maybe the whole notion of race is becoming 
more fluid,'' said Claudette Bennett, chief of the bureau's racial 
statistics branch. But the process of choosing a child _ and which 
categories of children to consider _ spotlights a family's deepest 
feelings about race and culture. So it should be no surprise that 
race shapes the adoption marketplace, as witness the bald fact that 
white children usually cost more than black children, and that in 
the world of international adoptions, Africa is almost ignored. Last 
year, more than 5,000 children were adopted from Europe, more than 
6,000 from Asia and exactly 182 from Africa. ``There's a variety of 
reasons why people go to China for a child,'' said Randall Kennedy, 
a Harvard Law School professor who often writes about race. ``Part 
of it is that they can close their eyes and imagine themselves the 
parents of a little Chinese girl, but not of Shaniqua with the kinky 
hair. But another part, which I've had white friends talk about, was 
the worry that given the debate over transracial adoption, they'd 
be looked at coldly by African-Americans if they adopted a black child.'' 
Race also plays a role in decisions regarding the largest pool of 
adoptable children, the 100,000 children in foster care in the United 
States who need new parents. The black children who make up, on average, 
44 percent of those in state care are slower to be adopted than the 
41 percent who are white. ``We have families who say I'll take Hispanic, 
American Indian, anything but black,'' said Joyce Wadlington, who 
is in charge of recruiting adoptive families at the Cleveland child 
welfare agency. ``I don't know exact numbers, but I'd say only about 
5 percent of the white families coming in are interested in black 
children.'' There are many reasons that American families turn to 
international adoption rather than the public agencies that handle 
foster care. For one, foster children are generally older, and most 
people are looking for infants. Then, too, many foster children come 
with siblings. Some white families say they have been discouraged 
from seeking to adopt foster children of another race. And many would-be 
parents worry about the lingering effects of the abuse or neglect 
that landed the child in state custody, and the possibility of the 
biological family's reappearance. It is almost as though the universe 
of adoption comprises two worlds _ one filled with couples looking 
for a healthy infant to make them a family, and the other with older 
children in foster care looking for parents _ whose orbits rarely 
connect. Adoption professionals say that many Americans have a romanticized 
image of overseas orphanages, and an enormously negative view of foster 
care _ the system this nation turned to in preference to orphanages. 
``If people are choosing international adoption because they think 
that the children available overseas won't be abused, won't be from 
a dysfunctional family, will be from a better background than the 
children in foster care here, that's not necessarily going to be true,'' 
said Nancy Ward, a supervisor at the Children's Home Society in Minneapolis, 
which handles many international adoptions. Until the political opening 
of Russia in the early 1990s, most children adopted internationally 
were Asians placed in white homes, with Korea providing the largest 
contingent. But last year, for the first time _ despite extensive 
publicity about emotional problems among children adopted from Russian 
and Rumanian orphanages _ the largest group, nearly 4,000 children, 
came from Russia. ``Always before, international adoption meant interracial 
adoption,'' said Barbara Irvin, of Family Adoption Consultants, outside 
Cleveland. ``In the good old days, I would stand up and tell families 
doing intercountry adoption that they were about to become a walking 
advertisement for interracial living, that they would never walk into 
McDonald's unnoticed again. But that's less true now.'' Ms. Irvin 
said, however, that she was ``not always sure that people who adopt 
a Caucasian child from Russia understand the intercultural aspect.'' 
``That child is Russian,'' she said, ``just like a Korean child is 
Korean, and all children, whether or not they look different from 
their parents, are curious about their background.'' In recent years, 
there has been increasing recognition that children benefit from feeling 
connected with their heritage. But when the child's background is 
different from the parents', that is a more complicated, and more 
self-conscious process. Though every adopted child must deal with 
individual identity questions, those who are adopted across race or 
culture lines also grapple with the issue of group identity. The issues 
range from the cosmic to the quotidian: What if a child adopted from 
Guatemala avoids the two other Hispanic children in his class and 
says he hates the Spanish-speaking stores and restaurants his adoptive 
parents seek out? Will a Chicago synagogue be a comfortable place 
for a Chinese girl's bat mitzvah? Or, for the Goldens, who live in 
a mostly white suburb west of Cleveland and run a wholesale window-covering 
business, how does a white family learn about black hair care? ``When 
Nikki was a little baby, with little curls all over,'' Ms. Golden 
said, ``I took her downtown to a black hair shop, put her down and 
said, `You have to help me learn.' They taught me about oiling the 
hair, they taught me everything I needed to know. By now, I can do 
extensions.'' The deeper questions of racial identity are not so easily 
answered. For the children adopted from overseas, there are new institutions 
to bolster that connection. Korean adoptees can take their pick of 
support groups, culture camps and guided homeland tours of their birthplace. 
For American black and Hispanic children adopted into white families, 
there are fewer formal supports. ``You have to do it yourself,'' said 
Ms. Golden, whose family provided foster care three years ago for 
a biracial brother and sister, until the sister's behavior problems 
became too disruptive. ``When Nikki was little, we would get together 
informally with other white families who had black kids. And even 
now that they're teen-agers, they stay in touch. It is important to 
have a racial identity. Nikki was 4 or 5 when she started calling 
herself black. We'd never told her she should call herself black, 
but she identified that way very early.'' The Debate: Pros and Cons 
Of Racial Matching Recent changes in federal law have re-ignited a 
longstanding debate over racial matching, an issue still throbbing 
with the passions released in 1972, when the National Association 
of Black Social Workers declared that placing black children in white 
homes was a form of racial and cultural genocide. In 1994, Congress 
passed the Multiethnic Placement Act, making it illegal to delay placing 
a child to find a racially matched family, and emphasizing the need 
to recruit more minority adoptive families. Two years ago, the law 
was changed again, making it illegal to use race as a routine consideration 
in placing children. While the laws were touted in Congress as a means 
of cutting the time children spend in foster care, many experts say 
that it is the lack of interested families, not policies favoring 
racial matching, that delays placement of older, dark-skinned children. 
The main impact of the law, they say, will be to facilitate white 
families' private adoptions of biracial infants. Many social workers 
of all races still believe that, when possible, racial matching is 
in the child's best interest. But many are confused about when and 
how to consider race in placements. ``There's a mixed message in the 
policy,'' said Madelyn Freundlich, of the Evan Donaldson Adoption 
Institute in New York. ``On one hand, race and culture shall not be 
considered. On the other, there shall be a lot of outreach to find 
minority families. No wonder people who place children are very nervous 
about what to say, worrying that they may be making a misstep, or 
being scrutinized in such a way that it's a no-win situation to talk 
about.'' Adding to the concern is a growing body of legal battles, 
including one now dragging through the Rhode Island courts, in which 
white foster families and black blood relatives fight over a child. 
Ms. Ward, who worked in the Detroit child welfare system before going 
to Minneapolis, said her experience had convinced her that it was 
difficult for white families to meet the needs of black children. 
``It may not be so in Europe, where the racism is different, but here, 
I don't think most families are equipped to give kids the coping skills 
they will need,'' she said. ``The history of racism against blacks 
in this country is so deep, so ugly and so violent. It's not that 
we don't have racism against Asians or Hispanics, or that it's benign, 
or that white families are any better equipped to help a Korean child 
fit in with Koreans, but in this society, that has less severe consequences. 
``When you close your eyes and listen to African-American adults who 
were raised in white families,'' Ms. Ward said, ``you would think 
they were white. Things like that make it hard for them to identify 
with the African-American community.'' The Goldens agree that, when 
possible, a child should be placed with a racially matched family. 
But they also say that their mixed family has changed them profoundly, 
giving them a window on a world in which differences are genuinely 
celebrated and race need not be a divisive force. ``Becoming a multiracial 
family opens up your eyes to the richness and beauty of all that diversity,'' 
Ms. Golden said. ``We celebrate Cinco de Mayo, we have black baby 
dolls, we have Hispanic dolls. It's really transformed me. I'm much 
more aware of all kinds of prejudice. I used to be a person who couldn't 
talk to someone without blushing. I was really shy. But when someone 
in Bible school calls your daughter a nigger, you have to confront 
them.'' Bound by Heritage: Bridging the Gaps At Culture Camp For one 
week in July, Camp Idhuhapi, a YMCA camp in the Minnesota woods west 
of Minneapolis, becomes Camp Tiger, a place where dozens of teen-agers 
adopted from Korea gather to explore their cultural heritage. In the 
dining hall, David Gross and Mia White are making mahndu, Korean dumplings, 
spooning the meat filling into egg roll wrappers and sealing the edges, 
while they talk about who has the neatest dumplings and who did not 
answer whose letters over the winter. It is desultory conversation, 
but the setting carries a profound charge for the young people who 
come, year after year, to spend a week with others who share their 
experiences. Camp Tiger is led by David Yoon. Mr. Yoon, whose parents 
are Korean, was born and reared in Detroit and has been bridging the 
gap between Korea and the United States, adoption and immigration, 
since his first trip to culture camp after fourth grade. ``When I 
went to my first culture camp, I thought it would be very different 
to be with adopted kids,'' said Yoon, now a 24-year-old high school 
teacher in New Orleans. ``And the family life is very different. But 
there is a lot that is the same about the experience of being Korean 
in America. That's the common ground. I saw one girl arrive yesterday, 
with fear in her eyes, and I knew she had never seen so many Koreans 
in one place before.'' Most of the Camp Tiger participants said that 
while they enjoyed the Korean cultural activities, what drew them 
to culture camp was less what they did there than simply being with 
others who were like them, in a way that their parents were not. ``I 
go to an all-white school, and I've had my share of people make fun 
of me,'' David White said. ``All my friends are Caucasian. It's a 
tough life to be by yourself. I come here, and I remember how beautiful 
Asian can be. It makes you feel better to be in an environment where 
everyone knows what you've been through.'' There are dozens of culture 
camps scattered across the nation, most of them for Koreans, the largest, 
and oldest, group of international adoptees. Camps have sprung up 
for Romanian, Russian and Chinese adoptees, including day programs 
for those too young for sleepaway camp. In Minnesota, there were four 
Korean culture camps this summer, plus Celebrate Romania weekend, 
and La Semana Culture Camp for families who have adopted Latin American 
children. At Camp Tiger, while the teen-agers ate the Korean dinner 
they had prepared, the parents who help out at camp talked about the 
questioning their children had gone through, about the daughter who 
said she would marry a ``regular'' _ that is, white _ boy because 
it was easier, the son who only wants to date Asian girls and the 
daughter who lay sobbing on the bed, asking why she had to look so 
different that no one would date her. As a backdrop to the singing 
and cooking and games, the campers share stories of being mistaken 
for the only other Asian around, of wondering whether colored contact 
lenses would help them fit in, of having people they considered friends 
make insensitive remarks about their having slanted eyes or a flat 
face. Most of the older campers, and counselors, also Korean adoptees, 
said their parents had done a wonderful job of rearing them and of 
encouraging their connection to Korea: many learned of culture camp 
while attending Korean dance classes or support group meetings. Still, 
several said wistfully that they had sometimes wished for parents 
of their same culture. ``I had kind of an identity crisis in junior 
high school, after a bunch of Hmong families moved into my neighborhood,'' 
said Eva Margolis, a counselor who is a student at Occidental College 
in Los Angeles. ``When I saw the Hmong students, speaking Hmong with 
their parents, being who they were being, I was really jealous. For 
a while, I just wanted to hang out with the Hmong kids and their parents, 
and I kept thinking what it would be like if I had parents who were 
the same as me. That's when I started teaching myself Korean. I do 
think the best thing is if Korean kids could be adopted in Korea. 
But that would only work if that culture changed enough so that they 
would be accepted.'' Bound by Choice: A Tough Journey To a New Home 
On a Friday afternoon in May 1996, the caseworker for Luis, a 10-year-old 
Puerto Rican boy, picked him up at school on Manhattan's Lower East 
Side and took him to a spacious beige stucco home in a New York suburb, 
where Charlotte and Scott, a white couple who wanted to adopt him, 
were waiting to show him his new room in his new home. ``He came in 
with nothing but the clothes on his back,'' said Charlotte, who asked 
that only first names be used to protect Luis. ``It's a day you never 
forget. You have this kid who crosses your threshold, who all his 
life had been told to hate white people, who's very vulnerable, and 
you immediately feel that he belongs to you. He's upset, he's crying, 
and you have to comfort him, but he doesn't know what to say, and 
you don't know what to say. What we ended up with, what we talk about 
a lot, is how many changes he's gone through, and how scary and confusing 
it must be. Then we went to the Gap and bought him some clothes.'' 
Luis remembers the day, too. ``When they picked me up, I didn't want 
to go,'' he said. ``They had to strap me down in the van. I cried 
and did all that baby stuff. I'd never been in a house before. I wasn't 
used to all the trees.'' But now, at 13, just back from a whale-watching 
camp, his adoption finalized, Luis has a different view. ``It feels 
wonderful,'' he said simply, smiling out from the flying-saucer toy 
he has stretched to frame his face like a neon-pink crown. ``I trust 
them more, we talk more, we do things together. They're my parents. 
Parents are someone that watches you, that grounds you, and they're 
also friendly.'' Luis may not have come as far as children adopted 
internationally, but his journey across ethnic and class lines has 
been just as dramatic. Born in poverty on the Lower East Side of Manhattan, 
Luis spoke Spanish until he was 5 and started school. That was also 
the year he was removed from his parents' home, and, after being shuttled 
around in foster care briefly, placed with a Puerto Rican foster mother 
nearby. Luis knew little beyond his own neighborhood, and when he 
arrived, Charlotte and Scott say, there was a lot of talk about ``you 
white people.'' They have tried to support Luis' sense of himself 
as Puerto Rican, although, Scott said, none of the positive stereotypes 
of Puerto Rican life _ extended family, strong sense of religion, 
good food _ resonated with Luis' early experience. ``He said he wanted 
Puerto Rican food, so we ran around getting recipes,'' Charlotte said. 
``But when we served it, he'd say he didn't like rice or beans or 
peppers. It turned out what he meant he wanted was McDonald's. One 
Puerto Rican friend suggested a very simple thing: if he says he wants 
to be a scientist, we say something like, `The world needs more Puerto 
Rican scientists.''' The ethnic differences were never a serious issue 
in Luis' adoption, and that seems right to Charlotte and Scott. ``Maybe 
in an absolutely ideal world, where you would be deciding which of 
many families should get to adopt a child, all this racial stuff, 
about providing direct role models to help kids develop self-esteem, 
would make sense,'' said Scott, who, sensing Luis' craving for adult 
attention, spends an enormous amount of time coaching his soccer team, 
helping with homework, even watching him play video games. ``But the 
basic thing every child needs is an emotional foundation, and finding 
someone who will be there for that is a far more important issue.'' 
There is little demand for children like Luis, older children in foster 
care, who often have medical or emotional problems. Of the 500,000 
children in state care nationwide, about 100,000 need adoptive homes. 
But in 1995, the last year for which statistics are available, only 
27,000 were adopted. ``We wanted to do this because it's where the 
need is greatest,'' Charlotte said. ``Most of our friends thought 
we were crazy. Adopting an older child from foster care is not something 
people like us are supposed to do. There's an assumption that you're 
doing this because of infertility, which was not our situation. And 
there's a perception that all the kids in foster care are crack babies 
who are going to grow up to be drug addicts.'' Charlotte, 38, the 
research director for an educational media company, and Scott, 39, 
a pension-fund manager who had worked in a summer camp for emotionally 
disturbed teen-agers, knew not to expect an easy adjustment, immediate 
bonding or perfect behavior. And it has often been rocky. At the beginning, 
especially, Luis had frequent rages, in which he would call them names, 
fight or break a window. ``When he first came, he was suspended from 
school for getting in a fight,'' Charlotte said. ``I thought, `Oh 
my God, he'll be marked for life as the bad kid from the city.' But 
he's very sociable. And he made friends very quickly. He's an amazing 
kid. He's amazingly resilient.'' Even for a resilient child _ and 
determined parents _ the long adoption process took its toll. ``People 
talk about adjusting to the child, which is certainly an issue, but 
far more agonizing was having this bevy of social workers and others 
in your life, and having the adoption, which we were told would take 
about six months, stretch out to two years,'' Charlotte said. ``Until 
the adoption was finalized, we were just foster parents, and if we 
went out of state, even to Newark airport, we had to get permission. 
If he needed medical care, like when he got the chicken pox, we couldn't 
take him to our doctor, we had to go to the clinic where they took 
Medicaid.'' In March, around the time the adoption was finalized, 
Luis' behavior took a nose dive after having smoothed out some. ``We 
had a really bad few months there, remember?'' Scott asks. ``No,'' 
Luis says. ``I try not to remember bad things.'' ``I think it was 
about the adoption being finalized,'' his father says. ``Yeah,'' Luis 
says. ``It took, like, duh, 20 years. It was weird, to think that 
I was going to be changed forever. I didn't think it was going to 
happen.'' After the adoption, Luis went for the first time to visit 
his previous foster mother, wearing his soccer gear and showing off 
the trappings of his new life. He seems solidly and happily in place 
with Charlotte and Scott, at ease performing on the piano or arguing 
with his parents about which room he can use to watch ``Buffy, the 
Vampire Slayer.'' ``The hardest thing, actually, the thing he can't 
disentangle in his mind, is sorting out what's race and what's wealth,'' 
Charlotte said. ``It's confusing. I travel a lot for work, so we took 
him to Russia, and now he thinks that's what white kids do. For us, 
this has all the rewards of any kind of parenting, like when he was 
at camp, and he called and told us everything he was doing. That's 
what's thrilling, being included in his life. There are these very 
touching moments, like when we go to Boston Market, and he insists 
that we get the family meal.'' Bound by Blood: 2 Kinds of Family Fight 
Over Boy If there is any single case that illustrates the intricacies 
of how the Multiethnic Placement Act affects adoptions, it may be 
In Re Justin, which has been making its tortured way through the Rhode 
Island courts for more than two years _ half the lifetime of the brown-skinned 
boy at its center. Justin was born to a Hispanic father and a 17-year-old 
black mother who was living in foster care with an aunt. Since he 
was 13 months old, Justin has lived with Ronald and Sharon Lapierre, 
foster parents who are white, and Eric, an older boy they had previously 
adopted out of foster care. The Lapierres want to adopt Justin, too, 
and the Rhode Island Department of Children, Youth and Families has 
approved their petition to do so. But Justin's extended family wants 
him back. Justin's grandmother, Linda Saxon, expressed interest in 
adopting Justin soon after he was taken from his mother, who had a 
history of drug abuse. But in 1996, Ms. Saxon died of a heart attack. 
Justin's caseworker took him to the funeral, and after the service, 
Christine Thompson, Justin's cousin and godmother, told the caseworker 
that she wanted the boy. The fight for Justin has become a Solomonic 
tug of war: The Lapierres argue that Justin's solid attachment to 
them must not be disturbed, and that the research points to good outcomes 
for transracial adoptees. Insofar as they raise the race issue, it 
is to stress that under federal law, racial-matching policies are 
illegal. Ms. Thompson does not frame the case as a racial one, but 
argues that blood ties are paramount, that religion and heritage _ 
a word some see as a stand-in for race _ must be considered, and that 
the state public welfare office has unfairly failed to consider Justin's 
extended family members as candidates to adopt. The competing claims 
are so strong that some experts in the case recommended an unusual 
open adoption, with the Lapierres adopting and Ms. Thompson having 
the right to visit. But Rhode Island law makes no provision for such 
a resolution. The case sounds many of the themes that mark the short 
history of transracial adoption. Until the civil rights movement, 
most adoption agencies did not serve African-Americans, and black 
children whose parents could not raise them were generally cared for, 
informally, by relatives or neighbors. ``People forget that adoption 
agencies didn't start working with black families until the late 1950s 
and 1960s,'' said Carol Williams, who heads the Children's Bureau 
of the United States Department of Health and Human Services. ``Then, 
with the civil rights movement, there got to be a significant amount 
of placement across racial lines, in the era of love is all you need. 
It was in reaction to that history of exclusion, and that idea of 
color blindness, that the National Association of Black Social Workers 
said that identity is important, that race matters.'' But then, when 
public welfare agencies pulled away from transracial adoption, white 
families complained that racial-matching policies were keeping them 
from parenting children who needed them. ``It was a predictable swing 
of the pendulum that got us to the Multiethnic Placement Act, and 
then the amendments,'' Ms. Williams said. Ruth-Arlene W. Howe, of 
Boston College Law School, sees the new laws as a way to give white 
parents easier access to the growing number of babies born to unmarried 
white mothers and black fathers. ``The new law on racial matching 
is really about helping white parents to assert their right to adopt 
whatever child they select,'' said Professor Howe, who has testified 
for Ms. Thompson in the Justin case. Ms. Thompson, a single 27-year-old 
credit specialist who lives in Cranston, R.I., stresses her continued 
relationship with Justin while he lived with his mother, then in supervised 
visits she and the mother made while he lived with the Lapierres, 
and finally, in a few overnight visits from Justin that she was granted. 
``I'm not saying a white family should never adopt a black child,'' 
said Ms. Thompson, who was last allowed to see Justin in March, ``but 
here you have a child whose blood relatives want him, relatives who 
can give him a true sense of belonging. There are thousands of children 
in foster care who desperately need adoptive families. Why are they 
trying to take this child, whose family wants him? Frankly, I can't 
imagine a case in which the headline would read, `State Favors Black 
Foster Parents Over White Blood Relatives.''' The Lapierres' lawyer, 
Keven McKenna, said that as foster parents, his clients may not speak 
to the media. But they have assembled an impressive list of experts 
on transracial adoption to testify for them in the closed-court hearings 
that will soon yield a decision one way or the other. ``Transracial 
adoption is a tremendously complicated issue,'' said Kennedy, one 
of two Harvard Law School professors who provided testimony backing 
the Lapierres. ``You're talking about kids, you're talking about groups. 
And one of the uglier things that's not often spoken of that's also 
going on is resentment of white yuppie infertile couples. I've had 
people come up and say, `How can you defend these people _ they've 
got everything else, now you want them to have our children.' ``But 
what we're talking about is who is `our children,''' Kennedy said. 
``Black children, American children, all children? When people talk 
about how tough it was growing up in a mixed-race family, I always 
ask, compared to what? Weren't there any advantages? Don't people 
growing up in a mixed-race family get a different view of human possibility?'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>