<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981026.2000.2374 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
If big brother is watching today, when Privacy International hands 
out its first annual awards in London, he will not be amused. Privacy 
International intends to publicly tweak those organizations that have 
done the most to invade personal privacy in Britain. Gus Hussein is 
with Privacy International. He's one of the organizers of the Big 
Brother Awards tonight. And first, I've got to get you, Gus, to describe 
exactly what this award looks like. It goes back to a quote from George 
Orwelle talking about human rights and how governments deal with human 
rights. And he said it's akin to a boot stomping on a human face. 
And it's basically that. It's a boot on top of a sculpture of a human 
face. Yeah, well, I'm sure a lot of the award recipients will appreciate 
the subtly in that. Yes, of course. Can you tell us who has been nominated? 
One of the most popular ones happen to be at the U.K. home office 
which is akin to the INS and the Justice Department put together. 
And that's for issues such as a police bill that was passed recently 
that really clamped down on civil rights a lot, basically and people's 
privacy. One particular nomination is for a town called Newham, and 
in this town, they have modern CCTB cameras where actually they take 
a picture of you. They can identify you on a computer database. By 
just picturing your nose and your ears, they can see if you're a good 
guy or a bad guy basically. It's amazing what technology can do now. 
Another one is a product such as Harlequin. What this does, it was 
an application that could listen in to people's telephone calls, and 
if somebody you call happens to be a bad person, it will watch who 
that bad person calls and creates a network of bad people basically, 
if you want to call it that. You know, when you talk about some of 
these products, there are probably going to be people in the audience 
who think, "Hey, that's a really good idea. Why didn't we think of 
that first?" I mean, you have to admit in some ways, some of these 
items and some of these deeds are seen as being progressive and good 
and maybe, you know, preventing crime on the streets of London by 
having cameras on the corners. Yes. Some of these technologies are 
very useful for making sure there's no crime, but we need to decide 
where do we draw the line. And unfortunately, the line keeps on fading 
and moving more and more towards reduction of the rights of individuals. 
So let me push you on that then. Then where do you draw the line? 
It's not an easy question. Well, some countries choose to make laws. 
Other countries prefer self-regulation as you see in the U.S. right 
now when it comes to privacy on the Internet, privacy of children. 
When we finally decide on the right to privacy and we can make it 
a universal right to privacy, that's the biggest line that we can 
draw and being an absolute right. I think that's the only solution 
from hereon forward. There are awards being presented tonight for 
those who have been able to draw the line in terms of protection of 
privacy as well. This is not a big brother award. This is being called 
the Winston Awards. Can you tell us about some of the recipients of 
those? Well, Winston was the main character from the book "1984" who 
tried to bring down big brother, basically. So we have such examples 
as Shnooze, which is a small underground newsletter talking about 
privacy and surveillance issues. We have another one, a 19-year-old 
student who was living in an apartment and she found out that in her 
bathroom, there's a two-way mirror with a video camera behind it. 
And that was held by her landlord, basically. So for two years, he 
was filming her in her bathroom. And so she's now trying to create 
bad landlord laws basically. We found her quite worthy of such a nomination 
if not getting an award as well. Do ever think that maybe in terms 
of retaining personal privacy, that we've simply lost the battle? 
Yes. To consider what has happened in the past 50 years with computers 
and digitalization to everything, you think that there's no winning, 
there really is no winning. But you know what? I think it's vigilance 
is all you have during the day, you know, as long as you can educate 
people about their personal privacy, how important it is and how you 
shouldn't give it away for convenience, you shouldn't give the credit 
card company 'cause you want to be able to buy things on the Internet 
and anything like that. As long as you create some awareness about 
privacy, I think that's the only solution. Do you have a favorite 
example of someone who is breaching privacy, personal privacy? My 
personal favorite is the National Security Agency. It's one of the 
largest arms of the U.S. government, and it's soul job is for signals 
intelligence. It listens in to conversations all around the world. 
And all it does is just listen. It constantly invades people's privacy. 
Listening to what? Telephone conversations, supposedly parts of the 
Internet go right through its headquarters. Does it hear radio interviews? 
I'm sure they do. They'll be taking down my name as we speak. Gus 
Hussein, researcher with the London School of Economics and one of 
the organizers of tonight's Big Brother Awards being handed out in 
London. Thank you. Nice to speak with you. Thank you very much. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>