<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981026.2000.0953 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It was one of those soccer matches that seem to be meandering along, 
then just when things couldn't have gotten more boring, lightning 
struck. We get the play-by-play on yesterday's match in Johannesburg, 
South Africa from the BBC's Jeremy Vine. Until ten minutes before 
full-time, players from the Swallows and Jomo Cosmots were not setting 
the world alight. Then the ball was crossed on the edge of the penalty 
area and this happened. A bolt of lightning struck the pitch and sent 
half the players on it tumbling to the ground, deafened, blinded, 
and shocked. The commentators were struggling. And the players have 
gone down on the pitch. The referee groped around blowing his whistle. 
Unbelievable scene here. And we've got everybody on the pitch now 
attending to players. Unbelievable scenes here. Like you said earlier, 
there's always a threat with the lightning. Seevey is down. So is 
Chabani. As spectators and coaching staff ran out to help the players, 
the commentators began showing slow motion replays of the lightning 
strike. So look and see if we can see it again. While their touch 
line reporter, Brian Mulder, conducted interviews with players lying 
flat out on their backs. What happened out there? I guess it was a 
lightning strike. Do you feel it was near enough to you? It didn't 
hit you, did it? It did. It did just a little. I don't know if I'm 
OK. Later, the news came. Some footballers appear to have been injured. 
Well, I'm down here in the Swallows dressing room. They're carrying 
in players here. There's a little bit of respiration tactics going 
on with one of the players at the moment. I think it's Seevey. They're 
pumping the chests, pumping the abdomen area trying to get some air 
into him. But that was followed by the allegation they were only pretending 
to be hurt. Accusations are flying around here that the Swallows definitely 
want the game called off, and that's why the injuries are being faked. 
They get to revive and then a couple moments later, they fall down. 
It's a desolate stadium now with the rain bursting down. Fortunately, 
no one died. The worst affected players suffered shock and temporary 
irregular heart beats. The lack of medical backup at the match has 
been criticized. The weather was so bad, that by the end, the commentary 
team sounded as if they were about to be washed away. We'll try and 
keep you informed... For THE WORLD, this is Jeremy Vine in Johannesburg, 
South Africa. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>