<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981026.2000.2997 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is THE WORLD. I'm Lisa Mullins. Germany's parliament was will 
elect the nation's seventh post-war chancellor tomorrow. He will be 
Gerhardt Schroeder, whose Social Democratic Party has formed a coalition 
with the Green party to gain a majority in parliament. The Greens 
are feeling their oats these days. They've gotten Schroeder to agree 
to one of their most urgent goals: the phasing out of nuclear power. 
That is not a policy that is pleasing all Germans, however, as THE 
WORLD's Margaret Evans reports from Bonn. Motorists head home along 
the autobahn, about 25 south of the German capital, Bonn. It's a picturesque 
drive along the Rhine, lush with trees. But nearing the town of Molimecarlick, 
the trees suddenly give way and it's impossible to miss the bulk of 
a nuclear power station's massive cooling tower looming ahead. This 
plant was built more than ten years ago, but it's still not operating, 
a symbol of the divided soul when it comes to nuclear power. Local 
resident Yakim Schmitt says he's happy the plant didn't open, even 
though some people supported it when it was first built. And this 
time, the people accept it. It's very good because modern nuclear 
energy it brings a lot of work here to the region. But after channel 
OFF-MIKE) people then it gets worse then they had. With the new government 
in power, it's unlikely Molimecarlick will ever open its doors. The 
anti-nuclear campaign has long held the position of strength in Germany. 
The natural home for people opposed to nuclear energy has been the 
Green Party. Udo Boonagel is one of the Green's environmental experts. 
He says the agreement between a new coalition to phase out nuclear 
energy is the success story of the Green campaign. This agreement 
is the beginning of the end of nuclear power in Germany. This is something 
that the Green Party has been fighting against for 18 years since 
the foundation of this party, and that was one of the reasons why 
this whole environmental movement in Germany was so strong. But the 
nuclear industry says it's not going without a fight and it's got 
clout. Thirty-six percent of Germany's electricity comes from nuclear 
power with 20 operable plants across the country. The power companies 
warn that closing the plants down will have far reaching consequences 
for the German economy, costing the country jobs, international influence, 
and competitiveness. Manford Petrol speaks for the German Atomic Forum, 
which groups together the major nuclear power companies. We had to 
see the arguments in favor of nuclear energy. Our power plants are 
saving the atmosphere 160-something like that millions of carbon dioxide 
emissions per year. The nuclear industry employs about 40,000 people 
directly, but the German Chamber of Commerce is warning that many 
more jobs could be at stake. Phillip Valdadorf says some Germany industry 
could decide to relocate. The electric power for industry is already 
25 percent higher paid as in France. And I think a big part of the 
industry which needs a lot of electric power, we go out of Germany 
and so we could lose perhaps 300-, 400,000 jobs in Germany. It's a 
tough claim against a government pledging to make job creation its 
top priority, but it hasn't swayed the new coalition government. The 
Green's Udo Boonagle insists jobs won't be lost overnight. He also 
says Germany can import energy. Now we are living in European community 
and it's no problem to import some amount of energy from our neighbors, 
although it that doesn't necessarily have to be nuclear energy from 
France. I'm thinking of water energy from Sweden. What you actually 
have heard is hydrogen bubbles, what's used in electro our class. 
Dr. Yakim Troich works at the Ulick Research Center at Cy Bonn, where 
scientists are experimenting with other forms of energy such as solar 
and wind power. But back I the '60s and '70s, this center was one 
of Germany's premiere creators of nuclear reactor prototypes. Today, 
just five percent of efforts are devoted to things nuclear. Troich 
says it's a sign of the times, that nuclear power is simply not popular 
in Germany. Even so, he still worries that Germany will lose out if 
it goes ahead with plans to abolish nuclear power. Oh, well, I hope 
except the present government is wise enough to see that for the next 
20, 30 years or so, we will need our present reactors and we have 
to handle them safely, and we have to have young people to handle 
them so we will do whatever we can to attract people to the field. 
At this stage, it's still not clear just how quickly the new government 
can or will act. The Greens would like to see at least five plants 
decommissioned over the next four years with the rest to follow within 
a decade. But Social Democrats are far more cautious and vague on 
the timing. They want to negotiate a gradual phase out during talks 
with power companies over the next year. If there's no consensus, 
the Social Democrats have promised the Greens they'll legislate a 
timetable of their own. The Greens insist they'll hold their partners 
to the promise. Reporting for THE WORLD, I'm Margaret Evans in Bonn. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>