<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981026.2000.0700 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Another U.S. brokered accord in another part of the world is running 
up against similar obstacles: the longstanding enmity of the signatories. 
Three years ago, the Dayton accord ended the war in Bosnia and mandated 
elections for a collective presidency, a federal parliament, and regional 
offices. But Bosnian voters seem to favor nationalist extremists over 
moderate peacemakers. As THE WORLD's Nanet Chebek reports from Sarajevo, 
the results of last month's elections raise a perplexing question 
for the What do you do when people don't vote the way you want them 
to? "It's time for change. It's time to get rid of the Nationalist 
Party," said this promo jingle by the Bosnian Liberal Party, the party 
that tried to challenge the Nationalists. But when the votes were 
counted, the Bosnian Liberal Party and nearly all other moderate forces 
had been defeated. The results are exactly the results which the international 
community present in Bosnia did not wish to see. Chris Bennett is 
the Sarajevo director of the U.S. based International Crisis Group. 
Bosnians voted for Nationalists, and they rejected those arguably 
more moderate but not necessarily reality that much more moderate 
national leaders, which the international community had so openly 
endorsed. We are actually quite pleased with the outcome of the elections. 
OSCE spokeswoman, Nicole Schultz, admits that some candidates the 
international community favored did not win. It's important to view 
the elections as part of a process, not a panacea in and of themselves. 
One of those moderate candidates the international community hoped 
would win is Sainka Nojitsa. Nojitsa lost, but she says she's not 
disappointed. No, I'm not disappointed. My aim was not to win but 
to introduce a new idea that hasn't been present for the past six 
or seven years to offer a non-nationalist option. It's certainly not 
time yet for an idea like that to win, but it was high time for it 
to appear. And I'm sure that I've found a significant number of supporters. 
Echoing Nojitsa's patience is OSCE spokeswoman, Nicole Schultz. It's 
unrealistic to expect that after two years and nine months since the 
guns fell silent that we will see magically a situation which people 
are embracing each other and able to put the past completely behind 
them. I think that's going to take time. I think we all recognize 
that that's going to take time. That's what you hear in Sarajevo's 
cafes where when politics are discussed, the phrase or "Everything 
in its own good time" comes up over and over again. Bosnians have 
yet to recover from a brutal war that tore the country apart, dividing 
its three ethnic groups, Croats, Muslims, and Serbs. The healing will 
take much longer than the war, according to Radid Milokitch, a high 
ranking official of the Bosnian Serb Nationalist Party, BSDS. The 
truth of the matter is that the international community can only achieve 
what it wants, a multi-cultural integrated Bosnia, if it cloned people 
in its own image. There is a place for military presence and for the 
other international organizations, the other implementing agencies 
as well as the nongovernmental organizations which play a huge role 
in the implementation of Dayton. So I think that internationals will 
be here in a fairly visible way for some time to come and should be. 
This is Nanet Chebek reporting for THE WORLD. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>