<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981026.2000.2026 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When U.S. drug czar Barry McCaffrey meets with Mexican government 
officials as he's doing today and tomorrow in Mexico City, the conversations 
can have a bit of an edge. Drug cooperation between the two neighbors 
has been tense. The United States considers Mexican law enforcement 
agencies to be rife with corruption, and Mexico sees the United States 
as hypocritical for its policy of judging other country's anti-drug 
efforts while continuing to be the world's largest drug consuming 
nation. Still, officials from both countries say there is some progress 
in their joint war against drugs. THE WORLD's Frank Contrares takes 
us to the front lines in the central state of Guerrero. A government 
helicopter sweeps over a steep mountain side and drops herbicide on 
the field where thousands of opium poppy plants grow. If harvested, 
this crop could generate millions of dollars in profits. About half 
the size of a football field, this is just one of six drug fields 
that can be seen from the sky. Havier Juarez supervises this team 
of anti-drug agents. We used to destroy the drugs by hand only, but 
now we use these helicopters to fumigate and it's much more efficient. 
So the drugs which used to grow in the north started showing up in 
central Mexico in Guerrero and other states. The Mexican government 
says it has destroyed some 50 square miles of drug fields so far this 
year. It has done so with assistance from the U.S. Besides the Vietnam 
era helicopters used in sweeps like this one, the U.S. is also sharing 
high tech radar intelligence with Mexico to track aircraft used to 
ship drugs to the U.S. The radar is the same technology used to detect 
Soviet wheat production during the Cold War. White House Drug Policy 
Director General Barry McCaffrey says this technology is already having 
an impact on drug shipment. We're doing a lot better, and the big 
flights have ended. The huge cargo aircraft flying out of Columbia 
and into Mexico, those days are over 'cause we definitely will seize 
the aircraft and arrest them on the ground. The U.S. can seize drug 
smugglers once they cross into American territory, but smugglers often 
avoid this risk by stopping first in Mexico where they can count on 
what analysts say is some of the worst police corruption in the hemisphere. 
Political analyst Jorge Chabart. In Mexico, we're in the process of 
building institutions and building democracy. How can you fight the 
drug trafficking if you don't have the tools to fight it? And to fight 
it, you need the strongest state, a strong democratic state, and you 
don't have it. So what can you do? What you fight is what you can. 
I'm not saying there is no corruption. Always there is corruption. 
And there is a part of lack of political will, but besides that, there 
is some objective fact that it is very difficult to fight this trade 
if you don't have a very strong state and very strong institution. 
And the United States have to understand that. Mexico's anti-drug 
operations have also suffered from this endemic corruption. Still, 
General McCaffrey praises Mexican efforts to carefully screen drug 
agents. The Mexicans, I think, have been very impressive. They went 
to the University of Mexico and designed their own system of drug 
tests, polygraphs, background checks, and focused on their people. 
And of course our own DEA does the same thing with polygraphs and 
drug tests. I think it's just something we're going to have to accept. 
On the front lines of the drug war in Guerrero State, Mexican Agent 
Havier Juarez leads his team on a sweep of yet another drug field. 
It's a slow process destroying fields one by one, and sometimes it 
means putting agents' lives at risk. "The drug traffickers are always 
nearby. They guard the crops and sometimes, when they see us in the 
fields, they shoot." This time, the shots missed their targets. The 
agents regroup and burn a pile of marijuana plants before boarding 
their helicopters for the trip back to base. On the way out, the agents 
on this mission agree it's not worth risking their lives to destroy 
such a relatively small amount of drugs. For THE WORLD, I'm Frank 
Contrares in Guerrero, Mexico. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>