<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981026.2000.2687 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Ten days after he was detained in London on human rights charges, 
former Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet is still being held under 
guard in a London clinic. A Spanish judge is seeking Pinochet's extradition 
to face charges of torture, genocide, and involvement in the murder 
of 94 people. Lawyers representing the former Chilean military ruler 
were in court in London arguing for his release saying that Pinochet 
enjoys state or sovereign immunity for actions he took during his 
17-year-rule. British police arrested him October 16th at the request 
of a Spanish judge. Ever since Pinochet's arrest, the Chilean government 
has kept up a steady chorus of protest saying that his continued detention 
risks destabilizing the country's delicate transition to democracy. 
Although the country's ambassador to the United States Penaro Ariagata 
oppose Pinochet's regime, he said today that the Spanish Judiciary 
and the British government should not prosecute the general. The position 
of the Chilean government is that we are not defending the person 
of Mr. Pinochet. That is a private matter. But many Chileans disagree. 
And ever since Pinochet's arrest, have been demonstrating their support 
of the move. Speaking from outside the clinic where the general is 
currently being held, Vincente Allagrilla, vice president of the National 
Organization of Chileans in Exile in the U.K. says he would be happy 
to see Pinochet on trial anywhere. The final result that we expect 
is justice no matter where it is, in Britain, in Spain, or and the 
international court of law, whatever it is, but it's justice. But 
Chile's U.S. Ambassador Penaro Ariagata says that his government has 
attempted to deal with some of the abuses perpetrated by the Pinochet 
regime with a commission similar to the one employed in South Africa 
after the end of apartheid. We are not trying to forgive. We are not 
trying to forget. We create a commission of truce and reconciliation 
in 1991 in the first year of the new elected democratic government. 
And Ambassador Ariagata says the government has worked hard to make 
reparations to those who suffered during the Pinochet regime. We built 
a memorial in Chile in which the names of those that were assassinated 
or disappeared their names were portrayed as criminals, but they were 
not under state of Chile recognized, that they were decent people, 
that they were victims. Today, Switzerland asked Britain to keep Pinochet 
under arrest in case Geneva wants to try him on separate charges. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>