<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981026.2000.1257 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is THE WORLD. I'm Lisa Mullins. Thirty years ago, as Benjamin 
Braddock learned in "The Graduate," plastics was the way to go. Nowadays, 
I have one word for you, one word: computers. Not only are many graduates 
going into the field, so are more and more immigrants who are finding 
high tech a high speed way of entering the American work force. Josh 
Brockman introduces us to some new arrivals on our shores who are 
learning a new language. Keystroke by keystroke, immigrants in New 
York are developing fluency and computer languages. Demand for skilled 
computer workers is attracting immigrants to the United States and 
convincing those already here to switch careers. It's a fast-growing 
market so the job opportunities are excellent. Byron Yu, an immigrant 
from Taiwan, is president of Novax, a technical school in midtown 
Manhattan that offers computer courses and job counseling to immigrants. 
The pay is much higher, much higher than average in this industry, 
and also requires only a short time to get into it with intensive 
training. Yu says his immigrant students are finding that a keyboard 
and mouse will help them find a technical job faster than an English 
class. So instead of learning English which might take to learn well, 
I mean, it might take a year, two years, three years to do, computer 
programming or network management might take only three months to 
learn. This drive has a primary partition. The name of it is MS-DOS. 
More than 3,000 students from countries like India, Russia, China, 
Malaysia, Indonesia, Hong Kong, and Taiwan, have been trained at Novax 
over the last five years. Business is booming. Courses are offered 
at all hours of the day, which means new students can study after 
work or in between jobs. I love programming actually. That's why I 
took my course there. And money, yes, you can make money in this field, 
too. Twenty-four-year-old Susan Curium arrived from Carela, India 
four months ago with a masters in computer science but no practical 
experience. She says she's willing to start at the bottom here in 
the U.S. And you can, you know, progress in your step up the ladder, 
too. You don't have to just stay in one position, and you can learn, 
learn, and learn, because there are all the new technologies coming 
out, so you can learn, and learn, and improve yourself. About 17 miles 
away in Sheet Head Bay, Brooklyn, Centurion Software Associates is 
also drawing crowds of immigrants. Twenty-three-year-old Ulena Lachtman, 
president of Centurion, helps many immigrants from Russia and the 
former Soviet Republic to break into the computer world by starting 
from scratch. The majority of people have no experience with computers 
at all, so we have to start with the basics, the keyboarding, and 
how to save programs, how to move files from one place to another, 
things like that, and then move up to a more professional level. Yeah, 
you're starting with the first letter, right? Yeah. And then you want 
to let two to a square. So this shows you that... Lachtman, who arrived 
in the U.S. in 1990 from Odessa, Ukraine fondly remembers one new 
student who mistook a CD-ROM drive for a cup holder. Originally, the 
business catered to Russia immigrants with computer backgrounds who 
wanted to update their skills for the American marketplace, but the 
pool of students has changed. Now, they come from all walks of life 
and experience. Inside Vladimir Surocos' computer class, Sasha Bay 
listens carefully. They came from the Republic of Kazakstan 12 years 
ago and has worked as a porter, doorman, truck driver, messenger, 
and now as an accountant. They didn't go to a university, and he hopes 
that his classes at Centurion will help him start a career in computers. 
I think it's creative. You know, it's not something you do with your 
hands. You get a chance to use your brain and it attracts me. Forest 
Faladarski drives part-time for a car service while he studies computer 
programming at Centurion. His work and studies consume more than 80 
hours a week, but he hopes to learn more computer languages and then 
find a job as a programmer. You don't really know. You don't have 
that much opportunity in New York here. It's not a lot of factories. 
I used to work in factory. Factory shrunk and I get fired. A programmer's 
job also means long hours, but Valadarski is focused on what he needs 
to do to get out of the driver's seat. You have to learn everything 
new stuff because it's growing, it's developing. You cannot finish 
your education once. You have to learn every day something new. For 
Boris Valadarski and other immigrants, learning something new about 
computers almost guarantees them a secure job. Computer industry studies 
point to nearly 350,000 information technology jobs currently unfilled, 
and the Department of Labor estimates that the industry will generate 
more than 1.3 million new jobs by the year 2006. That means that Boris 
Valadarski and other immigrants like him are much more likely to be 
running a hard drive than driving hard for a living. For THE WORLD, 
this is Joshua Brockman in New York City. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>