<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981026.2000.0373 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is THE WORLD. I'm Lisa Mullins. No one even vaguely familiar 
with Middle East politics thought the agreement reached in Maryland 
Friday would bring peace between Israel and the Palestinians. Sure 
enough, today, there were signs of trouble. In the West Bank town 
of Hebron, an Israeli security guard was shot and killed in an apparent 
attack by Palestinian militants and the Israeli parliaments law committee 
voted today to hold a first reading on a bill that would mandate new 
elections within 100 days. Three days after the signing of the accord, 
THE WORLD's Richard Myron in Jerusalem has a status report. In the 
Israeli parliament today, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu faced 
a barrage of criticism from right-wing opponents of the deal reached 
in Maryland. A far right political party proposed a no-confidence 
motion in the prime minister. But with the temporary support of the 
opposition Labor Party, Netanyahu easily survived the vote. A few 
members of Netanyahu's own Likud Party voted against him, angry that 
he signed what they considered to be a dangerous and bad deal. But 
most Likud members of parliament like Nommy Blumental voted for the 
prime minister despite their reservations. I'm not sure about the 
agreement. I'm going to support the prime minister because they alternative 
will be much worse for peace. The alternative will be worse for Israel. 
I think the prime minister has achieved a better way. I think if it 
would have been another leader of the left wing or a leader of the 
Labor Party, we would have been today in a much worse situation. Under 
the deal, Israel's agreed to turn over 13 percent of the West Bank 
in exchange for a Palestinian security crackdown. The opposition Labor 
Party has said it will support Netanyahu only until parliament approves 
the peace agreement. Shimon Peres, the former Labor Prime Minister, 
says the deal struck in Maryland proves the power of the peace process. 
It has shown that this is stronger than the politics, that the government 
was false to continue the role of Oslo. And as a matter of fact, I'm 
quite glad that the Likud Party that has objected to Oslo at this 
moment. Do you believe that this government has the will and the political 
room for maneuver to implement this agreement? They don't have a choice. 
They will try to do it, but I think this is also the end of the present 
government to push the peace process forward. They have reached the 
peak end of their capacity to serve the peace. Jury settlers and their 
supporters have already taken to the streets in Jerusalem and in the 
West Bank, calling for the prime minister to resign. But polls show 
that more than 70 percent of Israelis support the agreement signed 
by Netanyahu. Tommy LaPede, an Israeli political commentator says 
the prime minister is now in a strong position. The prime minister 
moved to the middle, to the center. This signature and hand shaking 
with Arafat are all signs that Netanyahu gave up all of the right 
to which he belong, and joined the middle ground. If the middle ground 
will support him, he can still win the elections if part of his own 
party leaves him. Palestine reaction has been mostly negative. According 
to Hanana Shwari, a member of the Palestinian Legislative Council, 
people feel let down by the deal. The Palestinian people certainly 
are much more skeptical. They do not look at this as a serious breakthrough 
or as earth an earth-shattering agreement. It's like pulling teeth. 
And there certainly is no confidence in the Israeli government or 
in the follow-up steps. The important thing is not to have the Palestinian 
authority also be perceived as an agent of Israeli security. This 
perception was backed up by events over the weekend in the West Bank. 
A Palestinian teenager was killed during a protest against the Palestinian 
Police who raided the offices of one of the political parties in the 
West Bank searching for illegal weapons. Under the terms of the agreement, 
the Palestinian authority promised to clamp down on the number of 
weapons in the West Bank and Gaza. Mustafa Baguti, a commentator on 
Palestinian political affairs says the agreement will have a negative 
effect on Yasser Arafat. This will weaken him further, and because 
of these conditions that were enforced on him to implement these conditions, 
he has to violate human rights which will weaken him further. This 
is not the way to stop the growth of Hamas and fundamentalism in the 
West Bank and Gaza Strip. The only way to do that is to strengthen 
democracy in this area, to strengthen the economical development, 
and to meet Palestinian basic rights. I think these concessions that 
were enforced on Mr. Arafat will make him even weaker, and they probably 
will strengthen Hamas. The agreement reached at the Y Plantation has 
thrown a life line to the peace process and prescribed a specific 
course of action. What it hasn't done is significantly reduce the 
distrust between the two sides. For THE WORLD, this is Richard Myron 
reporting from Jerusalem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>