<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981026.0500.1373 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Part of the American dream -- owning a home. Home ownership in the 
United States is now at an all-time high. An estimated 66 percent 
of all Americans own their own homes. A new study by Harvard University 
finds that immigrants and minorities now account for 17 percent of 
all homeowners in this country. Vladica Hoke reports. Vietnamese-born 
Quen Bouy runs a child care center at her home in Arlington, Virginia. 
She and her husband, Huang, were among the so-called boat people who 
fled South Vietnam when the Communists took over. They came to the 
United States 16 years ago from a refugee camp in Thailand with virtually 
no possessions. After two and a half years in this country, Mr. and 
Mrs. Bouy bought their first home. We set a goal that we need to buy 
the house. My husband worked full-time. Went to school full-time. 
I work full-time. After a few years, as the real estate market improved, 
the Bouys were able to sell their first home at a profit and buy a 
newer and more spacious home. By that time, they had two children, 
and Mrs. Bouy decided to work at home. They turned their basement 
into a child care center and the backyard into a playground. Mrs. 
Bouy says if they had stayed in Vietnam, they would probably still 
live in a rented apartment. Because if we're a young couple, without 
help from our parent, we won't be able to buy the house after 10 years 
or 15-year marriage. The Bouys are not an exception among American 
immigrants. The study by Harvard University's joint center for housing 
studies, titled "State of the Nation's Housing 1998," reports that 
new immigrants and minorities are a driving force in today's housing 
market. And younger immigrants are buying homes more quickly than 
their predecessors. The study says the home ownership rate for immigrants 
age 25 to 34, considered the prime home-buying age group, jumped from 
about 18 percent to almost 40 percent between 1990 and 1996. Immigrant 
groups found to achieve home ownership in the shortest amount of time 
were Chinese and Taiwanese. The Harvard study reports the rise in 
home ownership among immigrants is due in part to greater availability 
of financial assistance and programs to help these groups of buyers. 
Also, the National Association of Realtors and United States Department 
of Housing and Development have developed a training program for real 
estate professionals called "One America at Home with Diversity." 
Michelle Smith of the National Association of Realtors says the program 
is designed to help real estate professionals understand the needs 
and preferences of ever more diverse home buyers, in particular the 
fastest-growing Asian and Hispanic communities. Some people may assume 
that Hispanics would prefer to rent than to buy. That's not true. 
It is instilled in them in their native land that home ownership is 
something that is essential to their being. So they may be in the 
United States two years, and they'll suffer through living in a rental 
property for two years. But by that third year, they've saved their 
money to have an adequate downpayment or saved their money to the 
point that if they have a loan, it will not be needed to be carried 
30 years. Many real estate agencies train and employ people of different 
ethnic backgrounds in order to utilize their foreign language skills 
and knowledge of other cultures. Indian-born Maya Mulhultra has been 
with Long & Foster, a Washington, D.C. real estate firm, for eight 
years. They love the newer homes. The antiquated charm of some of 
the, you know, Victorians and 60-year-old and 50-year-old colonials 
is not as appealing to them. They're not, perhaps, used to this architecture, 
and as well, you know, the colonial look is not part of their cultural 
inheritance. Maya Mulhultra says some of her clients, notably Arabs, 
do not believe in paying interest. So they pay for the whole house 
in cash. Those who do take a loan usually try to pay it off in 10 
years to 15 years, as opposed to the more common 30-year loans. Real 
estate agent Maya Mulhultra says while her clients often say owning 
a home is an American dream, she believes it is a human dream. But 
she says here in America, it may be easier to turn this dream into 
a reality. I'm Vladica Hoke. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>