<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981026.1600.1336 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Thousands of people here in the United States make a hobby of restoring 
and driving classic cars. The Antique Automobile Club of America has 
over 55,000 members, and there are many other clubs for owners of 
cars such as Model T Fords or Porsche and MG sports cars. About 200 
motoring enthusiasts exhibited their classic automobiles recently 
at a show in Rockville, Maryland, and VOA's Martin Secrest stopped 
by to see the field. While a local jazz band plays music from the 
1940s, spectators mill about the grounds of the Rockville Civic Center 
to get a close look at a variety of antique and classic automobiles. 
There are cars no longer manufactured, such as Packards, Hudsons and 
Studebakers. There also are Jaguars, Chevrolet Corvettes, Ford Thunderbirds 
and even a 1960 Buick ambulance. In most American states, a car gains 
antique status after 25 years. At this show, all cars were built before 
1975. Chris Heckhouse organizes the long-running car show which gives 
out only two awards -- a people's choice and Rockville mayor's award. 
Ms. Heckhouse says that many of the exhibitors do their own restorations. 
We have one gentlemen who restored -- who was one of the winners last 
year and he took this car from a barn in Virginia. It's a '56 Crown 
Victoria, Ford, and he took it from a frame that was found in a barn, 
and he completely renovated the body. He did the painting. He did 
the upholstery -- everything. He put in 3,000 hours into the restoration. 
Windshield comes up and blocks the side. Look at the door handle. 
Do you twist it, or do you just pull it? Most of the cars at this 
show are unusual by virtue of their age or design. Bob Dalton owns 
a fully restored 1930 Ford Model A, a distinctive green and black 
car with tall wire wheels and a rumble seat in the back -- a seat 
outside the passenger cab. Mr. Dalton says he remembers the Model 
A from his youth. Really, what it is is a time machine. I get in this 
thing, and I'm about 40 or 50 years younger. I'm really not, but I 
feel that way. It's magnificent. Mr. Dalton says that Ford built 4.5 
million Model A cars between 1928 and 1931, and about 400,000 are 
still in existence. And he says he drives his Model A frequently. 
Once a week. No, really? Oh, yeah. You have to -- it's like a human 
being. If you sit down and become a couch potato, you die. You've 
got to get your muscles moving, your blood flowing. The same thing 
with an old car, an antique car. You've got to get the oil moving, 
the gasoline moving, and get the throttle moving. In another part 
of the show grounds, James Lee's 1937 Packard 120 touring sedan is 
drawing attention. It's a large, sleek car painted black, and it looks 
as though it just left the showroom. Perched in front of Mr. Lee's 
1937 Packard is a copy of an original advertisement for the car. It 
reads, "The car that surprised America will now surprise it again." 
And below that line, the price is listed for the vehicle when new 
-- $945. James Lee says his Packard touring sedan was one of the flowers 
of its day. Nowadays, you know, your modern cars driving, there isn't 
a whole lot of difference between a $20,000 car and a $50,000 car. 
You know, driving it? You know, they drive nice. They handle. They're 
quiet and, you know, smooth and all that. But back in the '30s, there 
was a big difference between your -- shall we say your low cost three, 
which was Ford, Plymouth and Chevrolet. And then, you got up into 
Packards. I mean, there was such a big difference in the way that 
they drove. This car, going down the interstate, it's hard holding 
it at 60 miles an hour. It really wants -- it just floats down the 
road. Floating down the road is just what car enthusiasts love to 
do, and vintage automobiles that are fully restored turn heads wherever 
they go. But restoring an old car is often a labor of love, which 
is to say there is very little money to be made by doing it. Even 
if the owner does all the work himself, the cost of a restoration 
usually exceeds the market value of the vehicle. So putting the luster 
back on a car of yesteryear is both an exercise in craftsmanship and 
a good way to occupy a lot of time. I'm Martin Secrest. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>