<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981026.0500.2375 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Clinton has spent much of the weekend trying to raise campaign 
money for Democratic candidates in the coming congressional election. 
He attended a series of events out West in the state of California 
that raised $2 million for Senator Barbara Boxer, who faces a tough 
re-election bid there. VOA's Deborah Tate, in this report from San 
Francisco, says the president will be back in Washington later today. 
Mr. Clinton's trip was not only aimed at raising money. It was also 
an effort to energize Democrats and get them to the polls on November 
3. Historically, Democrats lose seats in mid-term elections. Voter 
turnout is relatively light when there is no presidential race, and 
those who do vote are usually more conservative. This year, Democrats 
also fear that supporters may stay away from the polls because of 
disappointment over the sex and cover-up scandal involving President 
Clinton and former intern Monica Lewinsky. Republicans hope they will 
pick up seats as a result of the scandal. There is much at stake for 
the president in the November vote, as he faces impeachment hearings 
in Congress over the Lewinsky matter. The proceedings are set to begin 
shortly after election day. So Mr. Clinton is making every effort 
to appeal to his supporters to go to the polls. A fund-raising luncheon 
for Senator Boxer in San Francisco Sunday was no exception. We have 
the message. We have the candidates. We have the unifying vision. 
Don't let the fact that this is a mid-term election let the voter 
turnout be so low that we wind up disappointing ourselves on the day 
after the election. Mr. Clinton also used the opportunity to criticize 
the Republican congressional majority for failing to approve some 
of his domestic legislative proposals, including curbing tobacco use 
by young people and a patients bill of right to give Americans more 
of a say in their health care decisions. He said the proposals would 
become his priorities next year, along with finding a solution to 
preserving the cash-strapped U.S. pension system. In addition, as 
he has done at all his political appearances over the weekend, the 
president talked about the interim peace agreement signed by Israeli 
prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu and Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat 
Friday. He clearly hopes the accord, which he brokered, will help 
Democrats in next month's vote. Outside the event site, about 150 
people held an anti-Clinton demonstration. Some carried signs calling 
for his impeachment. The president is to resume his Democratic Party 
fund raising when he travels to Florida and New York this Thursday 
and Friday. Deborah Tate, VOA News, San Francisco, California. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>