<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981026.0500.1860 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Meanwhile, Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu is back home, 
claiming unprecedented breakthroughs at Wye Plantation. As VOA's Al 
Pessin reports, he's emphasizing the security guarantees to which 
Palestinian leaders agreed. Under crisp orders from its commanding 
officer, the honor guard at Tel Aviv's airport stood at attention 
and turned to face the prime minister's aircraft. As he emerged, the 
formal welcome began. To applause from assembled members of parliament 
and other dignitaries, Mr. Netanyahu and his team of senior ministers 
walked down the aircraft steps, inspected the guard along the red 
carpet and greeted the crowd. A short time later, Mr. Netanyahu began 
the serious business of convincing Israelis to accept what he did 
at the Wye Plantation. Mr. Netanyahu said his efforts resulted in 
something Israel did not have before -- specific commitments on security 
from the Palestinians and agreement that Israel will not withdraw 
any troops unless those commitments are fulfilled. He also offered 
a specific political message to his former supporters in the Israeli 
right wing who oppose this agreement and threaten to bring his government 
down. Mr. Netanyahu said he has proved that his government is the 
best one to lead Israel through the coming final stage of negotiations 
on the most sensitive issues -- Jerusalem, refugees, borders and Palestinian 
statehood. Some of the critics will not be convinced, and some of 
them are already protesting in the streets. But others may soon have 
to face the choice of supporting Mr. Netanyahu or going to early elections 
and risking the emergence of a new more leftist government. Prime 
Minister Netanyahu received important support in that regard Sunday 
from his new foreign minister Ariel Sharon. Mr. Sharon, a former general 
and champion of the Israeli right, said although giving up territory 
for peace is as difficult as fighting a war, this government managed 
to minimize dangers and maximize Palestinian security commitments. 
He said this is the best agreement Israel can get. A public opinion 
poll published Sunday indicates nearly three quarters of all Israelis 
believe Mr. Netanyahu was right to sign the agreement. The Palestinian 
leader, Yasser Arafat, changed plans to return to Gaza Sunday. After 
briefing Egyptian president Hosni Mubarak in Cairo, Mr. Arafat embarked 
on a tour of several other Arab capitals and is expected in Gaza in 
a couple of days. Al Pessin, VOA News, Jerusalem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>