<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981026.1600.2697 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It's well known that as far as longevity is concerned, men are the 
weaker sex. Rhoda Crose is a gerontologist who has written a book 
that attempts to explain why this is so. She tells VOA's Jane Hughes 
one reason men don't live as long as women is because they're more 
likely than women to abuse alcohol, use drugs, smoke and engage in 
violent behavior. I think when you look at the health statistics, 
you can see that men are dying. They are killing themselves with their 
health behaviors. And also, they -- men don't tend to ask for help 
when they need it. They are taught to deny pain, to ignore illness 
and to be that self-sufficient, macho kind of guy that never shows 
any weakness. And that's working against men in our society. Is that 
part of the reason why men tend to ignore symptoms? I think that's 
part of the reason, a good part of the reason. But another thing is 
that women are more tuned into their bodies, I think, partly because 
of our biological cycles that we have. So from the time we're little 
girls, we're starting to learn about our menstrual cycles, things 
like that. And boys are not taught to tune into their processes. Boys 
rarely learn much about their body functions in the way that girls 
do. Now, you also point out that men tend to neglect routine regular 
check-ups, and women are much more conscientious about scheduling 
them. Yeah, well, you can just look at the epidemiological statistics 
on this and see that women have more visits to the doctor. Women have 
-- are prescribed more medication. We're diagnosed with more illness. 
But part of that is because men just don't enter the health care system 
in the way that women do. Men rely on women to take care of them, 
not on professionals. I call women gardeners and men mechanics. oh, 
ok. Men tend to -- to, if they go in for their check-ups, treat it 
like checking up on their car or getting parts replaced or using medication. 
And women tend to treat their bodies more like gardening and paying 
attention to what needs to happen on a daily basis, as far as nutrition 
and as far as weight management, those kinds of things. Now, young 
men tend to be more active than young women. But this changes at middle 
age? Yes. Well, women tend to do less intense activities as far as 
exercise and sports and things. However, I think that's changing for 
women. Women are getting more involved with sports and with aerobic 
exercise and things like that. But men have always played more sports, 
had more intense exercise until -- until they can no longer compete, 
and then when they can't compete, often they just give up the activities 
altogether and become couch potatoes watching others doing it. Yeah, 
that's interesting. Yeah. CROSE And women continue to walk, continue 
to do group exercises, continue to do housework until they can just 
no longer do it. Dr. Royda Crose, who is associate director of the 
Fisher Institute of Wellness and Gerontology at Ball State University 
in Muncie, Indiana, also cites studies that women weather serious 
physical illness more successfully than men. She says this is because 
women generally have a wider range of emotional expressiveness than 
men. Dr. Crose, whose book is entitled "Why Women Live Longer Than 
Men and What Men Can Learn From Them," also told Jane Hughes that 
she believes the answer for both sexes is a balance of masculinity 
and femininity. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>