<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981026.1600.2156 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
One and a half years ago, stock markets around the globe were climbing 
higher and higher as investment money poured into emerging markets. 
Suddenly, a financial crisis struck. First in Asia, then in Russia 
and finally in Latin America. How did it happen, and what are the 
warning signs? Those are some of the questions "Dateline" will examine 
in a five-part series on the global economic crisis. Today's edition 
of "Dateline" looks at the evolution of the crisis. Here's Linda Cashdan. 
On July 2, 1997, Thailand ran out of foreign exchange reserves and 
was forced to devalue its currency, the baht, and turn to the International 
Monetary Fund for help. The initial reaction was that this was not 
a serious problem. After all, economic analysts reasoned, Thailand's 
strong economic fundamentals would surely enable the country to bounce 
back in no time at all. But Thailand's economic fundamentals were 
not as strong as the world thought, nor were those of Thailand's neighbors. 
As Clyde Prestowitz, president of Washington's Economic Strategy Institute, 
told reporters at a recent press conference, the crisis quickly spread 
to Indonesia and Malaysia. Once again, it was reiterated that the 
fundamentals in Southeast Asia are good. The savings rates were high. 
People were being educated. Inflation was low. The budget deficits 
were under control. And in fact, in September of 1997, the IMF itself 
issued a glowing report describing the great state of the Korean economy. 
And of course, the following month, Korea nearly went bankrupt and 
had to ask for an IMF bailout itself. Clyde Prestowitz says everyone 
expected Asia's economic superpower, Japan, to come to the rescue 
of its neighbors, much as the United States had rescued Mexico during 
its currency crisis in 1995. Unfortunately, Brookings Institution 
economist Barry Bosworth says, Japan's own economic problems made 
it more of a competitor than a savior. Japan has turned out to be 
more of a competitor in their time of need rather than a source of 
assistance. So you see the Koreans desperately trying to export more 
as a way out of their recession, and they're finding the Japanese 
yen declining in value, and Japanese products becoming increasingly 
competitive with their own. Barry Bosworth says the crisis continued 
to spread beyond the nations of Asia. As Asia slid into severe recession, 
demand for grain from that area of the world dropped, creating commodity 
surpluses in Latin America and the United States. Asian demand for 
industrial raw materials -- steel, oil -- also fell sharply. By August 
1998, collapsing world oil prices forced Russia not only to devalue 
its currency, but to default on its foreign debt. David Hale of the 
Chicago office of the Zurich Group says that move triggered a withdrawal 
of capital from Eastern Europe and Latin America and sent stock prices 
worldwide tumbling. And this has given us the most extraordinary example 
of not just regional, but global financial contagion we've seen since 
the early 1930s. Because Russia was $20 billion short of what it needed 
to maintain the confidence of the markets this summer, we've taken 
$3 trillion off global stock market capitalization and have set in 
motion will be, by the end of this year, quite a significant global 
credit crunch, producing a recession in two-thirds of the world economy 
next year. David Hale, an economist with the Zurich Group, speaking 
to us from Chicago. How did a currency devaluation in a small Asian 
country lead to a crisis of global proportions? Should the world's 
money lenders and economists have been able to predict what was coming 
and take the necessary steps to halt the contagion? Brookings Institution 
economist Robert Lighten. Economists and virtually everybody else 
are pretty lousy at picking turning points. We're great at sort of 
forecasting long-run trends. But trying to figure out exactly when 
a crisis happens and how large it will be is something that really 
has eluded virtually everyone. What you can do is say in advance here 
are the conditions under which you are highly susceptible to a crisis. 
Well, in retrospect, it's easy for us to say that when countries borrow 
a lot of money in foreign currency and they don't have that large 
a volume of foreign exchange reserves in their central bank, they're 
exposing themselves to, in effect, a run on their country. Which is, 
in effect, what happened in Asia, where both domestic residents and 
foreign investors took their money out of these countries and then, 
in the process, exhausted the scarce foreign exchange reserves of 
these central banks. Is that what you would point to as a chief cause? 
I mean, was there too much money, too few rules, too little transparency 
is what a lot of people have said, too? Or too much money traveling 
too quickly in and out? Well, there's obviously a lot of money sloshing 
around the world, and the people who say that there's a lack of transparency 
are right in the sense that a lot of money flow to Asia without people 
asking questions. American and Japanese and European banks and investors 
viewed the Asia experience or the Asian countries as the equivalent 
of Nobel Prize winners. They were growing at 6 percent to 8 percent 
a year, year in and year out. They looked indestructible. And so, 
a lot of people didn't ask a lot of questions when they sent their 
money over. Now, there are contributing factors to this. The countries 
also maintain fixed exchange rates, which meant that people inside 
those countries had very large incentives to borrow lots of money 
in foreign currency, knowing that the government was guaranteeing 
them a fixed rate of exchange, let's say between dollars and baht 
or dollars and rupee and so forth. And what these people did in Asia 
is borrow at very low interest rates in the United States. They took 
the money, exchanged it into domestic currency and invested it at 
what they thought was going to be much higher interest rates. And 
as it turned out, it was above. What we need are institutions to sort 
of moderate these rapid fluctuations in sentiment. We also need obviously 
better regulatory systems and so forth to prevent financial institutions 
from going overboard. damage to the rest of the world. Robert Lighten, 
an economist with the Washington-based Brookings Institution. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>