<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981026.0500.0711 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
General elections will be held in the United States in eight days. 
All 435 members of the House of Representatives will stand for re-election 
as well as one-third of the members in the Senate. One of the most 
closely watched races this year is in New York state, where incumbent 
Republican Alfonse D'Amato is fighting a tough battle. Correspondent 
Barbara Schoetzau has this preview. Most public opinion surveys show 
Senator D'Amato running evenly with his Democratic opponent, long-time 
congressman Charles "Chuck" Schumer. But one recent poll gave Mr. 
D'Amato the edge with voters who are likely to cast a ballot in so-called 
"off-year" or nonpresidential elections. Maurice Carroll, a former 
political reporter for the New York Times and Newsday newspapers, 
directs the polling institute at Quinnipiac College in Connecticut. 
He calls the D'Amato-Schumer contest the race of the year. Quinnipiac's 
numbers show them in an absolute dead heat. You can't turn on a television 
set without seeing an ad from one or the other of them. They're all 
over the place. It's a good election. Much of the $35 million the 
two candidates have already spent on the campaign has been for radio 
and TV commercials that blanket the prime time airwaves. Chuck Schumer? 
He's missed over 100 votes this year, including important votes on 
breast cancer. Al D'Amato? He's always there, doing his job... Al 
D'Amato is still lying. The truth -- Chuck Schumer supports upstate 
disaster relief. Always has. D'Amato voted against education and against 
Medicare 12 times... Two years ago, polls showed low approval ratings 
for Senator D'Amato, and he was thought to be one of the most vulnerable 
incumbents running for re-election. But the three-term Senator has 
worked hard to turn his image around. He took the lead in helping 
Holocaust victims claim assets held by Swiss banks since World War 
II, and he supported much of the agenda of gay rights groups. As a 
result, he has won endorsements from a number of groups that usually 
support Democrats, including some gay rights and Jewish groups and 
a leading black Democratic congressman. Maurice Carroll says Mr. D'Amato's 
highly visible stands on a number of issues resonate with New Yorkers. 
He did the breast cancer. He did the environmental bond issue. He's 
done the Swiss bankers. And one thing after another -- one thing after 
another that has increased his popularity. He and Schumer are not 
dissimilar in their tactics, in their technique. They're both very 
hard-working guys. They both are very aware of press and what it can 
do for you. They both have media campaigns that are very tough, very 
opulent and very savvy. The two candidates are on opposite sides of 
some major issues, such as gun control and abortion rights, with Mr. 
D'Amato taking a conservative stance and Mr. Schumer on the more liberal 
side. But neither candidate is considered an ideological extremist. 
Moreover, issues have played a smaller role than personalities in 
the campaign. The Democrats have tried to make Senator D'Amato's feisty 
personality an issue. Senator D'Amato's campaign has attempted to 
make an issue of the fact that Mr. Schumer missed many votes in Congress 
this year while he was in New York campaigning. Maurice Carroll says 
Congressman Schumer's response to the attack ads indicates they are 
having some success. Schumer has answered D'Amato's ads. The president 
came up to New York to campaign for Schumer, and Schumer wasn't there. 
He went down to Washington to cast a few votes. And I've got to believe 
that that was in response to the stuff that D'Amato's doing. The other 
thing is D'Amato wouldn't keep doing it if he didn't think it was 
working. In the last weeks of the campaign, the two men have heightened 
their attacks on each other. Congressman Schumer accuses Senator D'Amato 
of lying about his voting record and using an ethnic slur to insult 
him. Political analysts like Maurice Carroll say the race is too close 
to predict a winner. But they also say that Senator D'Amato has two 
big advantages -- he is an incumbent in a year when American voters 
appear content with the economy, and he is running in an off-year 
election when turnout is expected to be low. Republican candidates 
traditionally benefit from low voter turnout. Still, Congressman Schumer 
is giving Mr. D'Amato the toughest challenge of the Senator's long 
career in New York politics, and no one is certain which way the vote 
will go on election day. Barbara Schoetzau, VOA News, New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>