<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981026.0500.0357 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Israeli leader Benjamin Netanyahu is now back home after signing an 
historic peace agreement with the Palestinians here in Washington 
on Friday. He faces a lot of opposition from the conservatives in 
the parliament and in his own cabinet. One of the key parts of that 
agreement flared up Sunday when Israeli settlers on the West Bank 
blocked roads and clashed with police to protest the latest Israeli-Palestinian 
peace agreement, adding to the discontent among some people in Israel. 
VOA's Al Pessin reports. The settlers staged sit-ins and prayer services 
at key road junctions throughout the West Bank, snarling morning traffic. 
Police had been deployed in force, expecting such protests and moved 
in to clear the roads and prevent confrontations between the protesters 
and Palestinian motorists. The settlers organization has called the 
agreement a betrayal and has vowed to unseat the government of Prime 
Minister Netanyahu. The group's chairman was among several dozen settlers 
arrested at Sunday's protests. Meanwhile, the Palestinian police began 
a promised crackdown on militants and tried to confiscate some illegal 
weapons in keeping with the Wye Plantation memorandum. The Palestinian 
police arrested an Islamic clergyman in the West Bank town of Nablus 
who is a senior member of the militant Palestinian group Hamas. The 
clergyman had told a journalist the latest agreement goes against 
the basic teachings of Islam. On Friday, the Palestinian police in 
Gaza arrested journalists who were trying to get reaction from the 
Hamas leader, Sheik Ahmed Yassin. Later, not far away in Ramallah, 
members of Yasser Arafat's political party, Fatah, threw stones at 
their group's West Bank leader, Marwan Barhouti. Palestinian intelligence 
officers protecting Mr. Barhouti opened fire, and the protesters shot 
back. One protester was severely wounded in his head, prompting both 
sides to stop shooting. The incident was sparked by preliminary efforts 
by the Palestinian police to confiscate illegal weapons, as required 
by the Wye memorandum. During the last two days, more and more Palestinians 
have become displeased with the way the Palestinian Authority is implementing 
some of the agreement's clauses. But in general, in spite of the vocal 
opposition by some groups, the accord enjoys wide support among Palestinians 
and Israelis. A public opinion poll published Sunday indicates nearly 
three-quarters of all Israelis believe Prime Minister Netanyahu did 
the right thing in signing the agreement. Al Pessin, VOA News, Jerusalem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>