<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981026.0500.2687 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Microsoft, the world's largest independent producer of computer software, 
is in the courtroom as a defendant. In a trial that began on Monday, 
October 19, the U.S. Department of Justice charges that the Redmond, 
Washington-based company is a monopoly violating American anti-trust 
laws. Dan Noble has details. Microsoft is big. It has more than 25,000 
employees worldwide, and its stock is valued at $260 billion. Today, 
Microsoft's Windows Operating System is used on 90 percent of the 
world's personal computers. Its applications programs, like word processing 
and spreadsheets, dominate the industry. Bill Gates, the company's 
co-founder and chief executive officer, is one of the world's richest 
people. Microsoft's Web browser, software that makes it easier for 
people to get information from the Internet, is capturing a large 
share of the market. Microsoft is an incredibly successful company. 
This is Wendy Goldman Rohm, a journalist from Evanston, Illinois, 
and author of "The Microsoft File: The Secret Case Against Bill Gates." 
The book is highly critical of Microsoft. It cemented its monopoly 
position actually in the late '80s. And at that time, it was Microsoft 
DOS that was running on basically all computers all over the world 
-- that is, Intel-based personal computers. And at that time, they 
began using what was known as word processor licensing, which in effect 
forced computer makers to pay a royalty to Microsoft for every computer 
they shipped. As a result of Microsoft's effort to bundle or put together 
various software products, Wendy Goldman Rohm says that it became 
very difficult for computer manufacturers to include products from 
other software companies. It's not illegal to be a monopoly. But it 
is illegal to maintain your monopoly position through predatory means 
and by abusing your market power. First is through superior skill, 
is the exact wording of the anti-trust laws. Henry Tang is an attorney 
specializing in intellectual property with the New York City law firm 
of Baker & Botts. Mr. Tang has been following the Microsoft case. 
The primary charge that has to do with Microsoft bundling is Internet 
Explorer software together with its Windows Operating System by bundling 
their Internet Explorer and, in effect, offering it for free, they 
are driving companies like Netscape, which also provide Internet browser 
software, out of business. According to Henry Tang, the case is, in 
his words, very important to the software industry. If Microsoft should 
prevail, then they would be free to bundle virtually any application 
of theirs with their operating system. A defeat in court for Microsoft 
would chip away at its domination of the software industry. Again, 
Henry Tang. Particularly in the case of the Netscape Navigator software, 
which is a piece of software that can run on different operating systems 
and which can, in itself, act as a platform for application programs. 
What a loss would do to Microsoft would be to have its current monopoly 
diluted somewhat. The trial is expected to be a speedy one. U.S. district 
judge Thomas Penfield Jackson, who's hearing the Microsoft case, has 
limited the number of witnesses. A decision is expected some time 
early next year. Regardless of the outcome, court observers expect 
that whichever side prevails, an appeal to a higher court is just 
about inevitable. I'm Dan Noble. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>