<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981026.0500.0505 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Germany's new parliament convenes today for its first session to install 
a center-left government after 16 years of conservative rule. Joining 
us from Bonn is reporter Suzanne Kelly. Suzanne, please describe exactly 
what's going to happen today. What are the mechanics here? Well, Charlene, 
today is Helmut Kohl's last day of work, and the ceremonies today 
really are going to center around him. He's going to receive a letter 
of discharge from German president Roman Herzog. He's also going to 
receive a Grand Cross, which is Germany's second highest honor. He 
was chancellor in Germany, as you said, for 16 years. Now, today began 
with a church service this morning for all of the new members of parliament. 
That's followed by party meetings today. Everyone's going to get together 
for a nice luncheon and then meet together for the first time as parliament 
at German time. That's when they will officially confirm Gerhard Schroeder's 
election as chancellor-elect? Now, Gerhard Schroeder has to wait one 
more day for that to happen. That won't happen until tomorrow. He 
will be sworn in officially as Germany's next chancellor. He will 
be the seventh post-war chancellor also. So he's going to have to 
wait. Today, Mr. Kohl is leaving, and the ceremonies are focusing 
on him. Tomorrow, Mr. Schroeder will take the spotlight. Now there 
is a coalition government that's going to be forming between the Social 
Democrats and the Green Parties. How will this likely change German 
policies? Is it a comfortable alliance, or is it going to be somewhat 
strained? I think it's actually going to be a rather comfortable alliance 
for, one reason being that the Green Party has not really had a taste 
of power at the federal level in Germany before. This is their first 
chance. So during the negotiation talks, which took really just three 
weeks for the coalition agreement to come together, the Greens really 
gave in quite a bit, many people are saying here and -- in their sort 
of concessions for the negotiation. One thing that is really going 
to change, however, that both parties feel very strongly about is 
the status of foreigners in Germany. There are two million to three 
million people here, most of them Turks, who are not considered German 
citizens, although they've been here for generations. They are now 
going to be eligible for dual citizenship under a streamlined immigration 
process. Now, during the 16 years of Helmut Kohl, he constantly declared 
that this is not a country of immigration. But now, within the last 
month, the German Greens and the exiting have both said, no, this 
is, in fact, a country of immigration. The policies are going to be 
relaxed, and now children with at least one German parent will be 
German. In the past, that wasn't even heard of. Now, this -- the new 
chancellor-designate, Gerhard Schroeder, has made reducing unemployment 
in Eastern Germany his top priority. Has he said how he's going to 
do that yet? Not in specific terms. However, the coalition government 
has come up with a tax reform plan. But already it's being wrought 
by criticism about, you know, taxpayer groups here are saying that 
the modest tax reform plan is not going to come anywhere near cutting 
Germany's near-10 percent unemployment rate. So they're really calling 
for bolder moves by the chancellor already, and he hasn't even taken 
office yet. He's got a very big job ahead of him when it comes to 
unemployment. Suzanne Kelly joins us this morning from Bonn. Thank 
you, Suzanne. Suzanne, thank you. Thank you, Paul and Charlene. Tomorrow's 
the big day in Germany. We will, of course, keep you posted on what's 
happening. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>