<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981026.1600.3186 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Kennedy Center has hosted a little bit of everything on its stages 
-- the symphony, ballet, opera, theater and jazz. But recently, Washington's 
premier performing arts center entered somewhat new territory when 
stand-up comics paid tribute to one of their own. Susan Loge reports 
on the first annual Mark Twain Prize. Humor is nothing new to the 
Kennedy Center. There have been comic plays on stage and even dance 
and musical performances with elements of humor. But Kennedy Center 
president Lawrence Wilker says the Mark Twain prize celebrates comedy 
as a performing art that plays a special role in American culture. 
It is a really defining characteristic, I think, of the American psyche. 
It is a way in which we cope with the world. It's a way in which we 
look at our foibles and our problems. And it seemed that it was appropriate 
to devote an evening to recognizing those who have made important 
contributions to American humor. And as we went around and talked 
to people in the humor profession, almost everyone said Richard Pryor 
is the person who really started the whole renaissance of humor in 
America in our generation. Richard Pryor has appeared in nearly 40 
films. But he established his career as a stand-up comedian in the 
mid 1960s. He's known for pushing the boundaries of humor by turning 
his anger and pain to laughter, with routines on racism, relationships, 
crime, poverty and the drug culture -- all based on his personal experiences 
as an African-American male, but often using the voices of other characters 
based on people he knew. Damon Wayans says Pryor has served as a role 
model for younger comedians like himself. I think every -- especially 
every black comedian tries to emulate Richard, you know, whether it's 
in timing or just in terms of looking into their own life for humor. 
I think he inspired me to think about some of the people who I knew 
in my life. Damon Wayans was among those who came to the Kennedy Center 
to honor Richard Pryor. Others who were on hand included actors Danny 
Glover and Morgan Freeman and fellow comedians Chris Rock, Whoopee 
Goldberg and Robin Williams, who told reporters that Richard Pryor 
made him realize that to be a comedian you have to be willing to take 
chances. He used to say anything is available. And that's what he 
was always about. And talking about really painful things. I mean, 
deeply so. Even Freud would go, "You shouldn't go there." Pryor's 
addiction to cocaine and the near-fatal accident in which he set himself 
on fire while freebasing provided material for his act in the 1980s, 
including his 1982 performance film, "Richard Pryor Live On Sunset 
Strip." I was standing there on fire on Sunset. Why that's so pretty 
blue. You know what? That looks like fire! And you know something 
I found out? When you're on fire and running down the street, people 
will get out of your way. Except for one old drunk, going, "Hey, buddy, 
can we get a light?" In 1986, six years after he was rushed to the 
hospital with third-degree burns over 50 percent of his body, Richard 
Pryor faced another challenge. He was diagnosed with multiple sclerosis. 
Now in frail health and confined to a wheelchair, he watched the tribute 
at the Kennedy Center from a box seat. During the program, comedian 
Richard Belzer referred to it as the "Abe Lincoln seat," demonstrating 
the extent to which Richard Pryor has influenced his humor by removing 
all taboos. He told reporters in a press conference that Pryor is, 
in his opinion, the greatest stand-up comic who has ever lived. One 
of the things that makes him great is the fact that he could take 
socially complex situations and portray one or more totally divergent 
characters and make you laugh hysterically. There's a lot of talented 
people around today, but I don't think there's anyone that will ever 
embody all the things that he can do. Most of those talented people 
feel they owe a debt of gratitude to Richard Pryor for taking stand-up 
comedy to a new level, which is why he was the unanimous choice for 
the first annual Kennedy Center Mark Twain Prize. I'm Susan Loge. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>