<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981022.0538 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Now that Martin O'Neill's decided he's staying at Leicester City he 
now has to work out how to stop unbeaten Aston Villa. Having turned 
down the chance to replace George Graham at Leeds, the much sought-after 
former Northern Ireland international can concentrate on turning modest 
Leicester into a force in English soccer. What better than to become 
the first team to beat John Gregory's Villa? O'Neill has agreed to 
sign a new contract to stay at Filbert Street for the next two seasons 
and takes his workmanlike team to Villa Park on Saturday to try and 
break down one of the strongest defenses in the league. The Villains, 
who are four points clear of second place Manchester United, have 
conceded only two goals in nine league games and look almost certain 
to gain the last 16 of the UEFA Cup after a 1-0 shutout at Celta Vigo 
Tuesday night. With either Australian international Mark Bosnich or 
understudy Michael Oakes in goal, Villa looks just as secure behind 
a back line of England center-back Gareth Southgate, the towering 
Ugo Ehiogu and 17-year-old Gareth Barry, who is getting rave reviews. 
Villa's midfield is well organized and Gregory can recall Paul Merson, 
who was ineligible against Celta Vigo, to partner Stan Collymore in 
attack. It's a tough task for O'Neill's team although, in powerful 
striker Emile Heskey and veteran goalscorer Tony Cottee, Leicester 
has the firepower to cause an upset. Manchester United goes to mid-standings 
Derby knowing that, if Villa slips up at home to O'Neill's men, it 
still has a game in hand. Beaten only by defending titlist Arsenal, 
the Reds have won five out of eight Premier League games and easily 
lead the scorers' list with 18 goals. Dwight Yorke has six goals and 
strike partner Andy Cole four and the two are likely to team up against 
Jim Smith's Derby at Pride Park. Third place Middlesbrough goes to 
sliding Wimbledon, which was trounced 5-1 by Manchester United last 
week. After that loss Dons manager Joe Kinnear admitted there was 
a huge gulf between his team and Alex Ferguson's stars and, in terms 
of spectator support and financial muscle, few would disagree. Because 
it was in European Cup Winners Cup action on Thursday, fifth place 
Chelsea doesn't play again until Sunday, when it visits Leeds. Defending 
champion Arsenal, which stayed fifth after a disappointing 1-1 tie 
at home to last place Southampton last week, also plays Sunday at 
third from last struggler Blackburn. Sixth place Newcastle goes to 
lowly Tottenham while Liverpool, which has taken only three points 
from its last five league games and was held to a scoreless tie at 
home by Valencia in the UEFA Cup on Tuesday, hopes to improve on its 
seventh place position with a home victory over lowly Nottingham Forest. 
Last place Southampton hosts next-to-last Coventry but can't climb 
even with a win. The Saints are six points behind the Sky Blues even 
after its encouraging tie at Arsenal. In other games Saturday it is 
Charlton vs. West Ham and Sheffield Wednesday vs. Everton. After their 
1-1 tie Wednesday, division one Huddersfield still holds a two-point 
lead over second place Sunderland. On Saturday, Huddersfield goes 
to Norwich while Sunderland another mid-standings team, Bury. With 
Scottish Premier League leader Glasgow Rangers playing a League Cup 
semifinal against division one Airdrie, second place Kilmarnock has 
the chance to go top by beating St. Johnstone at home. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>