<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981022.0241 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
BAGHDAD, Iraq (AP) _ U.N. weapons monitors prevented journalists on 
Thursday from accompanying them on missions to suspected chemical 
and biological weapons sites, saying the U.N. monitoring is confidential. 
The incident developed at the inspectors' headquarters in Baghdad 
after the journalists were apparently encouraged by Iraq, which has 
been trying to picture the monitors as spies rather than neutral U.N. 
employees. An Iraqi colonel at the scene suggested the U.N. Special 
Commission in charge of arms inspections didn't want the journalists 
to see ``the procedure to collect intelligence information and military 
information.'' The weapons inspection chief in Baghdad, Nils Carlstrom, 
also told reporters that he had reported to U.N. officials in New 
York about Iraqi complaints that a U.N. monitor had taken personal 
photos last week against the agency's rules. This is the second such 
incident this month. UNSCOM's inspectors must verify that Iraq has 
eliminated its weapons of mass destruction before sanctions imposed 
after its 1990 invasion of Kuwait can be lifted. The inspectors have 
long been the subject of a dispute between Iraq and the United Nations 
because the Iraqi government maintains it has destroyed all its lethal 
weapons. Before Thursday's incident, journalists including television 
crews had applied for permission from UNSCOM and Iraq to go along 
on the monitoring missions, despite long-standing rules by the U.N. 
agency against such news coverage. Carlstrom refused permission for 
the journalists to accompany teams of chemical and biological experts. 
``UNSCOM's policy (is) not to give permission to follow our work. 
The work is confidential for both Iraq and UNSCOM,'' he said. Two 
Iraqi military officers told the reporters their government would 
agree to have them cover the monitoring, but could not override the 
U.N. objection. ``I have no objections to follow all teams. The objection 
comes from UNSCOM through New York,'' Col. Abdul-Razak Tarish said. 
``This is to prevent taking videotape about the procedure to collect 
intelligence information and military information about the site, 
not about the monitoring,'' he said, speaking in English for the benefit 
of cameramen from Western TV agencies. The second officer, Col. Mazen 
Zakaria, said Iraq had a ``gentlemen's agreement'' not to allow coverage 
by journalists unless both sides approved. Two teams, one chemical 
and one biological, left their headquarters at the Canal Hotel after 
the incident. Iraq has since Aug. 5 blocked U.N. nuclear inspectors 
and those in charge of investigating chemical and biological weapons 
from visiting new suspected arms sites and limited them to monitoring 
sites previously inspected. ``This is a monitoring inspection we are 
doing because all disarmament inspections are suspended,'' Carlstrom 
said. Concerning the inspector whom Iraq accused of taking personal 
photos earlier this week, Carlstrom said that he had passed along 
Iraq's complaint to U.N. officials in New York and was awaiting a 
reply. He added that a similar incident happened on Oct. 8, in which 
an inspector used a private camera and broke UNSCOM rules. This inspector 
was sent out of Iraq on the first plane, he said. Iraq has frequently 
accused the inspectors of being spies, particularly former American 
inspector Scott Ritter, who further fueled the charges by saying after 
he resigned that he got some information about Iraqi weapons from 
Israeli intelligence. On Wednesday, Iraqi officials accused the the 
International Atomic Energy Agency, in charge of monitoring the nuclear 
weapons program in Iraq, of trying to get military information by 
asking for details on Iraq's water supplies. The U.N. agency made 
no comment in reply. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>