<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981022.0225 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Thai government has canceled contracts for a digital communications 
project and the renovation of Bangkok's zoo amid allegations of corruption, 
government agencies said Thursday. Meanwhile, a former Cabinet member 
called for the cancellation of a suspicious landfill contract for 
Bangkok's new airport, and a former official of the Food and Drug 
Administration was accused of approving advertisements for products 
after he left the agency. These are just some of the many scandals 
plaguing the coalition government of Prime Minister Chuan Leekpai, 
who is widely regarded as one of the most honest politicians in Thai 
history. But perceptions of corruption are tainting his administration 
as questionable practices and decisions by some ministers and bureaucrats 
have come under fire. Of the four scandals, the alleged collusion 
in awarding a contract for a digital high-speed communications network 
is the one that most closely touches Chuan's team. Transport and Communications 
Minister Suthep Thauksuban, a senior members of Chuan's Democrat Party, 
was accused by a fellow Democrat of participating in a bid-rigging 
scheme for the project. No one has proven that the minister was personally 
involved. But on Thursday, the state-owned Telephone Organization 
of Thailand, which is overseeing the project, canceled the contract. 
``The board has agreed to cancel the project and initiate a new bidding 
process,'' the TOT said in a press release, adding it was sure new 
bidding would result in the project costing less. ``The cost of the 
project has exceeded the budget by 3 billion baht (dlrs 80 million),'' 
it said. The project had been budgeted at 10.4 billion baht (dlrs 
277 million). The companies involved in the project are Sweden's Ericsson, 
two companies in Japan's Mitsui and Tomen groups, Germany's Siemens, 
and Thai companies Loxley and Jasmine International. Also, a former 
Cabinet member urged Chuan to cancel a contract with Ital-Thai Development 
to supply landfill for Bangkok's second international airport, the 
building of which has been delayed for years, the newspaper The Nation 
reported. The call by Bokhin Polakul, who served during the administration 
of former Prime Minister Chavalit Yongchaiyudh, was unusual in that 
the contract was signed by the government in which he served. Critics 
say Ital-Thai is overcharging for sand. The Bangkok Post reported 
Thursday that the board of the Zoological Park Organization terminated 
a contract with Kingpower Development, a private company, to renovate 
and run the Dusit Zoo in Bangkok. Social activists complained the 
awarding of the contract wasn't handled with transparency, and demanded 
to know why only 6 percent of profits would be returned to the government. 
And The Nation reported that officials of the Food and Drug Administration 
have charged that Prasert Charoenphon, a former deputy, signed papers 
approving advertisements for food products after he no longer worked 
at the FDA. FDA approval is necessary before ads for food and drugs 
can be run. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>