<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981022.2100.0054 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
And good Thursday evening to you. As we go on the air tonight, the 
talks are still going on, the president of the United States is there. 
The principals in the talks have spent a good portion of this evening 
in the same room, and that is seen by all as a pretty good sign for 
ease on-again off-again peace conference talks taking place in Maryland's 
eastern shore. This is day eight. There's still progress to report 
this evening even though last night at this time the Israelis had 
ordered their aircraft fueled up. They were ready to go. Tonight, 
quite the contrary so far as they appear to be ticking down the items 
on the list as they go, though as long as the subject here is the 
mideast, this is far from a done deal as veterans of this kind of 
thing know, among them, chief foreign affairs correspondent, Andrea 
Mitchell. She is with us tonight. Andrea. Brian, they are making major 
progress. The talks are at the most intense stage yet. All the major 
players now in the same room, a far cry from last night. Tonight, 
a major agreement so far on a big sticking point. This was the Palestinian 
national covenant, which has for years, for decades, called for the 
destruction of the state of Israel. There is agreement that the Palestinian 
national council and other palestinian organizations will very publicly 
declare an end to that covenant, that charter. Basically, their constitution. 
And that this will be done possibly even with the president of the 
United States witnessing this ceremony sometime perhaps 12 weeks from 
now in the gaza and West Bank. So, you could see this would be a major 
public denonetheless yation of the declaration that the Palestinians 
are devoted to the destruction of the state of Israel. Still, the 
talks continue, and there are other sticking points. The president's 
return made possible by a major breakthrough overnight. Tentative 
agreement on the biggest obstacle to a deal. Israel's demand for more 
protection against terrorist attacks. The hardest decisions now at 
last are on table. Mr. Clinton's direct involvement and the first 
three-way talk since Monday, signs of real progress after a roller 
coaster night. On the phone to Arafat and Netanyahu, Jordan's king 
Hussein pushing for compromise. But the most important and unlikely 
negotiator, the C.I.A. director, Joe tenet. His plan, officers at 
listing posts in the field. It's a very controversial position for 
the C.I.A. to be in, but unfortunately, it's become necessary precisely 
because trust has broken down. Lags winter, Arafat met with the director 
in this hotel. Now Netanyahu has agreed to trust the C.I.A. as well. 
But today he's under fierce pressure back home from right-wing Israelis 
who don't want any agreement. Tonight Israeli sources say they have 
also agreed to release several hundred plainian prisoners, but not 
those whom they describe as having blood on their hands, charged with 
specific acts of terrorism. They've also reached an agreement that 
the Palestinians will reduce if size of their police force, so they 
have made quite a bit of progress. There still is some way to go. 
The major remaining issue, whether or not Israel will agree to a third 
withdrawal, a third redeployment from the West Bank. Andrea, this 
group doesn't seem to mind if they see morning on the way. Are there 
signs that they're going all night or at least into the morning gen 
tonight? And could we be talking about at AST a handshake at the end? 
I think so. I think one of the things to remember, though, is even 
if they reach an agreement, and I think that is more likely now, but 
even if they do reach an agreement, and sometime tomorrow have a south 
lawn White House signing ceremony with all the flags and all the players, 
this is going to be hard to implement. Any act of terrorism by either 
side could blow it up, give either side an excuse to cancel the agreement. 
I think this is unlikely to come through as it's described on paper. 
Andrea Mitchell will stay on duty tonight as long as they are talking 
on the eastern shore in the state of Maryland. Thanks. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>