<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981022.2100.2336 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
From "dateline NBC" tonight, cervical cancer, it's a disease that 
kills thousands of American women every year, but it's almost entirely 
preventable. While routine testing and early detext have saved a lot 
of lives over the years, the question remains why are so many women 
still dying. We have a "Dateline" healthline report for you tonight. 
Dr. Bob arnot takes a look at a new computer technology that could 
make a Wrled of difference here. Rod and sylvie were newlyweds and 
all the dreamt of having a baby, but at age 33, sylvie was diagnosed 
with invasive cervical cancer and was forced to have a radical hysterectomy. 
I begged the doctor. I said please let me have the baby first, then 
you can do whatever you need to. But it was too late. Doctors said 
sylvie may have had her wish if only the cancer had been found earlier. 
And the ironny is it could have been. Two 1/2 years ago, her annual 
pap smear came back normal. But just nine months later, after some 
disturbing symptoms, a second pap smear showed advanced cancer. How 
in six to nine months did we get such a serious aggressive cancer? 
The answer was devastating to Rod and sylvie. It turns out the cancer 
had been there all along. The first one had been misread. For most 
women, pap smear are normal every year, but for the small group of 
women who might have something wrong, the pap smear is far from perfect. 
It's an excellent test, but it has its limitations. Dr. Diane Solomon 
is a senior investigator at the national cancer institute in Washington, 
D.C. what percent of abnormalities does traditional screening miss? 
One pap smear, about 20% of abnormalities may be miss. A small minority 
of those women will go on to develop cervical cancer. That's not to 
say it doesn't work. It decreases the number of cervical cancer deaths 
by 70%. But there is a built-in problem, human error. A single slide 
looks almost like a satellite photo. A technologist has to pick through 
300,000 to 500,000 cells to find as few as 20 abnormal ones. It's 
like looking for a needle in a haystack. Some technicians are asked 
to read up to 100 slides a day and complain of fatigue, eyestrain, 
and fighting to stay awake. This machine could help. It's a computerized 
screening device called autopap. It can be run 24 hours a day and 
is more accurate at picking up abnormalities than technologists. About 
100 of them are currently in use across the country. I stand and watch 
this sometimes forself minutes, marveling at it. The television monitor 
isn't broken. It shows how quickly autopap screens 1,000 different 
images of each pap smear. The computer works so quickly the images 
appear almost like flickers to people watching. It's high-tech. It's 
cool. At Salt Lake City arup's labs, Dr. Jay Marshall has been using 
autopap as a Back-up to traditional screening, kind of like getting 
a second opinion. It's cauth many misses. Slides called normal or 
Negative when an abnormality is present. Doctors call these false 
negatives. I was surprised initially on high-grade, or the most severe 
lesions, before you actually have invasive cancer, we'll identify 
about six times the number compared to conventional practice. Conventional 
screening called this slide normal, but it just had one abnormal cell 
tucked away. Autopap caught it. The F.D.A. has taken a revolutionary 
step. For the first time, computers, not people, will be used for 
initial pap smear readings. That's already the case in some European 
and Asian countries. In Japan, half of all pap smears read by the 
compute and ruled normal may be set aside and never reviewed by a 
human eye. In America, the F.D.A. isn't willing to go that far yet. 
For now, only 25% of pap smears may be read by the computer alone. 
The rest must be double-checked by a technologist for abnormalities. 
It would allow the technologist to focus more simply on those cases 
that are most likely to have abnormal cells. The company ta makes 
autopap says one study showed autopap caught 33% more suspicious cells, 
including two cancers, than technologists working alone. So, is computer 
screening the answer? Drfment Solomon, from the national cancer institute, 
is hopeful. I think there's a potential to significantly impact on 
if false Negative rate. But her main concern is cost. There are so 
many new technologies right now that you could come out with a $200 
Bill for cervical screening. That will increase the cost by about 
10 times. We checked with several experts who said it's too early 
to know how expensive autopap would be, but it should become more 
affordable over time. A spokesman for the lab that misread sill ree 
vie's test says confidential prevents him from discussing the case 
but say they now use autopap. But the best thing any woman can do 
is get a pap smear, something 25% to 40% of American women fail to 
do regularly. The majority of deaths from cervical cancer are in women 
who have not had regular pap smear. Regular, routine, conventional 
screening is the best hedge against the risk of cervical cancer. That 
was Dr. Bob arnot with a "Dateline" health line report tonight. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>