<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981022.1830.1281 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Now, "living longer, living better." So much has been made of the 
wave of aging baby boomers in this country and the implications of 
so many Americans getting older all at once. One potential pitfall, 
whether there'll be enough doctors to go around, doctors trained to 
treat older people's problems. Here's NBC's Robert Hager. Dr. Michael 
westerman, in training with a professor from Johns hopkins bayview 
medical center, in Baltimore, En route to a house call. House call? 
In this age of assembly line office visits and managed care? Have 
you had any pain in your chest at all? Calls like this one or special 
clinics in retirement communities. Everybody's right here to help, 
if you need it. And hospital training for the unique needs of older 
Americans, all part of a special program run by Hopkins. It's called 
geriatric medicine, but some say too few doctors are trained for this 
specialized treatment many of us will need as we grow older. There 
are 50,000 pediatricians in the U.S. to treat the young, hundreds 
of thousands of ob/gyns and other specialists for adults, but only 
8,000 doctors with any specific training to treat older Americans. 
So as the country ages and people prepare for the years ahead, that 
could mean trouble. Some predict students entering medical school 
today can expect that half the patients they see later, in practice, 
will be over 65. It's a huge, huge issue. But of the 128 medical schools 
in the U.S. today, only 14 require even a single course on the needs 
of older people. Some estimate that within a dozen years, there'll 
be a shortage of 24,000 doctors with special training. Why is that 
a problem? Most of us, certainly those of us who are in our 60s and 
probably those in our 50s, are going to face what older people face 
today, chronic disease and illness. Already, for people in their 50s 
and 60s, problems with diabetes, blood pressure and arthritis triple. 
In the 70s, chances for cancer, heart disease and hip fractures double 
every five years. But early symptoms can be harder to detect in older 
patients. They also react differently to drugs and are more apt to 
be taking a lot of them. Why older patients need to be careful choosing 
a new doctor, Ask that physician if they've ever had any formal training 
in geriatrics. And don't let them tell you, "listen, I've taken care 
of old people, I know what I'm doing." Find out if they've ever had 
any formal training. Are they uniquely prepared for the coming wave 
of older patients, or even make house calls? Hard to find, but important, 
for "living longer, living better." Robert Hager, NBC news, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>