<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981022.0401 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Sen. Mitch McConnell cannot vote in Wisconsin. A Republican, he represents 
Kentucky on Capitol Hill. But he may have more to say than anyone 
else about whether his colleague, Sen. Russell Feingold, D-Wis., retains 
his seat next month. Along with Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz., Feingold 
is the co-author of a bill that would reform campaign finance, in 
part by eliminating ``soft money'' _ funds spent by local or national 
organizations on behalf of but supposedly independent of political 
candidates. McConnell is the bill's archenemy, and he also happens 
to be the chairman of the National Republican Senatorial Committee, 
which has plenty of soft money to spend. The result: at least a million 
Senatorial Committee dollars, by local estimates, and maybe twice 
that many, have cascaded into Wisconsin in recent months to buy television 
commercials promoting Feingold's Republican rival, Rep. Mark Neumann. 
If Feingold wins, campaign finance reform will get a lift; if he loses, 
the reform cause will suffer a major setback. The outcome here in 
Wisconsin could also play a significant part in determining whether 
the Republicans gain the five seats that they need to give them 60, 
enough to stop a Democratic filibuster on a party-line vote. Six or 
seven seats now held by Democrats are in jeopardy, including that 
of Feingold, a soft-spoken, slightly fey former Rhodes Scholar with 
a broad maverick streak. Mike Wittenwyler, Feingold's campaign manager, 
speaks of a ``vendetta'' by McConnell against Feingold. A Republican 
lobbyist in Washington said confidently that ``Mitch will spend what 
it takes in Wisconsin.'' And a Republican senator said McConnell had 
told him recently: ``Don't worry about campaign reform. Feingold's 
going to be dead meat by Christmas.'' That remains to be seen. But 
this much is clear: Before the Republican television blitz began on 
Aug. 11 with a series of commercials that Feingold allowed to go unanswered 
for a month, the senator held a lead of 10 to 15 percentage points 
in most polls. Afterwards, the race became a dead heat, and so it 
remains at the moment, with less than two weeks left until Election 
Day. Feingold is running television commercials now, some of them 
every bit as hard-hitting as his opponent's, including one accusing 
Neumann of indifference to the plight of people unable to procure 
needed health care through their HMOs. Both candidates have agreed 
to limit direct or ``hard-money'' spending to $1 for each registered 
voter, about 3.8 million, to accept no more than 10 percent of their 
campaign funds from political action committees and to raise no more 
than 25 percent of the total from outside Wisconsin. Feingold has 
also appealed to potential soft-money groups to stay out of the race. 
The Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee agreed, after warning 
him that he was jeopardizing his seat. Other groups have come in on 
his behalf, including the League of Conservation Voters, the Sierra 
Club and the AFL-CIO, but their contributions are much smaller than 
the Republicans'. Asked about the flood of soft money at a fund-raiser 
on Wednesday night in an auto museum in this Milwaukee suburb, Neumann 
bridled, calling Feingold ``an absolute hypocrite'' and charging that 
he had benefited from ``hundreds of thousands of dollars of soft money'' 
while pretending not to. In his own House race two years ago, Neumann 
added, unions had poured in $1.2 million in an effort to defeat him, 
and ``no reporters came out here and questioned that.'' Reports at 
the time showed the labor federation spending only $300,000. For his 
part, Feingold, boyish and sometimes puppy-like at 45, sounds fatalistic 
if determined to fight for his seat and his bill. ``McConnell wants 
to kill McCain-Feingold,'' Feingold said in an interview in his campaign 
van on Tuesday, on the way from Kenosha to Milwaukee. ``He tells his 
buddies that if they can kill it, they can control the Senate for 
20 years. This is one of the most brutal assaults of soft money ever, 
not only on television but huge mailings and phone banks, all paid 
for by undisclosed contributions from the big banks, oil companies 
and tobacco companies.'' If that kind of talk sounds a little like 
``Fighting Bob'' LaFollette and his heirs in Wisconsin's radical politics 
campaigning against the big lumber companies and the rapacious railroads 
generations ago, it is no accident. Feingold's father was a Progressive 
organizer, and the senator himself said fervently, ``A hundred years 
after the founding of the Progressive Party, if I was not going to 
draw the line in the sand this year, who was going to do it, and when?'' 
In effect, Feingold is gambling his political career on the premise 
that he can stick up for the principles embodied in his reform bill, 
specifically its ban on soft money, and still win a second term. From 
his point of view, he said, ``No career, including mine, is as important 
as breaking the hold of this system of legalized bribery.'' Asked 
how close he was to saying, ``I'd rather be right than re-elected,'' 
Feingold answered: ``Oh, I'm there already. Somebody told me Sam Houston 
once said he intended to tell the truth and suffer the consequences, 
and that sounds fine to me.'' The senator said he had saved $800,000 
for a final television assault, and indeed he appears to have as many 
commercials on the air as Neumann at the moment, at least in populous 
southeastern Wisconsin. The independent advertisements for the Republican 
nominee appear to have gone off the air for the time being. ``The 
issue is my issue now,'' Feingold said. ``We're on my playing field. 
Is Wisconsin going to become another state where money rules?'' He 
is convinced that Wisconsin cares about campaign reform. Neumann, 
a 44-year-old former teacher and real-estate developer, is convinced 
that voters here care a lot more about partial birth abortion, which 
he opposes and Feingold supports in some circumstances; about the 
proposed flag-burning amendment, about cutting taxes and especially 
about shoring up the Social Security system. President Clinton's embroilment 
with Monica Lewinsky seems to have vanished from the Wisconsin landscape. 
Voters seldom bring up the subject, and Neumann, who has called on 
the president to resign, said he was ``amazed by the silence, total 
silence.'' One of Neumann's main commercials criticizes both Clinton 
and Speaker Newt Gingrich on Social Security. Neumann says he favors 
what Clinton ``only pretends to favor _ saving the budget surplus 
to fix Social Security.'' As for Gingrich, the two have clashed often, 
with the speaker describing Neumann as ``a pain in the neck'' who 
did not know how to compromise, and Neumann refusing to vote for Gingrich 
for speaker after the 1996 election. Neumann relies on an unusual 
tool, an overhead slide projector in his campaign meetings, like the 
one he used this week at the Waukesha County Technical College in 
Pewaukee, west of Milwaukee. He calls them town hall forums, but they 
actually resemble sales pitches, with multi-colored charts and bar 
graphs designed to demonstrate, above all, Republican thrift and Democratic 
profligacy. Coatless, with his shirt sleeves rolled up, he said he 
hoped that a generation from now Congress could ``give our children 
a debt-free America,'' a Social Security trust fund from which no 
loans have been made to the government's general fund, and lower income 
taxes. In Washington, he has campaigned with unusual zeal against 
spending, including pork-barrel projects for his district. ``The campaign,'' 
he said, ``is about taxes and Social Security.'' But sometimes Neumann 
hits hard on abortion and flag-burning, and ridicules Feingold for 
``sending your dollars to Russia to study monkeys in space'' and supporting 
a government study of bovine flatulence in the United States. In a 
sign of the bitterness that has stained the campaign since the race 
narrowed, Feingold said that this state's other political tradition 
besides progressivism, the legacy of Sen. Joseph McCarthy, ``has reared 
its head in the most intensive form in decades in this right-wing 
Neumann juggernaut.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>