<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981022.0380 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As signs of deep financial trouble in China's trust and investment 
companies come to light, bankers and economists say they expect the 
Chinese authorities to close down dozens more debt-ridden financial 
houses. The action seems to be part of a deliberate policy shift in 
Beijing rather than a sign of imminent financial crisis, like those 
suffered by many other Asian nations. Insolvent trust and investment 
companies, a rickety and somewhat outdated part of China's half-reformed 
financial system, will no longer be saved. China is still in the early 
stages of a complex and difficult process of making its financial 
system more responsive to market forces, better regulated and less 
prone to manipulation by local officials. It may take years, if not 
decades, before a modern banking or securities system emerges. For 
now, Beijing still protects the state-run banks. Trust and investment 
companies, however, have become so prone to financial shenanigans 
and so dominated by local interests that clash with those of the Chinese 
government that Prime Minister Zhu Rongji is apparently ready to make 
hard choices. A spokesman for the People's Bank of China, the nation's 
central bank and the chief financial regulator, said trust and investment 
companies would be examined case by case. But bankers and economists 
said Beijing intended to drastically cut back the number of such companies, 
to 40 or so from about 240 today. The closing early this month of 
the Guangdong International Trust and Investment Co., also known as 
Gitic, has drawn fresh attention to the crushing debt loads at other 
trust and investment companies in China. Creditors understandably 
are more interested than anyone else. Yet in China's clunky banking 
system, which is at once chaotic and secretive, it remains unclear 
how much of Guangdong International's $2.4 billion in debt will be 
assumed by the government. Most of China's other trust and investment 
companies are thought to be deeply in debt as well, with a total of 
about $10 billion owed to foreign banks. ``The investment and trust 
companies are the weakest sector of the financial system,'' said Qu 
Hongbin, an economist with Dresdner Kleinwort Benson in Hong Kong. 
``I'm sure Gitic is not alone.'' China's trust and investment companies, 
largely creatures of the 1980s, were set up to provide financing in 
a time before this country had stock and bond markets, which are still 
small but emerging as more efficient financiers. Because a typical 
Chinese trust and investment company essentially operated as the investment 
arm of a local government, business decisions were invariably affected 
by the political and personal concerns of local leaders. Guangdong 
International, in the southern province of Guangdong, like countless 
other such companies, used its political connections for easy access 
to debt and sank much of its borrowing into real estate ventures and 
derivatives. As long as banks were flush, there was little pressure 
to repay debt, even when the property market started to sink badly 
last year. Guangdong International's demise was prompted in part, 
bankers say, by the way lending from Japanese and South Korean banks 
dried up this year as the financial situation in those nations weakened. 
Foreign lending to trust and investment companies has been declining 
all year and is now virtually nonexistent. The Guangdong province 
government, whose interests have sometimes seemed indistinguishable 
from those of Guangdong International, proposed a detailed bailout 
plan to Beijing authorities last month. The answer was no. That may 
have been a surprise to the Guangdong officials, accustomed to having 
financial problems covered as long as their political connections 
were in order. But the message was clear to trust and investment companies 
throughout China: The central government will no longer cover outsized 
debts automatically. Beijing announced early this month that the Bank 
of China, a commercial bank, would cover Guangdong International's 
foreign debts. But the bank's officials said later that it could take 
months to evaluate the debts and decide which to pay back, frustrating 
many foreign creditors. A U.S. banker in Shanghai complained that 
while Chinese officials said they would honor debts that were properly 
registered with regulators, there was no system in China to find out 
which loans were registered and which were not. Qu, the economist, 
observed that the closing of Guangdong International could not be 
seen as a purely financial event. Citing China's president as well 
as his prime minister, he said: ``Jiang Zemin and Zhu Rongji want 
to regain power from regions. Overhauling the tax system, reining 
in the trust and investment companies _ these are part of a larger 
effort.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>