<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981022.0257 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In every culture, objects of beauty bring delight. They also push 
ideologies, advertise interests, secure alliance and pump up reputations. 
So it has always been; so it is likely always to be. It was certainly 
true two centuries ago in Iran. There, a passel of ambitious new rulers 
came out of the blue and created an assertive, self-promotional dynastic 
art of almost hallucinatory strangeness and brilliance, briefly revivifying 
an ancient culture in its twilight years. Nothing quite like this 
late Persian art had ever appeared in Asia. And it has never been 
seen in bulk in the West before the opening Friday of an extraordinary 
exhibition, ``Royal Persian Paintings: The Qajar Epoch, 1785-1925,'' 
at the Brooklyn Museum of Art. Many shows flatter audiences by telling 
them what they already know; this one does the opposite. In a gathering 
of 100 objects from starry international collections, including the 
Hermitage and the Louvre, it fleshes out an almost unheard of chapter 
of art history as it upsets the popular image of classic art tradition. 
Think ``Persian painting,'' and what comes to mind? Small illuminated 
miniatures with diminutive landscapes and teensy figures. But the 
Qajar emperors thought big, sometimes very big. They liked their portraits 
life size, their battle scenes Cinemascopic. Even their collectibles 
_ lacquered boxes, gilded enamels _ have a trumpeting, clear-the-way 
flair, like props in a Handel opera, glinting under the stage lights. 
And by the time the Qajars, who were Turkish-speaking tribal warlords, 
came to power in Persia at the end of the 18th century, the empire 
was badly in need of star wattage. The last Safavid ruler had been 
defeated in 1722. Two stopgap dynasties had come and gone. The Ottoman 
Turks posed a serious threat, and European superpowers _ England, 
France, Russia _ had designs on Central Asia. The Brooklyn show, organized 
by Layla Diba, the museum's curator of Islamic art, and Maryam Ekhtiar, 
senior research associate, begins with a selection of late Safavid 
art, the most familiar of Persian styles. Here one finds an illuminated 
Koran, all lapis lazuli and gold, a scrap of official calligraphy 
and a miniature portrait depicting the court artist Riza Abbasi. He 
is shown as an elderly man, stooped, gentle, bespectacled, though 
the image is somewhat deceptive: he was notorious for his lifelong 
love of wrestling and louche company. What's most interesting about 
the portrait, though, is that it shows him at work on a painting, 
and that painting is the figure of a man in European attire. Europe, 
one quickly discovers, is everywhere in the art on view. Louis XIV, 
or someone who looks a lot like him, shows up in a miniature painting 
from Isfahan. A neo-classical Flora decorously hikes up her skirt 
in front of a stylized Safavid landscape in an album painting. A lacquered 
book cover is decorated with a pasted-on French engraving. Perhaps 
most striking is a European-inspired expansion in scale, dramatically 
demonstrated in four full-length portraits hung near each other in 
the show. Two of them are spectacular images of Charles I of England 
and his Queen, Henrietta, by Anthony van Dyck, on loan from Russia. 
The other two, of a boy carrying a bow and arrow and a young girl 
in a snood-like cap, are products of the Safavid court. Stylistically, 
the Western and Asian works couldn't be more different. Charles looks 
suave and relaxed, like a dancer at rest, in licorice-black armor 
set off by a cascade of royal red silk. The Persian youth stands as 
stiff as a doll in a spatial setting of Escher-like illogic, in which 
one-point perspective and the depthless flatness of Persian manuscript 
tradition clash. But side by side, the paintings tell a story of how 
a new Persian art developed, inspired by Western models but still 
Persian to the core. This hybrid art flourished during the short-lived 
Zand dynasty (1750-79). And although little from the period survives, 
the items in Brooklyn are wonderful. They range from vivid narratives, 
to naturalistic portraits, to full-length oil-on-canvas figures meant 
to occupy niches in palace walls. The standout is a large picture, 
once owned by Andy Warhol, of a couple locked in a steamy (for Persian 
art at least) embrace. Their clothing has been loosened, their limbs 
are intertwined. The woman salutes her importunate lover with a wine 
glass as he fondles her breast. But her attention is elsewhere. She 
stares confidingly out at the viewer as if extending an invitation 
to join the fun. After the Zand period, the Qajar dynasty (1785-1925) 
took charge and settled in for the long haul. Its founder, Aqa Muhammad 
Khan, was an odd character. As a young man, he had suffered castration 
at the hands of tribal enemies; and while his contemporaries extolled 
his martial prowess, they alluded to his unphotogenic looks with a 
shudder. His nephew and appointed heir, Fath Ali Shah, was his opposite 
in every way. He had a populous harem and fathered more than a hundred 
children, basically producing an entire ruling class of siblings. 
He was an indifferent administrator and was inclined to let his sons 
do the dirty work on the battlefield. But his gift for self-advertising 
was second to none, and in art he created one of the great, head-turning 
personal styles of the dawning modern era. Six of his life-size portraits 
are at the center of the Brooklyn show, and they are riveting. In 
one, from around 1809, he is shown standing, one hand at his waist, 
the other holding a staff topped by a little gold bird. His face, 
with its pale skin, looks youthful, but is is nearly lost between 
his beetling handlebar eyebrows and his long black beard. He wears 
a creamy ankle-length robe with a snug top, a nipped-in waist and 
a flared skirt bordered with pearls. His color-coordinated accessories 
_ wristlets, armlets, epaulets _ culminate in a peaked and feathered 
crown that is almost the size of his torso. His feet are shod in flowered 
hose and dainty high-heeled slippers. To the modern eye, he looks 
effete, faintly absurd, like a bantamweight dandy with attitude. But 
the portrait was meant to represent an ideal, an icon. The rigid stance 
and the kohl-lined eyes were modeled on those of the fabled Sasanian 
rulers of Persia's pre-Islamic Golden Age. The hand gripping the staff 
has suggestive connections with Napoleonic portraiture being created 
in France. The conspicuous beard may be read, at least in part, as 
a self-conscious emblem of virility, understandable in a dynasty whose 
patriarch was a gelding. The clothes and trappings, however, seem 
designed entirely for dramatic effect. They exude a distinctive but 
familiar chic defined by costliness, impracticality and an immunity 
to embarrassment. That immunity served Fath Ali Shah well when he 
packed paintings like this one off as a kind of diplomatic calling 
card to the courts of Europe. And he was no doubt gratified to learn 
than when his Persian ambassador in London bowed to one of the portraits 
as if it were a religious image, the English followed suit. Did he 
even suspect that they were just being shrewdly, amusedly polite? 
Probably not, given the atmosphere of willed fantasy that seemed to 
pervade the Qajar court. It was such fantasy that prompted Fath Ali 
Shah to have himself depicted receiving obeisance from English, French 
and Turkish envoys at a time when exactly the opposite balance of 
power was in effect, and Iran was on its way to becoming a pawn in 
a colonial game. In short, Qajar art is a work of fiction. In some 
cases it rewrites history; in others it creates an image of the court 
as an extravagant, sensual, no-expense-spared Eden. This is evident 
in a 22-foot-long painted ceiling covered with angels and floral arabesques, 
and in niche-shaped still life paintings of tempting meals. And it 
is nowhere clearer than in the pictures, of unflappably charming women, 
meant to decorate palace rooms. Several are included in the show. 
One is a dancer with castanets and a wealth of sausage curls. Another 
is a bare-breasted mother with her all-but-nude young daughter, an 
erotic Madonna and Child. Most remarkable are the upside-down female 
acrobats. Their faces peer impassively out from the bottom of the 
paintings while their bodies topple above, fragmented cubistic puzzles 
from which sets of toes emerge. These contortionist paintings are 
formally exhilarating, and they leave an indelible after-image, always 
a good sign. But there's also something disturbing about them, slightly 
cracked. They give the human figure no place to go except toward further 
disintegration. With the death of Fath Ali Shah, however, Qajar art 
pulled back, and took a more conventional route. An 1830s portrait 
of his successor, Muhammad Shah, shows the change. The picture's somber 
palette and realistic modeling adheres to European standards. Only 
a twist of patterned fabric tied around the sitter's waist is a reminder 
of lost dazzlement. There was, to be sure, fine Qajar work still to 
come. A battle scene painted on the lid of a lacquered box, dated 
1865, is a miracle of close-worked detail. And the official portraits 
of the next ruler, Nasir al-Din Shah, constitute an exquisite return 
to near-miniature scale. In a sparkling painting on loan from the 
Louvre, he assumes the time-honored power pose, but he looks small 
and shy in his chunky Victorian chair, and his soft, wide-set eyes 
seem distracted and a little sad . Late Qajar painting is Victorian 
art, with the mix of photographic realism and escapist fantasy that 
this implies. A portrait of the dynasty's last, aged leader, Muzaffar 
al-Din Shah, records his enfeeblement with merciless accuracy. Yet 
a genre scene from the same time, depicting an exorcism in progress, 
includes a clutch of scampering imps that might have come straight 
from English fairy painting. Ms. Diba, who worked for five years on 
this show, brings it to a provocative conclusion with a single 1907 
political cartoon from an Iranian newspaper. In it, Asian rulers are 
caricatured as dogs _ an animal despised in the Muslim world _ vying 
for scraps dispensed by two giant hands, one labeled Russia, the other 
Britain. This little marriage of art and politics is a quiet shocker. 
Far from being a self-advertisement for glory, it is an irate, self-critical 
call to action by underdogs, a militant demand for a new, modern national 
self-identity and for revenge. In the light of this image, the bright 
pageant of Persian art through which one has just passed feels like 
the mirage it was: vain, preposterous, evanescent. But there's no 
question that it was an illusion of inimitable glamour, which this 
once-in-a-lifetime show captures unforgettably. ``Royal Persian Paintings: 
The Qajar Epoch, 1785-1925'' remains at the Brooklyn Museum of Art, 
200 Eastern Parkway, through Jan. 24. The exhibition travels to the 
Armand Hammer Museum of Art and Cultural Center, University of California 
at Los Angeles (Feb. 24 to May 9), and the Brunei Gallery of the School 
of Oriental and African Studies, University of London (July 5 to Sept. 
26). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>