<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981022.0406 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When Richard Brown Baker bought Jackson Pollock's ``Arabesque'' for 
$2,500 in 1955, he demonstrated a keen eye, for the painting is now 
worth around $15 million and is a star of a Pollock retrospective, 
which opens next Sunday, Nov. 1, at the Museum of Modern Art in New 
York. Baker, now 86, is one of the most important collectors of 20th-century 
paintings, prints, drawings and sculpture in the United States. In 
1995 he donated a large part of his collection to Yale University, 
of which he's a Phi Beta Kappa alumnus. ``Arabesque'' was a part of 
that $24.5 million bequest. Before the passion for collecting took 
over his life, Baker, a Rhode Island native, was a Rhodes scholar 
at Oxford University in England, an equerry at the U.S. Embassy in 
Madrid, a journalist, a research analyst at the State Department in 
Washington and an aspiring artist. With little capital, Baker began 
to collect in the 1940s. He moved to New York in 1954, and during 
the decades that followed, his ability to spot the works of as yet 
unknown and still affordable artists _ Lichtenstein, Kline and Johns 
among them _ earned him fame as a ``collector's collector.'' Baker 
started keeping journals as a teen-ager and continued to write in 
them almost daily until recently. He recorded the story of how he 
came to buy ``Arabesque,'' and of a crisis that nearly aborted that 
purchase. Later, he described a meeting with Pollock and his wife, 
his response to the artist's death and entries about the painting 
and its escalating value. Following are excerpts from these largely 
unpublished journals. New York, Dec. 3, 1955 A few days ago, I went 
to see the Jackson Pollock retrospective at Sidney Janis' Gallery, 
where I ran into David Herbert (a staff member at Janis' gallery). 
On taking leave of him after looking at the show, I remarked casually, 
``I think I'd rather acquire a major de Kooning than a Pollock.'' 
David Herbert must have taken that as a challenge, for he no sooner 
heard me express a preference for de Kooning than he said impulsively, 
``There's a picture in the racks that you must see, and I even know 
the price of it.'' He almost pulled me into the inner room, where 
he produced a painting by Pollock entitled ``Arabesque.'' Herbert 
told me that Lee Krasner Pollock told him it was painted in 1948 and 
hung over the sofa in their home in Springs, L.I., until just before 
the show, when it was brought to the city for possible inclusion in 
the retrospective. Obviously, it was not hung in the show, a fact 
I'm very glad about now. The moment I saw it I was surprised and enchanted. 
Surprised, because until I saw ``Arabesque'' I had not felt any urge 
to get a Pollock. Indeed I remember looking earlier at a modest-size 
Pollock drip oil in the Art Lending Service of the Museum of Modern 
Art, where it could be purchased for $500 or $600, and mentally rejecting 
it as below the quality I aspired to in my collection. Yet here was 
a Pollock that I really did like. ``Arabesque'' is a remarkable painting 
of great distinction, which almost automatically won my enthusiasm. 
I am quick to make up my mind about pictures and rarely reverse my 
judgment. It's a large picture, the largest I've ever bought (3 feet 
by 11{ feet), and Pollock's name is at the forefront of the new movement. 
He's one of the few abstractionists about whom I'd heard even before 
I reached New York. It seemed to me an unquestioned opportunity and 
I took it. Departing the gallery, excited by this major purchase (from 
a wonderful new acquisition I always get a feeling of exhilaration), 
I went to dinner at the home of an art teacher friend who is also 
a collector of early American landscape paintings. I sat during cocktails 
next to a stranger who was described as a museum specialist in restoration. 
Since I was introduced as a collector of abstractions, he volunteered 
that he had seen the Pollock retrospective and was convinced that 
none of the pictures would survive beyond a few years. He claimed 
Pollock's canvases were neither stretched, sized nor primed. I knew 
so little about the techniques of painting that ``stretched,'' ``sized'' 
and ``primed'' were meaningless words, but I was upset. Yesterday, 
accompanied by advisers and translators of art terminology, I paid 
a solemn call upon Sidney Janis. We demanded an inspection of ``Arabesque'' 
by a restorer, who should report upon its durability. When my friends 
pointed out that ``Arabesque'' was indeed unstretched (Pollock probably 
laid the canvas on the ground to drip paint on it and had never bothered 
to fix it to wooden supports), we obtained Janis' agreement to have 
it stretched under the supervision of the artist. Janis said he had 
never faced a situation quite like this. He offered to refund my money. 
I found myself too enamored of ``Arabesque'' to give it up. Seeing 
that I was genuinely attached to the painting and not just trying 
to get out of a deal I regretted, Janis said soothingly: ``After all, 
Pollock is still a young man. If this painting does disintegrate as 
rapidly as your restorer friend claims, we can always get Pollock 
to replace it with another.'' New York, Jan. 5, 1956 Janis' restorer 
has rendered a written report that ``Arabesque'' will ``outlast my 
lifetime''; it's been stretched and re-signed by Pollock, and I've 
added it to my collection. New York, April 9, 1956 The de Kooning 
show at Sidney Janis opened a week ago. David Herbert telephoned last 
Monday leaving a message with my cleaning woman that I should come 
that day. I knew what he had in mind _ that I should get there early 
and take my choice. He was, I think, accustomed to thinking of me 
as a purchaser, since I'd bought the Pollock from him last December, 
a small oil by Matta last January and a Bodhidharma in San Francisco 
when I ran into him at Gump's. I rather congratulated myself on escaping 
the temptation to buy, as my return to New York from Providence was 
too late for me to reach the gallery that day. The prices for a de 
Kooning may be low compared to what they will become, but already 
they are virtually out of my range, being about $4,000. Anyway, arriving 
today a week late, I found the gallery rooms crowded. Both Janis himself 
and David Herbert devoted some time to talking with me. David suddenly 
presented me to a heavy-set man with a short beard (beards are apparently 
the fashion with avant-garde painters today, though certainly not 
with anyone else). The man, accompanied by his wife, was looking intently 
at de Kooning's paintings. He had a rather mountainous, closed look, 
as if he were grim and inaccessible; his wife I thought ill-favored. 
This couple were Mr. and Mrs. Jackson Pollock. Mrs. Pollock acknowledged 
the introduction; her husband uttered not a word. David explained 
that I am the possessor of a Pollock painting. He described it. This 
aroused Mrs. Pollock's interest. Still the painter did not speak. 
I imagine his mind was on the de Kooning paintings, and he had no 
desire whatsoever to interrupt his reflections by being gracious to 
a stranger. Mrs. Pollock reaffirmed what David Herbert had told me: 
that they used to have my painting hanging over the sofa in their 
living room. To ingratiate myself with the artist, I told them that 
Alan Davie (another artist of the time) saw ``Arabesque'' in my apartment, 
admired it and spoke of it as having ``elegance in the best sense.'' 
This compliment stirred Pollock beyond a monosyllable. He said they 
had met the Davies, but unfortunately at that time they had not yet 
seen Davie's own work. David Herbert asked Pollock if after he did 
see it, he liked it. Pollock said yes. The Pollocks then drifted off 
to another room. Later, as they departed, Mrs. Pollock politely paused 
to say goodbye to me. Pollock was kind enough to follow her lead and 
also say goodbye. New York, April 10, 1956 On my way uptown I stopped 
at the dealer Catherine Viviano's to look again at my recently purchased 
Alan Davie. I mentioned that Jackson Pollock told me he liked Alan 
Davie's work and regretted that he hadn't seen it at the time he met 
the Davies. He had seen it, contradicted Miss Viviano. Earlier in 
the winter, Pollock came into her gallery ``tight'' (I have previously 
heard that he drinks heavily) and denounced in obscene four-letter 
words the paintings in her group show. She has so few opportunities 
to hear explosive language of this nature that she was fascinated. 
As Pollock was in this expressive mood, she was curious to learn his 
reaction to Davie. Pollock resisted, but she brought out several Davie 
paintings to show him, whereupon he fell silent, looked at them studiously 
and expressed admiration. New York, Aug. 13, 1956 I was shocked to 
read in this morning's paper that Jackson Pollock was killed in the 
crash of his automobile on Saturday evening near East Hampton, L.I. 
He was 44. Pollock made a strange impression upon me last winter when 
David Herbert introduced us. I felt almost as if he were dead inside, 
voiceless and inanimate, a silent, huge hulk of a man. From reports 
of his addiction to alcohol, I sadly conclude that, in the old pagan 
sense, he was the victim of nemesis. Fate destroyed him. It is absurd 
to say it, but I have almost the feeling that he rushed to meet death. 
Evidently he was driving at excessive speed. Perhaps he had been drinking. 
With him were two 26-year-old women, artists' models, one of whom 
was killed. The survivor says she had been urging Pollock to drive 
slower shortly before the crash. It is a tragic loss, unless the creative 
flame had already been extinguished within him, as may perhaps have 
been the case. I recalled how Sidney Janis had reassured me, when 
I was concerned that ``Arabesque'' wouldn't last, ``If this painting 
does disintegrate, we can always get Pollock to replace it with another.'' 
Alas, as it turns out, seldom was reassurance less justified. New 
York, Aug. 18, 1956 Sam Kootz (a dealer and friend of Baker's) rang 
and invited me to dinner. I was delighted to accept. Sam and Jane 
Kootz spent the summer at Juan-les-Pins in the south of France. We 
naturally spoke of the death of Jackson Pollock. Jane said, ``It was 
a terrible shock to us all.'' Ibram Lassaw had described to them on 
the phone the funeral service, which he considered to have been badly 
mishandled. It seems that no reference to the artist by name or career 
occurred during the service. I did not know it, but Jane told me that 
Mr. and Mrs. Pollock had separated several months before his death. 
Of the two young women with him in the accident, the survivor was 
his new girlfriend; the girl who died was a friend of hers. At the 
time of the accident Mrs. Pollock was in Europe. She has flown home. 
Jane intimated that their marriage had been a rocky one but that Mrs. 
Pollock was ferociously loyal to her husband's work as a painter. 
Sam said that in the last year or two Pollock's artistic creativeness 
faltered. I said I understood he'd been drinking. Sam said the excess 
drinking has gone on for years; that wasn't new. I think Sam feels 
that Pollock's creative contribution was over, and that the artist 
himself sensed this. July 1, 1960 Four-and-a-half years have passed 
since I purchased ``Arabesque,'' and it may be bad taste to speak 
of prices, but the Pollock purchase was apparently my outstanding 
coup as a collector. I think this is so because I just read this quote 
from an Art Market letter of the Richard Feigen Gallery, Chicago. 
``Pollocks, incidentally, now command up to $100,000 on the market. 
A Chicago collector turned down that amount over a year ago.'' Pollock's 
death is partly, but not entirely responsible for the phenomenal increase 
in the demand for his work. I was actually more lucky than foresighted. 
But I'm very glad I stuck by my theory for collecting contemporary 
art, which is: get there first, with adequate credit, and decide promptly. 
If the work is as good as you think it is, other people, when they 
see it, may think the same. You don't need cash. All you need is credit 
and confidence in your own eye. Jan. 3, 1962 Most of the public surface 
transportation in New York being stopped by a bus strike, I walked 
across Central Park to call on Leo Castelli, who sells Pollocks often, 
to ask him his evaluation of my ``Arabesque.'' He puts it higher than 
Janis, but says that David Gibbs, by claiming $120,000, is ``over-optimistic.'' 
According to Leo, the big money people who want Pollocks are at present 
Californians. ``What about Texans?'' I asked. ``Not yet. They'll come 
later.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>