<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981022.0256 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Timothy (Speed) Levitch, the loquacious New York City tour-bus guide, 
sidewalk philosopher and one-man almanac of urban lore profiled in 
Bennett Miller's compelling documentary film ``The Cruise,'' is a 
man who enjoys making himself dizzy. One of his favorite activities, 
he confides, is to spin around under the twin towers of the World 
Trade Center and, when thoroughly disoriented, to look up and reel 
under the illusion that the buildings are toppling down on him. Filmed 
in high-contrast black and white that makes the city look harshly 
magnificent, at once irresistible and forbidding, ``The Cruise'' could 
be described as a whirlwind tour both of New York and of Levitch's 
feverish mind. In his extreme quirkiness and in his love-hate (but 
mostly love) relationship with the city, he is a representative New 
Yorker; there is probably no one in the world remotely like him. There 
are moments when Levitch, who speaks in an emphatic nasal honk, suggests 
a 90s update of a classic New York cabby. He has a strong opinion 
on almost everything and is ready to share it in winding soliloquies 
that display an impressive, eclectic erudition. His monologues, he 
confesses, aren't just aimed at entertaining tourists, they're a technique 
for picking up women. As his double-decker tour bus meanders through 
Manhattan, Levitch disgorges an encyclopedia's worth of facts, all 
filtered through a highly personal appreciation of New York. During 
a fascinating mini-history of Central Park, he mentions that the park 
was designed to evoke a Transcendentalist ideal of peaceful contemplation. 
Baseball, which was just being invented at the time, would have been 
outlawed there, he maintains. Levitch appears to be able to pinpoint 
the residence of every famous writer who ever lived in New York. Once 
he's finished ticking off the names of authors (along with salty anecdotes 
about their drinking habits and suicide attempts) who lived in Greenwich 
Village at various times, you are left with a palpable sense of that 
neighborhood as a permanent artists' colony. Levitch's gift for metaphor 
often approaches the poetic. He muses that he sometimes thinks that 
if the city ``is a living organism, perhaps it's more on the level 
of a scintillating streamlined mermaid who sings to me at night.'' 
As the movie goes along, the anger and insecurity underlying his intellectual 
bravado increasingly surface. Stung by his grandparents' disappointment 
in him for not being a material success, he reflects on the degrading 
aspects of conformism (symbolized in the city's planning by its right-angled 
grid pattern) and bridles at the prospect of having to shed the street 
clothes he's been accustomed to wearing on the job to don a uniform. 
The philosophy that emerges, which Levitch calls ``the cruise,'' is 
synonymous with his continually imperiled sense of personal freedom, 
which in his own flowery vocabulary is ``an effervescent homage to 
the present tense.'' ``I am cruising because I have dedicated myself 
to all that is creative and destructive in my life right now, and 
I am equally in love with every aspect of my life, and I am in love 
with the frantic chaos of this limitless universe,'' he babbles. As 
much as Levitch's voice grates, you can't help but admire the zest 
for life of this heroically independent but impossibly self-centered 
crank. PRODUCTION NOTES: `THE CRUISE' Directed and produced by Bennett 
Miller; director of photography, Miller; edited by Michael Levine; 
music by Marty Beller; released by Artisan Entertainment. At the Angelika 
Film Center, Mercer and Houston streets, New York City. Running time: 
76 minutes. This film is not rated. WITH: Timothy (Speed) Levitch. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>