<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981022.0510 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Now that Prime Minister Yevgeny Primakov has spent six weeks leading 
one of the biggest nations on Earth through its worst fiscal crisis, 
one thing is becoming increasingly clear: Nobody outside the Kremlin 
knows what the prime minister is doing. Whether this is by design 
or accident, or good or bad, is open to dispute. But it is indisputably 
making economists, financiers and politicians nervous. Never a gregarious 
sort, Primakov has been almost Delphic on the subject of Russia's 
economic policy since taking over day-to-day management of the government 
on Sept. 11. There has been no shortage of pronouncements: He has 
pledged to start paying both current and back wages to state workers 
and the military; to collect more taxes; to improve management of 
the 40,000 companies in which the Russian government holds a stake; 
to satisfy foreign debtors hurt in August by default and devaluation 
of the ruble. But where he will find money for wages, how he will 
rake in more taxes, whether he will increase state control of private 
business and what he will do to meet $17 billion in foreign obligations 
next year alone are, so far, mysteries. Indeed, he and his top advisers 
sometimes seem publicly and directly at odds with each other over 
even basic matters. That was never clearer than this week, when the 
deputy prime minister in charge of finance, the Communist Yuri Maslyukov, 
announced that the budget for the last three months of 1998, about 
130 billion rubles, would run a deficit of between 40 and 50 percent. 
Asked how the Kremlin planned to cover such deficits, Maslyukov's 
deputy said the government would mostly print new money, an inflationary 
policy dubbed ``emission.'' Primakov said there would be very little, 
if any, emission. And Maslyukov said emission would occur, but that 
much money would presumably come from foreign lenders like the International 
Monetary Fund. Some Westerners, noting that Russia already has failed 
to make payments on some government debt, roll their eyes at the notion 
that Russia can finance such a huge budget deficit with borrowed cash. 
``It's not a question of ideology,'' said Tom Adshead, co-director 
of research at United Financial Group, a Moscow investment bank. ``They're 
denying reality. They're just not competent to be in charge of anything. 
They shouldn't be running the government.'' Adshead's firm, which 
was closely associated with the free-market reformers who led Russia 
before Primakov, publishes a daily newsletter of financial analysis. 
Wednesday's edition bore the headline, ``Another Day in the Government's 
Economic Wonderland.'' Bald contradictions like those are not rare 
in the Primakov government. Some say Primakov is reflecting his personal 
history as a diplomat, in which compromise was generally preferred 
over confrontation. Others say the outward inertia could have been 
expected from a government that combines Communists and free-marketers 
and middle-roaders _ the very opposite of the charges that Primakov's 
predecessor, Sergei Kiriyenko, pursued free-market goals without regard 
to political realities. ``The silence of the government _ the uncertainty 
of future economic policy _has also become an economic factor on its 
own,'' said Andrei Netchaev, president of Russian Financial Corp., 
a government-backed investment bank. ``There are many complicated 
problems in the Russian economy. Businesses need concrete information 
about future exchange rate policy, monetary policy, emissions and 
so on.'' Maybe so. On the other hand, it is hard to say that Primakov's 
deep-inside-the-vest strategy has done the country visible harm. The 
ruble, which briefly dived to a rate of more than 20 to the dollar 
this fall, has more-or-less settled in the last week or so at an exchange 
rate of about 17. The Moscow stock market, which all but vanished 
in the wreckage of August's financial collapse, suddenly has gained 
almost 50 percent in two weeks as measured by one major index, albeit 
on thin trading. Store shelves are not bulging as they were before 
the August crash, but they are fuller than in the weeks of panic buying 
after the ruble was first devalued. And while the statistics say that 
Russia's gross domestic product fell nearly 10 percent in September 
alone, the cities continue to bustle _ running, perhaps, on their 
residents' savings from years past. There are explanations for Primakov's 
opacity, not the least of which is that a little benign neglect is 
not a bad thing. Officially, Primakov and others have said their priority 
is not to set long-range strategy but to put out the fires that already 
threaten to turn the rest of the economy to ashes. In that respect, 
the prime minister has already begun issuing back pay to some federal 
workers and has pledged to start making up unpaid pension checks. 
He has ordered the repeal of new duties on food imports, in an attempt 
to alleviate shortages, and announced plans to cut corporate income 
and value-added taxes to spur production. Weeks after his aides threatened 
that Russia was ready to walk away from Western debts unless creditors 
ponied up still more loans, the government has warmed up to Western 
investors and the IMF. Recent reports suggest that Primakov would 
give the investors special treatment in restructuring the repayment 
of near-worthless government bonds, which the banks bought at the 
height of the Russian speculative bubble last fall. Experts from the 
monetary fund are in Moscow this week, poring over the government's 
fiscal strategy in an effort to noodle the future of a $22.6 billion 
bailout of the government and the economy that was announced this 
summer. The fund already has put off releasing a $4.3 billion dollop 
of that package, and virtually no one expects much of that money to 
be released anytime soon. The government's latest line on the budget 
_ the one with the 40 percent to 50 percent deficit this quarter _ 
envisions a massive drop in spending compared to the proposal that 
was floated before it, a move some view as a bow to the IMF's pinch-penny 
philosophy. Still, the bottom line remains that none of the proposals 
are official, the hallmark of Primakov's brief reign. And to Western 
analysts, at least, no news is good news. ``The good thing about it 
is that there seems not to be a final decision to go out printing 
money like crazy,'' said Jan Lunden, the European executive director 
of the Russian-European Center on Economic Policy. ``If they do print, 
say, 100 billion rubles in the last quarter of 1998, you could have 
inflation of 40 percent to 50 percent a month.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>