<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981022.0444 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Just before adjourning this week, the Senate approved a 47-year-old 
accountant for one of the government's most powerful and important 
positions: comptroller general of the United States, the chief auditor 
of all federal programs, contracts and operations. In his new job, 
the official, David Walker, will be head of the General Accounting 
Office, an investigative arm of Congress that sooner or later infuriates 
almost every senior official by exposing waste, fraud, incompetence 
or plain silliness in remote corners of government. Walker, a partner 
and managing director in the Atlanta office of Arthur Andersen LLP, 
will be only the seventh comptroller general, a job that carries a 
15-year term and an exceptional degree of independence. Walker differs 
from his predecessors in several ways. He seems likely to have a higher 
profile than most other heads of the GAO, who were anonymous, somewhat 
aloof and virtually unknown outside Washington. Friends and associates 
say Walker is a hands-on manager, deeply engaged in any project he 
undertakes. He is likely to be a strong advocate for the solutions 
he recommends, especially in his areas of expertise, which include 
Social Security, Medicare, pension policy and employee benefits. Alan 
Nadel, another partner at Arthur Andersen, said that congressional 
leaders, who helped select Walker, probably ``don't know what they're 
getting themselves into.'' And he explained: ``David is not your typical 
CPA. He's not a paper-pusher. He doesn't just go with the flow. He 
definitely speaks his mind. He makes things happen. He's always looking 
at the big picture. He's a very strong influencer of policy. He's 
done this within our firm and with clients. He helps you make changes. 
He's a mover and shaker. He will have a lot to say about the cost 
and financing of Social Security, as well as other programs.'' Walker 
has led the expansion of Arthur Andersen's work as a consultant on 
human resources issues. The firm's revenues for such work have increased 
to $250 million this year, from $10 million in 1989, he said. Clients 
include Lockheed Martin, Nationsbank and Bell Atlantic. Nadel said 
that Walker typically becomes ``the focal point of any meeting: When 
he speaks, people stop and listen because his views are so well reasoned.'' 
He described Walker as ``a tremendous networker,'' who developed a 
huge number of useful contacts in government and industry. Co-workers 
said Walker had turned down more than a few lucrative assignments 
because he saw conflicts of interest or other ethical problems with 
the work. In an interview this week, Walker volunteered this insight 
into his values: ``The two presidents I identify with the most are 
Teddy Roosevelt and John Kennedy. Both were conservative on economic 
policy, but they were also progressive on social policy. That's basically 
where I'm at, from a philosophical standpoint.'' From 1976 to 1997, 
Walker said, he was a moderate Republican. Before that, he was a conservative 
Democrat. And since last year, he has been an independent. ``Once 
it became evident that I was a leading candidate for comptroller general, 
I felt it was important to become independent in mind, action and 
word,'' Walker said. The comptroller general is paid $136,700 a year, 
about one-sixth of what Walker makes at Arthur Andersen. The GAO has 
3,300 employees (down from 5,300 in 1992) and an annual budget of 
$363 million. It prescribes accounting standards for all federal agencies, 
passes judgment on the legality of federal spending and evaluates 
hundreds of government programs each year. The office of comptroller 
general has been vacant since October 1996, when Charles Bowsher stepped 
down. During his 15-year term, Bowsher sounded early warnings about 
the savings and loan crisis, investigated the 1987 stock market collapse 
and exposed scandals at the Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
Walker, who is registered as an investment adviser in several states, 
appears well prepared for issues likely to dominate his tenure. From 
1990 to 1995, he was one of two public trustees of the Social Security 
and Medicare trust funds. In that role, he submitted annual reports 
to Congress describing the programs' financial problems. Moreover, 
he has written a book explaining how to plan for retirement (``Retirement 
Security,'' John Wiley &AMP; Sons, 1997). And he has worked with clients, 
including a major telecommunications company, to solve problems in 
their pension plans, showing them how they can provide better benefits 
at little or no additional cost. Stanford G. Ross, the Democratic 
representative on the board of trustees, said that Walker was ``an 
excellent choice'' to head the accounting office. ``I don't think 
they could have gotten anybody better,'' he said. Ross said that he 
and Walker ``did everything on a bipartisan _ indeed, nonpartisan 
_ basis'' while they were trustees. ``Dave has tremendous energy,'' 
Ross said. ``He's a man on the move, but always available when you 
need him.'' David Michael Walker was born on Oct. 2, 1951, in Birmingham, 
Ala. His family lived in Birmingham, Tuscaloosa, Selma and Mobile, 
Ala., before moving to Coral Gables, Fla., when he was in the seventh 
grade. His father, David Sellers Walker Jr., worked for Southern Bell, 
eventually as head of governmental affairs in Florida. The younger 
Walker received a B.S. degree in accounting from Jacksonville University 
in Florida in 1973. He was a 19-year-old sophomore when he married 
Mary Etheredge, who was then a senior. ``Dave was instantly a husband 
and had a future to think about,'' his brother Steven recalled. ``He 
was very conservative as a student, sticking to the books and focusing 
on his goals.'' The couple has two children, Carol, 24, and Andrew, 
21. After graduation, Walker worked at two big accounting firms, Price 
Waterhouse and Coopers &AMP; Lybrand, and then at an executive recruiting 
firm. From 1983 to 1989, he worked in government. For two years, he 
was a senior official of the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corp., which 
insures private pension plans. He then moved to the Labor Department, 
where he became the assistant secretary in charge of regulating pension 
and health benefits for workers and retirees across the country. When 
he advises clients as a management consultant, Walker emphasizes one 
message above all others: Smart personnel practices enhance the value 
of a company and its stock. ``Given labor shortages, skill gaps and 
demographic trends,'' he said, ``the real winners in the 21st century 
will have to put a higher priority on their employees and invest more 
in human capital.'' In a book published this month (``Delivering on 
the Promise,'' Free Press), Walker and two partners at Arthur Andersen 
say that ``capitalism has not achieved its full potential'' because 
many employers underestimate the importance of human capital _ the 
talents and skills of their employees. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>