<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981022.0496 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A director of central intelligence, says George J. Tenet, the man 
who holds the job, ``should be seen and not heard _ and preferably 
not seen.'' But this week Tenet has been center stage, pressing the 
Israelis and Palestinians to make peace. Their talks have been hanging 
on a crucial question. Can he create a measure of trust and cooperation 
between the Israeli and Palestinian spy services? It is a role that 
he has played since 1996, shuttling in secret to Jerusalem and the 
West Bank, working the case but never cracking it. He has arranged 
to train Palestinian security officers at a secret base in North Carolina 
to increase professionalism and Israeli confidence in them. He and 
the Central Intelligence Agency's station chief in Israel have mediated 
disputes between their Israeli and Palestinian counterparts. And Tenet 
has changed from a suit to casual clothes in the Israeli Cabinet room, 
under the gaze of a portrait of Golda Meir, between meetings with 
the Israeli prime minister and the Palestinian secret police. On Thursday 
he made a last-ditch effort to work on the Israelis and Palestinians, 
who may detest each other but appear to trust Tenet, insofar as trust 
exists among spies. ``CIA's relationships with the intelligence services 
in both countries allow it to bridge gaps otherwise unbridgeable,'' 
said Jeffrey Smith, who as the general counsel of the agency worked 
with Tenet on his mediation efforts in 1996. Tenet, who looks and 
talks like a New York City police detective, first saw the delicate 
interplay of nations and religions as a child while watching customers 
at the 20th Century Diner, a restaurant that his father, a Greek immigrant, 
ran in the borough of Queens. He has kept a big shillelagh on his 
coffee table at CIA headquarters, twirling it from time to time, playing 
the tough cop with the world's evils as his beat. But for eight days 
he has played good cop at the peace talks. ``It's one thing for the 
president or the secretary of state to say, `We're going to professionalize 
the Palestinian security service,' and it's quite another to have 
the guy who's directing the program say it,'' an administration official 
said. ``He's built a degree of political capital with these people. 
That makes him a key player.'' Tenet, 45, says he does not want to 
be a public figure. But in the last week he won a windfall for American 
espionage, and he agreed to his first on-the-record interview as director, 
sending a message that an agency beset by shortcomings needs an infusion 
of money and talent to repair its problems. With his role in the peace 
talks Tenet, who barely three years ago had a low-profile post on 
the National Security Council staff, has become a name on the daily 
news programs, even if not one American in a hundred knows who he 
is. He had been regarded skeptically by some old pros, seen as too 
young, too inexperienced, too soft to run the intelligence empire. 
Some still say he lacks the gravity to command the senior military 
officials who head the Pentagon intelligence services or to control 
the clandestine service of the CIA. And that agency's reputation, 
damaged for years by self-inflicted wounds, has not been wholly redeemed. 
But if he can repair the agency's battered image, and help make a 
lasting Mideast peace deal, he has the potential, in some eyes, to 
become the most potent American spymaster in a generation. ``This 
guy will be the best or one of the best,'' said his predecessor, John 
M. Deutch, who hired Tenet as his deputy in 1995. A week ago Tenet 
let it be known that he was on a mission to revive the CIA. ``Unless 
you bring more people in and unless you develop the expertise, we 
won't achieve what we want to achieve,'' he said in an interview. 
``In 10 years we won't be relevant.'' That problem may be nothing 
that billions of dollars and thousands of talented new people cannot 
solve. Tenet won an additional $1.8 billion from Congress on Wednesday 
for the intelligence agencies that he oversees, bringing the budget 
to $29 billion. The CIA spends 10 percent of that. Some money will 
jump-start the biggest recruitment drive in CIA history and some to 
spy satellites and supercomputers. Hiring a new generation of spies 
and analysts is crucial, he said. ``I want people to know that this 
is not a fat old organization just asking for money,'' Tenet said. 
It has to pay for new people, ``recruitment, retention, pay, performance, 
education and training,'' and new equipment or hang up its cloak and 
dagger. Tenet said he realized that to rebuild the agency he would 
have to win public trust. That may come only through public victories 
in the wars to penetrate terrorist groups and to understand, and sometimes 
undermine, nations like Iraq, where the United States has no embassies, 
no spies and no crystal ball. ``There is an expectation that we have 
built a no-fault intelligence system,'' Tenet said. ``That intelligence 
is expected not only to tell you about the trends and to tell you 
about events and give you insight, but in each and every case has 
a responsibility to tell you when the date, time and place of an event 
is. That will not happen. We will continue to be surprised.'' The 
United States lacks the brainpower and technology to avoid those surprises, 
he said. ``There will always be days where we have to race to catch 
up to events we did not foresee, not because somebody is asleep at 
the switch, but because what's going on is so complicated,'' he said. 
Tenet said he had focused on rebuilding morale and now needed to turn 
to trying to manage other intelligence agencies like the National 
Security Agency that are run by senior military officers. ``That's 
the biggest challenge for him,'' said Rep. Porter J. Goss, R-Fla., 
who is a former CIA officer and is now chairman of the House Intelligence 
Committee. ``That's not where he has the experience and the good-old-boy 
network he has elsewhere. He has got to be the director of central 
intelligence,'' not just head of the CIA. But Tenet does have power 
with the Federal Bureau of Investigation, said Louis J. Freeh, the 
director of that agency who as a young field agent in Queens sipped 
many a cup of coffee at the 20th Century Diner. ``Nice place,'' Freeh 
remembered. Until recently, when the CIA and the FBI tried to work 
together overseas against terrorists and thugs, mistrust prevailed. 
By instinct and training an FBI agent confronted with a criminal wants 
to string him up. But a CIA officer wants to string him along, to 
learn what he knows. Now the two chiefs get along much better, Freeh 
said, and the arrests in the African embassy bombings prove it. ``It 
comes down to trust and understanding,'' he said. ``George is someone 
I can absolutely trust.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>