<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981022.0026 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In two instances on Wednesday night, Fox's Joe Buck showed why he 
is a delight. When Kevin Brown struck out his 42d batter of the playoffs, 
Buck quickly noted that the Padres' starter had set a post-season 
record. Then, he gave voice to anybody thinking about the playoff 
system. ``That comes with a gigantic asterisk,'' he said. ``Kevin 
Brown has had many more opportunities to rack up strikeouts with this 
playoff format.'' A few innings later, Buck related how Jimmy D'Angelo 
became a Yankees batboy, and speculated upon an apt alibi for any 
missed schoolwork. ``I swear, Don Zimmer ate my homework,'' Buck said. 
Like Buck, Fox almost always hit the right notes on Wednesday night 
during Game 4 of the World Series. This crew misses little. It could 
be Tim McCarver using a double-boxed screen to chart the contact play 
that led to Derek Jeter's scoring the Yankees' first run on a ball 
chopped high off home plate. Or, it could be Bob Brenly suggesting 
before the game that Andy Pettitte should use his cut fastball less 
frequently, or noting how Jeter keeps his right hand close to his 
glove to ease the transfer to a throw. Listening to Brenly and McCarver, 
former catchers, is like auditing a class in mastering the crafts 
of pitching to spots, blocking balls in the dirt, framing balls outside 
the strike zone and guessing catchers' signs. They excelled especially 
in parsing Brown's herky-jerky motion, which, Brenly said, forces 
batters to speed their swing on fastballs or changeups. And you can 
always sense that almost anything that the three announcers describe 
will be amplified with the right live picture from the director, Bill 
Webb, or the apt replay, from the producer John Filippelli. In the 
technical toy department, Fox decided on Wednesday night that less 
was more. There has been criticism from viewers that Fox is close-up 
happy. The Fox credo is to keep images flying, especially between 
pitches. So there are some excessive cuts to the managers, Joe Torre 
and Bruce Bochy, sitting expressionlessly. But the shots are rarely 
distracting and don't cause Fox to miss pitches. Through seven innings 
on Wednesday, there were 75 closeups, including 15 of Torre, 12 of 
Bochy, but only one of Zimmer, a serious cinematic oversight. By the 
eighth inning, the use of close-ups accelerated, largely to step up 
the endgame drama. By the ninth, the close-ups were coming even more 
furiously, as the emotional gap between Padre faces and Yankee faces 
widened. But there were quibbles. The major one was McCarver and Buck 
refusing to be quite when the game ended and let the Yankees' celebration 
and the Padres' misery speak for themselves. Everything they said 
to summarize the Yankees' 24th championship could have waited for 
the post-game program. And, in comparing the 1927 and 1998 Yankees, 
Buck erroneously described the earlier team as a very different one 
that played in the ``dead ball'' era. Also: The ``whooshing'' sound 
leading in and out of replays is annoying. The network promos that 
pop up between batters are distracting. The full-screen house ads 
for the Fox Sports Web site are unnecessary, but fortunately, nobody 
discussed the current on-line voting on foxsports.com to see if ``Fox 
NFL Sunday's'' Terry Bradshaw should shave his new goatee. It should 
never be required for Fox to display the prime-time stars it seats 
strategically throughout World Series stadiums. Fox has reduced the 
number of sightings from the World Series two years ago, but seeing 
two stars of ``Beverly Hills 90210'' did not illuminate the game in 
any way. More shots of Zimmer would have been far more welcome and 
appropriate. And unfortunately, the nature of Fox's prime-time programming 
rarely suits the reading of written promos by the sports division's 
announcers. You can sense that Buck is lightly mocking the promos, 
but when Pat Summerall must lend his august baritone to the concept 
of ``Miniskirt Monday,'' it sounds like the end of Western civilization. 
Remember, at CBS, each week he would say: ``Coming up . . . `60 Minutes.''' 
Those days are over. If Wednesday night's game did not reverberate 
with viewers as if it were the final episode of ``MASH,'' then this 
World Series may wind up as the lowest-rated ever. Through three games, 
the 13.4 average Nielsen rating is down from last season's Florida-Cleveland 
series. But last year's seven-game series finished at a 16.7, the 
second-lowest in network history to the 16.4 for the earthquake-interrupted 
San Francisco-Oakland series in 1989. ``The ratings are disappointing, 
but we don't control the outcome of the games,'' said Vince Wladika, 
a Fox Sports spokesman. Why the decline? Make your choice: (a) the 
Yankees were big favorites after a 114-victory regular season, lowering 
expectations for the Series; (b) Game 1 was dramatic, but rated lower 
than the Sept. 8 game in which Mark McGwire hit his 62d home run, 
and Game 2 was a blowout, which curbed the audience for Game 3; (c) 
neither McGwire nor Sammy Sosa were playing, (d) viewers were offended 
by Fox's salacious ``Miniskirt Monday'' promo for ``Ally McBeal'' 
and (e) there were simply too few close-ups of Zimmer and his skin 
pores. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>