<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981022.0016 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
His back was so sore, he could hardly bend over. His knees and quadriceps 
ached so much, he could barely swing without falling down. But even 
though Ken Caminiti would never say how hurt he was, there were those 
who felt the San Diego Padres' third baseman was hurting his team 
in the World Series when he insisted on playing through the pain. 
The Padres never bought into that argument. Caminiti is their cleanup 
hitter and one of their motivational leaders in the clubhouse. As 
San Diego General Manager Kevin Towers had said before Wednesday night's 
Game 4: ``Cami's presence alone is a plus for our club. And you would 
have a hard time dragging him out of the lineup, anyway. I'd rather 
tell one of you guys to go in and tell him he was out.'' But when 
Caminiti finally came through in his final at-bat in the Series with 
a line single to right off Mariano Rivera to load the bases in the 
bottom of the eighth, it was too little and it was soon to be too 
late. Jim Leyritz followed with a hard-hit liner, but straight at 
Bernie Williams. And the Padres could not avoid becoming the 16th 
team in World Series history to be swept in four games. For the series, 
Caminiti went 2 for 14 with 7 strikeouts, a double and one RBI. To 
make matters worse, even though he is one of the better fielding third 
basemen in the game, he made two crucial errors. One was an overthrow 
that led to three Yankee runs in the first inning of Game 2. The other 
came when it looked as if he couldn't bend enough for a ball hit to 
his left that scored New York's second run in the seventh-inning of 
a 5-4 Yankee victory in Game 3 here Tuesday night. And, in Game 3, 
Caminiti was playing with the bug that had beset the San Diego clubhouse 
throughout the series. ``I feel better today,'' Caminiti said before 
Game 4, his intense blue eyes burning as usual. ``I'm not complaining. 
I need to start.'' But, it was obvious the Padres needed some more 
production from their brawny third baseman, who was the National League's 
Most Valuable Player in 1996, to avoid being swept. After going 1 
for 4, Caminiti, who hit .252 with 29 homers and 82 RBIs this season, 
might have been playing his final game with the Padres here Wednesday 
night. He becomes a free agent, and there is no guarantee that the 
Padres will be able to re-sign him, especially if their Nov. 3 ball 
park initiative does not pass. But wherever he ends up next season, 
no one will ever question Caminiti's toughness. He played nearly his 
entire MVP season with a torn left rotator cuff that one doctor said 
was the worst he had ever seen. In August of that same year, he unhooked 
a set of intravenous needles from his body to hit a pair of homers 
against the Mets in Mexico when he was suffering from dehydration, 
then belted a grand slam the next day in San Diego. ``Who knows what 
this guy's played through,'' said Towers. ``He's violent, the way 
he plays. He's always on the ground. He tackles runners on plays at 
third. He plays baseball like a middle linebacker.'' Against the Yankees, 
Caminiti played like a middle linebacker who was hurt. To which his 
manager, Bruce Bochy, simply shrugged. ``What he did in '96, I questioned 
myself putting him in the lineup. And he was the MVP,'' Bochy said 
before Wednesday night's game. ``And he was hurt then more than now. 
He's not playing at 100 percent. But the only thing I can do is go 
on what my trainers say.'' Interestingly, the Padres' hitting coach, 
Merv Rettenmund, said that playing with the torn rotator cuff in '96 
may have helped Caminiti. ``He couldn't overswing,'' Rettenmund said. 
Which is something Caminiti did for most of the post-season. In 14 
games, covering all three rounds, the switch-hitting Caminiti batted 
only .200 (10 for 50) with 14 strikeouts, two homers and five RBIs. 
From the left side, he was an abysmal 4 for 26 (.154). Caminiti was 
down on himself even after the Padres won their division series matchup 
with the Houston Astros. And after Tuesday night's game, Caminiti 
_ who has always been accessible to the news media after games _ slammed 
the door to the players' lounge after undergoing treatment on the 
side of his left knee, where he had fouled a ball off during an eighth-inning 
at-bat, when he struck out against Mariano Rivera with the tying run 
on base. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>