<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981022.0365 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Nuyorican Poets Cafe does the best favor it possibly could to 
Ishmael Reed in its production of his ``Mother Hubbard.'' At the invitation 
of Miguel Algarin, the executive producer at the theater, Ronald McIntyre 
has written a score, and a few songs for which Reed supplied lyrics. 
The director, Rome Neal, and a cast so exuberant it sometimes seems 
downright unruly, play down the convoluted plot and treat the text 
as 10 discrete scenes of comic cavorting. It is only on reflection 
afterward that you fully realize what an emotional and intellectual 
muddle the play is. But after you've been laughing for a good part 
of two hours, the reflection doesn't much matter. This Hubbard is 
not the nursery rhyme Mother. She is the head of a gang of militant 
feminists who take over California, run Gov. Pete Wilson out of the 
state and decree the exile of all other men within two months. But 
the coup collapses when a rabbit that has become king of the U.S. 
fur trade hints that Mother Hubbard has a secret in her past, and 
a young woman who is the world lightweight boxing champion leads an 
assault on the Hubbardites' headquarters by a rabble that includes 
her house husband, her trainer and a bedraggled rat that was betrayed 
by the feminists. When Mother Hubbard's secret is exposed, the women's 
movement is transformed, along with the whole world, which becomes 
a brighter, more loving place. The hilariously discontented rat (Theo 
Polites) and the rabbit (Rod Bladel) _ a kind of Polonius turned robber 
baron _ are not the only articulate animals. The ghost of a dog (Frank 
Swingler) delivers a long sermon on injustice and liberal values that 
sounds like the playwright undisguised. Among the human characters, 
Joy Styles and Elliott Williams are finely matched as the aggressive 
lightweight with a soft heart and her husband, whose absurd sensitivities 
can be cured only by money and luxury. Frances McAlpine Sharp is a 
winning Mother Hubbard, a commander with a dangerous tendency to lapse 
into kindness who has to be recalled to duty often by her troops. 
Kathryn Chilson as her adjutant is so brassy you suspect she would 
ring if someone hit her, and William Williams as Mr. Money has the 
glitter of a silky serpent set on seduction. Not all the actors who 
are given solos are up to singing them, but the meters of some of 
Reed's lyrics would defeat a pro in any case, and on the whole the 
poorer singers manage to transfer their weakness to their characters, 
making their wobbles part of the comedy. A few in the cast, like Williams 
and Styles, could probably sing any song handed to them and, appropriately 
for her character, Sharp sounds as if she could make herself heard 
above a large gospel choir. Altogether, then, the production is considerably 
larger than this fractured fable of a play _ to the delight of the 
audience, which reacts to it much as a crowd of wide-eyed children 
would to a very ordinary cake hidden under wave upon wave of fantastic 
frosting. PRODUCTION NOTES: `MOTHER HUBBARD' By Ishmael Reed; directed 
by Rome Neal; original score and musical direction by Ronald L. McIntyre; 
lyrics by Reed; production stage manager, Triple-5 (William J. Vila); 
sets by Ha-Young Yoon; sound by David D. Wright; costumes by Marcel 
Christian. Presented by Miguel Algarin, executive producer. At the 
Nuyorican Poets Cafe, 236 E. Third Street. With: Elliott Williams 
(Rudolph Greene), Joy Styles (Olympia Greene), Theo Polites (Bobbie 
Rat), Frances McAlpine Sharp (Mother Hubbard), Rod Bladel (Pete Wilson), 
William Williams (Mr. Money), Kathryn Chilson (Margo Madison), Frank 
Swingler (Rex). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>