<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981022.0534 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When the Israelis finally claimed a breakthrough Thursday night, it 
did not involve the concrete issues of land and security, but rather 
matters of acute political sensitivity _ the Palestinian charter and 
the seizure of Palestinian suspects wanted by Israel. On the Palestinian 
side, one issue still hanging fire in the talks as day moved into 
night was an equally emotional one _ a demand for the release of Palestinian 
prisoners being held in Israel. The Palestinians also demanded that 
Israel accept its responsibility to complete a third withdrawal from 
the West Bank before a final agreement is reached; that it call a 
``time out'' in settlement construction on the West Bank, and that 
the Palestinians finally get their airport and safe passage between 
Gaza and the West Bank. Whether there was, in fact, a breakthrough 
would be known only if there was an agreement, and James Rubin, the 
State Department spokesman, went to considerable lengths Thursday 
night to say that nothing had been fully resolved, and that much hard 
bargaining lay ahead. But the emergence of these issues as the last 
and largest hurdles demonstrated the degree to which, in the end, 
success depended on insuring that the Israeli prime minister, Benjamin 
Netanyahu, and the Palestinian leader, Yasser Arafat, could return 
home claiming that they had reaped real benefits and had not sold 
out. That was what the conference was really all about. The fact that 
Israel would have to cede 13 percent of the West Bank and that Arafat 
would have to agree to security measures was a given from the outset. 
The problem was to make it politically possible for the leaders to 
agree. After 19 months of stalemate, during which each side demonized 
the other, the two leaders could not simply move on as if nothing 
had happened. Each needed the other to make amends; they needed a 
major political symbol. For Netanyahu, the challenge was to convince 
his right-wing constituency that he had firmly impressed on the Palestinians 
his government's insistence on concrete evidence that the Palestinian 
Authority was turning its people away from hatred and rejection of 
Israel. A formal security agreement monitored by the CIA was not enough, 
nor were promises by Arafat in English. What the Israelis needed was 
a loud and clear proclamation, made not only before the West, but 
before the Palestinian people. For Israeli conservatives, the major 
signals that Arafat was not sincere were the fact that he had never 
completed purging the Palestinian Charter of calls for Israel's destruction, 
and that he continued to allow Palestinians wanted by Israel to wander 
free. Among many Israeli liberals, as among Americans and Palestinians, 
the charter never loomed as a major issue. It was perceived as a relic 
of a different, demagogic era. In April 1996 the Palestinian National 
Council adopted a resolution declaring that offensive articles in 
the charter were void. But to conservatives that was not enough: The 
resolution did not spell out which articles were to be erased. Natan 
Sharansky, the minister of trade and industry and one of Netanyahu's 
close allies, emerged as the leader on the issue of the charter. Thursday 
night, as he prepared to board a plane to Jerusalem for his daughter's 
bat mitzvah, he was happy. He said he had made a special effort to 
convince Clinton that the demand to change the Charter was not a negotiating 
ploy, but a fundamental requirement that the Palestinians demonstrate 
in the most public way possible that they no longer regarded Israel 
as a mortal foe. ``He fully accepted that this was not some juridical 
problem, but an important social problem on which Arafat must pass 
the message to the Palestinians,'' he said. ``I leave with optimism. 
I only hope when I land in Jerusalem that my optimism will prove to 
be founded.'' On the Palestinian side, Arafat faced much the same 
need to return to his people with some indication that the peace he 
signed was bearing fruit. Another 13 percent in the West Bank was 
no major achievement for people who believe 100 percent is rightfully 
theirs. But releasing Palestinian prisoners, opening an airport, setting 
up safe passage _ these were tangible benefits. And getting a commitment 
from Netanyahu for a ``time out'' on settlements would be universally 
viewed as a serious ideological concession. So after seven days and 
seven nights of posturing, senior members of the two delegations sat 
down across from each other and agreed to name the most difficult 
questions. The Israelis zeroed in on the Charter and the terrorism 
suspects still at large; the Palestinians established their bottom 
line, and the real game got under way. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>