<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981022.0426 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Sanford Weill, the co-chief executive of Citigroup, excels at sizing 
up risks. He has swallowed up numerous firms, including Salomon Smith 
Barney, to create the world's largest financial company, winning praise 
for shrewdly negotiating the financial pitfalls of Wall Street. Yet 
when it came to the hedge-fund giant Long-Term Capital Management, 
Weill acknowledged that he did not know enough about the dangerous 
bets that the fund was making. Long-Term Capital borrowed heavily, 
made risky investments across many markets and last month nearly failed, 
surviving only after a $3.6 billion cash investment by big brokerage 
firms and banks under the guiding hand of regulators worried that 
the fund's collapse would disrupt the global economy. Why did seasoned 
financiers around the world not recognize the problem earlier? Weill, 
one of the few Wall Street executives to speak publicly about Long-Term, 
concedes the sheer star power of the fund's financial brain trust 
blinded him to the huge risks Long-Term was taking. The fund's managers 
included acclaimed economists who last year shared a Nobel Prize, 
former government officials and bond traders known for generating 
immense returns. The downfall of Long-Term Capital Management provides 
a rare window on the clubby world of high finance, where decisions 
about where to steer vast sums can be made with few questions asked. 
Like Weill, many of Long-Term's backers were satisfied for nearly 
four years to put hundreds of millions of dollars at stake with only 
a glimpse of the vaunted fund's trading and borrowing practices. The 
fund provided a brief monthly financial statement, without information 
on specific investments _ far less disclosure than many other hedge 
funds. And at times it took secrecy to great lengths. When representatives 
of a private Swiss bank met with the fund to discuss investing more 
money, notepads and pens were whisked out of the room so no one could 
take notes. Long-Term also received generous terms on its loans _ 
including a credit line of $900 million from Chase Manhattan and other 
banks requiring no collateral _ and amassed far greater amounts of 
debt than its competitors. All of this permitted it to make financial 
bets far out of proportion to the amount of cash it had on hand. Part 
of the reason no outsider knew the size of the fund's problem for 
so long was that everyone had only a small piece of the Long-Term 
puzzle. Lenders were unaware of the sums others were extending, and 
firms trading with Long-Term did not know anything about trades other 
than their own or about the fund's overall borrowing. ``I haven't 
met anyone who knew how big they were,'' said a senior executive at 
a major bank who requested anonymity. ``They wouldn't let anyone look 
at their positions.'' Why did Long-Term get special treatment? ``When 
you have two Nobel laureates, plus a former Federal Reserve vice chairman, 
a cast of star bond traders, and have extraordinary returns for a 
couple of years, the whole thing becomes self-reinforcing,'' said 
Henry Hu, a professor of financial law at the University of Texas 
at Austin who has testified before Congress on hedge-fund activities. 
``There was a willing suspension of disbelief by very sophisticated 
investors when it came to Long-Term.'' That opinion was echoed privately 
by Wall Street executives as well as by regulators, consultants and 
other hedge-fund managers. ``I think their lineage and Nobel Prize 
status allowed them to provide less information, although I'm not 
in a position to know entirely,'' said Leon Cooperman, chairman of 
Omega Advisors, one of the world's biggest hedge funds. ``We provide 
investors with a lot of information like balance-sheet statements. 
Long-Term was apparently very different. Caveat emptor.'' The Federal 
Reserve Board is now examining how well the banks it regulates gauged 
the riskiness of their loans to and trades with Long-Term, and is 
paying special attention to whether firms used computer models to 
test how the investments would fare in a market plunge. Banking regulators 
in Switzerland are conducting their own investigation. Weill, who 
says his company began taking a close look at Long-Term's activities 
only in June, now expects more disclosure from his trading partners. 
``I think the lesson of this is that if it's structured so that you 
can't get more than a fraction of the picture,'' he said, ``then in 
the future we will be taking our business elsewhere.'' Hedge funds 
_ largely unregulated investment pools open to wealthy investors and 
big institutions _ aim to provide consistently outsized returns on 
stocks, bonds, currencies or other securities while limiting losses 
from market downturns. Like the baseball slugger Mark McGwire, such 
funds swing for the fences. And like McGwire, winning funds attract 
a devoted, often rhapsodic following. Long-Term provided eye-popping 
gains on the billions of dollars it managed. In 1995, investors hauled 
in almost 43 percent after fees and nearly 41 percent the following 
year, before returns dropped to about 17 percent last year. ``Unfortunately, 
what you get in a bull market is people who forget there is a down 
side, especially if they have stardust in their eyes,'' said Paul 
Roth, an attorney with Schulte Roth &AMP; Zabel, a law firm that represents 
hedge funds. Exclusive List of Big Clients At its outset, Long-Term 
established relationships with global banks that it deemed strategic 
investors. The initial pitch, according to a person close to the fund 
who requested anonymity, was to a hand-picked group of fewer than 
10 commercial and investment banks that were offered the exclusive 
opportunity to invest in the hedge fund. As part of the arrangement, 
the hedge fund got research and intelligence on markets around the 
world, while the bank investors got advice on risk management from 
Long-Term's usually reclusive brain trust and such other perks as 
speakers for seminars. ``We hoped the relationship would be mutually 
beneficial,'' said the person close to the fund. Big banks in the 
United States, Europe, Asia and Latin America each invested $10 million 
to $100 million in the fund for this privilege. The investors were 
heavily European and Asian, and included Dresdner Bank of Germany, 
Sumitomo Bank of Japan, and Merrill Lynch &AMP; Co., which helped 
raise much of the original capital for the fund. The relationship 
between Merrill and Long-Term Capital blossomed over the years. In 
September 1997, about 10 executives from brokerage powerhouse Merrill, 
including the retired chairman, Daniel Tully, convened at the famed 
Waterville golf course in Ireland to meet with the course's owners, 
which included Long-Term's founder, John Meriwether, and several other 
Long-Term partners. The group golfed and fished for trout by day and 
discussed global markets over sumptuous dinners. The golf weekend 
was a rare event, since Long-Term was so ardently sought after as 
a business partner that it seldom engaged in the wining and dining 
that normally cements business relationships on Wall Street. Meriwether, 
a legendary bond trader who left Salomon Brothers in the early 1990s 
in the wake of a trading scandal, recruited a coveted cadre of bond 
traders from his former firm. Long-Term's partnership rolls also included 
some marquee names: David Mullins, a former Harvard Business School 
professor and a former Federal Reserve vice chairman, and Robert Merton 
and Myron Scholes, two economists who would win Nobel Prizes for their 
work in the field of modeling financial risk. ``When I met Myron Scholes 
I was like `Wow, I'm meeting Myron Scholes _ Nobel Prize _ this is 
something special,''' said a senior executive whose multinational 
bank traded with Long-Term but who requested anonymity. ``They were 
asked fewer questions because of their pedigrees. No question.'' The 
Attraction of Celebrities As Wall Street celebrities, Meriwether and 
his cohorts needed little salesmanship, attracting $1.3 billion by 
the time the fund began trading in February 1994. Still, whenever 
Long-Term's partners visited a bank abroad, they often played golf 
or had dinner with its executives. The banks never sent their junior 
people _ only senior executives met with Long-Term partners. Long-Term's 
partners liked the idea of knowing their business associates personally, 
so disputes about trades could be worked out quickly and amicably, 
according to the person close to the hedge fund. And partners emphasized 
that their own money was at stake as ``a selling point.'' They initially 
put in $100 million and later used a financial contract to increase 
their stake substantially. From the beginning, the fund's partners 
agreed to furnish only sketchy information about their practices and 
not to play favorites by giving some investors, lenders or trading 
partners more information than others, according to people close to 
Long-Term and bankers. They provided investors a monthly statement 
of two pages. The first page showed the net asset value for the fund, 
a profit-and-loss tally, and any additions or withdrawals. The second 
page was an abbreviated balance sheet with quarterly information on 
broad categories of investing, like government bonds and equities, 
but no information on specific securities. Antoine Bernheim, president 
of Dome Capital Management, which advises institutional investors 
about hedge funds, said some funds send not only a detailed write-up 
discussing strategy each quarter, but also a list of their 10 biggest 
positions. ``Now the trend is toward more openness,'' he said. Long-Term's 
penchant for secrecy extended to a meeting during the last year with 
bankers from Bank Julius Baer &AMP; Co., a private bank in Switzerland. 
At that meeting, pens and notepads were removed so the bankers could 
not jot down any information, according to people familiar with the 
visit. Julius Baer declined repeated requests for information about 
the incident or its relationship with the fund. Even with sketchy 
information, big banks were lining up to lend to Long-Term, according 
to investment and commercial banks. Bankers typically lend to hedge 
funds on an overnight basis, requesting daily information to reassess 
the quality of the collateral, but some of Long-Term's lenders provided 
financing for months at a time without checking the fund's books, 
according to a person familiar with Long-Term's books. Though some 
lenders wanted daily information about asset values and positions, 
Long-Term refused to give it. Among the fund's big debts was a credit 
line of $900 million led by Chase Manhattan that was parceled out 
to two dozen other banks and not backed by any collateral _ which 
is unusual for hedge-fund loans. Long-Term used $500 million of that 
credit line, which has since been repaid with the proceeds of the 
rescue fund. ``I think it's fair to say that banks were eager to do 
business with Long-Term because the firm had strong relationships 
and sizable positions,'' said Bernheim of Dome Capital. ``It was the 
lender's responsibility to demand more information. They should have 
had a much bigger picture of the overall balance sheet, and that seems 
to have been missing.'' Regulators say they had warned banks about 
easy lending to hedge funds. ``We have had concerns about lending 
standards to hedge funds, and on April 28, 1994, we put out a letter 
to all banks expressing concern about the growth of trading activities 
to institutional investors, including leveraged funds,'' said Peter 
Bakstansky, a spokesman for the Federal Reserve's New York branch. 
``It has been a matter of continuous supervision.'' Despite such concerns, 
the Fed says it did not become aware of how much debt Long-Term Capital 
had on Sept. 20, when the fund verged on collapse. Long-Term Balks 
at Disclosing Details Secrecy is not uncommon among hedge funds. They 
are not required to report their positions even to their investors. 
But several managers of big hedge funds said that along with providing 
regular, detailed statements, when investors call them to inquire 
about their trading strategy or even a specific position _ say, in 
a stock or a bond _ they gladly disclose it. Bank representatives 
who visited Long-Term were told what the hedge fund was doing in concept 
only, not anything specific about trades. Long-Term worried that if 
its trading positions or strategies became too widely known, competitors 
would take advantage of them. And the fund's financiers deliberately 
did not share data with one another. ``We were concerned about exchanging 
information too much,'' said David Komansky, Merrill's chairman and 
chief executive. Firms lending to Long-Term Capital did not have a 
clear idea how much each had loaned, he said, and sharing such information 
could have had legal repercussions. ``Collusion is illegal,'' Komansky 
added. A top executive at another Wall Street firm echoed that belief 
and pointed to the painful experience of the Nasdaq trading scandal, 
in which many firms agreed to pay hefty fines after regulators said 
they had illegally fixed prices. When it came to trading, Long-Term 
engaged in a bit of bravado. In mid-1997, the partners approached 
Credit Suisse about making a $100 million trade that the fund would 
increase in value. Credit Suisse sought to protect itself in the deal 
by taking a stake in the fund. When the fund faltered, Credit Suisse 
took a hit. The complex transaction contributed to a $55 million reduction 
in revenue that Credit Suisse announced last month. Long-Term got 
generous agreements with its trading partners as well as its lenders. 
Typically, a borrower wanting to buy $100 million in Treasury securities 
might be asked to provide $10 million of its own assets in addition 
to the Treasury securities as collateral. In some cases, Long-Term 
did not have to put up any assets other than the newly purchased securities 
for collateral. Clearly the appeal for banks doing business with Long-Term 
was the enormous fees it generated. Long-Term was one of the top five 
money-making clients for many of the big brokerage firms, according 
to people on Wall Street. The list of firms investing or trading with 
Long-Term ultimately became a who's who of the international financial 
world: Merrill; Morgan Stanley; Goldman, Sachs; Chase Manhattan; Bankers 
Trust; J.P. Morgan; Citigroup; Union Bank of Switzerland; Credit Suisse; 
Deutsche Bank; Sumitomo _ even the foreign-exchange office of Italy's 
central bank. Some Key Officials Join the Firm Long-Term's global 
clout was enhanced by the presence of former government officials 
at the firm. Mullins joined in 1994 as soon as he left the Federal 
Reserve, a move made possible because the Fed, unlike the Treasury 
Department, does not have a mandatory waiting period for its former 
officials' return to the financial sector. Mullins declined to comment. 
``He was looking to move on'' and asked Long-Term for advice, said 
the person close to the fund who requested anonymity. The fund's partners 
knew Mullins _ besides other duties, he was the Fed's point man on 
the bond-trading scandal at Salomon Brothers _ and invited him aboard. 
This person said that Mullins joined after the firm had completed 
its initial fund raising, but later helped with such efforts. His 
government experience gave the firm no special advantages in the bond 
market, the person added. Mullins' key role, he said, was devising 
strategies to maintain the firm's financial stability as it engaged 
in complicated trades. Likewise, people close to the firm said that 
Alberto Giovannini, a former Italian treasury official, played no 
role in encouraging the Italian central bank to become involved with 
the firm. Giovannini worked as an economist at Long-Term but was primarily 
involved in setting up a new asset-management business for Long-Term 
in Italy, according to the person close to Long-Term. Although central 
banks are generally conservative investors, the Italian central bank 
put a considerable amount of money into Long-Term. The foreign-exchange 
office of Italy's central bank had a $100 million equity stake in 
the fund and lent it $150 million more. Antonio Fazio, head of Italy's 
central bank, said in a recent press conference that there was ``nothing 
illegal'' about the investment. While questions are being raised in 
Italy, regulators in Switzerland are investigating its bankers' relationships 
with Long-Term. One report has indicated that Union Bank of Switzerland 
at least suspected how much debt Long-Term was taking on. According 
to an internal credit report cited by the Reuters news agency, UBS 
knew Long-Term was heavily indebted as early as December 1996. The 
bank report refers to a limit on dealing with a client that had ``leverage,'' 
or the ratio of debt to assets, of more than 30 to 1. Yet UBS estimated 
that when derivatives activities were accounted for, Long-Term Capital's 
leverage might be 250 to 1, according to the report. UBS did business 
with the hedge fund anyway. UBS declined to comment on the Reuters 
report or anything else having to do with Long-Term, citing the Swiss 
investigation. But it recently announced a loss of about $700 million 
because of its exposure to Long-Term. Several top UBS executives, 
including the bank's chairman, resigned. Just last week, Merrill Lynch 
replaced the person who had been in charge of risk management at the 
firm for 11 years _ a move that analysts attributed to a quarterly 
loss for the firm and in part to the Long-Term Capital fiasco. As 
Markets Sour, Questions Arise Once financial markets began to plummet 
this summer, Long-Term's creditors and trading partners pressed the 
rapidly deteriorating hedge fund for more information _ and got it. 
It was only then that Weill _ whose firm was suffering from its own 
errant bond bets and would announce a month later that it was exiting 
the arcane business of bond arbitrage _ had his minions begin to closely 
examine Long-Term's bond-trading strategies. Others started to look 
closely, too. A banker who requested anonymity said he visited Long-Term's 
partners in August ``and sat with them for about two-and-a-half hours 
and talked about the kinds of things you would want to know when there's 
stress in the system, and I got much more disclosure than previously.'' 
By then, what bankers heard was disconcerting. Besides the extraordinary 
debt burden, the fund had been engaging in risky trades and had been 
responsible for big moves in certain markets. In one instance, a major 
bank estimated that Long-Term's trading was responsible for 30 percent 
of the volatility on the major French stock index, the CAC-40, during 
much of 1998. Bankers also discovered that Long-Term's computer model 
was terribly outmoded in its capacity to test how the fund's investments 
would perform in an unusually rough market. For its part, once a little 
daylight was let in, Long-Term was reminded why it never wanted to 
broadcast its trading positions or strategies. Investors were invited 
in over the summer to help inject some money into the firm to keep 
it afloat. But individuals close to the fund's operations believe 
that some potential investors simply used what they learned to begin 
speculating against Long-Term, betting the fund would collapse. Regulators, 
also late to discover the size of the problems lurking behind Long-Term's 
glittering facade, feared that the hedge fund's collapse would undermine 
the global financial system. So a rescue of the hedge fund by a consortium 
of investment and commercial banks was arranged in late September. 
Whatever infatuation Wall Street bankers once had with Meriwether 
and his colleagues, they are now putting distance between them. When 
members of the banks arranging the rescue gathered at the offices 
of Skadden Arps Slate Meagher &AMP; Flom one day late last month, 
Meriwether was not invited. When he did show up the next day, he was 
sequestered in an office far away from the meeting room, said people 
who attended. To talk to Meriwether, bankers stepped out into the 
hallway. And the starry-eyed interaction that characterized previous 
encounters was notably absent. ``There wasn't any back-slapping,'' 
said one person at the meeting, ``and there was no talking about golf.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>