<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981022.0508 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Nomura Securities Co., Japan's largest brokerage, reported a $1.76 
billion loss for its fiscal first half Thursday and provided an emergency 
infusion of funds to rescue its hemorrhaging U.S. operation, which 
caused most of the losses at the parent company. Nomura, long considered 
the most aggressive and innovative Japanese brokerage, suffered huge 
losses on bets it made in financial markets around the world. Its 
biggest blow came in America, where the firm's once highly profitable 
business of repackaging and selling commercial real-estate loans turned 
sour after Russia's default on its debt in August scared investors 
away from risky debt securities. Nomura Holding America had losses 
of nearly $1.2 billion before taxes. The announcement comes amid a 
worldwide management shakeup. Nomura officials in Japan told reporters 
that Managing Director Max Chapman, former president of the now defunct 
Wall Street powerhouse Kidder Peabody &AMP; Co. and the pioneer of 
Nomura's business strategies outside of Japan since 1989, has lost 
his authority to make management decisions. Chapman continues as non-executive 
chairman of Nomura's units in the United States, Europe and Asia. 
A spokesman for Nomura said he had no information about Chapman's 
role at the parent company. Chapman could not be reached for comment. 
The demotion comes as many of the proprietary trading stars who generated 
big profits for Nomura _ and some of the fattest paychecks on Wall 
Street for themselves _ have either left or been fired. William Wraith, 
chief executive of Nomura Holding America, and Mark McGauley, the 
chief operating officer, resigned last month after Nomura suffered 
$240 million in Russia-related trading losses. Ethan Penner, the high-flying 
founder of Nomura's real-estate lending arm, also resigned. His unit 
contributed to losses approaching $1 billion in Nomura's mortgage-backed 
securities business. The company is disbanding its emerging markets 
trading operation in New York, Nomura executives said. One person 
who works there estimated that six or seven traders in that department 
have lost their jobs. But Nomura officials said they do not expect 
wholesale layoffs. For the first time since the mid-1980s, Nomura 
named a Japanese national, Atsushi Yoshikawa, as the sole chief of 
its U.S. business. Nomura said it has begun a review of all aspects 
of its international operations. Executives there said that they expect 
the firm to move quickly to reduce the risks it takes with its own 
capital. They said they anticipate that Tokyo-based officials will 
tighten their supervision over foreign operations. ``I don't think 
there's any question you will see them tighten controls,'' said a 
senior Nomura executive in the United States of the Japanese parent 
company. ``When you cause a billion dollars in losses, you have to 
do something about it.'' To strengthen the ailing American operation, 
Nomura announced that it would inject $1.2 billion into Nomura Holding 
America in addition to an equity infusion and debt forgiveness made 
last month. That brings Nomura's bill for the bailout of the U.S. 
business so far to $1.78 billion, or about half the size of last month's 
rescue of the hedge fund Long-Term Capital Management by a consortium 
of 14 banks and brokerages. The new capital reaffirms the parent company's 
commitment to the American market, Nomura officials said. Yoshikawa, 
Nomura Holding America's chief executive officer, said the new capital 
will guarantee the financial wherewithal of all its subsidiaries here, 
including the mortgage-backed securities operation. The steep losses 
almost certainly signal the end of Nomura America's heavy emphasis 
on cowboy-like trading strategies, Nomura executives said. In the 
past, the firm often acted like a speculative hedge fund in the way 
it used the firm's own capital to make bets on high-interest bonds, 
like those issued by the Russian government. Under Penner, 37, Nomura 
became a big player in real estate finance during the early 1990s 
property slump. Recently, he pioneered a way to make loans to people 
and companies, including sports and movie stars, then pool them into 
securities and sell them to big investors. The business was highly 
profitable in recent years. Propriety trading and real estate finance 
accounted for about 90 percent of Nomura America's revenue, and they 
made the firm the most successful Japanese brokerage in the U.S. market. 
Penner was one of the best compensated traders on Wall Street, earning 
$93 million over the past three years. Many other Nomura executives 
in America were also paid bonuses far larger than people in similar 
positions at the biggest U.S. securities companies. But in the past 
two months, Nomura's fortunes were quickly altered. Jitters in emerging 
markets prompted investors everywhere to dump fixed-income securities 
considered risky, with many seeking safe haven in U.S. Government 
bonds. Senior Nomura executives said most of the U.S. losses came 
from marking down the value of its huge inventory of real-estate related 
loans. In mid-September, Nomura had a loan inventory valued at $3 
billion, which it intended to sell off to investors. But it managed 
to sell only one-third that amount, and the market has continued to 
sink. Nomura's losses were not confined to the U.S. operation, however. 
It European arm lost $564 million and its Asian operation posted a 
$145 million shortfall. To improve earnings, Nomura said it will cut 
2,000 jobs in Japan, or 15 percent of its 13,000-strong workforce. 
The firm also said it will concentrate on managing the company worldwide 
from its Tokyo headquarters. ``If we are successful in implementing 
our business plan, we expect to be profitable by the end of the next 
fiscal year, or the year after,'' said Nomura President Junichi Ujiie. 
But the results prompted Moody's Investors Service to cut the company's 
long-term debt rating one notch o ``Baa1,'' two notches above ``junk,'' 
from ``A3.'' Nomura's ``potential further mark-to-market losses in 
its real estate and emerging markets portfolios, compounded by a shortage 
of client-driven recurring businesses and by reorganization costs, 
will prevent Nomura's overseas businesses from contributing sustainable 
and predictable earnings in the near future,'' the U.S. rating company 
said. Other Japanese brokerages also posted bad results. Daiwa Securities 
Co., Japan's second-largest broker, on Thursday reported a 66.839 
billion yen net loss, or 50.16 yen per share and Nikko Securities 
Co. reported a 57.724 billion yen net loss, or 37.96 yen per share. 
Daiwa said it would cut 1,500 jobs by the end of March 2001. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>