<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981022.2000.1259 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is THE WORLD. I'm Lisa Mullins. Nowhere are the signs of Asia's 
economic crisis more evident than in Hong Kong's property market. 
Hong Kong's economy revolves around real estate. Most major companies 
there have at least one arm of the property market and taxes from 
the sector play a large role in funding the government. But the bellwether 
statistics for the industry, property prices, housing starts, and 
a number of real estate transactions have all plummeted from their 
peaks last year. THE WORLD's Michael Swito has the story. Here at 
the Laguna Verde apartment complex on the banks of Hong Kong's Victoria 
Harbor, one of the city's biggest property developers has just put 
some 500 apartments on the market. It's the first day of sale, and 
more than 2,000 families have turned up. I think it's the area where 
they can see the sales procedure going before they went to the actual 
room to choose their plat they wanted to buy. Kenneth Yuen represents 
Chung Kong, a company which is building Laguna Verde. He explains 
that buying a new apartment in Hong Kong is a bit like choosing a 
dorm room in college. First, you register and put down a lot of money. 
Then you're assigned a number, and when that number is called, you 
get the pick of the best remaining apartments. By mid afternoon, Laguna 
Verde is sold out. That's a good sign for the market, and Yuen chalks 
up the success to his company's reputation. The Laguna Verde is well 
designed that people will really appreciate the location and the at 
the same time. What Yuen doesn't mention is that his company is making 
a lot less money on these apartments than it did a year and a half 
ago. Then, a new 1100 square foot unit cost more than $1.5 million. 
Today, it's 60 percent cheaper, and that's why people like this young 
man and his family have just purchased a new apartment. We believe 
the price has already dropped into well into stay where can afford 
it. While lower prices is good news for potential buyers, it's not 
so good for the people who bought apartments last year and for the 
banks which leant them money. As a result, Hong Kong's chief executive, 
Tong Jee Wah is backing off from a policy which was to be the show 
piece of his administration: a pledge to ease Hong Kong's housing 
crunch and build 85,000 new homes a year. When I made the policy just 
last year, it was against the background of an economy that was moving 
too fast, property prices were rising very rapidly, and the ability 
of our citizens to find decent homes were being very badly affected. 
Tong now says his housing pledge is a long-term goal, and he's changed 
his focus from providing new homes to stabilizing property prices. 
His administration has lifted a number of measures that had been put 
in place to limit property speculation, and it suspended land sales 
until at least next March, a major move, because the government is 
the primary supplier of new land to the market. We're going to see 
a big spike in price in two year's time when you see continual population 
growth within Hong Kong and household formation growth counterbalanced 
by insufficient supply. And that will cause prices to go up sharply 
in the next couple of years. Michael Leary is Lehman Brothers top 
property analyst. He says that despite the sharp drop in real estate 
prices, Hong Kong is still an expensive place to live or operate a 
business. Even with rents having fallen, you're still looking at paying 
close to 7-1/2 thousand U.S. dollars a month for a 2,000 square foot 
apartment close to the central business district. But chief executive 
Tong Jee Wah dismisses these concerns. He says prices have fallen 
far enough. We look very carefully at affordability issues. And I 
want to assure you that our affordability today is really very, very 
good. We compare ourselves for instance with London, with New York, 
with many cities, and especially if we do it on the basis of disposable 
income, because don't forget, our tax rate is much lower than these 
countries I've just mentioned. I think we are moving in the right 
direction. For the moment, though, property developers are taking 
a big hit on their books, and they've been trying all sorts of promotions 
to boost a lackluster market. One developer offered a free BMW with 
every luxury apartment. Others are guaranteeing customers that the 
value of their flats will appreciate within two years. Some observers 
see this as a desperate measure, but De Galyer says the developers 
know what they're doing. They're never going to have to pay the difference, 
and they know they're not going to have to pay the difference because 
they've cowed the government into not putting any land on the market, 
and they've cowed the government into allowing them to, in effect, 
not use land they have already leased and not have to pay a penalty 
for it, which is normally the case. When Tong Jee Wah came into office 
last year, Hong Kongers were clamoring for two things: more democracy 
and affordable homes. While no one expected Tong to meet the community's 
democratic aspirations, he appeared to stake his prestige on housing. 
Unfortunately for Tong, Asia's economic crisis is now forcing him 
to back off from such bread and butter issues. Reporting for THE WORLD, 
I'm Michael Swito in Hong Kong. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>