<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981022.2000.3177 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The British invasion of America in the 1960s was led not by generals 
but by pop culture icons. The Beatles and James Bond led the pack. 
Today's British musical imports, of course, echo to some extent what 
the Beatles created three decades ago. What's surprising, as THE WORLD's 
Marco Worman tells us, is that plenty of British bands also remain 
under the spell of James Bond. What is it about James Bond that inspires 
so many British pop bands? glamour, excitement, and sex. It's a matter 
of life. It's a matter of death. It's a matter of a beautiful Italian 
spy, seven killers, a voodoo witch doctor, a living corpse, a gorgeous 
double agent, 12 cars, five planes, ten acres of land, a wedding reception, 
a double decker bus, a fleet of speed boats, a sea of crocodiles, 
the beautiful sorceress named Solitaire, a man with a steel arm, and 
a retired Navy LSP, all against one man. My name's Bond, James Bond. 
He continues to be a force that shakes up, not stirs British pop music. 
Maybe the band, Propeller Heads, have some deep-seated belief that 
if they play enough bond-like music like this, the theme from "On 
Her Majesty's Secret Service," their lives will become more thrilling. 
And Propeller Heads isn't the first band to be obsessed by the twangy 
guitar that's become the 007 trademark. The Scatta Lights covered 
the Bond theme in the '60s when Scah was all the rage in Jamaica. 
Then the Neo-Scah Band, the selector, sort of recovered it in the 
late '70s. And the Scatta Lights reissued a jazz version of it this 
year, proving that you don't only live twice. There's also Tortoise 
Head, another '90s Brit pop band that's been heavily influenced by 
Bond music. Tortoise Head shows if you can believe it, that Bond music 
can inspire more cerebral stuff. Well, it's not proosed, but Tortoise 
Head lyrics do provide new directions for the horn styles from the 
Bond soundtracks. So Propeller Heads doesn't get the only prize for 
reinventing Bond themes, but Propeller Heads does have its own take 
on the genre. There is an original tune from Propeller Heads' recent 
release, "Decks, and Drums, and Rock and Roll," and it's pure gold 
thinker. The track, "History Repeating," features Bond theme alumna 
Shirley Basse. Now that's a groove that's got a "License to Kill." 
For THE WORLD, this is Marco Worman. Shirley Basse and Brit poppers 
Propeller Heads bring this edition of the program to a close. Don't 
forget, we're online at www.theworld.org. In Boston, I'm Lisa Mullins. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>