<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981022.2000.2427 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There is one word that for centuries was basically synonymous with 
the islands of the Caribbean: sugar, sugar cane to be precise. The 
Caribbean climate is ideal for cane, but early European settlers had 
one problem: no manpower to work the fields. So they started importing 
slaves, first from Europe then from Africa. The rest is history, or 
is it? In our week-long series on the legacy of slavery, THE WORLD's 
Boris Maksimov visits one of the oldest plantations in the Caribbean 
on the French island of Martinique. Distilled sugar cane juice, otherwise 
known as rum, is being bottled in a plant at one of the oldest plantations 
in Martinique, Abedasion Clemon. Sugar cane was the reason why the 
French settled here, and despite the passage of centuries, the plantations 
on Martinique continue, continue to grow cane and process it into 
something usable. Seree Regall, one of the managers of the Abedasion 
Clemon very, very proudly explains the entire process, how one puts 
75 proof rum into huge bulk gasks where this rum comes from, how one 
gets juice out of the cane, shifted about some five cents strange 
looking machinery, et cetera, et cetera. There are the pleasant sweetish 
whiff of evaporating rum called angel's share hangs in the air. The 
plantation house where the owners, the masters lived has been lovingly 
restored. Abedasion Clemon also makes some money out of visiting tourists, 
and the people who run it went through a great deal of trouble to 
resurrect the past. The main house, for example, dates back to 1750. 
And then you ask a question: Where did the slaves, who actually worked 
the fields all around the house, where did they live? Suddenly, Seree 
Rigall's tone of voice becomes just a bit more defensive. "They lived 
over there," says she, pointing to a stretch of grass down the hill. 
The huts were not very durable and all have disappeared. And unlike 
the main house, unlike the distillery itself, nobody even thought 
of restoring these places. The only thing reminding you that slaves 
were here are the very same cane fields still swaying in the wind. 
So how does it feel to work in a place with such a history, growing 
the same crop, walking the same fields, being surrounded not only 
by the beauty and chirping birds but also by ghosts of the past? I 
asked the man who's responsible for the rum at Abedasion Clemon, Jean-Pierre 
Glankovsky. No, it doesn't bother me at all. Everybody who works here 
is perfectly aware of the past, of the history of Martinique. Of course, 
it's important to talk about the past, not to forget it, but it's 
also important not to develop some psychological complexes about it. 
Most of the people at Abedasion Clemon are from mainland France. It 
must be easier for them not to develop those psychological complexes, 
to feel removed from the past. But how do the locals feel? "Me, personally, 
until the 150th anniversary of abolition, I never knew that slavery 
meant such suffering." That's Roget Dejamme, a white Martiniquen. 
He comes from an old white Martiniquen family. His ancestors came 
here more than 350 years ago. He himself is no longer in the plantation 
business. He and his family moved on running businesses in the city. 
And yet, living on an island full of reminders of slavery, he had 
to wait for the anniversary of abolition celebrated in July of this 
year to begin to understand what actually happened back then. "Of 
course, I read the book, the documents, but around the anniversary, 
a lot of information on slavery came out. And then I personally understood. 
What a dirty crime slavery was, because that's exactly what it was, 
a dirty crime." The end of this crime is being marked in Martinique 
on some scale. The main street in the capital, Fort-de-France, is 
named after one of the most active abolitionists in France, Victor 
Sholshayek. His and other abolitionist portraits hang in the street 
today, and the museum here has a small exhibition on the Trans Atlantic 
slave trade. But all of this is quite temporary, just for this year. 
Why? Relyay Mateur is the head researcher at the museum. Maybe we 
really don't want to think about this very painful period in our history, 
so we put these exhibitions on but that's all that happens, because 
otherwise, it would remind us permanently of something that we would 
rather forget. And do people want to forget? Well, there's one way 
to find out. I passed black passersby on the streets of Fort-de-France. 
They all are saying something similar. "Slavery hasn't been really 
abolished. We're still slaves. We still depend on others. Slavery 
is the living part of our history. It's our national tragedy in Martinique." 
You get a very strong sense that the wound that slavery left on the 
body of Martinique is deep and still bleeding. Roget Dejamme, the 
descendant of plantocrisy kept reminding me that slavery was the longest 
period in local history with all the racist implications of that. 
I often say that my parents grew up in a sort of racial apartheid. 
I am the son of my parents. They gave me my education, so my parents 
made a racist out of me. Only when I reach the age when I can think 
for myself, I understood that it was wrong, that this way of thinking 
is not for me. But whether we like it or not, we are the result of 
our education. And, of course, there's something racist still lurking 
in my genes, in my brain. I just hope that I will pass less of that 
to my children. That hope is something you hear from all Martiniquens, 
white, black, and brown, and hope seems to be the main legacy from 
Martinique's past, and of course, the sugar cane. For THE WORLD, this 
is Boris Maksimov. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>