<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981022.2000.2029 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With the deadline for Serb troops to withdraw more forces from Kosovo 
five days away, western officials today pressed Serbia's leader and 
the Kosovo Liberation Army to do more to achieve peace in the province. 
Despite an agreement reached this month with Slobodan Milosevic to 
diffuse the crisis, there is continuing violence. Kosovors claim that 
the Serbs are still killing ethnic Albanians. Serbs say the KLA is 
attacking the troops as they're withdrawing. THE WORLD's Nanet Chebek 
sent us this report from the Serbian side of the front line. The Serbian 
Police went on a offensive this week opening up its front line positions 
to a small group of journalists. Major Nikola Elich, the head of the 
police for the Likeni region southwest of the provincial capital says 
two of his men were ambushed last Saturday. One of the officers is 
in critical condition in a Belgrade hospital. The other, Yubeesha 
Baritch escaped with a leg wound. I thought my colleague was dead. 
He was bleeding profusely. He collapsed after a few hundred yards 
and I took over the steering wheel and somehow reached our police. 
Here, above the road leading to the front line is a reservation post 
manned by six Serbian policemen including Zoran Kafstich. In shifts 
of ten days, Kafstich lives in a makeshift shelter camouflaged with 
branches. It fails to keep him dry and warm. Kafstich has a wife and 
three children and says that no matter how cold or scary it gets here 
at night, he has no choice but to be in uniform and protect his family. 
With nowhere to go, he says, we can only stay here alive or dead. 
Farther down the road from Kafstich's observation post lies the command 
center that overlooks the positions held by the Kosovo Liberation 
Army around Keesh Marayca. As the cold October night descends up on 
us, an armored personnel carrier guns its engine and departs for another 
observation point. The police lieutenant leads me down to the front 
line and a small brick building that seems to be a hunting lodge in 
times of peace. The dogs usually provide the first warning that the 
post might be attacked. It's close to midnight and the changing of 
the guard. Darko Maksenovich checks his Koloshnokov assault rifle 
before taking his position behind a rolled up wire fence which serves 
as his shelter. He says Kalig guerrillas are shooting at the Serbs 
almost every night. When that happens, Maksenovich says the most important 
thing is to stay calm. You can't just shoot back like that. They can 
come up quite close to us there from that cluster of trees. One of 
them could try to draw my fire while another one located my position 
from my muzzle flash and then shoot me easily. It can get quite scary. 
It's tense at night; even when a deer or some animal breaks a branch, 
you wonder if it's the enemy and what weapons he's got. Shortly after 
midnight, just as another round of coffee arrives and we start sipping, 
shots were heard from outside. The policemen run outside and started 
to return fire. We could hear their commanders say, "Don't panic. 
Don't fire until we see them actually near sights." About five to 
ten minutes after that incident, everything seems to be quiet. One 
by one, the policemen walked back into the room warming themselves 
by a wood fire, which is the usual guard detail outside. When Maksenovich 
returns, he tells me what he just heard. First, there was a volley 
coming in from the left-hand side, I'd say from about five to six 
hundred yards away. The next volley came half a minute later from 
the forest right above us not more than 150 yards from us. I could 
see the flashes from the muzzles and that's when I returned fire. 
Major Elich reminds his men to use the radio frequency sparingly and 
not to fire until the last moment. About 15 minutes after the first 
attack, there was another volley of shots. From what we're hearing 
from the police radio, the attack came this time from the west. Major 
Nikola Elich says the attackers appear to be moving to our right and 
asks one of his men for some toast. I ask him how long will he live 
on the front line like this. I hope things will get sorted out in 
a positive way for us Serbs. This is our country. This is our land. 
How can anyone expect us to hand it over to Albanians. Albanians are 
welcomed to live with us if they are willing to accept Serbia as their 
state. Autonomy, yes, but independence, no. Some French toast is passed 
around and it's pass in the morning. Major Elich sends me across the 
corridor to a room with bunk beds for all three reporters, flack jackets 
close by, we manage to sleep through the beginning of the next fire 
fight which starts at 4:00. As the fog and dawn wage their own battle, 
I walk out of the post to see two fresh bullet scars on the wall next 
to the door. Reporting for THE WORLD, This is Nanet Chebek in Kosovo. 
Next week, Nanet Chebek plans to send us a story from a stronghold 
of the Kosovo Liberation Army. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>