<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981022.0600.0357 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A major point of contention in the effort to achieve Mideast peace 
is the issue of security. Israel insists upon a detailed Palestinian 
plan for disarming and disbanding the militant groups responsible 
for many deadly attacks. Well, as this debate has gone on at the summit 
near Washington, the Palestinian police have carried out two series 
of arrests in recent weeks aimed at weakening the militant Palestinian 
group Hamas in the West Bank town of Hebron. VOA's Al Pesson reports 
from Jerusalem. The new Palestinian moves against Hamas and Hebron 
began three weeks ago when police raided a house which Hamas allegedly 
used to build and store explosives. The Palestinian governor of Hebron, 
Aziz Amar, confirms that the arrest of the owner of that house, Muhammad 
Jamal Nache, led to the arrests of 10 to 15 more alleged Hamas activists 
during the following weeks. I know that I could be getting today arrested 
Muhammad Jamal Nache, and after that, they arrested many other persons 
from Hebron district. They are now in the jail of the Palestinians 
with the Palestinian authority. Muhammad Jamal Nache is now being 
described in local news reports as a top leader of the Hamas military 
wing in Hebron. According to one report by the Associated Press, Mr. 
Nache was arrested with a letter from a more senior Hamas leader, 
which identified the other Hamas activists who were arrested later. 
The letter is reported to have been written by senior Hamas official 
Halad Mashal, who lives in Jordan. An Israeli attempt to assassinate 
Mr. Mashal failed last year and resulted in an embarrassing scandal 
in which Israel was forced to release dozens of Hamas prisoners and 
the group's spiritual leader to gain the safe return of its secret 
agents. In addition to the arrests related to the bomb factory, the 
Palestinian police say they've rounded up another approximately 15 
alleged Hamas activists who are believed to be linked to the man arrested 
in Israel on Monday for throwing two hand grenades at a crowd at a 
bus station. Hamas claimed responsibility, and Israel says the man 
confessed to that attack and two others in Hebron in the last two 
months. The man, Salim Sarsour, is reported to be a long-time supporter 
of Hamas who only recently became active in its military wing. After 
one of the attacks he claims to have carried out, throwing hand grenades 
at Israeli troops in Hebron, the Hebron governor vowed to find and 
prosecute the perpetrator. But three weeks later, Salim Sarsour was 
35 kilometers away in the bus station in the southern Israel town 
of Beersheba, throwing more grenades. Governor Amar says the arrests 
in Hebron in recent weeks prove the Palestinian authority is serious 
about cracking down on what he calls "terrorists who hurt Palestinian 
interests." But for Israel, the lesson is the opposite, illustrating 
insufficient Palestinian efforts if the same man, living in Hebron 
and working for Hamas, really carried out three attacks in less than 
two months. These issues are prominent in the Wye Plantation talks 
as officials wrestle with questions of how arrested militants will 
be treated and how to judge the extent of the Palestinian authority's 
crackdown, to determine if it is enough to trigger reciprocal Israeli 
troop withdrawals. Al Pesson, VOA NEWS, Jerusalem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>