<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981022.0600.0802 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the U.S. state of Texas, it was choking drought just a few months 
ago. Today it's disastrous floods. What's happening? Global warming, 
according to a new study. The study argues that severe weather recently 
in North America verifies scientific predictions of global warming. 
The report calls on the United States to honor its pledge to cut emission 
of so-called greenhouse gases. VOA's Rick Nunez has more. The study 
was compiled by the U.S. Public Interest Research Group, a nonprofit 
organization that monitors environmental, consumer, and other issues. 
Karen Silverthorn, the staff attorney for the research group, put 
together the new study. She says extreme weather, like torrential 
rain or severe drought, killed 376 people throughout the United States 
between January and July. The harsh climate conditions have also caused 
$14.5 billion in economic damage. Miss Silverthorn based her findings 
on data from the Federal Emergency Management Agency, the Army Corps 
of Engineers, and other U.S. government offices. Miss Silverthorn 
says the state of Texas has been hit especially hard by the dangerous 
weather. Dense smoke from massive forest fires in Mexico earlier this 
year aggravated the situation. Texas has certainly seen two dramatic 
impacts this year. The smoke earlier this year caused horrible air 
pollution problems that kept people in Texas indoors. Now a number 
of communities that had the smoke problem earlier are suffering the 
flooding problems, their second and in some cases, for communities 
that had these terrible heat waves, their third major disaster this 
year that they've had to deal with. The study says such volatile weather 
is consistent with forecasts of global warming, a phenomenon that 
many scientists say is caused primarily by air pollution from automobiles 
and industry. Miss Silverthorn says in light of what many believe 
is a connection between pollutants and global warming, the United 
States should follow through on its promise to reduce emission of 
so-called greenhouse gases. These gases include carbon dioxide and 
methane. But critics say cutting the discharge of greenhouse gases 
is prohibitively expensive. The Global Climate Coalition, a Washington-based 
research group, says such a move could cost up to $5.2 trillion. The 
coalition says reducing greenhouse gases would also result in higher 
electric bills and gasoline prices. But Karen Silverthorn says the 
cost of global warming and its related effects, such as increased 
disease outbreaks and worldwide rise in the sea level, are far greater 
still. Rick Nunez, VOA NEWS, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>