<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981022.1700.2156 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Until a few weeks ago, The North Atlantic Treaty Organization, or 
NATO, was deeply divided on whether it could intervene in the internal 
affairs of a sovereign state without an United Nations resolution. 
Now, the world is posed to see whether NATO will carry out air strikes 
on Serbian territory as Serb forces in Kosovo are not sufficiently 
reduced by the NATO imposed deadline of October 27th. The question 
of sovereignty is the subject examined on today's Dateline. Here's 
Pamela Taylor. Russia had threaten to use its veto in the UN Security 
Council if NATO requested authorization for an attack on Serb targets. 
Russia's concern is understandable. In 1994, Russian forces crack 
down on breakaway Czechneia in a war that killed at least 80,000 people 
over the next 2 years. But the United States and the western allies 
decided the Czechneia War was an internal Russian matter. But, Kosovo 
is on Europe's southern flack and fears of a humanitary and refugee 
disaster prompted NATO to finally threaten military action against 
Serbia. The alliance hopes it's a threat it will not have to carry 
out. VOA's Ron Pemstein at NATO Headquarters in Brussels has our background 
report. The 16 NATO allies decided the best way to keep pressure on 
President Milosevicz would be to take the last procedural step before 
launching an air strike. They authorized General Clark to take control 
of all NATO aircraft to use against Yugoslavia. The strike order will 
stay in place says Secretary-General Salona despite the diplomatic 
agreement in Belgrade. I do hope very much that the report Ambassador 
Holbrooke gave us last night would come true and that a diplomatic 
channel will continue working so that a diplomatic solution to the 
whole crisis will be possible. We do not want to use force. We are 
not interested in using force, but force may be needed. If the implementation 
on the ground and deliberation is king is not working properly. If 
NATO decides to use its threaten big stick, it would mark a first 
for the alliance. When NATO attacked Bosnian Serbs in 1995, it was 
with the invitation of the government of Bosnia and the authorization 
of the UN Security Council. This time, Serbia rejected NATO's threat 
of air strikes. And Russia promised to veto any Security Council resolution 
calling for the use of force. The NATO allies, even the present caretaker 
governments in German and Italy accept the argument that Yugoslavia's 
actions in Kosovo constitute a threat to peace. Britain's Foreign 
Secretary Robin Cook believes there are significant concessions by 
the Yugoslav president. This is big plan done by President Milosevicz. 
He has agreed for the first time to contemplate a self-governing Kosovo 
and he has signed up to elections by Kosovo which will be supervised 
by an international body through the OSCE. The Organization for Security 
and Cooperation in Europe, the OSCE, will contribute 2000 people to 
monitor the situation on the ground. Yugoslavia is held responsible 
for guaranteeing their free movement and safety in Kosovo. Foreign 
Secretary Cook says NATO's threat of force is responsible for the 
reversal of policy by President Milosevicz. There can be nobody here 
who imagines that President Milosevicz would have gone into these 
agreements and gone so far if he had not been convinced that NATO 
meant business. This has been a vindication for our strategy of diplomacy 
backed by a credible threat of force. British Foreign Secretary Robin 
Cook. VOA Correspondent Ron Pemstein prepared that report. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>