<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981022.0600.1366 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Competition in the American daily newspaper business has dwindled 
steadily over the past 30 years, and now very few U.S. cities have 
daily newspapers that compete with each other. But competition remains 
alive and lively in several cities, including Boston. VOA correspondent 
Breck Artery reports. Most American cities have just one daily newspaper. 
In cities which have two, they are usually both owned by the same 
company, or are part of what are called joint operating agreements 
involving two publishers. But Boston, Massachusetts, is one of only 
five U.S. cities with two independently owned and operated daily newspapers. 
"The Globe," owned by The New York Times Company, is the larger. "The 
Herald," owned by businessman Pat Purcell, is just marginally profitable 
and has about half of the "Globe"'s daily circulation. But Mr. Purcell 
is betting millions of dollars that the "Herald" can become more competitive 
and more profitable. He's buying new equipment, hiring additional 
staff, and totally redesigning the paper's format. One of Mr. Purcell's 
most expensive investments involves new full-color presses to match 
the "Globe"'s regular color photos and advertisements. There are two 
issues here. One, the use of color from an editorial perspective, 
and also the use of color from an advertising perspective. In recent 
years, advertising color has gained enormously in acceptability and 
the requests for it have been really significant, more so. You miss 
out on some significant revenue-generating opportunities by not having 
color. Mr. Purcell says the addition of color also allows the "Herald" 
to make its front page more appealing, and its design is modeled on 
a typical Internet Web site. But while design may catch eyes, it is 
the content of a newspaper that holds readers. And Mr. Purcell says 
he wants the "Herald" to establish itself as the leader in local news. 
Most studies seem to indicate that people are content to get their 
national and international news off of the broadcast media. But what 
they really rely on their local newspaper for is local news, business, 
sports, arts, entertainment, those kinds of things, that are really 
appropriate for them in their local -- for the reader in its local 
community. Publisher Pat Purcell has also expanded the "Boston Herald" 
staff so that the paper can provide ongoing coverage of several issues 
in which research shows readers have a special interest. We've established 
five special areas of concentration, if you will, to focus on transportation, 
on health, on education, on consumer issues. And then another on sociological 
type of analysis of age and aging, of religion, those kinds of things. 
And we've got dedicated reporting staffs for each of those areas, 
so that we're not just having a group of general assignment reporters 
who are running around trying to follow this crime story or that fire 
or whatever. These people are charged with, and they're responsible 
for, producing original content in these areas of special interest. 
Integrity is a sensitive issue for newspapers, and for the news media 
in general. "The Boston Globe" has recently dismissed two writers 
for allegedly publishing fiction as fact. Mr. Purcell takes no joy 
from the problems at his competitor, saying rogue reporters can probably 
exist anywhere. You do everything you possibly can to make sure that 
the stories are accurate and true and factual. It's very hard to monitor 
that when you're facing a dead -- faced with deadline pressure and 
everything else that happens in the gathering of news every day. But 
your readers expect nothing less, so you've really got to make sure 
that the people that you hire and the people that are working for 
you are the most responsible they possibly can be. In a way, Mr. Purcell's 
efforts to boost "The Boston Herald"'s position are reminiscent of 
the 1940s and '50s in the United States, when there was real newspaper 
competition in most large American cities. But Mr. Purcell is not 
living in the past. The "Herald"'s Internet site, which is constantly 
updated with the latest news, is an adjunct to the printed paper. 
He hopes that by increasing "The Boston Herald"'s profitability and 
readership, he can demonstrate that daily newspaper is still possible 
and beneficial for residents of any community. Breck Artery, VOA NEWS, 
New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>