<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981022.1700.0715 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The London-based International Institute for Strategic Studies is 
out with its annual report on the military capability and defense 
spending of 170 countries. The survey shows an increase in defense 
spending and the arms trade; especially in the Middle East. Our Laurie 
Kessman tells us the authors of the report also see an increase in 
the use of threaten force as a diplomatic tool. The military balance 
report this years sees a growing problem with how the west is dealing 
with conflicts that erupt around the world. The study says US military 
resources are being stretched thin by deployments in the Persian Gulf, 
the Balkans, and other areas of potential conflict. But, the Institute's 
Director John Chipman says the study also shows a new trend towards 
using the threat of force as a diplomatic tool. In the case of Yugoslavia, 
Mr. Chipman says the strategy actually has forced President Slovin 
Milsovicz to accept an international presence in Kosovo, something 
the Yugoslav president had always opposed. But, Mr. Chipman warns 
it is a dangerous strategy because often the diplomatic outcome is 
less than expected. Air strikes against Yugoslavia would not bring 
back Albanian refugees or shore an acceptable level self-determination 
for Kosovo. The Holbrooke Agreement of October 1998 calls for a ground 
presence of unarmed verifiers, but does not tie with it any enforceable 
commitment to full compliance. Mr. Chipman says the only way to achieve 
full compliance is to include the threat of sending in fully armed 
ground troops. The Strategic Studies Institute also reports that 1998 
was the year that high tech military weapons; cruise missiles, were 
used in the fight against terrorism citing the US attacks against 
suspect terrorist facilities in Afghanistan and Sudan. Mr. Chipman 
warns that the campaign against terrorism cannot be fought as a classic 
war, because terrorist operations now are more shadowy than government 
sanction battles. When individuals with no clear and evident link 
to a state apparatus are now able to bring the instruments of terror 
to populations around the world, bring precise action against them 
becomes all the more difficult. The annual survey also shows that 
defense spending is on the increase, up 12 percent from last year. 
But, Russia's arm sales have dried up, largely because of the economic 
downturn in Asia where most of its customers are based Laurie Kessman, 
VOA News, London. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>