<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981022.1700.2386 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The decision to intervene militarily in other countries has usually 
been for reasons of retaliation or concerns about terrorism. The US 
strikes on Libya in 1986 followed a terrorist attack on American servicemen 
in Berlin. The US air strikes against Afghanistan and Sudan followed 
terrorist bomb attacks on US embassies in East Africa. And the Gulf 
War air strikes were in retaliation for Iraq's violation of Kuwait's 
sovereignty. The decision on when to intervene often falls on the 
United States as the world's last superpower. It's a heavy burden 
says Richard Hass of the Brookings Institution in Washington. One 
which he says has led Washington to hesitate more often than to act. 
When governments violate what you might call their obligations to 
their own citizens that the international community then in turn has 
either the right to intervene or if it gets bad enough, in the case 
say of genocide, has an obligation to intervene. So, increasingly 
sovereignty is seen not simply as something that governments benefit 
from, but it's also seen in some ways as something of a contract. 
And that when a government violates the contract in the way it treats 
its citizens then the international community has the option of intervening. 
Well, that sounds like a good theory, but in practice why does the 
United States and why does NATO choose to intervene in certain cases 
and not in others. Why did we bomb in retaliatory action in Afghanistan 
and Sudan and we're not taking similar measures, well we're threatening 
in Serbia, but not many people believe we'll actually do it. Well, 
the reason to do it is two fold. One, humanitarian. And secondly, 
strategic. But in every case, you've got to ask yourself not simply 
about the potential benefits but the potential costs. And in lots 
of these situations, particularly when there's only humanitarian interest 
at stake, a lot of countries including the United States are somewhat 
reluctant to intervene, particularly when they feel the cost would 
be high as they often are in situations that are essentially civil 
wars. We decided to intervene through launching cruise missiles in 
Afghanistan and Sudan because we thought we had strategic rationale 
for so doing. In one case, a terrorist conclave, in another case, 
a chemical weapons plant. And we thought we could do so at no costs 
to American soldiers and at a limited economic costs. In other instances, 
we've been more reluctant to intervene and indeed we've blinked or 
flinched. And I think there you could say Bosnia for several years, 
the United States was reluctant to intervene. In the case of Kosovo, 
we have been reluctant to intervene. If it's not clear to me in retrospect 
that NATO was really prepared to intervene in Kosovo, but to the extent 
people in NATO were prepared to intervene, I think it had mostly to 
do with the revelations of the atrocities and the fact that the cameras 
were capturing what had happen and were increasingly embarrassing 
governments. OK. So, we haven't quite yet dodged the issue of sovereignty, 
have we in this case? And even if we had, this question still rises 
didn't we violate the sovereignty of Sudan and if not Afghanistan. 
Well, of course, we violated the sovereignty of these countries, but 
under international law if a government is either unable to stop terrorists 
from using its territory or indeed decides to allow them consciously 
to use their territory for those sorts of purposes, they therefore 
forfeit some of the normal advantages of sovereignty. Essentially 
by allowing your country to be used as a terrorist base, you have 
declared war on others. So, the United States, or other members of 
the international community, are liberated, to use another word, to 
use force against those governments. So, in the case say of Afghanistan, 
which has allowed its territory to be used as a terrorists training 
area, I would say that yes sovereignty has been violated, but it's 
an understandable thing. And when does it require a UN resolution? 
And when doesn't it? Well, I would say it never requires a UN resolution. 
The idea that somehow UN resolutions are necessary is simply another 
way of saying that we give Russia, or China, or France, or Britain, 
or for that matter the United States a veto over what can be done 
in the world. And I for one would argue that that is simply wrong. 
I think it's better to act multilaterally. It might be NATO. It might 
be a particular regional organization or in some cases it might be 
a much less formal coalition, the sort of thing that we saw during 
operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm which would have been done 
without any formal UN action. Richard Hass is director of the foreign 
policies studies program at Washington's Brookings Institute. The 
question of sovereignty was the subject of today's Dateline. I'm Pamela 
Taylor. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>