<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981022.0600.3203 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Each year, the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in Cleveland, Ohio, assesses 
the talents of a group of performers for possible induction. This 
year they will pick at least six to be honored. To be eligible, an 
individual artist or group must have released their first commercial 
recording 25 years prior to the actual year of induction. As VOA's 
Bernie Bernard tells us, Rock and Roll Hall of Fame voters have some 
big names to ponder and difficult choices this year. Bruce Springsteen 
is one of the favored artists for induction into the Rock and Roll 
Hall of Fame in 1999. His first album, "Greetings From Asbury Park, 
New Jersey," was released in 1973. Growing up in New Jersey, Springsteen 
represented working class Americans in his music, as well as the hopes 
and dreams of restless youth. Nearly 1,000 voting members will be 
asked to recognize those artists who have had a significant impact 
on the evolution, development, and perpetuation of rock and roll. 
Along with Springsteen, fellow singer and songwriter Billy Joel will 
be a possibility for induction. The Long Island New York native is 
considered rock's link to the Tin Pan Alley songwriting tradition 
of decades past. Former Beatle Paul McCartney is another possible 
nominee to the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. While he was inducted with 
the Beatles in 1988, his first solo album was released in 1970. And 
the rock group Steely Dan is also eligible for this year's Hall of 
Fame. The nucleus of Steely Dan, keyboard player Donald Fagin, and 
guitarist Walter Becker share the responsibility for several hits 
in the 1970s. And during the 1990s, they reunited to tour the U.S. 
Steely Dan's music is a staple on classic rock radio stations in America. 
Rhythm and blues singer and songwriter Curtis Mayfield has already 
been inducted for his work with the Impressions, but as the case with 
McCartney, he is under consideration again as a solo performer. Pop 
singer Darlene Love, voice of 1960s groups the Crystals and Bobby 
Sox and the Blue Jeans, is a possible nominee for the Rock and Roll 
Hall of Fame as well. She won a court battle with her former producer, 
Phil Spector, over royalties and rights to her music. Gospel group 
the Staple Singers and early rocker Richie Valens will also be choices 
for voting members of the Hall of Fame. Other possible 1999 nominations 
include 1950s doo-wop groups the Moonglows and the Flamingos, early 
rocker Dell Shannon, pop singer Gene Pitney, and heavy metal rockers 
Black Sabbath, who have recently reunited. From the name mentioned 
so far, only six to eight artists will be chosen for actual induction. 
The official Rock and Roll Hall of Fame nominees will be announced 
in mid-November, and the annual awards ceremony will be held at the 
historic Waldorf Astoria Hotel in New York City in early 1999. Here's 
another artist who may be wishin' and hopin', 1960s pop singer Dusty 
Springfield, who was given special mention at last year's ceremony 
for her courageous battle with cancer. I'm Bernie Bernard. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>