<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981107.0285 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Police on Saturday arrested two Israeli men on suspicion of spying, 
and a court ordered them detained for eight days pending investigations. 
The two were produced in the Larnaca District Court hours after police 
raided and searched their apartment near an army camp shortly after 
midnight in the village of Ziyi near the south coastal town of Larnaca. 
Sgt. Kyriakos Kyriacou, the police lawyer for Larnaca district, told 
the court that an investigation is being conducted against the two 
for spying against the Cypriot army. He said police found in their 
apartment ``documents which may constitute the crime of spying.'' 
He did not elaborate. A police official, speaking on condition of 
anonymity, said the two men are suspected of spying for Israel on 
behalf of Turkey. The two countries have a military alliance. Justice 
Minister Nikos Koshis was also quoted by Cyprus state radio as saying 
that it should not be assumed they were spying for Israel. This was 
seen as an inference that spying, if any, might be for Turkey, which 
has occupied the northern third of the island since a 1974 invasion 
in the wake of an abortive coup by supporters of union with Greece. 
Kyriacou said police found cameras, wireless instruments, a tape recorder 
with tapes of conversations in Greek between police patrol cars and 
tourist maps in the apartment. Also confiscated were radio scanners, 
which are banned in Cyprus, he said. The two men were identified as 
Udi Hargov, 27 and Igal Damary, 49. They will appear in court again 
on Nov. 16 when either formal charges will be filed or the prosecution 
might ask for further remand. Kyriacou said the pair arrived in Cyprus 
Friday. They had also visited Cyprus and stayed in Ziyi between Oct. 
15 and Oct. 22 when the army was conducting its annual exercise nearby. 
The two men were under surveillance, he said. The arrest came only 
three days after Israeli President Ezer Weizman ended a three-day 
visit to the island this week. The visit, the first by an Israeli 
president, was hailed as ushering in a new era in the lukewarm relations 
between the two countries. The visit was nevertheless overshadowed 
by repeated expressions of concern by President Glafcos Clerides over 
Israel's military cooperation agreement with Turkey. Weizman said 
before leaving he was sorry he had not succeeded in persuading the 
Greek Cypriots that Israel's cooperation with Turkey was not directed 
against Cyprus or any other party. Once a hotbed of Arab-Israeli espionage, 
spying activity has been muted recently in Cyprus. In the 1970s and 
1980s, Cyprus was a listening post for the intelligence agents of 
Israel as well as the Palestine Liberation Organization, which was 
based in Lebanon, a half-hour flight from this Mediterranean island. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>