<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981107.0317 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Battered by international sanctions that have put Pakistan on the 
brink of economic collapse, government officials welcomed the good 
news Saturday that Washington had decision to lift some restrictions. 
U.S. President Bill Clinton wrote Pakistan's Prime Minister Nawaz 
Sharif to tell him, according to a foreign ministry statement issued 
in the Pakistani capital. The government is hoping this will be a 
''harbinger of the elimination of all sanctions, which Pakistan has 
consistently maintained are unjustified and counterproductive,'' the 
ministry statement said. In his letter, Clinton assured Sharif that 
the U.S. administration would ''exercise its influence with the international 
financial institutions to meet Pakistan's economic difficulties,'' 
the statement said. This is good news for Pakistan, which is in the 
midst of troubled talks with the International Monetary Fund for a 
dlrs 5 billion bailout package, without which Islamabad will surely 
default on its dlrs 32 billion debt. Sanctions imposed on both Pakistan 
and India following underground nuclear tests in May hit this poor 
nation of 140 million particularly hard because of its heavy dependence 
on international borrowing. Neighboring India, which had foreign reserves 
in excess of dlrs 25 billion, was better able to weather the storm. 
Less dependent on international aid, the Indian economy has not been 
hit as hard, but Indian foreign ministry spokesman K.C. Singh called 
the reported U.S. step ``positive.'' The Indian economy has only recently 
begun to open up to foreign investment, and U.S. companies had been 
eager to do business in a country with a population approaching 1 
billion. ``Washington's decision is an admission such punitive actions 
are restricting U.S. diplomacy,'' said Brahma Chellany at the Center 
for Policy research in New Delhi. Clinton's decision followed progress 
by both India and Pakistan on curbing their nuclear weapons program 
and promising to sign the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty, according 
to U.S. officials. But in newspapers in Pakistan on Saturday, Foreign 
Secretary Shamshad Ahmad made it clear that Pakistan will not sign 
the test ban treaty during Sharif's visit to Washington next month. 
``We are not going to sign the CTBT at this moment,'' the English 
language daily newspaper The News quoted Ahmed as saying. Pakistan 
has repeatedly said it would not be ``coerced'' into signing any international 
nuclear treaty. The lifting of the sanctions, however, may be the 
signal Pakistan needed to sign. The waiver will allow Pakistan's army 
to participate in the International Military and Education Training 
Program, which according to Clinton's letter is ''an important step 
toward creating the kind of security relationship that is appropriate 
for the next century.'' According to the foreign ministry statement 
issued in Islamabad, Clinton wrote that he intended to ''lift restrictions 
on private U.S. bank lending and to authorize overseas private investment 
corporation, U.S. export-import bank and the trade and development 
agency to resume financial and commercial activities in Pakistan.'' 
``This is very good news for us,'' said Ashfaq Ahmed, economic advisor 
to the government. Market analysts said they hoped the move would 
boost the stock market. Pakistan's economy has been teetering. Foreign 
exchange reserves are barely dlrs 600 million, which will pay the 
bill for roughly one month of imports. Ali Hussein, a broker on the 
Karachi Stock Exchange, said the U.S. administration decision paves 
the way for an IMF agreement and will go a long way to inspiring shattered 
investor confidence in Pakistan. ``I think that first of all by lifting 
of sanctions on Pakistan there will be a change of perception of foreign 
investors in Pakistan,'' he said. ``We're hoping that this will result 
in an optimistic attitude by the foreign investor and the stock market 
will be bullish.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>