<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981107.0698 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The bullet holes and blood stains in two cars at a roadside and Milazim 
Krasniqi's black eye bore testiment Saturday to the lack of security 
in this shattered central Kosovo village. Five ethnic Albanian guerrillas 
were riding in the cars Friday when Serb police opened fire and killed 
them, Krasniqi said. He also claimed that police beat him and other 
residents last week when they tried to return to their homes in Opterusha. 
Like ethnic Albanian refugees elsewhere, he said ``there's no way'' 
he would spend the night in his village until Serb police withdrew 
completely from Kosovo Violence in Kosovo has flared this week despite 
a de-facto peace treaty designed to end bloodshed in the turbulent 
Serbian province and set the stage for a political agreement between 
Serb authorities and the province's majority Albanians. Seven ethnic 
Albanians, all believed to be guerrilla fighters, have been killed 
since Thursday afternoon. The Serb Media Center, a mouthpiece for 
Serb officials, reported that the deaths occurred in a series of attacks 
by guerrillas on police. No police were reported killed or injured. 
Such continued violence in Kosovo undermines the Oct. 12 agreement 
between Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic and U.S. envoy Richard 
Holbrooke, reached under the threat of NATO airstrikes on Yugoslav 
and Serb forces in Kosovo. While Milosevic has complied with some 
aspects of the agreement, complaints of attacks by Serb police on 
some of the tens of thousands of refugees trying to return to their 
homes have continued. The rebel Kosovo Liberation Army also has launched 
attacks, mostly on police targets. Despite the sporadic incidents, 
international relief and observer officials in Kosovo say the overall 
situation has improved considerably in the past month. On Saturday, 
two blood-stained, bullet-riddled cars of the slain rebels sat on 
the roadside near Opterusha, 55 kilometers (35 miles) southwest of 
Pristina. Both cars appeared to have been shot at head-on. The Serb 
Media Center report said the rebels fired first on a police patrol, 
and a foreign observer team that came upon the incident by chance 
reported a similar account, a diplomatic source said Saturday. But 
Krasniqi disagreed. ``The police ambushed them as they drove down 
the road,'' he said. ``There's no chance they could have survived.'' 
Krasniqi said police beat him and other residents when they tried 
to return to their homes this week. His right eye was bruised. ``They 
beat me just because I'm Albanian,'' he said. ``Now, everyone is staying 
away.'' The Milosevic-Holbrooke agreement calls for setting up a 2,000 
strong verification mission of unarmed observers run by the Organization 
for Security and Cooperation in Europe. Until it begins operating, 
unlikely before next month, a previous observer mission started in 
July will continue to operate patrols throughout Kosovo. Richard Huckaby, 
the spokesman for the U.S. sector of the Kosovo Diplomatic Observer 
Mission, said an advance team for 74 more American observers was coming 
to Kosovo on Saturday. The new observers were contracted privately 
from DynCorp, a U.S. company of military specialists. The KDOM mission 
eventually will be absorbed into the larger OSCE mission. Also Saturday, 
KDOM chief Shaun Byrnes met with Adem Demaci, the political spokesman 
for the guerrilla KLA, at Demaci's headquarters in Pristina. No details 
of the meeting were immediately available. It was unclear if Saturday's 
meeting was connected to talks that U.S. envoy Christopher Hill held 
Friday with KLA figures in Dragobilje, a village 40 kilometers (25 
miles) southwest of Pristina. Hill is working on a political settlement 
for Kosovo that would restore the self-rule for the ethnic Albanian 
majority that Milosevic stripped in 1989. But most Albanians, especially 
the KLA, want full independence. Showing its dissatisfaction with 
the Kosovo peace process, the KLA said Friday it intends to establish 
its own civilian rule in territory it controls. Also Saturday, Kosovo 
Serbs protested against the possible political deal, saying it would 
result in Milosevic effectively handing Kosovo to the ethnic Albanians. 
A gathering of the Serbs in Pristina _ including Serb leaders, opposition 
politicians and Serbian Orthodox Church dignitaries _ said they opposed 
having Milosevic's regime sign any agreement on Kosovo on their behalf. 
In a unanimously adopted charter, the Pan-Serb Convention warned the 
international community of a likely ``massive exodus of Serbs'' if 
ethnic Albanians come to power in Kosovo. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>