<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981107.0506 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Two bullet-riddled cars in which five ethnic Albanian guerrillas died 
and Milazim Krasniqi's black eye showed the state of security Saturday 
in this shattered central Kosovo village. The guerrillas were ambushed 
Friday along the road by Serb police, who routinely patrol the village 
and beat anyone trying to move back, Krasniqi said. He repeated the 
assertion by ethnic Albanian refugees everywhere: until Serb police 
withdraw completely, ``there's no way I'm spending the night here.'' 
Violence in Kosovo is growing despite a de-facto peace treaty designed 
to end bloodshed in the turbulent Serbian province and set the stage 
for a political agreement between Serb authorities and the province's 
majority Albanians. Seven ethnic Albanians, all believed to be guerrilla 
fighters, have been killed since Thursday afternoon. The Serb Media 
Center, a mouthpiece for Serb officials, reported the deaths occurred 
in a series of attacks by guerrillas on police. No police were reported 
killed or injured. Foreign observers say attacks by both Serb forces 
and Albanian guerrillas have increased this week. Such violence violates 
the Oct. 12 agreement between Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic 
and U.S. envoy Richard Holbrooke, reached under the threat of NATO 
airstrikes on Yugoslav and Serb forces in Kosovo. While Milosevic 
has complied with some aspects of the agreement, complaints of attacks 
by Serb police on some of the tens of thousands of refugees trying 
to return to their homes have continued. The rebel Kosovo Liberation 
Army also has launched attacks, mostly on police targets. On Saturday, 
two blood-stained, bullet-riddled cars driven by the slain rebels 
sat on the roadside near Opterusha, 55 kilometers (35 miles) southwest 
of Pristina. Both cars appeared to have been shot at head-on. The 
Serb Media Center report said the rebels fired first on a police patrol, 
but Krasniqi disagreed. ``The police ambushed them as they drove down 
the road,'' he said. ``There's no chance they could have survived.'' 
Krasniqi said police beat him and other residents when they tried 
to return to their homes this week. His right eye was clearly bruised. 
``They beat me just because I'm Albanian,'' he said. ``Now, everyone 
is staying away.'' The Milosevic-Holbrooke agreement calls for setting 
up a 2,000 strong verification mission of unarmed observers run by 
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe. Until it 
begins operating, possibly by the end of the month, a previous observer 
mission started in July will continue to operate patrols throughout 
Kosovo. Richard Huckaby, the spokesman for the U.S. sector of the 
Kosovo Diplomatic Observer Mission, said an advance team for 74 more 
American observers was coming to Kosovo on Saturday. The new observers 
were contracted privately from DynCorp, a U.S. company of military 
specialists. The KDOM mission eventually will be absorbed into the 
larger OSCE mission. Also Saturday, KDOM chief Shaun Byrnes met with 
Adem Demaci, the political spokesman for the guerrilla KLA, at Demaci's 
headquarters in Pristina. No details of the meeting were immediately 
available. It was unclear if Saturday's meeting was connected to talks 
that U.S. envoy Christopher Hill held Friday with KLA figures in Dragobilje, 
a village 40 kilometers (25 miles) southwest of Pristina. Hill is 
working on a political settlement for Kosovo that would restore the 
self-rule for the ethnic Albanian majority that Milosevic stripped 
in 1989. But most Albanians, especially the KLA, want full independence. 
Showing its dissatisfaction with the Kosovo peace process, the KLA 
said Friday it intends to establish its own civilian rule in territory 
it controls. Also Saturday, Kosovo Serbs protested against the possible 
political deal, saying it would result in Milosevic effectively handing 
Kosovo to the ethnic Albanians. A gathering of the Serbs in Pristina 
_ including Serb leaders, opposition politicians and Serbian Orthodox 
Church dignitaries _ said they opposed having Milosevic's regime sign 
any agreement on Kosovo on their behalf. In a unanimously adopted 
charter, the Pan-Serb Convention warned the international community 
of a likely ``massive exodus of Serbs'' if ethnic Albanians come to 
power in Kosovo. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>