<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981107.1300.0201 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A spokeswoman for Gingrich says his decision to step down has brought 
him "Peaceful serenity." Alan Duke has a look back at the house speaker's 
political career. Newt Gingrich, a college history professor who stressed 
ethics and environmental issues, lost his first two races for Congress 
in 1974 and 1976. 1974 was probably the worst year since the depression 
to run as a Republican. When the incumbent democrat retired in 1978, 
he was finally elected to represent a mostly rural district in west 
Georgia. Gingrich first won national attention in 1984 when he got 
into a floor fight with democratic speaker tip O'Neil and won. It's 
the lowest thing that I've ever seen. In the 1980s, Gingrich began 
working toward his quest to become speaker of the house. He started 
by strengthening the conservative wing of his party, traveling the 
country to recruit candidates for Congress and to raise money for 
them. In 1989, Gingrich was elected house republican whip a campaign 
to unseat the democrat who succeeded O'Neil as speaker, Jim Wright. 
The issue was ethics, that Wright profited personally from books sold 
to political donors. When the ethics committee decided the charges 
were valid, Wright resigned. In 1994, Gingrich drew up a contract 
with America, a list of conservative causes for republican candidates 
to champion. It worked and his party seized control of both houses 
of Congress. Gingrich got credit for leading a republican revolution 
that ended 40 years of democratic domination on Capitol Hill. He was 
rewarded with a new job, speaker of the house. In his first 100 days, 
the house passed much of his agenda -- tax cuts, welfare reform and 
a balanced budget amendment. While not all of it became law, it put 
President Clinton and the democrats on the defensive. But in the fall 
of '95, when Congress and the White House could not agree on spending 
measures, Gingrich got most of the blame for a forced shutdown of 
the federal government. He also faced his own ethics problems, accused 
of using a tax-free education group as a fund-raising tool for his 
political action committee. After two years of denying the charge, 
Gingrich admitted in December of 1996 that he gave wrong information 
to the house ethics committee investigators. Now, following this week's 
surprising GOP losses at the polls, he can no longer stop the republican 
Turks he once helped get elected from taking away the reigns of leadership. 
Alan Duke, CNN. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>