<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981107.1300.1514 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Actors John Travolta and James Woods are working together to create 
a Credible on-screen conflict. Dennis Michael talked with them on 
the set of "the general's daughter." Well, we ain't seen the money 
yet, have we? How do we know he ain't one of them criminal investigations 
spooks? An illegal arms deal is going down in this scene from "the 
general's daughter." And working undercover, John Travolta is playing 
one of those criminal intelligence spooks he's talking about. They're 
the police in the army, and although they're not that high up in a 
Rank, they can actually arrest anybody, from a general to a sergeant 
-- anybody. They're undercover a lot. They don't have to wear uniforms, 
they don't necessarily have to have a Regulation haircut, so, it suits 
Travolta perfectly. He can be the outsider, but also play the game 
of being in the military when he wants to. John's character, particularly, 
just bends rules like crazy. Which is -- you know, those always makes 
good movies, those kinds of characters. On this particular day's shooting, 
Travolta is spending most of the day questioning a suspect, a military 
psychiatrist played by James woods. Well, now we both know we're both 
smart guys. Mm-hmm. Do you think I'm involved in this? One way or 
another, yes I do. The camera's on Travolta. Woods is there to provide 
his side of the dialogue. The reverse was true the day before. During 
a break in the shooting, the actors huddle. In a movie about conspiracies, 
the actors conspire, too. Mostly the huddle is about kind of observing 
each other and our choices in what we like, and advising each other. 
Because I think that what a lot of good actors do is they're open, 
they trust each other. So therefore if anyone has a good idea, they're 
up for it. You have to have tremendous cooperation. And the hardest 
thing to cooperate on is a scene of adversity. Because you have to 
maintain the reality of that adversity, but actually having an adversarial 
situation between the actors only, I think, sabotages the scene. The 
huddle time is important, because you're protecting each other and 
you're creating together two performances. You know, it's powerful 
then. So did you work together on a daily basis? Absolutely. And did 
you play together? Whenever we'd stop and talk, we'd actually -- it 
sounds boring, but we'd actually talk like actors. Like, "oh, if you 
do this, and I can do that. And there's that moment, don't forget 
that what you really thinking is this, but what you're saying is that." 
"Oh yeah, thanks for reminding me." It may look like conflict on the 
screen, but it's cooperation of the highest order. But did James wood's 
character actually kill the general's daughter? Well, you'll have 
to wait till next year to find that out. Dennis Michael, "CNN Entertainment 
News," Hollywood. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>