<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981107.1000.0054 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The republican party is looking for new leadership after Tuesday's 
elections reduced the GOP majority in the house. Newt Gingrich has 
announced he will not try for another term as house speaker, and some 
say he will resign his house seat as well. Bob Franken joins us live 
from Washington with an update on reaction to the turmoil. Bob, this 
has been quite a week for republicans? Yes, among those who are saying 
he's going to resign his seat is Newt gingrich who said as much last 
night in a phone call, conference call with various republicans. Gingrich, 
of course, has decided he will not renew his effort to be speaker 
of the house. He went on to say that that being the case, he really 
needed to leave congress if for among other reasons so he wouldn't 
overshadow his replacement. The democrats will not have Newt Gingrich 
to kick around anymore. He has decided after a week of a disappointing 
election result for the republicans and a week of getting harshly 
criticized in conferences with the republicans he came to the realization 
that he probably would not be able to in fact effect livively run 
his operation as speaker of the house. What has happened is all those 
people with ambition among the house republicans are converging on 
the various seats that are going to be available. Among those Steve 
Largent who announced yesterday he wants to run for the majority leader's 
post, number two spot. He said the time had come for Gingrich to leave. 
We owe as republicans Newt Gingrich a lot including my tenure here 
in washington, D.C. but it is time for new leadership. This is not 
a problem, this is not a crisis, this is an opportunity. So you're 
seeing a lot of new faces and fresh voices come to the scene. You 
talked about Jennifer Dunn, Jim Tal En, Rick Lazio, Chris Cox, this 
is an exciting time for the republican party. I'm very enthusiastic 
and very optimistic about where we're headed. Add to the names you 
just heard congressman Largent, other committeemen who say they are 
going to run. Livingston has already made his intentions official 
and ar sher is expected to follow shortly. Bob Franken, Capitol Hill. 
Any role for him in the republican party? Not if, he has told people 
he's going to resign. Everybody is saying at the moment there is a 
role. He has known to have had some presidential ambition SOS perhaps 
he's going to do something like, this is just speculation, some sort 
of lecture circuit or talk circuit as a way to keep his naming out 
there as he decides to make a run for the president. A way to make 
a lot of money, too. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>