<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981107.1830.0785 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The last time John Glenn came down from orbit, he splashed down in 
the atlantic. This time it was on land, in Florida -- a beautiful 
touchdown to match an all-but-flawless nine-day flight for the 77-year-old 
and his six fellow flyers, who are, by all accounts, tired but okay. 
NBC's Robert Hager from the Kennedy space center in Florida. bob? 
It was a picture-perfect end to a near perfect mission. But when the 
77-year-old John Glenn emerged, he he looked tired. Understandably 
stiff, after nine days in space. The medical exams are running long 
tonight and they put off a news conference until tomorrow morning. 
Here's how it went. As the shuttle slams into the atmosphere at 25 
times the speed of sound, and descends at a rate six times steeper 
than a commercial jet, an anxious nation watches, including people 
in new Concord, Ohio, the town where John glenn grew up, as commander 
Curt brown guides the shuttle to a flawless touchdown and rollout, 
in spite of concerns about light crosswinds. In spite of concerns 
that the drag parachute might deploy, accidentally. In new Concord 
and elsewhere -- applause. When John Glenn first went to space 36 
years ago, he had called back, "zero g and I feel fine." Today, five 
minutes after landing, he radioed this -- I want to reprise a statement 
I made a long, long time ago, except this time it's one G and I feel 
fine. "Discovery" and this crew took us around and around and that 
view is still tremendous. Our heartfelt thanks to and appreciation 
to the NASA team from top to bottom, bottom to top. Give each other 
a Pat on the back, you deserve it. But now, as the crowd waits for 
the astronauts to appear on the tarmac, what was expected to be 45 
minutes drags out. One hour -- two hours -- and then, they emerge. 
Commander brown first, then the pilot, Steve Lindsey. And now, John 
Glenn, grasping the handrails carefully, greeted with a hug. Then 
walking about, slowly, a bit stiff, a bit unsteady. Officials say 
they aren't surprised. After nine days in the weightlessness of space, 
astronauts often take several days, to get balance back. Bhe they 
leave the tarmac for more medical exams, family reunions and a Shower, 
that's the last we see of them until tomorrow morning. NASA had planned 
on reportedders meeting with the astronauts tonight, but the exams 
went for four hours. The doctor said a news conference would be an 
unnecessary strain so it will be tomorrow morning and John Glenn will 
be there. John? 
</TEXT>
</DOC>