<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981107.1830.0073 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. It hit like a bombshell the speaker of the house deciding 
to step aside and leave Congress. And tonight his decision has set 
off a scramble, a wide-open race within the republican party to pick 
a new leader, heal the damage and begin the 106th Congress with someone 
new holding the gavel. The former history professor from Georgia will 
make history by leaving washington, having realized he didn't have 
the votes to stay. Our coverage begins tonight with NBC's Joe Johns 
on Capitol Hill. Good evening, Brian. While the speaker ponders his 
future tonight, people here on Capitol Hill are lining up to try to 
get his job or to challenge other members of the republican leadership. 
In his first public statement since last night's stunning decision 
to give up his job after the weak republican showing in the elections, 
speaker Newt gingrich said he did it to head off damage to his party. 
I could hardly stand by and allow the party to cannibalize itself 
in that situation and I thought it best for all of us. Gingrich also 
explained the logic behind last day's proceed his decision to give 
up his seat approval thereof. In Congress, as well, despite the fact 
that he was just re-elected on tuesday. For me to stay in the house 
would make it impossible for a new leader to have a chance to grow, 
to learn and to do what they need to do. I think there comes a time 
when you've got to step out and let a new team take over. The scramble 
is on for places on that new leadership team. House appropriations 
committee chairman Bob Livingston has now emerged as the front-runner 
for speaker. Also declared as a candidate, congressman Chris Cox of 
California. The powerful chairman of the house ways and means committee 
decided not to run even though he thought he could win. I may be the 
right man for the job, but the job is not the right one for me. But 
scarcely 24 hours after the speaker Gingrich's announcement, shockwaves 
were still being felt. It did come as a surprise, although I think 
he did the right thing. Oklahoma congressman Steve Largent, who is 
seeking a Congressional leadership role for himself, says the speaker 
may have been persuaded to quit by his inner circle. I think that 
he had a number of people, including close friends who were saying 
for the good of the party for the good of our conference, it would 
be better for you to step aside. But a member of the speaker's inner 
circle reacted to the news with bitterness. I think some of the folks 
that Newt brought into the Congress and brought into the majority, 
many whom had known what it was like to be in the minority, really 
were acting like evil little gnomes poking around with their pitchforks 
saying, "do what I say or else." More political turmoil is likely 
as others consider throwing their hats in the ring. A lot of people 
have not been seen or heard from before and now are going to be taking 
center stage. Newt Gingrich has not set a date for his departure from 
Congress, but house republicans are expected to take a vote on a new 
speaker one week from wednesday. Joe Johns on the capitol. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>