<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981107.1830.1215 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
"In focus" this evening, helping those who want to be better parents 
but don't know how. It's a substitute for on-the-job training. NBC's 
Jim Avila on a program pioneered in Minnesota. Alex is here tonight. 
Alex is here tonight, yeah, alex. His mother, Angie, is happy that 
alex's father, Pete, is also there that night because it's a class 
in helping mothers and fathers become better parents. I enjoy coming 
to the classes as a family, and it's our time together. The ormsbys 
are attending an early childhood family education course in suburban 
Minneapolis. 24 years ago, Minnesota became the first state to have 
these classes. Now there are more than 283,000 children and parents 
taking part -- in all, 350 school districts and four native-American 
tribal schools throughout the state. Although Minnesota is the only 
state that offers the early childhood family education in every school 
district, there are now 12 other states that have some form of early 
childhood programs. We think in Minnesota that we should have parenting 
provided to any family that would like access to parent education 
and provide it for children from birth to five years of age. This 
is a class of 21 to 25-month-olds and the first one during which teachers 
try to separate the children from the parents so the fathers and mothers 
can go in the next room and talk about their mutual problems. Sometimes 
it doesn't work and one of the parents has to stay behind and comfort 
the child. Every other job that we have there would be training for 
and with parenting, you just kind of like go figure it out yourself. 
My wife and I enjoy listening to what other parents had to say. The 
same concerns that we have are the same concerns that they have, and 
it's refreshing. This is the third 14-week course that Larry and Patty 
wallmow have attended with their 24-month-old daughter Lauren. And 
it probably won't be their last, because they're expecting another 
child in a few months. Those parents who can afford it, pay up to 
$85 for the course. Those who can't, pay what they can afford. The 
state pays the rest. We've learned a lot of things and answered a 
lot of questions. I guess I was a little bit cocky, so I know how 
to be a parent. You know, I can do this stuff. Then I started getting 
into some of these problems. During the day, there are classes for 
parents and children up to 20-months-old. The classes for these toddlers 
are now thought to be especially important because of recent research 
showing that much of a child's brain development occurs in the first 
three years of life. Jack is a little bit younger than some of the 
other kids in the class. And so I see what it's going to be like in 
three months down the road. To help parents around the country, the 
national parent information network last month had 270,000 hits on 
its web site. Why is it so popular? Parents are on the move quite 
a bit, so they're not easily in contact with relatives or grandparents. 
Or it might be that you have two sets of grandparents for these children, 
and they might disagree with the advice they give you. Sociologists 
say that especially in this fast-paced world where many parents are 
working in addition to being parents, they need all the help they 
can get. Jim Avila, NBC news, Chicago. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>