<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981107.0111 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Helen Cluett remembers the indignities. In 1955, when she tried to 
register as a Republican after moving to Florida from New York, a 
courthouse clerk told her flat out, ``There's no such thing as a Republican.'' 
``She was so Southern she didn't know,'' said Ms. Cluett, an auction 
house representative in Palm Beach. ``The state was less than 10 percent 
Republican when I registered. For years I couldn't vote for governor 
because no Republican ran. We've come a long, long way, and I can't 
believe it's in my lifetime.'' If longtime Florida Republicans walk 
around giddy these days, it can be traced to a few words uttered by 
former President George Bush in a Miami hotel ballroom Tuesday night: 
``May I introduce to you the next governor of Florida, Jeb Bush!'' 
To the former president, Jeb Bush's victory meant having two sons 
in charge of two of the nation's most populous states, Texas and Florida. 
And to Florida Republicans, it meant that their state became the first 
in the South since Reconstruction to have both a Republican governor 
and a Republican majority in the Legislature, a dominance that gives 
the party a formidable power base for the next presidential election 
and the redrawing of legislative district lines after the 2000 census. 
The victory comes when Republicans like Jeb Bush and his brother, 
Texas Gov. George W. Bush, are redefining what voters can expect of 
a Republican administration. Jeb Bush epitomized an ideological flux, 
toning down the hard-edge conservatism that characterized his unsuccessful 
run for the governorship in 1994 to become an advocate of compassion 
and inclusion in 1998. In doing so, he raised the hopes not only of 
Republican constituencies that expect him to be friendly to business 
and hostile to taxes, but also of liberal Democrats and minority groups 
who expect him to improve public schools, open up economic opportunity 
and listen to them. ``I don't expect Jeb Bush not to be a politician, 
but I'm convinced that Jeb Bush will not sacrifice service to be politically 
expedient,'' said T. Willard Fair, president of the Urban League of 
Greater Miami and a partner with Bush in the founding in 1996 of a 
charter school in Miami's inner city that has raised student test 
scores. ``I don't think he'll make decisions that would impact adversely 
on a group of people.'' At his first news conference as governor-elect 
last week, Bush, a 45-year-old real estate businessman, was specific 
on what Floridians could expect from him. ``I think crime will drop,'' 
he said. ``I believe that they'll have an assurance that their taxes 
won't go up. They will see a new system of educating our kids, where 
they're going to see better results, where more children aren't going 
to be left behind, where reading scores will go up, particularly in 
the primary grade levels.'' And Bush also set a tone of diversity. 
He announced that the top members of his transition team would be 
a black man, a Hispanic man and a white woman, and said Republican 
rule ``does not mean that we don't need to create consensus and build 
some common ground.'' The middle-of-the road approach echoes that 
of other successful candidates for governor and underscores that voters 
reward those catching on to the country's centrist leanings. In Florida, 
Democrats say they do not expect a dramatic tilt to the right, mostly 
because the conservative Democrats who dominated Florida politics 
in the past often voted with moderate Republicans. That is not to 
say that the changing of the guard in Tallahassee will not be noticed. 
Bills passed by the Republican-led Legislature that were vetoed by 
Gov. Lawton Chiles, a Democrat who is retiring, but that Bush would 
be expected to sign include one that would require parental notification 
of a minor's plans for abortion, tort reform that would make it tougher 
for consumers to sue businesses and a tax rebate for property owners. 
John Thrasher, a Republican who will be speaker in the Florida House 
of Representatives, said Republican legislators were looking forward 
to ``a governor we can work with.'' But many others expect a friend 
in the governor's mansion as well. By broadening his base, Bush will 
likely face intense cross-pressures, especially from Republican fiscal 
and social conservatives who do not always agree. Surveys of voters 
leaving polling places Tuesday showed that Bush won by getting slightly 
more support from a cross-section of voters than he did when he lost 
to Chiles, with not one demographic group handing him the election. 
A poll by The Associated Press and a consortium of news media organizations 
found that Bush, who won by 55 percent to 45 percent over his Democratic 
opponent, Lt. Gov. Kenneth MacKay, gained votes this time from women, 
older Floridians and blacks. Bush also remained strong with Hispanic 
voters _ about 60 percent voted for him. But he did not transform 
himself enough to trouble earlier supporters. Bush, for example, has 
continued to hold conservative views on abortion and school prayer. 
``I haven't seen any significant changes,'' said John Dowless, executive 
director of the Christian Coalition of Florida. ``There's more moderation 
but there's no abandonment of principle.'' Democrats like state Rep. 
Addie Greene of West Palm Beach, who campaigned for Bush's opponent, 
said she expected Bush to work hard to fulfill election promises so 
that he could win a second term. But she remained skeptical of his 
sincerity, noting that among competing constituencies he must also 
pay back the special interests that helped finance his campaign. ``This 
is going to be very good to watch,'' Ms. Greene said. ``We're going 
to sit back and see how many lies he told.'' Democrats also need to 
regroup, some political analysts say, and build strength to keep Florida 
a competitive two-party state. All is not lost, they say, because 
of the tendency of Florida voters to cross party lines. In typical 
fashion, on Tuesday they also re-elected Sen. Bob Graham, a Democrat, 
and kept the state cabinet split with three Democrats _ the state 
attorney general and the commissioners of insurance and agriculture. 
Amadeo Trinchitella, 80, the president of the Democratic Club at the 
Century Village retirement community in Deerfield Beach whose 15,000 
residents voted overwhelmingly Democrat, was philosophical about the 
Republican takeover. ``I'm not afraid, I'm not concerned,'' he said. 
``The pendulum swings and things change. If they don't do the right 
thing there'll be a changeover. The Democratic Party will grow again. 
We're not going to go away.'' But Florida Republicans, who achieved 
their majority in the state Legislature in 1996 and have steadily 
gained on Democrats in registered voters over the last two decades 
but still lag in total registration, 40 percent to 45 percent, say 
nothing will stop them now. ``I'm confident that with the leadership 
of Jeb Bush, his fiscal conservative views with a compassionate touch, 
you're going to see a continued move to more equality between the 
two parties,'' said Ed Pozzuoli, a Fort Lauderdale lawyer who heads 
the Republican Party in Broward County, a Democratic stronghold. In 
Palm Beach, Ms. Cluett, a relentless worker for Republican candidates, 
also harbors big hopes. ``I hope and pray that's the best thing that 
ever happens in Florida,'' she said of the Republican rule that will 
start on Jan. 5. ``This is special. This is my swan song. I'm going 
to relax after this.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>