<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981107.0053 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When California voters approved a measure last week giving Indian 
tribes broad permission to run casinos unhampered by state control, 
it was a big loss for the Coalition for Unregulated Gambling, one 
of the measure's fiercest opponents. It's not that the coalition disapproves 
of gambling; in fact, it was financed largely by gambling companies 
based in that granddaddy of gambling states, Nevada. Why did Nevada's 
gambling bigwigs, many of whom have pushed aggressively for the acceptance 
of gambling in other parts of the country, work so hard to keep California 
from joining the club? Raw fear. More than a third of Nevada's casino 
patrons come from California, and many of them will stay closer to 
home if Native Americans offer a more enticing menu of table games 
and slot machines, which the ballot measure permits. You don't need 
to be a bookie to know how bad that would be for business in Las Vegas. 
California's tribes could end up with legal casinos with about 20,000 
gaming devices, about 5 times the number at Foxwoods, the Indian casino 
in Connecticut, according to William Eadington, an economist at the 
University of Nevada at Reno. Foxwoods is the biggest gambling joint 
in the Western Hemisphere. Legislators in California may now feel 
compelled to legalize or expand gambling at card clubs, race tracks, 
bars and taverns, and other recreation centers. ``All of this would 
indeed be bad news for Las Vegas,'' he said. Nevadans also know that 
wagering is now a national industry and that the explosive growth 
of the business has made it available everywhere _ on street corners, 
on the Internet, and all along the Mississippi River. By the year 
2000, 90 percent of Americans will live within 200 miles of a legal 
casino, the Las Vegas Convention and Visitors Authority noted in a 
recent report that pointed out challenges facing a town that is still 
regarded as the mecca of American gambling. Only a generation ago 
gamblers had few choices but Las Vegas. But all gambling moguls, not 
just those based in Las Vegas, are looking over their shoulders. Gambling's 
ubiquity is forcing the industry's impresarios to fret about the best 
ways to drum up new business. ``Americans have all the gambling they 
want,'' said Eugene Christiansen, a gambling analyst with Christiansen/Cummings 
Associates in New York. ``The driver of growth over the past three 
decades _ the satiation of unsatiated demand _ is no longer there.'' 
While Steve Wynn's new $1.9 billion Las Vegas casino, the Bellagio, 
aims to attract new gamblers with luxurious rooms, posh shops and 
a collection of Picassos and Matisses, analysts expect most gambling 
concerns to focus on something more basic to stir up new business: 
gamblers' thirst for action and the fast-paced, mindless devices like 
slot machines and video lottery games that quench that thirst most 
effectively. Even if its growth slows, gambling is still a colossal 
business. Americans bet $638.6 billion legally in 1997 and lost about 
$51 billion of that amount _ more than the loot pulled in by the recording, 
movie and theme park businesses combined. Those losing bets were also 
up 70 percent from the $30 billion gamblers forked over in 1992, according 
to International Gaming &AMP; Wagering Business, a trade publication. 
But that money is being lost in a lot more places now. In 1989, nearly 
all casino gambling took place in Atlantic City, N.J., and Las Vegas; 
now it's just over half. Riverboat gambling is now far bigger than 
the action in Atlantic City. And the boats are no longer confined 
to rivers. Last week, voters in Missouri approved a measure legalizing 
slot machines in casinos floating in artificial basins. So most gambling 
concerns are now focused on a core mission: pushing games that appeal 
to gamblers' need for speed. Speed sells. Speed hooks gamblers. Slot 
machines have long since replaced the plodding table games of craps 
and roulette as the mainstays of the casino business. Anyone walking 
into a casino a few decades ago, when the Rat Pack was in full swing 
in Las Vegas, would have encountered a room full of table games like 
blackjack and craps with slot machines relegated to the periphery 
where the little old ladies played. Today, slot machines dominate 
the floors of every casino and the allegiance of most gamblers _ especially 
retirees parked in front of the slots at their local gambling den. 
Slot machines are fast and simple; crap games are not. So slots and 
other electronic gambling devices accounted for about 70 percent of 
the money that gamblers lost in casinos last year. Many state lotteries, 
the recent Powerball mania notwithstanding, are encountering gamblers 
who are increasingly blase about huge jackpots. The lottery industry 
calls it ``jackpot fatigue,'' and many lotteries are relying on the 
speed of instant-ticket games to snag more gamblers. If piles of money 
aren't enough to get gamblers' attention, the adrenaline blast from 
a quick gambling hit usually will do the trick. The New York lottery, 
the largest state lottery in the nation, now gets more money from 
instant games than it does from its better known Lotto games that 
offer big jackpots and snare the lion's share of media coverage. And 
online lottery games like New York's Quick Draw game _ labeled ``video 
crack'' by its critics _ let gamblers play a new game every few minutes. 
Video lottery terminals, though legal in only five states, generated 
a quarter of all lottery sales nationwide last year. ``There is no 
question that when you make these machines available, people use them,'' 
said Christiansen, the gambling analyst. ``The other side of this 
is that with increased gambling you create social friction like compulsive 
gambling. It's a legitimate policy concern.'' The stakes in all of 
this are high, because compulsive gambling is still a fuzzy issue 
and is one of the key concerns of the National Gambling Impact Study 
Commission, which is currently examining the industry. It is expected 
to report its findings next year. When criticized, the gambling industry 
rightly points out that most gamblers wager within their budgets and 
just do it for fun. Still, a significant number of gamblers _ about 
20 percent in most markets _ lose the lion's share of the money, about 
80 percent, according to casino executives. And within this core group, 
a sizeable though unquantifiable chunk are compulsive or problem gamblers. 
Conventional wisdom has it that about 5 percent of the adult population, 
or some 10 million people, are compulsive gamblers. That is, they 
are hooked on gambling like others are hooked on nicotine, heroin 
or alcohol. But terms like compulsive and problem gambling are notoriously 
fuzzy, given that they are used to describe a wide variety of behaviors 
that do not fit easy definitions. Last year, the Harvard Medical School 
published a study indicating that about 1 percent of the adult population 
and 6 percent of youths are what could be described as active compulsive 
gamblers. The same study found that about 3 percent of adults and 
15 percent of youths are what could be described as problem gamblers, 
those who regularly wage beyond their means but are not addicted. 
The same study also found that gambling disorders in the United States 
have been increasing over the last two decades. Needless to say, the 
growth in gambling problems coincides with the expansion of the gambling 
industry, and with faster games. It is the faster, repetitive games 
that tend to be the most addictive. Still, attempts to put the brakes 
on gambling have little success. New York state Sen. Frank Padavan, 
R-Queens, sponsored legislation earlier this year to limit gambling, 
but it failed. ``Compulsive gambling disorders,'' he said, ``may be 
for Generation X what cocaine and crack were for their parents' generation.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>