<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981107.0135 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
She cuts such an elegant figure in her second-skin jodphurs and knee-high 
riding boots, a bejeweled dragonfly clip adding a whimsical teen-age 
touch to her blond hair, that it's hard to imagine she suffers, along 
with 1.4 million other Americans, from an incurable disease that kills 
many thousands of them every year. Sometimes, especially when she 
has jumped a clean round of the sort that helped her fulfill a dream 
and qualify for the prestigious Maclay Championships Sunday at the 
National Horse Show, even Kathie Ruffatto forgets she's sick. But 
when it comes time to plunge a syringe filled with Methotrexate, a 
chemotherapeutic agent used by oncologists for cancer treatment, into 
her thigh each week, Ruffatto gets a jolt of reality. There are too 
many mornings when the 100-pound Ruffatto, bedeviled at 17 by a case 
of systemic lupus so severe that it used to make her faint dead away 
in midleap during horse show competitions, is simply too exhausted 
to drag herself out of bed. Her joints get sore and swollen; her fatigue 
rules out attending high school (she has been home-schooled since 
her sophomore year and hopes to start college in January), much less 
any possibility of piloting a spirited, half-ton show horse. Lupus 
causes the body's immune system to attack its own cells and tissues. 
Despite a daunting drug regimen that includes a hefty dosage of Prednisone, 
which mitigates the inflammation in her joints but builds perilously 
brittle bones, and Fluorinef, which regulates her electrolytes and 
appears to have halted her fainting spells, there are times when Ruffatto 
feels ``like a robot'' _ the way she felt before her illness was finally 
diagnosed three years ago. ``When I see videos of myself falling off 
my horse during competition, it just looked like a dead body falling 
to the ground,'' said Ruffatto, whose symptoms flared when she was 
10. Miraculously, she never hurt herself in any of her tumbles. Stubbornly, 
whenever her baffled parents begged her to stay off her horse _ they 
were advised by pediatricians that parental pressure and stage fright 
were causing her spills _ she denied she felt sick. Now that she knows 
for sure she is sick, and may have to cope with the disease forever, 
Ruffatto's stubbornness has become a virtue. It's her refusal to give 
up her horses and bow to her disease that enabled her to ride in Madison 
Square Garden in the same ring as the world and Olympic champions 
of a sport that is, she said, ``who I am.'' Her parents, Michael and 
Joan, and her physician, Dr. Terri Finkel of the National Jewish Medical 
and Research Center in Denver, and her riding coach, Wilson Dennehy, 
whose daughter, Liza, also has lupus but continues to show horses, 
have all agreed that it's the riding that inspires Ruffatto to get 
out of bed each day. ``There's no doubt that the fact she gets up 
on these horses and competes is more dangerous than if she didn't, 
but I wouldn't let her ride if I thought it was life-threatening,'' 
said Finkel, who specializes in pediatric rheumatology and, during 
Ruffatto's complicated diagnosis, at one point feared her patient 
was suffering from lymphomic cancer at 14. ``It's true that she might 
be on a slightly lower dosage of medication if she wasn't competing, 
but I think it's riding that keeps her going,'' Finkel said. ``Kathie 
is very unusual in that she has this intense drive to live a normal 
life. Unfortunately, that's not true of most kids who are dealing 
with a disease like this. Many of them end up with chronic illness 
syndrome, just kind of withdraw.'' The Maclay is the ultimate test 
for the 72 junior riders judged the best in North America after strenuous 
regional preliminaries. After flying from Denver to New York on Tuesday 
to rest up and practice, all Ruffatto could do was hope that Sunday 
morning, the most important of her life, would be one of her good 
mornings. Though she was excited about seeing ``The Lion King'' on 
Wednesday night, her parents went off to the theater by themselves; 
she was too tired to leave the hotel. And because her own horse, given 
the Lion King-inspired name Haukana Matata (No Worries), was deemed 
too green to handle the claustrophobia of the Garden, she left him 
at home in Denver and leased a junior circuit veteran, Picasso, for 
this competition. ``I felt bad because my horse is the one I qualified 
on,'' said Ruffatto, ``but I also wanted to be safe and not have to 
worry about either of us getting hurt. Ever since I started showing, 
I dreamed of riding in the Maclay, but in truth I never thought I'd 
be able to. ``It's kind of an escape route for me when I'm riding, 
because when I'm on a horse, I feel like I'm the same as everyone 
else, sort of, even though I can't do all the things everyone else 
does,'' said Ruffatto, whose short supply of stamina prohibits her 
from doing the grooming and warm-up schooling that is second nature 
to most juniors at her level. ``At first it was hard for me to tell 
people I had lupus; it was hard for me to accept it, too. But now 
I just want to show other kids that even if they're sick, they can 
still follow their dreams. That's why I'm here.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>