<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981107.0203 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
On a day when Skip Away ran out of the money and lost his chance to 
become the world's richest race horse, Awesome Again won the world's 
richest race Saturday when he rushed through the pack near the finish 
line to take the $5.2 million Breeders' Cup Classic by three-quarters 
of a length over Silver Charm. Awesome Again not only won the laurels 
and the loot but also won his sixth consecutive race. Still, he needed 
a furious dash through the homestretch to knife his way through the 
10-horse field and hit the finish line in front. And in doing so he 
redeemed his trainer, Patrick Byrne, who dominated last year's Breeders' 
Cup with two juvenile winners, and gave Pat Day his biggest ride of 
the day. Skip Away, who presumably will retire with career earnings 
of $9.6 million, $400,000 short of Cigar's record total, stalked the 
leaders through most of the mile and a quarter. But he could not keep 
up, and he faded to sixth place just when he might have scored his 
greatest triumph. Swain, the 6-year-old Irish horse, finished third 
as the deepest field in recent racing memory provided an exciting 
conclusion to a day of championship performances. It was a classic 
finish: Silver Charm by a neck over Swain, who held third by a nose 
over Victory Gallop. The Classic was the main event of a festive, 
sunny and chilly afternoon filled with tight finishes and memorable 
moments, and it was run before a record Breeders' Cup crowd of 80,452 
at Churchill Downs. It was a day that featured the dramatic return 
of Da Hoss after a two-year absence from racing forced by a series 
of injuries, and the 6-year-old horse repeated his success of two 
years ago: He won the Breeders' Cup Mile as he did in 1986. And it 
was a day that saw the trainer Bob Baffert saddle horses who ran first 
and second in the Juvenile Fillies while D. Wayne Lukas got shut out 
with five horses in the Juvenile, and the strong European contingent 
shut out with 16 horses. The day got off to a rousing start when Answer 
Lively won the $1 million Juvenile by a head over the 76-1 long shot 
Aly's Alley, and cast a lengthening shadow toward next year's Kentucky 
Derby. He won it under a skillful ride by Jerry Bailey, who was riding 
the colt for the first time but was riding a Breeders' Cup winner 
for the seventh time. In other races, Silverbulletday won the Juvenile 
Fillies with Excellent Meeting finishing second and Three Ring finishing 
third; Reraise won the Sprint, with Grand Slam finishing second and 
Kona Gold taking third, and Da Hoss won the Mile, with Hawksley Hill 
second and Labeeb third. The program may not have included a race 
with the traditions and history of the 124-year-old Kentucky Derby, 
and the crowd was only half the size of the multitudes that flock 
to Churchill Downs in May for the Derby. But the Breeders' Cup featured 
85 of the finest horses from three continents, and the Juvenile kicked 
off a day of unquestioned riches but unknown fates. The unknown fate 
involved the winning colt and his chances of going on to stardom next 
year at 3. Since the Breeders' Cup was established 15 years ago, no 
colt who won the Juvenile returned the next year to win the Kentucky 
Derby. In fact, no colt has won the 2-year-old championship and come 
back to win the Derby since Spectacular Bid in 1979. Answer Lively, 
a son of Lively One, is owned by John Franks, an oil man from Louisiana, 
and he was not exactly a secret with the bettors. He had won three 
of his six starts before he went to the post as the favorite, and 
he responded with a well-rated effort under Bailey's guidance that 
not only won but also outran the small herd of five colts entered 
by D. Wayne Lukas. At the finish, he had a head on the long shot Aly's 
Alley, who was closing fast, and Aly's Alley had three-quarters of 
a length on Cat Thief, the only Lukas entry to run in the money. Franks 
was asked if he was happy that he hadn't changed his mind about selling 
Answer Lively to any of the many people offering substantial money 
for the horse, and he replied dryly: ``I didn't change my mind, they 
did.'' Lukas was asked how he felt being shut out, and he replied: 
``I was hoping to get a better finish. But the race set up for a closer 
to win. The horses there at the end were the ones that figured to 
be there, including Aly's Alley. He's run well all year.'' Answer 
Lively won two races in Louisiana this fall before running second 
to Cat Thief in the Breeder's Futurity at nearby Keeneland just three 
weeks ago. And he ran a strategic race Saturday, stalking the lead 
before making his move in the homestretch. And he had enough gas left 
to hold off the late rush by Aly's Alley. ``The whole trick was to 
see how he would rate behind horses, and he did that real nice'' Bailey 
said. ``Near the finish, I knew somebody was coming up on the inside, 
but I also felt the inside wasn't the best place to run. That's why 
I chose an outside lane for the finish, and my colt responded beautifully.'' 
Edgar Prado, the jockey on Aly's Alley, held up his fingers about 
three inches apart and said: ``I got beat this far. I tell you, we 
were in front two jumps after the wire.'' Along the way, Answer Lively 
outran and even buried some highly regarded 2-year-old colts. Yes 
It's True, the leader of the Lukas band, held the lead for three-quarters 
of a mile but gave way and finished 11th in a field of 13. Scotty 
Schulhofer's Lemon Drop Kid, second in the Champagne Stakes at Belmont 
Park last month, moved up gradually from eighth place but could not 
pass the four top finishers. The Groom Is Red, owned by Boston Celtics 
coach Rick Pitino and trained by Nick Zito, got pinched coming out 
of the gate and ran last almost to the homestretch, rallied but finished 
sixth. The other Lukas horses finished eighth, ninth and 13th. Two 
colts acted up and one was even scratched at the gate as the suspense 
built. Prime Directive balked and flailed when entering the gate, 
prompting Jorge Chavez to dismount and leading the trackside veterinarian 
to scratch the horse. Then Red Sea, a star in Britain, broke through 
the gate, prompting Kent Desormeaux to jump off. They got back in 
the gate and ran the race, but finished 12th. Answer Lively ran the 
mile and a sixteenth on a fast track in 1:44, paid $7.40 for a $2 
bet to win and went home with $520,000 and hopes of beating the curse 
of the Juvenile winners. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>