<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981107.0114 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With Republicans in fratricidal disarray, the White House is preparing 
a new winter policy offensive and approaching the impeachment inquiry 
with new confidence that President Clinton can emerge with little 
or no further damage. White House officials insisted that last week's 
election results and the departure of the president's chief Republican 
foil, House Speaker Newt Gingrich, will have no bearing on the president's 
handling of the impeachment threat in the next few weeks. These officials 
denied widespread speculation that Clinton would now feel emboldened 
to aggressively contest the Judiciary Committee's impeachment inquiry 
or the Paula Jones sexual misconduct suit. There is no chest-thumping 
or drum-beating going on in the White House, these aides said, even 
behind the bulletproof glass of the residential quarters. But there 
was no mistaking the sense of relief and elation at the White House 
and among congressional Democrats. One aide repeated the joke making 
the rounds of senior White House staff: ``The Monica strategy worked.'' 
But others warned that instability in the Republican leadership could 
pose new dangers. ``Their disarray makes that more difficult,'' said 
the White House official involved in handling impeachment matters. 
``Dangerous things happen in a disorderly situation. We're trying 
to get a little sense of how things are playing out on the other side, 
and we're not sure who's calling the shots now.'' As the danger of 
impeachment receded, the president began planning a series of policy 
initiatives for the coming months to respond to the public will expressed 
in Tuesday's voting. Clinton said last week that the midterm election 
results were an ``ear-splitting'' public endorsement of his policies 
on education, health care and Social Security, and vowed to pursue 
them with new aggressiveness. One thing at least has changed since 
Tuesday's balloting. Presidential advisers and Capitol Hill Democrats 
now speak openly of the possibility the Judiciary Committee will find 
no grounds for impeachment. And while aides quietly let it be known 
as recently as a month ago that the president might be willing to 
accept congressional censure or some other form of lesser punishment 
as an alternative to impeachment, there is now growing confidence 
at the White House that Congress may take no action at all. However, 
a senior Democratic aide on Capitol Hill, who would not allow his 
name to be used, said Clinton probably cannot escape the Lewinsky 
matter untouched. ``The sense up here is still that the exit will 
require some form of punishment, whether it's censure or whatever,'' 
the official said. White House aides involved in handling impeachment 
matters said they were particularly heartened by the decision by Rep. 
Henry Hyde, chairman of the Judiciary Committee, to call Independent 
Counsel Kenneth Starr as the panel's only witness. Instead of hearing 
weeks of repetitive testimony, the committee appears to be limiting 
its inquiry to areas Starr has investigated. ``Starr's not going to 
tell them anything we don't already know,'' said one senior White 
House official. ``It's going to be tough for them to vote articles 
of impeachment based only on Ken Starr as a witness.'' Instead of 
reassessing their scandal strategy, Democrats are gleefully watching 
the Republicans as they shoot their wounded and quarrel over the defeat. 
``Who cares about impeachment?'' one happy congressional Democratic 
aide said at the end of the week. ``We've got a war going on in the 
Republican Party.'' One presidential adviser said the White House 
impeachment strategy cannot be done in a vacuum, but only in response 
to actions from Capitol Hill. The Judiciary Committee on Thursday 
sent the White House a list of 81 questions arising from Starr's investigation 
of the Monica Lewinsky matter. White House lawyers said they planned 
to respond to the committee in a ``timely'' manner and would not try 
to drag out the proceedings. But a broader reaction to the inquiry 
will await the Republicans' next move, aides said. As the Republican 
drama plays out on Capitol Hill, the president intends to hew to the 
agenda he outlined last January in his State of the Union address 
and which Democrats used to their advantage in the fall campaign. 
In two post-election public appearances, Clinton stressed revisions 
to the Social Security system and support for a health care bill of 
rights as the top priorities of the new year. Aides are now putting 
flesh on this skeletal agenda for presentation in the budget submission 
to Congress early next year and in the State of the Union speech in 
January. ``The lawyers will continue to handle impeachment stuff and 
the president will continue to be president,'' said Douglas Sosnik, 
a senior presidential adviser. ``Despite the fact that no one inside 
the Beltway was paying attention all year, we have been working on 
his agenda to improve education, preserve Social Security, pass a 
health care bill and maintain the strength of the economy. Tuesday's 
balloting reaffirmed that the people were listening, and that is certainly 
satisfying for the people here.'' Clinton has been blessed, once again, 
by divided and inept opponents and by a tolerant, even indulgent, 
electorate. He has an opportunity now to seize the high ground of 
policy and dictate the terms of debate in Washington for the next 
several months. The president has a chance to command center stage 
against a Republican party with no clear voice or coherent policy. 
The White House enters the last two years of Clinton's term with a 
new group of senior officials in place, under the leadership of John 
D. Podesta, the new chief of staff. Many of the team members, including 
Sosnik; Paul Begala, a former campaign consultant; Craig Smith, the 
political director, and Steve Ricchetti, the deputy chief of staff, 
have years of experience dealing with Clinton's propensity for self-inflicted 
wounds. Despite the heady optimism brought by the Republican chaos 
and the dimming danger of impeachment, White House officials are chary 
of proclaiming another Clinton comeback. ``There's still time to mess 
up,'' one senior Clinton adviser said of the president's remaining 
time in office. ``No lead is safe with us.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>