<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981107.0181 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After more than 30 years of grinding depression, failed attempts at 
urban renewal and dashed hopes for a casino, Bridgeport is now reclaiming 
its decaying waterfront in an effort to stimulate its economy. It 
is replacing deteriorated industrial buildings and substandard housing 
with Harbour Place, a $1-billion, 3-million-square-foot commercial 
and retail project designed to attract tourists and generate economic 
activity in the surrounding area. Capitalizing on the public's affinity 
for the sea and maritime environments, as demonstrated in the success 
of waterfront developments in Portland, Maine, Portsmouth, N.H., Boston 
and Baltimore _ as well as Norwalk _ the city began acquiring 38 properties 
for the first 30-acre phase of the project last June. Demolition of 
existing buildings and relocation of residential and commercial owners 
and tenants is expected to be completed in December. Completion of 
the entire project could take 10 years. The site is a 52-acre peninsula 
bounded by Interstate 95, the Pequonnock River, Yellow Mill Pond and 
Bridgeport Harbor. It is just across the Stratford Avenue bridge from 
downtown. ``This will be a huge boon for the city,'' said Joseph P. 
Ganim, Bridgeport's mayor since 1991. The first phase of Harbour Place 
will be a 1.3 million square foot retail mall with restaurants, a 
20-screen movie theater and a large-screen IMAX theater. Construction 
is expected to begin in about 18 months and an opening is planned 
for the fall of 2002. The rest of the site would include an Early 
American ``village'' with restaurants, shops, a fishing pier, a waterside 
esplanade, a 400-room hotel and conference center next to a 250-hotel, 
a maritime museum and amphitheater, a fitness and wellness center 
and a 6,500-space parking garage. Amenities envisioned at the shoreline 
or in the water include a marina, a ocean liner converted to a hotel, 
restaurant and nightclub, cruise ships, water taxis, a high-speed 
passenger ferry service to Manhattan and La Guardia airport and, possibly, 
two office buildings with parking for an additional 3,000 cars and 
a helicopter pad. The plans, submitted by the Conroy Development Co. 
of Greenwich, won the city's approval over two other short-list competitors 
``because of its scope and magnitude,'' said Ganim. ``We brought together 
a variety of destination uses that would make Bridgeport a point of 
first interest along the coast from Boston to Washington,'' said Alexius 
C. Conroy, founder and president of the 13-year-old company. The rival 
companies on the short list were Hines Interests Limited Partnership 
of Stamford and Bridgeport Maritime Partners, a joint venture of Collins 
Enterprises of Greenwich and Dames, Moore &AMP; Brookhill, a Manhattan 
developer. Partial financing for Harbour Place will come from a $448 
million package approved this year by the state legislature for projects 
in Hartford, New Haven and Bridgeport. Bridgeport will get $130 million 
of that package, plus a state grant of $20 million. ``We wanted to 
start some entrepreneurship which would uplift depressed areas in 
cities that are trying to turn themselves around,'' said state Sen. 
Alvin Penn, a Bridgeport Democrat who is chairman of the bonding committee. 
Michael Freimuth, director of Bridgeport's Planning and Economic Development 
office, said the city would also issue $50 million in general obligation 
bonds. As the project moves forward property taxes of an estimated 
$10 million to $15 million a year will be committed to paying off 
the bonds. Marginal properties on the site now ``bring in less than 
$1 million a year,'' said Freimuth. The remaining $700 million is 
to be raised privately by the Conroy organization and its partner, 
Lend Lease of Atlanta, an international real estate and money-managing 
firm with a regional office in Manhattan. At present, said Gamin, 
``the work is moving along at an appropriate pace.'' And indeed, the 
few remaining stumbling blocks seem surmountable. Eight appeals from 
landowners dissatisfied with the city's terms of property acquisition 
by eminent domain cannot by law halt the taking of property. One lawsuit, 
filed last July by the century-old Pequonnock Yacht Club to gain a 
stay on a city order to move, is ``in negotiation on a number of alternate 
sites,'' said Russell Liskov, assistant city attorney. Securing an 
ocean liner will depend in part on the viability of dredging the harbor 
to accommodate such a vessel. Still open is the question of how many 
ferry services the state can support. A new task force on high-speed 
ferries is studying the matter. Three ferry services are currently 
operating, one from Bridgeport to Port Jefferson, on Long Island, 
another from New London to Orient Point, N.Y., and a summer service 
from Haddam to Greenport and Sag Harbor, N.Y. But interest is high 
in Stamford, Norwalk and New London in running passenger ferries to 
Manhattan and the New York airports and to Glen Cove, N.Y., and possibly 
other points on Long Island. And Captain's Cove, a 19-year-old marina, 
entertainment and shopping complex west of Harbour Place, has been 
developing plans for a service with Seaconn, a ferry company in New 
Haven. Captain's Cove could lose business to Harbour Place, but Kaye 
Williams, founder and owner of the popular 15-acre maritime complex, 
doesn't think so. ``We're more of a no-nonsense, boat-building, free-and-easy 
people place,'' he said. Two of its main attractions are a reproduction 
of the 18th century British frigate H.M.S. Rose and the Lightship 
Nantucket, both open for tours. On an infinitely grander scale, Harbour 
Place is also ``heavily involved in nautical and historical theming,'' 
said J. Thomas Porter, senior principal at the architectural firm 
of Thompson, Ventulett, Stainback &AMP; Associates of Atlanta, designers 
of the project. ``We are planning a large signature lighthouse on 
the point _ possibly as a restaurant and observation tower.'' Along 
the water, he added, the village of individual shops, restaurants 
and the fishing pier would be built of wood, recalling the city's 
early history. The mall will be contemporary but with nautical references 
in lighting fixtures, decorative accents, directories resembling treasure 
maps and identification plaques resembling those on ships. But Williams, 
like most people in Bridgeport, feels Harbour Place ``will open up 
the city _ bring more people in,'' he said. Just as he benefited from 
the new baseball park at Harbor Yard, he hopes to profit from the 
Harbour Place overflow. Still, haunted by the city's decades-old identity 
crisis, he added: ``Thank God Bridgeport's smokestacks are gone, but 
there's still a smokestack mentality out there.'' Outsiders driving 
in on I-95 may admire the People's Bank building, but once past that 
all they see is power plants, rundown factories, dilapidated housing 
and mean streets. ``The turnpike goes through the worst part of the 
city, giving people the wrong impression,'' said Charles Brilvitch, 
the city historian. ``It's a common misconception that Bridgeport 
is not on its feet.'' The city's decline from industrial powerhouse 
to rudderless city brought it close to bankruptcy in 1991. By 1995 
it had a $4 million surplus but was still searching for an identity. 
Its development as a tourist attraction would be a third incarnation 
since the late 18th century. ``Harbour Place is to be built where 
a steel mill once stood, giving the peninsula the name of Steel Point,'' 
said Brilvitch. ``Before the big industries came this was a major 
seaport. When the Hudson River froze the goods that came east on the 
Erie Canal came down through Bridgeport. Farmers brought their cornmeal 
and cider brandy here, traded it for factory goods and shipped it 
to New York and the West Indies. There was even a whaling fleet.'' 
Black Rock Harbor on the west side was a shipbuilding port, and Bridgeport 
Harbor was a prime location for clamming, duck hunting, and oystering. 
Talmadge Brothers, one of Connecticut's largest oyster companies, 
is now one of the properties to be moved off the Harbour Place site. 
Jose E. Rivera, Jr., his wife, Grace, and young sons, Jose III and 
Hector Luis, must also move. Their house at 23-29 Pierpont Street 
was condemned by the city. ``The closing is on Nov. 22,'' said Rivera, 
``and we have no place to go yet.'' Surrounding him are other condemned 
houses and a scrap yard. People like the Riveras, who are facing displacement, 
and Brilvitch who lives elsewhere in Bridgeport, are among the few 
city residents who are not pleased with what is happening at Steel 
Point. ``They could have restored the old oyster sheds, wharves, and 
houses,'' said Brilvitch, ``but this city has a monumental aversion 
to historic preservation.'' Next year's agenda for Harbour Place lists 
more land assembly and clearance, relocations, environmental remediation, 
design and engineering work, dredging, bulkhead construction and street 
alignment. And then, after a few years, Conroy believes Bridgeport 
will become a viable new venue for office construction because of 
``Stamford's constricted labor and real estate market.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>