<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981107.0124 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
One of America's most daring acts of piracy took shape late one night 
in 1970 as Capt. James F. Bradley Jr. of the Navy sat in his Pentagon 
office, meditating on how to achieve a nearly impossible goal. Bradley, 
according to a new book, was wondering whether U.S. spy submarines 
could somehow learn to tap the welter of undersea cables that encircled 
the Soviet Union like necklaces, heavy with communication jewels. 
``Here could be an open ear to the plans and frustrations of Soviet 
leaders, intelligence unmatched by any human spy or even the newest 
surveillance satellites,'' says the book, ``Blind Man's Bluff: The 
Untold Story of American Submarine Espionage.'' The problem was finding 
the cables, which were bundles of wires a few inches wide. In the 
wilderness of the seabed, their locations were deemed to be as safe 
as buried treasure. In the hours before dawn, Bradley's thoughts drifted 
back to his childhood in St. Louis, when his mother took him on Mississippi 
riverboat rides to escape the summer heat. He remembered the fun of 
riding high up in pilothouses with steamer captains. From that perch, 
he now recalled, he would occasionally see signs placed discreetly 
along the shoreline warning boaters not to anchor because of cable 
crossings. The same precautions, he realized, might hold for the Soviet 
Union. In great secrecy, scanning a distant shoreline in the Sea of 
Okhotsk with a periscope, a U.S. submarine discovered that such warning 
signs did exist, written in Russian. And that discovery led to one 
of the Cold War's most secretive and successful spy operations, which 
the book recounts in rich detail, going far beyond earlier sketchy 
accounts. ``Blind Man's Bluff'' was written by Sherry Sontag, a freelance 
journalist, and Christopher Drew, a reporter at The New York Times, 
with research by Annette Lawrence Drew, Drew's wife. It has just been 
published in New York by Public Affairs, a new publishing house. Drew, 
while working on a series of stories with a team of reporters at The 
Chicago Tribune, broke some of the details of the story in 1991. Ingenious 
cable taps in such places as the Sea of Okhotsk (near the submarine 
base at Petropavlovsk and Pacific fleet headquarters near Vladivostok) 
and in the icy Barents Sea (near Soviet missile submarine bases and 
Northern fleet headquarters at Murmansk) produced a torrent of intelligence 
data that shed light on Soviet plans and intentions during some of 
the Cold War's darkest days, the book reports. For instance, a Barents 
tap in 1984 allowed Washington to monitor a high-level Soviet alert 
in 1983, revealing details of nuclear planning for missile submarines. 
Intelligence analysts, the book reports, called the intelligence haul 
``the crown jewels.'' The book says the tapping was done by a small 
fleet of U.S. submarines, including the Halibut, the Seawolf, the 
Parche and the Russell. Typically, these submarines, upon finding 
a target, would send out divers who would help attach listening pods 
that recorded magnetic emanations from the Soviet cables without having 
to make a physical connection to any of the wires inside. The spy 
pods could be huge, the book reports. One was a metal cylinder 20 
feet long that was filled with electronics and emblazoned inside with 
the words: ``Property of the United States government.'' The book 
says some early pods were designed by Bell Laboratories, an arm of 
AT&AMP;T that had long experience working with undersea phone cables. 
A large pod, the book says, was discovered by the Soviets in the Sea 
of Okhotsk after its existence was revealed by Ronald Pelton, a former 
U.S. cipher expert who sold the secret to the Soviets for $35,000. 
The book contains a Russian photograph of the captured pod, taken 
at the Ministry of Security's museum in Moscow. The Okhotsk setback, 
however, did little to slow the clandestine work, the book reports. 
Tapping still pushed ahead in the Barents Sea, and spread to the Mediterranean 
as well. In 1986, even as the government was preparing to argue in 
a secretive court case that Pelton was a traitor, the Seawolf was 
trying to tap a cable that ran from West Africa to Europe. The goal, 
the book says, was to aid a showdown with the Libyan leader, Col. 
Moammar Gadhafi. The book chronicles not only many spying missions 
but also the feats and fears of the spy-submarine crews, which worried 
that their lives were at risk in hostile waters. The Navy has refused 
to make any substantive comments on the book, saying that to confirm 
or deny any of its details could be deemed detrimental to the nation's 
security interests. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>