<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981107.0207 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Penn buried Princeton under an avalanche of 21 unanswered points five 
minutes into the game Saturday and watched as the Tigers spent the 
rest of the afternoon struggling to dig their way out. The Tigers 
couldn't do it, so Penn (6-2), which entered the game tied with Princeton 
and Harvard for first place in the Ivy League, walked away with a 
27-14 victory before a crowd of 20,230 at Princeton Stadium. Penn 
also walked away with sole possession of first place because Brown 
defeated Harvard, 27-6, Saturday afternoon. Princeton (4-4) fell into 
a four-way tie with Brown, Harvard and Yale. ``Right now, life is 
good,'' said Penn Coach Al Bagnoli. ``We don't want to share this 
with anybody.'' Princeton entered the game with the best rushing defense 
in Division I-AA, yielding an average of 54.1 yards a game. The Tigers 
had given up a total of 156 rushing yards in four Ivy League games 
and had not had a running back run for over 100 yards against them 
this year. But Penn running back Jim Finn was averaging 157 yards 
rushing against Ivy League teams and was the last running back to 
rush for over 100 yards against Princeton (146 yards last year). Finn 
cracked 1,000 yards for the season on his second carry of the day 
(a 12-yard run) and proceeded to trample Princeton's defense the remainder 
of the afternoon. He had 101 yards rushing by halftime and finished 
with 164 yards on 39 carries. The Tigers' problems began when they 
fumbled the opening kickoff. Penn recovered the football at the Princeton 
32 and five plays later Quakers quarterback Matt Rader hit receiver 
Brandon Carson, who had lined up wide left and alone, on a 13 yard 
touchdown pass. That blown coverage was Princeton's first mix up of 
the day. Then, Penn poured it on. A 34-yard punt return by safety 
Joe Piela gave the Quakers a first down at the Tigers 28. On the first 
play from scrimmage Finn took a pitch from Rader and threw a touchdown 
pass to tight end Brandon Clay to help give Penn a 14-0 lead. It was 
the second time this year that Finn had thrown a touchdown pass off 
that play and it was the second time this season that a halfback pass 
had gone for a score against the Princeton defense. The fumble bug 
hit the Tigers again on their next possession when running back Derek 
Theisen lost the ball at Princeton's 18-yard line. Linebacker Jim 
Higsen recovered and on the next play, Rader threw an 18-yard touchdown 
pass to receiver David Rogers. The Quakers had taken a commanding 
21-0 lead and with 10 minutes 10 seconds still to play in the first 
quarter. ``When you're sitting on the sideline and you've only run 
one play and they're up 21-0, you're in shock,'' said Princeton quarterback 
John Burnham, who completed 14-of-30 passes for 249 yards and 1 touchdown. 
It wasn't a complete knockout blow. Princeton managed to climb back 
into the game by putting together a long scoring drive at the beginning 
of the second quarter (11 plays, 71 yards in 4:54) and a quick one 
near the end (five plays, 61 yards in 57 seconds). The first drive 
was capped by a 1-yard run by Theisen and the second score came on 
a 5-yard touchdown pass from Burnham to receiver Phillip Wendler. 
Penn had a 24-14 lead at half, but it wasn't nearly as imposing as 
it once was. Even so, Princeton wasn't able to get any closer than 
that and its chances to take sole possession of first place in the 
Ivy League was washed away in a sea of mistakes and missed opportunities. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>