<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981107.0051 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
What a difference a decade makes. In the late 1980s and early 1990s, 
Democrats fretted that they had been soundly thrashed in three successive 
presidential elections because the party had become too closely associated 
with black people, thus driving away white voters. To counter that 
impression, groups like the centrist Democratic Leadership Council, 
and its one-time chairman, Bill Clinton, wanted their votes but went 
out of their way not to be seen as pandering to blacks and even engaged 
in some public rebukes. As a candidate in 1992, Clinton told blacks 
to take more ``personal responsibility'' for improving their lot and 
he chastised Sister Souljah, a black rap artist who once suggested 
that blacks should kill whites. As president, he told parishioners 
of a black church in Memphis that the high homicide rate among blacks 
would shame the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. This year, blacks 
have became the Democrats' new best friends. The party spent millions 
of dollars advertising on black radio. Congressional candidates were 
urged by party leaders to make as many appearances as possible in 
black neighborhoods. In the closing days of the campaign, the president 
chatted on the Tom Joyner Show, a nationally syndicated black radio 
program, spoke before a black church in Baltimore and appeared on 
Black Entertainment Television. The Rev. Jesse Jackson campaigned 
for black and white candidates and, perhaps more significantly, in 
black and white communities for Democratic candidates in 35 states 
_ a sharp contrast for a man whose presence was once so troubling 
that even L. Douglas Wilder, a black candidate for governor of Virginia 
in 1989, did not want Jackson to campaign in his state. The effort 
paid off. In 1994 blacks made up 19 percent of Georgia's voters. This 
year they accounted for about 29 percent. In Maryland, blacks went 
from 12.5 percent of all voters in 1994 to 21 percent this year. In 
Michigan, the black share of the vote leaped from 13 percent four 
years ago to 19 percent. Black turnout also jumped dramatically in 
North Carolina, Alabama, South Carolina and Illinois, providing the 
margin of victory in several Senate and gubernatorial races _ although 
an overwhelming black vote in Illinois could not save Carol Mosely 
Braun, the only black U.S. senator. ``There is no longer a problem 
with the Democratic Party being associated with black voters _ none,'' 
said David Bositis, a senior fellow at the Joint Center for Political 
and Economic Studies, which analyzes issues involving black people. 
``Before it was: `We've got a problem. We've got to divorce ourselves 
from the black community.' Now, it's no longer a problem. It's an 
asset.'' The courting of blacks this year did not stop with Democrats. 
In Florida, Republican Gov.-elect Jeb Bush boasted that his victory 
stemmed from his ability to appeal to all groups _ blacks included. 
Will the wooing continue? Turnout this year was the lowest since 1942. 
And in low-turnout elections political strategists make special efforts 
to bring out their most loyal voters _ blacks in the case of Democrats. 
It's an open question whether the Democrats' current embrace of blacks 
will be as tight in a presidential election when appeals must be made 
to a broader electorate. And while blacks tended to vote for Democratic 
moderates this time to defeat conservative Republicans, there is a 
question whether liberal black leaders, flush from the bravura performance 
of black voters, may try to push the party to the left once more _ 
and, by doing so, once again turn off Southern whites and Northern 
blue-collar ethnics. Already, the results of last week's elections 
caused Jackson to contemplate challenging Vice President Al Gore for 
the Democratic presidential nomination. The journey from pariah to 
savior represents a remarkable shift in the way blacks are viewed 
by Democrats _ and perhaps by the country as a whole. Democratic strategists 
say the change stems from a realization that blacks remain the party's 
most loyal bloc of voters and that when their turnout is low, as it 
was in 1994, Democrats suffer. ``In '94 it became clear that most 
Democrats can't win nowadays without doing well with African Americans,'' 
said Democratic pollster Ron Lester. ``Some people had to learn that 
through hard knocks and bad experiences.'' But the patching up of 
the fractious alliance did not take place in a vacuum. With crime 
rates falling, out-of-wedlock birth rates plummeting among black women 
and welfare rolls declining, many of the issues that _ fairly or not 
_ have been associated with blacks have lost potency. And although 
Washington state passed a ballot initiative banning race and gender 
preferences, the victories of Democrats there indicate that the issue 
of affirmative action didn't demonstrably turn whites against the 
party. ``If you think back to the 1980s, what was it that allowed 
race to work so much against the Democrats? It was a perception of 
people getting something for nothing,'' said Elaine Kamarck, a professor 
at the Kennedy School of government and a former aide to Gore. ``When 
you change the welfare system to a work system, you suddenly get rid 
of that.'' Blacks now hold 38 seats in the House, a large enough bloc 
to convince the House Democratic Caucus that targeting black voters 
was a priority. And Rep. Charles Rangel of New York's Harlem parlayed 
his position as the ranking Democrat on the Ways and Means Committee 
to raise more than $1 million for his own campaign, mainly from corporate 
political action committees. He then donated $100,000 to the Democratic 
Congressional Campaign Committee and sprinkled at least another $50,000 
into the coffers of Democratic candidates around the country. Rangel 
also raised another $1.3 million for the congressional campaign committee. 
Once the decision was made to target black voters, Democrats found 
a receptive audience. Polls conducted by Lester and the Joint Center 
for Political and Economic Studies showed that blacks were becoming 
even more partisan than they had been in the past _ turned off by 
Republican oratory and policies and turned on by their improving economic 
lot, for which they gave President Clinton credit. Once a message 
was delivered to black voters that Republicans were trying to impeach 
and remove the President, blacks turned on the Republicans with a 
vengeance. ``The real lesson is that black people will vote,'' said 
Lester. ``If you give them a reason to and make the effort to get 
the vote out, you can make a difference. We know how to do this.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>