<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981107.0064 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When he turns on his television Sunday afternoon and sees Vinny Testaverde 
drop back to pass against the Buffalo Bills, Carlos Garay will think, 
``Lucky man.'' He knows whom the Jets' quarterback will have the pleasure 
of looking for, particularly on third down-and-trouble. Somewhere 
in the defensive backfield, he knows Wayne Chrebet will be waiting 
for the ball that does not have to be targeted like a jump shot, or 
a pitcher's precise delivery, mound to mitt. ``My motto was just to 
put it in an area where he could make a play,'' said Garay. ``Make 
it humanly catchable, and he'll catch it.'' In 1994, Garay threw 21 
touchdowns for Hofstra University. Chrebet caught 16 of them, including 
5 in the last game of an 8-1-1 season against Delaware, matching Jerry 
Rice's collegiate record. By that time, Garay was telling teammates 
that this gritty little receiver who once reminded him of a nerdy 
film character named Lucas was good enough to play for the professionals 
practicing on their Hemsptead, N.Y. campus. Most responded by wondering, 
in so many words, if Garay was making his own plans to visit the moon. 
Now Chrebet is an $11 million star, and Garay moonlights in the spring 
and summer Arena Football League for the New Jersey Red Dogs. But 
he also gets to play Monday morning quarterback with another former 
Hofstra quarterback, George Beisel, at their day job, with RCG Information 
Technology, a computer firm in f New Jersey. Beisel was Hofstra's 
quarterback in Chrebet's sophomore and junior years. Small world for 
two guys who benefited from throwing to an undersized receiver. ``Actually, 
at Hofstra, no one really looked at Wayne as little, or tiny,'' Beisel 
said. Unless Chrebet was disappearing from tackler's view on his way 
into the end zone. If there is justice in the pump-me-up playground 
known as the National Football League, then Chrebet will one day be 
Doug Flutie's downfield target in a Pro Bowl. Could happen later this 
winter, the way things have been going, but Sunday, it will be Vinny 
from Long Island whose standing is enhanced by Chrebet's knack for 
catching most balls that are humanly catchable. ``You don't just find 
guys every day who go after the ball the way he does,'' said Garay. 
``He makes the catch that decides the game.'' Where, for instance, 
might Testaverde and the Jets have landed last Sunday in Kansas City 
had Chrebet failed to hang on to a late-game ball thrown slightly 
behind him, to the right sideline, on third-and-3, with the blitzing 
Chiefs in Testaverde's face? As Chrebet turned to locate the ball, 
it was up on his right shoulder pad, a typically difficult play compounded 
by pressure, rain, wind, and a defender, Mark McMillian, who crunched 
Chrebet out-of-bounds a split-second after the ball hit him in the 
hands. Those sure hands, merely proportionate to his 5-feet-10-inch 
body, held on. From the Chiefs' 30, the Jets went on to drive closer 
for the field goal that freed them from the clutches of mediocrity 
to a four-way divisional tie for first. Only a quarterback who has 
had hands-on experience with Chrebet can fully appreciate his magnetism, 
as it relates to the thrown ball. ``His eyes and concentration are 
amazing,'' said Garay. ``I don't remember him dropping anything, not 
one, unless it was my fault, a really bad throw.'' Neither could Beisel, 
for that matter, and nor could they recall one truly memorable Chrebet 
catch. There were just so many; they tended to look alike. Keyshawn 
Johnson, now there's a wideout whose receptions are more of the highlight 
film, in-full-stride variety. Conversely, Chrebet looks like one of 
those guys in Australian Rules Football, two hands around the ball, 
diving to the turf, usually past the third-down marker he is again 
slipping past with the best of them this season in the NFL. Fittingly 
enough, what Beisel and Garay seem to remember most about their one-time 
target are snapshots of the qualities that make the man. One Saturday 
night when Beisel was a sophomore and Chrebet a freshman, they both 
played in what Beisel believes was their first game. Beisel was cut 
and needed stitches. Chrebet wound up with a concussion. There Beisel 
sat, in a hospital emergency room, with this quiet New Jersey kid 
who kept telling his father that he was fine, just fine, and would 
be ready to play again next week. Come to think of it, Beisel did 
remember one touchdown pass he made to Chrebet, though only because 
Chrebet ``got drilled'' and went back to the hospital with another 
concussion. Besides pointing out that Chrebet is a killer basketball 
player who can dunk, Garay's premier college flashback was a forced 
scramble, into the secondary when, all of a sudden, Chrebet was in 
position to make a key block. ``He absolutely de-cleated this kid,'' 
Garay said. ``After all the hits he took, I know he remembers that 
one.'' They arrived at Hofstra together, and Garay couldn't help but 
like ``this tough little white kid who had to be extraordinary to 
be noticed.'' The Bills will notice him, but he will find a way to 
get open. Testaverde will throw a ball behind him, but he will manage 
to catch it. This is what Chrebet does. He makes big catches and he 
makes quarterbacks better. Anyone who has played or practiced at Hofstra 
knows that. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>