<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981107.0082 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Georges Lievin, 57, was not even alive when World War I, the Great 
War, ended 80 years ago this month, but he, too, became its victim. 
``In 1991,'' he said, ``in one of the fields around here, I found 
one of the artillery shells the Germans used to fire messages between 
battlefields.'' He was taking a couple of visitors on a tour of the 
overgrown ruins of Fort Malmaison, held by the German invaders from 
September 1914 to October 1917 against countless French attacks. ``My 
father, who spent years disabling mines in this area, had told me 
that the Germans never boobytrapped message shells,'' said Lievin, 
who is retired from the French army. ``This one went off while I was 
cleaning it at home.'' The explosion, three-quarters of a century 
after the war, cost him an arm and most of a leg, but if anything 
it only heightened his interest in the great conflict that still scars 
the placid countryside. Under the trees on wooded hills run the outlines 
of artillery-shell craters and trench lines, incisions left by the 
biggest organized slaughter in human history up to that time. Even 
today, not only ammunition but dog tags, bones and occasionally more 
complete remains of fallen soldiers come to the surface. How much 
longer the war will remain vivid in collective consciousness is more 
of a question as Nov. 11, the 80th anniversary of the armistice, approaches. 
Invited to come to France to commemorate it, both President Clinton 
and Germany's newly elected chancellor, Gerhard Schroeder, said no. 
Queen Elizabeth II of Britain will lay a wreath on the tomb of the 
unknown French soldier who is buried at the foot of the Arc de Triomphe 
in Paris, on Nov. 11 at 11 a.m., the hour the armistice was signed, 
and then dedicate a statue to Winston Churchill, the British prime 
minister during the Second World War, which was spawned by the first. 
Later that day, she will visit, at Ypres in Belgium, one of the great 
World War I battlefields that claimed an entire British generation 
of boys and men. President Jacques Chirac, unlike his two immediate 
predecessors, will not lay a wreath at the grave of the greatest French 
hero of the war, Marshal Philippe Petain. The marshal blackened his 
reputation as head of the Vichy regime, which collaborated with Nazi 
Germany after France's defeat in 1940, as Hitler took revenge for 
the humiliation he felt the Allies had inflicted on the Germans after 
the World War I armistice. Now, most veterans of the first war are 
dead. The few still alive are or soon will be centenarians, men like 
Charles Fackler, 98, of Wescoville, Pa., who survived a bullet to 
the stomach and an attack of German phosgene and chlorine gas with 
the U.S. National Guard 28th Division in the Argonne Forest in 1918. 
``I haven't been back to France since,'' Fackler said over the telephone 
from the nursing home where he lives. ``I remember getting shot, and 
then the gas came and I couldn't get up, but I survived.'' According 
to U.S. Army records, 52,947 Americans were killed. Even more U.S. 
troops died of influenza and other diseases during a war that killed 
at least 1.8 million German soldiers, 1.7 million Russian, almost 
1.3 million Austro-Hungarian, 1.4 million French and nearly three-quarters 
of a million British troops, along with millions of civilians and 
troops of other nations on the Eastern front from the Middle East 
through Turkey, Crimea, the Balkans and the Baltics. The war shaped 
the world, and the century, sweeping away the Russian, Austro-Hungarian 
and Ottoman empires and unleashing forces of nationalism that still 
grip the Balkans today. It was near here, on this tiny part of the 
Western front, that the United States, roused out of isolationism 
by President Woodrow Wilson, played the crucial role at the end. The 
French and, to the north, their British and Belgian allies had fought 
the German invaders to a standstill in 1914 but then bogged down in 
years of trench warfare. Gen. John Pershing, the American commander, 
was determined that his troops would end the stalemate. A French attempt 
in 1917 to break through the German lines at Craonne along a road 
called the Chemin des Dames had failed in horrific slaughter, and 
thousands of French soldiers mutinied. The following spring, the Germans 
swept past them in a vast advance that seemed to threaten Paris. But 
by then the United States had entered the war, eventually building 
a force of more than a million, which tipped the balance in favor 
of the Allies. Together they pushed the Germans back in a series of 
great offensives from the Somme Valley to the Argonne Forest in the 
late summer and fall of 1918, and the exhausted Germans sued for peace. 
In the ensuing decades, many people in Braye-en-Laonnois _ a town 
of 192 people on the edges of the Champagne countryside northeast 
of Paris _ forgot that Americans had ever been here. Then Lievin and 
other World War I buffs started digging near underground limestone 
quarries that honeycomb the area. What they found was evidence left 
by soldiers of three nations who had used the subterranean labyrinth 
and fought one another in it for three years. ``Easy going down the 
ladder,'' warned Gilles Chauwin, one of the members of the Association 
du Chemin des Dames who recently got French authorities to declare 
the caves a national historical monument. The group had been seeking 
to keep souvenir hunters from making off with the evocative graffiti 
that the soldiers carved into the limestone or drew on it. Turning 
a flashlight onto one cave wall, Chauwin revealed a German inscription 
carved in July 1915 by W. Schmitz of the 9th Company, 161st Infantry 
Regiment. Next to it, Pierre Theoleyre of the 72nd French Infantry 
Regiment carved his own name two years later. Farther on, barbed wire 
marks the subterranean front line, and the cave ceiling is pocked 
with shrapnel from grenades. ``God punish the K,'' an inscription 
in German reads over a depiction of the Kaiser as a pig in a spiked 
helmet _ whether drawn by a desperate German soldier or one of his 
French enemies, it is impossible to tell. ``There are 1,000 graffiti 
in these caves, and 600 of them were American ones,'' Lievin said, 
laughing. ``The Americans sure had a lot to say.'' American soldiers 
left whole galleries of the cave marked with their names; insignia 
of the Masons, the Odd Fellows, the Ancient Order of Hibernians; depictions 
of the American flag; portraits of American Indians in feathered headdress, 
and the seals of their home states. The soldiers here were all in 
the 26th National Guard, or ``Yankee'' Division, while it was training 
with French units in (or under) the field in February and March 1918. 
M.J. Maloney of 35 Wave Ave., Wakefield, Mass., and Sgt. Flagg of 
66 Edgewood St., Worcester, Mass., were among the many who carved 
their names into the stone. So did Cpl. Earle W. Madeley of the 102nd 
U.S. Infantry Regiment, 20 years old when he signed his name here 
in March 1918, just before the German offensive that drove the Allies 
out that spring. From July to October his division took 5,000 casualties 
in fighting that won the area back, and he was one. ``Madeley never 
made it home,'' Chauwin said. ``He's listed among the Yankee Division's 
dead.'' American dead from both World Wars are remembered in 21 cemeteries 
of the American Battle Monuments Commission that are located from 
England to Tunisia. Visitors to the American World War I cemeteries 
are dwindling, said Brig. Gen. James Dickey, the retired American 
officer in charge of them. Last Sept. 26, however, a delegation led 
by Secretary of the Army Togo West Jr. did visit the cemetery at Romagne-sous-Montfaucon, 
26 miles northwest of Verdun, to pay homage to the 15,686 soldiers 
buried or listed as missing there, all people who died retaking the 
area in the final 47-day U.S. offensive in the Meuse-Argonne region 
in 1918. Among them was Cpl. Freddie Stowers of South Carolina, a 
member of the all-black 93rd Division who was awarded the Congressional 
Medal of Honor for giving his life during an attack on a German machine-gun 
nest on Sept. 28, 1918. But that did not happen until 73 years later, 
in 1991, when the Army reviewed the service records of black soldiers 
and concluded that he had been overlooked because of his race. Pershing 
called the Meuse-Argonne offensive ``one of the greatest achievements 
in the history of American arms.'' Had he had his way, the Allies 
would not have stopped on Nov. 11 but would have pursued the Germans 
across the border until their unconditional surrender. Would that 
have merely prolonged the first war, or avoided the second? ``Who 
knows?'' said Marc Bourdin, a member of the Chemin des Dames association. 
``The important thing is to make sure younger generations from all 
our countries never forget what happened here, and make sure it never 
happens again.'' That sentiment harks right back to those of the French 
mutineers of 1917. (They remained dishonored until last Thursday, 
when Prime Minister Lionel Jospin visited Craonne, on the Chemin des 
Dames, and formally rehabilitated them. A day later President Jacques 
Chirac called the action ``inopportune.'') A protest sung by soldiers 
on the Chemin des Dames so irritated French military commanders that 
they offered exemption from all military duty to anyone who would 
denounce its author. He was never found, but in 1919, a communist 
author, Paul Vaillant-Couturier, published the poignant text: It's 
finished, we've had enough, No marching anymore. ... Farewell life, 
farewell love, Farewell all the women, We're finished forever With 
this filthy war. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>