<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981107.0178 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Fourteen days before Election Day, Charles Schumer's campaign manager 
learned of a story that would appear in the next day's issue of The 
Jewish Week: Sen. Alfonse D'Amato, in a private meeting with supporters, 
had described Schumer with a Yiddish vulgarism and mocked another 
lawmaker from New York City for being overweight. D'Amato, a Republican, 
was holding a news conference later that afternoon, so the Schumer 
campaign had to act fast. Working out of Schumer's messy suite of 
offices on West 52nd Street, aides to Schumer, the Democratic challenger, 
paged reporters who were on their way to D'Amato's news conference, 
informed them of the story and pressed them to ask the senator about 
the reported slur. D'Amato never knew what hit him. As his aides watched 
in helpless disbelief, the question suggested by Schumer's aides instantly 
eclipsed an appearance intended to highlight D'Amato's efforts to 
win federal funds for breast cancer research and to attack Schumer 
for missing votes in Congress. When Schumer's campaign manager, Josh 
Isay, and his media consultant, Hank Morris, met for dinner that night, 
they saw the second product of their work on the television news: 
D'Amato, halting and defensive, denying a remark he would later admit 
having made. Morris and Isay, who had run a campaign based largely 
on portraying D'Amato as a liar, decided over grilled fish and white 
wine to turn the New York 1 News clip into an advertisement by the 
next night. A number of forces accounted for Schumer's upset of D'Amato 
last week. Democrats mounted their best get-out-the-vote operation 
in 10 years. Nationally, Republicans framed this year's elections 
as a referendum on President Clinton's behavior, the last thing D'Amato 
wanted in a state where Clinton is popular. Environmentalists and 
abortion rights advocates invested heavily in an attempt to unseat 
a senator they had long seen as hostile to their causes. Schumer had 
proven himself to be a dogged fund-raiser, while D'Amato entered the 
race with the burden of having served 18 years in office. But ultimately, 
an equally important explanation for Schumer's success in unseating 
a Republican fixture can be found in the contrasting bearings of the 
campaigns that day. In the end, this was a contest between a sharp 
and aggressive Democratic candidate backed by a crisp and sometimes 
ruthless campaign team challenging a three-term senator who often 
seemed a step off his game, and who was backed by an apparently distracted 
campaign organization that often seemed to be relying on an old political 
script. Schumer adopted a campaign theme _ ``Too many lies for too 
long'' _ the day after he won the primary, and stuck to it until he 
declared victory. While there were days when his campaign seemed beleaguered, 
particularly during the long stretch when D'Amato attacked him for 
missing votes, he never made a serious misstep. By contrast, D'Amato 
moved unsurely from attack to attack to attack until the final hours, 
when he was saying that voters should re-elect him so he could run 
for a fifth term. Schumer's campaign was run by a tight and intense 
group _ primarily Morris, Isay and Schumer _ who were almost obsessively 
preoccupied with anticipating and addressing every development. (A 
perpetually nervous Isay raced over to Elaine's restaurant late one 
night so he could win personal assurances that former Police Commissioner 
William Bratton, who is known to spend many evenings there, would 
go to an endorsement news conference the next morning.) By contrast, 
the people who had made up D'Amato's political brain trust for the 
last 20 years were scattered for most of this campaign season. Zenia 
Mucha was running the campaign of Gov. George Pataki, while Arthur 
Finkelstein was shuttling between New York and North Carolina, where 
he was advising Sen. Lauch Faircloth in his own unsuccessful re-election 
bid. By the end of October, when D'Amato's future in the Senate appeared 
to be in serious doubt, D'Amato's associates were joking darkly about 
the phone calls that were coming in from other Finkelstein clients. 
Through it all, D'Amato never seemed to be quite the indefatigable 
political puncher that New Yorkers have long known. His campaign aides 
made a tactical decision, over the objection of many of D'Amato's 
friends, to keep him off the public stump and out of his commercials. 
And when he appeared in public, he was usually escorted by some more 
popular politician _ Mayor Rudolph Giuliani one day, Pataki the next 
_ which often seemed to diminish the senator. ``I believe it was a 
terrible campaign,'' said Edward Koch, the former mayor and perhaps 
D'Amato's most prominent and loyal supporter. ``There is nothing wrong 
with negative campaigns, but they must (a) be true and (b) be a minor 
part of a campaign that is overwhelmingly positive about the candidate 
himself. Here it was all negative. I thought that was a mistake.'' 
Earlier this year, D'Amato had assured worried friends in the Senate 
that Schumer would be an easy opponent. In the days after the Democratic 
primary, his aides said privately that they had considered Schumer 
_ a liberal Jewish Democrat from Brooklyn with a 20-year voting record 
to examine _ a far easier mark than his main rival for the Democratic 
nomination, Geraldine Ferraro. But by the end of business on the Monday 
before Election Day, after a campaign in which D'Amato had outspent 
Schumer by almost 2 to 1, it was the Democratic challenger who was 
flush with excitement, dancing at a rally with Hillary Rodham Clinton 
in Manhattan. At 5 p.m. that day, Schumer impulsively ordered his 
campaign plane into the air for one more rally in Buffalo. At about 
the same time on Long Island, D'Amato had just given up speaking at 
a rally after a discouraging 15 minutes in which two sound systems 
set up by the political machine that produced him had given out. As 
Schumer headed for Buffalo, D'Amato called it a day. A Challenger 
Adopts an Effective Strategy Seven weeks before Election Day, Morris 
was in a television production studio on West 43rd Street. That day, 
Democrats across New York were choosing D'Amato's challenger. But 
Morris, who at 45 is the most active political consultant in the state 
_ and is known for appearing at even black-tie events wearing a rumpled 
sweater _ was producing advertisements for the general campaign. The 
advertisements that went on the air two days later offered the first 
clue that D'Amato was in for a different kind of challenge. Brash 
and counterintuitive, they portrayed D'Amato as soft on crime and 
as an advocate of higher taxes, turning a traditional D'Amato attack 
against him. They ended with the line, ``Too many lies for too long.'' 
The theme had been settled on two weeks earlier, by which time Schumer 
and his advisers had concluded that his victory in the Democratic 
primary was assured. But in tone and sweep, the advertisements were 
the product of the two years Schumer had spent studying D'Amato's 
previous campaigns and the attitudes of voters toward him. There was 
a flicker of apprehension among some of Schumer's aides when Morris 
suggested building a campaign around a slogan describing New York's 
leading Republican as a liar. Morris halfheartedly suggested a softer 
alternative _ ``too wrong for too long.'' But the ``too many lies'' 
theme played directly to what the Schumer campaign had concluded were 
two of D'Amato's biggest liabilities: Voters didn't trust him and 
thought he had been in office too long. It was also designed as a 
broad pre-emptive defense against any attack D'Amato might make. And 
it telegraphed to audiences who were skeptical that Schumer could 
beat D'Amato _ financial contributors, Democratic workers, the media 
and, of course, D'Amato _ the tenor of the campaign Schumer intended 
to run. Schumer's research had found that many voters admired D'Amato's 
bracing political style, and he set out to co-opt it. ``If you ask 
people what kind of vehicle he reminded them of, the people who don't 
like him say `a Cadillac' or `a Lincoln,''' said Morris, referring 
to D'Amato. ``People who do like him _ and the swing voters _ said 
`a bulldozer.''' So Schumer set out to be a bulldozer. That attitude 
permeated the Schumer campaign. At his Manhattan headquarters, Schumer's 
press secretary, Howard Wolfson, would repeatedly cite a line from 
the movie ``The Untouchables'' in rallying the troops. ``If he uses 
a fist, you use a bat,'' Wolfson said each day. ``If he uses a knife, 
you use a gun.'' Before the second of the two senatorial debates, 
Isay asked Mark Green, the city's public advocate and D'Amato's most 
persistent foe, to come to the WNBC studios and stand in D'Amato's 
line of vision, hoping to rattle him. There were bad moments. Schumer's 
campaign was flummoxed when D'Amato began assailing him for missing 
votes in Congress to run for the Senate. It affected the mood in both 
camps. D'Amato and his advisers went from listless to ebullient as 
Schumer's aides were forced daily to respond to the missed votes cited 
by D'Amato. While Schumer's aides asserted that they were not worried 
about the attacks, other Democrats observed that the campaign was 
no longer about D'Amato's record and credibility; it was now about 
Schumer's behavior in Congress. Some of Schumer's friends began to 
worry that D'Amato had again found the hook with which to drag down 
his opponent. That concern faded on the morning when Rep. Jerrold 
Nadler, the Manhattan Democrat whom D'Amato had mocked as overweight, 
called Isay and informed him of the story that was about to appear 
in The Jewish Week. An Incumbent's Gaffe Leads to Self-Doubt D'Amato 
and his campaign first tried to shrug off the report of the Yiddish 
slur and his subsequent denial of it, responding to every question 
with another attack on Schumer's attendance record. But inside the 
campaign's offices on Lexington Avenue, D'Amato's aides were shaken 
by what almost everyone believed was a massive misstep. And no one 
knew it better than the candidate himself. D'Amato, an instinctive 
and self-assured campaigner, began chiding himself. ``Alfonse was 
stunned, and there are very few times I've seen that,'' said one associate, 
speaking on the condition of anonymity. D'Amato's wave of self-doubt, 
and the growing concern among some of his advisers that he might lose 
this race, led him to push himself even harder. His efforts put a 
strain on his 61-year-old body, and fatigue began to set in. Several 
of D'Amato's advisers said they thought it showed in his first debate 
with Schumer, on Oct. 24, when he looked coiled, defensive and programmed, 
answering almost every question with a scripted attack on Schumer's 
attendance record. As the atmosphere darkened, some of D'Amato's advisers 
began to complain that Finkelstein was spending too much time on other 
campaigns. A bald, incessantly rumpled man whose knife-edged commercials 
belie a genial personality, Finkelstein had always been the calming 
force within D'Amato's campaigns. D'Amato missed his presence and 
began leaning more heavily on longtime friends and advisers like Ms. 
Mucha. Ms. Mucha quietly shifted her attention from Pataki's re-election 
campaign to D'Amato's. But it was too late. As he struggled to find 
his balance in the last weeks of the race, his campaign was wrought 
by bickering between Republican Party leaders and his senior staff 
members: Finkelstein, Kieran Mahoney and Jon Lerner. State Republican 
Party officials complained that Finkelstein and Mahoney, who have 
historically relied almost entirely on television advertising to win 
races, had, out of a budget of $20 million, set aside only $200,000 
for getting out the vote. The effect became clear in the final week 
of the campaign: The campaign buttons, lawn signs and mailings that 
normally remind voters that an election is at hand were largely absent. 
Even Schumer, campaigning on Long Island, pointed out to reporters 
how few D'Amato signs he saw. Schumer had expected that D'Amato's 
endgame would focus on his stature as a member of the Senate majority 
and on his ability to deliver for the state. But D'Amato remained 
in attack mode. At the end, even a fatigued D'Amato seemed concerned 
about the tenor of his campaign. During a tour of upstate New York, 
he began picking out people in the crowd whom his office had helped, 
among them a woman whose ex-husband had taken her children away. Later 
that afternoon, as D'Amato settled into the seat of his chartered 
jet, he turned to Pataki and spoke proudly of that moment. ``We should 
have made a commercial out of that,'' he said. But they never did. 
A basic political error pulled the last string out of D'Amato's campaign. 
Eight days before Election Day, Schumer's advisers learned that The 
Village Voice was about to publish an article showing that as a Nassau 
County official running for the Senate in 1980, D'Amato had done exactly 
what he was accusing Schumer of doing: ignored his legislative duties 
to run for office. Schumer's advisers instantly alerted other reporters. 
D'Amato's senior aides were caught completely off guard by the disclosure, 
and other Republicans expressed astonishment that D'Amato could have 
made such a fundamental mistake. ``The winds have been let out of 
the sails,'' a senior elected Republican official said sadly at one 
of D'Amato's campaign events the next day. On the last Sunday of his 
fourth campaign for the Senate, D'Amato, looking spent and worried, 
spent barely 20 minutes speaking in public. One of those appearances 
was at a rally among Orthodox Jews in Williamsburg, Brooklyn. A year 
before, at the same site but on a colder, rainy afternoon, thousands 
of people had filled the street, screaming in excitement as Giuliani 
appeared for his own post-election rally. They cheered the Republican 
mayor's every word and mobbed him as he walked down the street. On 
this Sunday, the Republican senator spoke for four minutes and headed 
for his car. The crowd _ D'Amato's crowd _ applauded politely, if 
briefly, and scattered into the dusk. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>