<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981107.0092 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Seven years after the Persian Gulf war, the Clinton administration 
is preparing to abandon the U.N. inspections regime as an effective 
instrument for restraining President Saddam Hussein of Iraq, senior 
American officials said. Instead, the administration is choosing other 
forms of traditional containment, including sanctions and the use 
of force, which now seems more likely than at any other time since 
the gulf war ended in 1991, the officials said. ``If we use force, 
we move into a new phase,'' a senior American official said. That 
would mean overt containment of Iraq through continued sanctions, 
with clear ``red lines'' to make it obvious to Hussein that attacking 
his neighbors or the Kurds in northern Iraq will bring retaliation. 
``If he tries to use weapons of mass destruction,'' the official said, 
``he should know that we will obliterate Iraq.'' During the gulf war, 
the official noted, Hussein heeded such warnings and did not use chemical 
or biological weapons. Washington no longer believes that Hussein 
will cooperate with the U.N. weapons inspectors, who have spent seven 
years trying to eliminate Iraq's nuclear, missile, biological and 
chemical weapons programs. Last weekend Hussein cut off all cooperation 
with the inspectors, who, senior American and European officials concede, 
have been unable to do their work for eight of the last 12 months. 
There is little prospect that Hussein will ever again provide the 
cooperation needed for the inspectors to finish their task, the officials 
say. In fact, Western officials have concluded that Hussein cares 
more about keeping his ability to produce weapons of terror than he 
does about lifting the sanctions, which the Security Council has said 
will end only when he complies with disarmament resolutions and which 
Washington has implied will end only when Hussein falls. American 
and British officials are not ruling out a diplomatic solution to 
this latest crisis, and they are pressing the Security Council to 
make Iraq live up to its commitments. But they also insist that Hussein's 
cooperation must be full, his retreat total. While calculations could 
change, senior officials emphasize that any use of force is likely 
to be a few weeks away, giving American officials time to convince 
the world that Washington is not eager for blood and that Hussein 
has had every opportunity to avoid a strike. But these officials agree 
that the use of force is more likely now and that one aim will be 
to undermine Hussein's hold on power. But they also agree that one 
likely consequence of its use is the expulsion of the U.N. inspectors, 
known as UNSCOM, and the end of an extraordinary seven-year effort 
to disarm Iraq by inspection. ``Our goal is to maintain the unity 
of the Security Council and contain Iraq, keeping the elements of 
containment that reduce Saddam's ability to threaten his neighbors 
and the world, namely UNSCOM and sanctions,'' an American official 
said. ``But nobody is seeking to preserve a useless UNSCOM, and UNSCOM 
cannot work without Iraqi cooperation, which has not been forthcoming, 
despite every promise,'' the official said. ``So either there will 
be a meaningful UNSCOM _ able to operate freely, without hindrance 
and with cooperation _ or there will be other alternatives. And if 
we were to use force, we don't expect UNSCOM to last.'' Some regional 
experts urge that the inspections be maintained. Edward Djerejian, 
a former ambassador to Syria and Israel, said: ``It is critical that 
UNSCOM keep its operations in Iraq, because Saddam wants weapons of 
mass destruction. The integrity of the inspection regime must be maintained, 
because it has been effective.'' But American officials argue that 
inspections have not been effective in discovering Iraq's chemical 
and biological secrets and that their integrity cannot be preserved 
without Iraqi cooperation. If force is used, the officials say, the 
stated justification will be to support U.N. resolutions and to reduce 
Iraq's ability to make or use weapons of mass destruction. The stated 
aim will not be to eliminate those weapons, since they cannot be eliminated 
with air power. Nor will the stated aim be to drive Hussein from power 
because that, too, cannot be guaranteed from the air. But force will 
also be used ``against the sources of his regime,'' a senior official 
said carefully. Translated, that means an effort to weaken Hussein's 
grip on power and promote his fall. Possible targets would include 
Hussein's ethnic base in Tikrit, his Revolutionary Guards, his interior 
ministry and secret police, his sophisticated weaponry, his palaces 
and communications. Still, officials say that the Pentagon remains 
reluctant to use force and that Arab allies are concerned that the 
real victims of violence will be the Iraqi people, who are already 
suffering from the sanctions. But after the United States held off 
using force against Iraq last November, and again in February and 
August, one official said, ``it's just that much harder to hold off 
again, because the president looks weak, and American credibility 
is on the line, not just the U.N.'s credibility.'' The last time the 
United States threatened force, in February, Clinton spoke apocalyptically 
about the dangers of Iraqi nuclear, chemical and biological weapons, 
and said the United States would go to war to protect the inspectors' 
``full and unfettered access'' to any sites in Iraq. The serious threat 
Hussein poses was overblown in the effort to sell the possible attack, 
some senior American officials now say. Defense Secretary William 
Cohen appeared on television brandishing a bag of sugar in an effort 
to describe how small a dose of biological and chemical weapons it 
would take to threaten Americans, but his own chairman of the Joint 
Chiefs of Staff, Gen. Henry Shelton, expressed serious reservations 
about the ability of the Pentagon to destroy such easily hidden and 
reconstituted weapons from the air. The confrontation was defused, 
but not ended, when Secretary-General Kofi Annan of the United Nations 
went to Baghdad and used the imminent threat of force by the United 
States and Britain to obtain a promise from Hussein that the arms 
inspectors would have the access they needed. Given all the policy 
confusion, American and British officials were relieved, but hardly 
pleased. Annan, an official said, expected to win the Nobel Peace 
Prize; American and British officials expected another round of Iraqi 
defiance, and held a thorough policy review, with its conclusions 
being put into practice now. The first conclusion was to try to prevent 
Hussein from dictating the game and manipulating Washington through 
UNSCOM. ``Look, it's happened over and over again,'' a senior official 
said. ``Saddam creates a crisis over UNSCOM, divides the U.N., we 
ramp up militarily at a cost of $1.5 billion a time, the French, Russians 
and the U.N. use our leverage to do a deal, and Saddam gains a little 
more, until the next time. That's just stupid.'' By trying to avoid 
confrontation on Hussein's terms and to keep the Security Council 
unified, the United States urged UNSCOM and its chairman, Richard 
Butler, to avoid unnecessary confrontations with Iraq that would allow 
Hussein to put the blame on UNSCOM, rather than allowing the United 
States and Britain to put the blame on Hussein, where it presumably 
belongs. That policy proved embarrassing to Clinton and Secretary 
of State Madeleine Albright when one inspector, Scott Ritter, quit 
and charged that Washington was undermining the group's ability to 
work by discouraging the surprise inspections that he felt were the 
key to success. Albright and senior American and British officials 
have rejected those charges, saying that they discouraged Butler from 
engaging in useless confrontation with Iraq only when it was became 
clear in August that Baghdad would not allow the very inspections 
Ritter demanded. They argue that their new policy is paying dividends 
now, with the Security Council _ including the Russians and the French 
_ firmly opposed to Hussein's latest demands. Rather than sending 
a high-level negotiator to Baghdad, as they did last winter, the French 
have withdrawn their charge d'affaires from Baghdad, American officials 
point out. Nor is Prime Minister Yevgeny Primakov of Russia, who defused 
an earlier crisis in November 1997, rushing to Iraq's aid or defense. 
The second conclusion was to limit military goals to ``deterring and 
diminishing'' Iraq's capacity to make and use terror weapons. That 
means the Pentagon is happier and there is less need to build up in 
the gulf or to ask much from vulnerable Arab allies like Saudi Arabia. 
``This is far from a perfect policy,'' a senior official said. ``Given 
the Security Council and the state of the Arab world, this is a least 
worst policy. And it's less worse than it was in February.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>