<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981107.0106 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Sanije Millaku, the mother of six children and a proud homeowner, 
fondly remembers the new bedroom set and the pots of yellow roses 
arranged on the window sill before the start of the terrible summer. 
A few days ago, she came down from her makeshift camp in the hills 
to find her house burned, the fancy furniture a heap of fine white 
ashes and her clay pots baked with melted glass that was once her 
bedroom windows. Many of the ethnic Albanian refugees of Kosovo, pushed 
out of their villages by the tanks and artillery of Serbian forces, 
have returned to their houses. But what they find is hardly home. 
Here in the Drenica Valley, the heart of operations of the separatist 
ethnic Albanian fighters, there is plenty of evidence of destruction 
for destruction's sake as the Serbs moved in to punish the civilian 
population that supported the guerrillas. Backyard wells have been 
filled with the carcasses of animals slaughtered by Serbian soldiers 
for food; the blackboards and desks in the schoolhouse in Dobre Vode 
have been burned and the windows smashed. Simple things, like the 
theft of a sewing machine motor and dainty coffee cups flung from 
a window, seem especially intended to inflict pain. Since the Yugoslav 
leader, Slobodan Milosevic, bowed to NATO and withdrew about 4,500 
Serbian special police officers from Kosovo nearly two weeks ago, 
almost all the ethnic Albanian refugees who had been camping in the 
hills have moved indoors. Fear of the well-armed Serbian policemen 
camped in their villages, even in their homes, had been the ultimate 
deterrent to returning home. Now that the refugees are out of the 
hills, many are doubling up with friends and neighbors. Some are sleeping 
in their cars. Others have found a room or two still intact at home 
and a few lucky ones have found relatively little damage. The catastrophe 
depicted by U.S. officials of refugees dying from the cold in the 
snow above the tree line appears to have been averted. But many of 
the 250,000 refugees that the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees 
estimates were swirling around Kosovo during the height of the fighting 
still lack proper shelter. And many say they still feel skittish about 
their security. About 10,000 Serbian special policemen remain in this 
southern province, the number that NATO officials said they and Milosevic 
had agreed was the level of the force before the fighting began last 
March. These policemen, according to an agreement signed by Milosevic 
and the NATO supreme commander, Gen. Wesley Clark of the United States, 
on Oct. 25, are allowed to man 27 ``observation posts'' in designated 
areas. Under the agreement, only nine of these posts are to be manned 
``initially.'' But there seems to be enough maneuvering around the 
edges of the agreement to crimp the confidence of the refugees that 
they will be safe at home. The U.N. high commissioner for refugees 
reported on Thursday, for example, that the Serbian police were using 
an earthmover to dig what appeared to be a new post at Orlate, near 
Malisevo. The agency said the arrival of truckloads of policemen at 
Cermyljan, near Djakovica, had caused newly returned refugees to flee 
again. Reports filed by the Kosovo Diplomatic Observers Mission, which 
consists of observers from the United States, Western Europe and Russia, 
say the Serbian police are continuing patrols intended to harass returning 
refugees. Two days ago, on the border with Montenegro, Serbia's sole 
partner in the Yugoslav Federation, 11 ethnic Albanians returning 
to their homes in Kosovo were taken off a bus and are still being 
held by the Serbian police in Pec, the refugee agency said. Agency 
officials said the incident was not an isolated one. What should be 
the more solvable problem of making damaged homes livable for winter 
is also difficult. ``We're talking about 20,000 houses that need to 
be rebuilt,'' said Margaret O'Keefe, the refugee agency's director 
in Serbia. ``Even if houses look OK from the outside, you go inside 
and you find the walls are crumbling.'' It is a race against the snow 
to get the homes patched together, she said. The southern flanks of 
Kosovo, along the Cursed Mountains bordering Albania, are already 
curtained with snow. Further inland, temperatures fall below freezing 
at night. On Saturday, rain and mud made for miserable conditions 
as returning refugees tried to clean up gutted houses and drain damaged 
water wells. Mrs. Millaku, 40, and her husband, Ibrahim, 45, seemed 
at a loss where to start. Not a room in their home of 16 years was 
habitable. Rain poured through windows where the glass had melted 
from the fire that burned in rooms filled with furniture and appliances. 
``We've collected some cooking pots, some wire and a few things,'' 
Millaku said as he pointed to a pile of belongings. ``There isn't 
much that is useful that they didn't ruin.'' Electricity throughout 
the Drenica region has been cut, the main switchboards gutted, said 
Millaku, who works for the electric utility. Since returning from 
the hills five nights ago, the eight members of the family have taken 
turns sleeping in their four-seater car and on the floor of a neighbor's 
house. In some areas, the U.N. high commissioner for refugees and 
other agencies have started to distribute plastic sheeting, like that 
which became almost a landmark in besieged Sarajevo, taking the place 
of windows blown out by artillery fire. But in a string of villages 
in western Drenica, no sheeting was evident Saturday. The Mother Teresa 
agency, the local ethnic Albanian group that distributes much of the 
U.N. supplies, turned up in Dobre Vode for the first time Saturday, 
Millaku said, dropping off flour, cooking oil and pasta, ``but nothing 
serious.'' In Trdevac, just east of Dobre Vode, the Ramaj family appeared 
more upbeat. They were out in their field Saturday, plowing with the 
tractor on which they had fled to the hills during the Serbian offensive. 
Nexhme Din Ramaj, 15, was planting two sacks of wheat seed, which 
if all goes well, he said, will be harvested next July. ``The Serbs 
burned the house, but left us one room,'' he said. ``And they didn't 
touch the seeds.'' For the most part, the agencies said, refugees 
appear to be returning to regions where the Kosovo Liberation Army 
had been the strongest. In these areas, like Drenica, the guerrillas 
appear to have bounced back, appearing in uniforms and with rifles 
at checkpoints and driving around in cars. In many cases, they have 
taken over positions on roads or in houses vacated by the Serbian 
police, helping to give the returning refugees a sense of security. 
The refugees said they still supported the fighters even though the 
Serbian forces had destroyed much of their property because they suspected 
them of harboring guerrillas, ``I feel safer if our fighters are around 
the village,'' said Sinan Gashi, 35, as he showed visitors around 
his compound of three homes in the village of Cabic. Two of the houses 
are unlivable; the third is overflowing with his extended family. 
In the largest house, an unfinished structure high on a hill, the 
Serbian police had gouged sniper holes in the walls. Spent bullets 
littered the floor. For the moment, Gashi said, he doubted that the 
presence of the fighters made the village a target. But spring, he 
said, when many fear the fighting between Serbian forces and the guerrillas 
will erupt again, was a different matter. ``It depends on the political 
and military situation if we rebuild,'' he said. ``If we rebuild they 
could come and burn us down again.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>