<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981107.0112 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It was one of the standing jokes of New York politics that Sen. Daniel 
Patrick Moynihan had written more books than Sen. Alfonse D'Amato 
had read. But all the royalties from all those books would not equal 
the amount of money D'Amato could raise in one phone call. You have 
talents, and then you have talents. Now they are both on the way out, 
the pair who have been the state's senatorial team for nearly two 
decades. D'Amato was the career pol who brought home bacon. Moynihan 
was the scholar-statesman, although a scholar-statesman who was quite 
into bacon himself. The Moynihan pork had to come in huge slabs, like 
the multibillion-dollar transportation act or the Manhattan post-office-turned-railroad 
station that, if it ever gets finished, will probably and justly be 
named the Moynihan Edifice. Just days after D'Amato lost his re-election 
race to Rep. Charles Schumer, Moynihan let it be known that he was 
quitting when his term ends in two years. Friends of the senator say 
he has been planning his retirement since 1994. If he had not, the 
sight of New York's junior senator going down in flames would certainly 
have sent him packing. Before D'Amato's political career expired, 
both he and Schumer got to see advertisements a dozen times a night 
featuring their pictures in tones of gray and white that suggested 
they were either half-dead or recently released from a year in solitary 
confinement. And how many people get to spend sums in the eight figures 
for the pleasure of being publicly branded a liar or a ``putzhead''? 
New York politicians are actually very averse to genuinely competitive 
contests. For most of them, a good election year is one in which everybody 
gets cross-endorsed by both parties and the day after the voting finds 
every single public official standing exactly where he or she was 
the day before. (It is no accident that the state Legislature scored 
a 100 percent rate of return for incumbents last week.) Moynihan never 
had a serious primary after 1976, when he won the Senate nomination 
as the lone centrist in a field of left-wing Democrats. His Republican 
opponents have included a state assemblywoman who campaigned by taking 
buses around the state in the company of her 22-year-old daughter, 
and a Long Island lawyer who got to drive his own car. In 1994, the 
Republicans put up the heiress to a convertible-sofa empire, whose 
greatest claim to fame was the fact that, as a tot, she had opened 
and closed a couch-bed on the company's television commercials. But 
the flip side to politics in New York is that if you climb high enough 
and hang on long enough, sooner or later somebody will smell blood 
and do you in. Gov. Mario Cuomo coasted along through two re-elections 
and then was tossed out on his ear by George Pataki, a pleasant Republican 
whose name people seemed to have trouble placing even after he had 
been in office several years. D'Amato created Pataki, plucking him 
out of nowhere and making him the party nominee. (In New York, nowhere 
would be the state Senate.) But four years later, Pataki was enjoying 
one of those virtual political cease-fires and D'Amato was the one 
voters had gotten sick of after 18 years on the job. The governor 
was practically carrying D'Amato around the state _ a particularly 
bad idea since Pataki is so tall he made the senator look as though 
he had shrunk to the size of a raisin. When your time is up in New 
York, it is really, really up. Schumer, who was considered to be doing 
quite well by running neck and neck with the legendary campaigner 
Al D'Amato, wound up absolutely obliterating the senator on Election 
Day. Schumer, a man who respects the manic activity his profession 
requires at the highest levels, was last seen running around upstate 
New York, thanking all the people who had actually not voted for him. 
D'Amato had portrayed him as the enemy of all things agricultural, 
and Schumer _ who is indeed one of your more urban politicians _ is 
determined to win over the rural areas. ``They think that once he's 
elected they'll never see him again,'' laughed one of Schumer's aides. 
``Little do they know they'll never see the end of him. God help us 
if there's an ice storm.'' ( Schumer was violently attacked for voting 
against relief for upstate farmers after an ice storm. If bad weather 
strikes this winter, look for him on snow shoes, somewhere near the 
Canadian border, delivering coffee door to door.) Moynihan did something 
similar when he was first elected, if on a more leisurely schedule. 
He became the first senator in New York history to visit all 62 counties, 
some of them extremely remote and containing only about a half-dozen 
people. But he has been around too long to feel that hungry again, 
and his decision to retire suggests that he has not lost his best 
political instincts. D'Amato had barely given his concession speech 
when the political chattering classes began theorizing that he would 
run against Moynihan in two years. Moynihan would be 73 then. D'Amato 
first won his Senate seat by claiming that 76-year-old Jacob Javits 
was too old to stay in office. But then, in two years, D'Amato will 
be 63 himself. Better to leave it to the next generation. Already 
we are hearing suggestions that the son of Mario Cuomo or the son 
of Robert F. Kennedy might run for the seat. Sons did not do too well 
in this last election, unless their name was Bush. Three heirs to 
great political family traditions were knocked off in Minnesota alone 
by Jesse Ventura. New York has never had a professional wrestler running 
for public office, although we did have a gubernatorial candidate 
whose claim to fame was a couple of years as TV's Grandpa Munster. 
The time may be right. Perhaps Hulk Hogan would have the energy. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>