<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981107.0084 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A day after House Speaker Newt Gingrich's abrupt resignation, the 
race for House speaker was transformed into a spirited free-for-all, 
with Republicans predicting Saturday that the roiling competition 
would soon engulf most of the top positions in the House Republican 
hierarchy. If Gingrich had hoped to bring some unity to his fractious 
caucus by stepping down, his departure instead opened the floodgates 
for new candidates in a party still reeling from an election that 
cost Republicans five House seats instead of bringing the opposition 
party its traditional gains in an off-year. Rep. Robert Livingston, 
R-La., the chairman of the Appropriations Committee, loomed like the 
giant-killer Friday when he announced the challenge that drove Gingrich 
out of the speaker's chair. And he is still the favorite in the race, 
having worked for a year to line up votes. By Saturday the 55-year-old 
lawmaker, who had presented himself as a manager who could ease the 
House out of paralysis, was himself facing new challengers for the 
powerful speaker's post as Republicans considered what face they wanted 
to put forward to the nation in place of Gingrich. Rather than recoiling 
from a fight, many Republicans said they were relishing the open competition. 
``I have a smile on my face and joy in my heart because this is a 
day I've been looking for,'' Rep. Steve Largent, R-Okla., said Friday 
night on CNN's ``Larry King Live,'' as he promoted his own candidacy 
for House majority leader against Rep. Dick Armey, R-Texas. Largent 
said, ``What the Republican Party needs so desperately is not retreads, 
not the old has-beens, but the new fresh ideas, fresh faces, and I'm 
excited.'' The leadership race is likely to become not just a battle 
of personalities, but a struggle between different factions of the 
Republican Party with conflicting ideological agendas. What remained 
unclear was whether the struggle would have any effect on the impeachment 
inquiry into President Clinton. Asked about the inquiry Friday, Livingston 
said simply that the matter was being handled by the House Judiciary 
Committee and that ``I, like all of the other members, await their 
decision.'' Many Republicans said they were longing for a speaker 
who could become a Ronald Reagan or who could replicate the successes 
of the Republicans who had won gubernatorial elections in Massachusetts, 
New York, Florida and Texas, by putting forward a conservatism that 
seems inclusive and compassionate. ``Ronald Reagan did not scare people 
and the guy was far more conservative than any Republican governor,'' 
said Rep. Joe Scarborough, R-Fla. He pointed to the transformation 
of Jeb Bush, who lost a race for governor of Florida four years ago 
but won on his second try Tuesday and captured more than half of the 
Hispanic vote. ``In '94 Jeb sounded like us,'' he said, referring 
to his own revolutionary class of Republicans who won the House in 
1994 on the ``Contract With America.'' ``In '98 he sounded like very 
few Republicans I have ever heard,'' Scarborough said. ``I heard him 
talk to Hispanics and African-Americans, and he was on fire. He came 
across better with those groups than middle-class whites.'' Rep. Christopher 
Cox, R-Calif., 46, a telegenic soft-spoken lawmaker, announced his 
candidacy for speaker in his own appearance on the Larry King program 
by reminding Republicans that he had served in the Reagan White House 
and by calling himself someone who had been able to work even with 
liberals. On the air, Cox even joked that he could lobby for support 
from Largent, who was also using the program as a platform. There 
was one sign of consolidation in the speaker's race. Rep. Bill Archer, 
R-Texas, 70, the chairman of the tax-writing Ways and Means Committee, 
had abruptly withdrawn support from Gingrich on Friday saying that 
he was considering a run for speaker himself. But Saturday, Archer, 
an apostle of tax cuts who wants to replace the income tax code with 
a national sales tax, pulled out of the contest. He had already been 
drawing support from fellow Texans, who make up one of the largest 
Republican delegations in the House, and from conservatives. It was 
not clear whether conservatives would now scramble for another candidate. 
Some House members said the situation remained fluid. Rep. Pete Sessions, 
R-Texas, said that many members who had given their backing to Livingston 
had done so expecting him to challenge either Armey or Gingrich. He 
said Gingrich's departure could prompt rethinking. ``It was seen as 
a Livingston versus Gingrich fight,'' Sessions said. The Livingston 
forces, he said, ``will have to go back and retest what they've got.'' 
Rep. James Talent, R-Mo., 42, also indicated that he might seek the 
post. Talent, the chairman of the House Small Business Committee, 
is a conservative who has worked well with GOP moderates. The speaker 
is the most powerful figure in the House and follows the vice president 
as the next in the line of succession for the presidency. The speaker 
also controls committee assignments and chairmanships, in that way 
exerting powerful sway over the legislative agenda. But many other 
positions could be up for grabs when House Republicans convene later 
this month to select their leaders for the incoming 106th Congress. 
``All hell is breaking loose,'' said a senior Republican aide. ``Everybody's 
jumping in. I wouldn't be surprised if members start running for multiple 
positions.'' Armey, a folksy conservative, has already been challenged 
by Largent. And Rep. John Boehner, R-Ohio, the fourth-ranking leader 
who serves as chairman of the House Republican Conference, faces one 
rival so far, Rep. George Radanovich, R-Calif., another member of 
the class of '94. So far only Rep. Tom DeLay, R-Texas, who is the 
majority whip in the House, appeared to be fending off competition. 
DeLay, whose role is to count votes, has the support of his extensive 
whip organization, even though his relations with other House leaders 
were poisoned by the abortive coup against Gingrich in 1997. The winners 
must be elected later on the House floor when the new Congress convenes 
in January. It was the prospects of how that second election might 
go that helped persuade Gingrich to step down, some Republicans said. 
Although Gingrich might have prevailed inside the Republican caucus 
elections later this month, eight or more Republicans had vowed that 
they would never vote for him. Their opposition meant that, since 
Republicans now hold only a six-seat majority, Gingrich might not 
have been able to win the second election on the House floor. In the 
wake of his stunning departure, Gingrich won praise from many of the 
Republicans he had worked with most closely. ``Few men or women have 
had a greater impact on the Republican Party and the nation over the 
last decade than Newt Gingrich,'' said Senate Majority Leader Trent 
Lott, who had grown up with Gingrich as a fellow member in the House 
minority. ``I will miss his visionary leadership.'' Senate leadership 
elections will come in December. Thus far, Lott appears safe, although 
some of his lieutenants may face challenges. Armey, who for four years 
had been Gingrich's second-in-command, said, ``Newt Gingrich deserves 
a place in history right next to Ronald Reagan.'' But Republicans 
on Saturday were already showcasing fresh faces and a new tone. Their 
weekly radio address was delivered by one of the newly elected incoming 
representatives, Greg Walden of Oregon, a 41-year-old radio station 
owner. He said that when he campaigned he met constituents who wanted 
Congress to pay down the national debt, make health care accessible, 
strengthen the national defense and protect the Social Security system. 
He asked President Clinton to join with Republicans in Congress ``in 
dedicating the next two years not to partisanship and posturing, but 
to real honest to goodness problem- solving where we debate policies, 
not personalities.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>