<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981107.0019 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Sen. Daniel Patrick Moynihan, the New York Democrat who for almost 
five decades has been a fixture of American politics as a presidential 
adviser, scholar and member of Congress, announced Friday that he 
would not run for re-election when his fourth term ends in 2000. ``It 
will have been 24 years,'' Moynihan said in an interview, adding: 
``I've been very happy, and there was a very positive note to this 
last election. It's time to make room for others.'' The departure 
of Moynihan, 71, who has been among the state's most popular elected 
officials for years, is certain to trigger fierce competition in both 
major parties to replace him. By Friday afternoon, a dozen of the 
state's best-known politicians were being mentioned as possible candidates 
for the seat, including New York Mayor Rudolph Giuliani, a Republican, 
and Democrats H. Carl McCall, the state comptroller; Andrew Cuomo, 
the U.S. secretary of Housing and Urban Development, and Donna Shalala, 
the U.S. secretary of Health and Human Services. Moynihan's announcement 
comes at moment when New York's congressional delegation has been 
steadily losing seniority and influence in the Republican-controlled 
Congress. In the last two years, six members of the state's 31- member 
House delegation have resigned or announced plans to retire, including 
its three most powerful Republicans: Susan Molinari of Staten Island, 
Bill Paxon of Buffalo and Gerald Solomon of Glens Falls. And on Tuesday, 
Sen. Alfonse D'Amato, the last remaining Republican in the Senate 
from the metropolitan region of New York, New Jersey and Connecticut, 
was defeated by Rep. Charles Schumer, a nine-term Democrat from Brooklyn. 
Well before Moynihan first made his announcement that he would retire, 
during an interview with Gabe Pressman of WNBC-TV in New York, New 
York Republicans had been warning that the entire metropolitan area 
would lose much clout in Congress if D'Amato was defeated. But Friday, 
Democrats said that Tuesday's election, in which their party gained 
five House seats, had led them to believe that they could recapture 
control of the House in 2000 and of the Senate in 2002. ``The same 
general trends which elected Chuck Schumer and which produced a complete 
Democratic Senate delegation in the metro area will be working in 
2000,'' said Sen. Robert Torricelli, D-N.J. Moynihan's announcement 
prompted a flood of news releases from Gov. George Pataki, Giuliani 
and New York City Council Speaker Peter Vallone praising his 22 years 
in office and bemoaning his decision to leave. Quoting an assessment 
of Moynihan in the Almanac of American Politics, Giuliani called the 
senator ``the best thinker among politicians since Lincoln and the 
best politician among thinkers since Jefferson.'' Moynihan has had 
a chilly relationship with President Clinton, but on Friday the president 
released a statement praising the senator. ``Senator Moynihan's decision 
to retire comes as sad news for all of us who have worked with him 
and learned from him during his long career of public service,'' the 
president said. ``Pat Moynihan has been a larger-than-life figure 
in the Senate, ably filling the seat once held by Aaron Burr, Martin 
Van Buren and Robert F. Kennedy.'' Moynihan has had one of the most 
varied careers of any member of the Senate. He started as an aide 
to Gov. W. Averell Harriman in the 1950s, was assistant secretary 
of labor in the Kennedy and Johnson administrations, chief domestic 
adviser to President Nixon and chief representative to the United 
Nations under President Ford. He has also been ambassador to India, 
taught urban studies at Harvard University and written or edited 18 
books. In the Senate, he is the ranking Democrat on the powerful Finance 
Committee, where he has played a leading role in shaping tax, health 
care and Social Security policies. He was also the main author of 
a 1991 law that set aside billions of dollars for highway and mass 
transit projects across the country. But arguably Moynihan's impact 
was greater as a writer and thinker than as a legislator. Known for 
his tweed jackets, knit ties and untamed shock of white hair, he often 
expounded on the floor of the Senate and to reporters on issues as 
far-ranging as race relations, welfare policy, nuclear arms proliferation, 
relations between India and Pakistan and the history of architecture. 
In ``Beyond the Melting Pot,'' which he wrote with Nathan Glazer in 
1963, Moynihan analyzed the impact of ethnic rivalries on American 
politics. In a 1965 report, he warned about the growth of single-parent 
families. And in his most recent book, ``Secrecy: The American Experience,'' 
he warns against the dangers of government secrecy. In the interview 
with Pressman, Moynihan said his wife and closest political adviser, 
Elizabeth, had ``made up our mind four years ago'' about not running. 
``I'll have served four terms in the Senate, just as dear Jack Javits 
had done,'' he said, adding parenthetically, ``I wished he had let 
it stay at that.'' Moynihan noted in the interview that he had read 
a news article last week in which McCall, the state comptroller, mused 
about running for the Senate in 2000. Looking into the camera, Moynihan 
said, ``This is to say, Carl, I won't be in that primary _ I hope 
you are.'' Noting that Sen. Carol Moseley-Braun, D-Ill., the Senate's 
only black member, was defeated on Tuesday, Moynihan said that McCall 
``may decide that he owes it to his community'' to run. ``I hope he 
does,'' he continued. ``It's not right that the U.S. Senate should 
be all white.'' Although many New York politicians had thought it 
unlikely that Moynihan would seek a precedent-setting fifth term _ 
he had done very little fund raising to prepare for a race _ few expected 
him to declare his plans so soon after the 1998 elections. Privately, 
many Democrats said they were relieved that he had made the announcement 
early, thereby giving candidates time to raise money and support before 
the 2000 primaries. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>