<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981107.0068 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As voters reaffirmed democracy last week, a report was released that 
seemed like lab results on a 200-year-old paternity suit against one 
of the Founding Fathers. DNA tests matched descendants of Thomas Jefferson 
with those of his beautiful slave Sally Hemings. This turned Jefferson 
scholarship on its ear; from the 19th century on, most historians 
insisted that a man of Jefferson's character could not have had a 
sexual relationship with Hemings. The study in the scientific journal 
Nature by Eugene Foster, a retired Tufts University pathologist, showed 
Jefferson fathered Eston Hemings at 65, an age associated more with 
retirement from life than with the creation of it. Sally Hemings' 
descendants had long claimed Jefferson as an ancestor, and a few books 
have tried to document the liaison. But Jeffersonian scholars preferred 
to discount the claim, specifically that contained in a memoir by 
Eston Hemings' brother, Madison. The scholars relied less on facts 
than on their understanding of Jefferson's character. Assessments 
of his character _ written before the DNA test _ follow. _ DARYL ROYSTER 
ALEXANDER HENRY ADAMS ``History of the United States of America During 
the First Administration of Thomas Jefferson,'' Charles Scribner's 
Sons, 1889. ``According to the admitted standards of greatness, Jefferson 
was a great man. After all deductions on which his enemies might choose 
to insist, his character could not be denied elevation, versatility, 
breadth, insight and delicacy . . . he fairly reveled in what he believed 
to be beautiful, and his writings often betrayed subtile feeling for 
artistic form, _ a sure mark of intellectual sensuousness. He shrank 
from whatever was rough or coarse, and his yearning for sympathy was 
almost feminine.'' DUMAS MALONE ``Jefferson the President, First Term, 
1801-1805,'' (Little, Brown and Co., 1970). Malone, who died in 1986, 
was considered the Jefferson authority. (The charges of a sexual relationship 
with Sally Hemings) ``are distinctly out of character, being virtually 
unthinkable in a man of Jefferson's moral standards and habitual conduct. 
. . . It is virtually inconceivable that this fastidious gentleman 
whose devotion to his dead wife's memory and to the happiness of his 
daughters and grandchildren bordered on the excessive could have carried 
on through a period of years a vulgar liaison which his own family 
could not have failed to detect.'' MERRILL D. PETERSON ``Thomas Jefferson 
and the New Nation,'' (Oxford University Press, 1970). `` Unless Jefferson 
was capable of slipping badly out of character in hidden moments at 
Monticello, it is difficult to imagine him caught up in a miscegenous 
relationship. Such a mixture of the races, such a ruthless exploitation 
of the master-slave relationship, revolted his whole being. It is 
of no historical importance, but the best guess is that Sally's children 
were fathered by Peter Carr. '' (Jefferson's nephew) FAWN M. BRODIE 
wrote ``Thomas Jefferson, an Intimate History'' (W.W. Norton &AMP; 
Co.) and famously re-ignited the Jefferson-Hemings question in 1974, 
using a Freudian approach. ``One of the important reasons that Jefferson's 
true nature has remained elusive is the insistence of all his previous 
biographers that after the death of his wife he never felt any lasting 
affection again for any woman. Gilbert Chinard stated the theme in 
1928 when he wrote bluntly that though Jefferson corresponded with 
many women ``there is no indication that he ever fell in love again.'' 
. . . But does a man's sexuality atrophy at 39, especially if he has 
already demonstrated that he was capable of very great passion? . 
. . Freud warned long ago (in ``Leonardo da Vinci: A Study in Psychosexuality''): 
``Biographers frequently select the hero as the object of study because 
for personal reasons of their own emotional life, they have a special 
affection for him from the very outset. They then devote themselves 
to a work of idealization.'' . . . This kind of canonization dominated 
19th-century biography, and even today the Jefferson scholars wary 
of the impulse to sanctify are nevertheless often its victim; they 
glorify and protect by nuance, by omission, by subtle repudiation, 
without being in the least aware of the strength of their internal 
commitment to canonization. This we see particularly in their treatment 
of the story of Sally Hemings. This liaison, above all others in Jefferson's 
life, is unutterably taboo. . . . Black historians, however, have 
long accepted the story as accurate, and it is one of the most ironic 
aspects of the Jefferson image today that the blacks who repudiate 
him as a hero, because of his ambivalence over slavery, nevertheless 
believe the historical Jefferson to have been a man of great sexual 
vitality.'' GARRY WILLS, in ``Uncle Thomas' Cabin'' (New York Review 
of Books, April 18, 1974), attacked Professor Brodie's book. But some 
of his statements about Hemings commented indirectly on Jefferson. 
``Yet there is no scrap of evidence for this passion, except perhaps 
the fact that he retained Sally at Monticello after stories about 
her had been widely circulated. Still, what was he supposed to do? 
Kill her? Freeing or selling her would make her more likely to talk, 
or to be tricked into talking. It was safer to keep her nearby. She 
was apparently pleasing, and obviously discreet. There was less risk 
in continuing to enjoy her services than in experimenting around with 
others. She was like a healthy and obliging prostitute.'' JOEL WILLIAMSON, 
in ``New People: Miscegenation and Mulattoes in the United States'' 
(The Free Press, 1980), argued against lumping Jefferson with other 
slave owners. ``Up to a point Jefferson fits neatly the pattern of 
the widower as miscegenator exemplified by his father-in-law. One 
ought not to be greatly surprised to find that he had a mulatto lover 
among his slaves, but if he did, it probably was not Sally. If it 
was, he departed the role in two important respects: he did not avow 
paternity . . . and he did not seem to maintain the relationship with 
the mistress until death did them part.'' JOSEPH J. ELLIS, whose 1997 
book, ``American Sphinx: The Character of Thomas Jefferson'' (Alfred 
A. Knopf) won the National Book Award, included the appendix, ``A 
Note on the Sally Hemings Scandal.'' ``What Hamilton and both Adamses 
understood about Jefferson, and what my own immersion in the historical 
evidence has caused me to conclude as well, is that for most of his 
adult life he lacked the capacity for the direct and physical expression 
of his sexual energies. Henry Adams put it most explicitly when he 
said that Jefferson's temperament was ``almost feminine.'' When scholarly 
defenders like Dumas Malone and Merrill Peterson claimed that Jefferson 
was ``not the kind of man'' to engage in illicit sex with an attractive 
mulatto slave, they were right for reasons that went deeper than matters 
of male gallantry and aristocratic honor. Jefferson consummated his 
relations with women at a more rarefied level. . . . He was, to be 
sure, capable of living with massive contradictions, but his psychological 
dexterity depended upon the manipulation of interior images and personae; 
he was not that adroit at the kind of overt deviousness required to 
sustain an allegedly 38-year affair in the very center of his domestic 
haven.'' ANNETTE GORDON-REED, a professor at New York Law School, 
sifted through the existing evidence and put her findings in ``Thomas 
Jefferson and Sally Hemings: An American Controversy'' (University 
Press of Virginia, 1997). She concluded: ``The failure to look more 
closely into the identities of the parties involved, the too ready 
acceptance and active promotion of the Carr brothers story, the reliance 
upon stereotypes in the place of investigation and analysis, all indicate 
that most Jefferson scholars decided from the outset that this story 
was not true. . . . In the most fundamental sense, the enterprise 
of defense has had little to do with expanding people's knowledge 
of Thomas Jefferson or the other participants in the story. The goal 
has been quite the opposite: to restrict knowledge as a way of controlling 
the allowable discourse on this subject.'' Last week Professors Ellis 
and Gordon-Reed appeared on PBS' ``Newshour With Jim Lehrer'' to discuss 
the DNA research linking Hemings' last born to Jefferson. Accompanying 
the report in Nature was an article by Ellis and Eric Lander, a geneticist. 
Asked on the program if he had a change of heart, Ellis said: ``It's 
not so much a change of heart, but this is really new evidence. And 
it _ prior to this evidence, I think it was a very difficult case 
to know and circumstantial on both sides, and, in part, because I 
got it wrong, I think I want to step forward and say this new evidence 
constitutes, well, evidence beyond any reasonable doubt that Jefferson 
had a longstanding sexual relationship with Sally Hemings. Even though 
the match is only with one of the Hemings' descendants, Eston Hemings, 
it's inconceivable that Jefferson, who was 65 when Eston was born, 
would have made a one-night stand here.'' Later, Professor Gordon-Reed 
said: ``I think the moral of this story is the thing this shows very 
clearly is that we're not two separate people, black and white; we 
are a people who share a common culture, a common land, and it turns 
out a common blood line, and this is something that we haven't wanted 
to deal with openly. And talking about Jefferson, which people like 
to do, I think is a good vehicle for exploring that question.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>