<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981107.0254 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Yes, Doug Flutie eats Flutie Flakes. ``Had some yesterday,'' he said 
one day last week in Buffalo, referring to his own brand of cereal 
that is a hot seller in that town, just like the hot quarterback. 
``Do you eat them every day?'' he was asked. ``I don't eat anything 
every day,'' he snapped. His face looked twisted. Oh. Flutie was flustered. 
With all the hype, glare and intensity being hurled his way, no wonder 
his patience was thinning. His free space has now become the size 
of a thimble. Could be that way when Flutie and the Bills jostle with 
the Jets Sunday afternoon at Giants Stadium. Both teams are 5-3, so 
first place in the American Football Conference East goes to the winner. 
Big game. But Flutie played in plenty of those in the last eight years 
in the Canadian Football League. It has been some trek: magical star 
and Heisman Trophy winner at Boston College, four seasons and only 
14 starts with two teams (Chicago and New England) in the National 
Football League, off to Canada (banished to Canada?) for eight seasons, 
back this year to the NFL. Back with Buffalo. Three consecutive Bills 
starts now. Three straight victories. And the talk of the league. 
All eyes are on him. Flutie, 36, knows there is a difference between 
playing in the CFL and in the NFL. ``You have to make the reads and 
the delivery a little quicker here. There is that bit of adjustment 
because the field is shorter. The windows of opportunity are smaller. 
You don't have the luxury of having your receiver run a longer route 
and develop it more on a defender. Plus the C.F.L. plays with 12 men 
and you have 11 in the NFL. It is a totally different read and a faster 
game here. When I first got here, my head was spinning. But now the 
pace is slowing down for me. I'm getting used to the pace. It's not 
so fast anymore. I'm slowing down.'' Fascinating, really. Doug Flutie 
is slowing down and everyone else, the NFL included, is speeding up. 
Catching up. The entire league did not think he could play _ too short 
(5 feet 9 inches), too light (175 pounds) _ and did not think his 
arm was strong enough or his game big enough. So, Canada became Flutie's 
playing ground for eight long seasons, from 1990 through 1997. He 
is back now. And his window of opportunity just blew wide open. He 
has been named the Bills' starter for the rest of the season, supplanting 
Rob Johnson, who was injured four games ago and is ready to play again. 
The Bills will stick with Flutie. The hot hand. Buffalo loves him 
now. The NFL adores the interest he has piqued. Bills ticket sales 
are improving. Teammates love his fire and desire. Opponents marvel 
at his determination and skill. Reporters tug at him. Television cameras 
cannot get enough shots. His No. 7 jersey is a favorite with the fans. 
Everyone wants to shake his hand. Get your Flutie Flakes! It is a 
wonderful time for Doug Flutie. It is, too, a time of some consternation. 
``What is aggravating to my wife, Laurie, and me is that I haven't 
been doing anything different from what I've been doing in the last 
eight years in Canada,'' he said last week in Buffalo. ``Now all of 
a sudden everybody cares. Something about that is not right to us. 
It's aggravating. People would recognize me before and maybe wave 
or nod. Now they all want that extra two or three minutes or to shake 
hands. There's some sincerity lost in that.'' His face looked twisted 
again. ``I don't like the fact that I had to go play in Toronto and 
Vancouver and British Columbia and all over Canada for eight years 
just to get a real shot in the NFL. I was never with an offense in 
the NFL before that was open-minded and did some of the things I need 
to do. They never really let me throw the ball. So, I was a guy that 
was too short and too this and that and had little choice but to go 
to Canada, and I missed a lot. I missed a chance to see my kids grow 
up. I could have been doing this the last eight years in New England 
all along.'' His face no longer looked twisted. ``I know, I know, 
it sounds like I have a chip on my shoulder,'' Flutie said, forcing 
a small smile. ``Maybe I do. Rob Johnson tells me that all of that 
time.'' A chip for the other 29 NFL teams that looked the other way. 
A little something for everyone who doubted. A little something for 
not even a window of opportunity for eight straight years. And now 
this. So, forgive Flutie if you will, but he is playing football this 
fall with a stick-it-to-you, sock-it-to-you redemptive attitude. Every 
pass, every touchdown, every victory is another triumph in his season 
of personal statement as well as the Bills' resurrection. Flutie loves 
the NFL adulation. He also resents it. If only it could have happened 
long ago. ``The height, the weight, the speed _ he fit the perfect 
stereotype of the guy who can't play quarterback,'' said Ozzie Newsome, 
the Baltimore Ravens vice president and chief of player personnel. 
``How many under-6-foot quarterbacks have been successful in this 
league? That is why the NFL didn't believe. He is a huge exception. 
``For every one Doug Flutie there are 20 that didn't make it and couldn't 
do it. And the thing about it is that many quarterbacks have shown 
that they can play three or four games and be good. Bobby Hoying, 
Danny Kanell, Jake Plummer _ they all did that last year. Look at 
them this year. Teams start circulating that tape and these defensive 
coaches come up with things to make it tough. If Flutie can sustain 
what he has done over the next 10 or 12 games, he will really be the 
exception. And, let me make this clear _ I'm not saying he can't.'' 
Flutie is the top-rated passer in the American Football Conference 
with a 102.7 passer rating. He has thrown 10 touchdown passes and 
only 3 interceptions. He has completed 62.8 percent of his passes. 
In Canada, he was a similar star and more: In his eight seasons there 
he won the league's most outstanding player award six times and his 
teams won the league championship three times. ``Doug is the new guy 
on the block, a new story,'' said Wade Phillips, Buffalo's head coach. 
``He's like Mighty Mouse _ he's come in to save the day. He's a hero.'' 
Bruce Smith, the Bills' mighty defensive end, said: ``To be honest, 
I don't think anyone in their right mind could foresee what was going 
to happen in the last five weeks. We lost three straight, won five 
straight, we're in first place and Doug Flutie is our starting quarterback. 
He does things that can't be done up there on the chalkboard. In boxing, 
they call it ring management. He improvises and takes control. He 
has a heart as big as any 300-pound linemen I've ever played against.'' 
The rest of the Bills say they wanted Flutie to remain the starter. 
``We know that if something happens to Doug that we have a great quarterback 
in Rob who can come right in and win for us,'' said Bills defensive 
end Marcellus Wiley. ``But the coaches' decision reflects the players. 
We are happy.'' Flutie gives the Bills mobility at quarterback. Defenses 
today fiercely pursue quarterbacks and Flutie counters that with elusiveness 
and breaks down defenses. His arm strength is good, his play-fakes 
and ball-handling are special and his intelligence is supreme. That 
is his real game, his smarts and his experience. And the combination 
of all of that enables him to find unique and uncanny ways with his 
talent to win. He makes others around him who have more talent, who 
have more speed, work harder, produce more. They see little Doug Flutie 
busting to win and they think, ``Gee, I'm twice as big as him, twice 
as fast _ why can't I do that? I can!'' They do. So Buffalo rolls. 
Flutie rolls. Others are at the forefront. Receiver Eric Moulds is 
making big plays. Fullback Sam Gash brings extra oomph. Running back 
Thurman Thomas, in a reduced role, still makes big Thurman Thomas 
plays. The former Dallas receiver Kevin Williams contributes. The 
Bills' offensive line is having an impact. The Jets this afternoon 
will most likely command that their pass rushers stay in their lanes, 
remain disciplined, and force Flutie to beat them from the pocket 
with passes down field. No mad scrambling. The Jets will attempt to 
make Flutie's fame fleeting once again. Flutie knows the ride can 
derail. His plan, though, is to keep sticking, keep socking. It was 
A.J. Smith, the Bills' director of pro personnel, who sold the owner 
Ralph Wilson and the Bills on Flutie. Smith saw the winner, and, simply, 
the football player that Flutie is. Flutie initially wondered if his 
new teammates would, too. ``When I first arrived in minicamp in May,'' 
Flutie said, ``I knew I could play. But I didn't know what to expect 
from the team. I didn't know if they would treat me like a rookie 
or a veteran. But I think I've showed them something.'' Showed them 
all. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>