<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981107.0062 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Listen to the daunting questions in the silence of the hoops, questions 
we never have time to ponder because the beat of a bouncing basketball 
is usually so insistent this time of year. Is Doug Flutie too short, 
is Bill Bradley too tall, is Katarina Witt too naked, is Mike Tyson 
too crazy, and should the pro football conglomerate be renamed the 
National Felony League? By delaying its opening from last week to 
possibly next year, the National Basketball Association has given 
us time to think beyond Allan Iverson's crossover dribble and Michael 
Jordan's crossover image. The sport has also provoked a general disgust 
among its most sophisticated fans. Tony Kornheiser of The Washington 
Post described the impasse as ``a fight between tall millionaires 
and short millionaires.'' Sam Smith of The Chicago Tribune likens 
it to ``watching two limousines collide.'' They are absolutely right, 
yet so are both sides in this size struggle. And that's what it is, 
a size struggle, which is even bigger than the class struggle. If 
you are a short millionaire who slunk into your family's business 
after being cut from your church or synagogue basketball team, you 
feel a genetic need to stand up to those ungrateful giants who never 
had to kowtow to Dad or meet a payroll. What do they know about the 
work ethic; they've been on scholarship since junior high. If you 
are a tall millionaire who grew up pushed to dribble and dunk instead 
of learning to read books, it's time to strike back at four-eyed bitty-bullies 
who made snide remarks in class. The lack of human-interest basketball 
news _ what's new on Latrell Sprewell's victimization, Michael's full-scale 
investigation of Nike atrocities, Dennis Rodman's body parts? _ has 
been a boon. The former Senator Bradley, who is deciding whether to 
fulfill the promise of his Knicks rookie year by running for President, 
will not suffer guilt by association. His new book, ``Values of the 
Game'' (Artisan), implies that the virtues he learned on the hardcourt 
in short pants have made him the open man for the next election. It 
would not be good to read about all the other tall men who went through 
the same hoops but came out more fit for the nut house than the White 
House. The upset gubernatorial victory in Minnesota of Jesse (the 
Body) Ventura, a former pro wrestler, helps set the stage for bigger 
pols. The current Playboy spread on Witt also raises an issue of size: 
If the public responds in a positive fashion to the layout, it could 
change the size of future ice skaters and perhaps even gymnasts. If 
larger, more developed and, most important, older women become those 
sports' stars, the exploitation of elfs and gnomes might end. Size 
is key. Flutie was not exiled from the National Football League because 
he was too short to see over his line, he was exiled because he was 
the same size as, or smaller than, many owners and coaches. He was 
a reminder of their failure to start on their college, even their 
pee-wee teams. They had always blamed their ``lack of size'' when 
it was their lack of will, talent, need. Some fans feel this way, 
too, which is why Flutie's middle name is ``Hail Mary pass,'' so that 
people think that he rates on luck or divine lagniappe. You don't 
have to be a Jets fan, only a size fan, to hope that Vinny Testaverde, 
who looks much less like you, wins today. Everything is size; it's 
the only way to explain the reluctance to hire Flutie while murderers, 
rapists, kidnappers and wife-beaters make the roster if they are big 
enough. In their new book, ``Pros and Cons: The Criminals Who Play 
in the NFL'' (Warner Books), Jeff Benedict and Don Yaeger claim that 
one out of five currently active NFL players have been charged with 
a serious crime (traffic offenses, disturbing the peace, shoplifting 
not included.) They came to this conclusion by researching the criminal 
histories of 509 players whose records were accessible. Of that sample, 
109 had been arrested a combined 264 times. Benedict, a Boston law 
student who has become something of the jocks' Javert in recent years, 
believes that a league that suspends players for gambling or using 
steroids should also ban players who commit felonies. While the new 
book is provocative and important, Benedict's shiny idealism is not 
exactly saleable; sports on TV is sold by crunch and stomp, and crooks 
and nuts may hit the hardest. It's size. People whose muscles _ or 
wallets _ are big enough can make crime pay. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>