<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981107.0052 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Amid the hundreds of exhibits at the World Gaming Congress and Exposition 
in September, no new products better summed up gambling's place in 
the American psyche than the ``Pedal 'N Play'' cycle and the ``Money 
Mill'' treadmill. What better way to get the heart pounding and the 
palms perspiring than to wager money while exercising? The stationary 
cycle and the treadmill both have slot machines attached, allowing 
casino customers to sweat and bet at the same time, or as they say 
in gambling parlance, to ``stay in action,'' even while they're working 
out. ``People are going crazy about this,'' said Kathy Harris, president 
of Fitness Gaming Corp. of Fairfax, Va., the company that created 
this latest way of efficiently separating gamblers from their money. 
Ms. Harris pointed out that the machines were wired so ``you can't 
gamble unless you're peddling and you can't peddle unless you're gambling.'' 
The company's motto: ``Put your heart into gaming.'' To visit the 
gambling industry's September extravaganza, which drew more than 23,000 
casino operators, entrepreneurs and government officials from over 
100 countries, is to totally forget that legalized gambling itself 
is undergoing a re-examination by politicians and law-enforcement 
officials around the country. The enthusiasm that caused the industry 
to mushroom throughout the 1980s and early 1990s is slowly giving 
way to trepidation, as local governments learn that casinos are no 
panacea for their economic infirmities. Meanwhile, a presidential 
commission is expected to release a report next year on gambling's 
impact on the nation. And casino operators themselves have even banded 
together to finance studies about compulsive gambling. The effort 
of the casino operators has as much to do with controlling the damage 
that full awareness of compulsive gambling could have on their industry's 
reputation as with any desire to expose the problem. Still, studies 
continue to show that a majority of people support some form of legal 
betting. A recent survey by American Viewpoint, an opinion research 
company, and Gtech, the powerful lottery company, found that 7 out 
of 10 Americans believe that legalized gambling is an ``acceptable 
form of entertainment.'' And with one or more types of betting now 
legal in nearly every state, it is little wonder that the frontiers 
of wagering were on full display at the gambling exposition. The cavernous 
Las Vegas Convention Center was filled with slot machines and table 
games, wildly colored casino floor carpeting and furniture, the latest 
technology in automated teller machines and coin counters and the 
gigantic fake trees, rocks and animatronics that have transformed 
the nation's gambling halls into alluring wonderlands. Plenty of new 
games were displayed, and their enterprising creators used prize giveaways, 
free beer and seductive models to corner and cajole wide-eyed casino 
operators and government regulators into giving these new games a 
home in a casino. At the Digital 21 exhibit, which featured a new 
game of virtual Blackjack, a model attracted plenty of interest, although 
many of the players who crowded around her table were clearly having 
a difficult time paying attention to the cards. One casino advertising 
and marketing company even beckoned delegates by packing its small 
booth with young women in tight clothing and posting a sign offering 
a drawing for ``a free exotic dancer in the privacy of your room.'' 
Among the celebrities at the convention was the pop star Michael Jackson, 
who has recently expressed an interest in investing in a Detroit casino. 
Priscilla Presley, his former mother-in-law, showed up to help promote 
a new Elvis slot machine, which allows gamblers to wager while they 
watch a video of The King himself in concert. Within a few days after 
the convention ended, the Flamingo Hilton in Kansas City, Mo., became 
the first customer to order the Pedal N' Play and the Money Mill, 
according to Ms. Harris. Other potential customers are making plans 
to include the machines inside their casino hotel spas or create exercise 
areas on the casino floor itself. And in Las Vegas, where slot machines 
can already be found at just about every two-bit bar and convenience 
store, Ms. Harris hopes to do what any health-conscious American entrepreneur 
would do: convince local health club owners to get gaming licenses 
and put her company's machines next to the weights, stair-climbers 
and aerobic exercise floors. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>