<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981107.0224 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Within minutes, the first game of this National Collegiate Athletic 
Association men's basketball season became a camp clinic. The Indiana 
Hoosiers played the role of teacher and, with all the tenderness of 
a military commander, forced the Seton Hall Pirates into the role 
of the aggravated pupil. Before 15,509 mostly red-and-white clad fans 
at the RCA Dome on Saturday, the Hoosiers, ranked 22nd by The Associated 
Press, tutored their guests on the finer aspects of hard-nosed, fundamental 
basketball to open the National Association of Basketball Coaches 
Classic with an 83-69 victory. Don't be fooled by the final margin: 
a testament to the Pirates' heart, it says nothing about the competitiveness 
of the game. Indiana, which led by 32-13 six minutes before halftime 
and 69-45 six minutes before game's end, controlled the action from 
baseline to baseline for all but a few moments. To its credit, Seton 
Hall closed the gap against the Hoosiers' bench, which Coach Bobby 
Knight cleared with 6 minutes 26 seconds remaining. ``That team is 
very good,'' said Pirates swingman Reggie Saunders, who led all scorers 
with a career-high 29 points. ``They play great together. They came 
out with more intensity than us. The only good thing for us was that 
we didn't quit.'' With Knight walking the sideline and barking out 
orders, the Hoosiers mastered the Pirates on both ends of the floor. 
Defensively, they hounded Seton Hall's players from the midcourt line 
to the basket, moving their feet to get in position to block the Pirates' 
view of their teammates, using their hands to deny entry passes and 
hustling relentlessly to contest shots and retrieve loose balls. Offensively, 
they taught lessons about setting screens, making backdoor cuts, boxing 
out underneath the basket, following shots and finding the open man. 
Consequently, the outcome was decided well before halftime. After 
a nifty driving layup by Shaheen Holloway cut Indiana's lead to 7-4 
at the 16:57 mark, Seton Hall melted under the Hoosiers' stifling 
defensive pressure. While Indiana forced turnovers and converted them 
into easy baskets, the Pirates went more than seven minutes without 
scoring a basket. During that stretch, they got off just one shot 
inside the paint, a heavily contested jump hook that the freshman 
center Damien Dawkins missed. By the time Rimas Kaukenas ended the 
drought with a 3-pointer, Indiana was ahead by 26-11. Indiana forced 
12 turnovers, shot 61 percent from the floor and held Seton Hall to 
30 percent shooting in the first half to take a 41-24 lead. ``They 
really knocked us back in the first half,'' said Tommy Amaker, Seton 
Hall's coach. ``Their defense was suffocating. It was aggressive. 
It was all of the things you think of when you think of Indiana basketball 
and Coach Knight.'' Al Harrington, the first-round draft pick of the 
Indiana Pacers who entered the National Basketball Association draft 
directly out of New Jersey's St. Patrick's High School, watched the 
game from a courtside seat near Seton Hall's bench. His thoughts? 
``Man, in the first half, it looked like Indiana had six players on 
the court,'' said the 6-foot-9-inch Harrington, who would have attended 
Seton Hall. ``They were everywhere.'' William Gladness, a 6-8 senior 
forward, sparked Indiana. Playing with both athleticism and muscle, 
he controlled the area around the basket and finished with 16 points, 
a game-high 14 rebounds and 5 assists. Dawkins and his fellow freshman, 
Charles Manga, both of whom are 6-10, could do nothing to stop him. 
``He definitely dominated,'' Amaker said. ``He was relentless.'' A.J. 
Guyton, the Hoosiers' preseason all-America point guard, led Indiana 
with 23 points, 14 of which came in the second half. The matchup between 
him and Holloway, the Pirates' all-Big East playmaker, never materialized 
because the game was so out of hand. Holloway scored just 6 points 
on 3-of-15 shooting. The high point total of Saunders, a transfer 
from Georgia Tech, is somewhat offset by the fact that he scored 22 
in the second half. But he and Duane Jordan (19 points) showed that 
they know how to put the ball in the basket, perhaps giving the Pirates 
two scorers besides Holloway. Seton Hall will face Valparaiso on Sunday. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>