<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981107.0126 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
On a recent Tuesday night, a dozen HIV-infected men headed to the 
back of a cluttered office suite on West 26th Street. They made their 
way past a table blanketed with fact sheets on the latest anti-AIDS 
drugs, past an extensive library that included all the established 
scientific journals and a computer that was available for Internet 
surfing on treatment and services. A list of AIDS-related symptoms 
was visible on an office desk. If there is any place that is fully 
up-to-date on AIDS treatment, it is the headquarters of the People 
With AIDS Health Group, a nonprofit organization that is financed 
by the state and federal governments to educate community agencies 
and to counsel clients on the use of the new drugs that suppress HIV, 
the virus that causes AIDS. But the men who gather every other Tuesday 
are not there for advice on the new drugs. These men, in fact, do 
not use the medications that have revolutionized AIDS treatment. In 
a decision that even some advocates for AIDS patients consider extreme, 
they have refused to use the anti-viral drugs, even though most have 
such high levels of the virus in their blood that doctors would urge 
treatment. These men, however, are forsaking the treatment for as 
long as they FEEL healthy. They say their bodies will be better off 
in the long run. Mark Niedzolkowski, 50, a tall, gregarious man, organized 
this support group a year ago. It is a way for him and the others 
to cope with the enormous pressure from doctors, friends and loved 
ones who have urged them, sometimes hysterically, to begin the triple-drug 
regimen that has allowed some people to leave their deathbeds. ``It's 
really hard to maintain your resolve when you're all by yourself and 
everyone is saying you're crazy,'' Niedzolkowski said. ``There's nobody 
to talk to.'' The support group may be on the extreme end of how patients 
try to beat the odds, but as problems with AIDS drug cocktails have 
cropped up, there has been a growing willingness by some to rethink 
the prevailing approach to ``hit early, hit hard'' with the drug therapies. 
The men in the support group call themselves the drug-naive group. 
The regulars range in age from their early 30s to early 60s. Some 
have lived for years without symptoms. All have watched friends die 
of AIDS. A couple of them marched in Washington with the militant 
AIDS organization Act Up in the late 1980s, to draw attention to the 
epidemic and to push for quicker federal approval of anti-AIDS drugs. 
The other night, the group was forced to improvise, without Niedzolkowski 
there to moderate the discussion. He was at home, sick. For a man 
whose disease-fighting T-cells have fallen to 168, it is worrisome. 
The average uninfected person has about 1,000 of these immune system 
cells. Even more important as an indicator of disease progression, 
his virus level has climbed to 177,000 copies of HIV per milliliter 
of blood. The federal government recommends starting treatment when 
the virus level is above 10,000. Yet Niedzolkowski insists that his 
body is not in a state of emergency. He says his illness is an allergic 
reaction to Bactrim, an antibiotic that he recently started taking 
to prevent AIDS-related pneumonia. He still has no intention of using 
anti-viral drugs. ``My resolve has been the same as it always was, 
to hold off as long as possible,'' said Niedzolkowski, who is also 
the operations director for People With AIDS. ``My life doesn't need 
to be saved yet. I feel there's an awful lot of hype out there about 
saving people's lives with these drugs. ``Many people are dealing 
with really severe side effects with these drugs,'' he added. ``We're 
trying to push it to the limit in terms of saving these drugs for 
later.'' The support group in New York appears to be the only one 
in the country that is exclusively organized around not using the 
anti-viral drugs. But its concerns about treatment are increasingly 
being voiced by others. Many advocates for AIDS patients say there 
is confusion surrounding the decision of when to begin treatment, 
despite new federal guidelines. ``This is definitely the era of uncertainty 
with the therapies,'' said Derek Link, the top federal policy analyst 
for the Gay Men's Health Crisis, the nation's largest AIDS service 
agency. While there is generally little disagreement that people who 
show advanced AIDS-related symptoms _ like thrush, a fungus infection 
in the mouth, or unexplained fever _ should be treated, a debate is 
growing over the best time to start treatment for others in earlier 
stages of infection. An article this month in the British medical 
journal The Lancet, for example, suggested that women infected with 
HIV might need to start the drugs earlier than men. Dr. Anthony Fauci, 
director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, 
said the federal guidelines were intended to provide flexibility _ 
unless patients were at an advanced stage _ so that patients would 
sit down with their doctors and make the decision about treatment 
together. Fauci said the complexities of patients' lives made it unrealistic 
to offer a standard code. And in a September issue of the same journal, 
a prominent AIDS researcher contends that some asymptomatic people 
should delay treatment of a lifelong regimen of drugs until their 
use is clearly required. The researcher, Dr. Jay Levy, a professor 
of medicine at the University of California at San Francisco, suggests 
in the article that the immune system is more resilient than is widely 
believed. ``You've got to say, `Wait a second _ it looks good for 
one or two years, but in the long run, is it going to be the answer?''' 
Levy said in an interview. ``The balance should be that when you need 
them, they're wonderful, but save them for the time when you need 
them. I have seen physicians jumping in to give the drugs even in 
some cases where there is very little virus in the blood.'' The case 
for delaying treatment has gained strength as optimism has faded that 
the new therapies are a cure, and as people have become more concerned 
about dangerous side effects and the appearance of drug-resistant 
HIV strains. ``The whole `hit early, hit hard' approach made a lot 
of sense if we thought we could cure the infection, but with a growing 
amount of evidence that we can't do that, it changes the balance a 
bit,'' said Dr. Roy Gulick, an assistant professor of medicine at 
Cornell University Medical College and the co-director of the Cornell 
Clinical Trials Unit. ``You find an enormous amount of variability 
right now in terms of aggressiveness'' of treatment. Even so, Gulick 
and other AIDS specialists say the advantages of the new drugs greatly 
outweigh their disadvantages. ``These therapies are life-saving,'' 
Gulick said, ``and anyone with advanced disease or even middle disease 
is going to benefit from the therapies in terms of not developing 
AIDS as fast and actually living longer.'' By most people's reckoning, 
the drug-naive group in New York is daring. Most of the members have 
dwindling counts of disease-fighting cells and high levels of virus 
that go far beyond what doctors would consider acceptable without 
treatment. The other night, the men in the support group sat around 
a conference table in an office that seemed to pay homage to a different 
era. Neon-orange chairs and donated furniture were scattered about. 
Posters vied for space on crowded olive-green walls. Besides providing 
treatment education, the People With AIDS Health Group is one of the 
nation's oldest ``buyers' clubs,'' as they are known. The organization 
sells pharmaceutical drugs that are approved in other countries, but 
not in the United States, to fight opportunistic infections. John 
Condelario, a 44-year-old vegetarian with a shaved head, earrings 
and a tattoo on a muscled arm, took Niedzolkowski's place as moderator. 
There was also a newcomer, a prosperous-looking young man in a navy 
blazer and khaki pants who announced that he needed guidance on whether 
to start treatment with anti-viral drugs. Members of the support group 
did not quite know what to make of the stranger. They frown on curiosity 
seekers, preferring to spend their time seriously hashing out technical 
advice, reviewing their lab sheets and discussing natural treatments 
like elderberries, milk thistle and vitamin B-12 shots. But the men 
listened politely to the newcomer, answered questions and shared stories 
of how they survived. Jimmy Jordan Smith, a reed-thin man who at 62 
looks a decade younger but is the oldest member of the group, told 
of how doctors had badgered him and accused him of being in denial 
about the disease. He resisted their pleas to use anti-viral drugs. 
Instead, he sees an acupuncturist, uses holistic therapies and meticulously 
charts his lab results. He also leads an active life, dancing at discos 
into the early morning, waving a glow stick to house music. ``It's 
been a good 13 or 14 years for me, and I'm still here, miraculously,'' 
said Smith, an administrative assistant. ``My feeling is, I'm going 
to hold out for as long as I can with the hope that if and when it 
becomes necessary, the drugs maybe will get better, that they'll be 
less toxic. Maybe they will know about long-term side effects.'' Condelario 
said he tested positive two years ago. He said he panicked when he 
first learned of his test results and even wrote a suicide note, before 
he set out to do his own research. That work led him to the support 
group. ``For me, the group's been the stuff that has kept my mind 
straight in terms of, `Am I doing the right thing?''' he said. But 
Condelario was barely able to contain his excitement about something 
else that was on his mind. He had just received his latest laboratory 
test results. ``I have some good news to share,'' he said, lifting 
his fists triumphantly. He said that his T-cell count had risen to 
679 from 408, and that the level of virus in his blood had fallen 
significantly. The group congratulated him. ``How did you do it?'' 
asked the newcomer, who declined to give his name. Condelario was 
not sure. But he said he reduced his stress by switching jobs at the 
human resources company where he works. ``You really haven't altered 
the antioxidants or the herbs?'' Smith asked. Condelario replied: 
``I went a week without my supplements, and I sort of panicked. But 
the week before my blood test, I started taking them again. That could 
have been it. I don't know.'' The newcomer, who tested positive seven 
years ago, told the support group that he was weighing the pros and 
cons of using the drugs. He said he felt more fatigued lately; he 
also has a persistent dry cough. ``I've been talking to a lot of people,'' 
he said. ``Everybody I know is positive and on drugs. They all said 
I'm crazy, nuts, to stay off of them. They are all so thrilled about 
having their viral loads down to nondetectable. I don't think it's 
so important to be nondetectable, but I do want to keep it down.'' 
The man wondered aloud whether he should make a move from his high-stress 
real-estate job. He also worried that ``all hell would break loose'' 
if he took the new drugs and did not adhere to the regimen. He got 
no clear-cut answer. ``We can't convince you to do one thing or the 
other; that's up to you,'' said Smith, the senior member of the support 
group. ``Everybody has a different way of approaching this. We all 
sit here with reasons of our own for not wanting to do the drugs. 
None of us are adamantly against the drugs. If we need them to keep 
living, we will do it. But many of us want to hold off as long as 
possible.'' Niedzolkowski, who was at home with fever and aches that 
night, barely got a mention in the meeting. Others in the group did 
not seem bothered: some have also experienced allergic reactions. 
Niedzolkowski's psychotherapist, Michael Shernoff, whose own HIV viral 
level is now undetectable because of the new drugs, said his client 
was neither a fanatic nor self-destructive. ``Mark pushes the envelope, 
but it's his right,'' Shernoff said. ``He's doing it as an extremely 
well-educated consumer. Those of us who have elected to take the meds 
are probably in what is the largest uncontrolled study in the world. 
We are all guinea pigs.'' But Niedzolkowski's doctor, William Shay 
of Manhattan, is clearly worried. At every opportunity, he tries to 
nudge his patient toward starting the anti-viral drugs. Shay said 
that the average person with a high level of virus in the blood was 
better off taking the drugs than not. ``Mark is delaying the inevitable,'' 
Shay said. ``His T-cells are falling, and his viral load is high. 
I just hope he doesn't wait too long. He is in a spot. He is putting 
himself at risk of infection and the loss of more T-cells that may 
not be replaceable. I don't know what the magic moment is.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>