<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981107.0133 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The space shuttle Discovery returned safely to the Kennedy Space Center 
on Saturday after a nine-day mission, with its oldest crew member, 
Sen. John Glenn, reassuring mission control that he felt as good on 
Earth as he had in space. ``I'm going to reprise a statement that 
I made a long, long time ago,'' Glenn said on landing, ``except this 
time it is, `One-G and I feel fine.' Discovery and this crew took 
us around and around, and that view is still tremendous.'' In 1962, 
when Glenn became the first American to circle the planet, his first 
words from orbit were, ``Zero G and I feel fine. ... Oh, that view 
is tremendous.'' Saturday, at 77, he returned to earth as the world's 
oldest astronaut. Heralded by two sonic booms, the shuttle appeared 
in sunny skies over Florida's east coast and touched down at 12:04 
p.m. in what a mission control commentator in Houston called ``a beautiful 
landing.'' The missing cover of a parachute compartment that fell 
off during the launching on Oct. 29 did not pose a hazard in the shuttle's 
descent and landing, NASA officials said. The absence of the insulation-covered 
aluminum panel forced the shuttle to do without the stowed parachute 
to help brake the shuttle's speed on the runway. Other shuttles have 
landed safely without such drag chutes, and NASA officials had not 
expected Discovery to experience any problems Saturday. The NASA administrator, 
Dan Goldin, said he planned to tell Glenn, ``You're a true American 
hero. You got back in that shuttle because you believed you'd improve 
life here on Earth. You did everything you promised me you'd do.'' 
About two hours later, Glenn emerged from the crew transport vehicle 
with Discovery's other crew members, smiling as he came down the stairs. 
The crew, with Glenn walking somewhat haltingly, then walked around 
the shuttle. Glenn's wife, Annie, his son, David, daughter, Lyn, two 
grandchildren and the Waterford High School band from Ohio, Glenn's 
home state and the one he has represented as a U.S. senator for almost 
25 years, were there to witness his return. Asked whether too much 
attention had been showered on Glenn, Goldin said, ``Yes and no.'' 
He said Glenn's return to space had created new interest in science, 
but he said that his agency had no interest ``in getting attention 
just to get more money.'' He added, ``It's our hope and dream that 
the same excitement prevails'' for future projects. ``Don't wait for 
Senator Glenn's third launch before you come back,'' he told reporters 
gathered at the landing site. Goldin said that any decision on whether 
future shuttle missions would include other elderly crew members would 
come in a year or two and depended in part on the results of studies 
from Glenn's flight. He said scientists agreed that ``this ought to 
be an exploratory flight, not a pilot flight.'' William Readdy, NASA's 
shuttle program director, told reporters Saturday, ``The mission vastly 
exceeded everybody's expectations.'' Readdy, a veteran of three shuttle 
missions, said that after nine days of weightlessness, Discovery's 
crew members would hit the ground feeling heavy, clumsy and thirsty 
from dehydration. ``It's like stepping on a pier after being at sea 
for a while,'' Readdy said. ``You're not quite as coordinated.'' ``With 
younger people it's all reversible,'' he said. ``The interesting thing 
would be how John Glenn recovers.'' The recovery on Tuesday of an 
$11 million satellite carrying images of the sun, two days after it 
was released by the shuttle astronauts, was a vindication of sorts 
for NASA, which botched an effort to use the satellite, Spartan, in 
a flight last year. It tumbled out of control then because of crew 
errors, and two space-walking astronauts had to go out and haul it 
in. This time the shuttle's commander, Lt. Col. Curtis Brown Jr., 
pulled up alongside the satellite, and another crew member, Stephen 
Robinson, slowly caught the Spartan with a robot arm. NASA expects 
some 1,200 images of the sun's outer atmosphere, or corona, and the 
charged particles streaming off the sun's surface. Glenn, back in 
orbit after 36 years, said during the mission that he enjoyed floating 
in the shuttle, which is far more spacious than the tiny cockpit he 
occupied on his first flight. He said he had suffered no motion sickness 
and was eating heartily. Glenn, who is retiring from the Senate in 
January, became the first American to orbit Earth, on Feb. 20, 1962. 
He is now also the oldest person to travel in space. Along with the 
aging-related research involving Glenn, the seven-member crew conducted 
scores of experiments ranging from solar physics and astronomy to 
the design of new drug delivery systems, studies of artificial bone, 
and testing of insulation material for the construction industry. 
Many of the more than 80 experiments aboard the Discovery are housed 
in a pressurized laboratory in the cargo bay that is connected to 
the shuttle's crew quarters by a tunnel. This laboratory, privately 
owned and operated by Spacehab Inc. of Vienna, Va., contains research 
like an experiment with aerogel, the lightest solid known. Spacehab 
also houses a bioreactor, a device that allows cell cultures to be 
grown in space in rotating cylinders. Astronauts are tending several 
experiments for growing human cells, including research into making 
artificial and synthetic material more acceptable for human implantation 
by seeding it first with bone cells. This work, researchers said, 
could lead to synthetic bone to repair limbs damaged by accidents 
or for dental reconstruction. Other experiments, like the Hubble Space 
Telescope Orbital Systems Test, or HOST, developed by NASA's Goddard 
Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Md., are in the shuttle's open cargo 
bay. A platform in the bay contains several instruments and devices 
tentatively scheduled to be installed on Hubble during its next servicing 
mission in the year 2000, said Rud V. Moe, payload coordinator at 
Goddard. Glenn was poked and prodded during the mission because of 
similarities between what happens to astronauts in space and bodily 
changes due to age, like loss of bone and muscle mass, greater susceptibility 
to infection and sleeping difficulties. The experiments required him 
to provide 10 blood samples and 16 urine samples while in space. The 
bloodletting was part of a ``protein turnover'' experiment to study 
muscle wasting by tracking protein building and breakdown. Data are 
being collected in six three-day sessions before, during and after 
the flight. Each session, including the two in space, requires five 
blood samples each taken from the senator and a fellow crew member, 
35-year-old Pedro Duque. In addition, Glenn and another crewmate, 
Dr. Chiaki Mukai, 46, are doing sleep studies by wearing specially 
instrumented suits and caps to measure breathing, chest expansion, 
eye movement and brain waves when they go to bed. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>