<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981107.0118 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After a trans-Atlantic tug-of-war over whether LucasVarity PLC, the 
British-based auto components and aerospace company, should move its 
headquarters to Buffalo, N.Y., small shareholders delivered a remarkable 
rebuff to both management and big U.S. investors, voting by a hair's 
breadth for the company to remain in Britain. With most of Britain's 
automotive industry _ from stately Rolls Royce to minuscule Minis 
_ owned by American, Japanese or German concerns, the battle had assumed 
jingoistic overtones, particularly among those who fear that Britain 
has forfeited its manufacturing base to become a nation of service-providers. 
``Lucas paid good money for Varity and we would have expected it to 
remain a British company,'' Gordon Hoar, a former Lucas Aerospace 
employee and a British shareholder, said before the ballot. Indeed, 
with a pedigree dating to its founding in 1897, Lucas' tussle with 
relocation had been viewed as one of the great milestones in its 101-year 
history. The vote on Friday night was so close that the announcement 
of the results was postponed until noon Saturday. In a statement, 
LucasVarity said the proposals of its British-born but U.S.-based 
chief executive, Victor Rice, for the move to Buffalo had been rejected 
in some cases by fractions of a percentage point. There was no immediate 
comment from the company on Rice's position after the defeat. LucasVarity 
employs 56,000 people and recorded sales of $7.8 billion last year. 
It is one of the world's biggest producers of automotive brakes and 
counts General Motors and Ford among its main customers. The ballot 
marked a major turning point in a corporate drama that began in 1996 
when Lucas Industries PLC of Britain paid $2 billion to take over 
Varity Corp., based in Buffalo. Last September, Rice stunned British 
shareholders by proposing that the corporation move its headquarters 
to Buffalo and abandon its listing on the Financial Times blue-chip 
index for a listing in New York. The idea inspired much British indignation. 
``We were told it would continue as a British company which would 
remain in Britain,'' declared Sir Anthony Gill, a former Lucas chief 
executive, when he arrived for Friday's meeting. And Schroders, a 
British investment house that controls 11 percent of LucasVarity stock, 
counseled against the move to Buffalo, saying a switch to a New York 
listing would not be ``in the best interests'' of investors. Not only 
that: British shareholders suspected that one motive behind the planned 
move is that senior executives would find it easier to live in the 
United States. ``Absolute rubbish,'' said Nicholas Jones, a company 
spokesman. Instead, the company's management argued, a move to the 
United States would anchor it ``among its automotive peer group'' 
and lower the cost of borrowing by a third. Right until the vote, 
the management remained quietly confident that it would carry the 
day. Despite the company's British base, British institutional and 
other investors control only 40 percent of the stock. U.S. investment 
is said to be between 54 percent and 60 percent. But there was a catch. 
An unusual dual voting system pitted big U.S. investors against small 
shareholders controlling only 5 percent of the 1.4 billion shares 
issued, but numbering an estimated 18,000. In effect, the voting procedures 
gave an institutional investor with 10 million shares the same clout 
as someone with 500. In its statement on Saturday, LucasVarity said 
it fell short of the required 75 percent of value by a mere 0.58 percentage 
point. The vote took place after London markets had closed for the 
weekend, so there was no way of knowing how traders would judge the 
outcome. In advance of the vote on Friday, shares slipped back by 
as much as 6 percent in a day of fitful trading, but recovered to 
208 pence. Rice had argued that a move to Buffalo would facilitate 
borrowing plans to finance acquisitions and a buyback of 20 percent 
of the stock. But critics remained suspicious, partly because of an 
earlier maneuver by Rice, who acquired the Canadian tractor firm Massey-Ferguson 
_ only to move it from Toronto to Buffalo and rename it. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>