<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981107.0131 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Under a light drizzle on the morning of Oct. 28, 1963, demolition 
crews began dismantling the mighty pink Milford granite walls of Pennsylvania 
Station. They are still doing so. Although it was largely demolished 
in the early 1960s, old Pennsylvania Station was too big to be erased 
entirely. Distinctive remnants of the original McKim, Mead &AMP; White 
masterpiece can be found exactly where they have been since 1910: 
brass balustrades, glass-block and Belgian-block paving, marble floors 
and a delicate cast-iron track indicator. But no vestige has been 
as substantial and surprising as an 8-foot-high section of granite 
wall that emerged last month from behind the cinder block partition 
of an abandoned underground office suite. The partition was being 
torn down to prepare for New Jersey Transit's new $105 million waiting 
room and passenger concourse in the southeast corner of the station. 
``You're talking about the size of blocks they used to build the Pyramids,'' 
said Saundra Lautenberg, the program manager for engineering and construction 
at N.J. Transit. Even if the stones are not quite that big, the wall 
constitutes an extraordinary urban archaeological find under West 
31st Street in Manhattan. Roughly 20 feet long, the granite wall is 
composed of a massive curb and two courses of finely finished stone 
on which the message ``Drive Slow'' can still be read. It once enclosed 
a covered taxi ramp that brought passengers _ including Farley Granger, 
at the climax of Alfred Hitchcock's ``Strangers on a Train'' _ directly 
to the waiting room from Seventh Avenue. Officials hope that, rather 
than jackhammering this wall into rubble, some blocks can be salvaged 
and incorporated as a commemorative element in the Amtrak concourse 
that is being planned within the General Post Office, or James A. 
Farley Building, across Eighth Avenue from the station. ``They're 
very beautiful pieces of stone,'' said Alexandros E. Washburn, president 
of the Pennsylvania Station Redevelopment Corp., the state agency 
overseeing the Farley building plan. ``You're always surprised by 
the scale of the old station. It's as if it had been built by giants.'' 
It is not yet clear how the blocks would be removed. But because they 
are only about 4 inches thick, Ms. Lautenberg said it appeared that 
they could be taken out whole. On a visit to the wall last week with 
Washburn, she pledged cooperation in any salvage effort, short of 
helping to finance it. The construction project that uncovered the 
wall is one of several being undertaken to adapt the cramped station 
to its growing role as a commuter hub and its future role serving 
high-speed trains on the Northeast Corridor. Walter Ernst, the general 
manager of the New York metropolitan division of Amtrak, is a veteran 
of the Pennsylvania Railroad, who wastes little sentiment on the architecture 
of the old station. ``It was kind of a cold, vast place,'' he recalled. 
But from an operational standpoint, he regrets the demolition. ``At 
that time,'' Ernst said, ``they could get away with a loss of passenger 
movement capacity. We can't get away with that any more.'' N.J. Transit 
will add stairs, escalators and elevators to the east end of Platforms 
1 through 6, connecting them to a new 51,000-square-foot, split-level 
passenger concourse, waiting room and ticket counter. The space, formerly 
used for stores and offices, is being leased from Amtrak for 99 years. 
The East End Concourse is to open in mid-2001. It is being financed 
by the federal government, New Jersey Transportation Trust Fund and 
Metro-North Railroad, some of whose passengers are carried by N.J. 
Transit. Sverdrup &AMP; Parcel are the architects. O'Brien Kreitzberg 
is the construction manager. N.J. Transit executive director Shirley 
DeLibero said the East End Concourse would ``reduce the bottleneck 
between Platforms 1 through 6 and the street, improving the quality 
of life for our customers.'' The quality of life for travelers will 
get worse before it gets better, however, since Amtrak has just begun 
a $37.5 million remodeling of its concourse, to prepare for the inauguration 
next year of 150-mile-per-hour train service between Washington and 
Boston. Four escalators will connect the concourse and platforms, 
and two waiting rooms will be built, one solely for high-speed trains. 
The architects are Hellmuth, Obata &AMP; Kassabaum. The construction 
manager is Tishman Construction Corp. In December 2002, if all goes 
according to plan, Amtrak would move to a new concourse and ticketing 
hall in the Farley building, probably leaving the existing concourse 
to N.J. Transit and the Long Island Rail Road. The Farley design will 
incorporate architectural details from the original station like the 
granite wall and the balustrades with X-shaped ironwork that are now 
being removed from the central platforms. At the back of Amtrak's 
baggage storage area, above Platform 1, is the last of the 12-feet-tall 
track indicators that once stood at the head of each stairway. A minor 
work of art in its own right, the indicator looks something like a 
grandfather clock, its face supported on scrolled brackets and topped 
by an arched pediment. The departure time of ``1 - - 7'' is displayed, 
the two middle numerals missing. (Did it last herald a 10:27 train? 
A 12:07? An 11:17?) ``It should go to a more prominent place,'' said 
Fred Bartoli, Amtrak's manager of high-speed rail and facility programs. 
``There is so much around you that is hidden from view.'' One remnant 
is in plain sight: the basic layout of a shop-lined arcade from Seventh 
Avenue that ushers passengers through a midblock gallery (originally 
the general waiting room, now a rotunda with an illuminated billboard) 
to a concourse paralleling Eighth Avenue that leads to the 11 platforms 
below. The public can glimpse the shadows of Pennsylvania Station 
on the fourth Monday of every month, at 12:30 p.m., on free tours 
given by Lorraine Diehl, the author of ``The Late, Great Pennsylvania 
Station.'' Although she is a longtime chronicler of the lost landmark, 
Ms. Diehl regarded the newly excavated wall rather coolly. ``It was 
so abstract,'' she said. ``It was like discovering a dinosaur claw 
long after the dinosaur is gone.'' ``The old carriageways were one 
of the most romantic parts of the station, with the play of light 
and shadow,'' she said. ``The station is really gone. When you're 
looking for it in these tiny pieces, it's too heartbreaking.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>