<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981107.0175 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It was two years between barrel rolls for Matt Alcone, the champion 
offshore powerboat racer. But a repeat of the 100-mile-per-hour boating 
accident that broke his resolve in 1996 did little more than make 
him mad nine days ago. Now it's on to the world championship this 
week in Key West, Fla., and with not much of a backward glance. ``If 
there had been another boat sitting at the dock after my accident 
on Halloween, I would have gotten right into it,'' Alcone, a 45-year-old 
marketing executive from Laguna Beach, Calif., said during a telephone 
interview. ``But I decided I would do whatever it takes to get ready 
for Key West. I had no jitters, just disappointment.'' A $100,000 
repair job is putting Alcone's 45-foot Skater catamaran back into 
shape. His crew is replacing the Superboat's twin 950-horsepower Sterling 
engines. And the electrical wire that was sure to corrode after being 
submerged in salt water near Biloxi, Miss., has been removed. As for 
Alcone and his throttleman, Jerry Gilbreath, the Key West race has 
a double agenda: to win the world championship among the 75 powerboats 
competing, and to break the 118.1 m.p.h. average speed record set 
last year by Bob Morgan, the throttleman for Big Thunder Marine. That 
46-foot catamaran, named after Morgan's powerboat company in Lake 
Ozark, Mo., is equipped with four 1,000-horsepower engines. Morgan 
has enlisted the driving expertise and financial backing of Guido 
Verme, a Brazilian lawyer. The Big Thunder team watched Alcone skid 
out of control in the recent accident at Biloxi. ``They were just 
driving over their heads,'' Morgan said. ``It looked like they went 
into the turn too fast. But you have to be driving like that to win, 
or else you might just as well go out and run slow around the course 
hoping everybody else breaks down.'' Neither Alcone nor Gilbreath 
was injured in that accident. But their boat skidded sideways after 
hooking a wave, and rolled over twice before stopping upside down 
in the shallow water of the Gulf of Mexico. Unlike the accident in 
1996 that forced Alcone into a three-month sabbatical, the roll this 
time felt like a well-practiced stunt. ``I was strapped in my seat 
and hanging upside down,'' Alcone said. ``It was our Halloween trick 
or treat. But because of training, we were able to stay calm. The 
cockpit was filled with water, regulators made it possible for us 
to breathe. The boat's F-14 fighter canopy kept us from getting hurt 
even though we skidded sideways at 150 miles an hour.'' Offshore powerboaters 
are required to train for such mishaps, Alcone said. He had been suspended 
at least six times in an upside-down chair immersed in a training 
swimming pool. With six fatalities having occurred at the world championship 
in the last decade, offshore racers are serious about safety. Beyond 
that, there is a calculated challenge. Alcone has taken the low road 
with a boat that is only one foot shorter than Morgan's, but weighs 
about 8,000 pounds less. And with two engines instead of four, Alcone 
is banking on his boat's nimble footing in flat calm and rough seas 
to outdistance Big Thunder's heavy tread. If seas are moderate, at 
two to four feet, Morgan's boat is expected to have the edge with 
its superior ability to accelerate. Big Thunder Marine is racing against 
seven other Superboats, while Alcone Motorsports competes against 
five boats in the Superboat Limited Class. Either way, top speeds 
of 160 mph can be expected on the 12.5-lap, 130-mile course. The overall 
world champion is determined by the best average speed. Actual race 
days are Wednesday and Sunday. MAKING WAVES In less than two years 
since its introduction, the Farr 40 has received enough attention 
internationally that the one-design sailboat class has organized its 
first world championship. The six-day regatta is scheduled to begin 
Sunday at South Miami Beach, Fla. Nineteen boats representing amateur-driven 
teams from Australia, England, Greece and the United States are expected 
to race. Among the favorites to win are Solution, a Farr 40 owned 
by JOHN THOMSON of Port Washington, N.Y., and Wired, owned by STEVE 
and HELGA GARLAND of South Weymouth, Mass. Thomson won four out of 
six class events this year to place first nationally. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>