<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981107.0172 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial on Sunday, Nov. 8: With food 
stocks dangerously diminished by a disastrous harvest and the economy 
still reeling, Russia is headed into a winter of deprivation and discontent. 
The critical question is whether Russians will stoically endure another 
season of hardship, as they have so many times before, or strike out 
in anger against the political order. The answer depends in part on 
decisions taken in Moscow and Washington in the days ahead. With President 
Boris Yeltsin sidelined by illness and in political eclipse, Prime 
Minister Yevgeny Primakov must develop a program that pulls Russia 
back from the abyss without abandoning democracy and economic reform. 
The United States must do whatever it can within reason to help Russia 
get through the winter and start down the long road to recovery. Primakov 
is off to a shaky start. Though he shows little inclination to reverse 
course entirely and return Russia to a Communist-style command economy, 
he is embracing anachronistic advisers and policies that threaten 
to put Russia in a state of perpetual decline. Primakov inherited 
a desperate situation. The government cannot pay its bills, food imports 
have declined precipitously, foreign investors have fled and prices 
are skyrocketing while wages and pensions are stagnant, if they are 
paid at all. But the economic plan Primakov recently outlined is misguided. 
It does little to deal with the oligarchs who control enterprises 
that have refused to pay taxes, and thus helped bring on the government's 
fiscal crisis. Instead, it seeks to prop up favored enterprises and 
print rubles to pay back wages and other government obligations. The 
government says it wants to avoid the hyperinflation that will surely 
come if it prints too many rubles, but its only strategy to avoid 
this is to ask for Western aid. Previous efforts to reform Russia's 
economy collapsed for a variety of reasons, including corruption and 
effects of the Asian economic implosion that scared investors and 
depressed the prices of commodities Russia exports, most notably oil. 
But that failure does not justify a return to the failed strategy 
of Soviet-era economic planning. Russia badly needs foreign investment. 
To get it, the country will have to do more to establish rules of 
law so that investors know what they are getting and to assure that 
the capital is put to productive use, not siphoned into foreign bank 
accounts. Russia will also need to negotiate acceptable terms for 
restructuring the billions it already owes. If foreign companies can 
be persuaded to help develop Russian natural resources, and to make 
use of the highly educated work force, a prosperous Russia could eventually 
evolve. For now, the outlook is grim. The International Monetary Fund 
has rightly refused to support Primakov's plan, but aid for Russia 
may still be necessary. After the poor harvest, the country needs 
food aid this winter, and the United States has promised $625 million 
worth of grain, meat, milk and other goods. More should be provided 
if donors can assure themselves that the food will feed the needy, 
and not benefit the powerful. These are perilous days in Russia's 
passage from tyranny to democracy. To navigate them safely, Primakov 
and Russia's friends in the West should not assume that the patience 
of the Russian people is infinite. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>