<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981107.0220 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A day after Speaker Newt Gingrich's abrupt resignation, the race for 
House Speaker was far from settled and Republicans predicted Saturday 
that the roiling competition would soon engulf most of the top positions 
in the House Republican hierarchy. In a brief appearance outside his 
home in suburban Atlanta, Gingrich repeated his warning to his divided 
party not to ``cannibalize itself.'' Looking relaxed in a brown leather 
bomber jacket, he said, ``The prospects of Al Gore as president and 
a Democratic Congress should be enough to focus every Republican in 
the country on learning to work as a team in a powerful way to make 
sure we have a better future.'' But Gingrich had hoped to bring some 
unity to his fractious caucus by stepping down, his departure instead 
started a scramble to reassess support and opened the floodgates for 
candidates of a party reeling from an election that cost Republicans 
five House seats instead of bringing the opposition party its traditional 
gains in an off-year. Rep. Robert L. Livingston of Louisiana, the 
chairman of the Appropriations Committee, whose challenge drove Gingrich 
out of the speaker's chair, was considered the favorite in the race, 
having worked for a year to line up votes. His position was strengthened 
further when Rep. Bill Archer of Texas, the Ways and Means chairman, 
announced that he had decided overnight not to run. But Archer, 70, 
declined to endorse anyone for speaker. ``We're going through a catharsis 
in the Republican Party discussing how we should move ahead in the 
future,'' he said. And Rep. Christopher Cox, 46, a telegenic soft-spoken 
lawmaker from California, announced his candidacy for speaker overnight 
on CNN's ``Larry King Live.'' He reminded Republicans that he had 
served in the Reagan White House and stressed his relative youth. 
Rather than recoiling from a fight, many Republicans said they were 
relishing the open competition as they considered what face they wanted 
to put forward to the nation in place of Gingrich. ``I have a smile 
on my face and joy in my heart because this is a day I've been looking 
for,'' Rep. Steve Largent, of Oklahoma, said on Friday night in his 
own appearance with Larry King to promote his candidacy for House 
majority leader against Rep. Dick Armey of Texas. Largent said, ``What 
the Republican Party needs so desperately is not retreads, not the 
old has-beens, but the new fresh ideas, fresh faces, and I'm excited.'' 
In one odd moment of humor, showing the flux in the House, Cox joked 
that he could lobby for support from Largent, even as the two were 
using the program as a platform for their separate candidacies. The 
House leadership races are likely to become not just a battle of personalities, 
but a struggle between different factions of the Republican Party 
with conflicting ideological agendas. Rep. Mark Foley, a Florida Republican, 
said that whoever became speaker will face a difficult job moderating 
among all the House factions. ``Whoever is running for Speaker ought 
to start jogging, lifting weights, taking multi-vitamins and praying 
because it will be a long haul,'' he said. It remained unclear whether 
the struggle would have any effect on the impeachment inquiry into 
President Clinton. Asked about the inquiry on Friday, Livingston said 
simply that the matter was being handled by the House Judiciary Committee 
and that ``I, like all of the other members, await their decision.'' 
Candidates worked the phones through the weekend and Republican offices 
on Capitol Hill were unusually packed with staff members and vote 
counters for a Saturday in a Congressional recess. Many Republicans 
said they were longing for a speaker who could become a Ronald Reagan 
or who could replicate the successes of the Republicans who had won 
gubernatorial elections in Massachusetts, New York, Florida and Texas, 
by putting forward a conservatism that seems inclusive and compassionate. 
Rep. Joe Scarborough, a Florida Republican pointed to the transformation 
of Jeb Bush, who lost a race for governor of Florida four years ago 
but won on his second try on Tuesday and captured more than half of 
the Hispanic vote. ``In '94, Jeb sounded like us,'' he said, referring 
to his own revolutionary class of Republicans who won the House in 
1994 on the ``Contract With America.'' ``In '98, he sounded like very 
few Republicans I have ever heard,'' Scarborough said. ``I heard him 
talk to Hispanics and African-Americans, and he was on fire. He came 
across better with those groups than middle-class whites.'' Despite 
the signs that the speaker's race was consolidating into a fight between 
Livingston, a pragmatic committee baron, and Cox, a conservative stressing 
his youth and California base, Republicans said the situation was 
fluid. Rep. Pete Sessions of Texas said that members who had given 
their backing to Livingston had done so expecting him to challenge 
either Armey or Gingrich. ``It was seen as a Livingston versus Gingrich 
fight,'' Sessions said. The Livingston forces, he said, ``will have 
to go back and retest what they've got.'' Rep.James M. Talent, 42, 
of Missouri, also indicated that he might seek the speaker's post. 
And Republicans dissatisfied with the field were casting about for 
possible draft candidates, like Rep. John Kasich of Ohio, the Budget 
Committee chairman, or Rep. Henry Hyde, the 74-year-old chairman of 
the House Judiciary Committee. Some Republicans even tried unsuccessfully 
to recruit Rep. Bill Paxon of upstate New York, who is retiring. A 
speaker does not have to be a sitting member of the House. The speaker 
is the most powerful figure in the House and follows the vice president 
as the next in the line of succession for the presidency. The speaker 
also controls committee assignments and chairmanships, in that way 
exerting powerful sway over the legislative agenda. But many other 
positions will be up for grabs when House Republicans convene later 
this month to select their leaders for the incoming 106th Congress. 
``All hell is breaking loose,'' said a senior Republican aide. ``Everybody's 
jumping in. I wouldn't be surprised if members start running for multiple 
positions.'' Armey, a folksy conservative, has already been challenged 
by Largent. And some Republicans said that Rep. J. Dennis Hastert 
of Illinois was considering a race for majority leader. Rep. John 
A. Boehner of Ohio, the fourth-ranking leader who serves as chairman 
of the House Republican Conference, faces one rival so far, Rep. George 
P. Radanovich of California, another member of the class of '94. Rep. 
J.C. Watts Jr., an Oklahoma Republican, was also entering the competition. 
So far, only Rep. Tom DeLay, a Texan who is the Republican whip in 
the House, appeared to be fending off competition. DeLay, whose role 
is to count votes, has the support of his 65-member whip organization. 
Republicans now have just under two weeks to mount their leadership 
campaigns. Republicans select their new leaders at an organizing meeting 
for the 106th Congress scheduled for Nov. 18. The session is presided 
over by the chairman of the Republican conference, Boehner, and the 
voting takes place by secret ballot. The winners must be elected later 
on the House floor when the new Congress convenes in January. In Georgia 
Saturday, Gingrich explained his reason for choosing to leave Congress 
altogether. ``I think as a practical matter for me to stay in the 
House would make it impossible for a new leader to have a chance to 
grow, to lead, and to do what they need to do,'' he said. He said 
he was confident a Republican would hold his district. In the wake 
of his stunning departure, Gingrich won praise from many of the Republicans 
he had worked with most closely. ``Few men or women have had a greater 
impact on the Republican Party and the nation over the last decade 
than Newt Gingrich,'' said Sen. Trent Lott of Mississippi, the majority 
leader. ``I will miss his visionary leadership.'' Senate leadership 
elections come in December. Thus far, Lott appears safe, although 
the editors of the conservative magazine National Review publicly 
urged Lott's second-in-command, Sen. Don Nickles of Oklahoma, to challenge 
him. Armey, who for four years had been Gingrich's second-in-command, 
said, ``Newt Gingrich deserves a place in history right next to Ronald 
Reagan.'' But Republicans Saturday were already showcasing fresh faces 
and a new tone. Their weekly radio address was delivered by one of 
the newly elected incoming representatives, Greg Walden of Oregon, 
a 41-year-old radio station owner. He asked President Clinton to join 
with Republicans in Congress ``in dedicating the next two years not 
to partisanship and posturing, but to real honest-to-goodness problem- 
solving where we debate policies, not personalities.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>