<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981107.0134 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This year marks the fourth time that Churchill Downs has played host 
to the Breeders' Cup. It's not yet racing's most prestigious event 
and may never be because of the aura that surrounds the Kentucky Derby, 
but from its inception in 1984, the Breeders' Cup has staged racing's 
richest day, and it is getting richer. The seven cup races of 1998 
featured a record purse distribution of $13,220,000. For racing fans, 
the Breeders' Cup represents a year-end championship, where Cigar 
and Favorite Trick closed out undefeated seasons, where Personal Ensign 
completed an undefeated career, and where the longest shot on the 
board, Arcangues, returned $269.20 when he won the 1993 Classic. Such 
deeds thrill industry insiders, too, but there are other facets of 
the competition to be considered, involving where future Breeders' 
Cups will be run. Churchill has a lock on the Derby. The Louisville 
track created the race, has run it for 123 years, and guards the property 
rights with an in-house team of corporate lawyers. But the Breeders' 
Cup is owned and run by Breeders' Cup Ltd., headquartered in Lexington, 
Ky., 75 miles to the east. Several years ago, Churchill and Breeders' 
Cup officials discussed the possibility of the track's permanently 
playing host to the event. ``The talks don't amount to much,'' said 
Karl Schmitt Jr., Churchill's vice president of corporate communications. 
``The Breeders' Cup has an informal location system where it moves 
around the country. Churchill supports this, because it best serves 
the promotion of our sport.'' To date, the rotation has taken the 
event to Hollywood Park three times and to Santa Anita twice. Both 
tracks are in Southern California. Gulfstream Park near Miami has 
run the Breeders' Cup twice, and will again on Nov. 6, 1999. Woodbine, 
in Toronto, has held it once, and the Breeders' Cup has made three 
trips to New York, to Aqueduct in 1985 and to Belmont Park in 1990 
and 1995. Churchill has produced the largest crowds. The track drew 
71,237 when it first played host in 1988. It drew 66,204 in 1991 and 
71,671 in 1994. The following year, the event lured barely half that 
many people to Belmont. The average Breeders' Cup attendance at sites 
other than Churchill has been 51,602. Louisville borders thoroughbred 
country. The industry's pre-eminent farms, Claiborne, Lane's End, 
Three Chimneys and the historic Calumet, are all in or near Lexington. 
They are heavily represented on the Breeders' Cup's 44-member board 
of directors. Three of the directors also served on Churchill's board, 
including William Farish, who is a master of Lane's End and the track's 
chairman. ``This is our World Series, and with its Derby heritage, 
Louisville knows how to handle it,'' Farish said. ``The hotels, restaurants, 
transportation systems, they're all experienced in dealing with a 
crush. And the population here consists of horse racing fans. We don't 
have to explain to them that a Breeders' Cup horse was a Derby, Preakness 
or Belmont Stakes winner. They already know.'' But Farish supports 
the rotation concept. The bulk of the money that Breeders' Cup puts 
toward purses comes from nomination fees, which are paid annually 
for stallions and once, at a cost of $500 each, for foals. In North 
America, Kentucky ranks third in thoroughbred stallions and first 
in foal production. Florida is fourth in stallions, and second in 
foal production. California ranks second in stallions, third in the 
production of foals. Tracks in these states will almost certainly 
be included in a permanent rotation system, if one is established. 
A Breeders' Cup site is usually chosen two years in advance. Several 
major tracks have never expressed interest. Pimlico in Baltimore, 
home of the Preakness, has yet to submit a bid. Neither has Arlington 
International Racecourse near Chicago. Both have the necessary facilities: 
A main track at least one mile in circumference; a turf course; large 
dining areas, and the ability to handle crowds of 50,000-plus. Lone 
Star Park, which opened last year near Dallas, wants to be in the 
mix. Texas legalized parimutuel wagering in 1989, and now ranks first 
in thoroughbred stallions and fourth in foal production. ``Having 
a Breeders' Cup here is our No. 1 goal,'' Corey Johnsen, the Lone 
Star general manager, said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>