<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981107.0077 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Ten years ago, when economic reform began its uneven march through 
Russia's industrial heartland, the most visible landmark in this steel 
town was a deadly multicolored plume that hung over the vast Magnitogorsk 
Metal Works. Now, on a misty autumn morning, the sky is still, a welcome 
breath of fresh air for the scarred lungs of the 430,000 people who 
live here on the banks of the Ural River. One reason is the changes 
that have swept Russia under the banner of free-market reform. Directors 
of the mill, now privatized, have done what Moscow's all-powerful 
central planners refused to let them do: They have spent their own 
profits to replace 11 of the mill's 35 aged and filthy open-hearth 
furnaces that heat iron into steel with two cleaner oxygen furnaces. 
But there is another reason for the clear skies, one that illustrates 
why so many Russians have come to associate economic reform with economic 
collapse. Today Magnitogorsk _ once the largest mill in the former 
Soviet Union _ is producing less than half the raw steel it did a 
decade ago, with about the same work force. It is a story repeated 
across Russia, whose gross national product has slumped 42.5 percent 
since 1989, the most abrupt decline in any major industrial country 
since the Great Depression. And new clouds loom on the horizon. The 
Magnitogorsk Metal Works is bracing for a blow that could shut off 
its sales to the United States, where it now sells 49 percent of its 
exports. U.S. steel producers, who say they are being undercut by 
imports from Russia, Japan and Brazil, have brought a trade case accusing 
the foreign competitors of ``dumping'' _ or unfairly selling steel 
in the United States for less than it costs them to produce it. A 
preliminary ruling is expected in a few weeks. As winter approaches, 
workers here are collecting only half their wages in cash, with the 
rest provided as credit at stores owned by the mill. And there are 
fears that this crisis, more than others before it, will hit home 
_ hard. ``If we lose our exports,'' said Anatoly Tamchuck, deputy 
chairman of the local Mining and Metallurgical Union, ``the drop in 
production will be about 50 percent, and layoffs could be about the 
same. This is the most frightening thing. Since Soviet times, we never 
have had mass unemployment. This is a new situation. The steel mill 
is the main enterprise in the city. There is no other work.'' Of all 
Russia's problems, the most vexing lie in its Rust Belt, an interlocking 
series of industrial giants now living off barter and choking on bloated 
work forces. Many of the industries are pillars of communities that 
have no other reason for being. Devalued Cash, Vanishing Assets Solving 
these problems without causing social upheaval will be a key test 
for Russia's new government, headed by Prime Minister Yevgeny Primakov 
and staffed with old-style Soviet ministers who have pointedly set 
out to rescue Russian industry _ or, as they put it, the ``real'' 
economy. By the end of the communist era, Russia's heavy industry 
was already heading for a slump. But many fault President Boris Yeltsin's 
team of young free-market reformers for failing to anticipate the 
economic disarray _ and corruption _ that followed their lifting of 
state controls. In the last seven years, the bottom has fallen out 
of Magnitogorsk's domestic market. Steel consumption in Russia, once 
one of the highest in the world at 970 pounds per capita annually, 
has dropped to less than 265. Russian factories that buy steel _ makers 
of tractors, tanks, railroad ties, ships and industrial machinery 
_ have verged on bankruptcy, struggling to sell what Russians either 
do not want or cannot afford. Many analysts say that the real problems 
in Russia's once-formidable metals industry run deep in a Soviet-era 
mentality that continues to regard steel production in terms of targets 
rather than markets, that views outsiders with suspicion and that 
shares information reluctantly. ``Russian steel mills on the whole 
haven't managed to make the final leap,'' observed James May, the 
Russia specialist at the London-based Metal Bulletin, a trade newspaper. 
``They haven't grasped the fact that just producing for the Motherland 
is not enough. They have to look at their markets, at their costs. 
Mainly, there is a failure to grasp the bull by the horns, and come 
to terms with the fact that they are going to have to sack a lot of 
people.'' Just a few months ago, Magnitogorsk was banking on the first 
hints of an industrial upturn. Then came the devaluation of the ruble 
in August and a simultaneous freeze on Russia's foreign and domestic 
borrowing. In one day, Magnitogorsk's bank accounts were blocked, 
foreign banks refused to finance steel exports and raw materials dwindled 
to dangerously low levels. After the August crisis opened a sudden 
$50 million hole in the factory's cash flow, it took the next obvious 
step _ one used across Russia to forestall layoffs. It delayed paying 
wages to its 55,000 employees, offering them instead plastic cards 
to buy goods at company-owned stores. ``They are like credit cards, 
but without any money behind them,'' said Mikhail Buryakov, head of 
the mill's finance and economics department. He said the factory _ 
which depends on barter for 40 percent of its domestic transactions 
_ had found ways to quadruple its stock of goods, from food to boots, 
in factory-owned stores. ``But that is the state we find ourselves 
in,'' he said. That the steel mill and the city have held together 
is the result of an eerie state of suspended animation, halfway between 
communism and capitalism, that has been characteristic of the seven 
years of Russian reform. Long after the privatization process began 
here in 1992, the mill remains in the hands of directors born and 
brought up in its shadow and educated mostly at the local mining institute. 
The government holds a 23 percent stake in the factory, a testament 
to Magnitogorsk's special place in Russia's industrial galaxy. Company 
Town With a `Steel Heart' But ownership is still a novel notion, and 
_ as elsewhere in Russia _ has come with a fair share of scandal. 
Last year 30 percent of Magnitogorsk's shares disappeared when the 
director of a local holding company secretly tried to unload them 
through sales that have since been declared illegal. Those shares 
have been recovered and are soon to be pledged as collateral against 
a $95 million credit from the European Bank of Reconstruction and 
Development. A Western steel trader tells of a visit to Magnitogorsk 
a few years ago when he asked a midlevel manager who now owned the 
metalworks. After a long conversation with a colleague, the manager 
came back with the memorable reply: ``First, we think that is a strange 
question. And to answer it, we don't know and we don't care.'' By 
various accounts, not all of Magnitogorsk's profits, earned in the 
export boom of the early 1990s, were plowed back into the steel mill. 
An untold share was siphoned into offshore trading companies, split 
between unscrupulous managers and their shady Western trading partners. 
``The factory was set free to export,'' said a former deputy director 
who left in 1993, ``and everyone in management understood that in 
their own way.'' The official spoke on condition of anonymity. But 
changes have taken place. During the export boom, when Russian steel 
was selling at world prices and costs were artificially low, Magnitogorsk 
sank almost $1 billion into new equipment, including a new hot-rolling 
mill. Even now, Magnitogorsk is seeking government-backed credits 
for another $1 billion investment, this time in a cold-rolling mill 
for another stage in the finishing process. Magnitka _ the nickname 
for both the town and the factory, intertwined since their birth in 
1929 _ is a company town. The factory employs almost half of the work 
force and pays 40 percent of the city's taxes _ if delivery of raw 
steel, in lieu of cash, can be called revenues. Very little happens 
here that is not connected with the ``kombinat,'' as the mill is called. 
In addition to steel, it produces furniture, cement, bread, meat and 
other unrelated products. Its electric generators _ including one 
still operating with boilers from the 1930s _ provide the city with 
light. All this has lent a certain feudal stability to life here, 
with the mill's general director playing the role of local baron. 
Workers, lining up outside the factory gates to pick up their delayed 
July paychecks on a gray October day, were both bitter and grateful. 
``At least work here is guaranteed,'' said Tatyana Konopolova, a clerk. 
``I see no danger of losing my job.'' In 1987 the mill employed 65,000 
people, which even then was considered far too many by industry experts. 
Today, thanks to retirements and other forms of attrition, the number 
is about 55,000 _ of whom half make steel. Such a work force, even 
sprinkled through the metalworks' array of daughter companies, flies 
in the face of economic common sense. But to the directors there is 
simply no other choice. ``Where would people go?'' said Sergei Nosov, 
grandson of the factory's famous World War II director, and now director 
of its capital construction department. ``There would be a huge social 
explosion, and that is something everyone is afraid of.'' The seven 
years since the collapse of communism have not been easy, but most 
people will admit that life has improved. They still remember meat 
and butter rationing a decade ago, and the hours they spent standing 
in line on cold winter mornings, waiting to buy milk. Now the stores 
are full of goods, even if the prices are high _ particularly after 
the ruble's collapse on Aug. 17. Private restaurants and cafes, even 
a Baskin-Robbins ice-cream store, have opened. People travel abroad, 
and the town is relatively well kept. Monthly salaries at the mill 
average 2,000 rubles, worth about $300 last summer and about $120 
today. By Russian standards, that is good pay, certainly better than 
the 800-ruble average salary of doctors at the city's hospitals, which 
are now struggling to afford imported medicines. An Isolation Not 
So Splendid But Magnitogorsk _ for decades virtually closed to foreign 
travelers _ is paying the price for its links to the global economy. 
First Europe stemmed the flow by imposing quotas. Next came the economic 
crisis in Asia, where until last year Magnitogorsk sold 43 percent 
of its exports. Then Russian producers turned to the United States. 
If it, too, closes its doors, Magnitogorsk will have to cut production 
_ again. This cuts deep into the legend of Magnitogorsk, which has 
been glorified in Soviet art as Russia's ``steel heart.'' In the beginning 
there was logic to Stalin's decision to raise a steel mill on the 
eastern slopes of the Ural Mountains, 800 miles from Moscow and 1,200 
miles from the nearest port, but next to an outcrop of iron ore that 
continued to supply the plant until the 1970s. In World War II the 
factory, safely situated hundreds of miles from advancing German troops, 
cranked up production to provide steel for half of the Red Army's 
tanks. But today isolation is a handicap. The mill's two main domestic 
competitors are in western Russia, closer to export markets and raw 
materials. In these hard times, transportation has become one of Magnitogorsk's 
many nightmares. Another problem is product quality. Throughout the 
communist period, Magnitogorsk fulfilled orders from Gosplan, the 
state planning agency, which emphasized quantity. Magnitogorsk's cold-rolled 
steel, even now, is not good enough for the Russian automobile industry, 
because its surfaces cannot hold paint. The Soviet command economy 
also left Magnitogorsk at the mercy of monopolist suppliers. Seventy 
percent of the iron-ore pellets it uses still come from a plant 200 
miles over the border, in Kazakhstan, now an independent country _ 
which accepts payment in dollars, not rubles. It remains unclear whether 
the Primakov government will grant Magnitogorsk a new flow of money, 
or forgive its old debts. ``Credits would be good for the factory, 
and the city,'' said Georgi Tikhonov, editor of Magnitogorsk Worker. 
``Whether it is good for the national economy is another matter.'' 
As far as Buryakov, the financial director, is concerned, the government 
owes the Magnitogorsk mill for the damage it caused on Aug. 17. ``It 
is our government that created a situation in which we have to live 
on credit from each other,'' he said. ``They should be the ones giving 
us credits. I don't know what they will do, but my impression is that 
this government will take any steps to avoid any sudden unrest.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>