<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981107.0032 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
House Speaker Newt Gingrich, who orchestrated the Republican takeover 
of Congress in 1994 and presided this year over what at times seemed 
like the political destruction of President Clinton was himself driven 
from office Friday by a party that swiftly turned on him after its 
unexpected losses in Tuesday's midterm elections. Catching virtually 
everyone on Capitol Hill by surprise, Gingrich announced Friday night 
in two conference calls to other Republicans that he would not seek 
re-election as Speaker and would leave Congress altogether when his 
term expired in January. ``This will give us a chance to purge some 
of the poison that is in the system,'' Gingrich said, according to 
a party official who heard one of the calls. Gingrich's decision to 
resign was a stunning reversal for one of the most combative and personally 
confrontational politicians in America. He made his name a decade 
ago by bringing down one Democratic speaker, Jim Wright, and continued 
his assaultive style through Tuesday's elections, approving last-minute 
commercials reminding voters of the White House sex scandal. Gingrich's 
reflexive pugilistic response was evident even Friday night. In his 
second conference call, said several members who listened, Gingrich 
blamed House conservatives for his downfall. Although it was their 
revolutionary zeal he harnessed to take control of Congress, they 
have become his most bitter critics in the last two years of his tumultuous 
tenure as speaker. On Friday night he called them cannibals who had 
``blackmailed'' him into quitting, said those who has listened to 
the call. Rep. Michael P. Forbes, R-N.Y., said: ``Newt said all those 
who had marginalized the Republican Party had engaged in cannibalism. 
He said, `Refer to the clips.' He's blaming others.'' Another Republican, 
who spoke on condition of anonymity, described the conference call 
this way: ``He started off very statesmanlike, but then you could 
see the anger building. When someone asked him why he was leaving, 
he said, `A handful of members have blackmailed the conference.' He 
said, `They're hateful.' And he said, `They're cannibals.''' Gingrich 
has been feuding with party conservatives for the last few years. 
They have complained that he is not a true conservative, that he has 
capitulated to Clinton on spending issues and has not advanced conservative 
causes like tax cuts. Gingrich's decision set up a scramble for a 
successor in the powerful post. The speaker, who is second only to 
the vice president in line for succession to the presidency, controls 
the legislative agenda, committee assignments and chairmanships in 
the House of Representatives. Gingrich announced his resignation just 
hours after Rep. Robert L. Livingston, R-La. announced he would challenge 
Gingrich for the job, putting himself forward as a level-headed manager 
who did not have Gingrich's propensity for self-created crises. After 
Gingrich's bombshell, Rep. Bill Archer, R-Texas, announced he was 
considering his own run. Livingston and Archer are chairmen of the 
two most powerful committees in the House, Appropriations and Ways 
and Means, respectively. Friday evening, in a reflection of the wide-open 
possibilities that other members suddenly see for advancement, Rep. 
Christopher Cox of California, chairman of the Republican policy committee, 
also announced his candidacy for speaker, on CNN's ``Larry King Live.'' 
In a statement Gingrich said, ``The Republican conference needs to 
be unified, and it is time for me to move forward.'' He said he hoped 
his colleagues would pick a successor ``who can both reconcile and 
discipline, who can work together and communicate effectively.'' Referring 
to his wife, he explained to his colleagues why he was resigning: 
``Marianne and I are tired. We need time off to get to know each other 
again.'' He did not specify why he was leaving Congress as well as 
not seeking re-election as speaker. But his supporters conceded that 
after being speaker and after consolidating more power in the office 
than anyone in recent decades, he would probably find life as a backbencher 
unbearable. Since he just won re-election this week, a special election 
will have to be held in his Georgia district to replace him. He also 
acknowledged his own knack for bringing negative attention to himself 
and to his party. ``If I stay,'' he told his colleagues Friday night, 
``my controversial nature would overshadow any successes we might 
have,'' an understatement to those who recalled his suggestion two 
years ago that he forced a shutdown of the government because he was 
miffed about having to sit in the back of Air Force One on a trip 
with Clinton. According to a Republican who took notes on the second 
call, Gingrich said: ``There is a lot of bitterness amongst some of 
the members. So long as I am around, I will always be a target in 
the news media, which would mean we would never be able to get our 
message out.'' For friends and foes alike, it was not clear that Gingrich 
had a message this year beyond relying on the Clinton scandal to propel 
Republicans to greater gains that never materialized. The bracing 
reality is that it is Gingrich, not Clinton, who is leaving Washington 
in disgrace. The next few weeks are sure to be politically awkward 
for him as the House plays out the process that he as House leader 
set in motion to impeach Clinton. The House Judiciary Committee is 
to consider articles of impeachment beginning next week. Many Republicans 
took the opportunity to portray Gingrich as a visionary. Rep. Sherwood 
Boehlert of New York said that in the first conference call, ``there 
was shock and surprise and strong expressions of appreciation for 
leading us to the Promised Land.'' Rep.David Dreier, R-Calif., called 
it a ``courageous'' decision. ``There were a number of members in 
the Republican conference that were not prepared to ever provide support 
for him. And it shows what a good man he is. He is desperate to see 
unity and solidarity ahead in January.'' His supporters said the speaker 
had the votes to win re-election, an election to be conducted by secret 
ballot on Nov. 18. But they agreed that the party's slim six-vote 
majority meant every vote on the House floor would be a battle. Kenneth 
Duberstein, a former official in the Reagan administration, said, 
``I have no doubt he had the votes to be speaker, but I'm not sure 
he had the votes to govern.'' He said that because of the deep rifts 
in the party, Gingrich would not have been able to implement his plans. 
Clinton, traveling in Arkansas, said in a statement Friday night, 
``Newt Gingrich has been a worthy adversary,'' adding, ``Despite our 
profound differences, I appreciate those times we were able to work 
together in the national interest, especially Speaker Gingrich's strong 
support for America's continuing leadership for freedom, peace and 
prosperity in the world.'' In an unusually biting reaction, Rep. Richard 
Gephardt of Missouri, the Democratic leader, said he hoped that Gingrich's 
resignation would clear the fierce partisan air that he had fostered. 
``I hope that whoever succeeds Newt Gingrich as speaker will immediately 
begin the process of repairing the damage that was wrought on this 
institution over the last four years,'' Gephardt said. House Republicans 
predicted that Gingrich's resignation would set off a more wide-ranging 
and hectic scramble to replace him than began Wednesday morning with 
the disappointing election returns. ``There will be a lot of pretenders 
to the throne who will test the waters,'' said Boehlert, who had supported 
Gingrich for re-election. ``There won't be any shortage of candidates.'' 
Archer's name gained currency earlier Friday when conservatives, who 
were already furious with Gingrich, said they were dissatisfied with 
Livingston as well. Archer's actions Friday captured the dizzying 
pace at which events unfolded _ and the appeal of having Gingrich 
out of the race. His aides said Friday afternoon that Archer was ``reviewing 
his options'' and that if he decided to run, he would announce his 
candidacy next week. They faxed a statement at 7:29 Friday night saying 
that Archer was ``saddened'' by Gingrich's resignation. Eleven minutes 
later, they faxed a statement from Archer saying he was ``actively 
considering'' running for speaker. Rep. David McIntosh of Indiana, 
leader of a group of conservatives in the House who had considered 
running for speaker himself, said Friday that he would not run and 
threw his support to Archer. He said Archer had the ``solid, seasoned 
leadership to unify our party, chart a positive agenda during the 
next two years and lead us to expand our majority in 2000.'' Demonstrating 
that time was of the essence, with just 12 days until the election, 
Cox announced his candidacy on ``The Larry King Show.'' He vowed to 
bring order to the now-chaotic budget process and said: ``I don't 
think my job is to unify the party but to unify the Congress and the 
country behind an agenda that is good for everyone.'' Still, Livingston 
has a huge head start. He had been campaigning for speaker anyway 
on the chance that Gingrich might step aside to run for president. 
Since Tuesday, he has converted those long-range plans into an extensive 
and immediate telephone campaign to shore up support. He has contacted 
not only Republican House members but an array of prominent Republicans 
across the country, including Mayor Rudolph Giuliani of New York. 
At a news conference outside the Capitol Friday afternoon, Livingston, 
an ally of the speaker for two decades, said he was running for speaker 
now not cheerfully but resolutely. ``Our ideas have gotten lost, perhaps 
our message has gotten lost, in the haze of high rhetoric and miscast 
priorities, lost in a management style where process is subordinated 
to polls and self-initiated crises,'' Livingston said. He cast himself 
as someone who could make the trains run on time and who would not 
lose himself in the high-blown revolutionary of Gingrich, who has 
spent much of his time traveling and raising money. ``I'll be more 
of a stay-at-home type of speaker who wants to get the job done,'' 
Livingston said. Gingrich remained in his home district Friday, calling 
members and seeking their support. His press secretary, Christina 
Martin, issued a statement Friday afternoon saying: ``As architect 
of the Republican majority, Speaker Gingrich is determined to correct 
the mistakes of the past and implement a positive, issue-oriented 
legislative agenda.'' She said in an interview Friday night that Gingrich 
had broached the possibility of resigning with his wife on Thursday 
evening and that he had reached a decision Friday afternoon. His staff 
was caught by surprise. ``This office was in full vote-counting mode,'' 
Ms. Martin said. Gingrich's plans beyond resignation were uncertain. 
He said he would take six months off next year. But he made no mention 
of his earlier notion of running for president, a path that many of 
his friends said they presumed was now impossible because of the circumstances 
of his departure from Congress, bearing the brunt of blame for the 
party's electoral losses and the perception of him as a divisive figure 
who made a better insurrectionist than leader. Gov. John Engler of 
Michigan, a Republican, suggested that Gingrich replace Jim Nicholson 
as chairman of the Republican National Committee. ``I would love for 
Newt to become our national chairman right now,'' he said. In a sign 
of the turmoil aswirl in the party, the governor said Gingrich would 
be more adept at handling the press than Nicholson. ``The media circus 
surrounding politicians is not his strength,'' he said of Nicholson. 
Engler said he spoke by telephone with Gingrich. ``He's weary and 
said he was tired,'' Engler said. ``It's been a grueling campaign.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>