<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981107.0132 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In defeating Sen. Alfonse D'Amato by nine percentage points on Tuesday, 
Charles Schumer gathered the support of many traditional Democratic 
demographic groups, some of whom had deserted Democratic candidates 
in the previous two contests for this seat. Women, blacks, Jews, Democrats, 
moderates and affluent voters all gave Schumer a large share of their 
votes. D'Amato did best among whites, conservatives, men and less-educated 
voters. Gov. George Pataki, who defeated his Democratic challenger, 
Peter Vallone, by more than 20 points, was supported by voters from 
all age groups, former supporters of President Bush and Ross Perot, 
and both men and women. Liberals, voters with postgraduate education 
and Hispanic voters all gave Vallone a large portion of their support. 
The accompanying table is based on surveys of voters leaving polling 
stations throughout New York state, and shows how about 60 demographic 
groups voted for U.S. senator in 1992 and 1998, and how they voted 
for governor in 1994 and 1998. Race and Religion While D'Amato received 
the support of most white voters, Schumer increased the Democratic 
share of white voters. Compared with four years ago, Pataki did better 
this year among whites. Both Democratic candidates were favored by 
a majority of black and Hispanic voters. Hispanic voters were more 
supportive of Schumer and Vallone than they were of Democrats in 1994 
and 1992. In his re-election bids in 1986 and 1992, D'Amato was supported 
by about 40 percent of Jewish voters, traditionally strong supporters 
of Democratic candidates. Schumer was able to get the support of three-quarters 
of Jewish voters. Jewish voters gave Vallone much less support than 
they gave Gov. Mario Cuomo in 1994. The Gender Gap There is a 10-point 
gender gap among Schumer's voters. The gender gap _ the difference 
between the percentage of men and the percentage of women supporting 
a candidate _ is seen in all age groups, from 13 points between men 
and women under 30 to six points for men and women ages 30 to 45. 
While there was a seven-point gender gap among Pataki's supporters 
in 1994, the difference between his support from men and his support 
from women dropped to two points this year. Party Loyalty Schumer 
did a better job of holding the votes of self-identified Democrats 
than Vallone did against Pataki this year, or Robert Abrams, then 
the state attorney general, did against D'Amato in 1992. In 1992, 
more than a quarter of Democrats voted for D'Amato. Both Pataki and 
D'Amato received more than three-quarters of the votes from Republicans. 
Independents divided almost equally between the candidates in the 
Senate race, but Vallone received only a third of the independent 
vote. Data for 1998 were collected by Voter News Service based on 
questionnaires completed by 2,191 voters leaving 45 polling places 
throughout New York state on Election Day. Data for 1994 were collected 
by Voter News Service based on questionnaires completed by 1,775 voters. 
Data for 1992 were collected by Voter Research and Surveys based on 
questionnaires completed by 1,997 voters. Those who gave no answer 
or voted for other candidates are not shown. Dashes indicate that 
a question was not asked or a category was not provided in a particular 
year. Asterisks indicate that there was an insufficient number of 
respondents in that subgroup. Family financial situation is compared 
with four years earlier for 1992 and with two years earlier for 1994 
and 1998. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>