<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981107.0065 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A Ph.D. in history, a futurist and a street fighter, a careful, sometimes 
eloquent planner and an impulsive loudmouth, Newton Leroy Gingrich 
often seemed to have more ideas, all at once, than the 49 men who 
served before him as speaker of the House. Like his singular boyhood 
ambition to reach the speaker's chair, he pursued some ideas for years 
_ lowering taxes, to name just one. But others he discarded in minutes, 
like a short-lived scheme to give every child in America a laptop 
computer. Gingrich knew he talked too much. But his ability to curb 
the inflammatory language he had used in opposition was fleeting, 
like a smoker's New Year's resolve to quit. His most famous gaffe 
came when he complained about a bad seat on the Air Force One flight 
to Israel for Yitzhak Rabin's funeral, in 1995. But even last month 
he won no friends when he needed them, by attacking critics of his 
latest budget deal as ``perfectionists'' and ``petty dictators.'' 
A central complaint last week as Republicans plotted against him _ 
and as he jumped before being pushed _ was that he gave the party 
no focus, no agenda, as he took it into the elections. It was an odd, 
though accurate, mark against the man who calculated and nationalized 
the 1994 congressional election more skillfully than anyone ever had 
before, making a unifying statement of the ``Contract With America,'' 
with its pledges of less regulation and lower taxes. But that lack 
of focus dogged his time as speaker. In an interview in January 1996, 
after his strategy of forcing a government shutdown had blown up in 
his party's face and set President Clinton on the road to re-election, 
he conceded he had tried too much: ``I set out to do a very unusual 
job, which was part revolutionary, part national political figure, 
part speaker, part intellectual.'' But it was hard to be speaker (or 
the part of the job that requires leading all of the House and not 
just one party) because for years he had also been part, and a very 
big part indeed, hatchetman. He had punctuated his career by attacking 
Democrats, and a very rare Republican or two, for alleged corruption. 
His biggest scalp of all was that of Jim Wright of Texas, the Democratic 
speaker of the House forced to resign in 1989, after an ethics inquiry 
engineered by Gingrich found financial irregularities in sales of 
a pseudo-book Wright used to get around outside earning limits. That 
success left Democrats seething. They paid him back in 1995 and 1996 
with an ethics probe of their own, one that ended on Jan. 21, 1997, 
when the House formally reprimanded him and fined him $300,000 for 
using tax-exempt funds to promote Republican goals and giving the 
ethics committee untrue information about it. Since Wright had quit 
before a verdict, Gingrich was the first speaker to be punished by 
the House. As he clawed his way up the Republican ladder, Gingrich 
had also scorned his own party's leaders as too timid. In 1990, he 
fought President George Bush's agreement to a budget deal that included 
tax increases. In 1992, he announced he would run for Rep. Robert 
Michel's job as minority leader two years later. Michel, one of the 
last of the oldtime House leaders who could debate an issue in the 
morning and golf with the other side in the afternoon, heard it first 
from a reporter. Still, when he ascended to the speaker's chair on 
Jan. 4, 1995, the first Republican to sit there since Joseph Martin 
Jr., 40 years before, he wanted to be inclusive. He told Republicans 
``it was the liberal wing of the Democratic Party that ended segregation'' 
and he called Franklin Delano Roosevelt ``the greatest president of 
the 20th century.'' And he told Democrats that they should re-examine 
their programs' results and ``reach out to the humans and forget the 
bureaucracies.'' That was just in his first speech _ though later, 
at a press conference, he said Democrats were ``pursuing a fairly 
stupid strategy of cheap and nasty.'' Gingrich has always been an 
eclectic _ some would say, rootless _ thinker. It often seemed that 
ideas, like personal attacks, were just weapons to be used to win 
political wars. But since he was fighting a dominant party whose works 
he could scorn as ``the welfare state,'' he was often taken, both 
by liberal Democrats and conservative Republicans, as an arch-conservative. 
And that reputation took deeper root after the 1994 Republican landslide 
swept some of the most rigid members of the Christian right into the 
House. Oddly, the one faction that never entertained the right-wing 
image of the speaker was the House's dwindling band of moderate Republicans. 
They found him more open and often more sympathetic than his leadership 
colleagues like Dick Armey and Tom DeLay, the Texans who serve as 
majority leader and majority whip. And so, when angry young conservatives 
and his fellow leaders mounted a coup against him in the summer of 
1997, it was Christopher Shays of Connecticut, a moderate, who warned 
Gingrich of the plot. But even though the coup failed, conservatives 
like Reps. David McIntosh of Indiana and Steve Largent of Oklahoma, 
and outsiders like the Rev. James Dobson, a religious broadcaster, 
were ready with long, sharpened knives on this last Wednesday, after 
the election loss of five seats was known. That may have been inevitable. 
After 40 years in the House minority, Republicans lacked experience 
in compromise _ especially among themselves. The ideological span 
from McIntosh to Shays is as broad as the distance Senate Democrats 
once found between James Eastland of Mississippi and Robert Kennedy 
of New York. Gingrich sought to overcome this by being a strong speaker, 
in the mold of a parliamentary leader. He tried to wield more power 
than any speaker since Joe Cannon left office in 1911, choosing committee 
chairmen himself, as Cannon did. But U.S. politicians are not trained 
in parliamentary discipline. The bell tolled ominously for Gingrich's 
future on Thursday when Rep. Matt Salmon of Arizona said he and six 
others would not vote for him as speaker even if their caucus chose 
him. Their mutiny would have prevented his election. Throughout his 
career, Gingrich has sought ways to spread his ideas. He pioneered 
the use of congressional television to broadcast after-hours polemics 
to a dedicated conservative audience, and he opened his speaker's 
press conferences up to television (before canceling them altogether). 
He often railed at reporters for overemphasizing conflict. Last week, 
astonishingly, he blamed the press for excessive attention to Clinton's 
affair with Monica Lewinsky, even though he had helped organize the 
impeachment inquiry over the issue. But Washington reporters often 
found him unusually attentive listening to their questions and trying 
to answer them directly rather than with the capital's staple of all-purpose 
soundbites. Catchy phrases have always meant a great deal to him. 
From labeling the Democratic Party as ``a coalition of big-city machines, 
trial lawyers, left-wing activists and political incumbents'' to calling 
the House Bank's rubber checks ``systemic, institutional corruption'' 
or comparing Clinton's health care plan to ``Soviet Communism,'' he 
was never skilled at understatement. But there was probably more than 
hyperbole at work on Friday night when he told Republicans that he 
was quitting because, ``I'm not willing to preside over people who 
are cannibals.'' The connection was almost surely subconscious, but 
many who heard it recalled a May 31, 1989, appeal to the House that 
``All of us in both political parties must resolve to bring the period 
of mindless cannibalism to an end.'' That was what Jim Wright said 
when he resigned as speaker. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>