<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981107.0055 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is supposed to be the Age of the Finance Minister. In the mythology 
of the 1990s, they are the titans of this unnamed era following the 
Cold War. In many countries these days, the guardians of the treasury 
are running the show. That's certainly the case in Europe, where the 
imminent introduction of a single currency is giving enormous power 
to the institutions that must make it work. And in Washington, Secretary 
of State Madeleine Albright joked recently that it only seems as if 
the Treasury Department has taken over vast swaths of U.S. foreign 
policy. ``Treasury Secretary Rubin assures me that's not the case.'' 
But as finance and diplomacy merge, the job of finance minister is 
becoming riskier. More than a few finance ministers _ long accustomed 
to limousines, antique-stuffed offices and lavish meals paid for by 
Wall Street firms eager to cut deals _ have discovered that when economic 
globalization goes bad, the finance minister goes down. The unluckiest 
have swapped pinstripes for prison stripes, fall guys for long-brewing 
trouble that erupted on their watch. The most glaring case _ one that 
will haunt President Clinton's trip to Asia this week _ is that of 
Anwar Ibrahim, the 51-year-old former finance minister of Malaysia. 
Anwar was the darling of American industrialists, the like-minded 
buddy of Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin, and the heir-apparent to 
Malaysia's testy, unpredictable leader, Mahathir Mohamad. Then the 
Asian crisis struck. Anwar advocated going with the flow of a global 
economy that had turned Malaysia into a phenomenal production site 
for high-tech goods. He said it was time to tighten belts and follow 
the prescriptions of the International Monetary Fund. Mahathir denounced 
the West and currency speculators, but he went along with Anwar's 
strategy until things really turned bad in September. Then Anwar was 
arrested, the strategy was reversed, and the government imposed controls 
on the flow of currency across its borders. Days later Anwar appeared 
in court with a black eye and lacerations from beatings he said had 
been meted out by the police. ``What happened with Anwar is terribly, 
terribly troubling,'' Rubin said last month. ``He is a highly respected 
member of the international financial community. He has really been 
a great force for great good, in many ways.'' Soon other finance ministers 
and World Bank president James Wolfensohn also rallied around their 
imprisoned comrade.. At his trial, which began last week, the country's 
top police intelligence official admitted he would lie under oath 
about Anwar's activities if ordered to do so by his superiors. But 
of course, the trial is really about the direct political challenge 
to Mahathir's iron control that Anwar's supporters have mounted. Anwar 
is not the only finance minister in the dock. In South Korea, Kang 
Kyong-shik, a 62-year-old politician was arrested because he was unlucky 
enough to be in the finance minister's chair last year when the country 
had to turn to the IMF for an emergency bailout. Since then the Korean 
currency has partly recovered, but the country is headed into deep 
recession. And Kang, who unquestionably sat on his hands as the situation 
grew worse, has become the scapegoat for a decade of financial sins 
in South Korea, a country where bureaucrats and the heads of Hyundai 
and Samsung have a lot more power than any mere finance minister. 
Kang sat in jail for months after his arrest this year, charged with 
abuse of power and negligence of duty, before he was released to prepare 
for his trial. The prosecution says he should have informed Korea's 
president at the time, Kim Young-sam, that the country was on the 
brink of financial ruin. They have a point: The Finance Ministry was 
covering up the fact that it had wasted most of the country's currency 
reserves in a failed effort to prop up the Korean won. But if Kim 
didn't know Korea was in deep trouble, he wasn't reading the newspapers. 
``I don't think that I should be tried in this sort of situation,'' 
Kang said earlier this year. Others familiar with his case say they 
fear that if economic mismanagement suddenly becomes a crime, finance 
ministers around the world will be paralyzed. In fact, since the global 
economic crisis began 16 months ago, it has become difficult to find 
people willing to become finance ministers. No Japanese politician 
wanted to get near the job when it came open in August. It was finally 
foisted on former Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa, who at age 78 isn't 
exactly putting his political future at risk. And anyway, Japanese 
finance ministers don't go to jail for mismanagement; if they did, 
Japanese construction firms would be building new jails the way they 
once built car factories. Then there is Russia, which in September 
made an example of Boris Fyodorov, who was the nation's chief tax 
collector and top economic policy maker. Fyodorov was a wealthy investment 
banker and former finance minister, and his elevation to the job of 
head of the State Tax Service in May seemed like a sign to the West 
that the country was finally getting its act together. But then he 
did something no Russian tax collector had ever really done before: 
He began collecting taxes, including from Gazprom, the natural gas 
monopoly. He even joined high-publicity raids on deadbeats. One might 
think that in a country desperate for revenues, Fyodorov would be 
a hero. But the Communists who came into the new government, led by 
Yevgeny Primakov, demanded Fyodorov's head. When he refused to go 
quietly, he was fired. Still hanging on, if by a thread, is Guillermo 
Ortiz, whom the United States credits for engineering the $60 billion 
bailout of Mexico's banking system after the 1995 peso crash. Now 
opposition parties say the bailout was an illegal rescue of rich bankers 
at the expense of poor workers, and Ortiz is trying to dodge impeachment. 
And what about Rubin himself? Last summer his Cabinet colleagues were 
predicting his imminent resignation, noting that he made his name 
on Wall Street by selling at the top of the market. But he has stayed 
on, through a period of rough times for both the president and the 
stock market. Now the Dow is back up, and so are the Democrats. And 
the rumors are circulating again that he will leave, before he is 
hit with the curse of the finance ministers. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>