<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981107.0147 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Even as city and state officials were clinching a deal last week to 
keep one financial market in Manhattan, the New York Stock Exchange 
increased the pressure for its own generous deal by talking to developers 
about building a new trading floor in Jersey City, N.J. The routine 
threat to cross the Hudson River drew the routine reaction: Officials 
in New York put a $600 million incentive package on the bargaining 
table, a sum that would cover more than half the cost of building 
and outfitting a new headquarters for the New York Stock Exchange 
directly across from its historic home on Wall Street, according to 
negotiators on both sides of the talks. The subsidies would also be 
triple those granted to the Nasdaq and American Stock Exchanges in 
a tentative deal struck last week for a new joint headquarters, possibly 
near Times Square. Flirting with New Jersey has become an enduring 
ritual for many of the city's largest and most profitable corporations, 
from Avon Products and Conde Nast Publications to General Motors Corp. 
and NBC. No industry has used the tactic more than the commercial 
banks, investment banks and insurance companies that make up New York's 
financial sector. And whether the companies truly intend to leave, 
it has worked. City and state officials over the last 15 years have 
granted more than $2 billion in tax breaks, cash and low-cost electricity 
to companies that threatened to move to New Jersey, Connecticut and 
elsewhere. ``The city of New York has become the softest mark in the 
country for companies looking to extract corporate welfare from government,'' 
said state Sen. Franz Leichter, a frequent critic of the deals. ``We're 
spending hundreds of millions of dollars on the financial industry, 
which is _ while important to New York _ downsizing. Couldn't this 
money be better spent on transportation, schools and other economic 
development initiatives?'' Perhaps surprisingly, Leichter's view is 
shared by developers like Leonard Stern, chief executive of Hartz 
Group, which owns the Colgate Center office complex in Jersey City. 
Some companies will move to less expensive space outside New York, 
he said, but most have no intention of doing so, even though they 
``routinely inquire about how to shake down the city.'' Despite the 
millions of dollars in subsidies provided by New Jersey or New York, 
he said, there is no net gain for the region's economy. ``The city 
is paying an unnecessary price in allowing itself to be shaken down 
by one tenant or another,'' Stern said. ``Too many politicians know 
the price of everything, but not the value of New York City. I don't 
know how Giuliani allows this rape of taxpayer dollars to continue.'' 
Stern acknowledged that his company was still talking to the New York 
Stock Exchange about a move to his Colgate complex. He said the exchange 
has ``assured us'' that New Jersey was not being used merely to extract 
larger concessions from New York. The New Jersey secretary of commerce, 
Gualberto Medina, said on Friday that his state was still in the running, 
but two other developers in New Jersey who are negotiating with the 
exchange said they did not believe there would ever be a New Jersey 
Stock Exchange. ``They're going to stay in Manhattan,'' said one developer 
who spoke on the condition of anonymity. City and state officials 
in New York contend that they have to take the relocation threats 
seriously, especially since New Jersey is luring companies with hefty 
tax subsidies of its own. Although the exodus of companies from New 
York has slowed to a trickle since the mid-'80s, both Cigna Insurance 
and U.S. Trust are now considering moving a total of 900 workers to 
Jersey City. ``The public investments in the exchanges are not simply 
corporate retention deals,'' said Carl Weisbrod, former president 
of New York City's Economic Development Corp. ``They're infrastructure 
deals, no different than the Erie Canal. Financial services are the 
key to our economic health and future. Ensuring that this industry 
remains concentrated in New York and competitive is a major public 
policy objective.'' It certainly has been for both Democratic and 
Republican mayors over the last 15 years. During the real-estate boom 
in the 1980s, Mayor Edward Koch gave a $235 million incentive package 
to Chase Manhattan and $90 million to Citicorp after those companies 
threatened to relocate some of their operations. During the recession 
in the early 1990s when the city's financial center appeared to be 
on the verge of disintegrating, Mayor David Dinkins continued the 
tradition, granting a total of $255 million in tax breaks to Morgan 
Stanley, Prudential Securities, Bear Stearns and Bank of America. 
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani, who as a mayoral candidate in 1993 criticized 
the use of corporate retention deals, has accelerated the process. 
His administration has granted $445.4 million in tax subsidies to 
20 Wall Street companies since January 1994, including $75 million 
for Bear Stearns and $50.5 million for Credit Suisse First Boston. 
Eight insurance companies got a total of $122.34 million. In the latest 
example, city officials granted a $5.8 million incentive package to 
Zurich Centre Group, even after it had abandoned its previously announced 
plans to move to Stamford, Conn., where it had obtained a $190 million 
tax credit for a new headquarters. Those so-called retention deals 
mostly involved cuts in sales taxes and property taxes. The city's 
financial markets, however, have bargained for far more by playing 
the relocation card for 30 years. Afte talking with New Jersey, the 
Mercantile Exchange got a $183.9 million incentive package from the 
Giuliani administration in 1994, which included $129 million in cash, 
the equivalent of 59 percent of the cost of its new headquarters and 
trading floor at Battery Park City. The Merc currently pays $1 million 
a year in rent on the state-owned land. Frank Zarb, chairman of the 
National Association of Securities Dealers, which owns the Nasdaq 
and American Stock Exchanges, also wanted a big subsidy package to 
build a joint home for both markets in New York or New Jersey. Zarb 
offered to move the NASD headquarters from Washington. Many real-estate 
executives and officials in New York doubted that Zarb, who has made 
no secret of his plans to create a financial market that could rival 
the New York Stock Exchange, would move to New Jersey, which offered 
$140 million in tax and cash incentives. City and state officials 
said they struck a deal last week to provide the exchanges with $20 
million in cash and $180 million in tax credits and low-cost electricity. 
The subsidy package, however, is portable and can be used at a site 
near Times Square or in Battery Park City. Michael Jones, a senior 
vice president at NASD, said on Friday that the company was ``still 
in the process'' of making a decision and obtaining board approval. 
City and state officials are frantically trying to conclude a deal 
with the New York Stock Exchange, which says it is continuing to negotiate 
with both New York and New Jersey. According to negotiators for both 
sides, the city and the state have offered to provide nearly $500 
million in cash and $100 million in tax breaks toward the construction 
of a $1.1 billion trading complex on a block bound by Wall Street 
and Exchange Place, between Broad and William streets. The $600 million 
package would be more than twice as large as any subsidy ever offered 
to a single company. It is unclear whether those incentives include 
the $300 million it will cost to acquire the construction site. City 
and state officials are hoping to sell the right to build an office 
tower above the exchange's new trading floors, which will rise about 
15 stories. The stock market has maintained that it will not pay for 
the land, while state officials have refused to grant any subsidies 
for new computers and other equipment. The bargaining is further complicated 
by the fact that the stock market favors moving to a vacant parcel 
at Battery Park City, while city and state officials want the exchange 
to remain in the city' traditional financial district. They fear that 
property values and the economic health of the district would be undermined 
by the stock market's departure. In the meantime, New Jersey, which 
has long sought the prestige a financial market could offer, beckons 
with its own set of subsidies. ``I am convinced that both of these 
exchanges gave very serious consideration to New Jersey,'' said Medina. 
``If they don't come, this stalking-horse was involved in a photo 
finish.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>