<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981107.0136 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The 15th Breeders' Cup got off to a rousing start Saturday when Answer 
Lively won the $1 million Juvenile by a head over the 76-1 long shot 
Aly's Alley, and cast a lengthening shadow toward next year's Kentucky 
Derby. Answer Lively became the first winner on a day loaded with 
seven Breeders' Cup races with purses of $13.2 million. He won it 
under a skillful ride by Jerry Bailey, who was riding the colt for 
the first time but was riding a Breeders' Cup winner for the seventh 
time. And he did it before a throng of 70,000 spectators at Churchill 
Downs. The Juvenile served as the opening act to racing's richest 
and grandest day of the year with its show-stopper finale, the $5.2 
million Classic with 11 of the world's finest horses led by Skip Away 
and Silver Charm, meeting for the first time but contending with an 
all-star field of nine rivals in the richest race in the world. In 
other races, Silverbulletday won the Juvenile Fillies with Excellent 
Meeting finishing second and Three Ring finishing third; Reraise won 
the Sprint, with Grand Slam finishing second and Kona Gold taking 
third, and Da Hoss won the Mile, with Hawksley Hill second and Labeeb 
third. The program may not have included a race with the traditions 
and history of the 124-year-old Kentucky Derby, and the crowd was 
only half the size of the multitudes that flock to Churchill Downs 
in May for the Derby. But the Breeders' Cup featured 85 of the finest 
horses from three continents, and the Juvenile kicked off a day of 
unquestioned riches but unknown fates. The unknown fate involved the 
winning colt and his chances of going on to stardom next year at 3. 
Since the Breeders' Cup was established 15 years ago, no colt who 
won the Juvenile returned the next year to win the Kentucky Derby. 
In fact, no colt has won the 2-year-old championship and come back 
to win the Derby since Spectacular Bid in 1979. Answer Lively, a son 
of Lively One, is owned by John Franks, an oil man from Louisiana, 
and he was not exactly a secret with the bettors. He had won three 
of his six starts before he went to the post as the favorite, and 
he responded with a well-rated effort under Bailey's guidance that 
not only won but also outran the small herd of five colts entered 
by D. Wayne Lukas. At the finish, he had a head on the long shot Aly's 
Alley, who was closing fast on the inside, and Aly's Alley had three-quarters 
of a length on Cat Thief, the only one of the Lukas army to run in 
the money. Franks was asked if he was happy that he hadn't changed 
his mind about selling Answer Lively to any of the many people offering 
substantial money for the horse, and he replied dryly: ``I didn't 
change my mind, they did.'' Lukas was asked how he felt being shut 
out, and he replied: ``I was hoping to get a better finish. But the 
race set up for a closer to win. The horses there at the end were 
the ones that figured to be there, including Aly's Alley. He's run 
well all year.'' Answer Lively won two races in Louisiana this fall 
before running second to Cat Thief in the Breeder's Futurity at nearby 
Keeneland just three weeks ago. And he ran a strategic race Saturday, 
stalking the lead before making his move in the homestretch. And he 
had enough gas left to hold off the late rush by Aly's Alley. ``The 
whole trick was to see how he would rate behind horses, and he did 
that real nice'' Bailey said. ``Near the finish, I knew somebody was 
coming up on the inside, but I also felt the inside wasn't the best 
place to run. That's why I chose an outside lane for the finish, and 
my colt responded beautifully.'' Edgar Prado, the jockey on Aly's 
Alley, held up his fingers about three inches apart and said: ``I 
got beat this far. I tell you, we were in front two jumps after the 
wire.'' Along the way, Answer Lively outran and even buried some highly 
regarded 2-year-old colts. Yes It's True, the leader of the Lukas 
band, held the lead for three-quarters of a mile but gave way and 
finished 11th in a field of 13. Scotty Schulhofer's Lemon Drop Kid, 
second in the Champagne Stakes at Belmont Park last month, moved up 
gradually from eighth place but could not pass the four top finishers. 
The Groom Is Red, owned by Boston Celtics coach Rick Pitino and trained 
by Nick Zito, got pinched coming out of the gate and ran last almost 
to the homestretch, rallied but finished sixth. The other Lukas horses 
finished eighth, ninth and 13th. Two colts acted up and one was even 
scratched at the gate as the suspense built. Prime Directive balked 
and flailed when entering the gate, prompting Jorge Chavez to dismount 
and leading the trackside veterinarian to scratch the horse. Then 
Red Sea, a star in Britain, broke through the gate, prompting Kent 
Desormeaux to jump off. They got back in the gate and ran the race, 
but finished 12th. Answer Lively ran the mile and one-sixteenth on 
a fast track in 1:44, paid $7.40 for a $2 bet to win and went home 
with $520,000 and hopes of beating the curse of the Juvenile winners. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>