<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981107.0170 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Every two years for the last 24, voters here went to the polls and 
gave the job of tax collector to James Branca. A gentle man, Branca 
did little to keep pace with technological advances, but treated residents 
with the warmth and deference to which they are accustomed. But in 
June, he died of pneumonia with 18 months left in his latest term, 
leaving town officials with the sticky question of whom to appoint 
to dog their 58,000 constituents for money. After one member's late-night 
brainstorm, the Board of Selectmen decided to pass the job to another 
local institution: Louis Caravella, 72, who for years has carried 
the affectionate but unofficial title of mayor of Cos Cob, a section 
of Greenwich. From 1953 until he sold it in 1988, he owned a store 
that was officially called Post Stationery but was known universally 
as Lou's. Besides selling stationery, Caravella made house calls to 
install hearing-aid batteries, fixed radios and flashlights, and tried 
to teach responsibility to children at the nearby school by automatically 
offering one day's credit on candy. Caravella's wife, Judy, had retired 
in May from teaching nursery school, and they had planned to travel. 
But Caravella dutifully answered his town's call. In July he was sworn 
in for the $60,000-a-year job of managing six employees and collecting 
$169 million a year in town taxes and sewer fees. He expected to serve 
out Branca's term, which will end in December 1999. But as beloved 
as he is, Caravella has one serious flaw in the eyes of a powerful 
group of residents. He is a Democrat. Branca was a Republican, and 
Caravella had just become, as his supporters proudly put it, the town's 
first Democratic tax collector in 334 years. Although Republican leaders 
in town say they like Caravella just fine, they gathered enough signatures 
to force a special election, and put up a candidate of their own. 
``Inroads,'' explained Christopher von Keyserling, a Republican who 
nevertheless campaigned for Caravella. ``The Grand Old Party doesn't 
like inroads.'' And so what had been a town ritual suddenly became 
a race. Caravella said he instantly felt like the underdog, since 
46 percent of the town's voters are registered Republicans while just 
19 percent are Democrats and the rest are unaffiliated. The Republican 
candidate was Samuel Telerico, 62, who owns a packaging-technology 
consulting company called Teleden Enterprises, because it was started 
in his den. Both men are Greenwich natives. Caravella was senior class 
president of Greenwich High School in 1944, and Telerico held the 
same honor 10 years later. Asked to describe their opponents, Caravella 
said, ``Sam's a great guy.'' Telerico said: ``Lou's a fine person. 
He's done a lot for our town.'' Nevertheless, they campaigned ferociously. 
Caravella raised $25,000, and Telerico collected $11,000 for a campaign 
that included 5 a.m. trips to the railroad stations to give commuters 
free copies of The Wall Street Journal, with campaign brochures tucked 
inside. Both men bought radio and newspaper ads featuring testimonials 
from various local and state officials. Telerico, who made modernization 
of the office his main campaign issue, donned Bermuda shorts and a 
golf shirt to troll the town beach and organized a ``supermarket brigade'' 
to spread the word to shoppers. Caravella hired a telemarketing firm 
to call 16,000 Greenwich households with a 30-second recording of 
him asking for support. He said he mailed 33,000 postcards and handed 
out 7,000 fliers at flea markets, pumpkin patches and fire stations. 
On election night, both parties set out spreads of beer, wine and 
finger sandwiches as they waited for the result. At the Democratic 
gathering at Redmen's Hall, owned by a fraternal organization, Selectwoman 
Stephanie H. Sanchez, cell phone to her ear, shouted, ``I think _ 
I think we've got it!'' In the first count, Caravella was ahead by 
62 votes. Since the difference was less than 0.5 percent, state law 
required a recount, which was set for 10 a.m. Thursday at Town Hall. 
Neither candidate stuck around: Caravella headed to Hilton Head, S.C., 
for an annual golf outing, and Telerico took off for San Francisco 
to visit his new granddaughter. On Thursday, the 1,000 absentee ballots, 
stuffed in cardboard boxes, were hauled out of the town clerk's vault 
and recounted one by one. Discrepancies were discovered. Party officials 
used tally sheets with columns labeled ``Sam'' and ``Lou'' to keep 
track as their candidates gained and lost a vote here or five votes 
there. Eight hours later, Telerico had gained four votes and Caravella 
had lost three, reducing his margin to 55 votes. Then the election 
officials headed downstairs to ``the dungeon,'' the unheated, concrete-floored 
storage room where the 49 voting machines had been impounded. Mechanics 
used power drills to jack up each one so its counters could be read. 
Sharon Vecchiolla, one of the town's two voting registrars, barked 
out the totals from Rows 13A (Telerico) and 13B (Caravella). A crowd 
gathered as people got home from work and heard the recount was still 
under way. Snickers bars, left over from Halloween, were handed out 
by Edward Dadakis, a former town Republican chairman. On the last 
machine, the drill jammed. One of the mechanics, Ed Handel, used a 
hand crank to open the machine as the crowd shouted, ``Go, Eddie! 
Go, Eddie!'' No number had changed. ``Right on the money,'' said Carmella 
Budkins, the town clerk. Caravella would remain the tax collector, 
by 55 votes out of more than 17,000 cast. Ms. Sanchez, the selectwoman, 
led a round of applause. On the way out, Dadakis said to Carol Ducret, 
the election's chief moderator, ``Carol, you're going to recheck those 
totals upstairs?'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>