<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981107.0073 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After a year of misery and distraction, White House aides repeated 
this joke with unabashed glee, given their surprising good fortune 
in last Tuesday's elections: ``The Monica Strategy: It worked.'' The 
reality is that _ intended or not _ an election that had been billed 
as a referendum on Bill Clinton ended up as much a referendum on the 
Republican Party. The verdict: A traditional and pragmatic Republican 
agenda of fiscal conservatism is in. A single-minded focus on social 
issues is out. ``It was a very bad day for the ideological, litmus-test 
Republicans,'' said Kenneth Duberstein, a chief of staff for President 
Ronald Reagan. Many of the most conservative candidates had already 
been knocked off in primaries, and there were more casualties Tuesday: 
Alabama Gov. Fob James, a champion of fundamentalists who had pressed 
for posting the Ten Commandments in courtrooms; and Sen. Lauch Faircloth, 
R-N.C., a favorite of the Christian Coalition. Rep. Mark Neumann, 
R-Wis., who repeatedly invoked his support for banning late-term abortions, 
lost his bid for the Senate. Jim Ross Lightfoot, who in a television 
blitz blasted his opponent for favoring nude dancing, lost what had 
been considered an easy election for governor of Iowa. In a race that 
was a high priority for religious conservatives, Tom Bordonaro, described 
by former President Gerald R. Ford as ``one of those extreme right-wing'' 
candidates, lost his drive to oust Rep. Lois Capps of California. 
And the retiring California Gov. Pete Wilson, a Republican, said he 
was convinced his party's candidate, Dan Lungren, fell to Democratic 
nominee Gray Davis in part because Lungren opposed abortion rights. 
``He was attacked by Davis relentlessly in television ads,'' Wilson 
said. ``It was practically a mantra.'' There was more bad news in 
ballot initiatives: Nineteen statewide referenda asked voters to choose 
between generally liberal and generally conservative positions on 
taxation and social issues like abortion, affirmative action, gambling 
and gun control; voters picked the more liberal side in 14. And in 
a New York Times/CBS News Poll a month before the election, most Republicans 
(including many self-described conservatives) said they wanted the 
new Congress to tackle problems like education before matters like 
abortion. ``The Republicans of the late '90s are the mirror image 
of the Democrats of the late '80s,'' said Al From, president of the 
Democratic Leadership Council, a centrist group founded in 1985 to 
try to marginalize, if not kill off, the left wing of the party _ 
unions, minority caucuses and gay rights advocates _ that had become 
its political base. ``We drove off the left side of the road in the 
'80s and they're driving off the right side of the road. The party 
that stays in the middle dominates American politics.'' Now there 
is even a Republican Leadership Council, founded early last year to 
do for Republicans what From's group did for Democrats. And Mark Miller, 
the Republican group's executive director, is singing From's tune. 
``The Democrats got to a point where they finally thought that the 
fringe of their party was in the driver's seat and it was driving 
them off the cliff,'' he said. ``And we may be at that point in our 
party.'' But identifying the problem is far easier than fixing it. 
The predicament for Republicans is that the party's supposed millstone 
_ social and religious conservatives _ is also one of its greatest 
strengths. These voters are among the most active and involved in 
state party organizations, and their support is essential for Republicans 
who want to win their party's Presidential nomination. Republicans 
have run up against the old adage: There is no such thing as a raging 
moderate. The point is that it is harder to motivate people from the 
middle. Complicating the matter further, many Republicans contend 
that the party's problem is that it has not been conservative enough. 
Newt Gingrich's stunning decision Friday to step down as speaker of 
the House came after his fellow Republicans blamed him for the showing 
Tuesday. They believe that, if anything, he has been too cozy with 
moderates. And the parallel with the Democrats is not entirely apt. 
The Democratic left gradually took over a party in power, leaving 
a potent, if often frustrated, moderate group in state houses (like 
Arkansas Gov. Bill Clinton) and in Congress. Republicans, by contrast, 
gained power from the ideological right, first in the White House 
with Reagan, then in Congress through Gingrich. Moderates were few, 
and they were harshly pushed aside, so there is much less on which 
to build. The remedy for Republicans might be, of all things, for 
them to find a leader like Clinton (a former head of the Democratic 
Leadership Council) who can disentangle the party from the demands 
of its conservative wing. Until now, at least, those who have tried 
to move toward the center have found it difficult. Kansas Gov. Bill 
Graves, for one, had a scare last August when David Miller stepped 
down as chairman of the state Republican Party and tried to oust him 
in a primary, accusing him of not being conservative enough. ``I'm 
not tooting my own horn,'' the governor said. ``But we pulled in 73 
percent in the primary and got 73 percent in the general election. 
You have to ask yourself: What was the state party chairman thinking?'' 
Now, Graves asks: ``How badly do we want to win the presidency? And 
are we willing to nominate a more centrist candidate who can win? 
Or is our goal to martyr our party over some principles that a good 
portion of our party may not believe in?'' Yet conservative leaders 
argue that the election was not a repudiation of their agenda. They 
blame the losses on the lack of an issue-based Republican message 
and a preoccupation with the Clinton scandal. Family Research Council 
president Gary Bauer said the party not only surrendered economic 
issues to Democrats but ``seemed to cave in on social issues and values 
issues, and the sanctity of human life.'' Many Republicans contend 
that voters do not mind conservatism, and some moderate voters can 
tolerate candidates who oppose abortion. But they are put off by politicians 
who appear to be trying to impose a moral agenda. And part of the 
difficulty in the campaign this year may not have been that the Republicans 
lacked issues to talk about, but that in their zeal to focus on scandal 
they allowed Democrats to define them as extremists. That is why many 
party leaders are citing as an example the brothers Bush: Texas Gov. 
George W. Bush, who easily won re-election, and his brother, Jeb, 
who was elected governor of Florida. Both oppose abortion, for example, 
but they couch their conservative stands in ways that do not threaten 
those who are not hard-core Republicans. Rep. David Dreier, R-Calif., 
a longtime friend of the Texas governor, said they chatted the day 
after the election about the need for leadership modeled after the 
optimistic approach of Reagan. ``George Bush could hardly be called 
a liberal or a moderate _ he's a conservative,'' Dreier said. ``Yet 
he does so in such an upbeat, positive, happy way. That's really what 
I see as necessary for the Republican Party.'' As he was showered 
with balloons and confetti last week, Gov. Bush, who did strikingly 
well with blacks, women and Hispanic voters, sounded what could be 
a theme for a presidential quest: ``Tonight's resounding victory says 
a leader who is compassionate and conservative can erase the gender 
gap and open the doors of the Republican Party to new faces, new voices.'' 
Bush is far from the only Republican who thinks he or she can run 
for national office by widening the appeal beyond social conservatives. 
After a failed run for the Republican nomination in 1996, Wilson, 
who supports abortion rights, said the outcome Tuesday made him even 
more tempted to try again. ``The results indicated that people who 
have pretty much my views and record did well,'' he said. For the 
party to recover, the feuding factions may not have to compromise. 
But they will have to learn to coexist _ perhaps even with Democrats 
_ something that is anathema to many. There is one great incentive. 
``A near-death experience,'' Duberstein said, ``has the tendency to 
focus the mind.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>