<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981107.0086 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A coalition of minority journalists' groups has ended one of the most 
fractious, if least visible, civil rights debates of the year, agreeing 
to keep its convention in Seattle despite Washington state's vote 
against affirmative action. The decision by the coalition, Unity: 
Journalists of Color, came after a debate that threatened to cripple 
the organization, which brings black, Asian, Hispanic and American 
Indian journalists under a single roof. Organized 10 years ago in 
the belief that nonwhite journalists have common goals, Unity nearly 
split over how to confront the rollback of affirmative action around 
the country. It was a snapshot of the problems inherited by a generation 
of successful minority professionals who fear that once-open doors 
are closing, and an illustration of the trapdoors built into a cross-cultural 
coalition. In this case, leaders of the National Association of Black 
Journalists said that holding the convention in Seattle would break 
faith with history by having 6,000 minority professionals spend $20 
million in a state rejecting government-sponsored affirmative action. 
But leaders of the Native American Journalists Association, with support 
from Hispanic colleagues, argued that a boycott would break faith 
with their groups, which could be financially crippled by hotel cancellation 
fees of $500,000 or more. So painful did the six-month debate become 
that some participants unsuccessfully sought a diversity training 
session to clarify cultural differences among themselves. ``We as 
the next generation are trying to figure out how we continue the civil 
rights struggle,'' said Vanessa Williams, the president of the black 
journalists' group and a reporter who covers city government for The 
Washington Post. ``The target is not so blatant. Now there are clear 
differences of opinion and also some confusion about how and when 
to fight.'' Other Unity members, including some blacks, thought that 
a boycott was one of several possible responses, but that the goal 
of holding Unity together was more important than any particular tactic. 
``There are hardly any other organizations in North America that operate 
the way Unity does,'' said Paul DeMain, the publisher of News From 
Indian Country, a national journal based in Wisconsin. ``We have to 
find the fortitude to put us, Unity, ahead of any individual organization's 
view.'' Since its founding 10 years ago, Unity has attracted the support 
of publishers and broadcasters committed to finding new faces to cover 
communities undergoing rapid demographic change. Aside from anything 
else, there are practical concerns. Publishers hope to reverse a decade 
of circulation losses. Television's audience is dwindling, too. Minorities 
represent 11.5 percent of newspaper journalists and 20 percent of 
those in television news. Unity and the four associations of minority 
journalists ``are the foot soldiers of diversity,'' said Jon Funabiki, 
a program officer for the Ford Foundation. ``They hold job fairs. 
They have high school and college scholarship and program aids. They 
have management training programs.'' At Funabiki's recommendation, 
the Ford Foundation has given Unity a $500,000 grant. With 3,000 members, 
the black group dwarfs the others. Yet when Unity was formed, every 
organization was given an equal voice. The presidency rotates each 
year. The 1998 debate was a reprise of the struggles that dogged the 
group's first convention in 1994. American Indians had concerns about 
Atlanta as the site because Georgia's government helped instigate 
the brutal 1838 removal of the Cherokees. Black journalists feared 
that they would be stuck with hotel penalties, though, if the convention 
were moved. Unity ``almost fell apart,'' Funabiki said, adding, ``The 
miracle is that they keep coming back.'' Ultimately, the Native American 
Journalists Association joined the 1994 convention, which was a success, 
in networking and bonhomie. Leaders of the groups also reached an 
understanding that if another convention was held, the smaller groups 
could choose a site. When Unity decided to hold a convention in the 
summer of 1999, the board chose Seattle, where the American Indians' 
presence is strong and the Asian population is growing swiftly. Unity 
attracted close to $2 million in foundation pledges and reserved hundreds 
of rooms. Then petitioners in Washington state put Initiative 200 
_ banning race or gender preference in state contracts, education 
or employment _ on the ballot. Some black journalists started discussing 
a boycott, arguing that abandoning Seattle would make the strongest 
possible statement. Confrontation is important, said Robert Pierre, 
a Washington Post reporter who was able to begin his career because 
of a scholarship from the National Association of Black Journalists. 
``There would not be blacks, Hispanics, Native Americans and Asian 
Americans in newsrooms,'' he said, ``if people hadn't fought newspapers 
and broadcast organizations into making it happen.'' But in April, 
when Ms. Williams of the black journalists' group proposed that Unity's 
board explore other sites, the other groups swiftly rejected the idea. 
DeMain, a past president of the Native American group, was concerned 
that boycott proponents were ignoring American Indians' sensitivity 
to broken agreements. ``We've had people rip us off for decades, signing 
agreements then tearing them up,'' he said. ``NABJ's saying, `You 
don't hear our concerns.' We're saying, `You don't hear ours.''' The 
leaders of the Asian American Journalists Association said they were 
concerned about whether journalists should be making political statements. 
``We've been strict about not jumping into controversial debates,'' 
said Benjamin Seto, the group's president and the deputy business 
editor at Newsday. ``We want to be seen as a credible group that can 
approach a situation the same way a journalist approaches a story, 
with impartiality.'' The black journalists were hardly unanimous. 
Some speakers at the group's convention in July argued against a boycott. 
``The people in Washington need to see our faces,'' one said. ``They 
need to know that we are what's right about affirmative action.'' 
Some members said that a boycott would threaten Unity itself. When 
the Unity board met in September in Virginia, Ms. Williams continued 
to seek new options. That discussion became heated, as black participants 
like Pierre grew impatient with digressions, like discussion of whether 
the physical act of pointing a finger in a debate is an insult. Kara 
Briggs, a member of the Yakama tribe and Unity's current president, 
felt that American Indians' sensitivities to such gestures were slighted. 
Unity had already agreed to sponsor a meeting for the public on the 
issue of affirmative action in Seattle in October. They agreed to 
resume the discussion then. On Oct. 10, Unity's board met in Seattle 
with the boards of all four groups. As the day proceeded, the discussion 
again deteriorated. Hispanic and Asian representatives sought compromise, 
in vain. ``We couldn't get past one group feeling that their concerns 
were more important than another group's,'' said Nancy Baca, the president 
of the National Association of Hispanic Journalists. When a vote to 
explore other sites was called at the meeting, the board deadlocked. 
The Asians voted with the blacks, saying that any group's request 
for information should be honored. The Hispanic group voted with the 
Native American group. The next morning, with feelings bruised and 
schedules tight, the board met again. At the last minute, the Native 
American group agreed to check other sites, but did so reluctantly. 
On Election Day, Initiative 200 passed with 59 percent of the vote. 
But King County, where Seattle is located, rejected the measure. That 
offered a fig leaf: Seattle voters had not opposed affirmative action. 
Last Wednesday, the board of the black journalists' group voted 12-6 
to go to Seattle, though some black journalists quietly decided they 
would stay away. On Thursday, the Unity board reaffirmed its original 
decision. ``We worked out in a very public setting the issues that 
all of us are going to have to learn to work out, in the media and 
in the workplace,'' said Ms. Briggs, a reporter for The Oregonian 
in Portland. For Ms. Williams, the debate corrected what she called 
an ``unhealthy tendency to try to smooth over differences as opposed 
to really confronting them so we could move on.'' She said, ``It has 
been more beneficial than any orchestrated discussion of cultural 
differences.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>