<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981218.1830.0095 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
So let's start in Congress tonight. ABC's Linda Douglass is on Capitol 
Hill, Linda, a status report if you would. Well, Peter, all day long 
the members of both parties quoted Abraham lincoln and the Bible and 
the declaration of independence as they prepared to cast what may 
be the most important vote of their careers. The house chamber fell 
silent as Judiciary chairman Henry Hyde rose to accuse President Clinton 
of high crimes and misdemeanors. The people's trust has been betrayed. 
The nation's chief executive has shown himself unwilling or incapable 
of enforcing its laws, for he has corrupted the rule of law. Democrats 
warned that impeaching the president will tear the country apart. 
We're about to inflict permanent damage on our constitution on our 
president, on the nation and on ourselves. Back and forth they went, 
republican versus democrat profoundly divided on the seriousness of 
Mr. Clinton's conduct. The president is our chief law enforcement 
officer and our chief magistrate. When he lies under oath, he undermines 
the integrity of our judicial system and threatens the rights and 
liberties of every one of us. What have we become, when we impeach 
a president over an extramarital affair and the lies to conceal it? 
I will vote for impeachment not because the president has human frailties, 
but because he has committed perjury repeatedly andillfully. Democrats 
charged that today is the culmination of a prolonged partisan effort 
to get Mr. Clinton. I am greatly disappointed in the raw, unmasked, 
unbridled hatred and meanness that drives this impeachment coup D'etat. 
Republicans suggested democrats were simply throwing up a smoke screen. 
No speaker has refuted the facts. The facts are that the president 
did not tell the truth under oath. Democrats pounded republicans for 
holding this vote when American forces are in harm's way. The majority 
may well have blood on its hands by starting this proceeding today. 
But republicans brushed that off, too. Our military fighting men want 
us to carry out our constitutional responsibility. As the debate raged 
on, members drift add way, leaving the chamber half empty, through 
it all was the question of history. Every future president, democrat 
or republican will be subject to harassment by his political enemies 
who can kredably threaten impeachment for the slightest misconduct. 
Our republic has weathered two centuries, a civil war, but it cannot 
weather corruption of its basic Tenet, the oath of office. Tomorrow 
they will vote and Mr. Clinton is expected to lose all but a handful 
of democrats are expected to vote against impeachment. Today, two 
of them said if Mr. Clinton is impeached, he should resign. Thank 
you, Linda. There's no stopping it now as you have made very clear. 
This final vote will begin tomorrow at 9:00 eastern time here in Washington 
in the House of Representatives and we will be here to cover it live. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>