<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981218.1830.0528 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There is quite a bit to try to digest tonight on the impeachment watch. 
We are joined again by our analysts, cokie Roberts, Bill kristol and 
George stephanopoulos. I want to go first to George Stephanopoulos. 
You listened to a lot of this debate today. Do you pick up highlights 
and low lights? I think the highlight was against the president of 
the United States, that he betrayed his trust to the American people. 
Usually it is a rule on the house floor that you're not even allowed 
to have personal criticism of the president. You heard a lot today. 
I think watching it through the day that the debate seemed to deteriorate 
over the course of the day. No stopping it? I don't think so. There's 
an awful lot of uglyness. I think one of the big questions we'll come 
away with is how could a Country that's so healthy have a political 
system that seems so diseased at this time on both sides of the aisle? 
Bill, it may be a little obvious question, but what do you think has 
actually been accomplished today? Well, the house has debated in an 
orderly and I think reasonably dignified way, the impeachment of the 
president of the United States. I think a lot of people looking at 
least part of the debate might think this is after all, the American 
constitutional system at work. The president is going to be impeached, 
as you said, tomorrow. I do think the question people in Washington 
are turning to already, Peter, you said there's no stopping it now, 
meaning there's no stopping impeachment now. But what happens after 
impeachment? Sam brought that up right away. Let me get a quick comment 
from you about what you think will happen in the senate. It is less 
likely that it seemed to everyone that there will be a quick deal, 
no trial, easy censure. People are now talking seriously about a Senate 
trial. People have an open mind about what would happen at such a 
trial. Let me go to cokie Roberts. Some of what we are hearing today 
is that the president's victory in the senate long assumed could no 
longer be taken for grant. Is that momentum at work? It's partly understanding 
the nature of the beast. When something starts in the Senate that 
you never are quite sure how it will come out in the Senate. Now, 
67 votes is a lot of votes. And it is two-thirds of the Senate, of 
course, being required to convict. There is an uncertainty that nobody 
wants to go into in the White House and the president's supporters. 
I think there will be a tremendous amount of effort to get some kind 
of a Deal in the Senate, but whether that can be done quickly or not 
is a very big question. Cokie, just before we rush on to the Senate, 
what was your thought about today as a highlight? The beginning, as 
George said when the clerk read those articles of impeachment, really, 
I felt almost sick to my stomach. It was so somber and that sense 
of, you know, it was almost like a death sentence that he was reading 
out there. And then the debate at the beginning was very somber and 
very effective. Members were very, very respectful and respecting 
of the process. Of course as the day has worn on they have left the 
floor. The debate has been at least started out, as a very high-level 
debate. The congressman from Illinois has stood in that chair since 
10:00 this morning. Thanks very much, cokie Roberts, George and Bill 
kristol. As we said earlier, there wasn't an enormous amount of mention 
during the debate, especially during the latter part of it about the 
interference of the debate and the attack on Iraq. How well is it 
working, how much longer will it go on? 
</TEXT>
</DOC>