<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981218.1830.1049 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Saddam Hussein made a television appearance today. Though we don't 
know how many Iraqis saw it. The U.S. did attack some television installations. 
As you'll hear. His remarks did make it here however. There's a live 
shot from Baghdad tonight. It was characteristic Saddam Hussein we 
heard. ABC's Bill Blakemore joins us again from Baghdad. Bill, how 
has it been? Well, Peter, for the third night running here this pattern 
of attacks is continuing here over Baghdad. Sometimes we're hearing 
the incoming cruise missiles as muffled explosions out on the eng 
of town. As always, we're seeing the red tracer of anti-aircraft fire 
shooting into the night sky. Saddam Hussein's first appearance since 
the attacks began was defiant. He declared "we will not compromise." 
He called his attackers "agents of satan." His deputy prime minister 
held a press conference moments later. What we are witnessing now 
is not a military conflict. The only damage Iraq is letting journalists 
see is relatively minor. This was Baghdad's natural history museum, 
for example. But last night's powerful explosions are believed to 
have decimated several military and intelligence buildings bagad. 
Incredible as it may seem, only a few blocks from the site of some 
of these explosions people were getting married. Many Iraqis seem 
to believe that for the most part, the American missiles are accurate. 
Most do not believe they are likely to be targets. So they often carry 
on as normal. And they know no attacks have hit central Baghdad in 
daylight, so markets, such as this one selling pets today, still have 
plenty of customers. The first explosions tonight were the sounds 
of Cannon fire, but with no military purpose. They were actually salutes 
announcing the beginning of the Muslim holy month of Ramadan. And 
Peter, you can imagine how bizarre that was for a few moments given 
what we've been experiencing here. Of course, many Iraqis, I think, 
are hoping that the arrival of the Muslim holy month of Ramadan will 
mean an end to this round of attacks here. They know that won't necessarily 
be the case. Peter? Thanks very much. Bill Blakemore for yet another 
night in Iraq. The question now or at least it's not too early to 
ask the question now, but what happens after the bombing 1234 as we've 
heard from Saddam Hussein today, we know he's well or at least available. 
Might he actually be stronger when this is over? 
</TEXT>
</DOC>