<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981218.1830.0882 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
While the debate over impeachment was going on in Washington, U.S. 
and british forces pounded Iraq for a third straight day. The Pentagon 
says the bombing campaign has done substantial damage. At this point 
the military planners know they have hit a lot of things, but they 
haven't been able to assess much of the damage. ABC's John McWethy 
has been keeping track at the Pentagon. John? Peter, it's clear that 
the air attacks have been aimed at targets much broader than Saddam 
Hussein's weapons of mass destruction. The number of targets grew 
from 50 the fir to 75 as the air campaign intensified. Gun-camera 
video provided by the Pentagon shows laser-guided bombs ripping into 
what the U.S. says is Iraq's communications system, tearing up buried 
telephone lines, destroying a radio relay site and air defense radar. 
We haven't destroyed his total capability right now, but we certainly 
have reduced his assets. The vast majority of targets have been outside 
of Baghdad, including a factory that the U.S. claimed was making and 
assembling missiles. Near the town of basra, the U.S. hit a radio 
television transmitter and a Refinery said to be used by Saddam Hussein 
to process oil that is smuggled out of the country, breaking the U.N. 
embargo. For the first time, America's B-1 bomber saw action, as did 
an air-launched cruise missile that has a 3,000-pound warhead. In 
an effort to discourage Iraqi troops from moving toward Kuwait, the 
U.S. showered southern Iraq with leaflets. Joint chiefs chairman Shelton 
said the message was Blunt. Stay where you are. Stay put. Do not threaten 
anyone and you will not be hit. Even though tonight is likely to be 
the last of this bombing campaign, ABC News has learned that the U.S. 
is more than tripling the number of American commandos in the gulf, 
Navy seals, army and air force special forces. Officials say these 
specialized troops could be used to sabotage any attack if Iraqi troops 
did try to come south into Kuwait. This is the tricky part, Peter. 
If these Iraqi forces in the event of some sort of uprising in the 
southern part of Iraq, the American commandos would be in the region 
in force and available to help if the president were to give the green 
light. John, any indication at all how much longer it might go on? 
NY hints? Peter, it does appear that tonight will be the last night, 
but they are holding open the possibility that they could extend it 
if they look at the targets and decide they need to go one more night. 
Okay. Thanks very much. John McWethy at the Pentagon. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>