<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981218.0847 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Moscow denounced the United States on Friday with the kind of rhetoric 
not seen since the Cold War, demanding an end to attacks on Iraq and 
warning that relations with the West could be badly damaged. In a 
rare display of political consensus, President Boris Yeltsin and his 
Communist and nationalist opponents harshly criticized the U.S. and 
British attacks on Iraq with verbal broadsides reminiscent of the 
Soviet era. ``We condemn the United States, and nobody should doubt 
our negative attitude,'' Prime Minister Yevgeny Primakov said. Russian 
Defense Minister Igor Sergeyev said Friday the U.S. and British strikes 
``flagrantly violated the norms of the international law and openly 
ignored the world community's efforts to settle the situation.'' Sergeyev 
said Moscow's relations with NATO were threatened. The Foreign Ministry 
called for a halt to the air attacks and a U.N. Security Council meeting 
to restore peace in Baghdad, a longtime Soviet and Russian friend. 
The Iraq crisis underlines Moscow's loss of global influence and the 
unhappiness of some Russian political leaders and officials about 
close post-Soviet ties with the West. Russian officials are furious 
that they can do little more than complain, recalling how the Soviet 
Union might have been able to use its global muscle to prevent such 
an attack. But Russia is no longer a global power and even the most 
vehement critics of the West admit privately that Moscow will do little 
more than growl and indulge in half-hearted sabre rattling. Russia, 
caught in its worst economic crisis since the Soviet collapse, needs 
the West far too much. The Kremlin, apparently concerned about the 
growing rhetoric at a time when it is desperate for Western aid, was 
already toning down some of the criticism. Presidential aides stressed 
there was no question of breaking relations with the United States 
or Great Britain even though Moscow recalled its ambassadors to protest 
the airstrikes. ``The president believes that under no circumstances 
should we slide towards confrontation (with the West), but we should 
call things by their name. The military strikes are unacceptable and 
should be stopped,'' presidential spokesman Dmitry Yakushkin told 
a Kremlin press briefing. Senior officials hastened to add that Russia 
still wants Western food aid and new loans from the International 
Monetary Fund. None of that is possible with the support of Washington. 
The State Duma, the lower chamber of parliament, passed an appeal 
to Yeltsin on Friday calling for Russia to unilaterally break U.N. 
sanctions against Iraq and provide aid to Baghdad. Such a move is 
not binding on the government and Yeltsin is unlikely to take any 
real action. In unusually strong criticism from the military, Gen. 
Leonid Ivashov, the head of the Defense Ministry's international military 
cooperation department, said the attack could lead to a rift with 
the West. Moscow ``will be forced to change its military-political 
course and may become the leader of a part of the world community 
that disagrees with the (U.S.) dictate,'' ITAR-Tass quoted him as 
saying. The Russian navy put some units on alert because of the Iraq 
crisis, but there had been no deployment of ships, officials said. 
The move appeared purely symbolic. The Russian military is not considered 
an effective force after years of neglect and poor funding. Yeltsin 
is under opposition pressure to curb ties with the West at a time 
when he has lost much of his political clout because of health problems 
and his failure to handle the economic crisis. Communist and other 
nationalist politicians have been demanding an end to Moscow's close 
ties with the West and NATO. Still, Yeltsin, who was mainly angry 
about not being informed about the attack in advance, has staked his 
foreign policy on good ties with the West and is not likely to change 
course. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>