<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981218.0848 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Mexico, Venezuela and Saudi Arabia tried but failed to reach a deal 
cutting production by a further two million barrels a day in a bid 
to boost sagging oil prices, Mexico's oil minister said Friday. But 
the minister, Luis Tellez, said the countries pledged to maintain 
cuts they agreed to in June and would try to persuade other oil producers, 
such as Iran, to join efforts to reduce global production. Tellez 
said that Iran, the second-largest OPEC exporter behind Saudi Arabia, 
was producing 300,000 barrels per day more than the limit it voluntarily 
agreed to in March, and that the extra production was creating problems 
for the market. Tellez said the tripartite meeting of oil and energy 
ministers in Madrid on Thursday had considered the plan for cuts of 
two million barrels a day, but ``there was no agreement to do this 
now.'' Under the deal, the 11 members of OPEC would have borne the 
burden of making production cuts totaling 1.5 million barrels a day, 
while non-OPEC members would have cut the remaining 500,000 barrels 
a day. Instead, the three countries agreed only to maintain through 
1999 the reduced production they agreed to in June: Saudi Arabia cut 
of 725,000 barrels a day from its baseline of 8.8 million barrels 
per day, Venezuela 525,000 barrels from its 3.5 million baseline and 
Mexico 200,000 from its 3.2 million baseline. Saudi Arabia, Mexico 
and Venezuela have led an initiative for cuts by producers that totaled 
3.1 million barrels per day as of June. Analysts and some OPEC members 
say an additional 1.5 million barrels a day in reductions is needed 
to have an impact on prices, which hit 12-year lows and stripped oil-dependent 
nations of billions of dollars in revenues. Tellez said that Saudi 
Oil Minister Ali Naimi was planning to visit Iran in the near future 
to try to convince the country to adhere to the 3.6 million barrels 
per day it agreed to in March. ``There's certainly a problem with 
the Iranians,'' he said in an interview Friday, a day after he concluded 
six hours of talks in Madrid with oil and energy colleagues from Saudi 
Arabia and Venezuela. But he added: ``If Iran doesn't want to comply, 
there's no way to force it.'' Iran publicly has said it it is adhering 
to the 3.6 million barrel-per-day baseline it adopted in March. But 
Tellez said he was told by Iran's oil minister, Bijan Namdar Zanganey, 
that Tehran was now using a baseline of 3.9 million barrels per day. 
Iranian officials could not immediately be reached for comment. Crude 
prices had risen Wednesday over the possibility of airstrikes against 
Iraq. But news from the oil ministers meeting Thursday, plus the growing 
belief that oil production from Iraq won't be disrupted, sent prices 
plunging dlrs 1.35 to dlrs 11.03 a barrel on the New York Mercantile 
Exchange. London Brent fell dlrs 1.27 a barrel to dlrs 10.09. After 
Madrid, Naimi headed to Norway as part of the initiative to urge other 
producers to cut output until the end of the year. Norway has already 
cut its production by 100,000 barrels a day. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>