<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981218.0864 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Israel will take all necessary measures against Iraq should it ``dare'' 
to attack the Jewish state, the defense minister said Friday. The 
minister, Yitzhak Mordechai, was more direct in his warning than Israeli 
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu who on Thursday, the first day of 
U.S. airstrikes against Iraq, would only say that Israel reserved 
the right to defend itself. Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein has not threatened 
to attack Israel in retaliation for the U.S. bombings, and Mordechai 
told Israel radio there has been no change in the military's assessment 
that chances of an Iraqi missile attack on Israel were slim. However, 
Israel army radio quoted a military source as saying that Iraq has 
Sukhoi Su-27 warplanes with enough range to reach Israel and that 
Israel has mobilized all reserves in its anti-aircraft force. Israel's 
military intelligence analysts believe Saddam might fire missiles 
at Israel only if he were desperate or facing death. Mordechai said 
Israel would like to see the American-British operation achieve its 
goals, but that Israel has ``no interest, directly or indirectly,'' 
in taking part in the fighting. However, Israel ``would take whatever 
measures are required against anyone who would, heaven forbid, dare 
to hit us,'' Mordechai told the radio. Fearing an Iraqi attack, the 
Swedish travel agency Fritidsresor pulled 336 people out of the Red 
Sea resort of Eilat on Friday. Other foreign travel companies pulled 
some 700 travelers out of the city on Thursday. Palestinians marched 
against the action in Palestinian-controlled areas of the West Bank 
and clashed with Israeli soldiers in Bethlehem. ``Death to America, 
Israel and Britain,'' shouted thousands of the marchers in Nablus. 
They also shouted slogans against the recent Palestinian-U.S. rapprochement. 
Some marchers shook their fists in the air when they saw Palestinian 
leader Yasser Arafat's helicopter approach. In Manger Square in Bethlehem 
_ where just days ago, U.S. President Bill Clinton was greeted rapturously 
_ several hundred marchers shouted ``Death to Clinton.'' Protesters 
threw bottles and stones at Israeli soldiers stationed at the city's 
border with Jerusalem. The troops responded with rubber bullets and 
tear gas, slightly injuring 15 Palestinians. During the 1991 Gulf 
war, Iraq fired 39 Scud missiles at Israel. Giving in to American 
pressure, Israel did not retaliate against Iraq. The United States 
was concerned that an Israeli counterstrike would threaten the stability 
of an Arab coalition backing the 1991 assault on Iraq. Dan Shomron, 
who was Israel's armed forces chief of staff during the Gulf War, 
played down the possibility of Iraqi missiles falling on Israel now. 
He said Iraq would have to assemble launchers in its western desert 
area, closest to Israel, and he doubted whether Iraq had the ability 
now. Mordechai said American-made Patriot anti-missile batteries have 
been deployed as a precaution. He said the plan was to deploy the 
batteries as soon as there was an American strike against Iraq. He 
said more American equipment is on the way here. The commander of 
Israel's anti-aircraft units, Brig. Gen. Ariel Fishben, said improvements 
have been made in the Patriot system since the Gulf War, when its 
success in bringing down incoming Iraqi Scud missiles was limited. 
The Israeli military recommended that Israelis check their gas masks, 
renew outdated models, stock up on plastic sheeting and tape to seal 
off a room in their houses, if necessary. In 1991, Israelis spent 
many hours in sealed rooms, wearing gas masks, during the Iraqi missile 
attacks. About 25,000 Israelis have traded in their old gas masks 
for new ones after the army opened 65 distribution centers around 
the country Thursday, the army said. Israel radio reported that 83 
percent of Israelis have gas masks. Protective kits distributed to 
Israeli citizens include gas masks, automatic atropine needle injectors 
to counter nerve gas and powder to treat chemical burns. There are 
special tents for infants and gas masks with plastic extensions for 
men with beards. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>