<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981218.0571 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Deafening explosions rocked Baghdad on Friday in the latest wave of 
U.S. and British air raids that Iraq says have killed at least 25 
people in the last two days. The Iraqi capital came under missile 
attack hours before dawn, capping a barrage of strikes that began 
late Thursday night. The bombardment covered Baghdad with a pall of 
smoke and set the skyline aglow in orange. Again and again air-raid 
sirens sounded the warning and the sky was lighted by anti-aircraft 
fire and tracer bullets. The two days of attacks have targeted dozens 
of sites, including the headquarters of the military intelligence 
and security police and factories that were monitored by U.N. weapons 
inspectors, Iraqi officials said. As a new day dawned, the tension 
of the night was less evident and early risers were seen going about 
their normal business. Traffic was light as Friday is the Muslim sabbath, 
but worried motorists queued up at gasoline stations to make sure 
their tanks were full. Iraqi newspapers Friday called on people to 
rally behind President Saddam Hussein. ``God bless Iraq and Saddam,'' 
the Babil newspaper said in large red letters above the name of the 
newspaper. Below the slogan was a drawing of Saddam dressed in a traditional 
white Arab robe hurling a spear at a large, black hissing snake. The 
picture showed Saddam atop a white horse and took up about a third 
of the front page. The newspaper urged Iraqis to ``show their readiness 
for sacrifice and their readiness to face the evil aggressors.'' Al-Thawra, 
the paper of Saddam's ruling Baath Party, headlined its anti-American 
editorial ``Operation Monica.'' In an apparent effort to incite the 
public to rise up against Saddam, U.S. aircraft dropped leaflets over 
southern Iraq on Thursday, an Information Ministry official said. 
He said the leaflets were designed to ``arouse the people'' but gave 
no further details. The largely Shiite Muslim south rebelled against 
Saddam following the 1991 Gulf War, but the uprising was suppressed 
by Iraqi forces. Saudi armored units briefly moved close to the Iraqi 
border Thursday, apparently on a surveillance mission, the Iraqi official 
said. He spoke on customary condition of anonymity. The aerial attack 
in the early hours of Friday had set off the loudest explosions heard 
so far since the United States launched the operation early Thursday, 
firing 1,000 pound (450-kilogram) Tomahawk cruise missiles from warships 
in the Gulf. On Thursday night and early Friday, B-52 heavy bombers 
joined the blitz, firing from the air 2,000 pound (900 kilogram) cruise 
missiles. British Tornado jets also participated in the operation, 
named ``Desert Fox.'' One missile appeared to have hit in the vicinity 
of the state Military Industrial Corporation, and smoke could be seen 
drifting up from the area. The corporation is in charge of Iraq's 
factories. The Thursday attack targeted several factories that were 
monitored by U.N. weapons inspectors, including the Nida heavy machinery 
factory, some 15 kilometers (10 miles) south of Baghdad, Iraqi Foreign 
Minister Mohammed Saeed al-Sahhaf said. The U.N. teams have cameras 
and chemical sensors at a number of sites in Iraq to ensure that the 
equipment is not used for the clandestine manufacture of chemical 
or biological weapons or long-range missile parts. Friday's early 
morning attack damaged several buildings in Baghdad, including the 
Museum of Natural History and the Pharmacy College of Baghdad, the 
official Iraqi News Agency said. Iraqi officials took photographers 
and reporters to the museum, where a missile punched a two-foot (2/3 
of a meter) hole through a wall and shattered the windows of several 
showcases that displayed stuffed lions and hyenas. Early Friday, 16th 
graf BC-Iraq, 8th Ld-Writethru 
</TEXT>
</DOC>