<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981218.0308 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Russia's relations with the United States and the West may be seriously 
damaged by the U.S. attack on Iraq, wiping out years of progress since 
the end of the Cold War, top military leaders warned Friday. President 
Boris Yeltsin and Russian leaders across the political spectrum have 
denounced the U.S. and British attacks on Iraq, demanding an immediate 
halt to the campaign. The Foreign Ministry said Friday it had recalled 
Russia's ambassador to Britain for urgent consultations. The move 
came one day after the Russian ambassador to Washington was recalled 
to protest the attacks. The Kremlin said diplomatic relations with 
Washington and London would not be broken. The State Duma, the lower 
chamber of parliament, was to consider calls Friday for Russia to 
unilaterally break U.N. sanctions against Iraq and provide aid to 
Baghdad, a long-time Soviet and Russian friend. In unusually strong 
criticism from the military, Gen. Leonid Ivashov, the head of the 
Defense Ministry's international military cooperation department, 
said the attack could lead to a rift with the West. Moscow ``will 
be forced to change its military-political course and may become the 
leader of a part of the world community that disagrees with the (U.S.) 
dictate,'' he was quoted as saying by the ITAR-Tass news agency. The 
Russian navy was putting some units on alert because of the Iraq crisis, 
but there had been no deployment of ships, officials said. The move 
appeared purely symbolic. The Russian military is not considered an 
effective force after years of neglect and poor funding. Russian Defense 
Minister Igor Sergeyev said Friday the U.S. and British strikes ``flagrantly 
violated the norms of the international law and openly ignored the 
world community's efforts to settle the situation.'' Sergeyev, the 
country's highest-ranking officer, said Moscow's relations with NATO 
were threatened. ``How can we talk about cooperation and partnership 
with the alliance now, when Russia's opinion is openly ignored,'' 
he said. Yeltsin is under opposition pressure to curb ties with the 
West at a time when he has lost much of his political clout because 
of health problems and his failure to handle the country's worst economic 
crisis since the Soviet collapse. Communist and other nationalist 
politicians have been demanding an end to Moscow's close ties with 
the West and NATO. Yeltsin's press spokesman said Friday the president 
did not want to damage ties with the West, but Russia could not accept 
the attack on Iraq. ``The president believes that under no circumstances 
should we slide towrds confrontation (with the West), but we should 
call things by their name. The military strikes are unacceptable and 
should be stopped,'' presidential spokesman Dmitry Yakushkin told 
a Kremlin press briefing. While Yeltsin is not likely to alter his 
pro-Western policy radically, he is angry about not being informed 
by Washington about the attack in advance. The Anglo-American attack 
on Iraq was criticized by some other ex-Soviet republics. President 
Eduard Shevardnadze of Georgia said the United States had no justification 
for the attacks, while Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan called for an end 
to the campaign. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>