<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981218.1255 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A defiant Saddam Hussein vowed Friday that his country will ``not 
compromise or kneel'' as the United States and Britain unleashed a 
third day of air strikes against Iraq. Moments after the Iraq leader's 
tough talk, air raid sirens wailed throughout the country, warning 
of a new wave of the attacks that have already struck government buildings, 
communications centers and factories that could be used to build weapons 
of mass destruction. Almost all potential weapons sites that U.N. 
weapons inspectors had been monitoring have been hit as part of the 
raids, Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz said Friday. There were no 
immediate reports of damage from the third night of strikes, which 
did not target the capital. There was one moment of jitters Friday 
night when a loud boom was heard in Baghdad, but it turned out to 
be a cannon announcing the beginning of the Muslim holy month of Ramadan. 
In a TV address to the nation, Saddam wore an olive green field marshal's 
uniform, ditching the civilian suits he has favored in public since 
the last crisis with the United Nations in February. He urged Iraqis 
to ``continue your resistance.'' ``We will not compromise or kneel 
in the face of injustice,'' Saddam said in his first television appearance 
to the nation since the air strikes began early Thursday. ``We will 
not let evil triumph over virtue.'' The United States has fired almost 
300 cruise missiles and U.S. pilots have flown some 200 combat sorties 
since the attacks began. While the Iraqi military announced its anti-aircraft 
batteries had shot down 77 incoming missiles, American officials said 
in Washington that they had met little real resistance to the attacks. 
But Gen. Henry H. Shelton, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, 
said there have been some glitches in the bombardment of Iraq. Initial 
bomb-damage assessments indicate that only a small number of the 75 
targets attacked have been destroyed or severely damaged. ``Not all 
have gone as planned,'' Shelton told a news conference. Dozens of 
Iraqi sites, including the intelligence and police headquarters, the 
national radio and television and an oil refinery have been struck 
in the bombardment. The missiles are targeting ``whatever is dear 
to the Iraqi people,'' Aziz told reporters. He added that there were 
``a lot of casualties,'' but gave no details. Iraqi officials had 
earlier said that 25 people were killed and 75 wounded in the raids. 
U.S. Defense Secretary William Cohen said Friday there had been no 
American casualties. In Baghdad's al-Kharkh hospital on the western 
side of the Tigris River, Amar Shakir lay unconscious on a bed, the 
stumps of his left arm and leg swathed in thick bandages. Doctors 
said the 25-year-old civilian was crippled in the air strikes. They 
did not know where Shakir was at the time of the attack. In the Karada 
district, near the center of Baghdad, workers quickly cleared away 
the debris from a missile that smacked into the middle of a street, 
rupturing a water pipe. Rihab Mohammed, a 39-year-old mother of four, 
said she was afraid to go back inside her 2-story brick home. ``The 
walls and the foundations are so weak,'' she said, looking at the 
old, yellow brick home. Nearby, Farouk Mansour, 46, surveyed the damage 
at his toy store. ``The windows were thrown out of the frames and 
all the merchandise was scattered all over the floor,'' he said. ``It 
will cost me a lot of money'' to repair the damage, he said. U.S. 
President Bill Clinton ordered the strikes to punish Iraq for what 
he said was Baghdad's obstruction of U.N. weapons inspectors, who 
are responsible for dismantling Iraq's programs to build chemical 
and biological weapons and long-range missiles. Until the monitors 
certify that Iraq is free of the illegal weapons, the U.N. Security 
Council will not lift economic sanctions imposed on Iraq for its 1990 
invasion of Kuwait. In announcing the start of the strikes, Clinton 
recognized that it would be offensive to the United States' Arab allies 
if the attacks continued into Ramadan. But National Security Adviser 
Sandy Berger said Friday the strikes would not necessarily end with 
the beginning of Ramadan. ``That is not an automatic deadline,'' Berger 
said. Aziz said Friday that Iraq would no longer be willing to accept 
both the sanctions and the inspection regime. ``Iraq cannot tolerate 
UNSCOM (U.N. Special Commission) and sanctions at the same time,'' 
he said. Thursday's attacks targeted several factories that were monitored 
by U.N. weapons inspectors, including the Nida heavy machinery factory, 
some 15 kilometers (10 miles) south of Baghdad, Iraqi Foreign Minister 
Mohammed Saeed al-Sahhaf said. Aziz said the U.S. and Britain ``have 
targeted many, many _ almost all _ of the sites that were under full 
monitoring.'' The U.N. teams have cameras and chemical sensors at 
several sites in Iraq to ensure that the equipment is not tampered 
with and used for the clandestine manufacture of chemical or biological 
weapons or long-range missile parts. Early Friday morning, missiles 
damaged several buildings in Baghdad, including the Museum of Natural 
History and the Pharmacy College of Baghdad, the official Iraqi News 
Agency said. Iraqi officials took photographers and reporters to the 
museum, where a missile punched a two-foot (2/3 of a meter) hole through 
a wall and shattered the windows of several showcases that displayed 
stuffed lions and hyenas. An editorial in Al-Thawra, the paper of 
Saddam's ruling Baath Party, called the attacks ``Operation Monica.'' 
Aziz echoed the feeling that the strikes may have been tied to Clinton's 
domestic troubles, adding that ``when a statesman... lies in one case, 
how can he be credible in another case?'' Early Friday, 106 U.N. humanitarian 
workers who monitor food aid to the Iraqis were evacuated by bus to 
Jordan. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>