<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981218.2100.2342 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It was the kind of Sunday the Sunday political talk shows were created 
for basically. Panelists full of fire, brimstone, and predictns about 
where this impeachment process is headed. "This week." "Face the nation." 
"Fox news Sunday." This is "meet the press." Will there be a Senate 
trial of impeachment against William Jefferson clinton? I do think 
that the leadership has to do a hard count and determine whether or 
not there are 34 or more who would not vote under the surnt circumstances 
and the knowledge that we have today for impeachment under any circumstances. 
We have a constitutional obligation to deal with this issue now that 
it's been sent to us by the house. There's no absolute requirement 
that we go through a trial. The constitution requires that the Senate 
now address this issue. There's nothing in the rules that requires 
that all the witnesses be heard in open session. If we actually end 
up having to hear from some of the more infamous witnesses, we're 
now all too familiar with, there's no prohibition under the Senate 
rules from hearing those witnesses in closed sessions. This will not 
be a spectacle. It will not demean 2 Senate. We are going forward 
to prepare for trial. We're getting ready the legal arguments. We're 
getting readily the motions practice. We've getting ready to present 
evidence. One thing we should remember is the Burden is on the managers 
from the house to establish a factual and evidentiary basis for the 
articles of impeachment. I think they're going to have a very difficult 
time doing that. I actually believe today therare more republicans 
who would vote against removing the president from office than democrats 
who would vote to remove him. Indeed I do not know of any democrats 
at the moment who would vote to remove the president from office. 
Rom the very start when Bob for I Shelly and I talked about this issue 
last march. I said at that time and continue to believe that a censure 
is not worth a Tinker's damn. Larry Flynt said he is the James Carville 
of publishing. Isn't that rich. Merry Christmas. This is a full page 
add Flynt took out offering $1 million to anyone who say they had 
an affair with a member of Congress. The republican Congress has made 
Larry Flynt one of the most powerful people in Washington. He is so 
powerful that he ought to show up at Sally Quinn's new year's eve 
party between Colin Powell and Alan Greenspan. What happened here? 
Bob Livingston stepped down, was that a good thing? Shld he have resigd? 
Well, Sam I wish he would T have. I understood why he did it. But 
I wish he wouldn't have done it. I think we are getting on a very 
slippery slope. Do you want President Clinton to resign? It's not 
a matter of what I want. I do think it would be honorable for the 
president to resign. I think from the things that he has admitted 
doing, he has degraded the office of the presidency. I think if the 
president were to resign under these circumstances, it would weaken 
the presidency, it would weaken the constitution, it would undermine 
i think the process that the founding fathers put in place. Would 
be a bad thing for America. Back in August, house democrats hired 
abbe Lowell to fight their case before the Judiciary committee. He's 
their chief investigative counsel officially and a veteran Washington 
attorney. He is with us tonight from Washington. Abbe, I want to quote 
to you two passage from "the Wall Street Journal" to start things 
off here. So much talk of a deal that would involve a fine. First 
of all, house republicans dismissing censure as constitutionally problematic, 
threatening the separation of powers between the White House and the 
legislative branch. I have a lot of regrets habit what the house did. 
I don't think I have any more regrets than the rhetoric of the republicans 
so desperate to win this than to do the right thing would trash something 
as the Senate's ability to set a censure deal. They said it's not 
in the constitution. You and I could both list 25 things not in the 
constitution, like sending troops to the percent gran gulf without 
a declaration of war. And abortion rights. We could go on and on. 
Of all the frivolous argument that was so disturbing. Quoting from 
the journal, they reject a fine as an unconstitutional Bill of attaineder 
in which Congress would be acting officially to penalize just one 
person. That would be the case actually if Congress passed a law that 
create and fine for one person called Bill Clinton, yes. But if Bill 
Clinton is part of a deal, as part of his admission of doing something 
wrong, said you censure me and I'll offset the cost of the investigation, 
that would be just fine in terms of reimbursent, not in terms of a 
fine. Brian, I hope Americans were Le to see through all of the bad 
rhetoric because there was some truth told on the days of debate but 
there was an awful lot of misinformation. Abbe, this has been called 
the era where nothing truly matters. Nothing breaks through. It all 
ends up sounding the same. Yeah. And when a certain congressman from 
Florida said during the debate saturday, have you no sense of decency, 
sir, using the same quote as what ended in a lot of Le's minds, the 
McCarthy era it didn't get through because it wasn't heard because 
at the same volume as everything else. The phrase "God bless America" 
really comes to bear now. The polls or the feedback on the air really 
tells me that the Americans understand something. The notion that 
the radical right republicans would now demand the president's resignation 
is tantamount to a lot of things. Americans recognize that the Judiciary 
committee proceedings were partisan and unfair. They also saw the 
votes for impeachment were all republican and no democrat. A republican 
Congress throwing out a democratic vice president or -- president 
or vice versa. Here the beauty and the wisdom of the entire scene. 
They now understand -- let me put it to you this way. Republicans 
asking President Clinton to resign is tantamount to a Lynch mob, drags 
a man out of jail to Hang him but then giving him a gun and saying 
shoot yourself. Abbe Lowell joining us from Washington tonight. We 
hope to have your counterpart Mr. schippers on the broadcast. Abbe, 
thank you very much. You're welcome, Brian. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>