<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981218.2100.0047 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good Monday evening to you. With only a day to recover after the shocker 
that draining and historic saturday in the nation's capital, politics 
and politicians were back at full bore status today in Washington, 
with the time until the Senate trial that will decide the president's 
fate now measurable in only days. The president did some charity work 
today, but to survive this without further damage, he'll need the 
other two ingredients often mentioned in that phrase -- faith and 
hope. Also some help from republicans. And there's the continuing 
disconnect between public opinion and an act of congress. The very 
latest poll numbers tonight, a new poll conducted by NBC news shows 
with a margin of error 4 1/2% plus or minus. That would be the very 
same president headed straight for trial in the senate unless a deal 
intervenes. We have two members of the Senate with us standing by 
to talk to us tonight. First, however, some background on where this 
all stands. For that we begin in Washington. Here's NBC's Lisa Myers. 
Brian, key members of both parties believe a trial is now all but 
inevitable, that in 18 days William Jeff everieson Clinton will become 
only the second president ever to go on trial in the Senate. Tonight 
White House hopes of a quick deal to head off a trial appear dim. 
A powerful democrat, senator Robert Byrd essentially told the president's 
men to stay out of it. 've moderate republicans oppose short-circuiting 
the process. You believe then at least the Senate must begin a trial. 
i do, i do, i do. It's very heavy weather out there for the president 
right now. A trial could begin as early as January 8. the Supreme 
Court chief justice william rehnquist swearing in 100 senators as 
jurors. Senators claim they will be less partisan and more dignified 
than the house. Most hope to keep Monica Lewinsky from appearing at 
all. This won't be a sideshow or circus kind of thing. Do you think 
having Monica Lewinsky on the Senate floor would be a Sideshow? I 
don't think it would add to the deliberative process at all. So far 
Senate republicans don't seem to have the same zeal as those this 
the house to remove this president from office. Already some are talking 
of censure. Many democrats say they're disgusted with the president 
but not enough to help provide the 67 votes required to remove him 
from office. At some point this trial after it commences will be adjourned 
and the senate will agree upon a censure resolution. To save his job 
even democrats say the president will have to pay a price. Some want 
him to admit guilt and acknowledge the seriousness of hidffenses. 
He bothers a lot of people, and it doesn't seem to come through to 
him the enormity of the situation in which he finds himself. Tonight 
the smartest people in Washington believe the president will survive. 
But this story has been wildly unpredictable. Says one Senate democrat, 
"anything can happen. Anything." Lisa Myers, NBC news, Washington. 
Thank you, Lisa. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>