<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981218.2100.2755 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> MISCELLANEOUS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Still ahead our first look at this week's news magazines. Including 
"Tim magazine's men of the year. Why is our company tagline a question? 
I ac tually just start on Monday. So I really don't kno well, you 
can't make software better... until you know wh people want to do 
with it. What do you want to do? What do you want to do Woman: what 
are kids really doing with technology, and why is it helpi them learn? 
We've noticed you tend to do some pretty amazing thing how can I make 
the comput easier for you to use E-mail's going to be Li the telephone. 
You pick it U you call somebody... things we never wou have imagined. 
What if your comput could recognize your face in fact, we do our best 
work trying to keep up with yo imagination. I design softwa for people 
like my da my mother, my neighbors. What gets you up in the mning? 
What are you passionate about Woman: it has to be for kids, for all 
different typ of people to use it. What if your comput could talk 
to you whatf your comput turned on like a Lamp so our tagline. In 
part, it's an invitation to you. In part, it's a question because... 
we really need to know the answe so, we'll ask it agai Monday night. 
It's a big one. Time for our first of the week look at th big three 
newsweeklies. Let's hope it goes well, just hitting newsstands across 
the country. "U.S. news" calls it what many television networks refer 
to it as -- war on two fronts. "Newsweek" with a -- I guess it would 
be a picassoesque rendition of the many faces of Bill Clinton, all 
on one face. And "time" magazine, what was once the issue that stopped 
America cold for a day or two. "Time" out with their men of the year 
issue. Inside "U.S. news," very gossipy items this week in "Washington 
whispers." That's why they call them that. To break the silliness. 
When we come bking the first look at the Tuesday morning newspapers 
this monday night. It was one of those moments in life you want to 
keep. My husband thought he was getting dinner. My daughter...A new 
friend. Time to cook the lobster! When the moment came, I didn't have 
to worry about the light being low hey! That's my lobster! Or them 
turning out blurry because they were moving. With Kodak Max, I knew 
I'd get my picture. Low light, sunlight, action or still Kodak Max 
is all you need to know about film. I work out to keep my body in 
shape. To help keep my mind sharp I take new quanterra ginkgo biloba. 
It helps me concentrate, maintain focus. Why quanterra? All ginkgos 
aren't the same. The patented quanterra extract was proven safe and 
effective by doctors in extensive clinical trials. And it increases 
oxygen supply to the brain. With new quanterra mental sharpness I 
feel my best, naturally. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>