<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981218.2100.0246 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As to the White House role in all of this, in preparation for the 
president's role as defendant at trial we have the view from there 
tonight. Here is NBC's David Bloom. If anyone expected a contrite 
President Clinton to be on bended knee tonight they'd be wrong. Two 
days after being impeached Mr. Clinton's job approval rating is at 
an all-time high. Tonight White House aides say if Mr. Clinton has 
to admit to perjury in order to spare himself a Senate trial, well 
then there'll just have to be a Trial. As the president manned a soup 
kitchen in downtown Washington, the first lady at his side, the shouted 
questions from reporters about impeachment went unanswered. His only 
message to the senators now considering his fate -- merry christmas. 
I hope that they and the country will take some time to think about 
other people and to do something in the spirit of the season. Like 
this. In that spirit, two former presidents, Gerald Ford and Jimmy 
Carter proposed today that the Senate censure Mr. Clinton. Under their 
plan the president would -- but Mr. Clinton's hadse say he's adamant 
he will not admit to perjury. The president's lawyers are preparing 
for a trial. His political team believes republicans will ultimately 
flinch at the prospect of removing a popular president. Today's spokesman 
argued defy aboutly that Mr. Clinton was impeached bus of a political 
vendetta. A majority party has impeached the president because they 
could do it, because they had the power. The bottom line -- both republicans 
and democrats agree there almost certainly will not be the 67 votes 
needed to convict the president in the senate. One White House aide 
predicted if it comes to a trial we will win. But they've been wrong 
here before. David Bloom, NBC news T. White House. With us this evening, 
two members and thus potential jurors in the United States Senate, 
democrat Tim Johnson, the junior senator from the state of South Dakota 
and republican Susan Collins from the state of Maine, with us from 
Bangor, tonight. Senator Collins, were you hat all swayed to read 
the words of the unlikely allies Ford and Carter in today's "New York 
Times" asking for, arguing for a deal? I very much appreciate the 
advice and counsel given by those two former presidents whom I respect 
greatly. But I think it's premature at this point. The constitution 
requires us to at least begin a trial before we can talk about the 
outcome, which may prove to be censure or some other remedy. Senator 
Johnson, don't the underpinnings of a deal at least have to be in 
place even before a trial is under way? Shouldn't there be for the 
sake of argument discussions about it? I think some discussions will 
go forward. Clearly if the American public had their way they'd probably 
impeach the house republicans at this point. But some of the groundwork, 
the ideas need to be sounded out, need to be thought through. The 
assumption has to be however that we will commence with a trial with 
the notion that we will expedite this as much as at all possible. 
It's very likely that some sort of arrangement will be reached which 
will not require this process to go on for weeks or months at a time. 
Senator Johnson I don't need to tell you that senator Robert Byrd 
of West Virginia is the one man among you who may venerate the rules 
and tradition and procedures of the Senate more than anyone else. 
And he is said to be dead set against anything that may circumvent 
the process of the Senate. I think senator Byrd is concerned about 
direct, overt lobbying on the part of the White House. The rules in 
hand are whatever the Senate says the rules are. In that light I think 
it is important for both the republicans and democrats to be thinking 
and working tot to see if there is some sort of combination that can 
be reached that will result in a bipartisan expeditious handling of 
this situation. The American public clearly does not want to see this 
go on indefinitely. We have anher agenda that needs to be proceeded 
with. So I don't think that it would be a short circuiting for the 
process to work its will in the form of both parties coming together 
to think of ways that we can expedite the process. Senator Collins, 
this morning's "Wall Street Journal" talked in a way and made a convincing 
case that perhaps there would be a separation of powers issue if the 
White House and the Senate were seen to be in a deal and perhaps there 
would be another constitutional issue if the Senate were in effect 
to be punishing one person in this case. I think there are a lot of 
very difficult legal issues that are raised by this case, and that's 
why it's important that we proceed in a very judicial, nonpartisan, 
and fair manner, a manner that wil help restore public confidence 
in the system. I would note that the proposals that have been advanced 
for censure, particularly by the two former presidents, have called 
for the president to make an admission that he lieded under oath. 
That's an admission that the president so far has shown absolutely 
no willingness to make. And that may make it more difficult to deal 
with all of these issues. Senator Collins, is there any promise or 
short of that an assurance you can make the American people tonight 
about the quality of the debate in the senate vis-A-vis the house? 
I have a lot of confidence in the Senate to undertake this very momentous 
debate in a serious, thoughtful, and nonpartisan manner that will 
make the american people proud. I think you'll see far less partisan 
rhetoric on both sides of the aisle, unlike what we saw in the house 
where it was extimely partisan both on the part of republicans and 
on the part of democrats. I think that that kind of thoughtful debate 
will be advanced if the president doesn't have his people out attacking 
republicans as he did this weekend on the talk shows. And senator 
Johnson, what would it take for democrats to defect? I really can't 
-- can't address that kind of hypothetical. It seems to me that all 
we can do is focus on laying out the facts and approaching this issue 
in as nonpartisan or bipartisan fashion as possible, take a deliberative 
approach to it all, and try to move away from the intensely bitter 
partisan kind of rhetoric and politics that characterized the house 
deliberations. I think that the senators on both sides of the aisle 
in the Senate are going to be concerned about maintaining the reputation 
and the character of the United States Senate and approaching it in 
that light. Has the White House be in contact with you yet? Absolutely 
not. Do you expect them to be? They may be in contact. But I don't 
think that there's any real lobbying going on. I think they're concerned 
that there view of the facts be laid out. But I really think that 
for the most part the senators are going to take their role as in 
effect jurors in this case very seriously and I think will be resistant 
to any kind of strong-arming or any kind of lobbying in any intense 
fashion. I think senator Byrd is correctly advised the White House 
about the error of even attempting that kind approach and I don't 
think the White House will go down that road. Senator Collins why 
do you think it is that columnists are fond of of calling you a crucial 
swing vote? Throughout my years in the Senate I've worked bipartisanly, 
I've teamed up with democrat senators on issues like repealing the 
$57 billion tax break for the tobacco industry and education and health 
care issues. So I hope I bring an approach of looking at issues very 
carefully and approaching them in a bipartisan manner. This is an 
issue that's going to be very tough for all of us. It's something 
that I'm going to decide by looking at the constitution, evaluating 
the evidence, and ull mately following the dictates of my own conscious. 
Senators Johnson and Collins, thank you both very much for coming 
on the air tonight. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>