<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981218.1830.0077 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. America is a nation at war on two fronts tonight, a 
shooting war in the Middle East and a bitter, political war in Washington. 
The impeachment of the president of the United States, a grave and 
historic act, to set in motion the possible removal of a president 
elected twice by the people. At the same time in Iraq tonight, as 
operation desert fox continued, anti-aircraft fire again lit up the 
skies over Baghdad, a futile attempt to stop incoming U.S. missile 
and bomb attacks. The language in the house impeachment debate was 
almost as incendiary, but not immediately as dangerous of course. 
But Bill Clinton's political life and personal reputation is at stake 
here. We begin with NBC's Gwen Ifill on Capitol Hill. For republicans 
in the house, minds are already made up. President Clinton, they say, 
is guilty of betraying his oath and lying to the American people. 
No man or woman, no matter how gifted a manipulator of opinion or 
winner of votes can be above the law. The outcome's already clear 
as the house moves to impeach the president almost exclusively along 
party lines. To fail to impeach him would send an awful message to 
the countryside. No one bothered to argue the president's innocence. 
Even democrats agreed that Mr. Clinton has committed immoral acts. 
Who among us has not sinned? What the president did was wrong. But 
the president's defenders argued that Bill Clinton deserves censure, 
not impeachment. In all sincerity, from my heart, we are deeply offended 
by the unfairness of this process. We are considering articles of 
impeachment that allege an abuse of power. We have a responsibility 
not to abuse our power. But few non-democrats support censure, and 
today the White House lost all but two of the moderate republicans 
it once hoped to win. Only two spoke against impeachment. As a matter 
of conscience, I must vote against impeachment and I rue this day. 
An emotional subtext to today's debate, the presence of thousands 
of American troops at war in the Persian gulf. I'm personally outraged 
that we would decapitate the commander in chief in a time where we 
are at war abroad. But republicans said that actions abroad should 
not short-circuit responsibilities at home. We felt the quicker we 
could go ahead, the more we could show the world our democracy works. 
But impeachment was not Capitol Hill's only drama today. Another admission 
of marital infidelity, this time house speaker Bob livingston who 
admit he, too, had been unfaithful to his wife. The house will continue 
debating impeachment late into the night, with a Final vote on four 
articles of impeachment scheduled for midday tomorrow, leaving the 
Senate to decide next year whether to convict and remove the president 
from office. Gwen Ifill, NBC news, the capital. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>