<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981218.1830.0806 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
NBC news "in depth" -- tonight, America's strategy after the bombs 
and missiles stop falling on Iraq. Since the gulf war, U.S. forces 
have staged four attacks on Iraq, two in 1993 -- missile strikes against 
an Iraqi nuclear facility and against saddam's intelligence headquarters. 
For two days in 1996, an attack on anti-missile sites in southern 
Iraq, and now, this bombardment. But each time America's guns go quiet, 
little changes. Will it be any different this time around? NBC's Andrea 
Mitchell with some answers tonight, "in depth." When the smoke clears, 
America thinks there will be a showdown. Saddam will still be there. 
His weapons of mass destruction will be there. Still, experts agree 
an attack was necessary. Bottom line is it has to work. The alternative, 
you know, Saddam Hussein with nuclear weapons, with chemical weapons 
that can certainly threaten the destruction of his neighbors and be 
a great danger to the rest of the world. But intelligence officials 
say the U.S. can't target his biological and chemical weapons. First, 
no one knows exactly where they are. And second, an attack could release 
plumes of poisonous gas, killing civilians. So what will really happen? 
The U.S. bombs Saddam's equipment. He rebuilds, then the U.S. bombs 
again. The problem -- a huge American military force is stuck in the 
gulf indefinitely, a big drain on money manpower and morale. I think 
it makes a lot of sense to try to figure out how to get off this merry-go-round 
of just repeating the same operations over and over. And each time 
allow Saddam to come up waving his fist at us. a second scenario -- 
the U.S. bombs, Saddam gives in, the inspectors return, Saddam destroys 
his weapons. The chief problem with that, experts say, it will never 
happen. Almost everyone agrees Iraq will insist on new ground rules 
for any future inspections, including the removal of Richard Butler, 
the tough chairman of the U.N. team. If the inspectors go back in, 
it will be under a new executive chairman. It will be restructured 
in a manner which is more aligned with the objectives of Iraq, Russia, 
China and France. The best outcome of all, the U.S. bombs Saddam's 
power structure. He is overthrown. Opposition groups take over. Most 
experts say that is just wishful thinking. So the most likely option, 
they say, the U.S. is trapped in an endless cycle of violence. So 
you can't turn your back on madmen out there who have the capabilities 
to destroy the world. Trying to stop the buildup of weapons it cannot 
locate and cannot afford to ignore. Andrea Mitchell, NBC news, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>