<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981218.0524 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Hours after Gov. George Pataki and the state Legislature agreed on 
a charter school plan coupled with a cherished pay raise for lawmakers, 
New York City Schools Chancellor Rudy Crew railed against the school 
plan, warning Friday that it was ``fraught with peril.'' Approval 
of the school-and-raise deal ended weeks of tortuous negotiations 
between the governor and the Legislature, and started what is sure 
to be a pointed debate between those who see charter schools as a 
way to improve public education, and those who see it as just the 
opposite. ``The passing of charter schools is truly a historic reform 
that for the first time creates real competition within the public 
system,'' the governor said. But Crew said that the new law could 
divert money from other public schools, which, he said in a statement, 
``the state has historically and notoriously underfunded.'' He also 
contended that by allowing the State University of New York to grant 
licenses to charter schools _ publicly financed schools run by teachers, 
parents and community groups _ the law would strip away his ability 
to maintain high standards in all public schools, including charter 
schools. Another Pataki move here Friday _ his decision to sign a 
bill that could help New York City's police union win bigger salaries 
_ also drew strong reaction from New York City: Mayor Rudolph Giuliani, 
who had fervently opposed the bill as potentially damaging to the 
city's finances, attacked the governor's decision as a ``very big 
mistake.'' Pataki has repeatedly pushed his plan for charter schools, 
but failed in the past to win approval of it because of opposition 
from the Democratic-controlled Assembly and the teachers' union, which 
has tremendous lobbying power through its contributions to legislators. 
This time, the governor won the Legislature's approval because he 
had a decisive weapon: his veto pen. Lawmakers, who have not had a 
raise in a decade, had spent much of the year privately agitating 
for one, and earlier this month, they passed a bill that would increase 
their base salaries by 38 percent, to $79,500 from $59,500, for what 
is officially a part-time job. Many lawmakers earn thousands of dollars 
more in stipends for serving in leadership positions. State Assembly 
Speaker Sheldon Silver sought to minimize the impact of the charter 
school law, saying it would permit a limited experiment to see whether 
advocates of charter schools were right in arguing that they would 
drive improvements in public education. ``I have my doubts,'' he said. 
The United Federation of Teachers, which represents New York City 
school teachers, got some concessions from Pataki during the flurry 
of final negotiations over the charter school bill, including pension 
and salary enhancements. But in a clear blow to the union, new charter 
schools with under 250 students would not be required to unionize. 
And even if those schools grow after their first year, they could 
remain nonunion. UFT president Randi Weingarten said she shared some 
of Crew's concerns about charter schools draining money from the regular 
public school system, but she said the union had been given assurances 
that charter schools could not have more than five uncertified teachers. 
``But I don't feel the union was hurt by this at all,'' she said. 
The Legislature also approved increases for judges, senior administration 
officials and statewide elected officials. The governor's salary would 
rise to $179,000 from $130,000. In the finest give-and-get tradition 
of Albany, Pataki made it clear that he would sign the pay measure 
only if the Legislature withdrew its longstanding opposition to charter 
schools. Pataki also added two other bills to the back-room bargaining. 
One would penalize lawmakers if they did not approve a budget on time, 
and the other would help dairy farmers receive higher prices for milk. 
At the same time, negotiators abandoned efforts to find a compromise 
on bills that would end tenure for public school principals and stiffen 
penalties for school violence. Pataki had until Monday to veto the 
pay bill. In the end, after talks late into the night that left some 
legislative leaders fuming about the difficulty of accomplishing things 
here, the parties reached a deal. Under the final version of the charter 
bill, the state would authorize the creation of 100 new charter schools, 
and allow an unlimited number of existing schools to transfer to charter 
status. Charter schools would be largely independent of local school 
districts and not have to abide by most of the state regulations that 
govern the public schools. Charter schools could be created by the 
state Board of Regents, the trustees of the State University of New 
York, as well as the New York City schools chancellor and, outside 
New York City, local school boards. The Regents would monitor charter 
schools and could revoke charters at any time. At a news conference 
in the late morning, Pataki eagerly promoted the charter plan, which 
he hopes to use to burnish his national standing. He brushed aside 
questions about the propriety of linking the charter bill to a pay 
raise _ which Crew denounced as ``absolutely pure politics'' _ and 
of the Legislature approving the measure in the predawn hours with 
little discussion. ``You know how the system works,'' the governor 
said. Silver was less sanguine. The speaker, who was maneuvered into 
a corner by Pataki, expressed frustration that the body's Democratic 
majority had to sacrifice its opposition to charter schools to obtain 
a raise that it felt it deserved. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>