<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981218.0258 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For the first time since Ireland was partitioned in 1922, leaders 
of Northern Ireland's Protestant majority and its Roman Catholic minority 
agreed early Friday to specific reforms that will give Catholics more 
power in this British province. In a breakthrough after eight months 
of stalemate, the two sides agreed to set up a 10-minister ruling 
executive cabinet for Northern Ireland that would include two representatives 
of Sinn Fein, the political wing of the Irish Republican Army. But 
negotiators sidestepped the problem of disarming the IRA and other 
guerrillas, which has blocked the peace effort since it was approved 
in April. After 18 hours of talks that ended at 4 a.m., the leaders 
also announced a new cross-border North/South ministerial council 
and other committees to give the Irish Republic more influence in 
northern affairs. The agreements cleared the way for the Assembly 
to receive home-rule powers in February from the British government, 
which took direct control of the province in 1972. The agreement came 
as the Loyalist Volunteer Force, a small but deadly Protestant paramilitary 
group, turned over a cache of weapons for destruction, the first time 
in the 29 years of sectarian warfare that any guerrilla group had 
surrendered any weapons. Evening television showed a screeching steel 
grinding wheel throwing sparks as it sliced through automatic rifles 
at a warehouse Friday morning. The destruction was witnessed by Gen. 
John de Chastelain, former chief of staff of the Canadian army, who 
heads the official disarmament commission. The decision by the Loyalist 
Volunteer Force to turn in dozens of rifles and pistols and bomb-making 
equipment was used by Protestant leaders to urge the overwhelmingly 
Catholic IRA, and the larger Protestant guerrilla groups, to begin 
disarming. The political leaders decided to postpone until early next 
year the appointment of officials to the new cabinet posts and other 
political bodies, hoping that by then the disarmament problem would 
be solved. If the problem persists beyond next spring, the entire 
peace effort could collapse in a new round of violence. David Trimble, 
the first minister of the Assembly, who has excluded the Sinn Fein 
from the new structures until the Catholic guerrillas begin to disarm, 
said of the IRA: ``They have been given an example. Let them and other 
paramilitaries follow it. It is now more important than ever that 
the IRA join in the process. This is now the only impediment to progress 
and to Sinn Fein taking its part.'' He said the agreement Friday was 
``major step forward.'' Gerry Adams, president of Sinn Fein, said 
it showed that ``progress is possible.'' But he did not say whether 
the specifics of the agreement, seen by many officials as important 
concessions to the Catholic Republican movement, would result in a 
start to IRA disarmament. Politicians of both sides agreed that the 
Loyalist Volunteer Force had made a public relations coup Friday by 
surrendering the weapons. Many saw it as a stunt to gain attention 
in an attempt to persuade the government to allow 25 of its members 
now in prison to be released before the end of their sentences. About 
200 other paramilitaries, Protestant and Catholic, have been released 
since the agreement was reached. Police have warned in recent days 
that small splinter groups, Catholic and Protestant, may be planning 
new attacks to damage the peace effort. Prime Ministers Tony Blair 
of Britain and Bertie Ahern of Ireland welcomed the agreement announced 
Friday and indicated that they hoped it would produce a conciliatory 
gesture by the IRA. But this group, which has held a cease-fire for 
nearly 17 months, issued no statement on Friday's events. Last week 
it restated its refusal to disarm until the full implementation of 
the peace agreement, which is scheduled for May 2000. The April agreement 
set general goals and guidelines for drastic governmental reforms 
in Northern Ireland. Friday, the politicians approved what amounts 
to a cabinet of 10 ministers within the new Northern Ireland Assembly, 
and six new bodies in which northern ministers and those of the Irish 
Republic would coordinate such activities as agriculture, trade and 
investment promotion, and tourism. While no mainstream politician 
mentioned it Friday, in the obvious interest of emphasizing bipartisan 
progress, the reforms are widely seen as concessions to Sinn Fein 
and the IRA. One of the new bodies established Friday is to promote 
the Gaelic language, a favorite Sinn Fein project. Since the current 
peace effort began in 1993, Adams has won a series of concessions 
from the British and Irish governments. The only concession the republican 
movement has made, most officials say, is the cease-fire. Even the 
nature of the new Assembly is a concession to Catholics, who have 
about 43 percent of the population. To make it impossible for the 
Protestant Unionist majority to govern roughshod over Catholics, the 
voting system in the Assembly is diluted democracy. In the past, a 
simple Unionist majority could vote down Catholic proposals. Now approval 
of a measure requires a majority of the votes among both the Protestant 
Unionist and Catholic nationalist Assembly members. ``Once we start 
working together and harnessing the international good will,'' said 
John Hume, head of the mainstream Catholic Social Democratic Labor 
Party, ``we will start transforming our society.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>