<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981218.0434 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Will President Clinton's constitutional travails derail the stock 
market's freight train in the weeks ahead? It is more than a passing 
question, given that America's most recent experience with the presidential 
impeachment process coincided with a blistering bear market in stocks. 
In 1974, the year Richard M. Nixon resigned, the Dow Jones industrial 
average lost 28 percent of its value. Not to worry, market strategists 
say. Stocks are unlikely to plunge this time around, whatever the 
outcome of the impeachment process. For the markets, ``impeachment 
is a wholly non-event,'' said James Paulsen, chief investment officer 
of Norwest Investment Management in Minneapolis. Even if Clinton were 
ultimately to leave office, the markets know that Vice President Al 
Gore would be a virtual clone on policy. So the uncertainty that the 
market loves to hate is not an issue today. Furthermore, the dark 
moods of the market and the economy at the time of Nixon's departure 
are missing now. In 1974, the nation faced rising interest rates and 
inflation, surging oil prices and a decline in the money supply. Today's 
situation is the opposite on every score. A better comparison might 
be to the economy and markets during the impeachment of President 
Andrew Johnson in 1868, says Richard Sylla, a professor of financial 
history at New York University's Stern School of Business. The economy 
was strong, thanks to efficiencies created by the railroad boom. Interest 
rates were falling, wages were rising and deflation was everywhere 
_ trends just like today's. Johnson's woes began in earnest in late 
December 1867, but radical Republicans were unable to muster an impeachment 
vote in the House then. On their next try, on Feb. 24, 1868, they 
succeeded, by a vote of 126-47. Johnson's trial began in the Senate 
on March 13; it ended in late May, when he retained the presidency 
by a single vote. The stock market watched it all with equanimity. 
From the beginning of January 1868 until the beginning of June, stocks 
rose almost 14 percent. They ended the year up 19 percent. Not that 
constitutional crises are good for stocks. They aren't. But what is 
bad about them is something of an intangible, Paulsen argued. It is 
the lost opportunity to govern _ these days, for example, to tackle 
the question of what to do with a federal budget surplus of almost 
$100 billion. It wouldn't take a long trial in the Senate to sap the 
White House of initiative, said Charles A. Gabriel Jr., senior Washington 
analyst for Prudential Securities in Arlington, Va. Still, he said, 
the risks are ``hardly on the scale that should impact investors' 
collective psyche on a sustained basis.'' If Clinton is unable to 
shape the debate, prospects for certain industries may brighten, Gabriel 
said. For example, shares of tobacco companies and health maintenance 
organizations, two industries on Clinton's hit list, could benefit 
if he is distracted. Retailers and fast-food concerns could be helped 
if Clinton's plan to raise the minimum wage is undone by scandal. 
It's proof again that in Wall Street's eyes, there's a silver lining 
in even the most ominous cloud. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>