<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981218.0418 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Ricardo and Donna Thornton stood proudly in the East Room of the White 
House on Thursday evening. They snapped photos, renewed acquaintances, 
accepted congratulations. Ricardo teased his son about the fit of 
his first tuxedo. He said Ricardo Jr. was playing basketball and eagerly 
looking forward to beginning a football career next year in the eighth 
grade. In his role as an ambassador for the Special Olympics, Thornton 
has traveled round the United States; last year he visited South Africa. 
But this was an amazing night capping a remarkable journey: from an 
institution in which he had been committed as a child with mental 
retardation _ and where he met his future wife _ to the White House, 
where he and 11 others were being honored on the 30th anniversary 
of the Special Olympics. This was a powerful evening on a day when 
the confluence of domestic and international tensions had thrust the 
nation into turmoil. Under a pavilion on the South Lawn, supporters 
of the Special Olympics gathered to celebrate with music and tributes; 
on Capitol Hill, members of the House were deciding to begin debate 
the following day on the impeachment of President Clinton; thousands 
of miles away a military assault had been carried out at the president's 
orders, against Iraq. Yet for three hours, this Special Olympics gala 
brought together a contingent of adversaries. There were Republicans 
like Orrin Hatch, the senator from Utah, mingling with Democrats. 
He stood in line and waited to greet the president and Mrs. Clinton. 
There was David Stern, the National Basketball Association commissioner. 
There were two NBA players _ Grant Hill and Rick Fox. Although players 
and league are involved in a bitter lockout, the NBA, Hill and Fox 
all play active roles in the Special Olympics. One of those at my 
table was Gene Stallings, the former Alabama football coach. He was 
an assistant there when his third child was born. Mental retardation 
was diagnosed. ``I drew back to hit the doctor and passed out,'' Stallings 
said. ``I thought that was the absolute worst thing that ever happened 
to me. But the thing I thought was the worst thing turned out to be 
one of the best things.'' Stallings said his greatest moment was not 
in a Super Bowl or a national championship but at a Special Olympics 
race he once saw in Dallas. ``One of the guys fell down and the others 
stopped,'' Stallings said. ``They didn't want to run off and leave 
him. They stopped and they waited until he got up. And dusted him 
off. And then all three went running. Of all the big games I've been 
in, all the great arenas, when you ask me the contests I really remember, 
I remember that Special Olympics, when they started off running and 
waited for the one who fell.'' For all of the turbulent political 
tensions outside the pavilion, the theme of the evening was the notion 
of determination and overcoming obstacles. The embodiment of such 
determination was Eunice Shriver, who organized the first Special 
Olympics on July 28, 1968, one month after her brother Robert was 
assassinated. Shriver, whose own child was mentally retarded, told 
the athletes and parents at Soldier's Field that day that they would 
no longer accept having experts discard children in warehouses and 
institutions. She told the audience that children with mental retardation 
can be exceptional athletes, that through sports they can realize 
their potential for growth. In 1968 a thousand athletes participated 
in the inaugural event; 30 years later more than a million athletes 
round the world participate. Nothing that happened Thursday night 
will change the rapid flow of presidential history. The celebration 
ended shortly after 11 p.m. The president, the first lady and their 
guests walked out of the pavilion, into the cold night air and the 
reality of the hour: The impeachment process was relentlessly moving 
forward; the military was maintaining its assault on Iraq. On a night 
like this, at a time when mistrust, suspicion and anger abound, one 
might be tempted to wonder if White House guests were simply so many 
pieces on a chessboard. But for those who have been involved in the 
Special Olympics, who have spoken with parents and heard stories of 
how athletic competition had enriched lives, cynicism gave way to 
higher ideals. The movement survived seven presidential administrations 
because it embodies ideals we desperately cherish, even when they 
are temporarily blurred from view, even when they seem just beyond 
our reach: courage, faith and a profound respect for the honest effort. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>