<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981218.0252 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Diplomats from four countries are vying to become the next head of 
the World Trade Organization, the Geneva-based trade arbiter, amid 
global economic strains that are making the process particularly delicate. 
A replacement is being sought for the current director-general, Renato 
Ruggiero, a former Italian trade minister who took over the top post 
in 1995. Ruggiero plans to leave at the end of his four-year term 
next spring, but the selection process is moving cautiously, even 
glacially. Representatives of the 132 member countries met Friday 
to set new deadlines for the process, which is behind schedule. They 
have acknowledged that the original timetable, which called for a 
mid-December selection, will not be met, and have set the end of January 
as the new goal. The wrangling stems from many factors. One is the 
fact that the member countries must make the decision by consensus, 
and right now even trading allies are feuding. The United States and 
the European Union, the world's trade giants, are distracted by skirmishing 
over banana imports. Asian countries are leaning toward protectionist 
measures to survive difficult economic times. And member countries 
are not eager for a reprise of the bitter power struggle that kept 
Ruggiero's selection on hold for months. In return for accepting him, 
U.S. officials received a pledge that the next director-general would 
not be European. As a result, the four candidates are Roy MacLaren, 
64, a former trade minister of Canada and ambassador to London; Hassan 
Abouyoub, 46, Morocco's trade envoy; Mike Moore, 49, a former prime 
minister and trade minister of New Zealand, and Suphachai Phanitchpaphak, 
52, a deputy prime minister of Thailand and a trade negotiator. On 
the surface, the job is an international post with a six-figure salary 
and plush benefits, including a gorgeous view of Lake Geneva, a hefty 
entertainment allowance and a chauffeur-driven Lexus. But it is also 
a pivotal post if the World Trade Organization is to thrive. The new 
chief must be a successful evangelist, catalyst, peacemaker and administrator, 
among other qualifications. It might also be helpful to have a good 
sense of humor, as Ruggiero found in October when he was hit in the 
face with a cream pie thrown by environmentalists who called him a 
turtle killer. They were protesting a ruling by the organization that 
many environmentalists say undercuts laws protecting endangered species. 
Given such situations, the Japanese trade envoy, Yoichi Suzuki, said 
the next chief ``must be capable of communicating in a clear and simple 
way what we are doing here.'' To win the top spot, the four candidates 
have made obligatory visits to various capitals, and last month were 
vetted before assembled member states in Geneva. This gave less developed 
countries a chance for firsthand questioning. Since then, two top 
trade diplomats _ one from Brazil and one from Switzerland _ have 
been consulting with individual countries to rank the contenders and 
to find out if there are insurmountable objections to any of them. 
Then a consensus has to be ``built around one, but that promises to 
be a complex process,'' one trade representative said. Just how complex 
was not readily apparent until the two trade diplomats produced an 
interim report, reflecting support for Suphachai. The French and African 
countries rallied to the support of Abouyoub, who speaks French, and 
movement stalled until Friday's agreement to set a new end date. The 
United States and the European Union have not declared a preference. 
But their views are paramount because they are involved in the largest 
number of cases before the organization. ``The current situation has 
probably made this a little more difficult,'' said Roderick Abbott, 
the European Commission's representative, referring to the banana 
dispute. He noted that European countries did ``not have a single 
choice'' so far, adding that the Europeans would have to consult with 
their U.S. counterparts to avoid a replay of the 1995 selection tempest. 
Thus far, U.S. officials have been unwilling to indicate any preferences. 
``We have said consistently that all four may be qualified, but we 
have not yet come to a conclusion,'' said Rita Hayes, the U.S. chief 
delegate to the World Trade Organization. Divisions within the Clinton 
administration have delayed the selection of a preferred candidate. 
U.S. officials also recall the last struggle to name a head of the 
organization, when Washington strongly backed the outgoing Mexican 
president, Carlos Salinas de Gortari, only to see his candidacy crumble 
amid turmoil in Mexico's economy and within his family. Selection 
of the new trade chief now will not be before next year, possibly 
close to Ruggiero's scheduled April departure. Behind the scenes, 
developing countries _ about 80 percent of the group's members _ insist 
that it is time for one of theirs to head the agency. These nations 
say that the benefits of freer trade have not been fairly shared with 
them. ``It's our turn,'' Munir Akram, Pakistan's trade envoy, said. 
``We want somebody who can stand up to the big boys.'' Also important 
are coming global trade negotiations, where agriculture will be a 
prime focus. Developing countries want trade restrictions dropped 
so they can more easily and widely export their commodities. Moore 
of New Zealand has advocated freer agricultural trade, and is unlikely 
to win support from Europeans, who heavily subsidize farmers. Suphachai 
of Thailand, whose country is also an exporter of agricultural goods, 
has similar views but is seen as less aggressive. Suphachai, however, 
favors a two-tiered membership structure that would give developing 
countries a less strict set of criteria for qualifying for the organization. 
That approach is rejected by countries that have overcome protectionist 
domestic interests to win admission to the global trade club. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>