<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981218.0295 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For the first time since Feb. 24, 1868, three years after the United 
States emerged from an awful Civil War, the House of Representatives 
debated the impeachment of a president Friday. It scheduled for Saturday 
votes on four articles of impeachment ``for high crimes and misdemeanors'' 
against William Jefferson Clinton. Although Democrats protested bitterly 
and ardently, they acknowledged that passage of at least one of them, 
and a Senate trial next year that could result in the president's 
removal from office, had become inevitable. Rep. John Lewis of Georgia, 
a Democrat who was badly beaten during the civil-rights demonstrations 
in the South during the 1960s, stilled the sometimes fractious House 
when he advised his colleagues, ``The spirit of history is upon us 
and the fate of the Republic before us.'' It was a grave and momentous 
day. For many, it was a grim day, without joy or satisfaction. Some 
of the participants said they were troubled that Congress seemed out 
of sync with the American people. Others ``hated to get out of bed 
this morning,'' as Rep. Tom Davis of Virginia put it. Rep. Henry Hyde 
of Illinois, the 74-year-old chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, 
sounded the Republican theme in his opening statement, asserting that 
``no man or woman, no matter how highly placed, no matter how effective 
a communicator, no matter how gifted a manipulator of opinion or winner 
of votes, can be above the law in a democracy.'' Rep. David Bonior 
of Michigan, the Democratic whip in the House, called impeachment 
``a runaway train headed for a cliff.'' Rep. Robert Wexler of Florida, 
another Democrat, raised the ugly specter of McCarthyism and demanded 
of the Republican majority, in a distinct echo of the Army-McCarthy 
hearings of 1954, ``Have we no sense of decency?'' The debate, sharply 
partisan like all the others in recent months, lasted through the 
day and into the evening. It took place as British and American warplanes 
rained bombs upon Iraq for the third day running, and as Hillary Rodham 
Clinton offered a rare public defense of her husband time since he 
admitted to having had a sexual relationship with Monica Lewinsky. 
It came, too, in a coincidental conjunction that would have delighted 
Kafka, at the very height of the holiday season, with festive parties 
scheduled every night at the White House. ``The vast majority of Americans 
share my approval and pride in the job the president has been doing 
for our country,'' Mrs. Clinton said on the White House lawn, with 
the dome of the Capitol, where the impeachment debate was underway, 
looming behind her. Rep. Louise Slaughter, a Democrat from upstate 
New York, urged Clinton to think about resignation if he is impeached. 
She said that ``his usefulness would be lost in dealing with other 
nations.'' Rep. William Lipinski of Illinois, another Democrat, spoke 
in the same vein. The White House spokesman, Joe Lockhart, replied 
that the president would ``absolutely not'' consider resigning, and 
he launched a fresh attack on the Republicans on Capitol Hill, accusing 
them of scheming to drive Clinton from office. Clinton himself spent 
the day focused on Iraq and the international economy and in meetings 
with several foreign leaders, including Chancellor Viktor Klima of 
Austria. While conceding that the president had committed ``reprehensible'' 
acts and made ``deceitful'' statements to cover them up, Democratic 
members of the House argued that his actions did not come close to 
warranting impeachment, that they should be given an opportunity to 
vote on censure as an alternative to impeachment _ an option the majority 
has denied them _ and that the debate should not be taking place in 
any case during military action in Iraq. ``What the president did 
was wrong,'' said Rep. John Dingell of Michigan, the dean of the House, 
who has represented a district near Detroit since 1955, in direct 
succession to his father, also John Dingell, who had represented it 
since 1932. ``What we are doing is equally wrong _ an exercise in 
the abuse of power by the majority over the minority.'' The House's 
only independent member, Rep. Bernard Sanders of Vermont, decried 
the prospect of a vote ``perhaps to paralyze our government as the 
Senate explores Bill Clinton's extramarital relations.'' He said that 
he had realized as never before ``just how out of touch this institution 
is with the American people.'' Republicans pressed resolutely forward 
with their accusations that Clinton had committed perjury, had obstructed 
justice and had abused his powers as president, all to conceal the 
truth about the Lewinsky affair. One of the most dramatic and possibly 
telling interventions came from Rep. Tom Campbell of California, a 
moderate Republican often criticized in his district for being insufficiently 
conservative. He said in a soft voice that he could never trust Clinton 
again _ indeed that he had been persuaded that the bombing campaign 
was legitimate only when Pentagon officials said it was. ``If it is 
in his interest not to tell the truth,'' the Californian said in a 
blunt indictment of Clinton, ``he will not tell the truth.'' Campbell's 
flawless legal pedigree _ son of a federal judge, star student at 
the Harvard Law School, clerk to a Supreme Court justice, former professor 
at Stanford Law School _ lent weight to his words. Another California 
Republican, Rep. Frank Riggs, one of 41 departing members who will 
cast the last votes of their congressional careers Saturday, said 
he had talked on Wednesday to two prominent Republicans, former President 
Gerald Ford and former Sen. Bob Dole, the 1996 Republican presidential 
nominee. Both, he reported, said that they would have voted to impeach. 
Rep. Ray LaHood, who comes from the quintessentially Middle American 
city of Peoria, Ill., presided over the protracted debate, in which 
dozens of members participated. He urged decorum as speeches began 
at 9:29 a.m., Eastern time, but he had difficulty maintaining it, 
repeatedly pounding his gavel for order. Hyde made a not entirely 
successful attempt to lend a sense of patriotic majesty to the occasion. 
He cited not only Roman law, the Magna Carta and the Constitutional 
Congress but also the Civil War, and the battles of Bunker Hill and 
Lexington and Concord. For the most part, the debate was more a series 
of political set pieces rather than a clash of oratorical titans in 
the mold of Clay or Webster. A low buzz hovered over the House chamber 
for most of the day, fed by whispered chats among members, ad hoc 
conferences, the rustle of turning newspaper pages and speeches practiced 
in stage whispers. A few times, hissing and hooting was heard. Democrats 
bemoaned the lack of civility characterizing the entire process that 
has brought the president and the nation to the current moment of 
crisis. Applause greeted a demand by Rep. Dick Gephardt of Missouri, 
the minority leader, for an end to ``the politics of slash and burn.'' 
At the beginning, the public galleries were packed and almost all 
the House's 435 members were in their brown leather seats. But by 
midday, the chamber itself was half empty, as if all the drama had 
been wrung out of the debate as soon as it started. By late afternoon, 
only 38 members were there, though there were still lines of people 
waiting for gallery seats. In backstairs conferences Friday morning, 
the two sides reached an agreement on the length and of the debate 
and other rules, avoiding a series of noisy public procedural squabbles 
that both decided they did not want. The Republicans moderated their 
rhetoric a bit, softening the prosecutorial tone they adopted in the 
Judiciary Committee's proceedings. But the Democrats' fury showed 
through. Rep. John Conyers of Michigan said that he was witnessing 
``a Republican coup d'etat,'' and the same phrase was used by his 
party colleagues, Rep. Jerrold Nadler of New York and Rep. Maxine 
Waters of California. At another point, in a more analytical mood, 
Conyers stated one of the central Democratic contentions: ``Impeachment 
was designed to rid this nation of traitors and tyrants, not attempts 
to cover up an extramarital affair.'' Later, Rep. Ike Skelton, D.-Mo., 
said the Republicans wanted to ``decapitate their commander in chief.'' 
Rep. Steven Rothman, D.-N.J., complained of a ``Republican juggernaut, 
driven by the right wing.'' Rep. Patrick Kennedy, D.-R.I., a nephew 
of the late John F. Kennedy, spoke of ``a political lynching,'' and 
Rep. Danny K. Davis of Illinois denounced what he described as ``a 
lynching.'' Rep. Jesse Jackson Jr., D.-Ill., son of the civil rights 
leader, said impeachment constituted an attack not only on Clinton 
but also on the accomplishments of the New Deal, the Fair Deal and 
the Great Society. African-Americans, who benefited hugely from all 
of those programs, have been among the president's staunchest backers 
from the start. ``In 1868,'' Jackson said, referring to the impeachment 
of President Andrew Johnson, ``it was about Reconstruction. In 1998, 
it's still about Reconstruction.'' There were repeated references 
to the Johnson impeachment, which was voted upon in the same House 
chamber where the debate took place Friday, and to the Watergate case 
in 1974. Articles of impeachment never reached the full House on that 
occasion, because Richard M. Nixon concluded that his conviction in 
the Senate was certain and resigned the presidency to avoid it. ``Some 
of my colleagues,'' said Rep. Vic Fazio of California, a Democrat 
who is retiring, ``obsess about Slick Willie in the same way that 
those on my side of aisle used to about Tricky Dick.'' But the continuing 
air assault on Iraq came up even more often. Some suggested that the 
Democrats saw a political opening in the Republicans' decision to 
stage the debate while the bombs were still falling. But some seemed 
genuinely offended; their views were crystallized on Thursday night 
by Rep. Charles B. Rangel, D-N.Y., who served in Korea. ``You can't 
separate the president from the commander-in-chief,'' he said. ``You 
can't salute him in the morning and impeach him in the afternoon.'' 
For the Republicans, Rep. Sam Johnson of Texas, a former pilot who 
languished for seven years in a North Vietnamese prisoner-of-war camp, 
made this retort: ``Our military fighting men want the Congress to 
carry on our responsibilities every day.'' A potentially volatile 
ingredient was injected into the political equation by the confession 
of marital infidelity Rep. Bob Livingston of Louisiana, the Speaker-elect, 
made on Thursday evening. But there were only a few heavily veiled 
allusions to his difficulties during the debate, all from the Democrats. 
Officially, the item under debate Friday was called House Resolution 
611. As read out Friday morning in a somber voice by the House reading 
clerk, Paul Hays, it began, ``Resolved, that William Jefferson Clinton, 
president of the United States, is impeached for high crimes and misdemeanors,'' 
and went on to accuse Clinton of perjury before a grand jury and in 
the Paula Jones lawsuit, of obstructing justice in a variety of ways, 
and of abusing his power by lying to and misleading Congress in his 
answers to 81 questions posed by the House Judiciary Committee. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>