<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981218.0436 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
While the politicians talk about the long-range strategies for Iraq, 
and even the overthrow of President Saddam Hussein, the Pentagon has 
depicted the air assault on Iraq in far more modest terms: keeping 
to a timetable. Before the first missiles fell in Iraq, the Pentagon 
had limited its attack to a sharp, swift assault lasting no more than 
a handful of days with no intention of even seriously crippling Saddam. 
As American and British forces struck Iraq for a third day, senior 
defense officials said the attack was simply working its way through 
a ``tightly drawn'' list of military and industrial targets. The strikes 
would end, they said, when the cruise missiles and jets reached the 
end of the list. That finite list of targets was drawn up with an 
eye toward avoiding American casualties and creating such a vague 
and limited benchmark of success _ ``degrading'' the enemy's capabilities 
_ that it would be fairly easy to declare the mission achieved. ``There 
is no fixed end time,'' Secretary of Defense William Cohen said in 
an interview on CNN Friday night as the attack passed the 48-hour 
mark. ``We have very specific targets we intend to attack.'' Having 
encountered little resistance from Iraqi air defenses or foul weather, 
the strikes have gone largely according to plan. And while the Pentagon 
indicated Friday that the success so far has been mixed, officials 
said the strikes would more than likely end after a fourth day on 
Saturday, exactly as commanders planned. When the Persian Gulf war 
ended, the Pentagon was criticized for failing to achieve larger goals. 
With the much more limited objectives of this air assault, the Pentagon 
is also protecting itself from what it believes was misdirected blame 
in the war. Cohen and other senior administration officials have repeatedly 
used the term ``degrade'' in reference to Saddam's ability to threaten 
his neighbors with chemical or biological weapons. ``Degrade means 
that we want to, in whatever period of time we intend to use to carry 
out this operation, to bring down his capabilities as much as we possibly 
can,'' the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. Henry H. Shelton 
of the Army, said during a news conference at the Pentagon on Friday. 
``We realize that you can't destroy it in all cases.'' The strikes 
are far from pinpricks. Although the Pentagon said after two days 
that 88 targets had been hit, only a small portion were severely damaged 
or destroyed. Ever since the attack began, defense and administration 
officials have sought to tamp down unrealistic expectations that force 
alone could do what seven years of sanctions and diplomatic isolation 
have not. One official said that since the latest round of confrontations 
with Iraq began in November, the Pentagon has had to convince the 
White House and State Department that it was simply not possible, 
as officials publicly vowed, to compel Saddam to comply with U.N. 
weapons inspections or to destroy with force his ability to make chemical 
or biological weapons. ``We've done yeoman's work to convince those 
in the administration who don't really understand, what kind of military 
objectives you can hope to achieve,'' the official said. On Friday, 
for the first time, Cohen, Shelton and senior officers on the Joint 
Staff outlined the objectives of the strikes, which began on Wednesday 
night with a barrage of cruise missiles fired from Navy warships and 
submarines. They included air defenses, command centers and military 
headquarters and the barracks and equipment of the Republican Guard, 
the special units that Cohen said help Iraq build, protect and use 
weapons of mass destruction. The missiles and bombers have also struck 
airfields and an oil refinery that officials said provided illicit 
funds to Saddam's government that are not allowed under U.N. sanctions. 
Still, the ultimate objective is unclear. The strikes at the refinery, 
near Basra, and against the Republican Guards, suggested an effort 
to erode Saddam's grip on power. American A-10 jets also dropped leaflets 
informing Iraq's regular army units in the south that ``only those 
units that support the Baghdad regime'' would be targeted, suggesting 
that they would be better off breaking with Saddam. Cohen said, however, 
that the leaflets were intended simply to keep those forces out of 
the fight. ``We are not seeking to destabilize his regime,'' Cohen 
said. Officials did not rule out the unexpected. ``You might get _ 
I don't want to say lucky _ some of the things that could hasten the 
end of the regime,'' one senior Pentagon official said. Both the scope 
and duration of the strikes are being narrowed by international and 
domestic political pressures. While some Republicans in Congress have 
called on the administration to do more to punish Iraq and oust Saddam, 
very few support what that would take: a prolonged commitment of American 
forces, including ground troops. Senior defense officials said they 
had to shape a plan that was tough enough, but not too tough. The 
advances in technology also shaped the objectives. More cruise missile 
were launched in the first two days of this strike than the 289 that 
were used during the entire Persian Gulf war, allowing planners to 
strike targets with more precision and, of course, less risk to pilots 
and to innocent civilians. Cohen and other senior officials left open 
the possibility that the strikes could continue even longer and that 
the United States could stop the attack and then resume it in the 
future if Saddam moves to threaten his neighbors. But the officials 
also said they could not envision more than a few days of bombing 
against Iraq for another reason: sentiment in already wary Arab states, 
some of them providing bases to American air and ground forces, would 
not tolerate any more. And to be sure, anti-American protests have 
grown in intensity with each passing day. The administration has also 
underlined their sensitivity to Ramadan, the Muslim holy period of 
fasting. While a senior military officer said Friday that the calendar 
was not an absolute barrier, the American and British forces were 
racing against their own deadline. In Iraq, officials declared the 
start of Ramadan Friday with the sighting of the crescent moon. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>