<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981218.0192 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Alan Richman is pretty plugged in when it comes to restaurants. After 
all, he's the food and wine critic of GQ magazine. But hearing that 
the Rainbow Room will soon be closed to the public for all but Friday 
night, Sunday brunch and the occasional holiday was news to him. He 
knew there was going to be a change in management at the end of the 
year. He knew the Cipriani family would be taking over the restaurant 
complex on the 65th floor of Rockefeller Center. It was the word ``closing'' 
that was giving him trouble. ``You sure?'' Richman asked. ``This is 
one of those things like a House appropriation to close the Washington 
Monument and nobody notices because it's in a subclause buried on 
the 300th page of some proposal. If true, IF, it's outrageous.'' Richman 
paused. ``The thing is, the Rainbow Room is one of the last grand 
democratic restaurants,'' he continued. ``Let me get my thoughts together 
here. It's a majestic piece of Americana that had the added virtue 
of being accessible to the public. You would see people dressed up 
wonderfully, having the night of their life. More and more of the 
best things in life have become inaccessible, saved only for the people 
with the luxury tickets.'' The Rainbow Room, the famous Art Moderne 
supper club with its revolving dance floor, site of thousands of celebrations 
of the heart, is, indeed, closing _ to at least most of the people, 
most of the time. The B.E. Group, which had managed the restaurant 
since 1987, did not renew its lease when Tishman Speyer Properties, 
the manager and an owner of Rockefeller Center, raised the rent from 
$3 million to $4 million this year. Last night was the last time the 
Rainbow Room complex, including the Promenade Bar and the Rainbow 
and Stars cabaret, was open to the public under the old management. 
Don't kick yourself for not popping over for one last dance. The regulars, 
apprised of the situation by members of the deeply peeved B.E. Group, 
had the place booked for weeks. Cipriani International, which operates 
the legendary Harry's Bar in Venice (Hemingway liked it and who better 
to do press?), as well as a number of elegant, pricey restaurants 
around town, holds the new lease and is scheduled to reopen the Rainbow 
Room, name intact, in February. All their plans are not known _ in 
part because, as the populace begins to howl, the Ciprianis seem to 
be changing plans, and in part because, as Nancy Friedman, a spokeswoman, 
put it, the Ciprianis feel they are being ``crucified'' by the press 
and are reluctant to speak. It is certain, however, that the Rainbow 
Room itself, perhaps the last grand nightclub in New York with the 
space for ballroom dancing, will be used primarily for private parties. 
The Promenade Bar, where for the price of a drink you could look out 
at the city for hours, will become a restaurant. Rainbow and Stars, 
the cabaret that drew performers like Rosemary Clooney and Tony Bennett 
but which rarely operated at a profit, had been scheduled to close 
at the end of the year even before the Ciprianis signed on. The people 
who love the Rainbow Room; the couples who celebrated an anniversary 
with an extravagant night on the town (dinner averaged $250 to $300 
a couple); the New Yorkers who sent visitors to the Promenade Bar, 
which the critic Gael Greene of New York magazine considers the city's 
most romantic (``those cozy alcoves enclosed in blue suede where you 
feel like you're the only two people in the world''), and the 350 
employees whose contract expires on New Year's Eve, are distressed. 
``You walk into the Rainbow Room, it's like walking into a movie set, 
like Fred Astaire and Ginger Rodgers,'' said James Lendino, a retired 
construction company owner from Sheepshead Bay, who has taken his 
wife to the Rainbow Room every Saturday night for the last eight years 
because he promised her, when they married more than 30 years ago, 
that their dates would continue for the rest their lives. ``You have 
no idea how devastated we are there's going to be a changing of the 
guard.'' Tim Zagat, an owner of the Zagat Survey, said, ``It's like 
taking the Empire State Building and saying you can't go.'' Helen 
Gurley Brown, editor in chief of Cosmopolitan magazine's international 
editions, said: ``It took me weeks to pin down a date for just a small 
dance party. Now that there's going to be just the one night of the 
week; the mind boggles.'' Then again, under the latest plans, Ms. 
Brown might be able to go dancing more than once a week. Just not 
in the space she's used to. The plans are changing rapidly. Giuseppe 
Cipriani, 34, who heads the Cipriani Holding Group (it was his grandfather 
who created the first Harry's Bar), told reporters as recently as 
last month that the Promenade Bar, a long narrow room that was being 
used as a private club at breakfast and lunch, was to be turned into 
a branch of Harry's Bar. The reason for focusing on private parties, 
a member of Cipriani's management team later said, was money: an operator 
makes much more with catering than what is called, in the restaurant 
industry, a la carte. (The industry figures usually cited are a 30 
percent profit for catering, 10 percent for a la carte.) Soon afterward, 
the carving knifes were out. A column in USA Today said that the panoramic 
bar, which it called a perfect 1930's replica, ``will become another 
Harry's Bar theme restaurant under the arrogant conceit that the apex 
of Rockefeller Center should deign to pretend that it's in Venice.'' 
Goodbye, Harry. Now, said Ms. Friedman, the Cipriani spokeswoman, 
the bar will be called the Rainbow Grill. It will also include a dance 
floor. ``The decor will remain the same,'' Ms. Friedman said. ``It 
will be consistent with the time period, the 1930s New York. It will 
not be a Venetian makeover, as has been erroneously reported. It will 
be a restaurant, which will be open for breakfast, lunch and dinner, 
seven days a week, and have dancing nightly.'' Given that the Rainbow 
Room sat 240 people and the Promenade Bar seats fewer than 100, it 
might seem more accurate to say there will be very close dancing nightly. 
Ms. Friedman acknowledges only that the dance floor will be smaller 
than the one in the Rainbow Room. ``New Yorkers feel they own the 
Rainbow Room, they have a very proprietary adoration for this landmark, 
yet they rarely go,'' Ms. Friedman said, giving the story a spin reminiscent 
of the Rainbow's famous floor, but faster. ``The idea of bringing 
the Ciprianis into the plan is to make it more of a place that New 
Yorkers will utilize. In its current situation, it's still closed 
much of the time.'' Jerry Speyer, the president and chief executive 
of Tishman Speyer, who has also been taking a lot of heat from the 
press, echoed Ms. Friedman's remarks. Speyer was appreciative of the 
romance of the Rainbow Room _ his daughter was married there. (``You 
didn't expect that, huh?'' Speyer said, with some satisfaction.) But 
he also said it was necessary ``to bring some efficiency to the business.'' 
Speyer said that there had been bids higher than those the Ciprianis 
submitted but that he felt the Cipriani group would be the best way 
``to insure a spectacular future for the Rainbow Room.'' ``I think 
the evidence is pretty strong that people only use the facility on 
certain days of the week and certain occasions,'' Speyer added. ``So 
in practical matters, it's not going to be so different from the way 
it's run now.'' The outgoing management disputes that. It says that 
with the exception of Monday, when the Rainbow Room was closed, the 
big room was rarely rented for private parties. This month, it was 
rented only three times. Waldy Malouf, the executive chef and a director, 
insisted the Rainbow Room was ``consistently used, almost to capacity, 
frequently to capacity'' during the week. A final, brutal rejoinder 
from a member of the Cipriani team regarding those capacity evenings: 
``Package groups. Discounted travel tours. The new management will 
be doing none of that.'' The Rainbow Room opened in 1934, a long ago 
era in which Rockefeller Center was owned by the Rockefeller family. 
By the mid-1980s, the club had faded, and the Rockefellers brought 
in the B.E. Group, led by Joseph Baum and his partners, Arthur Emil, 
Michael Whiteman and Dennis Sweeney, who oversaw the club's glamorous 
makeover some 12 years ago. A theatrically inclined restaurateur, 
who privately referred to the Rainbow Room as ``the Empire State Building 
with its strap down,'' Baum took the annual income from $8 million 
to $32 million. Seeing the Rainbow Room as the people's palace may 
not be accurate. New Year's Eve in the big ballroom was $450 a person, 
exclusive of beverage, tax and tip. But Baum, his admirers say, knew 
how to put on a good show. New Year's Eve included a conga line through 
the entire 64th floor, led by a ``Fellini parade,'' including several 
costumed dwarfs. The Cipriani group acquired the lease for the Rainbow 
Room in June. ( Baum, who had6been ill with cancer, died this fall.) 
Its decision to focus on private parties was not remarkable to Ellen 
Koteff, the executive editor of Nation's Restaurant News, a trade 
magazine. ``It's a trend we're seeing across the board in fine dining,'' 
Ms. Koteff said. But regulars, speaking from the heart, are not so 
philosophical. ``Where else can you get a view like this?'' said Don 
Mell, 36, one recent night in the Promenade Bar, his hangout when 
he was a photo editor with The Associated Press, which has its headquarters 
around the corner. ``They're going to tear this bar up. I can't believe 
the Rockefeller family would let them. Where's David Rockefeller in 
this?'' David Rockefeller is on the 56th floor on the old homestead 
_ but he is not, as he tells it, as powerful as some might think. 
Rockefeller Center is now owned by Rockefeller Center Properties Trust 
Inc., a consortium that includes Goldman, Sachs; Tishman Speyer; Troutlet 
Investments, and the Exor Group. ``My interest is very different in 
some respects than when the family owned it,'' Rockefeller said, ``Legally 
I have a 5 percent interest, and I'm the non-executive chairman.'' 
It may be Rockefeller, however, who is responsible for the public 
having any access to the Rainbow Room. ``When this came up, I did 
inquire what was proposed and, um, expressed my strong feeling that 
the public should have an opportunity to go there _ it did have a 
lot of history,'' Rockefeller said. ``They assured me that it will 
be open to the public regularly every Friday, and in addition on holidays. 
My feeling is that it is not an unreasonable compromise. I don't think 
I can tell the 95 percent owners they haven't a right to have a profit.'' 
What holidays will the room be open? ``You've got me there,'' Rockefeller 
said. It is said that Rockefeller and his future wife once won a polka 
contest in the Rainbow Room. ``That was a long time ago,'' Rockefeller, 
who is 83, said. ``I'm no longer dancing the polka. I do have particular 
favorite memories of that room. It's a wonderful place, and I look 
forward to the future.'' Others are not so sanguine. On a recent Saturday 
night, many came for one last dance. Mell and his wife, Jeanne, and 
their friends Carl and Sharen Butrum, invited 32 friends, some from 
as far away as California, Nevada and Michigan. Mell, who wears black 
tie with the unmistakable air of a fellow who usually does not, revealed 
that he had proposed to his wife at the Rainbow Room. Other stories 
followed: the New Year's Eves the gang celebrated in the bar, where 
for years there was not even a music charge; the luck of having spent 
time in a club in the clouds. At 2 in the morning, after the music 
stopped, Mell found his way to the Promenade Bar. ``I'll tell you 
the truth,'' he said. ``I guess I'm still here because when we leave 
we'll never come back again. It won't be the same Rainbow.'' Then 
a thought occurred. ``But you know,'' he said, ``it's New York. Things 
are always changing. In a couple of years, who knows?'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>