<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981218.0332 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Frank Weise strode confidently to the podium. As chief executive of 
Cott Corp. since June, Weise had ambitious long-term goals that he 
was eager to lay out for the audience of money managers and analysts 
at a beverage industry conference in New York last month. But before 
he could utter a word, almost everyone left the room. While much of 
the exodus could be attributed to an earlier speaker's question-and-answer 
session in an adjacent room, the stampede was symbolic of Cott's fall 
from grace. The company was a Wall Street darling just a few years 
ago, with its brazen challenges to Coca-Cola Co. and Pepsico Inc. 
and the runaway growth of its cornerstone business, private-label 
soft drinks. But a price war between Coke and Pepsi eroded Cott's 
main advantage as the low-priced alternative, while internal problems 
erupted in areas ranging from profitability to accounting practices 
to customer service. And then Cott's founder, biggest shareholder 
and guiding spirit, Gerald Pencer, died in February after a yearlong 
struggle with brain cancer. Cott is still the fourth-biggest soft-drink 
company in the world, behind Coke, Pepsi and Cadbury Schweppes, which 
makes Dr Pepper and 7-Up. But the brand-name giants no longer worry 
about Cott. ``We take all forms of competition seriously,'' said Larry 
Jabbonsky, a Pepsi spokesman. ``But private label has not been among 
our top concerns of late.'' Cott was in disarray when Weise arrived. 
A veteran of Procter &AMP; Gamble and Campbell Soup Co., Weise, 53, 
went directly into turnaround mode despite the uncertainties facing 
the company. ``There are many times when I walk down dark hallways, 
and sometimes you don't know what's going to happen when you open 
one of those doors,'' he said. ``But you stick to your knitting. You 
stick to your values.'' At the beverage conference, Weise stuck to 
his speech, and later noted proudly that many analysts returned to 
the room as he spoke. Weise was recruited by a search firm retained 
by the Pencer family, and he sought the approval of Thomas Lee, the 
buyout specialist who now controls much of the Pencer stake, before 
taking the job _ probably a wise move, since Cott's board is heavy 
with Lee appointees. Weise's first order of business, after hiring 
new executives for key marketing and sales positions, was to tackle 
the customer service problem. The record was pretty bad: Forty percent 
of customers were getting orders filled incorrectly, late or both, 
the company said. And it took a toll. ``Last summer, we couldn't ship 
all of the product we had, and some customers delayed or canceled 
promotional activity because of that,'' Weise said. Even though the 
company had brought efficient new plants on line, he said, ``we'd 
never trained the people right.'' Investors were also annoyed with 
Cott when Weise arrived. To ease their concerns, he did away with 
an unpopular accounting practice _ amortizing slotting fees paid to 
supermarkets over the life of contracts _ that many felt had the effect 
of exaggerating earnings. He also switched to a Dec. 31 fiscal year 
and began reporting results in U.S., not Canadian, dollars. (The company 
is based in Toronto.) Cott's rapid growth had left it an unwieldy 
hodgepodge, with more than 2,000 different brands and packages to 
track in the United States, Britain and Canada. Now, Weise said, unprofitable 
accounts will be pruned, sluggish businesses like a line of pet foods 
will be sold, and capital expenditures are on hold. ``I'm going to 
make these assets sweat,'' he said. To turn up the heat on senior 
management, Weise requires them to invest in Cott shares, and he says 
most of his own money is invested in the company. Improving efficiency 
and accountability is one thing; getting the company to grow on the 
top line is another. ``The part that remains a question mark is the 
growth,'' says Bill Pecoriello, a beverage analyst for Sanford C. 
Bernstein &AMP; Co. Coke and Pepsi are aggressively aiming at mass 
merchandisers like Wal-Mart Stores, historically Cott's biggest outlets, 
Pecoriello said. And competing private-label beverage makers regard 
Cott as a sitting duck. ``You have two categories of competition _ 
first Coke and Pepsi, the national brands, and second, the regional 
private-label players who are trying to cherry-pick Cott's customers,'' 
Pecoriello said. ``Cott has had such horrible customer service in 
recent years, and that's what these regional companies try to use 
to steal the customers away.'' Wal-Mart, which sells the Sam's line 
of soft drinks made by Cott, is not about to drop the company, but 
the competition gives Wal-Mart negotiating ammunition and may cut 
into Cott's profits, analysts said. A Wal-Mart spokesman said only 
that the company is ``very pleased with our relationship with the 
Cott Corporation.'' The third-quarter results, announced Friday, brought 
more bad news for Cott: a net loss of $68.3 million, or $1.10 a share. 
Most of that loss was because of restructuring, the company said. 
It is hard to find signs of worry in the bright blue eyes and dazzling 
smile of the courtly Weise. Enthusiasm may be his strongest suit, 
though he also has a track record in innovation. At Procter, where 
he was hired in 1967 fresh from a master's program in business economics 
at Lehigh University, he oversaw the development of Olestra, the fat 
substitute now used in potato chips and other foods. Lured away in 
1992 to become chief financial officer of Campbell Soup, Weise helped 
acquire a salsa company and pushed for expansion at the Pepperidge 
Farm and Godiva divisions. It still stings that Campbell passed him 
over for its top job last year, but in his typically chipper manner, 
he said that departing Campbell gave him more freedom ``to control 
my own destiny.'' His last stop before Cott was a family-held maker 
of private-label sanitary products; he helped sell the company before 
he left. ``They were poking a little finger in the eyes of some very 
big bears,'' said John Sicher, publisher of Beverage Digest, a newsletter. 
Cott never approached Coke or Pepsi in sales volume, but its presence 
did force them to lower prices in supermarkets, a major profit source 
for soft-drink companies, because stores used the Cott threat to gain 
leverage in negotiations. The Cott-Coke confrontation turned nasty 
in 1994 when M. Douglas Ivester, now Coke's chairman and chief executive, 
gave a speech at an industry meeting in which he scoffed at ``parasites'' 
in a context that made clear he was referring to Cott. Pencer riposted 
shortly afterward that he was happy to be a parasite, if that was 
``someone who has the arrogance to offer a comparable product to Coke's 
at a significantly lower cost.'' Cott's approach is more conservative 
now. ``There is room for both private-label and branded offerings,'' 
Weise told the November beverage conference. And in an interview, 
he said: ``Coke and Pepsi are getting sharper, but I'm not after Coke 
and Pepsi. We're playing in a specialty segment, a $5 billion segment, 
and we have a 40 percent share of that. It's Coke, Pepsi and a third 
player, and I want to be that third player.'' What to make of this 
evolution? Cott has ``basically gone from double-breasted to pinstriped,'' 
said Jennifer Solomon, a beverage analyst with Salomon Smith Barney 
who followed the company in the days when Pencer was in charge. ``There's 
no more complicated accounting, no more `We're going to beat Coke 
at their own game.''' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>