<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981218.0349 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Their ranks include Rep. Sidney Yates, a liberal Democrat from Chicago, 
who is retiring after 48 years in the House, and Rep. Vince Snowbarger, 
a conservative Republican from Kansas who lost his seat after a single 
term. Among the household names are Speaker Newt Gingrich of Georgia, 
who said after the Republican Party's disappointing showing in the 
November elections that he would leave the House, and Rep. Joseph 
Kennedy II, D-Mass., who decided to leave politics after the death 
last winter of his brother Michael. They are the lame ducks in the 
House, 21 Republicans and 17 Democrats, not including two Republicans 
and one Democrat who won election to Senate seats. And as the House 
took up impeachment Friday, they streamed back into the Capitol to 
deal with what for many is the most momentous issue of their careers 
in public service, one they variously view as unfortunately necessary 
or just unfortunate. ``This is the last issue I will address after 
17 years in this body, after thousands of votes, only a few of which 
I regret,'' said Rep. Barbara Kennelly, D-Conn., who is leaving after 
running unsuccessfully for governor and opposes impeachment. ``I do 
not want to regret this incredibly important vote.'' With their status 
comes, theoretically, a freedom from the party whip and from the need 
to explain their decision to the voters. Yet with most of them standing 
firmly on one side or other of the ideological divide and representing 
districts that remain safely in the hands of their parties, only a 
few of them are likely to break ranks. Among the Democrats who are 
leaving, only one, Rep. Paul McHale of Pennsylvania, is likely to 
vote in favor of impeaching President Clinton. McHale said he is fairly 
certain that about two-thirds of the voters in his district would 
prefer a vote against impeachment and want the president, whatever 
his faults, to remain in office. Asked if public opinion would matter 
more to him if he were not retiring, he said it would not. ``After 
scouring my own conscience, I believe Edmund Burke is right,'' McHale 
said. ``I am obligated to exercise the best judgment I can, even if 
it means in the short term I may be in conflict with what may be the 
passing public will.'' Among the departing Republicans, nearly all 
have come out in favor of impeachment. Indeed, there has been little 
agonizing among the departing members of either party. Among the Republicans 
in particular, there is a sense that their final act in Congress will 
be a weighty but entirely appropriate one, the strongest measure available 
to them under the Constitution to register their disapproval of Clinton's 
actions in both legal and moral terms. ``This is one last monumental 
change in American history before I leave office,'' said Rep. Mark 
Neumann, a two-term Republican from Wisconsin who gave up his seat 
for an unsuccessful Senate bid. ``When I first went to Washington 
the primary concern was balancing the budget, which we got accomplished,'' 
Neumann said. ``We leave making a statement that I hope is heard loud 
and clear: that even though a lot of people say the economy is strong 
and their jobs are secure and that they're content, that this country 
is about more than money. Especially for young people, the message 
should be that an extramarital affair plus perjury is not acceptable.'' 
They have been stripped of the trappings of power already. Most have 
closed their offices and lost their staffs, and many will be reduced 
to working from a cubicle with a single phone line in the basement 
of the Rayburn Office Building. But nearly all of them plan to be 
present and vote. Even Rep. Jay Kim, R-Calif., who lost his primary 
race after pleading guilty to a campaign contributions offense, plans 
to vote, aides said. Kim told a newspaper in California that he was 
leaning towards voting against impeachment. In several cases, Republicans 
who favor impeachment will turn their seats over in three weeks to 
Democrats. Rep. Mike Pappas, R-N.J., announced on Wednesday that he 
would vote for impeachment. The Democrat who defeated him, Rush Holt, 
said that he opposes impeachment and that Pappas should abstain. Yates, 
the Illinois Democrat, was elected to the House in 1948 and has served 
there since, except for two years during the 1960s when he ran unsuccessfully 
for the Senate. He said the situation struck him as a preposterous 
example of how rampant partisanship has taken over Washington. ``It 
should never have occurred,'' Yates, who is 89, said of the Republican 
decision to force a vote on impeachment, ``and it wouldn't have occurred 
in any Congress preceding this one.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>