<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981218.0279 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Despite Russia's anger over the bombing of Iraq and the recall of 
its ambassador from Washington, Moscow's private conversations with 
U.S. officials reflect a desire to preserve and protect the U.S.-Russian 
relationship, senior American officials said Friday. Russian fury 
has been leveling off from its peak on Wednesday, the officials said, 
noting that the most positive conversation yet occurred Friday morning 
between Russian Foreign Minister Igor Ivanov and Secretary of State 
Madeleine Albright. Ivanov repeated an invitation for Albright to 
come to Moscow, and she expects to go there toward the end of January, 
said her spokesman, James Rubin. The conversation Friday, which lasted 
half an hour with some translation, was ``an extremely important exchange,'' 
Rubin said, and Ivanov emphasized ``that the Russians understand the 
importance of maintaining a broad-based relationship with the United 
States.'' A senior U.S. official said later: ``The Russians recognize 
that they need to keep good political and economic ties to the West, 
even if they are angry and embarrassed. And they won't risk all that 
for the sake of Iraq.'' Ivanov also passed on a relatively conciliatory 
message from President Boris Yeltsin to President Clinton, officials 
said. On Thursday, Clinton sent a letter to Yeltsin explaining the 
U.S. and British decision to bomb Iraq and asking the Russians to 
work to manage their differences with Washington and concentrate on 
vital areas of common interest, including Moscow's financial difficulties. 
Also on Thursday, Vice President Al Gore telephoned Russia's prime 
minister, Yevgeny Primakov, to explain the U.S. position. When Primakov 
asked Gore to stop the bombing, Gore responded that the attacks would 
continue. Hours later, the Russians recalled Ambassador Yuli Vorontsov, 
who was due to retire and return to Moscow soon in any event. Vorontsov 
left Washington Friday. The Russians simultaneously recalled their 
ambassador from London. The recall was believed to be the first since 
1979, when Washington recalled its ambassador from Moscow because 
of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, and the Soviets recalled their 
ambassador from Washington. But given the tensions of the nuclear-tipped 
Cold War, both sides considered it more important to retain diplomats 
in each other's capitals than to give vent to pique. Discussions with 
Moscow about its budget and possible new loans from the International 
Monetary Fund are proceeding on a separate track, the officials said. 
U.S. officials do not want the Russians to think there is a crude 
economic or political price to pay for their opposition on Iraq, an 
official said. The Russians will keep up loud, public criticism of 
American and British actions so long as the bombing continues over 
Iraq, a senior U.S. official said. ``No one should be surprised by 
that, and we shouldn't overblow it,'' he said. ``Both sides are mindful 
of the importance of bilateral relations, there will be more meetings 
between officials next week and life will go on.'' The official identified 
three reasons for Russian anger. First, Moscow and Primakov personally 
have tried to be key players in resolving the Iraq crisis, but their 
efforts have failed, producing frustration. Primakov is an Iraq expert 
and knows its leaders well, including Saddam Hussein and Tariq Aziz, 
Iraq's deputy prime minister. In November 1997, Primakov, then foreign 
minister, personally arranged a deal with Iraq to comply with U.N. 
resolutions and work with U.N. weapons inspectors that short-circuited 
American plans to bomb Iraq. But Saddam broke his promises to Primakov 
then, as he broke similar promises made last February to U.N. Secretary-General 
Kofi Annan. Second, the Russians felt insulted that they were not 
consulted, as Security Council members, before the bombing began, 
and that the bombing in fact began in the middle of a Security Council 
debate on Iraq. While Washington says it consults Moscow, Russian 
officials often complain that such consultations often have the humiliating 
feel of lectures or briefings. The Chinese and French sometimes complain 
of the same feeling, U.S. officials admit. Third, Russian domestic 
politics essentially demands a tough reaction to the U.S. superpower 
taking nearly unilateral action against Russian wishes, whether it 
be in Iraq or in Bosnia. ``People and bureaucrats in the Russian system 
itself are frustrated by many factors, by the poor economy and Russia's 
reduced status, and they want to vent,'' an official said. ``Events 
like this one can become a way for Russians to vent their frustrations 
about everything.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>