<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981218.0343 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Ever since General Motors was formed through a series of mergers early 
in this century, executives have often risen to the top without ever 
managing a factory, relying instead on personal friendships commonly 
made while serving in the company's powerful treasury office in New 
York. Now the world's largest automaker is about to put a true car 
guy in charge of its Saturn division _ only the car guy is a woman, 
Cynthia Mary Trudell. On Jan. 1, she will become the first woman to 
run a car division for a U.S. or foreign automaker. Ms. Trudell has 
spent most of the last 19 years in factories, mainly transmission 
and engine factories and a foundry, some of the grittiest, dirtiest, 
most macho and most dangerous workplaces in the auto industry. Along 
the way, she has accumulated the kind of experience that GM has concluded 
it needs in senior executives, but has seldom found among its men. 
At a company that has lost more sales and profits from recent strikes 
than Microsoft Corp. sells or earns in a year, Ms. Trudell has won 
a reputation for working closely and harmoniously with factory union 
leaders in the United States, Canada and Britain. At a manufacturer 
perceived as having out-of-touch factory bureaucracies, Ms. Trudell 
has worked her way up through engineering jobs on factory floors. 
And at an automaker that invented the full-size sport utility vehicle 
only to lose much of the highly profitable market to Ford Motor Co., 
Ms. Trudell has spent the last year and a half as president of a GM 
subsidiary in England that manufactures and markets sport utility 
vehicles. Few auto analysts have met Ms. Trudell, but her track record 
has impressed them. ``She's obviously got a true love for the industry, 
which is rare to find in anybody,'' said Wesley Brown, an analyst 
at Nextrend Inc., an automotive consulting firm in Thousand Oaks, 
Calif. While senior European and Japanese auto executives tend to 
be engineers, top U.S. executives these days usually have master's 
degrees in business administration. Ms. Trudell, who is 45, took a 
very different route into the industry. She did a doctorate in physical 
chemistry at the University of Windsor in Ontario, only to decide 
after a year and a half in a postdoctoral fellowship that she did 
not want to spend her life in research. As the daughter of a new-car 
salesman in Saint John, New Brunswick, she decided to try auto manufacturing 
instead. ``I worked a lot with my Dad in the dealership and I grew 
to love cars,'' she said in a telephone interview on Friday from her 
current office in Luton, England, 35 miles northwest of London. After 
a brief stint as a Ford chemical-process engineer, Ms. Trudell worked 
from 1981 to 1990 in two GM transmission factories, first in Windsor 
and then in Ypsilanti, Mich. She decided to specialize in engines 
and transmissions partly because their sheer complexity appealed to 
her intellectual curiosity and partly because, she said, ``they're 
the heart and soul of the car.'' An early job in Windsor consisted 
of overseeing 150 workers who were machining transmission gears _ 
a job she chose because she wanted to learn manufacturing from the 
ground up. As a prank, the factory's manufacturing superintendent 
painted her new office entirely in pink. But she said that after she 
laughed about it and set to work without complaint, someone had the 
office repainted a week later in a shade somewhere between beige and 
peach. She keeps a can of pink paint in her office as a memento, she 
said, adding that graduate work in chemistry had prepared her for 
often being the only woman in a group. ``I'm very proud and secure 
in my gender, but I've never thought it to be a big deal,'' she said. 
While Ms. Trudell describes her time in the transmission factories 
as ``great years,'' fellow auto executives shake their heads at the 
idea. ``I'm just having trouble with the thought of spending nine 
years in a transmission factory,'' said Donald Hudler, a longtime 
sales executive who is Saturn's current chairman and president. ``I 
suspect it would be more of a challenge for a woman than for a man, 
but I suspect in the next nine years it will be easier.'' Hudler will 
retire from GM on Jan. 1, when Ms. Trudell will succeed him in both 
Saturn jobs. Hudler, 64, will become the chief executive of a new 
company that Saturn is setting up to own some of its dealerships. 
After her years in the transmission factories, Ms. Trudell did engine 
research for nearly two years, spent three months in an executive 
course at Harvard Business School, served as site manager of an engine 
factory and foundry in Ontario and then ran an assembly plant in Wilmington, 
Del. At all these factories, her knowledge of chemistry allowed her 
to understand metal castings, plastic-molding machinery and other 
industrial processes, and to seek solutions before things broke down. 
Ms. Trudell, who is married to a high school teacher of math and physics 
and has two children, also developed a strong, early interest in labor 
relations, regularly seeking the advice of local union leaders. ``They 
bring a perspective that a lot of times I never would have thought 
about, and it makes a difference in execution,'' she said. Ms. Trudell 
won admiration within GM for keeping the peace with no fewer than 
five unions at the sport utility vehicle factory in England. The factory 
has no executive dining rooms, designated parking places or other 
perks for managers. So the chance to work at Saturn, with its partnership 
of labor and management in Spring Hill, Tenn., has delighted her. 
``It's a dream come true,'' she said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>