<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981218.0479 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The newly appointed trustee of the city's largest municipal union 
lashed out at the union's top officials Friday, saying they had engaged 
in large-scale, unrestrained spending, including more than $300,000 
in unexplained credit card expenses and the creation of what he called 
a $2 million slush fund. Furious about the union's complete lack of 
financial controls, Lee Saunders, the new administrator of District 
Council 37, suspended the council's longtime treasurer and attacked 
the unchecked spending for helping cause the union's net assets to 
plunge to $3.4 million, from $22 million in 1994. Saunders said 10 
top council officials had the union pay a total of $455,300 in bills 
run up on their American Express cards, noting that the officials 
provided rough justification for only a quarter of that amount. Some 
of that spending was for personal items, Saunders said, noting that 
members of the council staff often traveled without approval and without 
justifying travel costs. ``I am so deeply disturbed right now,'' he 
said at a news conference in midtown Manhattan. ``Unions are supposed 
to operate for the benefit of their members. Not as a private candy 
store for the few.'' Saunders announced that he was taking strong 
steps to clean up the mess, among them destroying the American Express 
cards held by the 10 council leaders, and suspending a generous severance 
program in which officials who resigned under a cloud left with hundreds 
of thousands of dollars. Among the officials whose cards were destroyed 
was Stanley Hill, the longtime executive director who was forced to 
take unpaid leave when the parent union took direct control of the 
council on Nov. 30. With disgust in his voice, Saunders described 
a financial system in which there were no written procedures or checks 
and balances, in which officials operated without accountability and 
members were kept in the dark about how their dues money was spent. 
Saunders laid out the details of the financial mismanagement after 
speaking Friday morning at an internal judicial hearing at which the 
council's parent union, the American Federation of State, County and 
Municipal Employees, provided evidence to justify imposing a trusteeship 
on the council. Manhattan District Attorney Robert Morgenthau has 
undertaken a broad investigation into allegations of embezzlement, 
kickbacks and vote fraud at the council, which represents 120,000 
city workers. Last month, Hill acknowledged that there was vote rigging 
in 1996 at a large clerical workers' local, as part of an effort to 
insure the ratification of the union's five-year contract, which included 
an unpopular two-year wage freeze. Saunders described several schemes 
that allowed the council's senior officials to exploit the system. 
He said that in their projected budget, council officials deliberately 
underestimated the number of workers who pay dues, a move that meant 
the union ended up with about $2 million more each year than it had 
budgeted. He said this created a slush fund, which enabled council 
officials to spend money ``without the constraints of discussion, 
approval or reporting.'' He said KPMG Peat Marwick, an auditing firm 
hired by the parent union, was investigating whether the $2 million 
was spent improperly. Saunders detailed another scheme in which the 
city gave the district council dues money collected from workers' 
paychecks, and the council then gave each local its share. For many 
locals, council officials held back a certain amount of the dues, 
enabling top officials from the locals to spend that money without 
its being an official part of the local's budget and without their 
members even knowing about it. Saunders also acknowledged that Kroll 
Associates, a private investigative agency hired by the parent union, 
had found that tampering in the contract ratification vote was far 
more widespread than had been disclosed. Confirming a report in The 
New York Times on Friday, , he said investigators had found irregularities 
and possible fraud in at least 12 of the council's 56 locals. Saunders 
said investigators found union locals in which the number of votes 
for ratification was greater than the number of members who attended 
meetings where the vote was taken by a show of hands. There were also 
vote tallies in the district council's records for certain locals 
that voted by voice with no count taken at their meetings. In some 
instances, Saunders said, the tally in the local union's minutes was 
lower than the tally in the district council's records. He said the 
presidents of two locals had said their signatures were forged when 
a district council official sought to certify how their locals had 
voted. ``What we see here is unchecked spending, a complete lack of 
critical business practices in a major organization and a vote scheme 
that stole the voice of a union's members,'' Saunders said. ``That 
is unacceptable. This union is going to start operating in the best 
interests of its members. We will expose wrongdoing and abuses, and 
implement systems and controls to make sure they don't happen again.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>