<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981218.0386 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Pete Sampras does not consider himself a political animal, but after 
bypassing 1998 Davis Cup duty as part of his successful quest to finish 
the year at No. 1 for a record-breaking sixth straight season, he 
has confirmed that his 1999 Davis Cup policy will again be hard-line: 
he will not play. ``Winning the slams and staying No. 1, that's my 
priority,'' Sampras said Thursday night from Los Angeles, ``and I 
feel if I try to play Davis Cup, those other things will be in jeopardy. 
I'm in a special situation here with these records, and I hope people 
can understand that, though I know some won't.'' Sampras' services 
for the first round of Davis Cup in Birmingham, England, on April 
2-4 had been sought by Tom Gullikson, the U.S. captain. Not only does 
the United States face a daunting assignment against two top 10 players, 
Tim Henman and Greg Rusedski, but the U.S. Tennis Association had 
also already made arrangements to commemorate Davis Cup's centennial 
by holding the second round at the historic Longwood Cricket Club 
in Boston. Without Sampras to anchor Round 1, a Round 2 seems unlikely. 
``There's a number of things the heads of tennis can do to make Davis 
Cup more accessible for the top guys,'' said Sampras, who feels the 
four-round format is a drain on his Grand Slam preparation. ``To have 
a week off before and after Davis Cup, and not be penalized with your 
ranking, would be a step in the right direction, but I don't see much 
of that happening. I know one guy can't change Davis Cup, but unless 
they change the format, I don't see myself playing.'' And Sampras 
said he would not play the first round merely to help the Americans 
reach the second. ``I can't commit to something unless I'm going to 
finish what I start; but I have to be honest, the slams and the ranking 
come first,'' said Sampras, who gave Gullikson the bad news earlier 
this week. Sampras managed to win his 11th Grand Slam event at Wimbledon 
and finished the year at No. 1, and Lindsay Davenport used her U.S. 
Open victory to land atop the women's tour, but the rule of thumb 
for tennis in 1998 was that there wasn't one. The four Grand Slam 
events produced four different men's and women's champions. Sampras 
twice slipped behind Marcelo Rios of Chile, who led the men's tour 
with seven titles but none in Grand Slam events. Martina Hingis, relentless 
at 16 but regressing at 17, won only one of the three slams that she 
had grabbed in 1997. ``It's easier to be the hunter than the hunted 
one,'' she said. Things were helter-skelter on tennis' golden oldies 
front as well. No sooner had Jimmy Connors been inducted into the 
Hall of Fame than he found himself toppled as the head of the senior 
class. He was supplanted by John McEnroe, who is poised to follow 
Connors into the hall in 1999 and also proclaimed himself ready to 
take on Sampras and the youngsters, too. ``I think these guys should 
get their facts straight before they pop off,'' Sampras snapped by 
way of response to McEnroe's suggestion that the U.S. Davis Cup team 
might be better off tapping a solid soldier like him instead of begging 
for the services of a current star like Sampras. ``It's easy for McEnroe 
to criticize; back when he was doing this, he played just 13, 14 events,'' 
said Sampras, who has a 22-event schedule. ``You can't win majors, 
be No. 1, and be in Davis Cup; I physically can't do it or mentally 
can't do it,'' said Sampras, who won only four titles in 1998, his 
fewest since 1991. ``You can't have everything.'' But by finishing 
this season at the top of the pecking order, Sampras broke the blockbuster 
sixth-straight-year record he had shared with Connors. And by winning 
Wimbledon, Sampras put himself in position to tie Roy Emerson's career 
record of a dozen Grand Slam titles if he gets off to a perfect start 
next month at the Australian Open. Sampras also has a chance to surpass 
Ivan Lendl's career record of 270 weeks at No. 1 if he can hold his 
spot for 18 more weeks. ``These records out there are the reason I'm 
going to continue to work hard,'' he said. Davenport made a double 
breakthrough in 1998: first, she persevered to her first Grand Slam 
title at the U.S. Open; a month later, she replaced Hingis at No. 
1. But that sharing of the top spot by two low-key Californians was 
a coincidence that went virtually uncelebrated on home turf. Contrary 
to plans and predictions about the best pre-millennium tactic for 
keeping the sport globally competitive, men's and women's tennis did 
not get married in 1998, nor are they likely to hitch their famous 
and their fortunes in 1999. The men's game, painfully aware that the 
retirement of Boris Becker has been accompanied by a disappearance 
of the German-sponsorship marks that had helped finance the ATP Tour 
in the past decade, had pushed for the merger. But the women's circuit, 
pleasantly aware that its bumper crop of teen-age heroines is a marketing 
novelty worth its weight in magazine covers if not gold, has resolved 
to run a gender-specific business. Hingis became the first female 
athlete to land the cover of GQ, Anna Kournikova made People magazine's 
``Sexiest People of 1998,'' and Venus Williams was touted by George 
magazine as one of its ``20 Women of Influence.'' All this extracurricular 
attention gilding a year in which attendance hit a record of more 
than 3.6 million spectators and the 3.1 rating of the Davenport-Hingis 
U.S. Open final was the highest for any televised women's sports event. 
But the women will apparently not exit 1998 on the high note of having 
landed a title sponsor willing to shell out an estimated $15 million 
a year for 1999 and beyond. ``I think that sponsors were looking for 
some indication that we would still be around rather than in some 
way agglomerated with the men's tour,'' said Bart McGuire, chief executive 
officer of the WTA Tour. ``I think we have satisfied them on that, 
but that said, I am a little chagrined that the process is taking 
so long.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>