<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981218.0408 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
At least eight people were killed late Thursday night when a pleasure 
boat carrying 26 Cubans capsized off one of the keys that make up 
Biscayne National Park, Coast Guard officials said Friday. The officials 
described the incident as a probable case of immigrant smuggling. 
Coast Guard and immigration officials could not recall a recent incident 
in which a boat taking refugees across the Straits of Florida had 
caused so many deaths. Nine people were also reported missing. The 
vessel, about 30 feet long, capsized about 11 p.m. on Thursday, Coast 
Guard spokesmen said, some 20 miles south of Miami near Elliott Key. 
A passing freighter noticed the capsizing Friday morning and rescued 
seven passengers, including two children, who had been clinging to 
the boat for about 10 hours, authorities said. The dead passengers 
were discovered later in the vicinity by a Coast Guard rescue team. 
Using two cutters and three helicopters, the Coast Guard members searched 
for the remaining passengers. ``We believe it is a case of smuggling,'' 
said Jibran Soto, a Coast Guard spokesman. The boat was registered 
with Florida plates and was likely used to bring Cubans to the country 
illegally, Soto added. The incident comes as law-enforcement officials 
have encountered a growing number of cases involving smugglers trying 
to bring Cuban and Haitian refugees into the United States. But it 
was not immediately clear whether the group whose boat capsized Friday 
had been organized by a smuggler. The site of Friday's capsizing, 
the shallow flats south of Key Biscayne, an island neighborhood of 
greater Miami, holds normally tranquil waters where recreational boats 
are a common sight. Though more illegal immigrants try to reach Florida 
during the summer months than in December, the weather has been warm 
with mild winds. But navigating the waters from Cuba has often been 
a deadly trip for immigrants trying to leave the island, said Jose 
Basulto, who heads Brothers to the Rescue, a group that seeks to rescue 
Cubans and other refugees stranded along the Florida straits. ``We 
try to tell our brothers in Cuba not to do this because it's costing 
too many lives,'' he added. In a similar incident in March, three 
people died when a boat believed to carry 16 refugees capsized off 
Biscayne Bay. Two people were later charged with smuggling. President 
Clinton began ordering the deportation of Cuban boat people in May 
1995 after a huge influx of Cubans by sea. This represented a radical 
change from a 35-year policy of welcoming all those leaving Cuba. 
Since the new policy has been in place, those spotted in the water 
are more likely to be deported than those who make it to shore. So 
far this year, almost 1,000 Cubans trying to enter the United States 
have been picked up by Coast Guard patrols. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>