<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981218.0344 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
More than half of the U.S. strike aircraft at ground bases in the 
Persian Gulf region have been kept out of the attack on Iraq because 
of objections from Saudi Arabia, Western military officers said Friday. 
Of the 100 fighters and bombers at bases in the region, only those 
in Kuwait and Oman had joined in the campaign by Friday evening, the 
Western officers said. They include four B-1 bombers in Oman, the 
first time those advanced aircraft have joined in a combat operation. 
The bulk of the force, about 60 F-16 and F-15 fighters, have been 
effectively grounded in Saudi Arabia, which has repeatedly refused 
to permit attacks against Baghdad to be launched from its soil. Saudi 
Arabia was the main base of U.S. operations against Iraq during the 
1991 war. ``We have not asked the Saudis for permission to use aircraft 
from their bases,'' Capt. Michael Shavers, an Air Force spokesman, 
said by telephone from Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. That is because the answer 
would have been no, Western officials said. The episode has underscored 
the limitations on U.S. military operations in the region, where anger 
over the U.S.-led attack was vented in the verbal bombardment printed 
in many newspapers Friday. In the United Arab Emirates, the daily 
al-Khaleef called the air strikes an act of ``blatant aggression,'' 
and urged other to follow the Emirates in demanding an immediate end 
to the attack. ``Letting it pass without a stand means that the Arabs 
have become a whipping boy for the American empire,'' the newspaper 
said. Over the last 13 months, U.S. officials including Secretary 
of State Madeleine Albright and Defense Secretary William Cohen have 
paid repeated visits to Saudi Arabia to discuss Iraq and its refusal 
to cooperate with United Nations weapons inspectors. But the Saudis 
have been so clear in their opposition to permitting Saudi-based planes 
to attack Iraq that the U.S. emissaries stopped asking permission 
months ago. As recently as last month, the defense minister, Prince 
Sultan, reiterated the Saudi view. The Saudis say little publicly 
to explain their reasoning, and Saudi officials have made no public 
comment about the raids. While the Saudis were determined to oust 
Iraq from Kuwait, they apparently are sensitive about punishing a 
nation when there is no territory in dispute. U.S. officials have 
sought to gloss over the dispute, saying they are confident that Saudi 
Arabia, a key ally, would provide any support needed by the United 
States. In fact, Saudi Arabia has allowed KC-130 refueling aircraft 
based in the kingdom to service other strike aircraft planes on their 
way to and from Iraq, Western military officials said. ''What is the 
purpose of having all that firepower there if it can't be used?'' 
once Western military official said, reflecting military complaining 
that the United States spends heavily to protect the Saudis, but it 
is deprived of full access to that weaponry. The Saudi objections 
have made the United States rely on aircraft on the Navy carrier Enterprise 
that is less-advanced militarily. It is being used to back up what 
has been primarily a cruise-missile attack. The heavy dependence on 
cruise missiles reflects the advantages of those weapons, Western 
officers said. Hundreds of those missiles were launched in the first 
two nights of the attack, both from Navy vessels in the Gulf and from 
about 15 B-52 bombers based on the British island of Diego Garcia 
in the Indian Ocean. Unlike aircraft, the missiles are unmanned, and 
so their use greatly minimizes the risk of U.S. casualties. But even 
on the first night of the attack, F-14 and F-18 fighter aircraft were 
launched from the Enterprise at the rate of one a minute, officers 
on board the Navy vessel have said. The fact that those aircraft-together 
with some two dozen F-16 and A-10 fighters from Kuwait and that the 
four B-1s from Oman have been used to reinforce the cruise missile 
attacks have made clear that U.S. military planners believe that unmanned 
strikes alone are not sufficient. Citing what they called ``host-nation 
sensitivities,'' Capt. Shavers and officers at the U.S. Central Command 
declined to provide a precise breakdown of where U.S. warplanes in 
the region are based. But other Western officers said they understood 
that Kuwait, Oman and Saudi Arabia where the only Gulf countries where 
U.S. fighters and bombers are currently based. Saudi Arabia is not 
the only American ally bordering Iraq whose reluctance has limited 
U.S. options. Turkey, to Iraq's immediate north, has also signaled 
reservations about attacks on Iraq, and none of the several dozen 
U.S. fighter planes has joined in the current air campaign. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>