<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981218.0505 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Three New York City firefighters who were trying to rescue an elderly 
woman from her top-floor Brooklyn apartment were killed Friday when 
a fireball engulfed them as it swept through the narrow hallway, fire 
officials said. The three members of Ladder Company 170 in Brooklyn 
fell to the floor and shouted, ``Mayday!'' over a radio. But fire 
officials said the concrete hallways acted like an oven, and the flames 
melted the oxygen masks off the firefighters' faces. Within a minute, 
the men succumbed to smoke inhalation and burns, according to the 
City Medical Examiner's office. Unbeknownst to the firefighters, the 
67-year-old woman who lived in the apartment had already been pulled 
to safety by a neighbor. The flames should have triggered a sprinkler 
system on the top-floor hallway, but Fire Commissioner Thomas Von 
Essen said the system had inexplicably been turned off. When firefighters 
tested the system hours after the blaze, Von Essen said, the sprinklers 
worked properly. The building, at 17 Vandalia Ave. near Starrett City, 
houses low-income elderly people and is managed by the New York City 
Housing Authority. It was built in 1983 with money from the federal 
government. The hallway sprinklers are required by federal regulations; 
city fire codes do not require sprinklers in residential buildings. 
Fire officials were looking for Housing Authority maintenance records 
in hopes of learning why the sprinklers had been turned off and to 
determine whether the required monthly inspections had been made. 
``It would have made a difference,'' said Von Essen, stopping short 
of blaming the deaths on the sprinklers. He later added: ``We're all 
dumbfounded. We can't figure it out.'' The three deceased firefighters 
were identified as Lt. Joseph Cavalieri, 42; Christopher Bopp, 27, 
and James Bohan, 25. By Friday afternoon, firefighters at Ladder Company 
170 on Rockaway Boulevard in Canarsie had draped their firehouse with 
black-and-purple-striped bunting, a century-old tradition memorializing 
deaths in the line of duty. Bohan had delivered Christmas presents 
to young patients at Brookdale Hospital Medical Center in Brooklyn 
just the day before. Von Essen said investigators were ``95 percent 
sure'' that the fire started with a discarded cigarette in the apartment 
of the woman, Jacqueline Pinder. As of early Friday evening, fire 
officials had not yet interviewed Ms. Pinder, who was listed in serious 
condition at Brookdale Hospital. Six firefighters have now died on 
the job in New York City this year, and Friday's deaths marked the 
worst loss of life since three firefighters were killed in March 1994 
battling flames in an apartment building at 60 Watts St. in Manhattan. 
One of the worst fires in the city's history, a 1978 blaze at a Waldbaum's 
supermarket that killed six firefighters, occurred at 2892 Ocean Ave., 
a few miles from Vandalia Avenue. ``This is a very sad and difficult 
day for New York City,'' Mayor Rudolph Giuliani said at a news conference 
Friday night. He described the deceased firefighters as ``just among 
the very best,'' and said, ``They were walking into flames to save 
lives.'' Four other firefighters who had tried to rescue their colleagues 
were being treated at different hospitals for smoke inhalation and 
minor burns. Two paramedics who had tried to resuscitate the three 
victims were also hospitalized and being treated for burns and smoke 
inhalation. Four residents of the building suffered minor injuries. 
Those who knew the victims mourned their loss. ``He was the best guy 
that you could ever meet. He helped me shovel snow, go to the store 
for me, anything I asked,'' said Ed Gleason, 73, a neighbor of Bopp 
in the Midwood section of Brooklyn. Bopp's wife is expecting their 
first child in July. The fire started in the living room of Ms. Pinder's 
three-room apartment, 10-D, located in the northern wing of the building, 
officials said. The Fire Department must check the sprinklers every 
five years, and fire officials said they were working properly during 
the last inspection, in 1996. City Buildings Department officials 
said the building had only minor violations. But they said the Housing 
Authority was required to conduct monthly checks by a certified inspector, 
and investigators were seeking maintenance records to see whether 
the checks had taken place. ``We'll never know if the firefighters 
would have lived if the sprinklers were working, but we know the hallway 
would have been a lot cooler,'' said one ranking fire official. Ruth 
Colon, a Housing Authority spokeswoman, said the employee responsible 
for the maintenance records had taken the day off and was not located 
until Friday night. She said Housing Authority officials had only 
just begun to review the records. Firefighters got the first call 
at 4:54 a.m., and the fire was doused by 5:56 a.m. The mayor said 
the first trucks reached the scene in about four minutes. Relatives 
of Ms. Pinder told investigators that she is a heavy smoker. Fire 
officials at the scene said that as the fire grew, she staggered into 
the hallway, moaning and crying for help. An elderly man heard Ms. 
Pinder's cries and pulled her into his apartment, fire officials said. 
Ms. Pinder's self-closing steel door remained ajar. Within a few minutes, 
Cavalieri, Bopp and Bohan arrived. The firefighters, who made up what 
is known as a ``forcible entry team,'' did not carry a hose, and their 
job was to rescue victims. Fire officials said they had climbed the 
10 flights of stairs and were groping through the hallway, about 15 
feet from Ms. Pinder's door, when the fireball slammed into them. 
Officials said they believed that the pressure from the fire burst 
the windows in Ms. Pinder's apartment and that heavy winds coming 
off nearby Jamaica Bay carried the flames into the hallway like a 
blowtorch. ``The fireball was so ferocious that it caused the peephole 
in the apartment next door to explode,'' Von Essen said. Other responding 
firefighters heard a voice call, ``Mayday!'' over the radio, but the 
men apparently died within the next minute. A crew from Engine Company 
290 made a rescue attempt, crawling along the 10th floor as more firefighters 
sprayed the hallway with water from their hoses. The fire was contained 
to the northern wing of the 10th floor. The mayor visited the families 
of the victims, noting that each house was decorated for Christmas. 
``They were devastated,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>