<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981218.0442 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The irony of it had to smart a bit: Here was a Tulsa start-up that 
had rocketed to stardom on its prowess at collecting delinquent credit-card 
accounts asking a judge to protect it from its own creditors. Commercial 
Financial Services had been a dream come true for Tulsa. Just three 
years ago, the company moved into a nearly vacant 60-story structure 
originally built to house Oral Roberts' failed 777-bed hospital and 
began hiring at a rate of 40 people a week. In a year, the state's 
business community was honoring the company's founder, William R. 
Bartmann, with the Oklahoma Venture of the Year Award. Commercial 
Financial was on its way to becoming No. 1 in its industry, the fourth-largest 
private employer in Tulsa and a big source of jobs. Tulsans looked 
on with civic pride when Bartmann was on the cover of Inc. magazine. 
Now, however, the city is watching in confusion. The trouble at the 
closely held company started last September, when an anonymous letter 
to credit-rating agencies accused the company of puffing up its apparent 
collection-success rate by quietly selling large numbers of uncollected 
accounts to a shell company tied to a major shareholder. After first 
dismissing the accusations, Bartmann told the ratings services that 
there seemed to be some basis for them, according to Moody's Investors 
Service. In October, Moody's, Standard &AMP; Poor's and other services 
downgraded or suspended their ratings of the company and its securities. 
Since then, Bartmann, his wife, Kathryn, and the company's other co-founder, 
Jay Jones, have all resigned from management, at least temporarily. 
Outside lawyers and PricewaterhouseCoopers auditors have been called 
in to investigate. And on Dec. 11, after a bank that had invested 
in securities issued by Commercial Financial filed suit, the company 
filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection, claiming $415 million 
in total assets and $208 million in debts, excluding potential liability 
from lawsuits. Publicly, Tulsa business leaders expressed confidence 
that the company would solve its problems and survive. Privately, 
some said they feared that its success might have been too good to 
be true. ``Those kinds of companies always worry me,'' said Wayne 
Swearingen, an oil industry consultant based in Tulsa. ``I don't know 
of much besides cancer that grows 50 percent a year,'' he said, referring 
to Commercial Financial's leap from fewer than 200 employees in 1995 
to about 3,700 today _ 3,000 in Tulsa and the rest in Oklahoma City. 
The company grew into the nation's largest collector of charged-off 
credit-card debt by training employees in Bartmann's persistent but 
polite collection strategy, which appeared to be coaxing a surprising 
amount of money from debtors whom banks considered deadbeats. Having 
gone bust in the oil-industry slump in the 1980s, Bartmann had himself 
once been a delinquent debtor but won a new start by persuading his 
lender to trust him with another $13,000 while he started Commercial 
Financial. The key to the company's rapid expansion was Bartmann's 
novel approach to financing. He raised money to buy pools of bad credit-card 
accounts by linking them to securitized debt certificates, which are 
akin to mortgage-backed bonds like Ginnie Mae's. When investors bought 
the certificates, they were effectively lending the company the money 
to buy bad debts in exchange for a cut of whatever could be collected 
on them. About $1.6 billion in such certificates was outstanding at 
last count. The company made money _ $187 million in 1997 _ two ways: 
by selling the certificates for more than it cost to buy the underlying 
pool of credit-card debt, and by taking a 20 percent to 25 percent 
share of collections off the top as a servicing fee, said Stephen 
C. Macy, a senior analyst at Moody's. Investors will buy the certificates 
only if they believe enough will eventually be collected to give them 
an attractive yield, so sustaining a high collection rate _ and a 
good rating from the credit rating services _ was crucial to the company's 
success. Moody's was the first service to question Commercial Financial's 
methods. When it could not reach agreement with the company on several 
issues in early 1997, it stopped rating new issues at the company's 
request, Macy said. But even then, Moody's did not suspect that a 
large percentage of the company's ``collections'' might actually be 
sales of accounts to a Shawnee, Okla., company called Dimat Corp. 
Bartmann has told investors that Dimat, unbeknownst to him, was linked 
to Jones; Jones could not be reached for comment. In some of the securitized 
pools, more than 60 percent of the proceeds turned out to be from 
such sales, according to Fitch IBCA, another ratings service. Without 
a tip-off like the anonymous letter, such a situation ``can be almost 
impossible to detect,'' Macy said. Now the company is seeking a white 
knight to buy or merge with it, shore up its sagging credibility and 
let it borrow again. Tulsa business leaders are rooting for it to 
succeed, though from a distance, figuratively and literally. (Its 
skyscraper headquarters is miles from downtown.) ``Bartmann is not 
an old-time Tulsan,'' Swearingen said. ``Nobody quite understood what 
he was doing out there anyway.'' Since the company's troubles surfaced, 
``there has been a lot of 20-20 hindsight,'' he said. ``I didn't hear 
anything much negative about Bartmann until he got into trouble.'' 
But with layoffs under way in the oil industry _ a big employer in 
Oklahoma _ Tulsa would like Commercial Financial to right itself. 
Hundreds of employees, who tend to speak glowingly of their high pay 
and the company's habit of sending groups of workers on company-paid 
trips to resorts, have signed banners at headquarters expressing support. 
George Kaiser, who owns Kaiser-Francis Oil Co. and is chairman and 
majority shareholder of Bank of Oklahoma, said the local wisdom is 
that any new owner would continue the operation with minimal job losses, 
at least initially, though the rapid-growth days may be over. ``I 
think they have a solid business and a good business strategy,'' said 
Edward F. Keller, chairman and chief executive of Bank One in Tulsa 
and chairman of the Metropolitan Tulsa Chamber of Commerce. ``I'd 
prefer to believe that it's going to work out.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>