<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981218.0470 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In sneakers, sweats, jackets and caps, the Buffalo Bills offensive 
players flowed in slow, choreographed motion in their day-before-the-game 
walk-through of plays. It is normal to walk before you run. The Bills 
were inside their indoor practice facility next to Rich Stadium on 
this cold day outside and chilly one inside the building, where heaters 
were set _ if at all _ at the minimum. It was a Buffalo offensive 
walk-through before a hoped-for run-through of the Jets defense. The 
battle for first place in the American Football Conference East here 
on Saturday was near, and these players could sense it. Feel it. When 
the walk-through was over, the offensive players huddled around coach 
Wade Phillips. Something not audible, but full of spirit, was chanted 
before the players broke for the doors. It was more like a sprint. 
And emerging from the wad of players to head the pack was receiver 
Eric Moulds. It was fitting, really. Moulds has blindsided the league 
this season, just as the Bills have. Three seasons ago he was a first-round 
pick, the 24th selection overall in the draft, and for the last two 
seasons in Buffalo he remained obscure while returning kickoffs. In 
the last two seasons, the Bills were 10-6 and 6-10. After those Super 
Bowl runs from 1990 through 1993, they looked awfully obscure. Buffalo 
started this season by going 0-3, and Moulds began this year looking 
like any other receiver. But then Moulds emerged. And so have the 
Bills. Sure, for Buffalo, Doug Flutie arrived at quarterback and presented 
magical moments. The Buffalo offensive line coalesced and the defense, 
led by Bruce Smith, began smashing offenses. Phillips and his coaching 
staff maintained a steady hand through tough times, and now Buffalo 
(9-5) faces the Jets on Saturday and New Orleans next Sunday. The 
Bills can clinch a playoff berth if they beat the Jets; in fact, they 
would move a step closer to wining the AFC East. Flutie and the offensive 
line, the Smith-led defense and the coaching are all factors in the 
Bills' success. But there is no missing Moulds and his contribution. 
His teammates say he is a strong leader. They say he is the best athlete 
on a team full of splendid ones _ old and new _ who have aged and 
matured into the essence of team. ``Rob Johnson and Doug Flutie told 
me that way back in training camp and others have, too,'' Moulds said, 
shying from the anointed title of best anything. ``I know I'm more 
confident now. I know we all are. We see this game against the Jets 
as big as far as where we want to go. We think the Jets can't beat 
us. We are taking the approach that we can only beat ourselves. ``People 
say there is no `I' in team, but this is the way I see it,'' he added. 
``An offensive lineman can't run a pass route and catch the ball for 
me. I can't line up at center and block the defensive line. I think 
you have to do your thing. You have to take care of the `I.' And then, 
when everyone does that, it works together to form the team. That's 
the way we'll have to play to beat the Jets.'' It is the way Moulds 
leaped from obscurity to the Pro Bowl. The 25-year-old from Lucedale, 
Miss., and Mississippi State has a team-best 61 catches this season. 
He has 1,171 receiving yards, already the fourth-best in Bills history, 
with two games remaining. Another 141 receiving yards and he will 
surpass Andre Reed (1,312 in 1989) for the most receiving yards in 
a season for Buffalo. Moulds averages 19.2 yards per catch, and he 
has eight touchdown catches. He averages nearly 47 yards per score. 
A deep threat. A big, physical receiver who catches the ball underneath 
and crosses the middle without fear. He blocks well and causes big 
problems for defenses. He is 6 feet 2 inches and weighed 215 pounds 
last year. Now he weighs 200. That weight loss has made him both quicker 
and faster, but he said he remains strong. He is tougher mentally. 
His first two Bills offensive coordinators were comfortable with him 
sitting and watching _ in two seasons, Moulds caught 49 passes for 
573 yards and two touchdowns. Joe Pendry took over as the Bills offensive 
coordinator this season and told Moulds he could start. The Bills 
receivers coach, Charlie Joiner, a Hall of Fame receiver, told Moulds 
the same thing and showed him how to do it. ``I saw others drafted 
with me _ Keyshawn Johnson, Terry Glenn, Marvin Harrison and some 
others _ all performing right away, and I wanted that to be me,'' 
Moulds said. ``I trained hard in the off-season. I ate right and trained 
on the track and lost the extra weight. I put in some long hours. 
Now I can run by people as well as run over them. I have more endurance.'' 
He and the Bills have more of almost everything. More attention. More 
respect. More anticipation on what they will show against the Jets 
on Saturday. Their fans now enjoy the fanciful idea that their team 
can stride from 0-3 to divisional champs. And reach further. Beating 
the Jets on Saturday is a critical step in that process. ``It's a 
big change for me, what's happening now, the fact that people now 
are beginning to know my name,'' Moulds said. ``I don't think I'm 
a great player. Great players are made when you win the Super Bowl. 
Andre Reed and Thurman Thomas and Bruce, they talk about that sometimes, 
about how close they have been on four tries and how they want to 
finish it by winning it all. Being Super Bowl champions would define 
me and our team best of all.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>