<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981218.0247 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
If Russians are perplexed by the prospective impeachment of President 
Clinton over his testimony about extramarital sex _ and they are, 
to a man and woman _ perhaps they can be forgiven. Their own Parliament, 
you see, is trying to impeach President Boris Yeltsin over accusations 
of genocide, treason and abetting murder. And almost no one gives 
it a second thought. Indeed, most people expect that the impeachment 
will still be lumbering down the constitutional garden path when Yeltsin 
wraps up his second term and leaves office in 2000. Such is the yawning 
divide between impeachments, U.S. and Russian-style. One is saturnalia; 
the other Saturn, ungodly big and going in circles. One is convulsing 
a nation; the other is so somnolent that legislators have been known 
to snooze through investigative hearings. One is extraordinarily partisan, 
but rooted, at least in part, in the democratic axiom that no one 
is above the law. Actually, so is the other. ``The most important 
result of the committee's work is not whether we have considered evidence 
of a crime in presidential acts,'' Yelena Mizulina, the deputy chairwoman 
of the impeachment committee in Russia's lower legislative chamber, 
the Duma, said in an interview this week. ``It's that for the first 
time, a constitutional precedent is created. ``Those who occupy this 
post in the future will know that no matter how sophisticated the 
process is, it is quite realistic. They will have to control their 
actions.'' Sophisticated is not the word most people might attach 
to the proceedings, Ms. Mizulina readily admits. The Communist Party 
and its allies on the far right (in Russia, the Communists are right-wingers, 
not leftists) inspired and have managed the impeachment from its start 
in May. Most accusations against Yeltsin read like a party manifesto: 
that he committed treason by signing the accord that dissolved the 
Soviet Union in 1991; that he stage-managed the decline of Russia's 
ragtag military forces; that he abetted murder when his troops put 
down an armed rebellion by the Communist-led Parliament in 1993; that 
he committed genocide by allowing living standards, and the average 
Russian's life span, to decline. While many legislators resent Yeltsin's 
forceful quelling of the 1993 Parliament rebellion, not even the Communists 
who dominate the impeachment commission have seen fit to charge the 
president with manslaughter. Independent analysts dismiss the other 
charges as confections whipped up to give the Communists a platform 
for denouncing the Yeltsin government. Denounce they have, in regular 
Monday sessions that began in June and are supposed to end soon, but 
probably will not. Yeltsin has been called a clueless military strategist, 
a deserter of constitutional principle and a pawn of NATO and the 
United States. The panel's most flagrant hothead, the Communist legislator 
Viktor Ilyukhin, stunned many last week by declaring, during hearings 
on the genocide charge, that fewer Russians would have perished under 
Yeltsin's rule had the president not surrounded himself with Jewish 
advisers. The final accusation _ that Yeltsin exceeded his powers 
by waging a costly, failed war in Chechnya _ resonates more broadly 
across Parliament. Ms. Mazulina, a member of the pro-democracy, centrist 
Yabloko Party, supports the accusation. Were it to reach the floor 
in Parliament, it might even be adopted. But for a raft of political 
and legal reasons, that seems unlikely. In the United States, President 
Clinton's impeachment would take a rapid, straight path to a Senate 
trial presided over by the chief justice. Not so in Russia: a vote 
in the Duma to impeach would first require a two-thirds majority of 
the chamber's 450 legislators. It would then have to pass muster in 
the nation's Supreme Court and its Constitutional Court. Only then 
would impeachment proceed to the more moderate upper legislative chamber, 
the Federation Council. Most believe that will never happen. ``You 
should read the Russian Constitution to realize that we will not have 
to deal with this matter,'' the chamber's Speaker, Yegor Stroyev, 
said last month. Moreover, all of this assumes that the Duma genuinely 
wants to impeach Yeltsin, as the Communists insist. Most experts say 
the party is content simply to flog Yeltsin in public hearings and 
hope the economy continues to sour. ``They want to undermine presidential 
authority while waiting for 2000, when they'll win in elections because 
the situation will continue to deteriorate,'' Sergei Karaganov, a 
political analyst and head of the Moscow-based Institute of Europe, 
said in an interview. Ms. Mazulina said that tactic would explain 
why the impeachment panel has spent months looking into ``ridiculous'' 
charges like genocide and why, now that its official work is approaching 
a close, some members want to tack on a new charge blaming Yeltsin 
for this year's economic collapse. The tortuous process explains why 
Ms. Mazulina and some analysts express admiration for America's quick 
and comparatively clean method of presidential removal, even as they 
assert that removing a Russian president for concealing adultery is 
unimaginable. Well, almost unimaginable. In denouncing the United 
States for its attack on Iraq, the Communist Party leader, Gennadi 
Zyuganov, sputtered on Thursday that the bombings are inextricably 
tied ``with the Yeltsin impeachment, with his relations with a certain 
lady.'' Zyuganov stopped, then smiled. ``Clinton, of course. Clinton,'' 
he corrected himself. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>