<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981218.0200 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
At the first Winter Wonderland Ball, a fund-raiser at the New York 
Botanical Garden last week, a see-through tent was set up next to 
the all-glass Enid A. Haupt Conservatory. When the music started, 
200 young Establishment swingers in their 20s and 30s jumped up and 
writhed like eels. It was not your usual benefit dance, decked out 
with showy floral arrangements on tables and around the tent. Overhead 
and on the walls, there wasn't a flower in sight, only white paper 
that had been cut up and curled, then hung in loopy garlands. On the 
dance floor stood whimsical sculptures of a giraffe and a ballerina 
made by Marc Gagnon, a papier-mache artist. The unusual decor was 
conceived and assembled by David Hoey and Stewart Lucas, who are better 
known for their witty window displays for Bergdorf Goodman. ``We picked 
them because we knew the whimsical approach they would take,'' said 
Brooke de Ocampo, 32, a chairwoman of the ball, along with Nathalie 
Gerschel, Whitney Fairchild and Aerin Lauder Zinterhofer. ``All we 
said was, `Think of the scene in ``The Nutcracker'' where they are 
walking through the forest and the snow is falling.' And then we said, 
`We can't afford Robert Isabell and this is your budget.' They laughed. 
But they made us a winter wonderland out of paper.'' Messers Hoey 
and Lucas, both 35, are among a new wave of floral and party designers 
in New York who are challenging the long-reigning kings of the fabulous 
fete: George Trescher, 72, who has organized fund-raising galas for 
New York institutions for 30 years, and Isabell, 41, who first introduced 
his style of power flowers in the 1980s and is still at it. For the 
Metropolitan Museum of Art's Costume Institute Ball two weeks ago, 
Isabell packed dark red roses and amaryllis so tightly into the arrangements 
that a blowgun couldn't have wedged in another bud. Now, a new generation 
is asserting itself in the war of the rosebuds. And one of its main 
innovations has been to eliminate the rosebud altogether _ that is, 
to replace flowers as party decor with all kinds of unlikely materials. 
``It's really hilarious what you can do with reams of paper once you 
attack it with X-Acto knives,'' said Hoey, whose budget was under 
$10,000, very modest compared with more traditional galas, whose decor 
can cost 10 times that much. Part of the inspiration for using paper 
came from the vogue for paper sculpture in window displays in the 
1950s. ``There are no famous paper sculptors,'' Hoey said. ``But you 
used to see paper mannequins in windows all the time, and we even 
found directions in old crafts magazines. You don't see this stuff 
around, so it seems fresh now.'' Avi Adler, 42, of Avi Adler Flowers 
said, ``I like to give things a little edge, make them a little more 
contemporary.'' He designed the New York magazine New York Awards 
party on Monday with his partner, David Stark, 30. Their major design 
statement was a 16-foot-high wall of custom-made gold cubes, cones 
and spheres hanging from metal trusses, which greeted guests entering 
the old Dime Savings Bank, across from Grand Central Terminal. Inside 
the cathedral-size room, which is the newest catering hall to be opened 
by the Cipriani family, thousands of votive candles (and no flowers) 
flickered in the old tellers' windows and at tables. Adler said of 
the gaudy ornaments: ``I was inspired by those red and green, metal-and-glass 
markers you use for the edges of driveways _ you know, they shine 
at night.'' Offbeat sculptural walls are something of a signature 
for him as a party designer. He did a solid facade of 8,000 lemons 
for an Esquire magazine party this summer. In some ways, the trends 
in floral arrangements and party design in the late 90s seem bipolar, 
swinging between two moods: an exuberant maximalism and a defensive, 
protective minimalism. Coincidentally _ or maybe not so coincidentally 
_ the swings reflect the gyrations of the stock market this year, 
which has plunged from the high of summer to the low of autumn, and 
is now rebounding to another high, although one riddled with anxiety. 
``There is no middle ground,'' Susan Miller Smith said, speaking of 
trends in flower design _ although she could just as easily have been 
speaking of the market. Ms. Smith works in both maximal and minimal 
styles. For Robert Wilson's fund-raiser in August for his Watermill 
Center in Southampton, N.Y., Ms. Smith, 38, decapitated hundreds of 
white roses and laid the heads in rows on the center's bare floor 
in front of a blank wall. The minimalism of the late 90s is not the 
stark, seemingly impoverished minimalism of the early part of the 
decade. It is not the Banana Republic pocket T-shirt; it is the Banana 
Republic cashmere T-shirt. In floral terms, the minimalism of this 
moment can involve thousands of blooms, arranged in simple, pared-down, 
calmingly repetitive patterns. It is flower arranging as Prozac. It 
says you can afford indulgence, but you don't want to flaunt it, because 
the bottom could drop out at any time. Working in her maximalist mode, 
Ms. Smith recently created an over-the-top floral fantasy for the 
Upper East Side town house of William and Katharine Rayner. The Rayners' 
Christmas scene is rather loosely called ``Christmas in Jerusalem'' 
because of Ms. Rayner's collection of Tiffany vermeil palm-tree candlesticks 
and Arab-looking figurines holding still more candles. But the whole 
deal is really a great excuse to get away from red and green, and 
to use a fabulous collection of gilt animal figures: Egyptian sphinxes 
and Empire-style bullocks. Mixed in with jasmine, a black-tinged rose 
called Barcarole and furry, caramel-colored branching things called 
kangaroo paws are grapes, figs and privet berry. Like landscape architects, 
most party planners and floral designers come to their professions 
from somewhere else. Both Adler and Stark are painters. Ms. Smith 
was a psychology student supporting herself as a personal trainer, 
before she divined her true calling six years ago. ``I got so energized 
by flowers and by dirt,'' she said. Ms. Smith used cheese and bagels 
(and no flowers) as part of the Upper West Side theme for the opening 
party for the new Nora Ephron film ``You've Got Mail'' at the Museum 
of Natural History last Thursday. ``It was a portrait of the West 
Side in food, and it worked very well, very well,'' recalled Leslie 
Feeley, a private art dealer and a friend of Ms. Ephron's. ``I was 
starving.'' Another exemplar of the post-floral party designer is 
Benjamin Liu, who plans celebrations for Visionaire magazine and other 
hip downtown events. ``Flowers are irrelevant,'' Liu said, when asked 
what blooms partygoers in their late 20s prefer. ``They want them 
to go with the environment, so it doesn't look planned _ nothing too 
arranged,'' he said. ``I'd rather call it vegetation, actually. People 
might use just grass.'' But real flowers are not utterly over for 
the new party designers. When Remco Van Vliet and Cas Trap, Dutch-born 
brothers, were hired to do the decor for the opening of the new Jimmy 
Choo high-fashion shoe store recently, they set up Lucite columns 
topped with severe stainless-steel containers. And in the containers 
they stuck real flowers. ``Reds, burgundies and a deep maroon are 
what we used,'' Van Vliet, 23, said, ``especially a French amaryllis 
_ Royal Velvet. It grows four feet tall because it's raised hydroponically 
and gets 24 hours of light a day.'' The publicity agent who hired 
the brothers, Elizabeth Harrison, whose company has a number of fashion 
clients, also likes to use the designer Meredith Waga Perez to send 
flowers as thank-you gifts. For a fixed price of $40, Ms. Perez's 
business, Belle Fleur, sends out tiny, finely detailed arrangements 
in odd containers with hand-lettered calligraphy cards. ``They're 
good value, and when you order them they get there fast,'' Ms. Harrison 
said. She keeps ordering them, she added, ``because I get more phone 
calls about them than for flowers from other places.'' Belle Fleur's 
other fashion-related clientele includes corporate customers like 
Paul Smith, Donna Karan and Gucci, and others like Alexandra Von Furstenberg; 
Bonnie Fuller, the editor in chief of Glamour, and the actresses Gretchen 
Mol and Yasmine Bleeth, Ms. Perez said. Among certain old-line New 
Yorkers, those whose tastes run to understatement rather than grand 
statements, one of the most popular new floral designers is Carolyn 
Gregg. Ms. Gregg, 55, who has been in flowers for only four years, 
also has clients in publishing like Lynn Nesbit, the literary agent, 
and Arthur Carter, the publisher of The New York Observer. At Ms. 
Nesbit's home on the Upper West Side last week, Ms. Gregg did the 
flowers for a private party. A single arrangement summarized her style: 
it took her no more than five minutes to put together and consisted 
of fewer than a dozen big, fat cream roses and four or five branches 
of glossy magnolia leaves stuck in a white Victorian porcelain mantel 
ornament. Even in the elevator hall, the arrangement stopped traffic. 
It managed to be both maximal and minimal at once. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>