<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981218.0222 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When people look for nature without adornment, they often end up in 
Alaska, the American Eden. But five years ago, the governor of Alaska 
said something was horribly out of whack in the wilds of the Last 
Frontier state. There were too many wolves, he felt. Wolves eat moose, 
the preferred prey of human hunters. To keep more moose alive so they 
can be shot by predators on two feet, wolves had to be killed, the 
governor said. ``We can't just let nature run wild,'' said Gov. Walter 
Hickel, a Republican, who retired in 1994. What is it about nature, 
which supposedly answers to its own call, that is forever drawing 
people into debate over how to shape it, worship it or use it? Nature 
is constantly being invoked in one moral crusade or another, as evidence 
of the wonders of God, or as a warning about the excesses of humans. 
It has been hopelessly anthropomorphized. It has wrath, fury. It is 
art, poetry, perfection and, in bad moods, cancer. A perennial question 
in the open space of the West is whether wild horses should run free 
or be given up for adoption. Yet wild horses are not wild at all. 
They are descendants of domesticated Spanish animals brought to the 
upper Rio Grande Valley more than 400 years ago. So who has nature 
on their side? Glacier National Park in the northern Rockies may soon 
be without any glaciers. Is it a victim of a globe warmed by industrial 
society on hyperspeed, or just further natural adaptation? Or what 
about a meticulously sculptured courtyard garden? Does that have anything 
to do with the natural world, or is it just flora on a short leash? 
Certainly, the best British gardeners do not consider their hedgerows 
anything less than natural. Even philanderers of late have taken comfort 
in the new work on the sexual proclivity of animals. The new thinking 
goes: Males need promiscuity to keep the gene pool healthy; females 
crave alpha-male security (rich guys) for the same reason. The tag 
line is the same: Sorry, honey, it's nature's way. These attitudes 
are so human that they seem, well, natural. In his new book, ``Nature: 
Western Attitudes Since Ancient Times'' (University of California 
Press), the British author Peter Coates gives an exhaustively detailed 
account of the ever changing history of nature, mostly tied to the 
political goals of the times. What is surprising is how little has 
changed. ``Every culture projects its values onto nature and holds 
them up as nature's own authority,'' writes Coates, a senior lecturer 
in the Department of Historical Studies at the University of Bristol. 
Modern interpretations of nature, Coates writes, came from late 18th- 
and early 19th-century romantic poets, for whom an orchid was the 
essence of physical sublimity, but anything touched by man was outside 
the bounds of aesthetic purity. In ancient Greece, nature was viewed 
by leading philosophers as a system and not a physical thing. Human 
thought, no matter where it strayed, was as natural as a river flowing 
downhill. But of course the Greeks included that most elusive of human 
attachments _ a soul, or spirit _ in their discussion of what was 
``natural.'' Aristotle believed every living thing had a soul, but 
a human soul was different from that of, say, a bottom fish. The Romans 
continued the debate of Aristotle and others, to a point. But in the 
process of expanding and feeding their empire, they stripped much 
of the natural world bare, and their rationalizations followed. The 
areas around Rome and Athens were once heavily forested, and North 
Africa was such a fecund place that half a million tons of wheat was 
exported annually, in the first century A.D. ``Think of all the trees 
consumed by the furnaces in the ubiquitous Roman public bath,'' writes 
Coates. The Romans justified this plundering because they were creating, 
in the words of Cicero, ``a second world within the world of nature.'' 
They felt duty-bound to fashion such a construct. Rome fell, in the 
view of many modern environmental historians, because it simply expanded 
to the point of being an unsustainable beast. Others saw a moral failing, 
another persistent line of thought about nature's role. In this view, 
Roman leaders became too fat, lazy and promiscuous and lost their 
place atop the hill. What the Romans bequeathed to Europe was the 
idea that the countryside, wild and natural, was a balm for the soul. 
Sprawl was not a good thing. Cities had walls. The rural ``outside'' 
was sacred because of its material and spiritual utility. For European 
Christians, the great green saint was Francis of Assisi, who communed 
with birds, snakes and wolves in such a way that he could very likely 
win a seat on the Sierra Club board of directors today. St. Francis, 
who died in A.D. 1226, was of the school that materialism corrupts, 
because it leads to detachment from the natural world. But some historians 
have argued that when young Francis gave up his silk garments to his 
father, it was not so much a first step on the road to ecological 
divinity as it was a reaction to the excesses of a corpulent church. 
St. Francis remains a powerful figure, as any visitor to the Umbrian 
forest where he used to hike can attest. Pope John Paul II, in a 1989 
environmental address in which he cautioned against deforestation 
and global warming, praised St. Francis for keeping ``ever alive a 
sense of fraternity with all those good and beautiful things which 
almighty God has created.'' But Coates says St. Francis is one of 
the more striking examples of how figures from the past are made over 
in a modern image to suit political demands on the environment. Animal 
rights activists recite the tale of St. Francis releasing a rabbit 
from a spring trap, while green poets have made him out to be a medieval 
Wordsworth, says Coates. A century after the death of St. Francis, 
bubonic plague, or the Black Death, wiped out upward of a third of 
the population of Europe. The catastrophe has been interpreted differently 
by virtually every generation since. It was the revenge of nature 
for a world gone bad. It was nature culling itself of the weakest 
elements of society, a Darwinian view. It was an extreme example of 
what can happen when people pollute their land and rivers without 
care for consequences. Modern plagues have been similarly interpreted. 
A few years ago, Pat Buchanan, a Republican presidential candidate 
in the primary elections, said that AIDS was nature's way of punishing 
homosexuals. More recently, the television evangelist Pat Robertson 
said a hurricane might strike a community in Florida that had shown 
a bit too much tolerance for gay rights. In America, nature was long 
thought to be pristine and inviolate until the arrival of Europeans. 
The French, who coined the phrase ``noble savage'' to describe indigenous 
Americans, were particularly fond of this view. Some of today's environmentalists 
see nature's revenge in the gradual warming of the earth and its stormy 
hissy fits along the way. A hundred years ago, after the Americans 
had wiped out most of the bounteous bison of the West and removed 
the native people who had lived on those animals, there came a great 
die-out of domestic cattle. A long, bitter winter left cowboys without 
cows, and the Indians saying, ``Told you so.'' It was, many people 
still believe, nature's blow against the attempt to erase much of 
the native West. But what about the Great Plains tribes, who used 
to start big grass fires to drive bison off a cliff? By some estimates, 
up to 90 percent of a herd was wasted. It may have been natural or 
simply crafty and wasteful, no different from Roman excess. Americans 
embraced nature in a burst of nationalism around the middle of the 
last century. The Grand Canyon was sniffed at by the Spanish in the 
16th century; it rated barely a mention. But after John Wesley Powell 
breached the canyon in a wooden dory in the 1860s, the United States 
went wild over its big ditch, as Stephen J. Pyne documents in his 
new book, ``How the Canyon Became Grand: A Short History'' (Viking 
Press). Certainly, Europe had magnificent cathedrals, and Asia had 
wonders of ivory and porcelain as well as cities of layered beauty, 
but what the United States could boast about was nature _ and lots 
of it. President Jefferson had hailed the new country as ``Nature's 
nation,'' but it took the creation of the world's first national park, 
Yellowstone in 1872, to link much of the United States' identity solidly 
to the wild. Today, nature has become a commercial force; witness 
the growth of natural medicine and remedies. It is debated in the 
impeachment hearings, in the question of what is wrong but natural. 
It is evoked in the open land of the West, as wolves are reintroduced 
in an effort to restore a lost predator to the wild. Lacking a consistent 
definition, nature may simply be one of those ever ephemeral concepts, 
like news. Asked to define news, Walter Cronkite said, ``It is what 
I say it is.'' The same has long been said about nature. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>