<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981218.0240 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The trip from gown to town can be a bumpy one. Just ask anyone who 
has invested in small-capitalization stocks. According to a number 
of impressive academic studies, small-company stocks have significantly 
outperformed their larger-cap brethren over the long term _ a pattern 
known as the small-cap premium. Yet in the real world over the last 
15 years, despite spurts of outperformance, small caps have generally 
lagged behind. Consider the performance of the Dimensional Fund Advisors 
9-10 Small Co. fund, the index fund that most closely follows the 
methodology of the academic studies. It invests in the 20 percent 
of New York Stock Exchange stocks with the smallest market capitalizations, 
as well as companies of similar size on the American Stock Exchange 
and NASDAQ; such companies, on average, are much smaller than those 
in the typical small-cap fund. DFA 9-10 Small Co. produced a 10.7 
percent annualized return over the last 15 years, through Nov. 30, 
according to Lipper Inc., versus 17.2 percent for the Vanguard Index 
500, which tracks the Standard &AMP; Poor's 500-stock index, a large-cap 
benchmark. To be sure, small-cap stocks have rallied forcefully since 
August, leading some people to predict that they will soon reassert 
their historical dominance. But so far, such a belief is proving, 
as Samuel Johnson once said, to be a triumph of hope over experience. 
Impressive as the small-cap rally has been, the large caps have performed 
even better: The Index 500 gained 22.5 percent from Aug. 31 to Dec. 
11, versus 13.4 percent for the DFA fund. Several schools of thought 
have emerged to explain what is happening to the small-cap premium. 
Each appears to hold a portion of the truth. According to one school, 
it was wrong to ever think that the small-cap premium was very large 
in practice. This group says academic studies were seriously flawed 
because they ignored the higher transaction costs incurred when trading 
small stocks. Those costs are substantial, according to research by 
Donald B. Keim, a finance professor at the Wharton School of the University 
of Pennsylvania. Keim looked at the total costs of trading _ not only 
commissions and bid-asked spreads, but also the impact of trading 
on the prices of securities being bought or sold _ between 1991 and 
1993. He found that total trading costs for the buying and selling 
of the smallest stocks were sometimes more than 7 percent. For the 
largest stocks, by contrast, they were about one-half of 1 percent. 
Such costs can quickly devour the small-cap premium. According to 
Ibbotson Associates, a Chicago research firm, that advantage, before 
trading costs, was just 3 percent, annualized, from 1925 through 1981. 
(Comparable figures are difficult to obtain after 1981, when Ibbotson 
started taking trading costs into account.) Does all this mean that 
the small-cap premium was a figment of a few finance professors' misguided 
methodology? Some people say yes, but Economics 101 tells us otherwise. 
Assuming a relatively efficient market, small-cap stocks must outperform 
large caps over the long term, in order to reward investors for their 
greater risk and lower liquidity. This school holds that there must 
be a small-cap premium in reality, not just in theory. If so, transaction 
costs are at most a contributing factor in explaining the lack of 
a small-cap premium over the last 15 years. One factor that can explain 
it is the growing institutional dominance of the stock market. According 
to two Harvard professors, Paul A. Gompers and Andrew Metrick, the 
fraction of the United States stock market held by large institutions 
nearly doubled from 1980 to 1996, from 28 percent to 52 percent. But, 
for a variety of reasons _ including restrictions on what percentage 
of a company's outstanding stock such investors can hold _ only a 
tiny amount of that institutional ownership is in small caps. This 
has hurt the performance of small caps by reducing the demand for 
them, relative to large stocks. In other words, the increasing institutional 
dominance of the market has led to enormous stock market share being 
shifted from small caps into large caps. No wonder that the small 
caps have had such a hard time keeping up. The good news for small-cap 
investing is that this trend can't last forever. And when it stops, 
or reverses, large caps will no longer enjoy their performance advantage. 
No one can pinpoint when this will happen, but the longer it takes, 
I believe, the stronger the small caps' subsequent performance. Small 
caps will someday outshine large caps again. Yet even this silver 
lining is accompanied by a gloomy cloud. The small caps' relative 
advantage will not be big enough to pay the huge transaction costs 
that would accompany frequent trading. Mark Hulbert is editor of the 
Hulbert Financial Digest, a newsletter based in Alexandria, Va. His 
column on investment strategies will appear every other week. E-mail: 
strategy(AT)nytimes.com. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>