<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981218.0399 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Test-drive an electric car, and at first the sensation of quiet overwhelms 
all else _ except, perhaps, the anxiety about how much energy remains 
in the batteries. But drive an electric for a few days and subtle 
characteristics start to become obvious, such as the way the door 
over the fueling port locks (so no one can siphon your electricity?) 
or the realization that roads have sounds other than cars _ bird songs, 
for instance. And electric cars are great for sneaking up on pedestrians. 
I was driving a Toyota RAV4-EV, a small sport utility with a body 
designed for a gasoline engine but retrofitted as an electric. Toyota 
made 350 of them last year and rented them to fleet operators like 
utility companies for $457 a month; the company has not said how many 
it will build this year. My test car came from the Edison Electric 
Institute, the trade association of investor-owned utilities. With 
a body already high off the ground, the RAV4 is a good candidate for 
conversion to electricity, because there is space for the batteries 
underneath. But it is a conversion, not designed from the ground up 
for electricity _ thus the locking fuel door borrowed from the gasoline 
version. The designers were presumably not concerned that somebody 
would come along and steal the electricity. (On the RAV4, that's about 
$2 worth. But it would take you several hours to get it, and you'd 
need another electric car to dump it into.) The charging system, including 
the door, also has a psychological function; open it and you plug 
the car in with a cable that resembles a gasoline hose. The illusion 
is continued with the ignition key, which must be twisted against 
a spring just like the switch in a gasoline car, but in this case 
there is no starter motor. The RAV4 also has ``creep'' programmed 
into its drivetrain, so if the driver's foot is taken off the brake, 
the car inches ahead as if it were a gasoline model with an automatic 
transmission. Electric motors don't idle, of course, they just stop. 
But it's easier to change the software than the expectations of the 
driver. It makes you think of fuel economy differently; the RAV4 got 
3.5 miles a kilowatt-hour. A power plant can turn oil into electricity 
at the rate of about 13 kilowatt-hours a gallon; that means the RAV4 
was getting the equivalent of about 45 miles a gallon, about double 
the mileage of the gasoline version. At about 8 cents a kilowatt-hour, 
that's about 2.3 cents a mile, compared with 4 cents a mile for gasoline 
at $1 a gallon. The first question most people ask _ how far the car 
will go between charges _ becomes less important after a few days. 
The brochure for the RAV4 said 125 miles, but Richard Temchin, the 
manager of electric vehicles at the Edison Electric Institute, said 
to expect 90. A driver could obsess over this. At times you think 
you can see the charging gauge go down the way you can see a minute 
hand move on a clock, if you stare at it intently. But after a week 
you may start thinking of 90 miles as a long way to go in a typical 
day. I drove it from my home in Rockville, Md., over the Beltway to 
Arlington, Va., for a meeting, then to Washington, then home, and 
used only half the charge; that was my longest trip. True, my 1985 
Toyota Camry could have gone a lot farther and refueled in five minutes 
instead of four hours. But since the Camry is a second car and does 
not go on longer trips, the electric could easily fill its role in 
my household. There are other oddities. When I pull over to the curb 
in my old Camry to mail a letter, I wonder whether to shut it off. 
With an electric, it makes no difference, because the car doesn't 
idle. And an electric car is a great way to impress your mechanic. 
``It's a work of art,'' said mine, who works at Dave's Tune-Up Shop 
in Rockville, peering at the electronics under the hood. If I bought 
one, of course, he'd see a lot less of me. You also find hidden advantages, 
such as being able to back into the garage without pointing the tailpipe 
at the kitchen door. The RAV4 was so clean that I began to feel bad 
about parking it over the oil spot that my old Ford station wagon 
has left in the middle of the garage floor. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>