<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981218.0347 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As the acrid, rueful and righteous debate went on throughout Friday, 
the House stood poised to do what once was unimaginable, even to its 
Republican leaders: impeach a Democratic president on a near party-line 
vote, against the will of the electorate. This was not the way something 
as momentous as impeachment was supposed to take place. It was not 
what Rep. Henry Hyde, the Illinois Republican presiding over impeachment, 
had once described when he said, ``This has to be a bipartisan exercise. 
It's important that we have the confidence of the American people.'' 
On Friday, with the partisan gulf seemingly unbridgeable in the House, 
Hyde was left insisting that impeachment was not ``the ravings of 
some vindictive political crusade'' but was about protecting ``the 
basic structure of our freedoms _ the rule of law.'' Yet it was clear 
from the debate and the talk in the Capitol's corridors that a quarter 
of a century of resentments had loomed up as well: the disputes over 
the war in Vietnam and the Nixon impeachment, the personal and political 
battles over Robert Bork and John Tower, the House's own bitter fights 
over two speakers, Jim Wright and the man who forced him out, Newt 
Gingrich. Everything from the work schedule, to the redistricting 
maps, to the speeded-up news cycles of 24-hour television has played 
a role, but on Friday the House was far more like the polarized Reconstruction-era 
House that impeached Andrew Johnson of 1868 than the House that was 
ready, sorrowfully, to impeach President Richard M. Nixon when he 
resigned in 1974. And Washington politics has become meaner than ever. 
``There's live ammunition,'' said Kenneth Duberstein, a former White 
House chief of staff under President Ronald Reagan. ``You now shoot 
to destroy one side or the other. The Washington I grew up in, you 
always left somebody a side door or a back door. Now it is search 
and destroy.'' In part the polarization in the chamber known as the 
People's House is a function of political shifts that have occurred 
since Nixon departed grudgingly from the national stage. The years 
have brought about the near extinction of the southern Democrats who 
were once a swing block that could pull both parties to the center. 
``Those people disappeared,'' said Richard F. Fenno, a professor of 
political science at the University of Rochester in New York. ``They 
were the mediators, they were in the time of Watergate. And they just 
disappeared.'' So the parties in the House are divided into a largely 
southern-dominated, conservative Republican party and an urban-centered, 
Democratic party, more left-leaning than the party at large. This 
time the moderate Republicans, from districts that also voted for 
Clinton, were supposed to be the bridge between the parties. But one 
after another, after weeks of agonizing, most of them said they had 
decided to vote for impeachment. Congressional redistricting has also 
heightened divisions as the two parties in state houses across the 
nation have conspired to create a maximum number of ``safe seats'' 
that cluster together either Republican or Democratic voters. And 
both the voter apathy of recent years and the candidates' needs for 
campaign funds for television ads have made House members more responsive 
to their parties' most loyal _ and most partisan _ voters. ``Certainly 
in the mid-term election, as in this election, you want to play to 
the hard-core,'' said Charles O. Jones, professor emeritus of political 
science at the University of Wisconsin. These factors have created 
a stark divide on emotional issues from abortion, to school prayer, 
to welfare policy to tax cutting. Also adding to the polarization 
was the uncompromising ways of the conservative Republican class of 
1994, which came into office with a sharp ideological agenda and a 
sense of urgency coming from term limits and little experience in 
government. But all of this only partly explains the raw, angry emotion 
wafting through the House on Friday. For much of it is also due to 
the meanness of post-Watergate politics and political journalism. 
The search for scandal has become so dominant in campaigns that rafts 
of operatives specialize in ``opposition research'' that no longer 
focuses on forgotten votes or speeches but on the scouring of private 
lives that began when Gary Hart was asked if he had committed adultery. 
Tellingly, this now also the era of the independent counsel. ``Now 
we are routinely using criminal accusations and scandal to win the 
political battles and ideological differences we cannot settle at 
the ballot box,'' said Rep. Charles Schumer, New York's senator-elect. 
``It has been used with reckless abandon by both Democrats and Republicans 
and we are now at a point where we risk, deeply risk wounding the 
nation we all love.'' Almost every member of Congress had a theory 
of when this all began. Perhaps it was when the Democrats refused 
to confirm John Tower and Robert Bork. Perhaps it was the wedge politics 
practiced by the late Republican, Lee Atwater. Many Democrats blamed 
Newt Gingrich, who in his ascent to speaker constantly accused Democrats 
of corruption and forced the resignation of a former Democratic speaker, 
Jim Wright, on ethics charges. Many Republicans say it is Clinton 
himself who did so much to bring about this mood through his embrace 
of the idea of government as a permanent campaign, with a war room 
on every issue and White House aides who practice ``quick response'' 
politics playing to the news cycles. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>