<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981218.0478 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Uncovering what it called a caviar smuggling scheme worth millions 
of dollars, the federal government Friday indicted three men, two 
of whom run a distributing company that supplies caviar to retail 
shops and restaurants in New York City, as well as throughout the 
country. The distributors, based in Stamford, Conn., were charged 
in U.S. District Court in Brooklyn with illegally smuggling thousands 
of pounds of Russian sturgeon roe into the United States from Poland. 
The indictment accuses the company, Gino International, of transporting 
some of the supply by hiding it in luggage on many commercial flights 
from Poland to Kennedy International Airport. None of the caviar was 
refrigerated, the authorities said, nor could proper papers for the 
caviar be produced. The government would not disclose the names of 
retailers or restaurants that buy caviar from the company, only that 
it was one of the largest distributors in the area. The government 
seized some of the caviar at Kennedy, where federal agents and inspectors 
have been enforcing tough new international caviar regulations intended 
to stop the flow of illegally harvested caviar. The operation at the 
airport has intensified over the holiday season _ the peak time to 
indulge in caviar _ and has roiled the lucrative caviar industry. 
Until recently, it was not difficult to import mislabeled, old, previously 
frozen or black-market caviar into the United States. The government 
says such caviar amounts to 50 percent of the trade. But now, agents 
from the United States Fish and Wildlife Service who are enforcing 
the regulations can easily test the DNA of a single egg, revealing 
whether caviar is, in fact, the grade, provenance and variety promised 
on its label. Locally, retailers and chefs are scrambling to destroy 
questionable caviar and replenish their holiday stocks. Industry sources 
say that more than nine tons of caviar is sold in the city between 
Thanksgiving and New Year's Eve, and up to $10 million is spent on 
the delicacy. In Friday's indictment, Zachary Carter, the U.S. attorney 
for the Eastern District of New York, brought charges against Eugeniusz 
Koczuk, the owner of Gino International; his business associate, Wieslaw 
Rozbicki, and Andrezej Lepkowski, of Warsaw, Poland, a man the government 
said recruited couriers to smuggle the caviar. Each man was charged 
with seven counts related to smuggling endangered wildlife into the 
United States. If convicted, each could face a fine of as much as 
$250,000 and a maximum of five years in prison on each count. In addition 
to destroying the 2,000 pounds of unlawfully imported caviar they 
seized, the government is requesting up to $2 million in restitution 
for sales of illegal caviar before to the seizure. All three were 
released on bonds. Leaving the courthouse, Koczuk, speaking through 
a translator, would say only: ``This is all a big misunderstanding 
that will be made clear soon.'' Last April, the United States joined 
140 other nations to enforce caviar importing regulations drafted 
by the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of 
Wild Fauna and Flora, called Cites (pronounced SIGHT-ease). Carter 
said that the United States is the world's leading importer of caviar. 
More than 80 tons of caviar __ with a declared wholesale value of 
$1,889,911.00 and a retail value of as much as to five times that 
much _ is legally imported into the United States each year. Uncounted 
additional tons are concealed in suitcases, packed in shipping containers, 
or shipped through the mail without permits and are most likely black 
market products. Throughout the caviar industry, a markup of 100 percent 
is not uncommon. Black market caviar can be marked up as much as 500 
percent _ and still cost less than legitimately imported caviar. Most 
retailers responded to questions about Friday's indictments with shock, 
fear and rage. ``It's a terribly unfortunate thing when people do 
things like this,'' said Saul Zabar of Zabar's, whose store on Manhattan's 
Upper West Side has long waged holiday caviar price wars with Macy's. 
He said his store has taken ``every action to protect the public.'' 
But the seven-count indictment indicates that millions of illegal 
fish eggs have been smuggled into the country. Recovering them all 
evokes visions of needles in haystacks. On numerous occasions, the 
indictment says, the three defendants conspired to smuggle shipments 
of caviar by concealing them in the luggage of airline passengers, 
whom they paid a $500 courier fee. None of the passengers have been 
charged. In fact, Gino International is accused of having sold 1,900 
pounds of caviar _ with a retail value of more than $5 million _ between 
April 1, 1998, and Nov. 3, 1998. The company, however, received necessary 
government permission to import only one shipment of 88 pounds of 
caviar, the indictment says. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>