<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981218.0429 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After three days of the air assault on Iraq, the Pentagon indicated 
Friday that it had fired some 300 cruise missiles at Iraqi targets 
but had severely damaged or destroyed only 18 of the 88 sites they 
hit. Iraqi President Saddam Hussein showed defiance toward the United 
States in his first televised address since the attacks began, calling 
his attackers ``the agents of Satan.'' U.S. military planes rained 
thousands of leaflets on Iraq warning ground troops that if they mobilized 
they would face bombing raids from the forces assembled on aircraft 
carriers in the Persian Gulf and at bases scattered around the region. 
President Clinton was scheduled to meet Saturday with his national 
security advisers to talk about how long the air campaign would continue, 
but the Pentagon suggested the bombing would go on into the weekend. 
In Iraq, at about 4 a.m. Saturday (8 p.m. Friday Eastern time), another 
air raid was reported under way in Baghdad, according to news services 
dispatches from the Iraqi capital. At a briefing Friday afternoon, 
the military released the first detailed assessment of the damage 
inflicted on Iraq in the largest military strike ever ordered by Clinton. 
While refusing to say exactly how many laser-guided cruise missiles 
and conventional bombs were hurled against Iraq this week, Gen. Henry 
Shelton, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said more cruise 
missiles were launched in the first two days of the air campaign than 
the 290 or so missiles that were showered on Iraq in 1991. Each of 
the flying, computer-guided bombs costs about $1 million. Cruise missiles 
were not the main weapon of the 1991 air war against Iraq, which relied 
much more heavily on bombs dropped from B-52 airplanes. But Pentagon 
planners are anxious to keep the risk of casualties to an absolute 
minimum in this operation, and cruise missiles do not require human 
pilots or crews. Cruise missiles also present a lower risk of civilian 
casualties in Iraq, since they are far more accurate than bombs dropped 
from overhead, even laser-guided bombs. Shelton, seeming anxious not 
to offer the sort of inflated damage assessments that embarrassed 
the Pentagon during the gulf war, acknowledged that the results of 
the U.S. and British air campaign had been mixed so far. Initial reports 
from the first two nights of air strikes on Iraq showed that the Pentagon 
was able to confirm that only 18 of the 88 targets had been severely 
damaged or destroyed. The targets included military command centers, 
missile factories, television and radio transmitters and an oil refinery 
in the southern Iraq city of Basra, which the United States said was 
being used for oil exports in violation of United Nations economic 
sanctions. ``We have had some very good success with our strikes, 
but not all of them have gone exactly as planned,'' Shelton said at 
a news conference in the Pentagon, where he released videotape of 
laser-guided bombs slamming into a variety of targets. Senior Clinton 
administration officials continued to insist that the goal of its 
military campaign was not to to destabilize the Iraqi government or 
encourage a coup against Saddam. But the Pentagon confirmed reports 
by the Iraqi government that U.S. warplanes had dropped tens of thousands 
of leaflets on Iraqi troops in the southern part of the country, informing 
them that ``only those units that support the Baghdad regime'' are 
being targeted for attack by U.S. missiles and bombers. The leaflets, 
which were printed in Arabic, bore photographs of the charred hulks 
of Iraqi tanks destroyed during the 1991 gulf war. ``Your unit has 
not been targeted but it is being watched,'' the leaflets said, warning 
the soldiers not to mobilize. At the same time, Radio Free Iraq, the 
seven-week-old U.S.-sponsored radio network beamed into Iraq and described 
by the Iraqi government as an anti-Saddam propaganda machine, said 
that it had expanded its programming to Iraq to four hours a day. 
Spokesmen for the Arabic-language radio network insisted that the 
programs were straightforward news broadcasts but acknowledged that 
they also reported on the activities of Iraqi opposition groups. In 
releasing its bombing reports Friday, the United States said that 
it had targeted television and radio transmission towers in hopes 
of cutting off communication from the central government in Baghdad 
to Iraqi troops and the public, and it was unclear how many Iraqis 
may have seen Saddam's defiant television address. In the speech, 
the Iraqi leader, dressed in a military uniform and seated beside 
an Iraqi flag, with an enormous bouquet of red flowers on the table 
in front of him, offered fierce words that contrasted sharply what 
U.S. military officials have described as the feeble response of his 
military to the air strikes. ``By God, we will not compromise,'' he 
thundered in the taped address, which was broadcast shortly before 
air-raid sirens sounded in Baghdad to mark the start of the third 
night of air strikes. ``We stand against the barbaric way of those 
that have used our airspace to launch an aggression against our people. 
A curse on the agents of Satan.'' He asked Iraqis to ``continue resistance 
and attack in the name of God and may the criminals lose.'' He added, 
``We will fear nothing but God and we will not kneel except to the 
face of God.'' Military commanders at the Pentagon said Friday night 
they were closely studying new bombing reports from the third day 
of air strikes to determine when they they could halt the air campaign, 
which they hope to do this weekend given the imminent start of Ramadan, 
the month of religious reflection that begins Saturday and is the 
holiest time in the Islamic calendar. ``We are sensitive to the issue 
of Ramadan and will take that into account,'' Defense Secretary William 
Cohen said in an interview Friday night on CNN. ``But there is no 
fixed end time. We have to keep some flexibility'' He said that the 
air strikes would continue until the United States and Britain determined 
that the bombing had accomplished done significant damage to Iraq's 
ability to make chemical and biological weapons. ``Once those missions 
are completed, the mission will end,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>