<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981218.0416 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A government advisory group has voted to give a clean bill of health 
to the artificial sweetener saccharin, which, despite its pink-packeted 
presence on restaurant tables everywhere, has been classified since 
1981 as a suspected cause of cancer. The group, the executive committee 
of the National Toxicology Program, voted 6 to 3 at a meeting Wednesday 
to recommend that saccharin be removed from the government's list 
of suspected carcinogens, said a scientist who attended the meeting 
and who spoke on the condition of anonymity. The toxicology program 
is part of the Department of Health and Human Services, and its role 
is to coordinate government programs that evaluate the safety of chemicals 
to which people are exposed, including substances like saccharin that 
are added to foods. The program is based in Research Triangle Park, 
N.C. The committee's vote is not the final word on saccharin, but 
it carries weight with policymakers. The vote will be considered by 
the toxicology agency director, Dr. Kenneth Olden, who is to make 
a recommendation about saccharin in a Report on Carcinogens that will 
be presented next summer to Donna Shalala, secretary of Health and 
Human Services, and later to Congress. Officials at the toxicology 
agency declined to comment on the vote, said a spokeswoman, Sandra 
Lange. The reason for secrecy was not clear, and several scientists 
who attended the meeting said they were puzzled by it. Ms. Lange said 
meeting participants had been instructed not to disclose the vote 
because executive committee meetings are not public and it is the 
executive committee's policy to keep its proceedings confidential. 
The committee action followed votes by three other advisory groups 
that had been asked to evaluate saccharin studies in people and animals. 
Two of the other groups, comprising government scientists, had also 
recommended that saccharin be taken off the official list of suspected 
carcinogens. But a panel of non-government experts on carcinogens 
that met in October 1997 voted 4 to 3 to keep saccharin on the list. 
The toxicology agency's executive committee was asked to take all 
the earlier results into account when voting. The votes were part 
of a review process that began in September 1996 when the Calorie 
Control Council, an Atlanta-based trade group for the diet-food industry, 
petitioned the toxicology program to have saccharin removed from the 
list of ``anticipated,'' or likely, carcinogens. In past years, the 
toxicology program has removed seven substances from the list, either 
because the evidence of danger was judged insufficient, or because 
people in the United States were not exposed to the chemicals, said 
Dr. William Jameson, head of the Report on Carcinogens Group of the 
toxicology program. About 200 chemicals are now on the list. Jameson 
said that if saccharin is taken off, it will be the first compound 
to be removed by means of a review process as rigorous as the one 
required to put a substance on the list in the first place. Saccharin 
was first singled out as a possible carcinogen in 1977 by a Canadian 
researcher. The Food and Drug Administration sought to ban it, but 
consumers, who would have been left without any artificial sweeteners, 
protested. Cyclamates, another sweetener, had been banned as carcinogenic. 
Ultimately, Congress refused to ban on saccharin, but required warning 
labels. The results of the four recent votes on saccharin, none of 
which was unanimous, reflect the fact that, despite years of research, 
scientists still disagree about how to interpret the data. Most studies 
in people have not found a link between saccharin and cancer, but 
a few did suggest a connection to an increased risk of bladder cancer. 
But researchers say that even those studies indicate that if saccharin 
is carcinogenic, it is only weakly so. In rats, high doses of saccharin 
do cause bladder cancer, but Dr. Samuel Cohen, a pathologist at the 
University of Nebraska, says he has found that the saccharin is interacting 
with a component in rat urine that is not found in human urine. Therefore, 
Cohen says, the rat studies have no bearing on people. Other scientists 
have questioned that assertion, and countered that tumors might still 
form in people by some other mechanism. Saccharin accounts for about 
one-third of the artificial sweetener sold in the United States. (Most 
of the rest is aspartame, sold as Nutrasweet and Equal.) The main 
ingredient in the popular sugar substitute Sweet 'N Low, saccharin 
is also added to diet pastries, candies, chewing gum, toothpaste, 
mouthwash, salad dressing and other products. But foods containing 
it must carry warning labels that state: ``Use of this product may 
be hazardous to your health. This product contains saccharin, which 
has been determined to cause cancer in laboratory animals.'' Striking 
saccharin from the carcinogen list does not mean that the warnings 
would be dropped immediately: They are required by law. But taking 
saccharin off the list might open the door to getting rid of them. 
The Center for Science in the Public Interest, a consumer health group 
based in Washington, strongly criticized the move to remove saccharin 
from the list. Dr. Michael Jacobson, director of the center, said 
the government had been unduly influenced by the diet-food industry. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>