<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981218.2000.0872 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Impeachment conspiracy or not, was also topic number one in Washington 
today, where the House of Representatives debated impeaching President 
Clinton for transgressions in his attempt to conceal an affair with 
a former White House intern Monica Lewinsky. The World's Emily Harris 
joins us now from Washington. Emily, just a few moments ago, we heard 
some of the comments from the floor. How volatile are things down 
there today? EMILY HARRIS: Well, it actually seems a bit more restrained 
than some of the rhetoric we've seen leading up to this, particularly 
some of the rhetoric Wednesday and Thursday as the bombing attack 
on Iraq was just beginning and there was an impassioned plea by the 
Democrats, impassioned and angry, trying to put this off for another 
few days. But it's definitely still very partisan, very strong. People 
are making their points. Most members are speaking for two to four 
minutes at a time and making very succinct points and sticking to 
largely the arguments we've heard before the Democrats were saying, 
it's inappropriate to do this at this time with the bombing campaign 
in Iraq and of course that these are not impeachable offenses, even 
if they could be prosecuted in a criminal court of law, even if they 
are morally inappropriate. Still, they don't rise to the level of 
impeachment. That's the Democrat's argument. The Republicans are reiterating 
what they've been saying for a long time which in fact is the argument 
that they are impeachable, that the President has lost the basic trust 
of the country and that they must go forward. MULLINS: Talk a little 
bit more about that. The saying of course is that no house divided 
against itself can stand. Are there any Republicans who are expressing 
doubts about the debate taking place today? HARRIS: No so much that, 
but there are a few Republicans who have come out publicly saying 
that they will vote against impeachment. But the numbers really stack 
up right pretty much down the party line. And there's some people 
on the House floor who have addressed that, who have, Democrats notably, 
who have said that a partisan, such a partisan impeachment process 
is, will hurt the country for a long time, that that should be taken 
into consideration when you try to evaluate whether this is an appropriate 
process or not. But as far as the concerns about doing it today, not 
hearing a lot of that from the GOP. We heard earlier from Martin Frost 
of Texas who was saying that the case against the President was trivial 
and that if similar investigations of this scale were staged against 
members of the House rumored to have had affairs, there would be, 
soon be just a few empty seats. Well, that was directed I think largely 
at the revelations that came out recently that Bob Livingston, the 
incoming speaker of the House, had an affair. And he made, he spoke 
about that yesterday with party members, but he drew very clear lines. 
He felt that his situation was different because he did not lie under 
oath. He was not part of a court case and he was not put in that situation 
and did not lie when he was asked in court. But there's a - then Henry 
Hyde, in the last few weeks, was publicly, had to publicly admit infidelity. 
So the message there, yeah, people in glass houses shouldn't throw 
stones is there but one of the most memorable points of today's debate 
point at the very, very beginning when the gentleman presiding over 
it, Ray LaHood gave a reminder that the rules of the House do not 
allow a general personal abuse of language against a president or 
against any member of either House of Congress and he was booed. This 
is not what you hear very often on the House of Representatives floor. 
He was booed by those, by those... Democrats. I couldn't actually 
tell which side it was coming from, but it was definitely from one 
side and it seemed to be more likely the Democrats. Well, given that 
kind of start, I wonder if there's any sense that there's actual genuine 
debate happening here. Well, for this whole story, I mean there's 
been, comparisons have been made again and again of course to Watergate 
and the sense of the country that there were no discoveries being 
made every day, both the Judiciary hearings and of course we didn't 
get this far with Watergate and that there was a story that you needed 
to hang onto. There's a feeling in Washington that we know everything. 
We know the details of this. Nothing new is going to come out and 
yeah, this is to a degree a showcase rather than a debate, something 
we'll have to get through. But people are in fact making their points 
and they certainly want this opportunity to make them. And very briefly, 
Emily, what happens next? Next it presumably goes through, which it 
should on Saturday. There should be a vote. The Senate will not be 
back this year. A Senate trial will likely start in January. MULLINS: 
The World's Emily Harris, speaking to us from Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>