<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981218.2000.2503 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It has been a busy week for foreign journalists who are covering American 
news. As the President commands an air assault on Iraq, the House 
of Representatives is debating impeachment. From Capitol Hill to the 
United Nations to Baghdad, reporters are trying to keep up those fast 
changing stories and one of those reporters is who is the New York-based 
diplomatic correspondent for the Arab daily Al-Hayat which is published 
out of London. the past couple of days, I can pretty safely assume 
have been hectic ones in the life of a diplomatic correspondent. Could 
you tell us what angles you're focusing on now following two nights 
of bombardment of Baghdad and today's impeachment hearings. I actually 
today have been working on a very interesting dimension of this that's 
surrounding the world to pretty much not only Washington and Baghdad. 
I'm tackling the issue from the point of view as to who wants whom 
ousted and how and we know that of course President Clinton is facing 
impeachment and so he is resisting efforts to oust him. Saddam Hussein 
from his point of view of course and as it's been made clear to us, 
is facing attempts by the administration to replace his regime and 
he is holding on and saying I won't be ousted. And Richard Butler, 
the UNSCOM chief, is saying I will not resign and he's hoping that 
he's not ousted. So you're looking at kind of a three-pronged effect 
here. I wonder that when you're righting particularly about the assault 
on Baghdad, do you find yourself having to by necessity also write 
about the impeachment and the controversy concerning the timing of 
this. Can you write about one without writing about the other? Well, 
you know, in the case of covering the United Nations security council 
deliberations, yes, but then immediately the interaction between the 
two takes place but as I said, it's the battle of holding onto power 
that is very prominent in my writing today. Also of course whether 
UNSCOM has any future going back into Iraq. And I'm tackling also 
the angle that if there is no swift action in terms of the operation 
of the military operation, how much will the Arab and Islamic reaction 
be so muted. Already I'm hearing now voices of criticism. I wonder 
if it seems as though impeachment is looming large in terms of the 
timing of the bombings. In your own coverage and the view from some 
of your Al-Hayat readers. In my coverage, I honestly have to believe 
one has to be as fair as possible. I don't think that it came without 
reason and that the bombardment started. I do believe that Iraq has 
crossed the red line back in October. However, I believe that the 
decision by the President, President Clinton then, was to say, yes 
I want priority for diplomacy backed by force. That was in his November 
decision not to go ahead and bombard. Through that last month since, 
Iraq has really cooperated on the substance. Where they went wrong 
again, was in defying of some minute minor things knowing that this 
is going to result in the necessity of showing power and we just overplayed 
that card as usual. However, yes, I bring it to impeachment yes. In 
my mind, there is the bit of a relationship I don't think it is that 
relationship, but in the larger sentiment at large if you will, it 
is a more immediate link between the two. So then in terms of your 
own coverage, how do you say it differs perhaps in that regard from 
the kind of coverage that you see in your here in the United States? 
Is there a substantial difference? Yes, because I point out to the 
what,, the exit strategy, whether operations accomplish a degrading 
of the regime of disintegration of that infrastructure of the regime 
in Baghdad and if they succeed, operations in doing that, what would 
happen, what's the substitute? How is to be in Iraq in charge and 
if they fail to bring about weakening, a fundamental weakening of 
the regime, also then what? Whereas I think in the U.S. it is much 
concentrated on America going to war somewhere. You see this is sort 
of on television, it's live coverage, war brought to you by the United 
States and the United Kingdom. It's war in Iraq and there are other 
cameras by other networks that are showing what's happening but it's 
not so distant. It's there. It's in their midst. It's about their 
people. It's about the Iraq people who have once again I have to say 
been the loser through sanctions, through military bombardment, through 
the lack of strategy and through unclarity of purpose and policy. 
is the New York-based diplomatic correspondent for the Arab daily 
Al-Hayat published out of London. thank you. I thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>