<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981218.2000.0531 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We go to Washington in a few minutes for an update on the impeachment 
debate. But first, the latest on the continuing U.S. and British air 
strikes against Iraq. The BBC's Richard Downs is in the Iraqi capital 
and he says so far today it appears that Baghdad has not been hit. 
RICHARD DOWNS: We're in Baghdad here. It looks like some of the targets 
must have been around the country. We've heard the air raid sirens 
going off. These are the usual preludes to an air strike, although 
we haven't heard any sounds of anti-aircraft fire or anything that 
usually is a prelude to air strikes. So the bombing must be going 
on around the country or else it's on its way to us here. MULLINS: 
What about the official word that's come down today. We know that 
Iraq's deputy prime minister Tariq Aziz gave a press conference earlier 
today. Can you tell us the gist of what he said? DOWNS: Well, absolutely. 
He said that this crisis, this conflict was a conspiracy conjured 
up between the United States and Richard Butler, the head of the UN 
inspection team. And the aim of that conspiracy he said, was to keep 
President Clinton from being impeached. He said it was the final report 
of Mr. Butler, you know, detailing the lack of Iraqi cooperation which 
finally precipitated this conflict and he's described the American 
president and the British prime minister as liars and Zionists. It 
was quite an outspoken performance on the part of Tariq Aziz. He also, 
interestingly gave us some details as to which areas and which parts 
of the country were being hit and they included quite a few unusual 
or surprising targets. MULLINS: There have been pictures on television, 
in the newspapers today of some of the damage, the more serious damage 
in what appears to be some of the residential neighborhoods. Richard, 
have you been able to see those areas for yourself? Have you been 
able to walk around some of the civilian areas that were badly hit? 
DOWNS: No, everything we do here is very heavily controlled by the 
Iraqi government so we're not free in any way to go and make an independent 
assessment of what exactly has been going on. However, I have seen 
damage at a hospital in the center of Baghdad. This is one of the 
biggest teaching hospitals in the country and there was obviously 
a bomb blast, an explosion quite near the hospital. It certainly wasn't 
hit in any way by missile but there was obviously a shock wave or 
something which dislodged hundreds of windows, left glass all over 
the place, frightened patients without injuring anyone and the Iraqis 
were pointing to this as a very ominous development. They say that 
the U.S. and Britain are actually targeting civilians rather than 
as the U.S. and Britain say, just military infrastructure. MULLINS: 
There have been reports which first came from Iraqi officials that 
the United States and British air craft have been dropping leaflets 
over southern Iraq and they are specifically targeting regular army 
troops. Do you know anything about these leaflets? Have you seen any 
of them or heard much about them? DOWNS: No. We've asked the information 
ministry who told us about this very early today. We've asked them 
for copies of the leaflets so that we can have a look at them and 
check their authenticity. We haven't actually had any word back from 
the ministry of information. And we're very anxiously keeping an eye 
out on the situation there. That would certainly seem to indicate 
if they are dropping leaflets and flyers of various sorts in the south 
of the country, urging an uprising which is what the ministry of information 
has been saying. But perhaps the war aims or the aims of the British 
and the Americans are not quite as clear as they say they are. We've 
got another indication that that might be the case as well on the 
part of Tariq Aziz,, the deputy prime minister here. He's been telling 
us that the oil refinery in Bazara has been attacked by American and 
British forces and of course oil is the life blood of Iraq and the 
fact that this installation would have been attacked is a very serious 
development indeed and would indicate if it is true that the objectives 
in this war are somewhat wider than have been previously stated. I 
don't know whether you can hear in the background we're getting more 
air raid warnings here. People here are expecting an attack imminently. 
I think this is the third or fourth wave of air raid warnings we've 
been getting and they are generally, as I say, a prelude to some sort 
of a physical attack. MULLINS: At the same time, I can hear in the 
background apparently a lot of traffic moving along. Are people heading 
out to shelters or what does it seem that's going on out there? DOWNS: 
Well, no, there isn't a lot of traffic on the streets. It's been thinning 
out as darkness fell in Baghdad and there is very little traffic by 
Baghdad standards on the street. This is one of the main arteries 
of the city. It's usually choked with traffic, even on Friday, the 
Muslin holy day, but people have generally gone home a lot earlier 
than they would usually do. They're staying at home. They're bunkering 
down. They're not going out at night and they're looking after their 
families and making sure everyone is safe. MULLINS: Let me ask you 
one other brief question about something that's happening very far 
away from there. In Washington, D.C. of course, the impeachment debate 
has been going on today. Is there any kind of reference to that at 
all among the people that you've been talking with, any kind of discussion 
about it? DOWNS: Oh yes, indeed. It's captured the imagination of 
people here as well. In Iraq, the Iraqi official media have started 
to call this, operation Monica, believe it or not, not operation desert 
fox as the United States and Britain have been calling it. Tariq Aziz 
of course has taken the lead in this earlier today. The deputy prime 
minister said basically that the whole conflict here was a conspiracy 
as I mentioned conjured up between the United States and Richard Butler, 
the head of the UN inspection team. And the aim, the simple aim of 
that conspiracy was to keep President Clinton from impeachment and 
I think that's something that many people here will believe. They 
think it's just too coincidental that the air strikes happened just 
days before the impeachment hearings in Washington. MULLINS: The BBC's 
Richard Downs in Baghdad. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>