<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981218.2000.2007 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
U.S. and British war planes launched a third wave of strikes against 
Iraq today, targeting television transmitters, oil facilities and 
other sites. Iraq has been under attack since Wednesday when President 
Clinton ordered the strikes to punish Baghdad for obstructing UN weapons 
inspectors. Pentagon officials say the objective of the military action 
is to diminish Saddam Hussein's ability to build nuclear, biological 
and chemical weapons. Former under secretary of defense for policy 
Paul is in Washington. Well, I think the first thing to note is they've 
set an extremely low goal because they're not sure they can accomplish 
anything. Unfortunately, by delay and delay and delay, the United 
States got itself in a position where if the President had failed 
to act this time, he and the United States would have lost all credibility 
in the Gulf and with Iraq. And so we had to do something. But I think 
also failed to build up serious options and I believe the only really 
serious options are options that recognize that ultimately liberating 
Iraq from Saddam Hussein grasp is the solution to the problems. By 
failing to develop that they really don't have an effective political 
framework or effective strategy for the use of force. So I'm afraid 
that to some extent we're going to see the military operation that 
is largely pointless. But if indeed it is a feckless strategy, what 
is the reason behind that. I mean certainly there's been enough provocation 
on the part of Iraq, at least according to the administration that 
it would have had time to plan some kind of strategy. Where is the 
fault line? I think what you need to do is to really punish Saddam 
Hussein. In blowing up buildings that are probably largely empty, 
by the time we attack them, doesn't really punish him. What would 
really punish him would be to reduce his control over his own people 
in his own country and we've already or largely the Kurds through 
their own efforts have managed to do that in northern Iraq. I think 
we had this opportunity. We should have been using it to support opposition 
forces in southern Iraq and to begin to wrest Saddam's control over 
that part of the country as well. What do you think the reasoning 
is for the fact that there seems to be a limited amount of response 
coming from the troops within Iraq itself? Why are we not hearing 
much about retaliatory fire? There's not much to retaliate with. Their 
air defenses are terribly weak. I mean we do see a lot of that fireworks 
you see in the sky over Baghdad are the ineffective air defenses. 
But we demonstrated during the Gulf war that we have the capability 
to suppress most of that. The fact is and the irony is at this point 
I believe Saddam is in many ways very weak and if we give some more 
active support to the millions of Iraqis who would like to be rid 
of this monster, I believe we could set a process and train that would 
overthrow him. I'm afraid in fact of what our American policy is eventually 
going to lead however is to his revival as an effective ruler of Iraq 
and a serious threat to his neighbors and ultimately perhaps even 
to the United States. In terms of your own history and involvement 
in strikes such as this, you are the principal civilian official responsible 
for strategy during the Gulf War. How do you compare the military 
strategy then with today's operations? I think then President Bush 
set very, very clear objectives for the U.S. military. It was to get 
Saddam Hussein out of Kuwait. We developed very, very clear plans 
to do it. We executed those plans and did so very successfully. I 
think in this case we've set a very fuzzy standard of degrading his 
capabilities. So I think there's an enormous difference. Having said 
that, let me say I do acknowledge I believe that we made a mistake 
in March of 1991 in not recognizing after the Iraqi army had been 
evicted from Kuwait which was the objective we set out to accomplish 
that by that time we had created in Saddam Hussein a man who was so 
dangerous that we should have been supporting the opposition when 
they did rebel in the Euphrates valley in northern Iraq in 1991. That's 
what we should have done then. Those are the conditions we should 
be trying to recreate now. Dr. thank you very much. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>