<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981218.2000.1190 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As if Russia hadn't already made its opinion of operation Desert Fox 
clear, today the the communist dominated lower House of parliament 
passed a resolution calling the United States and Britain international 
terrorists. The Duma also called on President Boris Yeltsin to abandon 
UN sanctions against Iraq. Also today, Russia recalled its ambassador 
to Britain for urging consultations over the Iraqi air strikes. That 
follows yesterday's recall of the Russian ambassador to the United 
States. All this activity suggests that relations between Washington 
and Moscow may be at their lowest point since the end of the cold 
war. The World's Patrick Cox reports. Russia's relations with the 
United States have had their ups and downs since the breakup of the 
Soviet Union, but not in decades has Moscow recalled its ambassador 
to Washington. U.S. Secretary of State Madelaine Albright didn't try 
to downplay the gravity of the Russian's action. It's unfortunate 
that they have done that. We regret it. We are not recalling our ambassador. 
We obviously disagree about the use of force in Iraq but we have a 
very important relationship with the Russians and we will continue 
to manage that relationship. We will cooperate where we can and manage 
our differences. I think that Iraq is just one aspect of this. But 
for Russia, a highly important one. Economic sanctions on Iraq are 
biting into Russia's already woeful economy and Baghdad owes Moscow 
billions of dollars. Perhaps with that in mind, Russian leaders today 
denounced the bombing raids. Russian President Boris Yeltsin called 
them impermissible according to his spokesman Dimitri Yakushkin. He's 
very much annoyed by what happened. He thinks that everything will 
be done to stop all military actions against Iraq and to return to 
a political dialogue on this issue. Outside the U.S. embassy in Moscow, 
ultra nationalist leader Vladimir Zhirinovsky raged against what he 
called U.S. global imperialism. Zhirinovsky's protest though attracted 
barely 40 supporters. Still on the streets of Moscow today, there 
were plenty of harsh words for the bombing raids. As a Russian citizen, 
I say it's entirely out of order. I'm against the U.S. attack. I heard 
about the casualty and saw pictures of a wounded man in an Iraqi hospital. 
It's scary. It's terrible. They can come and bomb us now if Russia 
did something they didn't like. Of course, it's scary. Imagine if 
you come home from work and drink your tea and all of a sudden all 
hell breaks lose. I'm against the war. The Arabs should unite and 
stand up against America. Russia may be less able to stand up against 
America. It desperately needs billions of dollars in credit from the 
International Monetary Fund and Kremlin budget chiefs know how influential 
their American counterparts can be in helping secure those credits. 
But that doesn't mean Russia's doing nothing. The country's military 
leadership today said the Iraq crisis was pushing Russia into a security 
rethink which could create a cold war style divide and the Russian 
parliament has shelved plans to ratify the START II Treaty that would 
reduce nuclear arms. In the longer term, the concerns may be greater 
still. Joint U.S./Russian projects to safely store nuclear material 
to turn the former Soviet Union's massive biological and chemical 
weapons programs into peaceful research enterprises and to train the 
guards who protect those former weapons plants. All these efforts 
may slow down. That's particularly worrying says Jessica Stern former 
director of Russian, Ukrainian and Eurasian affairs at the National 
Security Council, in light of evidence that a handful of Russian nuclear 
and bio-weapons scientists may be exporting their expertise to among 
other countries, Iran. The possible proliferation of nuclear materials 
or possibly even nuclear weapons and chemical weapons and expertise 
and in particular biological weapons expertise poses very grave threats 
to the international community and the more Russia feels itself to 
be isolated, the more likely the economy is to go into hyper inflation, 
the graver the risk to the international community, because it becomes 
harder and harder for the Russian government to prevent the kind of 
proliferation that we have been seeing. The U.S./Russian relationship 
has weathered plenty of turbulence in recent years. Stern remains 
optimistic that both sides can ride out this crisis too. I think it's 
temporary. We really need Russia, but Russia really needs us as well. 
As if to underscore that mutually beneficial relationship, the State 
Department announced that Secretary of State Albright spoke with her 
Russian counterpart today and that she still intends to go ahead with 
the planned trip to Moscow next month. For the World, this is Patrick 
Cox. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>