<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981218.2000.2903 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For only the second time in history, the House of Representatives 
today debating impeaching a president. Bill Clinton stands accused 
of committing perjury before a grand jury and in the Paul Jones lawsuit, 
obstructing justice and abusing his presidential powers, all in his 
effort to conceal his sexual relationship with a former White House 
intern. Republicans today called for the President's ouster for betraying 
the public's trust. Democrats urged a lesser punishment and said it 
was wrong to begin the debate during the ongoing U.S. military action 
in Iraq. Polls show more than 60 percent of Americans oppose impeaching 
the President. We don't know what the figure is for Americans who 
are living overseas, but our unscientific poll came up with a similar 
result. Melody Mead, an American teacher living in Brussels was typical. 
For me to view a domestic problem kind of having tentacles going out 
internationally is very embarrassing to me as an American. I think 
that people that want to have negative opinions of the states, this 
is just another feature in their bonnet and it's very easy because 
this is in many ways a laughable situation. It's outrageous. There 
are jokes on the Internet. My neighbors of all different nationalities 
constantly ask me about it. Europeans tend to in the world around 
tend to think of Americans as very puritanical and we are very puritanical, 
but in this one instance, it's the American public that wants to keep 
the President in the office and the politicians that were elected 
by the public that seemed to by a small majority, they seem to have 
a very strong say in ousting him. And that's frightening to me. My 
people have finally turned around and I feel somewhat more in synch 
with what the population feels and very much out of synch with the 
politicians representing the population. I'm Chris McCarriss. I'm 
an American journalist living in Kinshasa, the democratic republic 
of Congo. It wasn't too many months ago that I was back in New York 
and I was working as a journalist on the Monica Lewinskygate affair 
and I'm very thrilled not to be there because I was sick of it and 
I guess I'm angry and embarrassed at the same time. I've been in bars 
and standing on the street and people will come up and say, oh, you're 
an American but I don't understand why you guys did this to your president. 
Just because he had an affair with one of his female aides, why did 
you guys treat him so poorly? That makes no sense, so they think we're 
really weaker because personal, sexual relations are treated publicly. 
My name is Paulette Ryan and I am an American living in the Philippines. 
I feel absolutely appalled and outraged. I cannot believe that this 
is happening. It's all happening so fast. It's just somebody said 
it was like a coup and I feel that the Republicans are trying to rush 
this through a final vote so fast that the American public doesn't 
have time to react to it. So I feel helpless. I am overseas but I 
think even if I were in the states you know, the American public is 
completely ignored. You know, the refusal to delay it for a few more 
days, you know, while the strikes are taking place in Iraq. You know, 
it's just, it is sending the wrong message to the Iraqis. It is sending 
the wrong message to the U.S. armed forces. I mean it's just so unpatriotic 
and since that, over the world, people are mystified on what's happening 
in America. My name is Janice. I am an American citizen living in 
Mexico City. Well, I've been at parties and events where the topic 
will come up and to me, it's not embarrassing to me personally, you 
know. I believe that everybody makes mistakes and he's a human being 
and everyone's going to make a mistake at one thing in their lives. 
And I have not heard anyone here who is really, Clinton should be 
impeached. They just believe that it's not just a affair he had with 
Monica Lewinsky is not an impeachable offense. Because that's sort 
of saying that it's just common down here. So they just don't understand 
what the big deal is all about. I'm Mike Saler. I teach journalism 
at American University in Cairo. To tell you the truth I feel exactly 
as if I were there. We watch the hearings and the endless discussions 
on CNN, start my day on the Internet, reading New York Times, Washington 
Post and other news, so it's not as if we're remote. But from our 
point in view in Cairo, this does not seem like a crisis, even if 
the President is impeached by the House as it appears he's going to 
be. Even if he were convicted by the Senate and thrown out, why the 
orderly process of government would go on. The United States would 
go on being a great super power and a great economy, simply with a 
new president. The opinions of Americans abroad on the impeachment 
debate in Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>