<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981218.2000.0380 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
HENRY HYDE: After months of argument, hours of debate, there's no 
need for further complexity. The question before this house is rather 
simple. It's not a question of sex. Sexual misconduct and adultery 
are private acts and are none of Congress' business. It's not even 
a question of lying about sex. The matter before the House is a question 
of lying under oath. MULLINS: House Judiciary Chairman Henry Hyde 
laid out the case for impeaching President Clinton today in one of 
the most contentious debates in recent congressional history. For 
only the second time ever, the House of Representatives debated impeaching 
a president. As committed as Congressman Hyde and his fellow Republicans 
were, that is how committed Democrats, like Martin Frost of Texas 
were in decrying the timing. MARTIN FROST: By starting this proceeding 
today, while we are engaged in military action against Saddam Hussein, 
sends entirely the wrong message to Saddam and to the rest of the 
world. We have a great bipartisan tradition of supporting the commander 
in chief and supporting our sailors, soldiers and airmen in the time 
of war. That tradition is being shattered today by a partisan majority. 
Starting this proceeding today may wind up costing American lives. 
MULLINS: Frost said the case against President Clinton has no merit. 
FROST: The Republican majority is trivializing the U.S. constitution 
and setting a terrible precedent, by pressing for impeachment on these 
particular grounds. What Clinton did was wrong. But it does not rise 
to the level of an impeachable offense. If we make every member of 
this House rumored to have been involved in affair subject to a $40 
million special prosecutor, and then hold them accountable for any 
misstatement of fact, we may be faced with a number of empty seats 
in this chamber. MULLINS: But Asa Hutchinson, the Republican from 
Clinton's home state of Arkansas, reckons the President had ample 
warning. ASA HUTCHINSON: Prior to his testimony, we all recall that 
there was a uniform warning across this land by his aides, by the 
public, for the President, whatever you do, do not lie to the grand 
jury. Dick Morris warned him that the people would forgive a personal 
misconduct, but they could not forgive perjury or obstruction of justice. 
And despite these warnings, the committee found that the President 
went before the grand jury, took an oath to tell the truth, and then 
intentionally provided false statements to the grand jury of citizens 
charged with the heavy responsibility. Republican Congressman Asa 
Hutchinson. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>