<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981218.2000.2236 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Britain said today its war planes have struck a base close to Baghdad 
where Iraq was hiding remotely piloted aircraft designed to deliver 
chemical and biological weapons. Defense Secretary George Robertson 
said the target is one of several hit by 12 British war planes based 
in Kuwait. Prime Minister Tony Blair has won widespread support in 
Parliament for Britain's participation in the air strikes. But as 
the World's Steven Beard reports from London, not all Britons are 
standing behind their leader. Several hundred protesters have demonstrated 
outside the British ministry of defense in London for two days running. 
Students, Islamic militants and anti-nuclear campaigners united in 
their opposition to the bombing of Iraq. Among them were members of 
the Iraqi community in Britain. actually this bomb is going to have 
the Iraqi people and do no damage to Saddam Hussein whatsoever. I'm 
demonstrating because the aim of this bloody war and the sanction 
is to destroy the country and the people of Iraq and nothing to do 
with energy. In Parliament yesterday, Tony Blair got a warmer reception. 
The prime minister won support across all the parties for Britain's 
involvement in operation Desert Fox. He told a somber House of Commons 
that for the safety of the middle east and the world, Saddam Hussein 
must be prevented from building up his weapons of mass destruction. 
There is no realistic alternative to military force. We are taking 
this military action with real regret but also with real determination. 
We have exhausted all other avenues. We act because we must. Most 
members of Parliament appear to agree, but after a somber start yesterday's 
proceedings ended in uproar. Around 20 dissident members of Tony Blair's 
own party gave vent to their fierce opposition to the bombing raids. 
They were especially enraged that they were deprived of a chance to 
vote on the issue. Veteran MP Tony Ben denounced Prime Minister Blair 
as Clinton's poodle and forecast a blood bath in Iraq. It will cause 
the death of many innocent people, 200,000 which were fueled in the 
last Gulf war, leaving Saddam stronger. And why does he do everything 
he's told by President Clinton instead of take an independent view 
in support of the charter which has always been central to the policy 
of the party that he leads. The demonstrators outside parliament also 
wanted to know why Britain is America's only active ally in the air 
raids against Iraq. Actually Tony Blair is just the latest in a long 
line of British Prime Ministers to cooperate closely with the U.S. 
military operations. Mark Seddon, a member of the Labor party's national 
executive committee, says it's a depressing fact of British political 
life. Being at the beck and call of the United States is almost an 
unthinking response. It's almost like a reflex action and it's an 
action that is isolating Britain not only from countries in the middle 
east but also from countries such as France. But of the centrist liberal 
Democrat party sees the close military relationship between Washington 
and London in a more positive light. The United States United Kingdom 
cruise missiles, access to high quality intelligence and also nuclear 
test information. The United States gives no other country in the 
world the same level of access at that level in military terms. In 
spite of the demonstrations, most British people seem to support operation 
Desert Fox but if the operation continues well into next week, and 
the images of dead and dying civilians continue to appear on British 
TV screens, that support and Britain's close relationship with the 
United States, could come under pressure. For the World, this is Steven 
Beard in London. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>