<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981218.1600.0354 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Where the law ends, tyranny begins. Mr. Speaker if we believe in our 
constitution. This is VOA News Now from Washington, I'm Victor Morales 
along with Tony Riggs. Our constitutional no one not even the President 
is above the law. None of us thought the burden of impeachment when 
we ran for this office. You are listening to Representative John Boehner, 
Republican from Ohio, speaking on the floor of the House of Representatives. 
The US House of Representatives is still engaged at this hour in a 
long debate over four articles of impeachment against President Clinton. 
The session has been going on for seven hours now. VOA Congressional 
Correspondent Paula Wolfson has been watching the proceedings so far 
and joins us now from Capitol Hill. Paula, what is happening at this 
stage? A point of today's debate they are going to go late into the 
evening here in Washington, 10 o'clock in the evening to be exact 
Washington time. Now they are going to adjourn for the night, come 
back in the morning, debate for another hour, and then start voting 
on these four articles of impeachment. These charges against President 
Clinton stemming from the Monica Lewinsky matter. At the moment we 
have Mr. Boehner just finishing up his remarks. We have Ron Kind a 
Democrat of Wisconsin who just began his comments about impeachment. 
Let's hear what he has to say. In 1974 the House Judiciary Committee, 
when Congress was controlled by Democrats, drafted articles of impeachment 
against President Nixon based upon fraudulent tax returns. But the 
Judiciary Committee in a bipartisan fashion determined that it didn't 
rise to the level of an impeachable offense because it was private 
as opposed to public misconduct. Well then what is this all about 
if it isn't really about perjury? If it is just about punishing and 
holding the President accountable and retribution, we can do that 
short of punishing the country as well and paralyzing this government 
of ours for the next six to eight months through censure. Talking 
about censure and censure is the option most favored by the Democrats. 
Censure being short of impeachment. It does not carry the threat of 
removal from office. The Democrats desperately want to bring censure 
as an alternative to the House Floor but the Republican leadership 
of the House says it is not constitutional. No where in the constitution 
is censure mentioned and they are blocking it. Well how successful 
is that blocking going to be? Well the Republicans have the majority 
and they are pretty much keeping their troops in line at this point 
Victor. They are going to try on Saturday -- the Democrats are going 
to try a parliamentary maneuver to try and force consideration on 
censure as an alternative to impeachment. But chances are that will 
be defeated sounded. It will be defeated along party lines with all 
of the Republicans voting to block bringing censure to the floor and 
all of the Democrats voting for it. Now would that apply to the alternative 
idea of a joint House/Senate resolution on censure? That is an idea 
that has been put forward by former Senate Majority Leader, the Republican 
Leader Bob Dole, who ran against Mr. Clinton in 1996. The specific 
resolution that will come before the house is a little different - 
that the Democrats want to bring rather before the House is a little 
different than what Mr. Dole suggested. It is basically a House resolution 
at this point although it contains language that would indicate it 
would go to the Senate. Well Paula, how would you characterize the 
overall debate today? Sad. Very, very sad and I would characterize 
the mood up here, Victor, as surreal. I mean it is very hard to believe 
that something of such great historical importance as a debate to 
impeach the President is going on at this point. There are not that 
many members on the floor at this hour and the chamber watching the 
debate and you sort of understand now why there is such a disconnect 
with the American public on this whole issue. It is sort of playing 
out almost like a soap opera and the enthusiasm as they go through 
the motions here with hour after hour of debate, I have got to tell 
you, it is not much more enthusiasm than we might hear for a highway 
bill. Well Paula, it sounds like they are, as you say, going through 
motions. If not many people are there to listen to the debate it means 
that people are not really ready to have their minds changed. They 
have made up their minds. I think just about everybody in the House 
has their mind made up, Tony. I think this vote - you are going to 
have four separate votes by the way on impeachment - one on each of 
the four counts against the President. I think pretty much we see 
how it is going and most members have their minds made up. What you 
are going to see is a vote along party lines. You are going to see 
all but maybe two or three of the Republicans vote for impeachment. 
Maybe four of the Democrats - I mean all but three vote for impeachment 
and then you will have about three Democrats join the Republicans 
in voting for impeachment. It is going to be a party line vote and 
that in a way is what the White House expected. I would imagine it 
is what they wanted because it enables them to portray this as a partisan 
affair as an attempt by the Republicans to get back at a president 
that they just don't like. Well Paula, if we are looking at a Senate 
trial of President Clinton, what are you hearing from the Senate side 
today? What sort of rumblings? What sort of preparations are going 
on over there? Preparations in the Senate are pretty much behind the 
scenes. The Senators for the most part have decided to keep quiet, 
let the House do its will, do its work. Then when the House sends 
over its recommendation to the Senate, then the Senate will act. Does 
the President have any chance of avoiding impeachment, apropos what 
you just said about the votes? Is there any chance that this will 
not happen? Well this is the Christmas season, Tony. It is said it 
is the season of miracles. I guess miracles always happen but at this 
point it looks pretty certain that at least one of these four articles 
of impeachment, the ones that deal with lying under oath to a grand 
jury, will be approved by the House. I think that at this point the 
White House is probably looking beyond the House to what is going 
to happen in the Senate. Senate Republican Leader Trent Lott has confirmed 
that they will convene a trial. He has said he is not interested in 
any pre-trial deals with the White House, but he never said that he 
wasn't interested in maybe working out something short of a full trial 
once proceedings get underway. Paula, why don't we go back down to 
the floor of the House and listen a little bit more? The account you 
are hearing is Steve Chabot of Ohio. damage the office of the presidency, 
our judicial system, and our country. This was not. President cannot 
be taken lightly, but in this case our constitutional duty is clear. 
Some of my colleagues have come to the floor today using inflammatory 
rhetoric and attacking members for voting their conscience. This is 
unfortunate and does not reflect the dignity that we owe this debate. 
It is the President by breaking his oath to preserve, protect and 
defend the constitution of the United States who has violated the 
trust bestowed upon him by the American people. OK let us come out 
of this. You are listening to the Republican from the State of Ohio, 
Steve Chabot a Judiciary Committee member. You are listening to Representative 
Steve Chabot. He is a Judiciary Committee member from the State of 
Ohio, a Republican. Pretty much saying what he has been saying all 
along that impeachment is warranted and giving you the Republican 
Party line on this very historical and very decisive issue. Paula 
Wolfson is our Congressional Correspondent. We sure thank you for 
joining us today, Paula. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>