<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981218.1600.3074 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
An economic forecast by the University of California predicts continued 
but slower growth in the US economy despite a fluctuating stock market. 
As we hear from Mike O'Sullivan, the report says a stable economy 
depends on a number of factors such as maintaining the flow of middle 
eastern oil. The quarterly forecast by the Business School of the 
University of California Los Angeles foresees continued growth in 
the US economy, but the report says the US rate of growth which was 
3.7 percent this year will slow to 2.5 percent in 1999. The slowdown 
is the result of the financial crisis in Asia which has cut into US 
exports and hurt the US manufacturing sector. But economist Rajeave 
Dawan notes the larger service sector, which is 70 percent of the 
US economy, is expanding. He says this kind of disparity was not seen 
before the birth of the computer technology sector. If you had trouble 
with the manufacturing sector it will usually cascade down to the 
other sectors. This is when -- the time when manufacturing was 30 
percent of the year's economy and was pretty much you know the Indian 
of growth. Nowadays, manufacturing is only barely 12 to 15 percent 
and you have a new Indian of growth which is the technology and the 
other stuff named for mission processing industries. So things have 
changed. The economist says that overall the US economy is expanding 
at a moderate and sustainable rate. Mr. Dawan believes that Asia will 
probably not recover for another two to three years. The financial 
crisis in Asia will continue to be a factor, slowing the US growth 
rate. He says other markets will compensate for the loss of Asian 
trade. The trouble from Asia to some extent is going to get offset 
by the European Monetary Union. The EMU coming in on January 1, 1999. 
Because EMU will integrate those countries and if integration is good, 
that means it is going to boost their growth rates. That means they 
are going to demand more of the American products. But economist Rajeave 
Dawan says an extended conflict with Iraq could slow the flow of oil 
through middle eastern ports to customers in Europe and Japan. He 
says this could further dampen international markets. In addition 
he notes that oil prices will not remain at their current low levels 
forever. He says that US consumers must work to correct an imbalance 
between a high rate of consumption and a negative savings rate. He 
says a prolonged downturn in the stock market could undermine the 
expansion by frightening overextended consumers. Mike O'Sullivan, 
VOA News, Los Angeles. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>