<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981218.1600.2156 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
One group of American's has had more trouble than most others enjoying 
the fruits of America's wealth and culture. They are the first Americans 
- Native American Indians whose way of life has been largely relegated 
to life on reservations. But one tribe, Montana's Blackfeet, is working 
on an economic revival that won't compromise traditional Indian ways. 
Montana's Blackfeet Indians is the subject of today's Dateline. Here 
is Pamela Taylor. Most Native Americans have a standard of living 
well below that enjoyed by other Americans. On the Blackfeet Reservation 
in Western Montana for example, an estimated 80 percent of the tribes 
1,500 members are reported unemployed. Over 60 percent may live below 
the US Government's official poverty line. But tribal leaders hope 
a renewed pride in Blackfeet culture and traditions can be transformed 
into ways to make money for their proud but impoverished people. VOA's 
Adam Phillips has more in this special report. The specific source 
of this Blackfeet song was lost sometime in their history which Blackfeet 
Cultural Advisor Curly Bear Wagner believes to be over 5,000 years 
old. But Curly Bear says that the spirit embodied by the chant lives 
on in the long stemmed tobacco pipe ritual his people still use for 
spiritual insight and friendship. When we prayed now we prayed with 
our pipe because the smoke is like a spirit. You see it for a minute 
then it disappears and so that it is going up to the creator, the 
mysterious one, in a white man's word this would be god. Curly Bear 
touches the bright leather thong entwined with his traditional shoulder 
length braids and continues. And when we pray we always include all 
the things that are around us because everything is living starting 
from the sky, the sun, the moon, the stars, the clouds, the mountains, 
the rocks, the trees, the grasses, the roots, the water because these 
things were given to us as part of our survival as a people. Without 
these things we cannot survive and so therefore we always honor them. 
Until recently, the complicated Blackfeet language itself had been 
in danger of dying out. But children like six year old Ocogopee and 
his eight year old brother may be changing all that with their high 
cheek bones, tawny skin, and long black hair done in the traditional 
Blackfeet style. They sing an ancient Blackfeet song their ancestors 
knew quite well. Lorena Oinger looks on deeply pleased and not just 
because she is the boys' mother. As a Blackfeet Youth Guidance Counselor, 
she is part of a grassroots movement on this impoverished 400,000-hectare 
reservation to educate youth about their heritage through total immersion 
schools and other activities. It is really neat to see my kinds -- 
even horseback riding -- instead of being a cowboy, they are wearing 
a pair of trunks, no shoes, no shirt and saying I am an Indian. They 
are so glad to grow their hair long and dance and that is just something 
you can't take away. That is something that they will remember for 
the rest of their lives and have within them. They are Indians. Ms. 
Oinger's own parents and grandparents discourage this attitude. A 
decision that still saddens her. I was kind of like just a shell of 
a person because I could do really well in math and all those areas 
but I didn't know who I was. So I ran into a lot of problems of having 
any sort of connection to my community. That had a lot to do because 
I didn't know my language and I didn't know my culture. Many of today's 
Blackfeet elders were separated as children from their parents and 
sent to boarding schools run by Christian Missionaries far from the 
reservation. Often they were beaten for speaking their mother tongue. 
Robin Bird, a middle-aged waitress at one of the reservations few 
eateries, says that the practice ended some three decades ago but 
that scars remain. You see a lot of older people very damaged by the 
abuse that they lived through. They figured to break the Indian we 
have to break their tradition, their culture. That is what they tried 
to do. It took away the hope of the Blackfeet people, but now we are 
learning that we can get all of that back because we still have elders 
that can remember. It is OK now to talk about it. It is OK to teach 
us. In recent years there has also been a renewed interest in traditional 
healing skills that are still practiced by Blackfeet elders like 85 
year old Molly Kicking Woman. She combines the medicine in the native 
plants with the ancient Blackfeet prayers. I pray, Indian words we 
pray. It is like this one old lady, she has been sick. Oh she has 
been just sick. I told her right now I will fix you up. I had some 
roots and I fixed her medicine and I prayed for her. The next thing 
I see her, how do you feel? She said I am OK. I ain't sick anymore. 
That is what happened. So we heal a lot of people by our prayers and 
I am really proud of that. Her husband, George Kicking Woman, listens 
to his wife and nods sadly. As one of the last and most respected 
old-time Blackfeet medicine men, he is deeply concerned that the prayers 
and the songs he knows and the oral wisdom they embody will die with 
him. Because they are not learning the song. They are not learning 
the movement. They are trying and not improving. I think it is going 
to be lost. But valuing the old ways is not the same as actually living 
according to them says Darryl Norman, a Blackfeet who runs an Indian 
Art Gallery and Teepeeing Camp for tourists just outside the reservation's 
main town. A long time ago you just grew up in our cultural way. Anymore 
you have to learn the culture in a formal way. It is hard to be an 
Indian because if you go to the ceremonies you have to learn the ceremonies, 
you have to learn the songs, you have to immerse yourself in it. Our 
people are like other people in the United States, they work 9 to 
5 and that doesn't leave much time in their lives for these things. 
Horses, Blueboy, Victoria, Ruby Some Blackfeet like Bob Blackbowl 
want to earn a modern livelihood by reviving their traditions of the 
past. We here him calling the heard of Spanish Mustangs he has reintroduced 
to the area. This remarkable breed of horses was once favored by the 
great Blackfeet horseman and warriors of the past. Mr. Blackbowl swells 
with pride at the sight of his heard which has grown from 18 to 118 
horses in just three years. Damn right. The blood in my veins is also 
I think the blood in their veins. They are part of my history and 
culture. It is intertwined; you can't pull it apart. It is like we 
both need each other to survive. They are going to give our children 
hope for the future. This is the pride of the past and hope for the 
future. Mr. Blackbowl adds that the mustangs will bring jobs to the 
Blackfeet through an equestrian center that will help train young 
people in traditional Indian sports and teach them how to herd and 
sell the prized horses. He hopes the jobs will slow the out-migration 
the reservation has undergone. VOA's Adam Phillips traveled to Western 
Montana to gather material for that report. Adam notes that however 
much the Blackfeet would like to rely on their cherished and picturesque 
past for their future development, they may need help from the outside. 
Only time will tell whether this interdependence with the world outside 
the reservation will ultimately compromise the very traditions preserved 
by more than a century of isolation. Montana's Blackfeet Indians was 
the subject of today's Dateline. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>