<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981218.1600.1377 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A recording just released here in the United States features an unusual 
combination of sounds. The wind blowing on the planet Mars interspersed 
with the piano music of Johann Sebastian Bach. VOA's Martin Bush has 
more on the story from New York. The wind blows with a fury on the 
planet Mars. Scientists know this from date of broadcast to Earth 
by the Mars Pathfinder, a space probe that landed on the surface of 
the red planet in July 1997. Now a recording company has transformed 
this electronic information into sound allowing people on Earth to 
hear the winds of Mars which is the title of a new recording. Producer 
Kelvin Miller got the idea of making a recording that reproduces the 
sounds of the winds on Mars after hearing a lecture by Edward Stone 
who heads the jet propulsion laboratory which direct the Mars Pathfinder 
project. And he talked about how there were readings that were taken 
on the surface of Mars by a kind of weather station if you will. It 
was actually just six little wires that were heated and how quickly 
those wires cooled and from which direction they could tell the velocity 
and the direction of wind. As I was sitting there listening to this 
lecture, it just sort of popped into my mind that it would be really 
interesting to take those mathematical or numerical readings and translate 
them into some kind of sounds that Earthlings think of as wind and 
then Bach came into my mind. I happened to be a church musician as 
well and have heard a lot of Bach through my life. The combination 
of the two seemed rather made for each other. To record the music 
of Johann Sebastian Bach, Mr. Miller brought in pianist Roderick Kettlewell 
Director of the Bach Society of Minnesota. Right from the start Mr. 
Kettlewell was enthusiastic about combining Bach's keyboard music 
with the lonesome moan of the wind. Together we went to a concert 
hall where he performed and myself and our other producer Paul Bergley 
selected the 17 pieces that we have chosen to use on the recording. 
Then it was really up to Roderick to interpret those piano works in 
a kind of imaginative and almost ethereal way to have them come across 
as the appropriate sounds to be combined with the winds of Mars. The 
thing that we worked on together was that the recordings that we had 
from Mars were taken on one particular day, sole 25, Martian Day 25, 
which translates for us on Earth as about July 29 or 30. The Winds 
of Mars album is based on digital data from Mars transformed into 
sound. But in about one year the US National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration plans to record the actual sounds of Mars using a tiny 
56 gram microphone aboard the Space Probe Mars Polar Lander. The cost 
of the microphone, $100,000, will be borne by the Planetary Society 
of Pasadena, California which is going to work with Kelvin Miller 
to produce a second Martian sound recording. On it they hope will 
be such sounds as Martian dust blowing in the wind and electrical 
discharges which crackle like lightning. This is Martin Bush, VOA 
News, New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>