<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981126.0984 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Pete Sampras has his piece of tennis history and a few other landmarks 
are within his grasp. Considered by many to be perhaps the finest 
player in the history of the game, Sampras is notching up the numbers 
to prove it. On Thursday, Sampras made sure of holding the No. 1 ranking 
for a record sixth consecutive year, a mark he feels may never be 
broken. He had been tied with Jimmy Connors, each finishing No. 1 
for five straight years. Connors did it in 1974-1978. Marcelo Rios 
made a perfect Thanksgiving for Sampras when he pulled out of the 
ATP Tour World Championship because of a back injury. Rios, ranked 
No. 2, was the only man who could have threatened Sampras for the 
top ranking. Sampras entered the season-ending championship with a 
33-point lead over the Chilean in the computer standings. If Sampras 
wins the tournament for the fifth time, he will pull even with Ivan 
Lendl on the all-time list. Sampras won the elite event in 1991, 1994 
and the last two years. Having won his first two round-robin matches, 
Sampras was already assured of a place in the semifinals before he 
played Karol Kucera Thursday. A relaxed Sampras then demonstrated 
why he is No. 1, crushing Kucera 6-2, 6-1 in 45 minutes. Kucera is 
No. 7 in the world and beat Sampras once in their three previous matches 
this year. ``It feels great,'' Sampras said. ``I put a lot of work 
into the game. It's tough to stay on top so long.'' Sampras' declared 
career goal is to break Roy Emerson's record of 12 Grand Slam titles. 
Sampras, 27, already has 11 and a few years ahead of him on the tour. 
He leads all active players with 56 career titles, but Connors' record 
of 109 looks safe for a long time to come. By his standards, Sampras 
has had a relatively modest year, winning four tournaments. That included 
his fifth Wimbledon, but no other Grand Slams. When the year-end rankings 
are released Monday, Sampras will be at No. 1 for the 248th week, 
the third longest total behind Lendl (270) and Connors (268). Sampras 
could pass both of them next year. In the first match Thursday, Tim 
Henman beat Alex Corretja 7-6 (7-4), 6-7, (4-7), 6-2 to become the 
second player to advance to the semifinals. Corretja dropped to 1-1 
but remains alive under the round-robin format. Henman is 2-0. Henman 
paid tribute to Sampras. ``It's a phenomenal achievement,'' he said. 
``It's tough for anyone else really to comprehend. I don't think it's 
one that's going to be broken for a long, long time, if ever,'' Henman 
said. Rusedski, an alternate, played Albert Costa, the second alternate 
who is ranked No. 14 in the world, and won 7-6 (7-5), 6-1. The second 
Briton in the field needed 10 set points to win the first set, but 
breezed through the second. Rusedski replaced Andre Agassi, who dropped 
out late Wednesday, also because of a back injury. The dlrs 3.5 million 
tournament brings together players with the best results over the 
year. But with Patrick Rafter and Richard Krajicek both pulling out 
before the event because of injuries and Agassi and Rios withdrawing, 
four of the best players are missing. Rios had to do better than Sampras 
in the tournament to have a shot at dethroning him. But Sampras scored 
quick and impressive victories in his opening matches. Rios had already 
dented his hopes of overtaking Sampras by losing his first match, 
to Henman. ``When I tried to practice this morning, it was really 
sore. It made no sense to go out on the court and play two games,'' 
Rios said. ``I am disappointed but that's the way it goes.'' On Friday, 
Yevgeny Kafelnikov will battle Carlos Moya for a place in the semifinals. 
In other matches, Rusedski plays Henman and Costa meets Corretja. 
Their outcome will determine the other two semifinalists. With Henman 
already through, Corretja and Rusedski are still in the running. Corretja 
will advance is Rusedski loses to Henman. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>