<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981126.0245 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Panicked depositors pulled 40 billion Taiwan dollars (U.S. dlrs 1.2 
billion) out of a troubled bank, but calm was restored Thursday as 
branches reopened with plenty of cash displayed on the counters. The 
run on Taichung Business Bank was the worst in Taiwan's history, and 
some branches stayed open into the early hours of Thursday, after 
depositors had lined up all day Wednesday to get their money. The 
government sacked the bank's chairman and other directors Wednesday 
over alleged improper loans, and ordered a consortium to come up with 
emergency funds to pay off depositors. It was reported that the ousted 
chairman, Tseng Chen-jen, had gotten into financial troubles during 
a property slump several years ago, but he bailed himself out by going 
to a Las Vegas casino where he won U.S. dlrs 30 million. The report 
in the United Daily News could not immediately be verified. This time, 
Tseng's luck is not holding up so well. On Thursday, authorities barred 
Tseng from leaving Taiwan pending investigations into allegations 
that he abused his position of trust at the bank in Taichung, 120 
miles (200 kilometers) south of Taipei. Tseng, who is head of the 
Kuang Shan business conglomerate, was appointed as the Taichung Business 
Bank's chairman Oct. 31. Just days later, the bank approved loans 
of 7.4 billion Taiwan dollars (U.S. dlrs 227 million) to six shaky 
investment and property companies believed to have ties to Tseng. 
After Tseng was ousted, the run on Taichung Business Bank became the 
worst in Taiwan's history. Depositors took out four times as much 
money as they did three years ago at the Changhua Credit Union, where 
the manager had embezzled money to play the stock market. A consortium 
of nine banks provided the troubled bank funds totaling 60 billion 
Taiwan dollars (U.S. dlrs 1.8 billion), and the run by depositors 
finally ended, Vice Finance Minister Sean Chen said. Tseng started 
out as a property developer, and later expanded his interests into 
department stores and banking. His sensational troubles were the latest 
in a spate of financial woes for Taiwanese business groups. At a Cabinet 
meeting Thursday, Premier Vincent Siew said the government will be 
able to maintain financial stability and stamp out any irregularities. 
Siew blamed the recent financial troubles on a younger generation 
of entrepreneurs who are preoccupied with making quick profits. ``They 
appear to be more interested in tinkering with finances than running 
their businesses,'' he said. Many of the companies that have gotten 
into trouble reportedly have good ties with politicians. Antonio Chiang, 
publisher of the Taiwan Daily News, said the government let the troubles 
come into the open rather than quietly bailing out the companies in 
an effort to clean up entangled relations between businesses and politicians 
ahead of the Dec. 5 legislative elections. If politicians backed by 
those business groups are elected, they could help their corporate 
friends gain contracts by threatening otherwise to block government-proposed 
bills, Chiang said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>