<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981126.1023 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Miss Israel, a 19-year-old model called Linor Abargil, won the new 
look 1998 Miss World Contest on Thursday, held for the second year 
running on this tiny Indian Ocean archipelago. Abargil, who said she 
wants to work in the media, won the top prize of dlrs 100,000, beating 
the runner-up, Miss France, a 23-year old language student called 
Veronique Caloc, who has ambitions to become an interpreter and professional 
model. Miss Malaysia, Pick Lim Lina Teoh, a 22-year-old actress and 
model with plans to be a film director, was the second runner-up. 
After 48 years, the beauty contest created by former British serviceman 
Eric Morley to liven up drab, postwar England, underwent a face-lift 
for this year's contest. A British production company did away with 
the high heels and swimsuit parade before the judges. Instead, the 
girls paraded in four different sets of clothes, from casual look 
to smart party dresses, and instead of talking about themselves, talked 
about their friends. And the company made sure that the contestants 
were environmentally friendly, planting trees and taking part in a 
ceremonial return of hawksbill turtle shells to the sea, the theme 
of this year's contest. The audience, seated in a lagoon beach, watched 
prerecorded film of the girls, divided into groups of 11, swim, play 
volleyball, or practice aerobics. The initial 86 entrants were whittled 
down to 10 girls from Israel, Peru, Chile, France, Brazil, the United 
States, Jamaica, South African, Malaysia and the Czech republic. The 
judges, who included singer Mica Paris, photographer Terry O'Neill 
and Diana Hadden, last year's Miss World, said they looked for qualities 
in the girls ranging from baring to inner beauty. In recent years, 
the contest has been criticized by some for demeaning women. Two years 
ago, Indian groups demonstrated against the pageant in Bangalore, 
forcing Morley and his wife, Julia, to move the swimsuit competition 
to Seychelles. A holding company formed by the government of Seychelles, 
a 92-island archipelago, staged the event in hopes of bolstering its 
image as a haven for snorkelers and eco-tourists. The archipelago 
is home to the world's largest population of giant hawksbill turtles. 
After the turtles were hunted to near extinction for their shells, 
commercial exploitation was banned. The Irish pop group Boyzone headlined 
Thursday's awards show, and lead singer Ronan Keating hosted along 
with MTV hostess Eden. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>