<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981126.0727 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Security on the strife-ridden African continent was the focus of a 
summit drawing 49 African nations, including 34 heads of state, to 
Paris Thursday, a meeting sure to underscore France's bid to expand 
its sphere of influence. The 20th French-African summit, which ends 
Saturday, could possibly take steps toward addressing the knotty issues 
at the crux of conflicts via meetings on the sidelines. The main actors 
in the Congo conflict are attending the summit, including Congolese 
President Laurent-Desire Kabila and the presidents of Uganda and Rwanda, 
Yoweri Museveni and Pasteur Bizimungu, respectively. Both countries 
support rebels waging an insurgency in the Congo. The Rwandan leader 
said Wednesday he is prepared to meet with Kabila in Paris. Kabila 
and the Ugandan president are scheduled for separate talks with President 
Jacques Chirac on Saturday. The guest list suggests a bid by France 
to break out of its traditional sphere of influence, and expand beyond 
its former colonies to other parts of Africa. Among those making first 
appearances at the summit, which starts real business Friday, are 
Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak and U.N. Secretary General Kofi Annan. 
Annan and Organization of African Unity chairman Blaise Campaore of 
Burkina Faso are to address the summit. Among absentees are Sudan 
and Libya, uninvited because their countries are under U.N. sanctions, 
Algeria, which traditionally refuses to attend, and Gabon. French 
presidential spokeswoman Catherine Colonna said this week that France 
seeks a ``pragmatic reflection'' on the security issue, including 
conflict prevention and peacekeeping. A quarter of sub-Saharan Africa 
is currently implicated in crises. ``There will be no development 
without security,'' French Cooperation Minister Charles Josselin said 
in an interview published Thursday in the daily Le Figaro. Paris feels 
``concerned with elaborating a new architecture of security'' for 
Africa, Colonna told reporters this week. Chirac said last year that 
France would no longer serve as Africa' s gendarme. Paris favors regional 
security organizations and an African peacekeeping force. Since last 
year, France has moved to redefine its relationship with Africa after 
a century as benevolent patriarch across a large swath of the continent. 
Former colonies gained prestige and financial benefits for remaining 
within Paris' sphere of influence. But in 1997 France announced a 
five-year plan to cut its forces in Africa from 8,000 to 5,000 and 
close one of six military bases. The French push for an increasingly 
multilateral approach to Africa came as the United States' began asserting 
its influence there. French aid to Africa - at some dlrs 1.25 billion 
- still surpasses American aid, about dlrs 700 million. But it is 
a development in another city, London, that has added a layer of mystery 
to the Paris proceedings. The House of Lords' decision Wednesday not 
to grant immunity to former Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet had 
led to questioning about some of the leaders gathered here, particularly 
Kabila. The Paris-based International Federation of the League of 
Human Rights and the French League for the Defense of Human Rights 
on Tuesday both filed court complaints against Kabila for ``massive 
violation of human rights.'' Colonna refused to specify to questioning 
reporters whether Kabila, as a guest head of state, would be sheltered 
from French justice. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>