<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981126.0743 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For the first time since the signing of the latest Mideast peace accord, 
violent confrontations erupted between Israelis and Palestinians Thursday 
in three areas of the West Bank. On the outskirts of the city of Jenin, 
Israeli troops fired rubber-coated bullets into a crowd of about 100 
Palestinian protesters who threw stones and marched towards the soldier 
compound. An Israeli soldier could be seen on a tower inside the army's 
compound alternately ducking and shooting. Two Palestinians suffered 
mild injuries and were treated at hospital. Palestinians had been 
demonstrating for the release of relatives jailed by Israel. Organized 
by Yasser Arafat's Fatah party, protesters walked behind a white banner 
showing prisoners' hands chained and bleeding. ``No peace without 
release of all prisoners,'' it said. More than 2,500 Palestinians 
are in Israeli jails, and the issue is sensitive among Palestinians, 
many of whom spent time in jail or had relatives jailed during the 
three-decade occupation by Israel. Israel set free 250 prisoners last 
week and will release another 500 in two more stages as part of the 
peace accord signed last month in Washington. But prisoners who murdered 
or conspired to murder will not be among those included in the release, 
despite requests from Palestinians. In the tensely divided city of 
Hebron, scuffles broke-out after Jewish settlers tried to prevent 
Palestinian school children on their way to a field trip from walking 
by the settler compound. Palestinian witnesses said adults from the 
settler community pushed and shoved the girls, ages 6-14, back into 
the nearby school yard. Five girls were carried away in Palestinian 
ambulances after fainting and the hospital later reported 12 were 
seen by doctors but none suffered lasting injury. Israeli police however 
said the 40 children, led by their principal, Firial Abu Hekal, were 
holding an illegal protest in front of the settler homes. Palestinians 
are frequently harassed by Jewish settlers when walking near their 
homes. The principal and three others from the girls school were detained 
and questioned by police. In the Burkin village near Qalqiliya, about 
2,000 Palestinians and 15 Israeli peace activists protested Israeli 
construction of a bypass road on confiscated Arab. The demonstrators 
blocked the road and stopped the bulldozers briefly. The Palestinians 
threw stones, and Israeli troops guarding the site responded by firing 
in the air and lobbing tear gas to disperse the crowd. Palestinian 
police, stationed in all three West Bank areas, did nothing to keep 
their citizens at bay. In Burkin, Palestinian police watched from 
their post but did not get involved in the confrontation. After warnings 
from Israeli officers, Palestinian security police arrived a half-hour 
after the violence began to persuade protesters to pull back. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>