<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981126.0484 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Japanese Prime Minister Keizo Obuchi apologized Thursday for his country's 
wartime aggression against China, but the remorse expressed to visiting 
Chinese President Jiang Zemin basically repeated what his predecessors 
had said. Obuchi also offered new loans of 390 billion yen (dlrs 3.2 
billion) for 28 environmental, farming and other development projects 
in China for 1999-2000. Obuchi told Jiang that Japan was in economic 
difficulty, but the loan was extended as a special symbol for the 
first visit to Japan by a Chinese head of state since the end of World 
War II. Despite repeated references to a new partnership, the two 
sides were still working out the wording of the apology in a declaration, 
more than five hours after Obuchi delivered his oral version. Japan's 
Foreign Ministry said the wrangling was over technical interpretation, 
rather than content. In a meeting with Obuchi, Jiang made clear that 
Japan's need to face up to history was crucial in Japan-China relations, 
calling it an emotional issue for the Chinese people, Japanese Foreign 
Ministry officials told reporters after the summit. Obuchi responded 
by again offering the apology issued by then Prime Minister Tomiichi 
Murayama in 1995 that referred to ``Japan's deep remorse and heartfelt 
apology'' for its actions before and during World War II, said Japanese 
government spokesman Sadaaki Numata. Although officials from both 
sides signed agreements on environmental cooperation and student exchanges, 
the declaration on the apology was not being signed. ``Certain things 
are best conveyed orally,'' Numata said, adding that both leaders 
were satisfied with the declaration. Foreign Ministry officials quoted 
Jiang as saying that one way to look at history was that enough had 
been said. ``I don't agree with this view. The more we discuss this 
issue, the future will open up for us,'' Jiang was quoted as saying. 
But he was also quoted as saying that he welcomed Japan's continued 
commitment to reject the militarism of the past and that the Japanese 
people were also victims of their nation's past militarism. Jiang's 
visit had been heralded as an effort to put to rest the bitter memories 
of the war and decades of Cold War division that still weigh on relations 
between Asia's two most powerful countries. Japanese officials played 
down differences between the apology issued to China and the apology, 
which was signed, to South Korean President Kim Dae-jung during his 
visit to Tokyo last month. To Kim, Japan gave its fullest apology 
yet for its 1910-45 colonial rule over the Korean Peninsula. Numata 
said the messages were ``similar'' and that Japan had already issued 
similar signed apologies to China in 1972, when two nations normalized 
relations, and again in 1995. Numata acknowledged that Jiang said 
he found it puzzling that sometimes remarks that contradicted the 
official government apology surfaced now and then. Some conservative 
Japanese politicians have outraged China repeatedly by making remarks 
that deny wartime atrocities by Japan's army. Japan remains worried 
that too many expressions of remorse could trigger renewed demands 
for compensation by victims of atrocities. In Thursday's talks, Jiang 
said Taiwan was another key issue. Obuchi reassured him that Japan 
was behind Beijing's ``one China'' policy, which holds that Taiwan 
is a renegade province that is part of China. Obuchi also made clear 
that Japan does not support an independent Taiwan. He told Jiang that 
Japan's security treaty with the United States is purely ``defensive,'' 
and does not refer to any specific nation, Numata said. Economic ties 
were mentioned in Thursday's talks but took a definite back seat to 
the issues of history and Taiwan. China is Japan's second-largest 
trading partner, and Japan is China's largest, with annual trade volume 
of more than dlrs 60 billion. Jiang, who arrived Wednesday, plans 
to meet with business leaders, civic groups and students at a major 
university before leaving Tokyo Saturday for visits to two northern 
Japanese cities, Sendai and Sapporo. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>