<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981126.0476 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Israeli soldiers shot rubber-coated bullets into a crowd of about 
100 Palestinians who threw stones at their outpost during a demonstration 
Thursday to demand freedom for Palestinian prisoners. One Palestinian 
was wounded in the leg, and another was struck in the arm. Both were 
taken away in private cars to a hospital. About 500 people marched 
through Jenin to an office where Israeli soldiers and Palestinian 
police coordinate security. The protesters walked behind a white banner 
showing prisoners' hands chained and bleeding. ``No peace without 
release of all prisoners,'' it said. More than 2,500 Palestinians 
are in Israeli jails, and the issue is sensitive among Palestinians, 
many of whom spent time in jail or had relatives jailed during the 
three-decade occupation by Israel. Under the Wye River peace agreement 
signed last month in Washington, Israel agreed to release 750 Palestinian 
prisoners in three stages by the end of January. Palestinians complained 
that most of the 250 prisoners freed in the first phase were common 
criminals, not political activists. ``Free the fighters, not the criminals,'' 
the protesters shouted. Awad Kenami said his son Ahmed, 37, a founder 
of the Black Panther faction that fought Israeli occupation, was jailed 
two months after the Oslo peace agreement was signed in September 
1993. ``My son was a soldier in a war led by Yasser Arafat; now Yasser 
Arafat is a leader of peace, and so my son and his comrades must be 
freed as soldiers for peace,'' Kenami said. Israeli Prime Minister 
Benjamin Netanyahu said he would not release prisoners with ``blood 
on their hands'' or members of the Islamic militant group Hamas, which 
has rejected the peace process. Meanwhile, the daily Haaretz newspaper 
said that a slain Hamas leader, Adel Awadallah, had planned to set 
off a series of five car bombs in major Israeli cities before he was 
killed by the army in a hail of bullets in September. The newspaper 
said that according to information found in his hideout, Awadallah 
planned to set off a car bomb and then demand Israel free all Palestinian 
prisoners. Hamas also planned to attack senior political figures, 
the report said. Also Thursday, Jewish settlers in the divided West 
Bank town of Hebron blocked Palestinian school children heading out 
for a field trip, touching off scuffles, witnesses said. The confrontation 
began when 6- to 14-year-olds from Kurtouba Preparatory School gathered 
to board a bus to Jerusalem. Palestinian witnesses said about 20 settlers 
from nearby Beit Haddasah enclave began pushing the girls back into 
the school. Ofir Sivan, spokesman for Israeli police in the West Bank 
district, said the scuffle broke out after 40 students led by their 
principal, Firial Abu Hekal, refused orders to end a protest. Five 
girls were carried away in Palestinian ambulances after fainting, 
and the hospital later reported 12 were seen by doctors but none suffered 
lasting injury. In the Burkin village near Qalqiliya, about 2,000 
Palestinians and about 15 Israeli peace activists protested the building 
of a road linking an Israeli settlement with an industrial estate. 
The demonstrators blocked the road and stopped the bulldozers briefly. 
The Palestinian protesters threw stones, and Israeli troops responded 
by firing in the air and lobbing tear gas to disperse the crowd. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>