<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981126.0231 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A divided OPEC opened its year-end ministerial meeting a day behind 
schedule Thursday, with some delegates saying the organization would 
agree to extend production cuts to the end of 1999. That is the bare 
minimum analysts say is needed to prop up rock-bottom oil prices, 
but it doesn't promise a boost for prices, flirting with 12-year lows. 
A 2.6 million barrel-a-day cut that the Organization of the Petroleum 
Exporting Countries set in June to run for six months could be extended 
to the end of 1999, an Iranian delegate said. Ministers had pushed 
back the start of the meeting, originally scheduled to begin Wednesday, 
because of deep differences over the issue of extending the production 
cuts and disagreements over production levels. Iran acknowledged it 
was facing criticism over its output level, but called that unfair 
and said it isn't overproducing. ``Others are blaming Iran,'' a senior 
Iranian delegate told The Associated Press, speaking with customary 
anonymity. The delegate said that when OPEC was determining Iran's 
production capacity it did not take into account two new refineries 
that came on line in February. He said Iran had been asked to cut 
too much. Iran says it deserves a review of its base production level 
and that any further cuts should be made mostly by Saudi Arabia, the 
group's biggest producer. Saudi Arabia has drawn ire at the Vienna 
gathering, with some members complaining the kingdom seized market 
share after Iraq's departure from the oil market in 1990 and now won't 
let go. Iraq has been barred from exporting crude since its 1990 invasion 
of fellow OPEC member, Kuwait, but is now allowed to sell limited 
amounts of oil under U.N. supervision to purchase food and other humanitarian 
goods. Indonesian Oil Minister Kuntoro Mangkusubroto said he didn't 
favor fresh cuts, but did favor an extension, in what seems to be 
a growing consensus view. He also said Indonesia was conducting a 
legal review of its domestic oil industry after the fall of long-time 
ruler Suharto. ``We want to have a competitive sector, oil and gas, 
a sector that is effective and transparent, in terms of an open market 
downstream and an effective market upstream,'' Mangkusubroto told 
The Associated Press. Venezuela threw a late spanner in the works 
when Oil Minister Erwin Arrieta told ministers during preliminary 
talks that with a new government taking over in February it could 
not commit to an extension of the existing production cuts. But Arrieta, 
speaking just before the scheduled start of the formal session, said 
he was confident an agreement could be reached by the end of the day. 
He did not elaborate. Saudi Arabia, OPEC's biggest producer, is pushing 
for better compliance with June's cuts, saying there is no point to 
further cuts until full compliance is achieved. North Sea Brent Blend 
crude oil for delivery in January opened in London Thursday at a record 
low of dlrs 10.88. OPEC's average oil price has been cut nearly in 
half over the past year because of a global oil glut brought on by 
its ill-timed decision last winter to boost production, coinciding 
with Asia's economic crisis and falling demand. Kuwait, which says 
its 1998 oil revenue will sink by 45 percent, favors new output reductions 
as do Algeria and Libya. Qatari Oil Minister Abdullah bin Hamad Al-Attiyah 
said he expects OPEC to convene again in March. OPEC members are Algeria, 
Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Libya, Nigeria, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, 
the United Arab Emirates and Venezuela. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>