<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981126.0230 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
More than 1,000 students taunted troops who blocked them Thursday 
from marching on the home of former President Suharto to press demands 
that he be prosecuted for corruption. Another 200 were stopped from 
staging a sit-in protest at the attorney general's office. The peaceful 
demonstrations in the capital contrasted with a clash between police 
and students in the provincial city of Semarang on Wednesday. The 
official Antara news agency reported that at least 54 demonstrators 
were injured. Student activists who helped oust Suharto in May have 
stepped up their demands that the former army general be held accountable 
for official wrongdoing during his 32 years of authoritarian rule. 
Suharto's successor, President B.J. Habibie, announced last week that 
he would set up a new inquiry into his former mentor's wealth. A previous 
investigation by Attorney General Andi Muhammad Ghalib turned up no 
evidence of corruption and critics labeled it a whitewash. Students 
have tried repeatedly in recent days to march to Suharto's heavily 
guarded home. On Thursday, they were blocked by dozens of security 
personnel armed with bamboo shields and sticks. The standoff was in 
a park adjacent to the U.S. ambassador's house about one kilometer 
(one half mile) from Suharto's home, where the former leader lives 
as a virtual recluse. Many students held up pictures of Suharto dressed 
as a bandit. Several members of one Muslim student group carried posters 
of the founder of Iran's Islamic revolution, Ayatollah Khomeini, and 
its current supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei. ``We want a charismatic 
leader like Khomeini. This would inspire Indonesians,'' said one protester, 
who identified himself by the single name of Budi. Some jeered and 
made fun of the soldiers blocking them. Earlier, several busloads 
of students arrived at Ghalib's office to press their demands. Security 
forces prevented them from entering. Earlier this week, hundreds of 
students occupied the attorney general's office before army negotiators 
urged them to leave and military trucks ferried them back to their 
campuses. Also Thursday, dozens of students protested outside the 
studios of Television Republik Indonesia, complaining that network 
coverage of political events was biased in favor of the government. 
They later tried to drive to the nearby Parliament, but were blocked 
by security personnel. Meanwhile, angry residents gathered for a second 
day of protest in a northeastern town Thursday, a day after mobs burned 
local government buildings, according to police and witnesses. On 
Wednesday, thousands of depositors of a troubled finance cooperative 
burned government offices after they failed to get their money refunded. 
The violence occurred in Pinrang, on the southern end of Sulawesi 
Island, 1,370 kilometers (856 miles) northeast of Jakarta. As many 
as 31 people have been killed in demonstrations and riots in Jakarta 
in the past two weeks. The total includes at least nine students who 
were killed when security forces opened fire when protesters, demanding 
democratic reforms, tried to march on the Parliament Nov. 13. The 
U.S. State Department has urged Indonesia to carry out its pledge 
to fully investigate the shootings. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>