<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981126.1600.0077 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Rain and winds did not dampen one of the holiday traditions in the 
big apple. As usual, thousands lined the streets of Manhattan for 
the 72nd annual macy's Thanksgiving day parade. Babe, the movie pig, 
made its first appearance this year, joining many regulars in the 
extravaganza of helium-filled balloons, including Barney the dinosaur. 
Marching bands, Broadway stars and dancers were also a part of the 
fun. Several balloons had to sit out the parade this year because 
of the weather. New precautions were put in place to prevent a repeat 
of last year, when a Spectator was seriously injured after a balloon 
toppled a lamppost onto her. Deborah feyerick reports. For Maurice 
sendak's character "the wild thing," the parade was over before it 
began. Just as it was about to step into the parade, a sudden gust 
of wind forced macy's showcase balloon into a lamp post, puncturing 
a gash in the fierce-looking beast. He got hurt and couldn't come. 
Helium gushed from the 10-foot side wound, though its head suffered 
no apparent injuries. The balloon was balled up and removed from the 
scene, leaving behind some disappointed balloon handlers. An unexpected 
wind came up and we lost control and just got caught up. "the wild 
thing" was not the parade's first casualty. Garfield was pumped-up, 
ready to go, 61-feet long, but he ended up missing the parade because 
of what balloon handlers described as a leak. And another favorite 
who never made it -- Spiderman's not in the parade. Spiderman, wounded 
in action last year, was an unexpected no-show this year. One balloon 
is down, but of natural causes. And that's spiderman who had a bladder 
problem. And though Dexter finished the parade, his jet pack didn't. 
Last years walking wounded included the pink panther and the cat in 
the hat, which crashed into a lamp post, seriously injuring a woman. 
Other balloon mishaps in years past involved kermit the frog, sonic 
the hedgehog and Betty boop. This year, parade organizers hoped to 
avoid all that, taking extra precautions with wind monitors to gauge 
the flying conditions and keep the balloons low away from trees and 
lamp posts. So did the absence of some of these popular characters 
affect the parade viewers sense of wonder? I would have liked to see 
garfield. I can't believe garfield deflated. That's all right, that's 
okay. We got to see some of them. I got to see Santa. And that usually 
means presents are just a few weeks away. Deborah feyerick, for CNN, 
New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>