<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981126.1830.0802 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
NBC news "in depth" tonight -- creating a better diet food that could 
Ward off some of the deadliest diseases. Today, most of us throw caution 
to the wind and pretty much eat anything we want. The typical Thanksgiving 
feast contains about 2,500 calories and 130 grams of fat -- not a 
very healthy meal. But what if the food on your holiday plate could 
actually improve your health, even protect you from killer diseases? 
NBC's Dan abrams begins tonight's "in depth" reporting. Eggs that 
prevent heart disease. Broccoli that fights cancer. And margarine 
that lowers cholesterol. The designer foods of the future. These are 
foods that can actually Ward off the kinds of diseases and ailments 
that we all develop as we grow older. They're called functional foods 
-- specially created to provide health benefits beyond just good nutrition. 
And they're good business, too. We're looking at a market in the next 
five to ten years that is going to be about $30 billion, $40 billion. 
For the food giants, the race is already on. Kellogg just launched 
a new line from cereals to snacks, all made from a Cholesterol-lowering 
fiber called psyllium. From Johnson & Johnson, a margarine that lowers 
cholesterol, already sold in Europe. And at Monsanto, hopes that oil 
made from seaweed will give cookies and cakes the healthy nutrients 
of fish without the taste. Of course, everyone knows some fruits and 
vegetables help fight disease. But now, as scientists discover the 
reasons why, their goal is to engineer "Superfoods" with even more 
health benefits than ever before. We are trying to build a better 
broccoli, one that will offer prevention of cancer, or at least decrease 
your risk of cancer. Working with over 50 varieties of broccoli, researchers 
at the university of Illinois found that some contain 30 times more 
cancer fighting compounds than others. So they are breeding new species, 
testing them on mice and taste-testing them on people. I think it's 
going to become a part of everyday life, that you feed your family 
vegetables that have added nutritional power. Imagine fresh eggs that 
prevent heart disease. At pilgrims pride, chickens eat a special feed 
so their eggs come out enhanced with healthy fatty acids and vitamin 
E. It is not a bionic egg, it's not injected. It is an all-natural 
egg in a shell, perfect packaging. The same old taste with even better 
nutrition. The number one trend in the food business today, with real 
promise to help americans live healthier, and live better. Dan abrams, 
NBC news, New York. Still there are no magic bullets no, guarantees 
designer foods or supplements will protect from you ravages of old 
age. Tonight, David schardt of the center for science in the public 
interest offers a healthy dose of skepticism "in his own words." These 
are a lot of hype about functional food? Oh, yes, there is. An example 
is the herb ginkogo which is being added to candy bars as a way to 
supposedly improve memory. There's not a shred of evidence it will 
help the memories of the vast majority of people, so adding it to 
these foods really doesn't have any proven benefit. The fear is that 
we'll be inundated with thousands of products with very little evidence 
for their benefit but they're called functional foods so consumers 
will want to try them and there will be little way for consumers to 
figure out which really work, which are safe, which are worth spending 
their money on. It has a potential for being a very confusing situation. 
The functional foods have the potential for providing terrific and 
important health benefits to people. But we have to be careful. So 
don't believe everything you read. Try to follow guidelines from respected 
health organizations like the government, which tend to be very careful 
in their review of products. David shart of the sure inform science 
in the public interest "in his own words." 
</TEXT>
</DOC>