<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981126.1830.0498 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the Persian gulf, it's a tense holiday for 24,000 American troops, 
who are poised to make Saddam honor his U.N. commitments. For its 
part, the U.N. is making yet another humanitarian gesture -- it has 
extended repeatedly to the Iraqi people. Allowing Saddam to sell oil 
to buy supplies for his suffering people. But Saddam may be getting 
the better part of the bargain. NBC's Ron Allen explains from Baghdad. 
Iraq's health care system before the war among the best in this part 
of the world. After eight years of sanctions, December Praed conditions. 
A young girl suffers with kidney failure but no anti-by ought to my 
recollection fight infection. Babies struggling in broken down incubaters. 
The temperature controls often say, killing the infants. Doctors in 
surgery using disposable single use instruments over and over again. 
In 1996, the United Nations set up a program to ease the hardships 
of sanctions. The Iraqi people suffering, but not their leaders. The 
program allowed Iraq to sell oil in exchange for food and medicine. 
But Kathy Kelly, an American human rights activist says it's not much 
of a Deal for most iraquis. Many Iraqi people with whom we've met 
have said it's the oil for nothing deal because they haven't been 
able to get anything close to what would be needed. Critics sarge 
Iraq's government with abuse, diverting goods to wealthy supporters, 
even requesting luxury items in exchange for oil detailed in U.N. 
documents. Liposuction machines, silicone breast implants, laser teeth 
whiteners, rowing machines, musical instruments all on Saddam Hussein's 
shopping list. They are less worried about the ordinary people of 
Iraq and much more worried about the luxury living of the elite within 
the Iraq system. The people here need help badly. The U.N. says even 
though it never approves the government's outrageous request, the 
iraquis keep asking. There's another concern, seemingly harmless items 
Iraq asks for and the u.N. has approved that may have more sinister 
uses. On that list, household items -- The iraquis are shipping in 
raw material, that won't be used as pots and pans, but will be smelted 
down and turned over to the military industrial factories. Saddam's 
government dismisses it all calling the charges propaganda. But no 
one can deny the fact that basic medical supplies rarely ever reach 
iraq's hospitals where vulnerable people die every day. Ron Allen, 
NBC news, Baghdad. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>