<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981126.1830.0206 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Now to Washington, where tomorrow the holiday spirit gives way to 
the harsh reality of the ongoing impeachment inquiry. President Clinton 
will be sending the house Judiciary committee answers to 81 questions 
that cover virtually all aspects of the Lewinsky investigation. It's 
the next step in a process that is getting more complicated and controversial 
with each day. Joining us now from the White House, NBC's chip Reid. 
John, the president is spending this holiday relaxing, White House 
officials say, much like any average American. But with the deadline 
looming for answers to those 81 questions, the president must soon 
turn his attention back to the question of impeachment. The president's 
Thanksgiving included a round of golf, time with friends and family, 
and a traditional Turkey dinner. A short break before the next step 
in the impeachment process. Have you fun issued the questions, Mr. 
president? Back at the White House, the president's lawyers were putting 
the finishing touches on answers to 81 questions about Clinton's relationship 
with Monica Lewinsky and efforts to cover it up. White House officials 
say the questions, from house Judiciary chairman henry Hyde, are more 
a partisan tool than a legitimate effort to find facts. Even so, they 
promise the answers will be delivered to Hyde Friday, after final 
approval by the president. White House sources say the strategy is 
to not say anything substantially different from what's already on 
the public record which could further anger congressional republicans. 
That could provoke the committee and say, moreover, "since you've 
been evasive, we'll ask you directly. Then you come before us and 
we'll demand that you give answers." The Judiciary committee has also 
been busy, reportedly drafting articles of impeachment, charging the 
president with perjury, obstruction of justice and abuse of power. 
If the house fails to impeach, it may then vote on a less severe penalty, 
like censure. There is also the possibility of criminal prosecution 
by independent counsel Ken Starr after the president leaves the White 
House. There is a constitutional doubt about whether he could be prosecuted 
while he is a sitting president, but certainly, after he gets out, 
that's perfectly constitutionally permissible. Ken Starr's office 
now says they could be in business for another two years and that 
Starr himself now is open to the possibility of prosecuting the president. 
Here's the White House response to that -- "two more years of Ken 
Starr should send chills down the spines of American taxpayers." zo 
Do we have any clue when the impeachment process will be over? The 
house seems to be on track at this point, assuming nobody upsets the 
apple cart, they are on track for a vote by the full house for the 
middle of December. Of course, if they do vote for impeachment and 
it goes over to the Senate, then all bets are off. Chip Reid in Washington. 
Thank you very much. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>