<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981126.0177 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Nearly half a century has passed since Shoeless Joe Jackson died, 
yet fans still search out his grave to leave mementoes _ bats and 
balls and sometimes even white socks. They ride by the small brick 
house that was his in a working-class neighborhood and visit the ballpark 
where he first picked up a bat. Jackson, whose .356 lifetime batting 
average remains the third highest in major-league history, is not 
forgotten here, where he returned after being banished from baseball 
for his role, along with seven of his teammates, in throwing the 1919 
World Series. Most people here believe Jackson did not go along with 
his Chicago White Sox teammates, and they want baseball to right what 
they consider an intolerable wrong. South Carolina political leaders, 
baseball greats, Jackson family members and others have mounted a 
campaign to get Jackson inducted in the Baseball Hall of Fame in Cooperstown, 
N.Y. They have been trying to persuade baseball commissioner Bud Selig 
to end Jackson's banishment, thereby making him eligible. Attending 
a dinner program here Monday to draw attention to the effort were 
South Carolina Gov.-elect Jim Hodges, former Los Angeles Dodgers coach 
Tommy Lasorda and former Boston Red Sox star Ted Williams. In January, 
Williams filed a 58-page appeal with Selig, claiming that Jackson's 
banishment ended when he died in 1951. Williams sought the support 
of his dinner companions, and the lawyer who drafted the appeal, Louis 
Hegeman of Chicago, said they could best help by circulating petitions 
to be sent to Selig and calling on political leaders for backing in 
the effort. ``The evidence proves there could have been too severe 
a penalty on somebody never convicted in court,'' said Williams, 80, 
who now lives in Hermosa, Fla. He said of Jackson, ``I think he's 
a pretty terrific man.'' Williams' playing days did not overlap those 
of Jackson, but Eddie Collins, the man who signed Williams with the 
Red Sox, did play with Jackson. As a young player in 1936, Williams 
asked about the legendary and somewhat mysterious Jackson. ``He paused 
maybe 3-4-5 seconds,'' Williams said, ``looked down, then looked up 
at the ceiling and said: `Boy what a player, what a hitter. The closest 
hitter I ever saw to Joe Jackson is you.''' That memory sticks with 
Williams and pushes him along as he pays lawyers and makes appearances 
on behalf of Jackson. Joseph Jefferson Wofford Jackson was born in 
1888 in Pickens, S.C. Like many Southern farm families, the Jacksons 
moved to town to work in the cotton mills, settling in West Greenville. 
The oldest in a family that would eventually include eight children, 
Jackson went to work sweeping floors in the Brandon Mill when he was 
7. The family reasoned that the money was more important than his 
education. Baseball became his life at 13 when he stepped onto a dusty 
sandlot outside Brandon Mill to join the mill's team. Jackson's slashing 
swing and sizzling throws soon took him to Greenville's first minor-league 
team, the Spinners, where he earned his nickname. In one game, he 
played in his socks because new shoes had caused blisters. A fan of 
the opposing team shouted, ``You shoeless sonofagun,'' as Jackson 
belted a long triple. In 1908, he went to the major leagues, with 
the Philadelphia Athletics. He joined the White Sox in 1916. In 13 
years as a major-leaguer, he batted .356, an average surpassed only 
by Ty Cobb and Rogers Hornsby. Babe Ruth said he imitated Jackson's 
swing, and many, including Cobb, have called him the greatest natural 
hitter of all time. In court testimony after the White Sox lost the 
series to the Cincinnati Reds in six games, Jackson admitted taking 
$5,000, but, he said, he had tried to give the money back. He also 
went to Sox owner Charles Comisky to tell him what was going on. Moreover, 
Jackson's series play was flawless. He led the Sox's with 12 hits, 
six runs batted in and the only homer of the series. He had no errors. 
He was acquitted but banned from baseball for life by Commissioner 
Kennesaw Landis. Jackson lived for a time in Savannah, Ga., then returned 
to the Brandon Mill area to run a liquor store and a pool hall. He 
never talked about the series. His niece, Joy Standridge of Greenville, 
said the first she and other family members had ever heard of her 
uncle's side was just a few months ago when The State, a newspaper 
in Columbia, reran an article first published in 1949. ``My conscience 
is clear,'' Jackson said in the article. Several years ago, the Greenville 
County Recreation Commission spent $250,000 to improve the mill sandlot 
where Jackson first played. In July, the city staged a month-long 
celebration of his life. City councils in Chicago and Philadelphia, 
the South Carolina General Assembly and sports fans around the nation 
have tried before to get Jackson in the Hall of Fame. In 1989, baseball 
commissioner Bart Giamatti rejected the effort, saying he did not 
``wish to play God with history.'' But people here in this northwestern 
South Carolina city want history to note that once there was a ball 
player who could not read or write but who nonetheless stands as one 
of baseball's greatest. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>