<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981126.0077 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Not since the world began For Solomon talked to a butterfly As a man 
would talk to a man.)) NEW YORK _ There are plenty of Solomonic exchanges 
to be seen at a butterfly exhibition that opens Friday at the American 
Museum of Natural History, mostly between delighted children and the 
magnificent insects that have found their fingers a useful perch. 
The butterflies hatch daily from pupae shipped to the museum from 
butterfly farms in Florida and Costa Rica. One morning this week, 
two queens and a monarch butterfly were holding court in the puparium 
where visitors can watch the miniature miracle of a butterfly spreading 
its wings for the first time. The stars of the show are the morphos, 
large butterflies that seem nothing special when at rest because their 
outerwear is of an unassuming brown. But when they unfold their wings, 
they display an iridescent blue of startling intensity. The morphos 
are joined by a supporting cast of 39 other species, making up a troupe 
of about 400 butterflies. The museum has created a home for the butterflies 
by constructing a vivarium, an enclosed habitat, in its hall of oceanic 
birds. Visitors step from the dour panoramas of storm-swept seas to 
a bright patch of electronically sun-drenched forest so hot and humid 
that most people will want to shed coats and jackets immediately. 
Butterflies are the dinosaurs of the insect world _ crowd pleasers 
that catch attention, even though in the entomologist's eye they are 
no more important than their less showy cousins, the myriad ant and 
beetle species that keep tropical forests in good working order. Nature 
may be red in tooth and claw, but in the swirl of pastels on a butterfly's 
wing, evolution's design studios seem to be purely at play, throwing 
off one stunning pattern after another for the joy of creation. Alas, 
this is not the case at all. The bright colors of a butterfly's wing 
are a danger sign. Most butterflies are poisonous, having absorbed 
as caterpillars the toxins that their food plants create to fend off 
browsers. Those gorgeous hues and conspicuous patterns are a blunt 
message to birds: ``Eat me and have the worst stomachache of your 
life.'' Nature at its most beautiful is most venomous. The morphos' 
iridescent blue seems to have a different rationale, however, one 
that is somehow connected with male-to-male interaction. An old collector's 
trick, writes Dr. Philip J. DeVries in his book on the butterflies 
of Costa Rica, is to wave a blue silk scarf while walking down a forest 
trail. The female morphos, many of which are brown, will ignore the 
lure but the patrolling males will come fluttering down to inspect 
it. Another Costa Rican species in the exhibition is the zebra longwing, 
a member of a striking family of butterflies whose caterpillars feed 
on passionflowers. The male zebras are so passionate and impatient 
that they will mate with a female before she has even left her chrysalis. 
After mating, the female protects herself from further attention by 
wafting from organs known as stink clubs, an antiaphrodisiac scent 
that repels new suitors. Unfortunately, the museum has been unable 
to show the butterflies going through their life cycles. One reason 
is that the exhibition lasts only until the end of February. Another 
is that the U.S. Department of Agriculture, which regulates butterfly 
houses, forbids the use of the insects' natural food plants. The department 
fears that foreign butterflies, if allowed to breed in the United 
States, might introduce diseases that could spread among native species. 
The butterflies in the vivarium seem healthy enough. But some, deprived 
of their familiar food by U.S.D.A. fiat, appear a little forlorn and 
disoriented. A few ignore the potted plants and palms and roost disdainfully 
on the ceiling. It is not a natural experience for them. Still, they 
are blissfully free of predators, they have as much rotten fruit and 
nectar as any butterfly could need, and they are performing an important 
educational mission by showing urban visitors the biological riches 
from the suddenly imperiled forests that have been the butterflies' 
homes for the last 100 million years. Visitors are shown a lively 
display of butterfly lore while approaching the entrance of the vivarium. 
Particularly striking is an array of the butterfly species in the 
Dzanga-Sanga (pronounced zonga-songa) rain forest of the Central African 
Republic. The region is not some hot spot of butterfly speciation, 
as the visitor might suppose, but just a locale chosen because it 
is featured in another exhibition, on biodiversity, at the museum. 
Dr. Eric Quinter, an entomology curator, selected the butterflies 
from the museum's large collection. The vivarium was designed by David 
Harvey, the museum's director of exhibitions. An earlier attempt to 
open the exhibition had to be postponed when the butterflies died, 
perhaps because of adverse reactions to the plants they were offered. 
``The art of doing this is to give them plants they like but don't 
love,'' Harvey said, referring to the agriculture department's ban 
on plants the butterflies could breed on. ``We had to keep changing 
the mix of plants until we got it right.'' The vivarium is small and 
intimate, and is notable for its lack of ropes or other physical barriers 
to separate people from the exhibits. ``We have to trust people, we 
are not taking the heavy-handed approach,'' Harvey said. At least 
during previews, no one trampled the flower beds or tried to catch 
the butterflies. Dr. Jim Miller, a curator of entomology, helped prepare 
the exhibition. His specialty is moths, although he studies a particular 
family of tropical, day-flying moths that he says are as brightly 
colored as ``little jewels.'' There are many more moth species than 
butterflies, but moths get less respect because they are mostly drab 
and nocturnal. Butterflies are thought to have evolved from moths 
more than 100 million years ago, though experts dispute which family 
of moths is their closest living relative. ``Butterflies are just 
a moth group, in a sense,'' Miller said. Most things in a museum, 
however artfully displayed, are dead. Nothing can compete with a living 
butterfly for conveying evolution's design skills. And it doesn't 
take the wisdom of Solomon to understand the message that these delicate 
creatures bring from their fragile homes. ``The Butterfly Conservatory: 
Tropical Butterflies Alive in Winter'' opens Friday and runs through 
Feb. 28 at the American Museum of Natural History, Central Park West 
at 79th Street. Museum hours: Sundays through Thursdays, 10 a.m. to 
5:45 p.m.; Fridays and Saturdays, 10 a.m. to 8:45 p.m. A separate 
admission is required for the butterfly exhibition in addition to 
the suggested museum admission; admission to the exhibition and museum 
is $13; $9 for students and the elderly; $7.50 for children 12 and 
under and free for children under 2. A combination ticket including 
museum admission, the butterfly exhibition and one film at the museum's 
Imax Theater is $16; $12 for students and the elderly; $10 for children 
12 and under and free for children under 2. Information and film schedule: 
(212) 769-5100; to buy tickets by phone: (212) 769-5200. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>