<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981126.0116 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Once heard one friend offer another this observation about romance: 
``It's not serious until he reveals his paycheck.'' I was tempted 
to blurt out, ``That's ridiculous!'' But memory stopped me. After 
all, my husband and I were practically engaged before we felt comfortable 
making any confessions about salaries. And a quick poll of our friends 
bore a similar conclusion. While most of us wouldn't hesitate to ask 
a confidant about his love life, his paycheck is a different story. 
Sex may be private, but it is rarely secret. Money, however, is the 
best-kept secret. It's no wonder. Mixed messages about money surround 
us. At some point, we have all been taught that money is the root 
of all evil, that it does not buy happiness or, as the song goes, 
love. Hollywood, notorious for making its elite obscenely rich, has 
always preached the villainy of wealth. See the humble, poor hero 
outwit the selfish, rich snob. (Think ``Titanic.'') Watch the leading 
lady escape wealth and find the path to happiness. (Think ``Titanic'' 
again.) And yet, save for a few eccentric starving artists, we rarely 
find people in real life who brag about their humble circumstances. 
When discussing our current status, the popular strategy seems to 
be to subtly give the impression of having means. You might, for example, 
work the phrase, ``I prefer Paris in the fall'' into a conversation. 
Well, maybe that's not so subtle, but you get the idea. The trick 
is to have money, but not to act as if you have a lot of it, while 
making people assume that you have a lot of it. And if you (italics)do(end 
italics) have a lot of it, by all means veil its source. Was it inherited? 
Won? Earned? Borrowed? Let them wonder. Psychologists say family customs 
involving money are loaded with emotional issues of control, power, 
security and love. I don't have many financial memories of my childhood 
_ I know that I had what I needed and most of what I wanted. But I 
do remember my first brush with real wealth. It came in college. A 
dorm-mate offered me a ride home, never bothering to mention that 
the driver would be her family's chauffeur. While she enjoyed easy 
banter with the uniformed driver, I was tongue-tied. ``We'll stop 
at the next Pizza Hut for lunch,'' she directed, with comfortable 
authority and without a hint of snobbery. I sat in stupid silence, 
amazed at her ease. The only person I had ever commanded with such 
confidence was my 9-year-old little brother _ and with fewer results. 
So this was what it was like to be rich. Later, when I was in my late 
20s, a friend likened our circle of newlywed peers to teams at the 
start of a race. Sensing injustice at having poor earning power despite 
a rich education (a PhD in biochemistry), she was the first of my 
friends to express the strain of reconciling her personal worth with 
her bank account. Now that we are older and, we like to think, wiser, 
this kind of questioning is far more common and the cause for some 
puzzling behavior. The few people I know who have acquired wealth 
seem as uncomfortable as those without it. My brother says little 
when asked about his work _ a successful career that finds him lavishly 
entertaining clients in the south of France. I think he is quiet because 
he does not want to be perceived as pompous. (He isn't.) And I'm certain 
that he is quiet because he fears he is at risk of losing the right 
to whine about his job. (He is.) I once read an article about a support 
group for the born rich. Its members struggled to find purpose in 
their lives because the usual mission, to support oneself and one's 
family, was absent. So I suppose that even the rich can be conflicted 
about money. My own ambivalence surfaces in my response to the question, 
``What do you do for a living?'' I am slow to confess full-time motherhood 
to the preschool aide who works three jobs, but I wouldn't hesitate 
to tell the doctor next door. The main reason for our confusion is 
that we hate to acknowledge how much money changes our lives, how 
it gives us opportunities. In the United States, we like to believe 
in equality. We talk endlessly of leveling the playing field, of equal 
rights and access. We don't want to admit that money makes an irreconcilable 
difference in individual lives, in opening doors to education, training 
or experience. Might I have been a deft polo player? Perhaps, but 
who cares? Yet if Johnny the Drug Lord could have been a skilled surgeon, 
it is tragic if he didn't have the chance. Maybe we are ready for 
a new brand of psychology. Call it financial psychology. It might 
be interesting to hear all those popular catch phrases like ``enabler,'' 
``codependent'' and ``self-actualized'' applied to our fiscal lives. 
And imagine the eyebrows I could raise when I told friends that I 
was off to see my financial therapist. Linda Carroll Martin is a writer 
in Cincinnati. Submit your account of struggling or succeeding in 
financial life to My Money, Money &AMP; Business, The New York Times, 
229 West 43rd Street, New York, N.Y. 10036. E-mail: mymoney(AT)nytimes.com. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>