<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981126.0158 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The effort by the former Chilean dictator, Gen. Augusto Pinochet, 
to escape extradition to Spain and a possible trial for mass killings 
moved into the political arena Thursday, with the British government 
facing the decision of whether to go forward with the diplomatically 
volatile case. Jack Straw, the home secretary, requested a week's 
extension, into mid-December, of a court deadline for deciding whether 
to authorize moving ahead on the Spanish petition for extradition 
or letting the 83-year-old general return home. The deadline was set 
in motion by a court ruling Wednesday that Pinochet did not have immunity 
from extradition. The Chilean embassy Thursday night delivered written 
arguments for Pinochet's release to the Home Office, and Chile's foreign 
minister, Jose Miguel Insulza, was flying here from Santiago for a 
Friday meeting with Robin Cook, the foreign secretary. Holding to 
a government line increasingly strained by events, Cook said he would 
emphasize to his Chilean counterpart that the extradition process 
was a judicial one and not a political one. Straw, for his part, said 
he would be acting in a ``quasi-judicial'' role. But the issue is 
an awkward one for Prime Minister Tony Blair's government. Britain 
is eager not to jeopardize its close diplomatic, military and business 
relationships with Chile, but any move to rid itself of the unwanted 
case would run counter to the commitment that Blair has made to an 
``ethical'' foreign policy. It would also bring condemnation from 
the large numbers of Europeans who revile Pinochet and the many members 
of Blair's Labor Party with strong memories of the repressive government 
that Pinochet ran. Rights groups that were elated by the ruling Wednesday 
would also be upset. Straw, a key member of the Blair Cabinet, was 
himself a college radical who marched in anti-Pinochet rallies in 
the 1970s. The Law Lords of the House of Lords, England's highest 
court, set the stage for the Blair government's deepening preoccupation 
with the case on Wednesday by ruling that Pinochet did not have sovereign 
immunity from arrest under British law. The majority in the 3-to-2 
decision argued that crimes like hostage-taking and torture could 
not be considered the functional acts of a head of state. The ruling, 
an unexpected reversal of a unanimous lower court decision last month 
in Pinochet's favor, was hailed by human rights groups and a number 
of European governments as a major advance in international law and 
a warning to tyrants that they could not escape punishment for abuses 
in office. But critics denounced it as a reckless extension of authority 
across national boundaries that could empower rogue prosecutors to 
try to extradite people like Queen Elizabeth and President Clinton 
on their travels abroad. From the moment the general was arrested 
in London on Oct. 16, Blair's government has tried to keep itself 
publicly detached, saying the matter was one between magistrates in 
Spain and England. The original warrant came from Baltasar Garzon, 
a high-profile Spanish magistrate who has been investigating atrocities 
committed during the ``dirty wars'' in the 1970s and 1980s in Latin 
America. Accusing the general of genocide, it tied him to the deaths 
and ``disappearances'' of 3,178 people. The Spanish government has 
given Garzon only belated and begrudging endorsement. The bold move 
caught the British by surprise and placed them in an awkward diplomatic 
position because Chile is a longtime friend and an active trade partner 
as well as having been a valued backer of Britain during the 1982 
Falkland Islands war. British businessmen have been active in Chile, 
particularly in the mining sector, and Chileans have purchased arms, 
frigates and warplanes from Britain. ``The military bonds are strong, 
and it would be a mistake to underestimate the importance today of 
the ties from the Falklands war,'' said Christopher D. Scott, an expert 
on the Chilean economy from the London School of Economics. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>