<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981126.0112 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Putting televisions and videocassette players in vans is nothing new. 
Builders of custom vans have been doing it for years. But buying a 
custom van has often meant accepting all that goes with it: crushed 
velour curtains, for instance. Moreover, the size and shape of traditional 
cathode-ray TV's usually require a ``pop-top'' _ a reinforced fiberglass 
roof into which the monitor is mounted _ that can raise a vehicle's 
height to more than 7 feet, barring it from many parking decks. Thus 
owners of TV-equipped custom vans may find themselves exiled from 
that most sacred of American soil: the mall. Oldsmobile's new Premiere 
edition of the Silhouette minivan solves that problem by using a compact 
liquid-crystal-display monitor as the centerpiece of its integrated 
entertainment system. Similar to the personal LCDs in the upper-class 
sections of jetliners, the Silhouette's monitor folds into the ceiling 
when not in use. The system (which has inputs for video games and 
camcorders) may delight sojourning parents who would otherwise have 
to endure long bouts of familial closeness with their children. But 
don't expect the Palm d'Or from neighborhood film critics. If in a 
cinephilic moment you have ever bemoaned the fate of films adapted 
to the small screen, the Silhouette's tiny display will leave you 
sobbing like the last scene in ``Old Yeller'' _ and squinting, besides. 
At the video store, you can pretty much rule out the works of David 
Lean, Sidney Pollock or Vittorio Storraro, or any movie with the word 
``sweeping'' in the box blurbs. Also, since LCDs tend to wash out 
in direct sunlight, the Premiere's display is unkind to dark movies 
involving menacing asteroids, sinking luxury liners and/or Bruce Willis. 
So, ``2001: A Space Odyssey,'' no. ``The Water Boy,'' sure. Bear in 
mind that since the system does not receive broadcast signals (or 
even cable), you will be captive to the same movies over and over 
for as long as your trip shall last. Stay away from story lines that 
might give the youngsters ideas, like ``Children of the Corn'' or 
``Battleship Potemkin.'' On balance, though, the Silhouette Premiere 
might well be the ultimate family vacation vehicle. The audio system 
accommodates four sets of headphones, so that the rear passengers 
_ be they youngsters or elders _ can each listen to the movie, radio 
or Nintendo while the folks up front listen to a CD or carry on a 
conversation (a far-fetched notion, I grant you). When the front compartment's 
stereo system is switched off, the video soundtrack can be played 
through the speakers with self-deafening effect. Note to Celine Dion: 
Less is more. The CD unit, videotape player and videocassette storage 
rack are stacked neatly under the center console of the dashboard; 
the screen flips down between the headrests for the front seats. Despite 
the tidy packaging it is a bit of a contortion for the passengers 
to move to and from the back of the van. The system includes a handy 
remote control _ which, like the headphones, was stolen from our $31,345 
test vehicle, proof that some people will steal about anything. The 
Premiere comes larded with every convenience in General Motors' minivan 
repertoire. Twin sliding doors yawn wide for back-seat access; the 
passenger-side door is powered so that a slight tug on the handle 
will send it on its way (there is a child safety lock as well as a 
pinch-protection program to protect little fingers). Vacation-wise 
features include a sturdy roof rack, an oversized rear cargo door 
and a heavenly host of cup holders, map pockets, cargo netting, convenience 
lights and electrical outlets. There is even a built-in air pump in 
the back for inflating kiddie pools or novelty gifts. While the Silhouette 
can be had with eight-passenger seating (including two integrated 
child safety seats), the Premiere version kicks appointments up a 
notch with a second row of reclining leather captain's chairs and 
a third row of 50/50 split-bench seating. From the driver's seat, 
the Premiere feels a lot like other GM products, which trade a degree 
of refinement and personality for the cost advantages of standardization. 
Buyers enamored of the high seating positions of sport utilities will 
like the Premiere's power-adjustable seats. I am over 6 feet tall. 
Standing outside the vehicle, I can adjust the seat height from knee 
level to nearly hip-high, where it is actually higher than those of 
many sport utilities. Mechanically, the Premiere _ while lacking the 
silken solidity of, say, the Toyota Sienna _ does everything asked 
of it with quiet competence. The 3.4-liter V6 engine produces a bit 
more power (185 horsepower) than it used to, and it's smoother than 
I remember. The Premiere rides on a touring-tuned suspension with 
automatic load leveling, stiffer shocks, anti-roll bars and 15-inch 
radial tires. This setup helps: The ride is firm but comfortable and 
compliant. Roomy, versatile and well-equipped for the price, the Silhouette 
Premiere will be a godsend to buyers whose children suffer boredom-induced 
behavior meltdowns on long trips. I also suspect that a few kid-frazzled 
parents will sneak out to the driveway at night with a blanket, a 
bottle of wine and an old movie. Ah, alone at last! INSIDE TRACK: 
A private screening room with power steering. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>