<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981126.0123 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Gene Moore, a window dresser who worked such fanciful wonders with 
shoes and had such a whimsical way with diamonds that he had Fifth 
Avenue pedestrians doing delighted double takes for more than half 
a century, died on Monday at his home in Manhattan. He was 88 and 
best known for turning Tiffany's five little windows into head-turning 
attractions. While the 5,000 or so windows Moore decorated for Tiffany 
&AMP; Co. during his 39 years as the store's vice president for window 
display were testament enough to the scope of his imaginative powers, 
to fully appreciate the impact of his artistic genius you must take 
a stroll down memory lane, force yourself to stop in front of a typical 
Tiffany window of the 1940s and yawn as you regard a neat, linear 
arrangement of silver platters, bowls, candlesticks and the like. 
Now fast forward a decade or so, retrace your steps and just try not 
to stop when, out of the corner of your eye you spot, say, a bird, 
its beak extended, pulling _ hey, that's not a worm, that's a diamond 
necklace! _ out of the earth. For all the acclaim he enjoyed at Tiffany's, 
by the time he joined the store in 1955 Moore had spent 20 years making 
a name for himself as a Fifth Avenue innovator, first at the I. Miller 
shoe store chain, then at Bergdorf Goodman and its Delman shoe division 
and later at Bonwit Teller. At a time when the theory of window display 
was to cram in as many mannequins displaying as much merchandise as 
possible, Moore created interest simply by clearing away the clutter 
and limiting a single window to one or two mannequins, but always 
in such a startling pose or situation that they were sure to draw 
attention. In one Bonwit window on a firefighter-red theme, for example, 
he had red-clad fashion mannequins interacting with firemen, one of 
whom roasted a hot dog against a mannequin's presumably red-hot red 
swimsuit. He also enlisted artists like Robert Rauschenberg to provide 
backdrop paintings and other artistic touches for his displays, even 
giving Jasper Johns his first public exhibition as part of a Bonwit 
window display. The man who captivated New York was born in Birmingham, 
Ala., ``the wrong place,'' as he called it in his 1990 illustrated 
autobiography, ``My Time at Tiffany's,'' written with Jay Hyams. He 
spent his childhood plotting to escape, dreaming first of being a 
concert pianist, later imagining himself as a painter and enjoying 
some modest success until he decided he would never be great and burned 
all his paintings. By then, Moore had made it to New York, a city 
in which his impish humor and extravagant flights of fancy fit right 
in. It should come as no real surprise that the man who repeatedly 
used his collection of stuffed hummingbirds in window displays would 
make it a practice to talk to himself and even converse, he boasted, 
with ``what other people call inanimate objects.'' What set Moore 
apart in the pantheon of artistic eccentrics is that the inanimate 
objects talked back. It was, for example, one of the lions in front 
of the New York Public Library, the downtown lion, to be exact, that 
steered him to his first job in New York. Frustrated at not being 
able to find work after arriving in the city in 1935, Moore was resting 
against the lion's pedestal, he recalled, when he asked what he should 
do. The lion told him to follow his nose, down East 41st Street, where, 
sure enough, he found a job as a bookstore messenger. He stumbled 
onto his career a year later when he went to work for a company that 
made props for window displays. He impressed a client, Jim Buckley, 
a free-lance window dresser who later became display manager at I. 
Miller and hired Moore as his assistant. In addition to his window 
work, Moore had a hand in many artistic projects over the years, designing 
costumes and sets for the Paul Taylor dance company, for example, 
and creating a rage for tiny white Christmas tree lights with a series 
of seasonal displays for the plaza of the Seagram Building. Still, 
it was his window displays, especially at Tiffany's, that established 
his reputation for zany creativity. He used broken glass as a motif 
so often that alarmed passers-by were forever calling the police. 
Once, during a water shortage, he insisted on replacing the water 
in a fountain display with gin. Moore, who leaves no immediate survivors, 
never worried about where his next idea would come from. When he was 
stumped, as he was when it came time for his last Tiffany's windows, 
in December 1994, Moore knew where to turn, in that case to his favorite 
teddy bear, Porridge, which explains why Moore filled all five windows 
with teddy bears. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>