<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981126.0082 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Attention fellow dinosaurs, old fogies and senescent Beatlemaniacs. 
If you can hardly find any music on the radio to listen to nowadays 
and the bouncy toy sounds of Brandy and Monica fighting over a boy 
don't speak to your soul the way Joni Mitchell's or Bob Dylan's records 
once did, there is still pop music being made that is worth your attention. 
Some of it is even made by musicians in their 20s. And some of it 
(although not much) is even very popular. That music is not the weepy 
bombast of Celine Dion or the generic country-pop of Shania Twain, 
two talented mass-appeal singers whose songs and productions reflect 
a glitzy late-90s, corporate impersonality. Nor is it the Three Tenors 
peddling ersatz high culture to stadium-size audiences. It is certainly 
not Barry Manilow delivering a shallow, emotionally vapid tribute 
to Frank Sinatra on his newest album, ``Manilow Sings Sinatra'' (Arista) 
or Neil Diamond pompously trampling over classic movie songs on his 
new two-disk recording, ``The Movie Album: As Time Goes By'' (Columbia). 
Unpretentious, nondisposable pop has always been hard to find, but 
it's a little harder to come by nowadays than it used to be. Eons 
ago, it seems, pop music was the medium adopted by baby boomers for 
sharing their feelings about sex, politics, relationships and society. 
Pop music mattered. With the rise of MTV, television swallowed up 
pop and regurgitated it as passive couch entertainment. Now computers 
are supplanting television as the hot center of youth culture. The 
world is a chat room in which you can download fragments of the new 
Jewel and Alanis Morisette albums and sample them like dabs of cologne. 
Twenty years ago, it seemed possible that the American songwriters 
who came of age in the 1960s and 70s would develop into grand old 
sages of rock-and-roll and that their audiences would grow old with 
them, continuing a shared conversation about growing up, learning 
hard lessons and facing mortality. That expectation proved wrong. 
Once it had grown up, the rock-and-roll generation didn't need its 
pop stars to be role models anymore. It was too busy making money 
and creating babies to keep up with heroes who themselves seemed less 
heroic as they aged and sobered up. At the same time, the performers 
who were supposed to remain beacons of wisdom and enlightenment in 
an extended rock-and-roll community (with a few scattered exceptions) 
lost courage. Fame tends to be addictive and toxic. Once it's attained, 
holding onto it becomes an end in itself. In a youth-obsessed culture, 
pop stars are the last people in the world who want to be viewed as 
middle-aged. Most feel compelled to eke out the last drop of youth-culture 
adoration before their fan bases evaporate. Even pop stars who are 
now in their 30s are busy cultivating ``younger'' sounds. On much 
of Whitney Houston's new album, ``My Love Is Your Love'' (Arista), 
one of pop's most powerful balladeers has suddenly turned girlish, 
reining in her majestic gospel power to pose as Brandy and Monica's 
sassy peer. Meanwhile, the old dinosaurs roll on. Joni Mitchell's 
hugely disappointing new album, ``Taming the Tiger'' (Reprise), may 
not have a fraction of the immediacy, depth and melodicism of her 
best 1970s work, but the music has some texture and the voice sounds 
lived in. Probably this year's best ``new'' album of adult pop music 
was recorded 32 years ago: ``Bob Dylan Live 1966'' (Columbia), a two-disk 
``authorized bootleg.'' So here follows one veteran critic's annotated 
personal roundup of favorite adult pop albums of 1998. Omitted is 
Dylan's album because it consists of old material. Except for the 
top two _ Audra McDonald's ``Way Back to Paradise'' and ``The McGarrigle 
Hour'' _ the rest are listed alphabetically. (CDs are $17 to $18 for 
a single disk to $25 for a two-CD set.) AUDRA McDONALD: ``WAY BACK 
TO PARADISE'' (Nonesuch). The debut recording of the 28-year-old vocal 
phenomenon who has won three Tony Awards just barely qualifies as 
a pop album since most of the material hovers on the thin line between 
Broadway and opera. Instead of making a conventional debut by singing 
Broadway standards, Ms. McDonald boldly introduces recent work by 
six rising young composers who represent musical theater's best hope 
of transcending the schlock of Andrew Lloyd Webber, Frank Wildhorn 
and Disney's second-string songwriting teams. Whether any of these 
composers make it on Broadway, however, depends on whether their work 
strikes a populist chord. The group includes one genius, Adam Guettel 
(the grandson of Richard Rodgers), whose deeply romantic pop music 
roams all over the landscape, from Samuel Barber to gospel, and several 
others who over time might prove to be equally important. Ricky Ian 
Gordon's settings of texts by Langston Hughes and James Agee, like 
Guettel's three contributions, are accessible, moving art songs. The 
chattiest numbers are by Michael John LaChuisa, who is composing a 
musical, ``Marie Christine,'' specifically for Ms. McDonald. Ms. McDonald's 
singing is magnificent: highly dramatic, tasteful, psychologically 
acute, heart-rending. Although operatically trained, the mezzo-soprano 
thinks nothing of slipping into gospel or into speech-song or into 
hard belting when the song demands. Her casual breaking down of musical 
categories, both vocally and in her choice of material, indicates 
the affinity a new generation of formally trained singers has for 
nonclassical music. Everything about the record is extremely encouraging. 
``THE McGARRIGLE HOUR'' (Hannibal/Rykodisc). The wonderful 21-song 
collection is a kind of summary statement by North America's leading 
folk music dynasty, whose senior members are now in their 50s. They 
include the French-Canadian sisters Kate and Anna McGarrigle; Kate's 
former husband, Loudon Wainwright III, their two children, Rufus and 
Martha Wainwright, and assorted other relatives and friends. The album 
is a kind of marathon home musicale in which they sing each other's 
songs as well as personal favorites by others, from Irving Berlin's 
``What'll I Do?'' to Cole Porter's ``Allez-Vous-En.'' Even the vintage 
Broadway tunes shed their urban glamour to become bare-bones reflections 
on life, love and loss, sung plainly without a trace of self-pity 
by the McGarrigles' lovely homespun voices. ``The McGarrigle Hour'' 
conveys a powerful sense of the extended family as a vital, complicated 
organism nurturing itself through music, the young and the middle-aged 
singing side by side, all allowing their blemishes and quirks to show. 
The folksy purity of the music along with a sense of these intertwining 
creative lives offers a realism rarely found in pop. Note: Loudon 
and Rufus Wainwright each have fine solo albums in this roundup. Here 
are the other recommended albums: ANDY BEY: ``SHADES OF BEY'' (Evidence). 
The little-known jazz baritone has a voice so cool and mellow you 
want to take a dip in it. Dorival Caymmi's ``Like a Lover'' (with 
lyrics by Alan and Marilyn Bergman), crooned to a softly strummed 
guitar, sets the dreamy mood. ERIC CLAPTON: ``PILGRIM'' (Reprise). 
The best songs on this bleakly eloquent album of orchestrated blues 
meditations express a choked-up grief and despair that slices to the 
bone. The year's most underrated album. Killer cuts: ``Pilgrim'' and 
``Inside of Me.'' ``ADAM COHEN'' (Columbia). The debut album of Leonard 
Cohen's son Adam reveals him to be a chip off the old block in his 
grimly perceptive evisceration of troubled sexual relationships and 
rivalries. A promising beginning. ELVIS COSTELLO WITH BURT BACHARACH: 
``PAINTED FROM MEMORY'' (Mercury). The collaboration on a suite of 
lovelorn ballads with music (lavishly arranged) by Bacharach and lyrics 
by Costello, who sings them in an anguished geeky voice, powerfully 
weds an airy 60s pop romanticism with a lingering post-punk orneriness. 
Killer cut: ``God Give Me Strength.'' SHERYL CROW: ``THE GLOBE SESSIONS'' 
(A&AMP;M). These tough, knotty well-made observational songs sung 
with sinewy bravado (tinged with tenderness) find a bracing balance 
between vocal spontaneity and solid song craft. ARETHA FRANKLIN: ``A 
ROSE IS STILL A ROSE'' (Arista). In songs written and produced by 
such hip-hop luminaries as Lauryn Hill and Sean (Puffy) Combs, soul, 
hip-hop and funk collide happily. If the material is uneven, the queen 
of soul is in great voice, not having sounded this good since the 
early 1980s. HERBIE HANCOCK: ``GERSHWIN'S WORLD'' (Verve). Hancock's 
triumphantly sweeping overview of George Gershwin and his influences 
features an all-star cast that ranges from Stevie Wonder (``St. Louis 
Blues'') to a craggy-voiced Joni Mitchell (``The Man I Love''). Hancock 
plays a movement from Ravel's Piano Concerto in G. Comprehensive and 
deep. LYLE LOVETT: ``STEP INSIDE THIS HOUSE'' (Curb/MCA). The two-disk 
anthology of Lovett's favorite Texas songwriters (including Townes 
Van Zandt, Vince Bell, Guy Clark and Willis Allan Ramsey, among many 
others) is a labor of love that is beautifully sung, if a trifle bland. 
MADONNA: ``RAY OF LIGHT'' (Maverick/Warner Brothers) This transcendent 
semi-electronic disco album matches the best Donna Summer in atmospheric 
intensity. Madonna's explorations of spirituality feel sincere if 
a little awkward. But the spectacle of the 40-year-old pop star still 
refusing to play it safe is heartening. BETTE MIDLER: ``BATHHOUSE 
BETTY'' (Warner Brothers) Ms. Midler's best and most varied album 
since her 1972 debut, ``The Divine Miss M,'' captures its prototype's 
exuberance but in a more restrained, grown-up 90s way. WILLIE NELSON: 
``TEATRO'' (Island). The producer Daniel Lanois, the master of evocative 
rustic sound effects, helps enhance Nelson's well-earned aura of Texas 
sage on a collection of old and recent Nelson true-grit ballads. Emmylou 
Harris provides haunting rough-edged backup vocals. BONNIE RAITT: 
``FUNDAMENTAL'' (Capitol). Ms. Raitt, teamed with the producer Mitchell 
Froom, draws back into a spare bluesy groove. The singing is tough 
and convincing. Killer cut: John Hiatt's devastating ``Lovers Will.'' 
SEAL: ``HUMAN BEING'' (Warner Brothers). Multi-layered, impassioned, 
almost symphonic in places, Seal's third album broods about the end 
of a relationship and its cosmic implications. Trevor Horn's astonishingly 
rich production makes up for the vagueness of some of the lyrics. 
Killer cut: ``No Easy Way.'' DUNCAN SHEIK: ``HUMMING'' (Atlantic). 
Sheik's Buddhist-influenced reflections are gently sung and exquisitely 
arranged in an orchestral style that recalls Nick Drake's early records 
inflected with George Harrison-style psychedelia. Luscious. ELLIOTT 
SMITH: ``XO'' (Dreamworks). While the bright, lush production of the 
first major-label album for a rising singer-songwriter recalls the 
heyday of the Beatles and the Beach Boys, Smith's introspective songs 
and low-key delivery pull intriguingly against the arrangements. LOUDON 
WAINWRIGHT 3D: ``LITTLE SHIP'' (Charisma). Just because the songs' 
middle-aged growing pains are expressed comically doesn't mean they 
don't hurt. Wainwright imparts bitter truths and makes you laugh at 
them. ``RUFUS WAINWRIGHT'' (Dreamworks). Once you get used to his 
marble-mouthed diction, you find delight in the lavishly arranged 
folk-pop songs by Loudon Wainwright's gay son. These elliptical, anguished, 
funny, ornate reflections on family ties and the painful comedy of 
(usually) unrequited love are well worth studying. LUCINDA WILLIAMS: 
``CAR WHEELS ON A GRAVEL ROAD'' (Mercury). Southern country-rock realism 
constructed so artfully it sounds artless. These timeless vignettes 
evoke people and places with the same pungency as great short stories. 
Ms. Williams embodies a literary and musical esthetic that might be 
called essentialist in its leanness and precision of inflection. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>