<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981126.0171 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The walls and roof are almost finished on a huge new General Motors 
diesel engine factory in southwestern Ohio. Several thousand engineers 
in Michigan, Indiana and Illinois are still developing new diesel 
engines for future cars, sport utility vehicles and pickup trucks. 
But the industry's broad plans to put diesels into millions of vehicles 
early in the next century have suddenly been thrown into confusion. 
California environmental regulators voted this month to eliminate 
the more lenient pollution standards that have long prevailed for 
diesel-powered vehicles. Instead, diesel engines will have to meet 
the same pollution standards as gasoline-powered vehicles. Gasoline 
engine standards are being tightened, so regulators say it will be 
almost impossible to design diesel engines to meet the new rules, 
despite considerable progress in the design of cleaner diesels. The 
result is a virtual ban on diesel engines in California, which accounts 
for a tenth of the nation's auto sales, once the new rules are phased 
in between 2004 and 2007. Auto industry executives are furious. They 
had been counting on diesel engines as part of the answer to environmentalists' 
concerns about global warming and poor fuel economy, particularly 
the low gas mileage of full-size sport utility vehicles and pickup 
trucks. The latest diesel engines use as much as 33 percent less fuel 
per mile as their gasoline counterparts, according to auto industry 
engineers. And while even the cleanest diesels still produce slightly 
more soot and smog-causing gases than gasoline engines, diesels emit 
up to 20 percent less carbon dioxide, a gas linked to global warming. 
GM in particular had been counting on diesels to improve fuel efficiency 
and reduce emissions of so-called greenhouse gases. ``It's a major 
concern coming out of the California regulations,'' said John Smith, 
GM chairman and chief executive. ``It goes to the fundamentals of 
what is our long-term strategy for dealing with emissions and so forth.'' 
Engine manufacturers are even angrier. ``Which environmentalist group 
is going to be in power tomorrow, so I know whether diesels are going 
to be the greatest thing or the worst thing?'' asked Timothy D. Leuliette, 
vice chairman of Detroit Diesel, a unit of the Penske Corp. California 
regulators say that reducing emissions of greenhouse gases is not 
their problem, and should be handled by the federal Environmental 
Protection Agency. ``Our clear, unmistakable authority to enact regulations 
is to reduce urban smog,'' said Allan Hirsch, a spokesman for the 
California Air Resources Board. ``Global warming is an international 
issue and the U.S. EPA ought to be the agency taking the lead.'' The 
EPA is drafting new pollution standards for vehicles, to be released 
early next year, and declined to discuss what they would include. 
The agency has a tradition of adopting regulations slightly less strict 
than California's. The California Air Resources Board's own technical 
staff recommended a more lenient standard covering diesels, but the 
board rejected this idea after hearing strong pleas from environmentalists 
in the hours before the board's final vote on Nov. 5. Many U.S. environmentalists 
are dubious about diesels. They point to research indicating that 
tiny soot particles can cause cancer, and warn that diesels will always 
create more soot than gasoline engines. Environmentalists also warn 
that converting to diesels will limit opportunities to tighten pollution 
rules even further someday. And they contend that diesel engines are 
not the only way to improve fuel efficiency and reduce emissions of 
greenhouse gases _ alternatives include building smaller vehicles, 
developing advanced technologies like fuel cells or even taking such 
simple steps as installing multivalve gasoline engines, said Daniel 
Becker, an energy efficiency expert at the Sierra Club. Becker said 
that in installing diesel engines, automakers were not really interested 
in addressing global warming. Instead, he said, they want to keep 
building ever-bigger sport utility vehicles, which earn the highest 
profit margins, and must install diesels to continue meeting federal 
fuel-economy rules. The light-truck operations of GM, Ford Motor Co. 
and DaimlerChrysler AG are all struggling to comply with these rules. 
Automakers are beginning to install multivalve engines in some large 
sport utility vehicles, but are reluctant to do so on a wide scale 
because it hurts the vehicles' towing capacity. And the American public 
shows little interest in buying small fuel-efficient cars, said Robert 
J. Eaton, a co-chairman of DaimlerChrysler. Automakers, particularly 
GM, last tried to push diesel engines during the oil crisis of the 
early 1980s. But the diesel engines marketed then were comparatively 
smoky, noisy and smelly. They have virtually disappeared from the 
U.S. light-vehicle market. Yet since the early 1980s, enormous progress 
has been made in building better diesels. The latest diesels coming 
out of the laboratories emit no visible smoke, produce up to 90 percent 
less soot and generate up to 75 percent less noise than the vehicles 
of the early 1980s, industry engineers say. Even the smell has faded. 
Manufacturers have spent heavily on diesel development mainly because 
of these engines' popularity in Europe. Fuel prices in Europe are 
four times higher than those in the United States, and Europeans have 
taken a great interest in global warming. Diesels are now installed 
in 22 percent of new family vehicles in Europe, compared with less 
than 2 percent here. Engine factories have been unable to keep up 
with demand in Europe, and diesels are expected to reach 30 percent 
of the European market, once the factories catch up. The auto industry 
has a history of saying that further pollution reductions are impossible, 
only to find ways to comply with new regulations. Patrick Charbonneau, 
vice president for engine engineering at Navistar International Corp., 
which is designing diesel prototypes for the next generation of Ford 
Expedition and Lincoln Navigator sport utility vehicles, said that 
research on diesel emissions was not as advanced as research on gasoline 
engine emissions. Further spending might lead to breakthroughs, he 
said. But making diesel engines as clean as gasoline engines is particularly 
difficult because current regulations, particularly in California, 
allow diesel fuel to be much dirtier than gasoline. California regulations 
require oil companies to remove almost all of the sulfur from gasoline, 
for example, because sulfur clogs catalytic converters and allows 
a vehicle's emissions to soar. But California's rules allow diesel 
fuel to have nearly 17 times the sulfur of gasoline. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>