<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981126.0117 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
America is putting on an unusual spectacle: The economy keeps growing 
and thriving even while manufacturing suffers and falls behind. That 
rarely happens, and its appearance now reopens the long-debated question 
of whether manufacturing still matters. The issue is particularly 
pertinent because manufacturers have been insisting, with much chest-thumping, 
that they have made American factories the most efficient in the world 
today. The Asian crisis, they argue, is only a temporary setback in 
a turnaround that is not yet evident in the data. But evidence of 
manufacturing's shrinking role in the economy shows up everywhere. 
The Olin Corp. has just announced the closing of a factory that makes 
copper rods, wires and tubes; imports cost less. Thomson Consumer 
Electronics recently shut the last factory in the United States making 
television sets, replacing it with a plant in Juarez, Mexico, where 
labor is so much cheaper. IBM, Dell Computer and others assemble computers 
from parts increasingly made abroad. Once the kingpin of the economy, 
manufacturing in 1997 accounted for only about 17 percent of the wages, 
salaries, benefits and profits generated within the United States, 
the Commerce Department reported this month. The Asian economic crisis 
has been particularly hard on manufacturers, denying them sales abroad 
while cutting costs for their overseas competitors. Anecdote and statistic 
alike suggest that the slide is not easily reversed. Even the sophisticated 
equipment that American manufacturers buy for their factories _ computer-controlled 
machines, for example, that cut and shape metal _ now come mostly 
from Japan and Europe. Manufacturing has been losing momentum for 
decades, with its share of the gross domestic product dwindling to 
just over half of what it was in 1953, the peak postwar year. That 
year, manufacturing yielded 29.6 percent of personal compensation 
and corporate profits; by 1989, the eve of the last recession, its 
share had fallen to 18.6 percent. ``My concern is that we can go too 
far down,'' said the economist Robert Hayes, an expert in manufacturing 
at Harvard University. ``But I don't know how far too far is. I would 
have thought 10 years ago that where we are now was too far. But we 
are still humming along.'' Switzerland is the only developed nation 
whose manufacturing has diminished further than in the United States, 
and it regards itself as vulnerable, Hayes said. The Swiss are still 
active in pharmaceuticals and machinery manufacturing, but banking 
and tourism play ever bigger roles as sources of wages and profits. 
And these days, banks can leave a country through mergers even faster 
than factories. Factories leave fast enough. What still surprises 
so many executives, Hayes said, is ``how quickly less-developed nations 
have been able to master advanced manufacturing techniques and technology.'' 
In theory at least, any nation should be able to function quite nicely 
with a diminished manufacturing sector. The huge and growing service 
sector _ retailers, banks, insurers, law firms, hotel operators, restaurants, 
phone companies, brokers, home builders, airlines and Internet operators 
_ should be able to generate a satisfactory amount of income and profits. 
Certainly they play a big role today in the stock market's spectacular 
performance and in strong job growth. But none of the major manufacturing 
nations has tested the theory. Diminished though it is, manufacturing 
is still central to the economy. Americans are far and away the most 
innovative in developing new products and new software, which are 
then incorporated into manufacturing here and abroad. And within the 
United States, manufacturing generates more income per hour worked 
than any other sector. As these jobs disappear _ 198,000 since last 
March and 760,000 since 1989 _ the displaced workers get new jobs 
outside manufacturing, but usually at lower pay. That downward shifting 
in wages is one reason why the nation has escaped inflationary wage 
pressures, despite strong economic growth and an unemployment rate 
of only 4.6 percent. Manufacturing has other advantages. There is 
the multiplier effect: the great number of satellite companies that 
come into existence to service manufacturers. In addition, no other 
sector in the American economy does as much research, the source of 
new technology. Above all, the United States has built up over the 
decades great reservoirs of knowledge and skill in the manufacture 
of complex products. That experience disappears when makers of railroad 
cars, for example, leave the country. ``In the sense of production 
capability,'' said Seymour Melman, a Columbia University manufacturing 
expert, ``we are in danger of finding ourselves, at the end of the 
current expansion, weaker than we were at the beginning.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>