<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981126.0181 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Return with us now to those dreary days of yesteryear when television 
was black-and-white, Dad was a hopeless sap and Mom was still the 
virgin mother of two. We are talking, of course, about the 1950s, 
and this week's vehicle for taking us back is ``Pleasantville.'' It 
is a funny and thoroughly confused movie based on the ever popular 
notion that the 1950s was the black hole of the 20th century. We can 
only guess why this misconception is so common nowadays. My theory 
is that it's because the '50s were the golden age for parents of today's 
baby boomers, who now run things and, so, are in charge of revising 
history. Their parents had lived in a heroic age, prevailing against 
poverty and tyranny, leaving their children doomed to know only the 
unheroic tranquillity of peace and prosperity. Born too late to get 
in on the big show, and being only human, the children might naturally 
resent their parents' triumph and take vengeance by belittling what 
the old folks made of their moment of glory. Which, of course, was 
the 1950s. Nowadays the unheroic era of peace and prosperity has degenerated 
into an age of decadence. In middle-age, today's boomers now confront 
a world of their own making which cannot much comfort their spirits. 
What do they see? A society ruled by greed and moral license. A nation 
whose governing political theory is devil-take-the-hindmost. You could 
make a strong case for the thesis that the century's real black hole 
is right here, right now, and that it is the creation of people who 
were ``kids'' in the '50s. All the above, I hasten to say, is the 
kind of highly doubtful speculation we fall into when generalizing 
about decades, generational antipathies and the flow of history. I 
hope no one will swallow it whole. It is offered here only to suggest 
that the present widespread view of the 1950s is also mostly horsefeathers. 
``Pleasantville'' presents the familiar malarkey in genial, clever, 
all-in-good-fun style until it loses its head and presents its '50s 
reactionaries as homespun Nazi book burners and Kristallnacht window 
smashers. The story is a fairy tale about two '90s adolescents who 
get trapped in a town created for a 1950s TV sitcom. What a no-fun 
town! It's all black-and-white. Stupid old Dad enters his house every 
night and, as mechanically as a cuckoo clock, cries, ``Honey! I'm 
home!'' Mom, wearing a little oppressed-housewife apron and hopelessly 
ignorant of 1998 dietary dogma, stuffs the whole darned family with 
foods dangerously rich in animal fat. The high school students have 
never heard of sex. Neither have Mom and Dad. As a joke about the 
inanity of '50s sitcoms, all this is very funny until you realize 
that there is an absurdly serious subtext; to wit, that TV sitcoms 
in the '50s were even more inane than TV sitcoms today. Sexual activity 
is at the heart of the lesson here. Nobody in the town of Pleasantville 
has ever engaged in it. Nobody even knows it's possible. The two teen-age 
visitors from the '90s don't put up very long with this deprived state 
of affairs. The girl, apparently a seasoned slut, soon deflowers the 
star of the basketball team and pretty soon their example has all 
the kids in town being naughty up in Lover's Lane. Her '90s brother 
has to inform hopelessly innocent Mom about the art of masturbation, 
then assist her in moving up to adultery. As sexual activity spreads 
through town, life becomes richer, better, and the population starts 
losing its black, white and gray complexion and breaking out in glorious 
Technicolor. The town is now ready for a '90s sitcom to move in. The 
real joke here is on the 1990s, which have no sitcom to compare with 
``I Love Lucy'' and no TV humor at all to compare with the Sid Caesar 
shows, both of the '50s. Check out ``Saturday Night Live'' or ``Politically 
Incorrect'' to see how letting it all hang out in '90s style has done 
in TV humor. No, the '50s decade was not so glorious as old-timers 
claim, but it had its many excellences. For us here in the '90s to 
sneer at the '50s is as silly as it would be for President Clinton 
to sneer at Gen. Eisenhower. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>