<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981126.0120 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Marco Polo did not get to China on frequent flyer miles. Travel in 
his day was arduous, dangerous, stressful, inconvenient (to say the 
least) and infinitely time consuming. Travel in our day is arduous, 
dangerous, stressful and inconvenient (to say the least _ try sitting 
for hours on a runway), but it only seems infinitely time consuming 
because the expectation of brevity is so high and the sense of time 
available to spend and waste has shriveled to a nubbin. The last century 
witnessed the real development of travel, as the Industrial Revolution 
created a leisure class with the time, money and interest to wander 
far from home, as well as the vehicles to make that possible. Since 
this trend began, travel _ both the actual variety and the vicarious 
kind _ has changed with intemperate haste. ``The Cultured Tourist'' 
at the Leslie Tonkonow Gallery in Chelsea has put on view some 19th- 
and 20th-century travel photographs that make quite clear the differences 
not only in the two centuries' photographic and lifestyles but also 
in their modes of travel. Leslie Tonkonow and Ingrid Schaffner are 
the curators. Some of the photographs are lovely, some challenging 
or entertaining, some almost as dull as the view outside an airplane 
flying through a cloud bank. All are indisputably experiences once 
removed, for a photograph can hardly be anything else, but a few of 
the more recent ones hint at a change that has recently befallen both 
the whole idea of voyage and distance and the notion of travel once 
removed. Actual travel has compressed time and space as if they were 
accordions, accomplishing this by means of railroads, steamships, 
automobiles, airplanes and, for a very few, rockets. Photography exploded 
the potential for vicarious travel, bringing mountains swiftly and 
miraculously to thousands who would not or could not go to them. Such 
travel by proxy was soon expanded by international expositions that 
set up African and Asian villages with imported natives so that visitors 
could tour exotic spots while remaining close to home. Photographic 
postcards drove the grander images to ground, and the personal camera 
removed the subject of travel matter from the monument to the traveler, 
smiling, with the monument there no longer as itself but as a testimony 
to vacation. Then came cinema, television and, at length, simulation, 
pastiche and re-creation. As actual travel increases exponentially, 
a kind of internal travel, either the armchair kind or the fairground 
kind, rachets up as well. The 19th-century views tend to be elegant, 
extremely still and unpeopled, though the century also had its share 
of pictures of tourists viewing Niagara or climbing pyramids with 
a strong hand up from the guides. The immense grandeur and dignity 
of pictures like Francis Frith's fine ``Temple of Kom-umboo''(1857) 
at the Tonkonow Gallery, with its fallen architraves and columns half 
covered by the Egyptian sand, are partly a side effect of the limitations 
of the equipment. But such images also borrowed a tradition of decorum 
and respect before monuments. Illustrators and painters had limned 
the ancient sites with classical gravity or romantic nostalgia; photographers 
could do no less. Lynn Davis' 1989 image of a pyramid, pure and almost 
abstract, takes the tradition of the reverential, iconic view of an 
ancient subject to its logical conclusion. Ruth Thorne-Thomsen's small, 
shimmery image (1979) of the Leaning Tower of Pisa in an Illinois 
field where a tiny hot-air balloon floats by removes the tradition 
to the realm of dream. The gallery also has a photograph of slaves 
in Zanzibar posing for the camera in 1880, and one by Felix Beato 
of an executioner with the heads of two assassins. The Beato was included 
in an album in the late 1860s called ``Views of Japan.'' Japan having 
only recently become visible to any degree in the West, people were 
understandably curious. A very good case can be made for picturing 
slavery or decapitation when trying to give a full picture of a country, 
but a good case can also be made for the witting or unwitting use 
of such images to further the colonialist and racist ideas and policies 
of the time. In the 19th century, people in industrialized nations, 
and the British particularly, believed or tried to convince themselves 
that they had expunged the remnants of barbarism at home to achieve 
a superior civilization; photographic evidence of barbaric practices 
elsewhere reinforced this notion. Ogling women of ``inferior'' races 
thereby became practically guilt free. A photograph of a Tunisian 
woman around the turn of the century shows her carefully accoutered 
and posed: bare breasted _ her dress appears to have been pulled down 
about her hips _ and wearing a big necklace, bracelets and a hat with 
a flower, with native rugs on the wall. This picture doubtless says 
less about Tunisian custom than about the photographer's inventive 
approach to voyeurism. When it comes to voyeurism, Sophie Calle, as 
the sample at the Tonkonow Gallery proves, can outdo a mere studio 
photographer any day. In the mid-1980s, she got herself a job cleaning 
hotel rooms, which she photographed and inventoried, noting such things 
as which beds were slept in and which clothes left out. She might 
have been illustrating Susan Sontag's pronouncement that ``essentially 
the camera makes everyone a tourist in other people's reality, and 
eventually in one's own.'' Travel photography, like landscape photography, 
has been rather victimized in this century by its overwhelming success 
on calendars and in brochures. In 1986 Barbara Bloom printed up a 
series of pointed remarks on this phenomenon, her ``Calendar on Travel 
and Tourism.'' Here unremarkable photographs have unexpected captions: 
An Asian man reads a blurred newspaper, and the calendar explains, 
``The Minister of Tourism, who hasn't attended a Cabinet session in 
months, made a rare public appearance in order to sign copies of his 
next book, `Ten Years with the Minority Tribes.''' Tourism itself 
has become so obligatory, so essential an element of middle-class 
life, so fused with photography, that photographers from Lee Friedlander 
to Tseng Kwong Chi, who photographed himself with nearly every major 
monument from Niagara to Mickey Mouse, have observed both the rituals 
and the people photographing them. The newest phenomenon, briefly 
noted in ``The Cultured Tourist,'' is the invention of a foreign country 
close to home and the devotion of tourists to it. Arne Svenson photographed 
the Excalibur Hotel in Las Vegas, a castle lifted straight from an 
illustrated fairy tale, with good parking space for tour buses. Not 
included in this show are Robbins &AMP; Becher's photographs of Leavenworth, 
Wash., a logging town of declining fortunes that in the 1960s decided 
to turn itself into an ersatz Bavaria to attract visitors. Annual 
festivals feature maidens in dirndls and men in lederhosen. The town 
added some Bavarian architectural elements, as well as Germanic type-faces 
on commercial signs; within a decade, the economy had improved. Tonkonow 
does have two of Robbins &AMP; Becher's pictures of German Indians, 
people who meet annually to camp in tepees and live like native Americans, 
supposedly to preserve the heritage, though they apparently mix one 
tribe's attributes with another's. One man poses with buffalo horns 
and fur pieces hanging about his head, lots of beads, a mustache and 
a face that no one would mistake for Sitting Bull. Photographs are 
no longer enough; the real thing is required. (Of course the real 
thing may be Mickey Mouse.) Whatever it is, if it's too far away, 
just beam me up to the local theme park, Scotty. You needn't have 
a language problem if Bavaria is in Washington. And if you can't find 
a Sioux warrior in Dresden you can become one for a while; it's the 
ultimate voyage of the psyche. Wherever you go bring your camera so 
you can be certain that even if the country you were in wasn't exactly 
anywhere, you at least were there. `The Cultured Tourist,' at Leslie 
Tonkonow: Artworks and Projects, 601 W. 26th St., through Dec. 19. 
At the Carol Ehlers Gallery in Chicago from Jan. 8 through Feb. 20. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>