<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981126.0133 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
SUNDAY GAMES Cardinals (6-5) at Chiefs (4-7) Comments: The Cardinals 
are in the playoff hunt. When is the last time you heard that phrase? 
The Chiefs may not make the playoffs. When was the last time you heard 
that as well? Arizona is ahead of where most thought they'd be this 
season because quarterback Jake Plummer is playing unbelievable football. 
He has a 96.2 passer rating in his previous four games. He will have 
a tough time this week because the Chiefs have the second best pass 
defense in the league. But because Kansas City is reeling so badly 
now, the Cardinals win a close one on the road. Cardinals, 27-24 Falcons 
(9-2) at Rams (3-8) Comments: The Falcons are no longer worrying about 
winning the NFC West. They see the San Francisco 49ers in their rear-view 
mirror. The Falcons are looking at the bigger picture, and their eyes 
are turned towards Minnesota. There is a chance, albeit slight, that 
Atlanta could get the home-field advantage throughout the playoffs 
if the Vikings slip. That is their greater goal, and the Falcons won't 
let a sorry Rams team get in the way, even if quarterback Chris Chandler 
is ailing. Atlanta clinches a playoff birth with a victory or a New 
Orleans loss and Detroit tie or loss. Falcons, 35-7 Panthers (2-9) 
at Jets (7-4) Comments: The Jets this year have often followed up 
a great victory with a puzzling loss. Last week, they hammered a solid 
Tennessee team. This week come the hapless Panthers. Will history 
repeat itself? Not this time. Coach Bill Parcells has probably spent 
the past few days yelling at the Jets from sunrise to sunset, trying 
to imprint on their brains that Carolina is dangerous. The only true 
danger on the Panthers is linebacker Kevin Greene, tied for the league 
lead in sacks with 14. He'll do some damage. Jets, 28-17 Colts (2-9) 
at Ravens (4-7) Comments: The kind of year quarterback Peyton Manning 
is having is scary. He's a rookie, and unlike many rookie quarterbacks 
he has taken every snap, all 693 of them. His streak of a touchdown 
pass in every game this year is the most by a rookie since Joe Namath 
in 1965. But Manning can't play safety or linebacker or defensive 
line. The Colts have one of the worst defenses in football, giving 
up 367 yards a game. Baltimore's offense should pick Indianapolis 
apart, especially running back Priest Holmes, who ran for 227 yards 
last week against Cincinnati. Ravens, 21-14 Jaguars (8-3) at Bengals 
(2-9) Comments: Blowout city. The Jaguars are not happy campers after 
losing to Pittsburgh last week. While the home team has won the past 
five meetings, and six of the last seven games in this series were 
decided by 8 points or less, this game won't be close. Jacksonville 
cranks up its running attack and quarterback Mark Brunnel, wh has 
a 97 rating in past three games against Cincinnati, will throw for 
over 300 yards. Jaguars, 28-0 Buccaneers (4-7) at Bears (3-8) Comments: 
Tampa Bay is probably the most disappointing team in the league. Things 
will only get worse. Chicago has just three victories but a number 
of their games have been extremely close; they should have seven or 
eight W's. The last time Tampa Bay was at Chicago, the Bears won by 
6 points off two Buccaneers fumbles. This season, Chicago's 12 fumbled 
takeways ranks third in the NFC. Don't be scared by the fact Erik 
Kramer isn't starting _ he's being replaced by backup Moses Moreno 
_ because the Bears are going to run the ball a zillion times anyway. 
Chicago, 15-9 Bills (7-4) at Patriots (6-5) Comments: How this game 
turns out depends on the index finger of quarterback Drew Bledsoe. 
He has two slight fractures and Bledsoe maintains he can play; he's 
listed as questionable. But there is some question about whether it's 
possible for a quarterback to effectively throw a football the entire 
game with such an injury, though Bledsoe threw beautifully in the 
final minutes against Miami. If he plays, the Patriots win, because 
this team could be on the verge of a three- or four-game winning streak. 
They are also starting to get some of their injured players, like 
wide receiver Terry Glenn, back on the field. Doug Flutie is the X-factor, 
as he's coming home, and could be pumped up. He's 10-0 at Foxboro 
Stadium _ 5-0 when he played with the Patriots and 5-0 with Boston 
College. Patriots, 17-16 
</TEXT>
</DOC>