<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981126.0245 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For four years, children who visited the Cyberkids Web site have found 
puzzles, interactive stories and other activities intended to appeal 
to the 7- to 12-year-old crowd. But lately, the young visitors have 
encountered a new and decidedly less playful feature: a consent form 
that must be downloaded, copied, signed by mom or dad and mailed to 
Cyberkids before the children can join in certain activities, like 
entering contests or using chat rooms. It is intended to let the publishers 
of Cyberkids know that parents approve of their children's taking 
part in features in which the child might disclose such personal information 
as an e-mail address. Although Julie Richer, president of Able Minds 
Inc., the San Francisco company that publishes Cyberkids, is not completely 
happy about the form, she posted it because she wants to comply with 
a federal law that has yet to take effect but is already shaping children's 
online experience. The new law, the Children's On-Line Privacy Protection 
Act of 1998, quietly entered the books last month, when President 
Clinton signed the budget bill. It seeks to protect children's privacy 
by requiring, with a few exceptions, that commercial Web sites aimed 
at children obtain parental permission before collecting personal 
information, like names, addresses, phone numbers or Social Security 
numbers, from children under 13. It is separate from a similarly named 
law, the Child On-Line Protection Act, which is intended to shield 
children from commercial pornography. That recently passed law is 
being challenged on First Amendment grounds by a group of free speech 
advocates and Web publishers in a lawsuit that recently led a federal 
judge in Philadelphia to block its enforcement temporarily. Whatever 
happens with the pornography statute, some believe that the privacy 
law could exercise a greater influence on what children see and interact 
with online. Kathryn Montgomery, president of the Center for Media 
Education, a public interest group in Washington, said: ``I really 
believe the online privacy bill will have the most impact on children's 
online experience, because it will help guide the development of this 
online media culture for children. It focuses on content and services 
directed at children, rather than focusing on what is not intended 
for them.'' Ms. Montgomery hailed the law for protecting children 
from online marketers who otherwise might be tempted to use showy 
contests, animated cartoon characters and the like to extract information 
that parents would rather keep private. But businesses are worried 
about the law's unanswered questions, many of which will be taken 
up as regulators begin drafting the rules for how the statute is to 
be carried out. The law does have the backing of some major industry 
players, among them America Online, which has a children's section, 
and Time Warner Inc., which has a site aimed at children. In a statement, 
Arthur Sackler, a Time Warner vice president, said the law was ``a 
compromise produced by the interested parties and not without some 
pain to business.'' But he said he believed that commercial Web site 
operators thought that regulation was important ``for that special 
age category.'' Privacy advocates have raised different concerns about 
the law. Marc Rotenberg, executive director of the Electronic Privacy 
Information Center, a privacy advocacy group in Washington, favors 
online privacy protections for adults, too, and would have preferred 
legislation based not on parental consent, but on the idea of privacy 
for all. The bill was passed in part in response to a survey by the 
Federal Trade Commission this year. After examining 212 children's 
Web sites, the regulators found that though 88 percent of the sites 
collected identifying details from their young visitors, only 23 percent 
advised them to seek their parents' permission before disclosing the 
information. The new law helps correct that, said David Medine, associate 
director for financial practices at the commission. ``It puts parents 
in control of information collected from young children,'' he said. 
There is still much about the law that has to be worked out. For one 
thing, it is unclear when it will go into effect. The law specifies 
that its effective date can be up to 30 months from the date it was 
signed. But Medine predicts that commission officials will finish 
drafting regulations for carrying out the law much sooner, so that 
the measure could be in force in 18 months. What exactly will be in 
the regulations is another big question. Among the thorniest issues 
to be decided is exactly how parents are to provide consent to the 
Web site operators. When the measure was discussed in Congress, legislators 
made it clear that consent delivered by regular mail or some kind 
of online credit card verification scheme would be acceptable. But 
the most obvious way to give consent online, through e-mail, was viewed 
with skepticism, in large part because it is easy for a child to send 
disguised e-mail that seems as if it comes from a parent. Medine said 
he hoped that by the time the law went into effect, technology would 
offer a solution, either through digital signatures or another tamper-resistant 
mechanism that would give an e-mail message the stamp of authenticity. 
Still, the industry is worried, said John Feldman, a Washington lawyer 
who represents Web sites that offer children's content. If only slower 
methods of granting permission, like postal mail, are acceptable, 
he said, that will put a damper on the very quality that makes the 
Internet so compelling: its ability to transmit information instantly. 
Privacy concerns have already had an effect on some children's online 
selling strategies. Time Warner's Sports Illustrated for Kids Web 
site used to market the print version of the children's sports magazine 
by asking children interested in subscribing to submit their names 
and addresses and other information by e-mail. The e-mail message 
was followed up by a subscription letter to their parents. That practice 
changed several months ago, largely in response to privacy concerns. 
On the Sports Illustrated for Kids site, visitors find a form to be 
printed out and sent back by regular mail. There has been a price 
for the change: The number of subscriptions that come from the Web 
site has fallen about 90 percent, the company says. Ms. Richer, of 
Cyberkids, wonders if the law will also have an unintended consequence, 
pushing children into sites meant for more mature audiences, because 
it will be cumbersome for them to get permission to view some children's 
sites. ``The government is making it harder for kids to get into Web 
sites specially targeted for them,'' she said. ``So where are they 
going to go? Adult sites.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>