<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981126.0184 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Here I come bearing a lovely gift: proof that with the power of the 
passion for freedom, Americans can rise high above the government 
they elected and compel politicians to follow them. Those good tidings 
were rarely more important than now, when from Washington rises the 
odor of a garbage-dump of corruptions. Our president has such contempt 
for his job and countrymen that he risked the presidency on back-room 
sex, sure that if caught he could lie his way out of it. Congress 
skitters about, looking for a solution, desperate not to see it in 
the Constitution: impeachment, trial and verdict. Whatever Congress 
does, or flees, Bill Clinton's decision to risk the presidency like 
a dollar chip is his immortal insult to America. All the while, the 
capital is afloat in the greed of Americans who transfer to foreign 
countries the political skills they acquired while taking U.S. paychecks, 
and our country becomes the personal yo-yo of Saddam Hussein. Sometimes 
the stench of cynicism is so powerful that we fear it will smother 
us all. But unwrap the gift. You will see that for almost three years, 
tens of millions of Americans, without money to fight the power of 
the lobbies, without advertising to break through the press's bored 
near-blackout, without any weapons but their letters, voices and prayers, 
with no reward except to look at themselves without shame, these Americans 
forced the administration to accept what it had used claw and dollar 
to defeat. What was this demon that the administration-trade lobby 
alliance tried to destroy? It was a bill that condemned persecution 
abroad of Christian and other minorities and called for economic or 
political penalties against the persecutors. Why did it take years 
of hard struggle to pass? One reason is that the administration trembled 
at the warnings of lobbies that fury of the persecutors might damage 
trade. Washington was also jittery that most of the persecuting countries 
are Muslim. Persecution cannot be the godly expression of any religion 
but is its perversion by man. Persecution in Muslim countries is a 
blotch on Islam. It would help if more Muslims in free countries said 
so. American Christians may be the only religious group in the world 
that has never been persecuted. It took them, and Jews, too long to 
get it through their heads that Christians could be tortured and murdered 
still, not just in the New Testament. And it took self-examination 
for some American Christians to understand that Asian and African 
Christians are not exotic guest-Christians but as deeply rooted in 
their religion as the president who carries his Bible to Sunday service 
but calls China's persecutor regime his partner. Other Americans turned 
up their noses at cooperating with conservative Christians, although 
the issue was not divisive, or debatable. But eventually so many did 
understand that the issue was American unity against persecution that 
the administration heard the sound of votes, if not prayer. It caved. 
The final Senate vote for the bill often pronounced dead was 98-0. 
Supporters made concessions. But the bill keeps essentials _ a commission 
on international religious freedom, appointed by the president and 
Congress, an annual report naming persecuting nations, a list of sanctions 
from which the president must choose or explain why he prefers none. 
The list ranges from near-nothings like private demarches to real 
somethings that might persuade persecutors that oppressing religion 
does not pay _ like suspension of U.S. developmental or strategic 
assistance and loans, and withholding of export licenses. For America, 
the special importance is that conservatives and liberals showed that 
action for human rights is not the property of either group and that 
success depends on the support of both. Now, back to work. In China, 
recently, 140 more Christians who refuse to submit to government domination 
of their churches were beaten and arrested. In Sudan, the government 
uses the civil war to kill, starve and enslave Christians. In Pakistan, 
the government enforces on Christians the harshest forms of Islamic 
law, including death for blasphemy. Et cetera. So, as they say at 
many church meetings in America, pray on Sunday, and act on Monday. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>