<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981126.0099 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For decades the industrial area just east of this city's downtown 
was an economic wreck _ 15 blocks of derelict, half-century-old buildings 
abutting the flophouses, cheap hotels and unappetizing sights of skid 
row. But in recent years the area has come to boisterous life with 
voices in various South China dialects, Vietnamese, Korean, Farsi, 
Spanish and myriad other languages, all talking about toys. The energy 
of immigrant entrepreneurship and a vision of a specialized commercial 
district have effected this remarkable transformation, turning Central 
City East, the kind of archaic industrial area that lies rotting in 
cities all across the country, into Toytown, a bustling marketplace 
with more than 4,000 jobs and $1 billion in annual sales. ``In December, 
we have about the worst traffic problem in downtown,'' Charlie Woo 
says, proudly. Woo immigrated to Los Angeles from Hong Kong as a teen-ager 
in 1968 and now, at 47, is widely considered Toytown's founding father. 
During the holiday season, consumers flock to the area, seeking cut-rate 
toys, dolls and action figures, including knockoffs of well-known 
brands. The rest of the year, the district sustains itself as a global 
wholesale center, with nearly half its shipments going to Latin America 
and Mexico. Toytown was not dreamed up in City Hall. Few in the Los 
Angeles establishment noticed in 1979, when Woo and his family started 
their first toy wholesaling business there. ``When Toytown started, 
the CRA didn't even know about it,'' recalled Don Spivack, who is 
now deputy administrator of the city's Community Redevelopment Agency. 
``It happened on its own. It was a dead warehouse district.'' How 
dead? Dave Zoraster, an appraiser at CB Richard Ellis, a commercial 
brokerage firm, estimated that, in the mid-1970s, land in the area 
was worth about $2.75 a square foot and half the commercial space 
was vacant. Today the land commands $100 a square foot or more, and 
vacancy rates are in the single digits. The redevelopment agency saw 
the area as a place for low-income transients, safely away from the 
new high-rises of the financial district a few blocks west. But Woo, 
then working on a Ph.D. in physics at UCLA, saw it as a great central 
location for wholesaling and distributing the billions of dollars 
in imported toys flowing from Asia into the ports of Los Angeles and 
Long Beach. He bought a building for $140,000 and got started. Personal 
connections in Asia helped him establish close relationships with 
scores of toy manufacturers there. He built up volume by halving the 
40 to 50 percent markup typically sought by traditional small toy 
wholesalers. Today, Woo and his family own 10 Toytown buildings and 
a distribution company, Megatoys, with $30 million in annual sales. 
Woo built the toy district around him with a strategy that few other 
business people would ever consider: He invited his competitors in. 
He reasoned that the critical mass of a Hong Kong-style commercial 
cluster would lower shipping costs, attract more buyers and ultimately 
benefit everyone in the district. ``It was a tough decision,'' Woo 
says, surveying Toytown recently on crutches, the legacy of a childhood 
bout with polio. ``But we saw how the garment district was working. 
We saw it in the flower and food markets. Convenience brings in more 
customers.'' Today, the toy district, a hodgepodge of one- and two-story 
buildings often painted in pastel shades, is home to roughly 500 toy 
and electronics-related businesses. Many of them started in much the 
same way as M&AMP;J Toys did: Minh Quach and his family came from 
Vietnam in 1980 and started selling toys at the swap meets that flourish 
throughout ethnic Southern California, then graduated to a small storefront 
and today operate a 6,000-square-foot store and a nearby 30,000-square-foot 
warehouse packed with boxes of toys. Toytown's success has bred growth 
in toy-related businesses across Southern California. The region, 
also home to Mattel, the world's largest toy maker, has spawned hundreds 
of smaller toy designers, distributors and manufacturers. The Otis 
College of Art and Design in West Los Angeles has started a toy design 
department. Over all, 60 percent of the $12 billion in toys distributed 
nationally come through Southern California. With Toytown's rents 
and land prices much higher now, Woo believes the area's future lies 
in retail development. To make Toytown more attractive to families, 
he recently helped establish a business improvement district to clean 
streets and improve security. The area has also seen a boom in new 
construction and restoration of older buildings. But perhaps most 
important, the area's continuing success testifies to the ability 
of immigrant entrepreneurs to turn around even the most destitute 
urban neighborhoods. Woo sees the latest improvements as helping keep 
Toytown a vital place for wholesalers and designers keen on staying 
close to industry trends. ``The future of Toytown will be as a gathering 
point for anyone interested in toys,'' Woo said. ``The industry will 
grow all over, but this place will remain ground zero.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>