<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981126.0168 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Graziella Viterbi is preparing to leave this city, which was devastated 
by earthquakes last year, and with her will go a piece of history 
that has produced some unexpected earthquake relief. Ms. Viterbi was 
among some 200 Jews who fled here during World War II and were saved 
because local Catholic Church leaders set up a secret organization 
that sheltered refugees in monasteries and convents or created fake 
identities for them. She has told the story of her days in hiding 
to visiting Americans attending educational programs here for older 
tourists. After the earthquakes last year, one student, Paul Levine, 
a retired businessman who lives near San Francisco, started a fund-raising 
drive among that city's Jews as a way of repaying what he saw as a 
debt to Assisi. ``It seemed appropriate that Jews remember when people 
help them,'' said Levine. That need for help began in 1943 when German 
troops invaded Italy. Ms. Viterbi said her father did not know where 
to turn, but one evening he overheard that Assisi might provide a 
haven because the Germans had declared the city a hospital town and 
that other displaced Italians were going there. ``My father believed 
in destiny and the signs of destiny and so we left,'' said Ms. Viterbi, 
an energetic woman with a face framed by gray hair. Today, Assisi 
is struggling to recover from earthquakes that rocked this region. 
But when Ms. Viterbi arrived here in the fall of 1943 _ after a harrowing 
journey during which she fooled a German officer into giving her family 
a car _ it was filled with wounded German troops. With the aid of 
a local priest, the Rev. Aldo Brunacci, Ms. Viterbi's family moved 
into an apartment. Posing as displaced Catholics from southern Italy, 
they were given phony identification papers and new names. For Ms. 
Viterbi and her sister, Miriam, who was 10, it was a life of strained 
normalcy. They studied the geography of the village from which they 
had supposedly come and on some Sundays went to church, though at 
first they had no idea what to do. ``We had to have people teach us 
how to make the sign of the cross,'' she said. Such precautions were 
necessary because those caught hiding Jews could be shot. One day 
local Fascists, who suspected church leaders of harboring Jews, stormed 
into Brunacci's home to arrest him. Ms. Viterbi's father and mother 
were visiting at the time, but the priest acted quickly, pushing them 
behind an open door, where they were shielded while he was taken away. 
Brunacci was imprisoned for a time, then released to the custody of 
the Vatican. Several Catholic leaders involved in the Assisi underground 
including Bishop Nicolini, who has died, have been honored by Yad 
Vashem, the Holocaust memorial in Israel. And this spring Levine, 
the retired businessman from California, came here to present the 
current bishop of Assisi with $40,000 he had helped raise. It will 
be used to rebuild a school for handicapped children. After the war, 
the Jews who had hidden here dispersed. But after her husband's death, 
Ms. Viterbi returned to Assisi six years ago, moving back into the 
same apartment. Once again her future, like her past, is being shaped 
by events affecting this city. Recently, her landlord told her that 
she would have to move because the apartment had to be made earthquake-proof. 
While she still holds a faint hope that she will find a place to live 
here, she is also saying her good-byes. ``My friends say that when 
you leave, all of this will leave with you,'' she said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>