<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981126.0137 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A Spanish galleon known as the Santissima Trinidad went down in a 
fierce 1711 hurricane just a few miles west of Havana harbor. Loaded 
with $400 million worth of gold bullion, silver ingots and coins, 
the ship has lain undisturbed for centuries, guarded by Fidel Castro's 
gunboats since 1959. But the ship is not likely to rest in peace much 
longer. Last February, at a ceremony presided over by Carlos Lage, 
Cuba's vice president, and the ambassador of Canada, Keith Christie, 
a Toronto company was awarded a five-year contract for salvage rights 
to the treasures that lie sunken in Cuba's territorial waters. It 
will be the first such effort by a Western treasure hunting concern. 
Officials of the company, Visa Gold Resources, are meeting this week 
in Havana with their Cuban joint venture partner, Geomar SA, to finish 
plans for an on-the-water survey intended to pinpoint a handful of 
the galleons that are most historically significant _ and most likely 
to hold treasure. The survey is expected to start in December, with 
the hunt getting under way in earnest by March, according to Doug 
Lewis, Visa Gold's president. By some accounts, Cuban waters contain 
the richest concentration of sunken Spanish treasure anywhere _ perhaps 
tens of billions of dollars in New World riches from the era of European 
conquest. But while that treasure seems tantalizingly within reach, 
recovering the ships and their loot will be a formidable task. For 
all the sunken treasure around the globe, only a tiny fraction has 
ever been found. Visa Gold's assigned territory, some 1,500 square 
miles off Cuba's northwest coast, Havana harbor and a portion of the 
southern shore of the island, is believed to contain as many as 500 
sunken galleons, 400 of them in Havana harbor. Lewis said the company 
would seek ``the most likely targets with the largest amount of reported 
treasure on the ship.'' Two other salvage companies _ Terra West, 
another Canadian company, based in Vancouver, British Columbia, and 
a South African consortium _ have been given permission to explore 
Cuban waters for sunken treasure. Since the February agreement, Visa 
Gold's marine archaeologist, Phill Wright, and Jack Haskins, a consultant 
based in Florida, have been researching archives at Spain's House 
of Trade in Seville and at the Royal Naval Library in London and have 
been poring through historical records in Cuba and Florida. They have 
pieced together a chronicle of Spanish exploitation, tracing the routes 
of sailing ships between the New World and the Old. Of the estimated 
13,000 Spanish ships that sailed over a two-century period, perhaps 
as many as half sunk before reaching their destination in Seville. 
Many of these vessels went down near Cuba, leaving what, at today's 
values, is as much as $100 billion at the bottom of the sea. ``The 
potential in Cuba is mind boggling,'' said Patrick J. Clyne, vice 
president of Salvors Inc. ``It would make Key West look like it didn't 
have any wrecks at all.'' Salvors, under the direction of the flamboyant 
treasure hunter Mel Fisher, found the Nuesta Senora de Atocha, a treasure-laden 
galleon that sank off the Florida Keys in 1622. The company recovered 
about $400 million in treasure. For most of the 16th and 17th centuries 
Havana was the main port of commerce for the New World. Its deep harbor 
was an ideal collection point for Spanish galleons that cruised up 
and down the east coast of South and Central America amassing gold, 
silver, platinum, emeralds and jewels. Visa Gold's deal with Cuba 
grew out of negotiations lasting two years, according to Lewis, who 
was a senior Canadian Cabinet minister in the previous government 
of Prime Minister Brian Mulroney. The deal gives the Cuban government 
half of the proceeds of the venture, with the balance split evenly 
between Visa Gold and Geomar, a branch of the Cuban Hydrographic Department. 
``We have what we feel is a fair and workable agreement,'' Lewis said. 
Although Canada's government did not play an official role in the 
negotiations, the friendly relations between the two countries was 
an important factor in securing the deal, he added. Canada is the 
second-largest export market for Cuba, after Russia, and bilateral 
trade between the two countries was $717 million last year. The agreement 
also breaks new ground in defining, beforehand, the legal ownership 
of recovered treasure. ``In other ventures of this kind around the 
world, when the diver comes up from the ocean floor, he is met by 
a government lawyer who claims it all,'' Lewis said. Preserving the 
historical integrity of the recovered artifacts will be a priority 
of the project and was key to securing the deal, he added. In the 
United States, the relationship between treasure hunters and archaeologists 
has long been stormy and salvors have often clashed in court with 
state and federal authorities over claims to their discoveries. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>