<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981126.0086 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Aldrich Ames has been called the worst mole in the history of the 
CIA. As played by Timothy Hutton, he is also something of a weasel. 
But mostly he is a cipher, a colorless bureaucrat, an empty suit who 
sells out his country and insures the deaths of at least 10 spies 
(probably far more), all because he is vaguely peeved at his bosses 
and wants to pay off some pesky debts. Hutton has the title role in 
``Aldrich Ames: Traitor Within,'' a film that Showtime is offering 
Sunday night. It is based, of course, on a true story. As sketched 
here, Ames was a second-generation, second-rate CIA employee who was 
having trouble keeping his Colombian-born wife, Rosario, in the manner 
to which she had become accustomed. You may wonder how Mrs. Ames (played 
by Elizabeth Pena) became accustomed to that manner in the first place, 
since the folks back home are evidently broke, and she keeps nagging 
her husband to send large sums of money to her mother and brother 
in Bogota. You may also wonder why a fiery Latin woman ever married 
this struggling milquetoast in the first place, and why, since he 
was not particularly good in the job the government was paying him 
to do, he thought he could do better as a high-stakes turncoat. You 
won't find out here. Still, the film, written by Michael Burton and 
directed by John Mackenzie, does a workmanlike job of storytelling. 
You may not care about these people, but you know what happened to 
them once Ames convinced himself that his agency colleagues didn't 
deserve his loyalty. ``They wouldn't recognize a real spy if they 
tripped over one,'' he says in a voice-over at the moment of decision. 
``Ah, the hell with it. I'll go for it.'' And he does, giving the 
Russians, among other things, the names of their own officials who 
were passing secrets to the United States. He makes a lot of money 
at this until the CIA assigns the task of rooting out its deadly mole 
to an analyst named Jean Vertefeuille (Joan Plowright), who declares, 
``No room for traitors in my CIA.'' Unlike Hutton and Ms. Pena, who 
seem unable to find real people in the lines they've been given, Ms. 
Plowright furrows her brow above eyes gleaming with determination 
and breathes some life into the proceedings. Once she's on the case, 
you know that she'll set things right. The real Aldrich Ames, who 
now lives at the federal penitentiary in Allenwood, Pa., is listed 
in the film's credits as a technical adviser. The production notes 
say that the executive producer, Robert Benedetti, first met Ames 
at the University of Chicago in 1960 and visits his old friend at 
the prison. Is this the reason Ames never really comes into focus 
and is treated rather gently? How exactly did the convicted traitor 
participate in the making of the film? Explaining the process might 
be the job for yet another made-for-television film, based on one 
more true story. PRODUCTION NOTES: `ALDRICH AMES: TRAITOR WITHIN' 
Showtime, Sunday at 8 p.m. Written by Michael Burton and directed 
by John Mackenzie. Walter McGill, director of photography. Produced 
by Dufferin Gate Productions and distributed by Paramount Network 
Television. Robert Benedetti, executive producer. WITH: Timothy Hutton 
(Aldrich Ames), Joan Plowright (Jeanne Vertefeuille), Elizabeth Pena 
(Rosario Ames), Joyce Gordon (Sandy Grimes), Eugene Lipinski (Vlad), 
Robert Benedetti (Chief of Operations), C. David Johnson (Brooks), 
Patricia Carroll Brown (Connie Drucker) and Mike Shara (Tim Brett). 
Cab to Canada CBS, Sunday night at 9 (Channel 2 in New York) Want 
to bask in the glow of a real movie star, the kind they don't make 
anymore? Here's your chance. Maureen O'Hara is a joy as she overacts 
her way through this wisp of a movie. As a woman of a certain age 
and uncertain prospects named Katharine Eure, Ms. O'Hara walks away 
from a friend's funeral in Pasadena, Calif., and decides to live a 
little while she still has a chance. So she tells the cabdriver that 
she isn't ready to go home. First they go to the beach. Then they 
go to San Francisco. Then Vancouver. If that's not living on the wild 
side, what is? During this several-day quest, a mutual admiration 
develops between the patrician Katharine and her accidental companion, 
the driver, Mike Donahue (Jason Beghe of ``To Have and to Hold''). 
He's a gruff blue-collar guy with a heart of _ you know. Back home, 
Mike's devoted girlfriend, Sandy (Catherine Bell of ``JAG''), fills 
in for him as a selfless pal to Bobby (Haley Joel Osment), the lonely 
little boy next door. None of this makes a lick of sense. You can 
abandon the story at any point and make up your own sticky-sweet ending. 
But then you'll miss Ms. O'Hara, hair still Technicolor red, being 
every inch the grand lady and looking as if she's having a ball. More 
than 50 years after ``Miracle on 34th Street,'' she has a few little 
miracles left. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>