<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981126.0097 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For more than a year, advertisements from investment houses and articles 
in the financial press have touted the benefits of the new Roth IRA. 
Yet few people seem to be paying attention. Surveys find that no more 
than one in 20 eligible Americans has put retirement money into a 
Roth. Perhaps this will capture your imagination: If you make a single 
$2,000 investment in a Roth IRA and it earns the historical average 
return for stocks of large companies, your heirs could withdraw money 
from the account for the next 80 years, pocketing nearly $1.3 million 
without paying a penny in income taxes. Interested now? Then read 
carefully, because while the figures can get complicated, the Roth 
is one of the biggest single investment tax breaks Congress has ever 
given to middle-class Americans _ especially those who are diligent 
savers. And if you want to move money from another retirement plan 
to a Roth on the most favorable terms, you have just over a month 
in which to act. A warning: Not everyone can profit from a Roth IRA. 
Eligibility for a full, $2,000-per-person annual contribution is limited 
to spouses who together make less than $150,000 and single people 
earning no more than $95,000; smaller contributions are allowed for 
couples who make up to $160,000 and singles earning up to $110,000. 
But these boundaries encompass 95 percent of taxpayers. And the income 
eligibility limits for starting a Roth are more liberal than those 
for making tax-deductible contributions to traditional IRAs, which, 
for people with pension plans, rapidly phase out once spouses together 
earn $50,000 and individuals earn $30,000. A worker without a pension 
can contribute $2,000 to a traditional IRA regardless of income. (And 
anyone can make a nondeductible contribution to a traditional IRA, 
though experts recommend this route only for those who cannot qualify 
for any other savings plan.) The other big difference between the 
two types of accounts involves the timing of tax payments. A Roth 
is built with money you have left after you pay the government, but 
it allows you to withdraw money tax-free at retirement. By paying 
up front, you are essentially betting that tax rates will not fall 
in the future, or that you won't be in a lower tax bracket when it 
comes time to withdraw money from your account. So Roths make sense 
for people who expect their incomes to rise in the future, especially 
diligent savers who expect to have more income in retirement than 
they are earning today. In traditional IRAs, by contrast, you use 
pre-tax dollars to contribute to the account, but your withdrawals 
are taxed. In essence, you're assuming that you will be earning less 
in retirement than during your prime saving years, so your withdrawals 
will be taxed at a lower rate than if you had paid your taxes up front, 
as with a Roth. But even then, you'll be paying taxes on the money 
you withdraw at high ordinary income rates, even though much of the 
growth in your IRA will be capital gains. With a Roth, by contrast, 
you pay at ordinary rates on your initial contributions, but pay no 
taxes at all on the money that grows in your account. So why are relatively 
few Americans taking advantage of the Roth, which became part of the 
tax code last January? A big reason, financial planners say, is that 
people have become so accustomed to deferring taxes whenever possible 
_ a generally sound strategy _ that the idea of paying a tax sooner 
rather than later is hard for many people to grasp. ``Even though 
intellectually you can analyze that if you pay this tax up front you 
will be better off in the long run, it is so against what we are programmed 
to do that many find it difficult psychologically,'' said Steve Mitchell, 
a senior vice president at Fidelity Investments, the largest mutual 
fund company. John Barth, a principal in the retirement services group 
at Vanguard, another mutual fund giant, said his firm's analysis of 
customer calls found ``a lot of uncertainty'' about the Roth. ``People 
say if you pay the taxes first, then what is the benefit?'' Barth 
observed. The reluctance to accelerate tax payments also seems to 
be discouraging many people from converting their traditional IRAs 
into Roth accounts, even though the math, for many, makes a compelling 
case for the switch. Couples filing jointly with less than $100,000 
in adjusted gross income (the last figure on the front of the Form 
1040 tax return) can roll any amount of money from a 401(k), traditional 
IRA or similar retirement savings vehicle into a Roth. The income 
limit is the same for singles. But as with any contribution to a Roth, 
taxes must be paid up front in exchange for the right to withdraw 
the money tax-free at retirement. That requirement discourages many 
prospective users of the Roth, according to Barth; they simply don't 
have the money to pay the income taxes. And this is where time is 
of the essence: Rollovers completed by the end of December get a special 
tax break _ Congress says you can take four years to pay the income 
taxes. If rollovers are made next year or later, the money is due 
all at once. For all the benefits of the Roth, financial advisers 
say there are other retirement savings plans that trump it. Experts 
say you should save all you are allowed in a 401(k) or 403(b) (the 
latter for teachers and other public and nonprofit employees) or similar 
plan before you put money into a Roth _ so long as your employer is 
matching your contributions with more than 10 cents for every dollar 
you save. Bob FitzSimmons, a certified financial planner in Lincoln, 
Neb., offers this advice: First, put as much money into your 401(k) 
as your company will match; then put $2,000 into a Roth. Then, if 
you can afford to save more for retirement, add unmatched money to 
your 401(k) up to the $10,000 annual maximum. His logic is that the 
match is the most valuable benefit, followed by the tax-free income 
from the Roth and, finally, additional tax-deferred savings in the 
401(k). Put another way, if your employer does not offer a match, 
you would need to contribute $2,778 to a 401(k) to get the same retirement 
income as $2,000 in a Roth, assuming that you are in the 28 percent 
tax bracket. Even without a match, the 401(k) has one practical advantage. 
Because your contributions will be automatically deducted from your 
paycheck, you are more likely to follow through on your retirement 
savings program than with a Roth, said Mitchell of Fidelity. Still, 
Roth IRAs have a number of twists that make them an appealing retirement 
planning tool _ and not just for baby boomers. If you are a teen-ager 
working after school, or a young adult just starting out _ and if 
you are more Puritan than prodigal in your thinking about money _ 
the Roth is an ideal savings vehicle. After all, your tax rate looks 
almost certain to rise in the future. Consider this example: A 16-year-old, 
in the 15 percent tax bracket, saves $2,000 from her job selling toys 
at the mall. Her money earns 10.9 percent annually, the historical 
long-term return for stocks of large companies. Through hard work 
over the years, she becomes marketing director for a chain of toy 
stores and finds herself in the top 39.6 percent bracket when she 
retires at age 66 and withdraws the balance in her retirement account. 
If she had put that original $2,000 into a Roth (which means she paid 
$300 in taxes back when she was 16), she would have accumulated $352,864. 
But if she had saved in a traditional IRA and then paid taxes on her 
withdrawal, she would be left with just $213,130. Even if she had 
been disciplined enough at 16 to invest the extra $300 in a taxable 
account, she would have added less than $10,000 to her wealth. In 
short, for every after-tax dollar in a traditional IRA, she would 
have $1.57 in her tax-free Roth account. Roths can also figure in 
the plans of the elderly. If you qualify for a Roth conversion (that 
is, your income is $100,000 or less) but have enough wealth to be 
subject to estate taxes (that is, assets of more than $625,000), your 
heirs will get more money if you roll over your traditional IRA or 
other tax-deferred plan into a Roth. That is because the taxes you 
pay up front on the conversion ``reduce the size of your estate and 
avoid the tax-on-a-tax at death, when you pay both estate and income 
taxes,'' said Sanford Schlesinger, an estate tax partner with Kaye 
Scholer Fierman Hays &AMP; Handler, a New York law firm. Estate taxes 
aside, by making a single contribution to a Roth and naming a young 
child as the beneficiary, an elderly person can generate a cool million 
for a grandchild or great-grandchild, assuming Congress makes no changes 
in the rules. Here is how: Assume that an heir is born today and made 
the beneficiary of a new $2,000 Roth account. If the benefactor leaves 
the account untouched and dies in 5 years, the child, under IRS actuarial 
tables, will have about 75 years to withdraw the money, taking 1/75th 
the first year, 1/74th the next and so on until the account is emptied. 
If the account earns historical average returns, the child will collect 
nearly $1.3 million _ and the fund will grow faster than the withdrawals 
until the last few years of the heir's projected life expectancy, 
according to Seymour Goldberg, a tax lawyer and certified public accountant 
in Garden City, N.Y., who runs seminars on Roth IRAs. ``With proper 
planning, you can accomplish a tremendous stretch that lets money 
grow untaxed for decades,'' Goldberg said. The Roth IRA is named for 
Sen. William Roth, R-Del., who is chairman of the Senate Finance Committee. 
In an interview last week, Roth said he would ask Congress next year 
to raise the annual ceiling on contributions to both traditional IRAs 
and Roths to $4,000 or $5,000. The limit has been $2,000 since 1981, 
when IRAs were created. Roth also wants everyone with $1 million or 
less in annual income to be eligible. ``At first blush, the Roth IRA 
is a little difficult to understand,'' he acknowledged. ``But if you 
can afford to pay the taxes at the beginning, you are much better 
off. ``The compounding of interest is wonderful,'' he said, ``and 
when your money is never taxed, it is amazing.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>