<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981126.0244 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The state of Washington followed California earlier this month when 
it voted to eliminate state-sponsored affirmative action in education 
and government contracts. But the nation as a whole has moved in the 
opposite direction since California's Proposition 209 raised fears 
of a national movement that might resegregate higher education and 
the professions, deepening racial divisions. Faced with the prospect 
of civic disaster, even hard-line conservatives have taken a more 
moderate stance, seeking ways to limit affirmative action instead 
of killing it. The new tack among conservatives is to frown on race-sensitive 
policies in most contexts, while endorsing them in the municipal services 
and in public colleges on the premise that publicly financed institutions 
should be racially representative to keep taxpayer support. The historian 
Abigail Thernstrom presented a troubling variation on this theme last 
month in The Wall Street Journal. Ms. Thernstrom argued that African-Americans 
who attended middling and ``allegedly dead-end colleges'' had done 
so well professionally that they had no need of access to first-tier 
institutions like Harvard, Duke or the University of Chicago. In the 
Thernstrom theory, elite universities could resegregate with no foreseeable 
harm to African-Americans _ as long as middling colleges continued 
to provide broad access. This view is noxiously classist and historically 
naive. Studies of work-force integration show that African-Americans 
are routinely required to have far more impressive credentials than 
whites, even when competing for the same jobs. For whites, elite university 
degrees are a nice enhancement. But for African-Americans, those same 
degrees are required just to get in the door. The ``black superstar'' 
effect was first documented in, of all places, professional baseball. 
The sport portrays itself as the ultimate meritocracy and pats itself 
on the back for hiring Jackie Robinson at a time when other sports 
still barred African-Americans. But 10 years ago, a study of lifetime 
pitching and batting averages by sports sociologists at Northeastern 
University showed that black players had to outhit and outpitch their 
white counterparts by substantial margins to win and keep their jobs. 
Baseball managers who had come of age when the game was all white 
had difficulty recognizing baseball talent when it came with a black 
face. Mere journeymen could have long and profitable careers _ as 
long as they were white. But among African-Americans, only stellar 
and above-average players would do. These inequities are rooted in 
the logic of slavery and are based on the myth that blacks are intellectually 
inferior. As a consequence of this myth, black people face substantially 
higher barriers to employment than whites _ especially in the elite 
professions where whiteness has historically served as an unstated 
job requirement. Elite law firms today are roughly analogous to professional 
baseball teams 50 years ago. The old-money firms are notoriously clubby 
and overwhelmingly white and have only in recent decades dropped policies 
that excluded women and African-Americans. But residual racism finds 
fertile ground in an interview process that makes less than it should 
of objective qualifications _ and far too much of subjective judgments 
about an applicant's personality and suitability to the ``culture'' 
of the firm. The Harvard University legal scholar David B. Wilkins 
is researching these problems in a national project. He published 
some of his early reflections in a 1996 article in The California 
Law Review. Wilkins notes that black law firm applicants with average 
grades are less likely to be hired than whites with the same transcripts. 
Black partners are far more likely than whites to have attended Harvard 
or Yale. The ``black superstar'' effect is especially pronounced at 
the top-rated law firms. A partner at the Chicago firm of Sidley and 
Austin told researchers that law firms set ``higher standards for 
minority hires than for whites. ... If you are not from Harvard, Yale 
or the University of Chicago, you're not adequate. You're not taken 
seriously.'' Critics of race-sensitive admissions policies argue that 
black students who come from mediocre public schools could enhance 
their transcripts and professional opportunities by attending less 
competitive universities where they could more easily excel. That 
option is open to whites _ who get hired and reach partner status 
with degrees from middling law schools. But black students who pursue 
such a course are locked out of elite firms. This process has been 
best documented in law, but related studies show it at work well across 
the corporate spectrum. The Thernstrom theory _ that African-Americans 
can achieve equal professional access without attending Harvard, Yale, 
Princeton or the University of Chicago _ is wrong on its face. The 
country may yet get there, but we have a long way to go. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>