<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981126.0247 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Three months ago, the city Board of Education gave Schools Chancellor 
Rudy Crew a 25 percent raise and an extension of his contract, saying 
that the school system was on the way up. But new state data raise 
troubling questions about how much impact the chancellor's policies 
have had on the lives of children. On Nov. 13, state education officials 
announced that because of declining scores on a state reading test, 
they had added 21 schools to the list of failing schools in the city, 
bringing the total to 97 schools, the most in a decade. Then this 
week Crew reluctantly confirmed that state test scores had declined 
not just in the worst schools but in schools across the city. In response 
to requests from news organizations under the Freedom of Information 
Act, he released data showing that third-grade performance on a reading 
test given last spring had dropped 4.2 percentage points, while sixth-grade 
scores had dropped 5.3 points. Crew made his announcements by press 
release, and declined to elaborate. When the state list of failing 
schools came out, he was on a personal trip to Connecticut, according 
to a spokeswoman. When the state test scores were released he was 
away for the Thanksgiving holiday. His silence and distance spoke 
volumes. For a chancellor who has promised to fashion a ``performance-driven'' 
school system, the decline in test scores and the rising number of 
failing schools were troubling developments. In 1996, a change in 
state law gave Crew more direct control over superintendents and principals. 
But how well he has used his increased power _ and whether it is better 
than the old system _ has to be measured not just in salutes up the 
chain of command but in how his policies play out in the classroom. 
As Crew begins his fourth year, he is discovering _ as other chancellors 
have before him _ that it is hard to control what happens in 1,100 
schools. A look at state test scores over much of the last decade 
shows them fluctuating according to the dictates of some kind of chaos 
theory, a little better here and a little worse there, but ultimately 
not much has changed. ``Oftentimes, because of political expedience, 
any chancellor tries to make a big deal of scores that go up a few 
points from one year to the next, when what's important is the long 
haul,'' said Raymond Domanico, executive director of the Public Education 
Association, a nonprofit group that monitors school performance. Crew 
was not reticent when it came to celebrating improvements in school 
performance. A year ago, he traveled to Albany to join State Education 
Commissioner Richard Mills in a triumphal announcement that 18 failing 
schools in New York City _ more than ever before _ had improved enough 
to be taken off the list of ``schools under registration review.'' 
(Another 18 were taken off this year, while 21 were added.) Last June, 
he called a press conference to announce jubilantly that scores on 
a reading test given by the city had risen by 2.3 percentage points, 
the second consecutive year of improvement. ``This is not a fluke,'' 
Crew boldly declared at Board of Education headquarters in Brooklyn, 
surrounded by nearly all of his district superintendents. Domanico 
suggested that Crew had made too much of the good news and not enough 
of the bad. Crew and Mayor Rudolph Giuliani have all but ignored the 
state monitoring and test scores this year. Last August, when Crew 
was granted a four-year contract extension and a $50,000 raise, to 
$245,000, his supporters cited the results of the city test, deflecting 
questions about reports from some school superintendents that state 
scores had gone down. Crew has increased central control of the system, 
but has shied away from other, more costly, initiatives that parents 
and teachers say could touch children's lives more directly, like 
reducing class size and allowing schools to do more direct hiring 
of teachers. Last year, the average elementary school class in the 
city had 28 pupils compared with 22 in the rest of the state, according 
to state statistics. ``If Rudy Crew really wants to raise standards, 
which is just rhetoric, if that's the truth, the only way it can be 
done is by following the lead of other school systems in the country,'' 
said Cecilia Rubino, a parent who is active at her son's school, P.S. 
321 in Park Slope, Brooklyn. ``We have to support our teachers by 
realizing that if there is that number of children in the room, some 
of them are just going to slip past.'' Aides to Crew say he is not 
trying to paper over a problem. Rather, they say, he believes the 
city test is simply a better measure of students' reading skills than 
the state test. Knowing that the chancellor values the city test, 
schools may have spent more time preparing for it. ``That message 
definitely got out,'' said Robert Riccobono, superintendent of in 
East New York, Brooklyn. The only district that showed a notable increase 
in state reading scores _ up 11 points in third grade and 14 points 
in sixth grade _ was the chancellor's district, which consists of 
schools taken over by Crew because they were failing. Robert Tobias, 
director of assessment for city schools, said he would not be able 
to analyze the data from the state test until scores for schools outside 
New York City had been reported. If scores in the rest of the state 
also declined, he said, that would be a red flag. Such unanimity, 
he said, is often caused by something about the test _ perhaps test 
preparation or a change in questions _ rather than by what children 
learned in class. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>