<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981126.0073 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Looking at the Jackson Pollock canvases now on view at the Museum 
of Modern Art and thinking about the short, cometlike arc of Pollock's 
life and career, one seems to face an inscrutable proposition from 
the science of physics: naked energy, mass transformed by momentum 
and explosion, an explosion in this case whose laboratory was the 
body and psyche of a single person. In fact, there's a rough correlation 
between the initial efforts to split the atom in the early 1940s, 
Hiroshima, the nuclear tests of the late 40s and Pollock's step-by-step 
breakthrough into what is perhaps the most radically innovative painting 
style in the second half of the 20th century. Epic-size canvases, 
poured, dripped, splattered paint, found materials and a subject matter 
electrified by the process of its own transformation _ designs as 
disturbing as they are intoxicating _ serve a vision of overwrought 
glamour and celestial greed. Pollock was nothing if not a child of 
his times. Abstract Expressionism, the movement of which Pollock, 
Willem de Kooning, Mark Rothko and Franz Kline are usually considered 
the stars, was sometimes known as the New York School. The Dutch-born 
de Kooning said that although he was no longer European, he wasn't 
exactly American: ``I am a New Yorker.'' Rothko, born in Russia, came 
to the city from Portland, Ore., and New Haven in the 1920s to ``wander 
around, bum about'' and ``take advantage of the freedom to develop'' 
that he believed only New York offered. Kline couldn't imagine ``working 
anywhere but New York.'' Arriving in New York in 1930, Pollock, too, 
found it ``keener, more demanding, more intense and expansive'' than 
anywhere else. Asked in the early 1940s why he didn't work from nature, 
Pollock replied, ``I am nature.'' The city, too, refuses to imitate, 
becoming itself a new form of nature instead, an indoors that is also 
outdoors. Pollock moved to East Hampton in 1945, and in later years 
he sometimes found his trips to the city depressing, even ``brutal.'' 
Yet the monumentality of Manhattan, its man-made sublime of allover, 
compacted spaces dense with interactive matter and shifting vistas, 
was stored in his optic treasury, as integral to his art as the bare 
reaches of Long Island or his native Southwest. New York's long tradition 
of small manufacturing industries had left a plethora of lofts begging 
to be converted into studios scattered throughout the East and West 
Villages. With Hitler's ascent in the 1930s and the fall of Paris, 
the art capital of the West, to the Nazis in June 1940, dozens of 
important emigre artists made their way to New York. Here the Museum 
of Modern Art, founded in 1929, was amassing the greatest collection 
of modern art in the world; Paris did not open the Georges Pompidou 
Center, a museum exclusively devoted to the modern period, until 1976. 
By the 1930's, more than three-fourths of American artists were already 
in New York; the Federal Arts Project of the New Deal allowed them 
for the first time to make a living by their painting. Once the United 
States entered the war, the Modern enlisted in the propaganda effort, 
opening an ``Artists for Victory'' show and a buy-American-art campaign. 
Between 1940 and 1946, the number of galleries in New York grew to 
150 from 40. Paintings by Mondrian and Fernand Leger turned up in 
fashion spreads in Harper's Bazaar; Salvador Dali decorated a Bonwit 
Teller window. ``Money can be heard crinkling throughout the land,'' 
an art dealer, Sam Kootz, observed in 1941. ``All you have to do is 
get a new approach.'' By the late 1950s, corporations had discovered 
avant-garde art as a growth stock. Though its popular arts had traveled 
worldwide by the 1940s, until the advent of Abstract Expressionism 
no form of American elite art commanded international attention. At 
the International Biennale exhibition in Venice in 1950, the Italian 
painter Giorgio Morandi surveyed paintings by de Kooning and Arshile 
Gorky with keen interest, but when he saw the Pollock canvases, he 
exclaimed: ``Ah, ah _ this is new. Vitality, energy _ new!'' Only 
in America could such art appear. Pollock was the first poster boy 
of serious American art, the one who ``broke the ice,'' in de Kooning's 
phrase, the focus of its esthetic, cultural and commercial desires. 
In a pathbreaking Life article of Aug. 8, 1949, titled ``Jackson Pollock: 
Is He the Greatest Living Painter in the United States?,'' Pollock, 
then 37, was photographed standing before one of his paintings. Dressed 
in dark jeans, a work jacket and heavy shoes, his arms insolently 
crossed, head cocked, a cigarette in his mouth, he was the very image 
of the tough, tortured, ultra-masculine rebel, indifferent to all, 
presumably, but the picture behind him. The critic Clement Greenberg, 
then Pollock's fervent champion, said that the contemporary artist 
existed in ``inconceivable'' isolation and alienation; Pollock was 
``Gothic, morbid, extreme,'' he was ``brutal'' as no European artist 
could be, committed to an endless task of remorseless innovation. 
Conventional modes of representation could not adequately convey the 
unprecedented terrors of the modern world; the real artist, partisans 
explained, perforce dealt in abstraction. ``If you want to see a face,'' 
Pollock once snapped, ``look at one.'' The artist created not particular 
portraits or recognizable landscapes, but eternal, universal ``myths,'' 
drawn from the depths of the unconscious, ``tragic and timeless,'' 
in Rothko's phrase. These painters belonged to the generation that 
Amiri Baraka called the ``last romantics of our age''; the melodramatically 
pumped-up exaggerations in which their claims were often couched, 
no matter how alien, even distasteful, to post-modern ears, are part 
of their art and its continuing appeal. Pollock won recognition first 
not only because he was extraordinarily ambitious and gifted, but 
also because he was the most marketable of the group. De Kooning, 
who spoke with a strong Dutch accent, didn't become a United States 
citizen until 1962; Rothko, who was Jewish, had waited until 1938. 
The dark, dashing Kline was of Spanish and German descent. Pollock, 
however, tall and fair, born in Cody, Wyo., of Scots-Irish stock, 
was an all-American cowboy capturing Manhattan with a lariat of paint. 
Though he had been a shy, troubled and pampered boy who couldn't ride 
a horse or rope a cow, as a young man he spent summers crisscrossing 
the continent, hopping freight trains and sleeping under the stars. 
De Kooning noted more than once the awful ``burden'' of being American. 
Cars became Pollock's weapon of choice; a demon driver, in 1956, at 
44, he killed himself (and a passenger) in a drunken crash in East 
Hampton, N.Y. Pollock appeared ready-made for the needs of a newly 
imperial nation, flush with its victories in World War II and finding 
fresh ordeals and triumphs in the Cold War that rapidly succeeded 
it. As various art critics of the day pointed out, in the totalitarian 
Soviet Union artists had to be banal and realist in style, conformist 
and upbeat in spirit, or vanish into the gulag. In contrast, the United 
States encouraged liberty of expression, rewarding precisely those 
like Pollock who wouldn't or couldn't adjust, who entertained the 
darkest of demons as their muse. The damage that the activities of 
the House Un-American Activities Committee and Sen. Joseph R. McCarthy 
did to the image of America abroad was offset by the damage that artists 
like Pollock wreaked on the social conventions, and themselves. Rothko, 
de Kooning and Kline were all alcoholics, but Pollock was in a class 
by himself. At a party in Kline's small, crowded, smoke-filled apartment, 
Pollock punched out a window with his fist, inspiring others to follow 
his example. They were men acting like children, de Kooning later 
said, ``such an emotion, such life,'' such ``desperate joy.'' But 
others remembered Pollock differently: hideously drunk, jumping out 
of a car in midtown at rush hour to play Russian roulette with the 
traffic; sitting in the Cedar Tavern, pounding his fist on the table, 
crying, ``Why do I suffer like this?'' A doctor put him on tranquilizers 
in 1948, and for two precious years he didn't drink. But his manic-depressive 
temperament surely required a permanent course of antidepressants 
and mood stabilizers, drugs not available in the 1940s. The ``last 
romantics'' were also the last unmedicated artists; post-modernism 
and psychopharmacology are synonymous. As the age of machines approached 
its peak, painting was still handmade, stubbornly resistant, at least 
until the advent of Andy Warhol in the 1960s, to mass production. 
If the postwar painter, at once avant-garde and obsolete, wanted to 
sell a new kind of art, he needed a concept, ideas about modernity 
and words to put them in. De Kooning, a student of Wittgenstein, spoke 
about painting with elegant sophistication, as did Rothko, a devotee 
of Kierkegaard and Nietzsche. Though Pollock's intuitive gifts were 
legendary _ ``three words and he knew the whole story,'' a friend 
said _ he was subject to agonies of self-consciousness; he read little 
and talked less. Exquisitely understanding and kind to children and 
animals, he came at adults with terse, in-your-face questions: ``Who 
are you? What are you involved with?'' Profanity was as necessary 
a shorthand to him as to a Hemingway hero. In interviews, his wife, 
the painter Lee Krasner, sometimes filled in for him, and others supplied 
the titles for those of his paintings that were named rather than 
numbered. To explain ``She Wolf'' (1943), his most-discussed early 
work, was to destroy it, he said: ``A painting has a life of its own. 
I try to let it live.'' The hyperactivity of his paint is articulation 
_ the paint is talking. Pollock was the first American painter to 
receive full-blown media treatment, a shock that this media-saturated 
age must strain even to imagine. The year after the Life article, 
Hans Namuth did a series of photographs and short films (now on view 
as part of the Modern's exhibition) showing Pollock in the act of 
painting. The surface to be covered lies flat on the ground. Pollock 
moves around its four edges, occasionally going into the arena of 
the painting, pouring the paint (an industrial rather than an art-supply 
brand) straight from the can, wielding hardened brushes to get the 
tighter delineations that will lace the painting into a centerless 
yet stunning coherence, adding detritus (shells, coins, wire) to the 
mix, pausing occasionally to ``get acquainted,'' in his phrase, with 
what he has done, then gardening the painting again, his forearm and 
hand, taut with precision, poised above it, choreographing its patterns 
in the air. The method, critics noted, was the content. Photography 
and film require no explanation from their subject, nothing except 
the willingness to be reproduced. Pollock on camera suggests the artist 
as athlete and actor; the painting and the artist's body mate in a 
ritual as cerebral as it is sensual. But Pollock painting is quintessential 
media material precisely because it is an extraordinarily private 
act disturbingly exposed to public view. Bending to the ground, his 
back hunched, his face agonized in its concentration no matter how 
graceful and controlled his movements, Pollock conjures up images 
not only of dancers but also of Hugo's Quasimodo, tending the bells 
he believes so much more beautiful than himself. Artists can be monsters, 
and monsters negotiate the line between public and private differently; 
they know that we do and don't want to see them with equal force. 
After the last shoot in November 1950, Pollock and Namuth went back 
to Pollock's farmhouse, where Pollock poured himself a glass of whisky, 
his first in two years, saying, ``Damn it, we need it!,'' then got 
violently drunk, upending the carefully laid dinner table and walking 
out the door. Maybe the ``natives'' are right, he told a friend; whoever 
takes your picture steals your soul. With fame, ``you're not your 
own you'' anymore. During the last alcohol-drenched years of his life, 
Pollock produced several masterpieces, most notably ``Blue Poles'' 
(1952) and ``The Deep'' (1953), but the astonishing flood of energy 
that produced ``No. 32, 1950,'' ``One: No. 31, 1950,'' ``Autumn Rhythm'' 
and ``Lavender Mist'' in the space of a year was spent. Is it entirely 
coincidence that in 1955 and 1956, as exhibitions and sales of his 
work multiplied, when at last he could have sold whatever he did, 
he ceased to paint altogether? At the center of ``The Deep'' appears 
a melodramatic rift, a black abyss framed by jagged, snow-encrusted 
ice, precise as an unwanted look into the bowels of nonbeing. Pollock's 
awkward, fumbled early drawings (also on view at the Modern) testify 
that he was not a skilled draftsman. He didn't do preliminary sketches 
for his later work, going straight to the canvas and working in great 
bursts of productivity. The gigantic ``Mural'' of 1943, a stampede 
of interlacing forms and colors, took less than 24 hours to paint. 
His art was a one-shot venture, a performance requiring the utmost 
discipline; if he ``lost contact with the painting,'' in his words, 
he had to start again. His only ticket was an instant pass to the 
center; denied it, he stood balked and lost, stranded on the outskirts 
of the town he wished to conquer. In ``The Flame,'' an early work 
from the late 1930s, licking tongues of red, white, yellow, brown 
and black build and interweave in dense, rhythmic motions, devouring 
landscapes, people, the archaic shapes Pollock loved and the invisible 
universe within him. What burns can't be distinguished from what is 
burnt. Jean Cocteau, asked what he would save if his house were on 
fire, replied, ``The fire.'' Nobody escapes Pollock's bonfire. Standing 
before his paintings, who would want to? (italics)Here is a selection 
of sites in Manhattan that were connected with the lives of the Abstract 
Expressionists:(end italics) 1. ART STUDENTS LEAGUE, 215 West 57th 
Street. Tuition-free art school, established in 1875 and still open. 
Mark Rothko, 20, wandered in to meet a friend in 1923, saw the nude 
model the class was drawing and decided that this is ``the life for 
me.'' Jackson Pollock, 18, began classes here in 1930 with the American 
Realist Thomas Hart Benton, who told him: ``You've the stuff, old 
kid. All you have to do is keep it up.'' 2. 46 EAST EIGHTH STREET. 
Pollock lived here with various family members (at $35 a month) and 
then with Lee Krasner, from 1933 until 1945. In December 1943, working 
on the mural commissioned by the bohemian heiress Peggy Guggenheim, 
Pollock had to tear down a wall to accommodate its size (8 feet 11 
inches by 19 feet 9 inches). It was ``exciting as all hell,'' he wrote 
his brother. In 1945, he moved to 830 Fireplace Road, Springs, East 
Hampton, attracting other artists to Long Island, though he continued 
to spend time in the city. 3. 5 WEST 19TH STREET. Experimental Workshop 
of the Mexican mural painter David Alfaro Siquieros. Pollock participated 
in April 1936, learning to work with lacquers, Duco paint, airbrushes 
and spray guns. Siquieros encouraged his students to pour, drip, splatter 
and hurl paint at the canvas; he left to fight in the Spanish Civil 
War in late 1936. 4. 314 WEST 75TH STREET. Rothko lived in the basement 
in the early 1930s; his apartment once served as a dog kennel. He 
sometimes slept in the bathtub, or in subways. Rothko believed that 
poverty is part of the alienated artist's consecration for his task. 
5. 143 WEST 22nd STREET. Willem de Kooning's loft in the 1930s and 
40s. When his wife, Elaine, moved in, in 1943, he built a smaller 
loft for her in the center, white outside and pink within. A confessed 
``clean bug,'' who liked everything ``light and bright,'' he washed 
the apartment top to bottom every Saturday. 6. WASHINGTON SQUARE PARK. 
Rothko and de Kooning first met here on a bench one evening in the 
1930s, while taking a rare break from their work. De Kooning didn't 
speak, lest he be thought a homosexual. ``Nice evening,'' Rothko finally 
said, and they discovered they were both painters. 7. ART OF THIS 
CENTURY GALLERY, 30 West 57th Street. In 1942, Peggy Guggenheim opened 
her avant-garde, surrealist, egg-shaped gallery, designed to achieve 
a ``continuous flow.'' The floors were turquoise, the paintings unframed. 
Pollock's first one-man show was held here, in November 1943. Guggenheim's 
lipstick shade was ``Eternal Wound.'' (The gallery closed in 1947.) 
8. 52 EAST NINTH STREET. Franz Kline had his studio on the top floor 
beginning in 1944. The building once belonged to Lillian Russell, 
and a friend noted that ``its winding staircase looked exactly like 
her.'' Kline had his great breakthrough into black in 1950. He was 
evicted in 1953 when the building was torn down. 9. BETTY PARSONS 
GALLERY, 15 East 57th Street. Parsons, a socialite and an artist, 
opened her gallery in 1946. She exhibited Pollock, Rothko, Barnett 
Newman and Clyfford Still. ``I knew that my artists saw into the future,'' 
she said. In the 1950s, many of the painters defected to the Sidney 
Janis Gallery (in the same building). Janis could offer them more 
money. (The Betty Parsons Gallery no longer exists; the Janis Gallery 
is now at 110 West 57th Street.) 10. CEDAR TAVERN, Eighth Street and 
University Place. (The present Cedar Tavern is a few blocks north 
of this site, on University Place.) The artists' stomping and drinking 
ground in the late 1940s and 50s, with pea-green walls but no decor 
or music, and smelling of roughhouse masculinity. ``The people were 
the style,'' said Pollock's lover Ruth Kligman; Pollock, drunken or 
sober, was king, ``the greatest of the matadors.'' In the later 50s, 
Kline drank here with his friend Jack Kerouac. 11. ARTISTS' CLUB, 
39 East Eighth Street. The place where New York artists and intellectuals 
mixed in the late 1940s and 50s, sponsoring panels with John Cage, 
Edwin Denby, Hannah Arendt and Frank O'Hara. Members, women included, 
drank as much as they talked. ``What happened is that we turned into 
alcoholics,'' Elaine de Kooning later realized. Pollock seldom came; 
Robert Motherwell called it ``de Kooning Party Headquarters.'' 12. 
242 WEST 14TH STREET. Kline found a studio on the second floor in 
1958. He lamented the changes in the Village: the Italian section 
had been replaced by modern apartment buildings, he complained, and 
downtown was now indistinguishable from uptown. He bought a black 
Thunderbird with the revenue from his paintings, opened its hood and 
discovered that the engine looked ``just like a washing machine.'' 
13. FOUR SEASONS, in the Seagram Building, 375 Park Avenue, at 52nd( 
Street. Rothko painted 30 murals for the new restaurant in 1958 but 
withdrew from the project, returning his commission determined that 
its rich patrons ``will never look at a painting of mine.'' 14. 118 
EAST 98TH STREET. Rothko, now worth millions, moved here in 1961. 
Alcoholic and tormented, he killed himself in his 69th Street studio 
in February 1970, slashing his veins and leaving no suicide note. 
``Silence is so accurate,'' he once said. 15. 242 LEXINGTON AVENUE, 
near 34th Street. Andy Warhol lived here, with his mother, from 1953 
until 1959 and laid siege to the New York art world. He decided to 
invent Pop Art because ``I hate Abstract Expressionism.'' The apartment 
was decorated in white, with wicker and twig furniture, multiple televisions 
and a large tiger skin rug. Warhol claimed to live on candy and cake. 
16. 231 EAST 47TH STREET. Warhol's Factory grabbed the spotlight in 
1964 with a huge ``silver party.'' Reynolds Wrap was everywhere; the 
floors and the pay phone were painted silver. Warhol liked silver 
because it suggested astronauts and narcissism. In 1974, the Factory 
moved to 860 Broadway at Union Square, as Andy Warhol Enterprises. 
``The new art is really a business,'' he commented. In East Hampton, 
at a party given by Larry Rivers in late 1968, a drunken de Kooning 
refused to shake Warhol's hand. ``You're a killer of art,'' he said. 
A few years later, Warhol planned a movie about Pollock, starring 
Jack Nicholson, but the project was unrealized. Here is a selection 
of books about Jackson Pollock and other Abstract Expressionist painters 
in New York: ``THE CULTURE OF SPONTANEITY: IMPROVISATION AND THE ARTS 
IN POSTWAR AMERICA,'' by Daniel Belgrad. University of Chicago Press, 
1998. $29. A broad and intelligent synthesis of the ethos of spontaneity, 
which links Pollock with be-bop, the Beats, Zen Buddhism, Black Mountain 
poets and Jungian psychology. ``HOW NEW YORK STOLE THE IDEA OF MODERN 
ART: ABSTRACT EXPRESSIONISM, FREEDOM AND THE COLD WAR,'' by Serge 
Guilbaut, translated by Arthur Goldhammer. University of Chicago Press, 
1983. $13.95. The controversial but indispensable brilliant historical 
analysis of how Abstract Expressionism was co-opted for American propaganda 
purposes after World War II. The author's passionate concern for Pollock 
shines through. ``THE FATE OF GESTURE: JACKSON POLLOCK AND POSTWAR 
AMERICAN ART,'' by Carter Ratcliffe. Farrar, Straus &AMP; Giroux, 
1996. $35. A smart, generous-hearted study of Pollock's art as part 
of the postwar economic boom and optimism, and those it influenced, 
including Jasper Johns, Andy Warhol and Robert Smithson. ``THE TURNING 
POINT: THE ABSTRACT EXPRESSIONISTS AND THE TRANSFORMATION OF AMERICAN 
ART,'' by April Kingsley. Simon &AMP; Schuster, 1992. $30. This focuses 
on 1950, the annus mirabile of Abstract Expressionism, and offers 
wonderfully astute, elegantly written readings of the art and the 
men. ``CLEMENT GREENBERG: A LIFE,'' by Florence Rubenfeld. Scribner, 
1997. $29.50. A fair-minded, revealing biography of the critic who 
put Pollock on the map. ``THE TRADITION OF THE NEW,'' by Harold Rosenberg. 
1959; reprinted by Da Capo, 1994. $14.95. Seminal study of the avant-garde 
by Greenberg's biggest rival. Its defining essay, ``The Action Painters,'' 
is on Abstract Expressionism. (Pollock believed that he was Rosenberg's 
model.) ``JACKSON POLLOCK: ENERGY MADE VISIBLE,'' by B.H. Friedman. 
1972; reprinted by Da Capo, 1995. $14.95. A sympathetic, discerning 
biography of Pollock, by one who knew and loved him. ``JACKSON POLLOCK: 
AN AMERICAN SAGA,'' by Steven Neifeh and Gregory White Smith. Woodward/White, 
1989. $27.95. Exhaustively researched, compelling biography, marred 
only by the author's contention that Pollock was a closeted homosexual 
_ an intensely troubled heterosexual identity does not automatically 
translate into homosexuality. ``JACKSON POLLOCK,'' by Kirk Varnedoe 
with Pepe Karmel. Museum of Modern Art, 1998. $35. The catalog for 
the museum's current exhibition is a marvel of accurate, balanced 
scholarship, with special attention to Hans Namuth's photos and films 
of Pollock, and superb close-up reproductions of Pollock's paintings. 
``THE LIFE AND DEATH OF ANDY WARHOL,'' by Victor Bockris. Bantam, 
1989; reprinted by Da Capo, 1997. $17.95. Colorful, vivid account 
of the man who was Abstract Expressionism's nemesis. (italics)Here 
are current Manhattan exhibitions that show work from the Abstract 
Expressionist period:(end italics) JACKSON POLLOCK, Museum of Modern 
Art, 11 West 53rd Street, (212) 708-9400 (through Feb. 2). Hours: 
Saturdays through Tuesdays, and Thursdays, 10:30 a.m. to 6 p.m.; Fridays, 
to 8:30 p.m. Admission: $12.50; students and the elderly, $9.50. MARK 
ROTHKO, Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th 
Street, (212) 570-3676 (through Sunday). Hours: Wednesdays, and Fridays 
through Sundays, 11 a.m. to 6 p.m.; Thursdays, 1 to 8 p.m. Admission: 
$9; students and the elderly, $7. WILLEM DE KOONING, ``Drawing Seeing/Seeing 
Drawing,'' the Drawing Center, 35 Wooster Street, SoHo, (212) 219-2166 
(through Dec. 19). Hours: Tuesdays through Fridays, 10 a.m. to 6 p.m.; 
Saturdays, 11 a.m. to 6 p.m. ``Drawings and Sculpture'' (through Dec. 
19): Matthew Marks Gallery, 523 West 24th Street, Chelsea, (212) 243-0200, 
Tuesdays through Saturdays, 10 a.m. to 6 p.m., and Mitchell-Innes 
&AMP; Nash, 1018 Madison Avenue, near 79th Street, (212) 744-7400, 
Tuesdays through Saturdays, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. Admission to all three 
sites is free. ARSHILE GORKY, ``Paintings and Drawings 1929-1942,'' 
Gagosian, 980 Madison Avenue, at 76th Street, (212) 744-2313 (through 
Jan. 9). Hours: Tuesdays through Saturdays, 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. Free. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>