<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981126.0087 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There's a lot of Ross Bleckner to see in New York City right now, 
with two gallery exhibitions and a spate of Absolute Vodka ads in 
glossy magazines. Taken together they suggest an artist in search 
of diplomatic immunity, that is, easy travel to different artistic 
planets, from mystical light-filled abstraction to political art to 
popular illustration. They also provide a particularly clear view 
of Bleckner's strengths and weaknesses and his tendency to undermine 
and cheapen his own accomplishments. The gallery shows are at Lehmann 
Maupin in SoHo and at the artist's longtime home base, Mary Boone, 
on 57th Street. The Lehmann Maupin show, which includes a soupcon 
of political photo-based work (a new tangent for the artist), features 
some of the best paintings he has made in years, maybe ever. Seductive, 
refined, dominated by his characteristic grisaille palette and infused 
with a melancholy inner light, these works treat motifs and effects 
that the artist has pursued for years but with a new economy and force. 
Thankfully, Bleckner has jettisoned the greasily varnished fields 
dotted with birds, flowers or flares of light that dominated so many 
of the canvases in his 1995 mid-career survey at the Guggenheim Museum. 
While those works were often described as memorials to the devastation 
wrought by the AIDS epidemic, such meanings seem largely tacked on 
by admirers. What really came across was an air of slick Victorian 
kitschiness. In these new works, gray-toned expanses of tiny overlapping 
shapes suggest tiny cells, the transparent cytoplasm of larger cells, 
microscopic views or cross sections of skin or fish scales. They evoke 
illness and the body more concretely but also more abstractly than 
anything Bleckner has done before. They also resurrect his penchant 
for Op Art-like effects but seem less a quotation of the earlier style 
than an attempt to extend it. The fields are generated by a real dazzler 
of a technique: Hundreds of quick, closely spaced bursts from an airbrush 
transform still-wet surfaces dotted with circles and spheres into 
fluctuating networks of cells and shadowy forms. (Think of Yayoi Kusama 
nets painted in the style of Roger Brown's tightly rendered shaded 
clouds.) In fact, the new technique is so dazzling that the first 
reaction to these paintings may simply be, ``How were these things 
made?,'' followed quickly by a close-up examination of the surface, 
which doesn't explain much. You can almost forget to back up and look 
at them whole, which is something of a weakness. Such mysterious high 
finish goes bravely against the grain of most current abstraction's 
emphasis on self-evident process; it's even mildly Victorian (we also 
look closely at paintings by Edward Burne-Jones or Richard Dadd to 
try to see how they're made) but with a contemporary sci-fi edge. 
It is not surprising that one of two paintings titled ``Tolerance,'' 
in which the little cell-shapes are organized into a big mandalalike 
dome or wheel, is the best work here. Its concentric circles and radiating 
spokes add a larger purpose to the tiny pulsating units. In addition, 
it is more loosely worked: The airbrushed cell-shapes read more clearly 
as the little pool-like clearings of paint that they really are. And 
they're not continuous; patches of Bleckner's casually brushed underlayer 
remain visible. Having returned to more abstract imagery, Bleckner 
presents his political conscience as a kind of side dish. Along one 
wall at Lehmann Maupin are a series of photographs of page A3 of The 
New York Times, all with a major international story appearing beside 
an ad for Tiffany's. This kind of appropriation was done much better 
nearly 20 years ago by some of Bleckner's contemporaries, among them 
Richard Prince and Sarah Charlesworth. In addition, this juxtaposition 
of images of harsh reality (war-torn Bosnia, for example) with smug 
promotions of high-priced elegance seems disingenuous, considering 
that Bleckner's paintings belong to the second category themselves. 
Things deteriorate further at Boone, where Bleckner essentially puts 
his new technique into overproduction, something he has done before. 
The addition of stronger colors makes the paintings seem more obvious 
and cloying. DNA-like chains of cells come in pleasant shades of blue, 
yellow and pink; red is added to other works so that blood cells and 
scientific illustrations are evoked. And the airbrush technique seems 
to tighten, which means that many of the cells seem to be made of 
jelly-beans or beads; suddenly the paintings seem more photo-realist 
than abstract. The vodka ads, which also feature the cell-shape surface, 
are something like the last straw. In this context, a motif intended 
to set off a certain visual and poetic resonance is leveled, stripped 
of seriousness and reduced to entertainment. There are very few artists 
whose work can travel from art gallery to magazine advertisements 
and retain anything close to its original character; Andy Warhol, 
Keith Haring and Barbara Kruger are possible exceptions. It would 
be easy to say that Bleckner misunderstands his own art if he thinks 
it can, too, but maybe the misunderstanding is ours. Ross Bleckner's 
new work remains at Lehmann Maupin, 39 Greene St., near Grand Street, 
SoHo, and the Mary Boone Gallery, 745 Fifth Ave., near 57th Street, 
through Jan. 19. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>