<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981126.0190 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The idea of censuring President Clinton for his conduct in the Monica 
Lewinsky scandal, rather than impeaching him, is steadily gaining 
momentum in the House. That development reflects the awareness among 
lawmakers of both parties that the votes to impeach Clinton on even 
a single perjury count are in doubt, at least in part because opinion 
polls show that two-thirds of the public wants him to remain in office 
while about half backs censure. House Democrats in particular support 
censure as a means of condemning Clinton's misconduct without removing 
him, and of shielding themselves from Republican criticism that they 
are being too lenient. But as difficult as the politics of impeachment 
are, it is not clear whether supporters of censure can build a majority 
for their option, either, partly because some lawmakers harbor doubts 
about its constitutionality. Moreover, the Republican leaders have 
the power to prevent a vote on censure, and might do so if they perceived 
that this would strengthen the chances of impeachment. Many of the 
228 Republicans in the current Congress _ perhaps more than 100 of 
them _ might vote against censure, senior Republican aides say, because 
they think it either insufficient or unconstitutional. So a majority 
of the 206 Democrats and 1 independent would most likely have to hold 
firm to win passage of a censure resolution. There are serious cracks 
within the Democratic ranks, though. Many of the 35 members of the 
Congressional Black Caucus, for example, oppose any punishment of 
the president, saying he is a victim of a biased investigation by 
Kenneth Starr, the independent counsel. Other liberal Democrats speak 
similarly. Senior Democratic aides express confidence, however, that 
the party leaders would prevail among their rank and file by making 
an impassioned argument for unity, just as they did on the resolution 
to begin the impeachment inquiry itself. Only 31 Democrats voted for 
the Republican version of that resolution, in October. ``I'm not really 
for censure, but if there's a strong Democratic consensus I'd reconsider,'' 
said the Black Caucus' chairwoman, Rep. Maxine Waters of California, 
a strong voice on the House Judiciary Committee. House Democratic 
leaders were especially heartened by the censure proposal offered 
on Tuesday by Rep. Paul McHale, D-Pa., who had earlier called on Clinton 
to resign. Republicans had been counting on McHale to vote for impeachment. 
A central question for Republican leaders is whether to allow a censure 
vote if impeachment, having been recommended by the Judiciary Committee 
as expected, is then rejected by the full House. Many lawmakers say 
any censure vote on the floor would most likely come only after impeachment 
had failed. A vote to censure would give Democrats _ and perhaps two 
dozen moderate Republicans _ political cover. And it would deny conservatives 
the chance to paint Democrats who vote against impeachment as endorsing 
a party of perjurers. ``If there's no impeachment, there will be a 
fallback censure position,'' said Rep. E. Clay Shaw Jr. of Florida, 
a senior Republican on the Ways and Means Committee. ``The House will 
want to speak to the conduct of the president. Democrats will want 
to do that as well as Republicans.'' Rep. Amo Houghton Jr. of New 
York, a moderate Republican, said: ``There will be a censure option. 
It's just a matter of what's involved in the censure.'' Most of the 
House Republican leadership has stayed silent on the question of censure, 
waiting for the committee and its chairman, Henry J. Hyde of Illinois, 
to make their recommendations. Rep. Robert L. Livingston of Louisiana, 
whom Republicans have chosen to succeed Newt Gingrich as speaker, 
has not ruled out a censure vote, but has suggested it might be more 
fitting in the Senate. Rep. Tom DeLay of Texas, the Republican whip, 
is actively fighting any attempt to bring a censure resolution to 
the floor. DeLay believes that by denying wavering lawmakers an alternative 
to impeachment, fence-sitters will be pressured to vote against the 
president or explain to their constituents why they let him off scot-free. 
``It will be a difficult road to bring a censure vote to the House 
floor,'' said Michael Scanlon, a spokesman for DeLay. Rep. Tillie 
Fowler of Florida, the newly chosen fifth-ranking House Republican, 
expressed strong reservations about a rebuke: ``How do you censure 
the president one week, and the next week have him give the State 
of the Union or order the bombing of Iraq, when you're rallying support 
for him?'' With a majority of Americans opposed to impeaching Clinton, 
but favoring some sort of reprimand, Democrats and some Republicans 
warn that blocking a censure vote could backfire on Republicans. ``It 
would be a political mistake for the majority party to be seen as 
thwarting the clear will of the people, that Congress admonish the 
President,'' said Rep. Rick Boucher, a Virginia Democrat on the judiciary 
committee. And lawmakers on both sides of the aisle say that to be 
effective, impeachment or censure needs to be bipartisan. ``We certainly 
don't want this to appear to be a partisan lynching,'' said Shaw. 
Clinton's top lieutenants have signaled his willingness to accept 
censure, saying he would be open to a ``serious and reasonable'' compromise. 
Cabinet officers, including Energy Secretary Bill Richardson, a former 
Democratic Congressman from New Mexico and former representative to 
the United Nations, have been sounding out moderate Republicans. ``He 
asked if I had any advice,'' Rep. Christopher Shays, a Connecticut 
Republican who opposes impeachment and censure, said about his recent 
conversation with Richardson. ``I told him the president should tell 
the truth.'' What a censure resolution would look like is unclear. 
McHale's four-paragraph proposal is a searing condemnation of Clinton's 
affair with Monica Lewinsky and their efforts to conceal it. ``It's 
stronger than many Democrats would like to see, but strong enough 
for Republicans to feel that the president's conduct has been sufficiently 
condemned,'' said McHale. Some censure proponents have proposed fining 
Clinton or requiring him to stand on the House floor and accept his 
punishment. Support for these ideas appears thin. A fine would require 
Clinton's consent to avoid constitutional hurdles, and many lawmakers 
fear bringing Clinton to the floor for a scolding would demean the 
presidency. Among the roughly 100 Republicans who oppose censure there 
are various factions. Some, like Shays, say a reprimand would set 
a dangerous precedent. ``To censure or rebuke would open the door 
to censure of the week, censure of the month,'' Shays said. Another 
group of lawmakers cites the testimony from scholars that censuring 
Clinton has no basis in the Constitution. ``The Constitution establishes 
a process to deal with the misconduct of the president,'' said Representative 
Charles T. Canady, R.-Fla. ``Impeach or not, that's it.'' On the judiciary 
committee, where there is virtually no support among Republicans for 
a rebuke after or instead of an impeachment vote, some Republicans 
say the committee's almost certain approval of at least one impeachment 
article would be penalty enough. ``If the committee reports out a 
resolution, and it fails to pass on the House floor, I believe he's 
still been censured,'' said Rep. George W. Gekas, a Pennsylvania Republican 
on the committee. But Democrats, in particular, are pressing for censure 
as a way to vent their anger at Clinton and preserve their integrity 
in the history books. There are also electoral considerations. House 
Democrats did not fare as well with older women voters in the mid-term 
elections as they have in the past, and party leaders believe a rebuke 
would help shore up support with that important constituency. ``There 
should be some punishment,'' said Rep. Charles E. Schumer, a New York 
Democrat on the committee who was elected to the Senate in November. 
``I don't want my children or grandchildren reading in the history 
books that someone lied under oath, which I think the president did, 
and was not rebuked for it in some way.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>