<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981126.0111 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Fifteen years have passed since Lee A. Iacocca drove the first modern 
minivan off a Chrysler Corp. assembly line in Windsor, Ontario. That 
short trip, on Nov. 2, 1983, began a noteworthy journey in which the 
minivan dethroned the station wagon as the preferred utility vehicle 
of American families. But more recently, the minivan has become the 
object of snickers and it has seemed at risk of being muscled aside 
by sport utilities with comparable space plus a rugged image. Although 
the minivan segment is not growing, it is far from dead. Auto makers 
are frantically working to lure new buyers with vans that are safer, 
more exciting, more luxurious and more practical. On average, Americans 
have purchased 1.2 million of the vans each year for the last four 
years. Industry-wide, they account for approximately 8 percent, or 
one in 10, of all new vehicles sold in the United States. For this 
segment to remain viable, some significant demographic challenges 
have to be dealt with, according to a 1998 report on the compact van 
market by J.D. Power &AMP; Associates. Auto makers are grappling with 
how to continue to appeal to baby boomers (those aged, roughly, 35 
to 50) as they move out of their prime child-rearing years and how 
to attract the group that Power calls Generation X'ers (25- to 35-year-olds) 
as they move into their family-raising years. Baby boomers account 
for more than half of all minivan sales, and they are loyal. When 
it is time to replace the old minivan, 40 percent purchase another, 
compared with only 36 percent of those aged 25 to 35, according to 
another J.D. Power report. Although minivans appeal to people with 
children, this report found that those in the 25-to-35-year-old group 
appeared to be marrying later, or perhaps not at all. When they do 
have children, the report said, they are more inclined to buy sport 
utility vehicles. These buyers appear to be rejecting the minivans 
of their parents, much as their parents rejected the station wagons 
that they had grown up with. One surprising finding about minivans 
_ and what may be part of their salvation _ is that children are not 
required. J.D. Power says that a third of all compact vans sold in 
1997 went to families without children, said Paul Ballew, chief economist 
and senior director of automotive analysis at J.D. Power. Such a high 
number bolsters the idea that minivans are not dead. Also, 85 percent 
of the buyers without children were over 50, suggesting that minivans 
may have a future as utility vehicles for older buyers. It seems likely 
that what these older buyers will want, and can afford, is pampering. 
Just as most consumers older consumers move upscale in their vehicle 
choices, ``the same thing will be true for the people who want to 
be in minivans,'' said Susan G. Jacobs, an auto industry analyst in 
Rutherford, N.J. ``So at least within the empty nester group, the 
people who stay in minivans are more likely to prefer luxury versions.'' 
A prime example is Chrysler's Town &AMP; Country Limited, a step up 
from the already luxurious Town &AMP; Country LXi, with special trim, 
a distinctive interior and even an umbrella holder. It is aimed at 
retaining van customers and attracting luxury car owners. And Chrysler 
may be onto something: Town &AMP; Country sales rose to 73,188 in 
1997 from 33,695 in '95. Oldsmobile is offering its Silhouette Premiere, 
and the Ford Motor Co. is positioning its redesigned 1999 Windstar 
SEL (which last year was called the Limited) against the Town &AMP; 
Country Limited. It has a leather interior and just about every feature 
is standard, including dual power sliding doors, side-impact air bags 
and a sensor that warns the driver if there is something in the path 
of the vehicle as it backs up. The bad news is that even in the pamper-me 
arena, the minivan faces competition from its nemesis, the luxury 
sport utility. ``It is a very dynamic, fast-paced environment,'' Ballew 
said. ``And, because of that, we're all sitting back here scratching 
our heads a bit and trying to get our arms around it. The key is that 
it doesn't add up to the demise of the segment, but it does add up 
to a very competitive future.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>