<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981126.0118 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Lynn Zimmer wasn't even in the same room as a marijuana cigarette 
until 1980, when she was 33 years old. By then she already had two 
children and was working on her Ph.D. in sociology. Somehow, as the 
child of working-class parents in upstate Binghamton, she had sidestepped 
the turbulence of her generation, and its sweetly pungent perfume. 
``When I graduated from high school in 1965, I had never even heard 
of marijuana,'' she said. ``By 1967 I had a child and was taking care 
of my family and going to school at night, and working in a day-care 
center mornings. So I had no interest in the '60s. I guess I saw it 
on television.'' But for all the frenzied experimentation and generational 
struggle that took place outside her window back then, the debate 
over marijuana has only grown in intensity in the ensuing decades. 
And suddenly, Ms. Zimmer finds herself in its dead center. Now teaching 
sociology at Queens College, she has become at once an academic authority 
on the drug and a passionate advocate of its decriminalization. Ms. 
Zimmer's arguments about marijuana's essential harmlessness, collected 
in a recent book co-written with a City University colleague, Dr. 
John Morgan, have become a flashpoint in the battle over legalization, 
which gained steam earlier this month when five Western states voted 
to permit the medical use of marijuana. Groups that favor liberalizing 
the nation's drug laws have been promoting the book, which bears the 
somewhat presumptuous title of ``Marijuana Myths, Marijuana Facts,'' 
as a kind of bible on the subject, saying it effectively shoots down 
the accepted wisdom that the drug is a physically harmful gateway 
to crack and the abyss. Academic experts have been far less kind, 
calling it a well-researched compilation of opinion that occasionally 
leaves out information that might cast marijuana in a negative light. 
Opponents of drug use have condemned it as an invitation to surrender 
in the war against drugs. ``There's no doubt marijuana leads to trouble 
and I can show you 10 books that prove that for every one like the 
one you just showed me,'' Police Commissioner Howard Safir, a former 
drug enforcement agent, told MSNBC earlier this year. ``The fact that 
these two professors are teachers leads me to wonder if they are fit 
to be leading a classroom.'' Under Safir and Mayor Rudolph Giuliani, 
marijuana arrests in New York have soared to record levels this year, 
30 years after the drug became the token of the counterculture, and 
the arrests are likely to reach 40,000 by the end of the year, eight 
times the number six years ago. Most of those arrested are charged 
with possession of the drug. To Ms. Zimmer, all this effort is a waste 
of taxpayer money, a misguided extension of the quality-of-life campaign 
that runs counter to a growing public perception, cherished by many 
baby boomers, that marijuana holds little intrinsic danger. ``We now 
are getting into the adult population many more people who have had 
experience with marijuana,'' she said, at the dining room table of 
her apartment in the Chelsea section of Manhattan. ``Many have children 
and are concerned about their children, so they're a little ambivalent, 
but I think they are questioning some of the exaggerated claims about 
marijuana's dangers and certainly questioning the utility of putting 
people in jail for engaging in a behavior that 70 million people have 
engaged in.'' Some of that perception has been fostered by several 
large foundations that are promoting the relaxation of drug laws, 
and Ms. Zimmer, 51, has been the beneficiary of some of their largesse. 
Her book was published by the Lindesmith Center, a group funded by 
financier George Soros, who has made a worldwide campaign of finding 
a less punitive response to drug use than the current laws. She served 
for a time on the board of directors of the National Organization 
for the Reform of Marijuana Laws, known as NORML, and her book is 
dedicated to Dr. Lester Grinspoon, the Harvard professor who serves 
as chairman of the Norml Foundation's board. Ms. Zimmer said she first 
became interested in the subject after conducting a study in 1986 
of Operation Pressure Point, an attempt by the Police Department to 
rid Manhattan's Lower East Side of drugs, an effort that she and others 
judged ineffective. She later became more interested in the various 
claims being made about the dangers of marijuana, most of which she 
determined were exaggerated, and which she attempts to debunk in her 
book. But in the polarized world of the drug debate, the book inevitably 
came to be considered a partisan argument, particularly because it 
rarely acknowledges any downside to marijuana. ``The book puts forward 
as many myths as it debunks,'' said Mark Kleiman, a drug policy expert 
at the University of California at Los Angeles, who himself favors 
decriminalizing possession. ``If you didn't know anything and read 
the book and you're not too critical about methodology, you'd be impressed. 
Otherwise you sort of say, come on.'' But Ms. Zimmer, straightforward 
and almost prim in her love of research and statistics, remains confident 
that any thorough review of the scientific literature will produce 
the same conclusions. And no, she said, although she did smoke the 
occasional joint, she never seriously indulged. ``I was way too busy 
for that,'' she said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>