<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981126.0174 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As protests to the continuing detention of Gen. Augusto Pinochet in 
London mounted here, the foreign minister flew to London Thursday 
in an 11th-hour bid to free the former dictator. ``I am not defending 
a dictator,'' Foreign Minister Jose Miguel Insulza Salinas told reporters 
before leaving Chile. ``I am defending the country.'' Insulza said 
he planned to meet with British Foreign Secretary Robin Cook on Friday 
morning, adding that he was aiming for ``mutual understanding.'' But 
he said people ``should not expect immediate results.'' The official 
Chilean position, which was stated again in a legal petition delivered 
Thursday to British Home Secretary Jack Straw, is that, as a former 
head of state, Pinochet is immune to prosecution and extradition to 
Spain. On his arrest in London in October, the note contends, the 
general was carrying a diplomatic passport that grants him immunity. 
Government officials privately say that Insulza, a Socialist party 
leader, will appeal to Labor and Socialist leaders in London and Madrid, 
arguing that a prolonged detention of the former dictator will jeopardize 
Chile's stability and transition to democracy. He is also expected 
to make a personal appeal on behalf of the general, telling British 
and Spanish officials that, at age 83, Pinochet is ailing and may 
not survive a lengthy extradition and trial. Leaders of the country's 
two conservative parties have called on President Eduardo Frei to 
make an all-out diplomatic effort to free Pinochet by forming a delegation 
that includes members of the opposition and jurists with expertise 
in international law. They have expressed concerns that the Socialist 
Party, which governs with Frei's Christian Democrats, does not really 
want Pinochet to return to Chile. Members of the military's high command 
have come out in support of Frei's initiatives in an apparent effort 
to cool the passions of right-wing supporters of Pinochet, who have 
taken to the streets. A small band of Pinochet supporters Thursday 
burned a British flag on a bridge in central Santiago, and there were 
several anonymous bomb threats that proved to be hoaxes. The rumblings 
followed a night of protests by right-wing and left-wing activists 
in Santiago as well as in the provincial city of Concepcion. Police 
broke up demonstrations with tear gas and a water cannon, but not 
before some Pinochet supporters threw rocks and eggs at the British 
and Spanish embassies. Police arrested 120 people, and 10 officers 
were slightly injured. Six of the police officers were injured by 
projectiles thrown at them by leftist students in front of the University 
of Concepcion, a center of revolutionary ferment since the 1960s. 
Police blocked traffic and reinforced security around the embassies 
and ambassadorial residences of Spain and Britain, as well as those 
of Sweden, Switzerland and Belgium. Those three countries joined Spain 
in petitioning Britain for Pinochet's extradition on human rights 
charges. The leading presidential candidate in next year's election, 
Ricardo Lagos of the Socialist Party, came a step closer to supporting 
the government's position favoring Pinochet's return in an interview 
published Thursday in Chile from Mexico City. Previously Lagos had 
said he would stay out of a judicial matter; but now he says he favors 
Pinochet's return so he may be tried in Chile. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>