<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981126.0229 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A report commissioned by the Fannie Mae Foundation, an arm of the 
federally chartered home-mortgage provider, shows the extent to which 
race plays a determining role in where immigrants live in New York 
City. The study focuses on the conditions immigrants face in their 
communities, rather than just their buildings. The study, prepared 
by the Center for Real Estate and Urban Policy at the New York University 
School of Law, shows that black and Hispanic immigrants live in city 
neighborhoods with the highest rates of serious crime, tuberculosis 
and unsafe buildings, and that their experience is rivaled only by 
conditions faced by blacks born in the United States. Immigrants from 
Europe, Asia and the nations of the former Soviet Union, by comparison, 
live in neighborhoods with fewer deleterious conditions. Titled ``Nativity 
Differences in Neighborhood Quality,'' the study builds on the findings 
of a previous Fannie Mae study of immigrant housing. The earlier study, 
released in May, found that black and Hispanic immigrants lived in 
the city's most dilapidated buildings, paid the highest percentages 
of their incomes for rent and had the lowest rates of home ownership. 
As in the new study, those conditions were matched only by those faced 
by native-born blacks. ``Our results suggest there is a racial hierarchy 
of neighborhoods in New York,'' said Michael Schill, director of the 
NYU real estate center. ``Blacks and Latinos live in worse-quality 
neighborhoods than whites, regardless of whether they were born in 
the United States or not.'' The new report was prepared by Schill, 
Samantha Friedman of the NYU center and Emily Rosenbaum, a sociology 
professor at Fordham University. It examined six neighborhood conditions: 
crimes against persons per 1,000 residents; tuberculosis cases per 
10,000 residents; the percentage of buildings with safety violations; 
the percentage of the neighborhood population on public assistance; 
the percentage of subsidized housing units, and the availability of 
physicians per 10,000 residents. In every category except the availability 
of physicians, immigrants from the Dominican Republic, other Caribbean 
countries, Latin America, Africa and Puerto Rico lived in neighborhoods 
that posted the top four or five rankings, indicating that they faced 
the worst conditions. For example, in the category of crimes against 
persons, Puerto Ricans, at 17.58 cases; Caribbeans and Africans combined, 
at 15.57 cases; Dominicans, at 13.99, and Latin Americans, at 13.02, 
lived in neighborhoods with the second through fifth highest crime 
rates, topped only by native-born blacks, at 19.01. In the category 
of tuberculosis cases per 10,000 residents, Dominicans topped the 
list, at 34.99, followed by native-born blacks, at 34.37; Puerto Ricans, 
at 31.66, and Latin Americans, at 29.48. The study was based on data 
from the 1996 Housing and Vacancy Survey, which is considered the 
city's best source of housing data, as well as on crime and other 
housing statistics. The Housing and Vacancy Survey, conducted every 
three years by the Census Bureau, sampled 15,752 households, of which 
5,933 were headed by immigrants. Surprisingly, immigrants from the 
former Soviet Union live in neighborhoods that rank particularly well 
with respect to crime, disease and unsafe housing _ even when compared 
with native-born whites. The crime rate for neighborhoods occupied 
by those immigrants ranked lowest on the list, at 8.69 incidents per 
1,000 residents, compared with 9.39 for native-born whites. With tuberculosis 
as an indicator of the prevalence of disease, Soviet immigrants experienced 
the lowest rates of exposure, 17.52 cases per 10,000 residents, while 
the rate for native-born whites was 18.31. And in terms of housing 
safety, the average number of buildings with code violations for Soviet 
immigrants was 0.14, compared with 0.23 for native-born whites. ``Russians 
do well on these indicators,'' said Rosenbaum, ``largely because of 
their concentration in relatively well-to-do neighborhoods like Forest 
Hills and Manhattan Beach, and even Brighton Beach.'' ``They have 
a relatively higher proportion with college educations, compared to 
other groups,'' she said. ``But I think part of it is that they are 
white. It's really race and ethnicity that drive the difference between 
the ethnic groups.'' The two groups with higher proportions of college 
educations than immigrants from the former Soviet Union were those 
from Southeast Asia, and from India, Pakistan and Bangladesh, taken 
as a group. In the category of physician availability for every 10,000 
residents _ based on the location of the doctor's primary office _ 
immigrants from the Indian subcontinent had the lowest number of doctors 
in their neighborhoods, 20.64; those from the former Soviet Union 
had the second lowest number, 20.79, and native-born whites had the 
most doctors available, 37.61. Naomi Bayer, director of the New York 
office of Fannie Mae, said the study was commissioned because ``Fannie 
Mae is committed to eliminating discrimination in the mortgage financing 
system.'' ``One of the challenges that the study shows we must address,'' 
she said, ``is how to reach people who may not have access to information 
about the home-buying process. We really think that there's a great 
improvement in neighborhood conditions when there's a higher proportion 
of homeowners.'' Schill said the public-policy implications of the 
study ``are that stepped-up enforcement of antidiscrimination laws, 
such as the Federal Fair Housing Act, and investment in minority neighborhoods, 
such as that promoted by the Federal Community Reinvestment Act, are 
likely to go a long way in improving conditions of immigrants living 
in this city.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>