<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981126.0243 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial on Friday, Nov. 27: In drafting 
New York's death penalty statute three years ago, Gov. George Pataki 
and the state Legislature set out to avoid defects that could render 
it unconstitutional. Even so, they approved a flawed plea-bargaining 
process that now poses the first test of the new law before the state's 
highest court, the Court of Appeals. At issue is a section of the 
statute that specifically prohibits the death penalty when a defendant 
in a capital case reaches a plea agreement with prosecutors. The maximum 
sentence a defendant who pleads guilty to capital murder can receive 
is life in prison. As a legal matter, this should not be a difficult 
call for Chief Judge Judith Kaye and her colleagues. The plea-bargaining 
section is remarkably similar to a provision that led the U.S. Supreme 
Court, in an important 1968 case, to strike down a North Carolina 
death penalty statute, finding that it unconstitutionally penalized 
those defendants who demanded a jury trial. Two lower state appellate 
decisions in the past year have upheld New York's scheme. But the 
attempts to distinguish it from the North Carolina case do not stand 
up to scrutiny. It is true, for example, that in contrast to the disapproved 
North Carolina rules, a New York defendant cannot plead guilty without 
a prosecutor's consent. But it is hard to see how that small difference 
alters the fact that both statutes unconstitutionally scare people 
away from a jury trial by inducing them to plead guilty rather than 
risk the possibility of a death sentence. Other jurisdictions maintain 
room for plea bargaining in capital cases. But it is noteworthy that 
New York is alone among death penalty states in having a statute that 
links the possibility of the death penalty to the exercise of the 
constitutional right to a jury trial. Many legal experts find the 
provision unconstitutional. Whether that conclusion requires overturning 
the whole statute is a harder call that depends largely on how the 
Court of Appeals reads the ``severability'' clause the Legislature 
included in the law in an attempt to prevent the possible unconstitutionality 
of one provision from overturning the entire death penalty statute. 
But, plainly, the drama in this case goes beyond the validity of the 
state's death penalty law. The Court of Appeals has been under intense 
criticism from Pataki and other politicians in recent years for its 
willingness to safeguard the constitutional rights of criminal defendants, 
and among court-watchers there is concern about the impact of all 
the political pressure on the court's jurisprudence. The outcome here 
will say much about its continued integrity and independence. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>