<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981126.0128 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
MOSCOW _ ``The subject of the president's health should be closed. 
The subject does not even exist.'' Standing before cameras in the 
Kremlin last March 10, Boris Yeltsin looked hearty enough to make 
that command stick. He dared reporters to match him in swimming, tennis 
and track. A thorough physical five days before, he said, had shown 
``no deviations, even as far as the smallest microelements.'' Then 
he spat over his shoulder three times and rapped a nearby table. ``Touch 
wood, of course!'' he added. It is dangerous to tempt fate. Three 
days later, Yeltsin, who is 67, was laid up at home with a chest cold. 
On March 17 he postponed a summit meeting of regional heads of state. 
On March 26 doctors shifted a meeting with German and French leaders 
from the Ural Mountains to Moscow. Remarkably, that episode was but 
the mildest of recent ailments that have made Yeltsin's health one 
of the great political issues _ and mysteries _ of Russian politics. 
Before his March illness Yeltsin spent much of December and January 
in sanitariums and dachas fighting what aides called a bad cold. In 
July a top aide said Yeltsin was too worn out, mentally and physically, 
to serve past 2000, when his term ends. In mid-October he needed support 
from the president of Uzbekistan to make it through a welcoming ceremony 
there, and seemed to wander during a toast at a state dinner. He has 
not been at the Kremlin regularly since then. Ill with pneumonia, 
Yeltsin on Monday held an extraordinary state visit with Chinese President 
Jiang Zemin in his hospital suite _ an apparent statement that whatever 
ails Yeltsin, he is still the elected head of the government. What 
ails him, if anything, is an open question. The Kremlin, which long 
insisted that he is simply susceptible to colds, has lately begun 
to acknowledge obliquely that Yeltsin suffers from ``emotional stress'' 
and the wear and tear of age. His latest deputy chief of staff, Oleg 
Susuyev, has made increasingly blunt statements about Yeltsin's physical 
and political stamina, including a recent suggestion that Prime Minister 
Yevgeny Primakov should simply take over his duties ``if the situation 
persists.'' A Kremlin spokesman declined to comment this week on whether 
Susuyev was speaking for himself or was reflecting some broader consensus 
in the executive branch. Yet a person with some of the best information 
on Yeltsin's condition, the renowned U.S. heart surgeon Michael DeBakey, 
insisted in a telephone interview that the Boris Yeltsin he knows 
is a healthy and mentally astute leader. ``There's certainly no basic 
reason to be concerned about any neurologic problem because in previous 
studies all neurological functions were normal,'' he said. ``His liver 
function was normal, his kidney function normal, and his heart function 
is good. I can't account for his symptoms except to note that they're 
a symptom of the flu-like illnesses he's had.'' DeBakey said he was 
confident that his assessment of Yeltsin was accurate up to the onset 
of the president's most recent illness in October. ``I had lunch with 
him in the latter part of June,'' he said. ``At that time he was in 
excellent condition, quite vigorous and in good spirits, and really 
sort of a delightful host.'' Before his 1996 bypass surgery, Yeltsin 
had a history of heart trouble. He suffered several heart attacks 
or near-attacks in the early 1990s and underwent quintuple-bypass 
surgery after his re-election. Aides said in the mid-1990s that Yeltsin 
suffered from high blood pressure, and doctors said this month that 
his current case of exhaustion was coupled with fluctuations in his 
blood pressure _ a possible sign of new heart troubles. But DeBakey 
dismissed that possibility as remote. Yeltsin's blood pressure has 
not been especially high in recent years, he said, and he has not 
been on medication to regulate it. If Russia's president is sidelined 
for weeks or months by flu-like symptoms _ well, he said, the flu 
can be an enervating disease, even for a young, strong person. That 
said, outside observers _ none of them medical experts _ say they 
see something more in Yeltsin of late. They describe a waxen-faced 
man who has difficulty walking, whose movements and speech are slow 
and labored, and who can have difficulty concentrating on the task 
at hand. During a visit to a Novgorod meat-packing plant this autumn, 
witnesses say, Yeltsin was driven to a special entrance so that he 
would not have to climb stairs. An employee there noted that Yeltsin, 
whose temper is well-known, tried to stamp his foot but was unable 
to do so. In October, Uzbekistan officials skipped the normal review 
of troops and reception line at a welcoming ceremony for Yeltsin in 
Tashkent, the Uzbek capital, so he could go almost directly to a nearby 
building. Even then, Uzbekistan President Islam Karimov had to support 
Yeltsin after he stumbled. Franz Smets, the Bonn bureau chief of Deutsche 
Press Agentur, the German news agency, reported on Yeltsin extensively 
during a stint in Moscow and said in an interview that the president 
has had difficulty walking for years, and that what other people may 
be seeing now are the effects of advancing age. What strikes him and 
some other first-hand observers more is the apparent change in Yeltsin's 
mental state. A person who attended a state dinner during Yeltsin's 
Uzbekistan visit in October came away feeling ``quite sad'' after 
the president suffered a prolonged fit of coughing, then appeared 
unable to get through a toast whose written text had already been 
passed out to many diners. Yeltsin skipped from the first to the last 
paragraphs of the toast and then, seeming to realize something was 
amiss, plunged back into the middle. ``It was difficult to tell whether 
he ad-libbed or whether he realized that what he was saying wasn't 
long enough,'' the observer said. ``He made it to the end, but only 
after a lot of us held our breath for a very long time.'' That evoked 
memories of a similar occurrence during President Clinton's visit 
to Moscow in September, when Yeltsin was asked a question at a news 
conference, gave a cryptic answer and waited an excruciatingly long 
time, as if lost in thought, before saying, ``That's all.'' Smets, 
who returned to Moscow to cover German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder's 
visit this month, said Yeltsin seemed ``very, very sick.'' ``His face 
was very thick,'' he said. ``He wasn't able to speak whole sentences, 
like a normal man. He was very long thinking about what he was saying. 
It seemed to me that he had very many problems concentrating.'' Thomas 
Roth, the Moscow bureau chief for Germany's ARD Television, who has 
reported on Yeltsin since 1991, was in the same room. ``He looked 
frail; very pale,'' he said. ``My impression was that they'd given 
him some makeup. He moved very slowly, spoke very slowly; his hand 
movements were very slow. I am, of course, not a doctor, but I had 
the definite impression that he's a sick man.'' Such descriptions 
are consistent with other public reports of Yeltsin's condition. A 
Japanese diplomat who saw Yeltsin in April and this month, during 
a state visit by Prime Minister Keizo Obuchi, told Reuters the change 
was dramatic. ``He looked like a robot today,'' Reuters quoted the 
official as saying, without identifying him. ``He looked completely 
different, like someone on drugs.'' Yeltsin skipped a state dinner 
with Obuchi, an unusual breach of protocol that Russian officials 
said was prearranged, and which Japanese officials said was a complete 
surprise. In November, Yeltsin has canceled a trip to India and one 
to Vienna, pleading exhaustion. Yeltsin is at an age that is still 
vigorous for many Americans but close to elderly in a country where 
the average male life span is 57.7 years and where the diet and medical 
care have never matched Western standards. Three Soviet leaders _ 
Leonid Brezhnev, Yuri Andropov and Konstantin Chernenko _ died respectively 
at 75, 69 and 73. By all accounts Yeltsin has never been especially 
careful with his health. As a student in the 1950s he was hospitalized 
for stress from all-night studies and all-day sports, but discharged 
himself against doctors' orders. In 1987 he was again hospitalized 
for head and heart pain after a dressing-down by Communist Party leaders. 
Rumors of heavy drinking have followed him for years. His failure 
over the years as president to make scheduled meetings _ with Ireland's 
prime minister, the U.S. Treasury secretary and Japan's foreign minister 
_ have only fueled the rumors. In Ireland, Yeltsin never even emerged 
from his plane after it landed at Shannon Airport. Yeltsin has still 
been seen to drink two or three glasses of wine at dinners, but aides 
insist any alcohol abuse is in the past. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>