<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981126.0124 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As she checked in, the elderly woman told the man at the concierge 
desk that she had a dog at home, Fifi, that needed to be walked. No 
problem, she was told. ``We contacted a pet store near where she lived,'' 
said Leroy Mobley, the aide who handled the request. ``Someone at 
the pet store found a neighbor to walk the dog.'' The Ritz? Hardly. 
The woman was having an asthmatic attack, and checking herself into 
Sinai Hospital's new emergency center here, she discovered what thousands 
of other area residents have found since December 1997, a new customer-friendly 
approach to urban emergency care. It has proved so successful that 
hospital officials from more than a dozen other states and from countries 
as far away as South Korea have come to see it. Gone are endless waits 
and dingy rooms filled with injured patients and anguished relatives. 
As a replacement, the hospital has built a $16 million wing, twice 
the size of the previous emergency-services area, that is designed 
to speed patients with anything from a cut lip to a heart attack into 
one of seven independent treatment areas, each for a different type 
of illness or trauma. High-technology bells and whistles abound, including 
an electronic communications system that tracks the whereabouts of 
every staff doctor and nurse. But what makes ER7, as it is called, 
unusual _ and now, more cost-effective _ is the consideration of each 
patient as a customer, even the 16 percent each year that hospital 
officials say are uninsured. The concierge desk with aides like Mobley, 
who are known as patient-care advocates, and a private room for the 
family of each patient are among the services provided to reduce the 
anxieties of a visit. And amenities, like dog walking, are available 
free for the asking. ``The trend in emergency care is to be more responsive 
than in the past,'' said Jennifer Joynt, an official with the Health 
Care Advisory Board, an organization in Washington that conducts strategic 
research for member hospitals. ``Some patients were not always given 
true priority.'' Experts in emergency health care say Sinai's approach 
is one of the most ambitious in the United States as hospitals search 
for new ways to deliver services and increase revenues in highly competitive 
health-care markets. Sinai's emergency center, for example, competes 
for patients with at least five other major hospitals within a short 
drive. ``Sinai has taken it to the nth degree,'' said Dr. John Moorhead, 
president of the American College of Emergency Physicians. But hospitals 
in other cities have also upgraded their efforts in recent years to 
reduce the waiting period and create a friendlier atmosphere for patients 
and their families. Ms. Joynt said Harris Methodist Hospital in Fort 
Worth, Texas, for example, speeded the check-in process by using bedside 
registration. Bruce Gilbert, general counsel for Universal Health 
Services of King of Prussia, Pa., which owns 40 hospitals around the 
country, said many of them guaranteed that a patient would see a nurse 
within 15 minutes of arrival and a doctor within an hour, or the visit 
was free. Gilbert also said hospital personnel performed personal 
services, like picking up children from school or walking a dog. Sinai 
officials concede that the hospital was motivated to conceive a new 
emergency center, in part, by a need to offset rising costs of administering 
emergency services in an aging one. Warren Green, president and chief 
executive of Lifebridge Health, which owns Sinai, said that emergency 
rooms typically lost money, and that Sinai regained some money through 
patients _ about one in five _ who required more care and were admitted 
to the hospital for a longer stay. But Sinai's 20-year-old emergency 
center, Green said, was attracting only about 54,000 patients a year. 
Rather than expand the existing center, he said, hospital officials 
imagined ``a blank piece of paper'' and started from scratch. The 
result is a center that officials say will have treated about 67,000 
patients by its first anniversary in December, a 12 percent increase 
over the old center, which translates to an additional $12 million, 
or 5 percent of the hospital's projected annual revenues. The building 
has the capacity to accommodate 75,000 a year before expansion would 
become necessary. As patients arrive at the new center, they are evaluated 
and directed to treatment areas that specialize in their problems. 
They include a Fast Track Center that treats patients with minor problems 
and releases them quickly, an Emergent Care Center for people who 
are critically ill, and a Chest Pain Evaluation Center for cardiac 
problems. The center also has a pediatric center. Family and friends 
of patients are encouraged to use the private rooms, adjacent to the 
lobby and each treatment center. Many have telephones and televisions, 
and people like Mobley are trained to meet other needs, like walking 
dogs and retrieving children. Sinai officials acknowledge that some 
problems remain, including the time some patients have to wait, especially 
during busy evening hours. But still, waiting times are generally 
less than before, hospital officials say, and their latest survey 
of former patients found that the rate of satisfaction was higher 
than it had been in five years, a change that is also evident among 
the staff. ``I'm in love with it,'' Dr. Tariq Khan, an emergency physician 
who has worked at Sinai for seven years, said of the new center. ``I 
wouldn't want to go back to the way it was. I wouldn't want to do 
that at all.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>