<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981126.0125 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Most states are behind schedule in renovating their computers for 
the year 2000, and as a result, it is likely that benefit payments 
will be delayed, or services interrupted, for some people who receive 
welfare, Medicaid, food stamps or other types of assistance, federal 
and state officials say. State employees are working feverishly to 
fix the problem and to draft contingency plans in case their computers 
are not ready by Jan. 1, 2000. But some states are lagging, and states 
that have repaired computers for one program are often behind schedule 
in fixing computers used for other social programs. Federal officials 
say the problems could begin as early as January 1999 in some programs 
like unemployment insurance. People filing claims for jobless benefits 
typically have a year to draw all the checks to which they are entitled. 
The last day of this ``benefit year'' is recorded when an application 
is received. So computers must be able to handle dates with the year 
2000, starting in January 1999. Randy Johnson, chairman of the Hennepin 
County Board of Commissioners in Minneapolis and former president 
of the National Association of Counties, said: ``I'd be surprised 
if there was not some dislocation and some interruption of services. 
We are trying to work with our clients, many of whom are elderly or 
frail, to make sure they know how to reach us if they have problems.'' 
Many federal benefit programs are administered at the county level, 
and county officials will have to deal with the consequences if payments 
are late. The year 2000 problem arises because early computer programmers 
often used a two-digit format to express the year. In such computer 
programs, 2000 is often indistinguishable from 1900. If the problem 
is not corrected, experts say, computers could produce inaccurate 
data or shut down. A recent survey of states by the General Accounting 
Office found that many were behind schedule in renovating their computers. 
Only one-third of the 421 computer systems used for seven major health, 
welfare and nutrition programs were ready for 2000. ``The compliance 
rate ranged from only 16 percent of the Medicaid systems to about 
half of the child care and child welfare systems,'' the accounting 
office said. Failure to make the necessary repairs ``could result 
in billions of dollars in benefit payments not being delivered,'' 
the report said. In addition, it said, states may have difficulty 
determining eligibility of new applicants, and people already on the 
rolls may receive late payments or underpayments. Joel C. Willemssen, 
who supervises the work of the General Accounting Office on computer 
operations of civilian agencies, called the survey results ``fairly 
discouraging.'' The federal government had set September 1998 as the 
target date for computers to be renovated. That date would have allowed 
time to test the performance of computers and to correct software 
errors. ``Testing is 60 to 70 percent of the job of getting ready 
for the year 2000,'' said Wendy Rayner, chief information officer 
of New Jersey. Steve Kolodney, director of the Department of Information 
Services in Washington state and chairman of a panel studying the 
year 2000 problem for the chief information-technology officers of 
the 50 states, said: ``There is likely to be some dislocation, some 
disruption of services. I don't think there will be a wholesale failure 
of these computer systems. But it's inevitable, when so many systems 
are being renovated, that there will be some delays and hiccups.'' 
The interruption of services ``won't be for lack of attention or concern 
among state officials,'' Kolodney said. ``It would occur because we 
are overwhelmed with the number of fixes that need to be made.'' Many 
governors, including George Pataki of New York, have formally recognized 
the year 2000 problem as a priority. But John Koskinen, a White House 
official who supervises preparations for the year 2000, said, ``We 
are concerned about some states where it's not a priority of the governor 
and it's viewed as merely an information technology problem, off on 
the side.'' Koskinen is chairman of President Clinton's Council on 
Year 2000 Conversion, an interagency group formed in February. Governors 
may ultimately be held accountable if benefits are not paid on time. 
John Thomas Flynn, the chief information officer of California, said: 
``If social services are disrupted, you'll have more than computer 
problems. You could have civil disturbances. That's why this issue 
is a high priority for us.'' Janice Lilja, acting deputy administrator 
of the federal Food and Nutrition Service, said the government had 
asked the top welfare officials in each state to certify, in writing, 
that they had fixed their food stamp computers to cope with the year 
2000, or that they had some alternative means of delivering benefits. 
Welfare agencies could issue checks by hand for a few weeks, as they 
sometimes do after an earthquake or a hurricane. State and local officials 
could simply assume that everyone on the rolls of a particular program 
in December 1999 was entitled to assistance in January 2000. Or the 
federal government could advance the necessary money to the states 
for a few months, without receiving the data normally required to 
justify such payments. Likewise, a state having difficulties could 
seek help from other states with extra computer capacity, or could 
hire private companies to write checks and perform other tasks normally 
done by government agencies. Even a state that fixes its own computers 
may have problems if its repairs are not compatible with those made 
by the federal government or by counties and cities in the state. 
In addition, state officials must deal with thousands of providers 
and vendors of services, who may or may not have made the necessary 
computer changes. A state Medicaid program, for example, receives 
tens of thousands of electronic claims from doctors, dentists, hospitals, 
pharmacies, nursing homes and home health agencies. If such health 
care providers do not fix their computers to cope with the year 2000, 
their Medicaid payments may be delayed. Joel Schnedler, deputy director 
of computer operations for the Missouri Medicaid program, said there 
would be no problem paying hospitals and chain drug stores that file 
large numbers of Medicaid claims. But he said he worried about doctors 
and dentists who filed just a few claims a month. State employees 
may have to do some ``manual manipulation'' of the data before paying 
such claims, he said. Koskinen, the White House official supervising 
preparations for the year 2000, said, ``Six or eight states have difficulty 
even identifying who operates these electronic data exchanges,'' so 
they are in no position to test the arrangements. Jeff Jinnett, a 
lawyer who specializes in technology issues, said several states, 
including Georgia, Virginia and Hawaii, had passed laws to shield 
themselves against lawsuits that might be filed if their computers 
fail. Under such laws, he said, if a person does not receive a benefit 
check and therefore cannot buy medicine needed to treat a severe illness, 
the person might be barred from suing the state for damages. States 
are attacking the year 2000 problem in different ways and vary greatly 
in their efforts to measure progress. Judi Worsham, data processing 
manager for the Medicaid program in Oklahoma, keeps track of her work 
with great precision. ``As of Nov. 5,'' she said, ``we have completed 
55.07 percent of the work to be done by June 30, 1999, and we have 
used 56.51 percent of the days available since we started on Jan. 
1 of this year.'' Health and welfare officials in New York, New Jersey 
and Connecticut said they had been renovating their computers for 
several years and foresaw no major problems. ``We are about 95 percent 
ready for the year 2000,'' said Joyce Thomas, commissioner of social 
services in Connecticut. But Sarah Mingledorff, deputy commissioner 
of the Alabama Medicaid Agency, said: ``Our existing computer system 
is not being touched. We won't upgrade it. We'll put in a new one 
on Oct. 1, 1999.'' Federal officials said that was a high-risk strategy 
because information technology projects were rarely completed on time 
and often required extensive testing to eliminate defects. Alabama 
has posted a progress report on the Internet. It says, ``Jan. 1, 2000, 
will be here before most of us are ready.'' Moreover, it shows that 
the state has done just 6 percent of the necessary work on the computers 
that track child abuse and neglect cases, and less than 10 percent 
of the work needed to fix the computers that issue food stamps and 
welfare benefits. A report prepared for Gov. David Beasley of South 
Carolina says that ``a significant number of large computer systems 
will experience year 2000-related failures'' despite the best efforts 
of state employees. ``Payments to welfare recipients could be severely 
delayed because compensation systems either halt or produce checks 
so erroneous that the system must be shut down and checks processed 
manually,'' the report says. California has upgraded its Medicaid 
computers, but told the General Accounting Office that it could not 
provide statewide data on the renovation of computers used to establish 
eligibility for welfare and food stamps because the computer systems 
varied from county to county. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>