<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981126.0119 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
NEW YORK _ ``Days of Discipline and Grace: Treasures From the Imperial 
Buddhist Convents of Kyoto'' is a tiny exhibition tucked away deep 
in the stacks of the C.V. Starr East Asian Library at Columbia University. 
Many of the objects are pocket-size. Most date from the 17th century, 
though some are quite new. Several were made for pleasure, not spiritual 
profit: parlor games outnumber religious icons. Together they capture 
the subtly exalted ordinariness of convent life. The Institute for 
Medieval Japanese Studies at Columbia, the show's sponsor, has been 
researching the history of Zen Buddhist convents in Japan for a decade. 
This year is the 700th anniversary of the death of the woman who founded 
the first such institution, the abbess Mugai Nyodai (1223-1298). The 
show is culled almost entirely from convents associated with her name. 
She is a central figure here, making a startling personal appearance 
in the form of a life-size sculpture installed near the library's 
entrance. The sculpture is a plastic-resin cast of a 13th-century 
image still in Japan. Nyodai's age-creased skin, with its quizzical 
eyes and lopsided mouth, projects plenty of personality even in this 
similacrum. Little about her secular life is known. She was born into 
a family of high-powered shoguns renowned as ferocious warriors and 
ardent Buddhists. She seems to have married well, and may have had 
a daughter. But the family archives went up in smoke centuries ago, 
and all such details remain hazy. The picture of her religious career 
is another matter. Almost every aspect of it is scrupulously documented. 
She received her instruction from the great Chinese Zen master Wuxue 
Zuyuan, who clearly held her in high esteem. He gave her an inscribed 
self-portrait, asked her to oversee the building of a chapel to his 
memory and bequeathed a portion of his relics to her at his death. 
His trust was well placed. She built the chapel as promised. And having 
secured the patronage of both the imperial court and the ruling warrior 
clans, she established the first Japanese Zen convent, one that spawned 
numerous sub-chapters and produced a proud lineage of aristocratic 
abbesses. Scroll portraits of some of them appear in the show, along 
with one of Nyodai herself painted in the 17th century, by which time 
she was a folk heroine and an object of veneration. She sits with 
her feet tucked up under her robes. Her head is shaved, symbolically 
removing traces of sex and class. Her face, utterly unlike that on 
the sculpture, is idealized, smoothed out and ageless, an emblem of 
social decorum and psychological poise. Far more characterful are 
the portraits that flank her. One is of a child abbess who died at 
the age of 10 and is shown with alert dark eyes and rosebud lips dwarfed 
by her cloth-swaddled chair. The other is a wonderful likeness of 
a recent abbess, Shun'on Jiei (1887-1967), who bears a resemblance 
to both Virgil Thompson and Gertrude Stein. The purple kinomo she 
wears in the painting is on view in a case in the gallery, along her 
fan and rosary beads. Along with these portraits of women there is 
art made by women. A scroll painting of Miroku, Buddha of the Future, 
comes from the hand of Shozan Gen'yo (1634-1727), a nun who was the 
daughter of an emperor and a phenomenally prolific artist. She is 
said to have produced thousands of paintings and sculptures, an example 
of which is also included. Another dynamic polymath, the abbess Hongakuin 
no Miya (1672-1745), is responsible for a bold calligraphic piece: 
the character ``ki,'' meaning ``return,'' brushed with a vigorous 
downward stroke that the show's catalog suggests resembles the tapering 
braid of a woman's hair. In the 17th century, the convents founded 
by Nyodai came under the direct patronage of the imperial house. The 
Emperor Gomizuno'o was an avid Zen devotee; six of his sisters and 
eight of his daughters became nuns and eventually abbesses. With its 
intellectual pursuits and leisure pastimes, the court set the tone 
for convent life. Scenes from ``The Tale of Genji,'' that bible of 
chivalric love, appear everywhere. They are especially vivid on a 
set of miniature incense boxes thought to have been made by the Empress 
Tofukumon'in and on first-time public display in this exhibition. 
Shaped like butterflies, fans and flowers, they carry narrative scenes 
ingeniously worked out in scraps of appliqued fabric, an effect at 
once endearingly homemade and exquisite. Similar motifs are painted 
on seashells used as pieces in a popular parlor game; another game 
involves a kind of giant Monopoly board with Buddhist pilgrimage sites. 
No doubt such diversions helped to while away wet fall afternoons 
accompanied by pipe smoking (a wooden tobacco tray is on view) and 
tea poured piping hot from a silver kettle incised top to bottom with 
chrysanthemums. Images of other flowers, along with soaring birds 
and autumn maples, can be found on a cluster of gilded cut-paper lotus 
petals meant to be tossed in the air during memorial services for 
nuns and members of the imperial family. One petal, looking as fresh 
as the day it was painted, is dedicated to Nyodai, and is an appropriate 
inclusion in a show that is, in essence, a tribute to her. Certainly 
the exhibition's curators _ Maribeth Graybill of Swarthmore College; 
Manabe Shunsho of the Kanagawa Prefectural Kanazawa Bunko Museum in 
Japan, and Sadako Ohki of the Institute for Medieval Japanese Studies 
at Columbia _ have, with the slenderest of means, brought her vital 
spirit to life here. ``Days of Discipline and Grace: Treasures From 
the Imperial Buddhist Convents of Kyoto'' will be at the C.V. Starr 
East Asian Library, Columbia University, through Dec. 4. A concurrent 
exhibition, ``Images of the Dharma: Buddhist Art From the Columbia 
University Collections,'' will be in the rotunda gallery of Low Library 
at Columbia through Jan. 31. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>