<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981126.0163 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Wall Street banks earn big profits greasing the wheels for companies 
to buy one another. But when banks merge, sparks often fly. Banks 
rarely blend well. The best investment banks have such strong cultures 
they are sometimes compared to cults. Their most important assets 
are not loans and custody accounts but traders and deal-makers _ assets 
that, as the industry saying goes, walk out the front door every night. 
If, as expected, Deutsche Bank AG and Bankers Trust complete what 
could become the largest international bank merger in history early 
next week, then they can ponder all those challenges and one more: 
Bankers Trust itself has been a ravenous acquirer of late, and its 
most aggressive purchase, $2.8 billion for the boutique investment 
bank Alex. Brown &AMP; Co. of Baltimore, has caused some indigestion. 
Analysts said the difficulties in merging those two banks should raise 
a warning flag for Deutsche Bank, which will try to bridge a much 
wider gulf between two companies on two continents. Like the German 
and American banks, Bankers Trust and Alex. Brown had different cultures, 
about as different as two East Coast houses of finance can be. Alex. 
Brown, the oldest independent investment bank in the United States 
before the merger, is a button-down provincial firm that specializes 
in financing new companies _ it underwrote initial offerings of stock 
in Microsoft and Starbucks, for example _ as well as managing money 
for wealthy clients. Bankers Trust is a swank New York firm best known 
for designer derivatives, an impressive client list and risky bets 
in emerging markets. On paper, that made the two seem more complementary 
than redundant, and merger-related layoffs were insignificant when 
the two were joined more than a year ago. But the process of integrating 
them proved trickier than expected, current and former BT Alex. Brown 
employees and outside analysts said. Alex. Brown has tussled with 
its New York parent for months. Some issues are minor, like whether 
Bankers Trust should appear on Alex. Brown business cards. Others 
are more weighty, like determining how bankers should be paid. Alex. 
Brown managers have complained about what they see as extravagant 
perks afforded to their Bankers Trust colleagues, especially the president, 
Frank Newman. The disagreements have taken a toll. Of a dozen top 
Alex. Brown executives at the time of the merger, six are gone. A.B. 
Krongard, the chief executive and the man who made the firm a top 
contender in stock underwriting nationwide, left to take a senior 
post at the CIA. The co-head of investment banking resigned. Two other 
senior executives defected to Legg Mason, a crosstown rival. In recent 
weeks, top Bankers Trust executives have rushed to Baltimore to soothe 
flared tempers, especially after the parent company reported big losses 
in its international trading operation and saw its share price plummet. 
``The two companies are entirely different and don't mesh culturally,'' 
said Gerard Cassidy, a senior vice president and equity analyst at 
Tucker Anthony. ``It's always hard to integrate firms, especially 
when a New York bank clashes with a smaller, non-New York organization 
used to being on its own.'' Bankers Trust officials argue that the 
merger has worked out well. Some departures from senior ranks were 
expected, they said. And they point out that the new BT Alex. Brown 
has not had more troubles than the newly formed Citigroup or the merged 
BankAmerica, both of which have sought to meld securities companies 
with traditional banking operations and have seen wrenching turnover 
in senior staff. BT Alex. Brown also says it has realized some sought-after 
synergies. Bankers Trust's traditional focus on bond markets, especially 
junk bonds, has complemented Alex. Brown's stock market expertise. 
``We both had what the other needed,'' said Alexander Mason, a Bankers 
Trust managing director and co-head of corporate finance for BT Alex. 
Brown. For example, he said, Bankers Trust and Alex. Brown teamed 
up to underwrite a complex $1 billion stock offering for Chancellor 
Media, the owner of radio stations, earlier this year _ work that 
might have been assigned to another investment bank if the two banks 
could not offer combined services. Some analysts agree. Brad Ball, 
a bank industry specialist for Credit Suisse First Boston, said that 
at least before turmoil in world markets pummeled the financial markets 
serving start-up and highly leveraged companies, the stomping grounds 
of Alex. Brown and Bankers Trust, synergies were evident. He estimates 
that matching Bankers Trust's client list with Alex. Brown services, 
and vice versa, led to a one-third increase in business for the combined 
entity. Still, few deny the merger has been rocky at times. And several 
Alex. Brown bankers said they were wary of taking on another merger 
partner before resolving issues from the first marriage. ``People 
are willing to give it a chance, but I would not say they're optimistic,'' 
one current employee said. The frustrations all seem to involve cultural 
issues. Examples abound. Even the most senior Alex. Brown executives 
were accustomed to flying economy class cross-country with few exceptions. 
Their colleagues at Bankers Trust fly first class. Alex. Brown, a 
pillar of the Baltimore business community, took special pride in 
its annual effort to recruit new bankers, a function now largely controlled 
by Bankers Trust in New York. Several current and recently departed 
Alex. Brown executives said they took umbrage when Newman, who had 
a senior position in the Treasury Department before becoming the president 
of Bankers Trust, came for meetings at Alex. Brown offices in a style 
they described as imperial. He flew in a rented corporate jet with 
a retinue of bodyguards, equipped with microphones on their suit lapels. 
One executive said a bodyguard barred others from using the men's 
room when Newman was inside. Bankers Trust staff parties, including 
one annual meeting at the New York Public Library where the cast of 
the Broadway musical ``High Society'' provided the entertainment, 
were described as lavish. ``We would rather have had chicken and rice 
and a short pep talk and kept the rest as a bonus,'' one Alex. Brown 
executive joked. A Bankers Trust official said some at Alex. Brown 
had complained about entertainment and Newman's personal perks. But 
the official said that the issue had been exaggerated and that Bankers 
Trust spending was neither extravagant nor unusual. Some at Alex. 
Brown have clung to traditional ways of doing things, even when they 
run up against what has often become standard Wall Street practice. 
For example, Alex. Brown has fought to retain a commission-oriented 
pay system for some traders and brokers while Bankers Trust has pushed 
a now industry-standard annual bonus plan, people involved with the 
debate said. The two banks also butted heads over differing perceptions 
of how to treat clients. Because Bankers Trust is a big supplier of 
derivatives, which are financial instruments tied to an underlying 
security, it frequently enters into contracts in which it takes the 
opposite side of a bet from a client, becoming what bankers call a 
counterparty. That is a normal service many big banks provide. But 
the old Alex. Brown did not deal much in derivatives. Some at the 
Baltimore bank found the idea of trading against a client inimical. 
``We never put ourselves in a position that we would root for a client's 
transaction to be a bad one,'' one former Alex. Brown banker said. 
Some of those issues seem likely to be resolved in coming months. 
``I think you need two years to make a merger like that work, when 
people stop thinking about it as us and them,'' a Bankers Trust official 
said. But the unrest at Alex. Brown cannot be a good omen for Deutsche 
Bank, which has a record of buying securities companies that perform 
less well than hoped under its tutelage. The new German-American bank 
will have to combine far-flung securities operations into a single 
efficient one. That probably means centralizing investment banking 
and asset management in New York and London, not Baltimore. Some layoffs 
seem inevitable, as does a further loss of autonomy for the managers 
at Alex. Brown. For the Deutsche Bank-Bankers Trust merger to make 
sense for the German bank, expenses, mainly people, will have to be 
cut by $1.5 billion a year, Ball said. That figure is higher than 
what Deutsche Bank officials have hinted at so far. Ball said he thought 
most of the savings would come from streamlining United States operations. 
Michael Flanagan of Financial Service Analytics in Philadelphia sees 
trouble ahead. ``I don't think Deutsche Bank will be satisfied with 
what they have now in BT Alex. Brown,'' he said. ``It doesn't level 
the playing field for them against Merrill Lynch or Goldman, Sachs. 
You will probably see further consolidation and reorganization, which 
will really add to the already tense situation there.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>