<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981126.0214 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the early 1990s, the Dallas Cowboys built a Super Bowl championship 
team around a cadre of offensive stars _ a shifty running back, a 
sure-handed possession receiver, a poised quarterback _ plus a massive 
and powerful offensive line and a punishing defense. The offensive 
philosophy embraced all the conventional notions of pro football _ 
ball control and a balanced attack, with substance over style. The 
Minnesota Vikings blew into Texas Stadium on Thursday with an offense 
that turns most of those notions on their head. Ball control. Forget 
about it. Why not score on possessions of three minutes or less if 
you can score five or more touchdowns a game? Possession receivers. 
Yeah, right. If the possession is at the end of a 50-yard heave and 
culminates with a point-after attempt. Welcome to the new millennium. 
And what better way to usher in the new era than having a wonderful 
receiver like Randy Moss, who turns every reception into a day at 
the circus and the Fourth of July combined. Moss caught three passes 
Thursday and all three were for touchdowns of more than 50 yards. 
Cris Carter added a 54-yard touchdown reception and Leroy Hoard had 
a 50-yard touchdown run as the Vikings strutted their stuff and beat 
the Cowboys, 46-36, before a crowd of 64,366. The Vikings (11-1) moved 
closer to sewing up the National Football Conference Central Division, 
and home-field advantage throughout the playoffs. The Cowboys (8-4) 
now know what they have to look forward to if they meet the Vikings 
in the playoffs. The most anticipated matchup of the afternoon _ between 
Dallas' brilliant cornerback, Deion Sanders, and Minnesota's sensational 
rookie receiver, Moss _ never materialized because Sanders was starring 
in his own version of ``My Left Foot.'' It's the story of a fleet-footed 
National Football League cornerback with a badly sprained big toe 
on his left foot that prevents him from running. Without Sanders, 
Moss put on his own show, a rousing version of ``Showboat.'' After 
one quarter, Moss had caught two passes for 107 yards and two touchdowns, 
with a 54-yard touchdown reception by Carter sandwiched between them. 
Moss' first touchdown reception came on a 51-yard pass from quarterback 
Randall Cunningham off a flea-flicker play. Moss' second one was on 
a 56-yard pass from Cunningham. It gave Moss 958 yards for the season, 
the most receiving yards by a Viking rookie since Sammy White had 
906 in 1976. The touchdown also put the Vikings ahead by 21-6 with 
2 minutes 41 seconds to play in the first quarter. The Vikings looked 
like a runaway train. But then came a slight derailment. The Vikings, 
who entered the game averaging 31.6 points a game, lost one component 
of their high-powered offense in the second quarter when Robert Smith 
sprained his right knee and did not return. Without the threat of 
Smith in the backfield, the Vikings' offense lost some steam. It was 
a temporary setback. The Cowboys were able to deploy some well-timed 
blitzes, putting extra pressure on Cunningham and slowing the Vikings 
in the second quarter. The Vikings also hurt themselves on foolish 
penalties during big returns on special teams in the first half. They 
were penalized twice, for 166 yards, on two returns by David Palmer 
_ one wiped out a 90-yard touchdown return. Meanwhile, the Cowboys' 
receivers were afflicted with a severe case of the drops, not holding 
on to six catches they should have made in the first half. Michael 
Irvin, normally a sure-handed receiver, dropped two passes and looked 
completely out of sync. The Cowboys displayed their own big-play capability 
with a 67-yard touchdown pass from Troy Aikman to receiver Patrick 
Jeffers, but the 2-point conversion failed. After a 45-yard field 
goal by Gary Anderson with 16 seconds to play in the half, Minnesota 
took a 24-12 lead into the locker room. The Cowboys opened the second 
half with an 11-play, 76-yard drive that was capped by a 2-yard run 
by Emmitt Smith, who passed Jim Brown on the NFL career rushing list 
during the game, to help make it 24-19 Vikings. The Cowboys had taken 
a slow, measured approach to crawl back into the game. But on Minnesota's 
first possession of the third quarter, the Vikings went back into 
quick-strike mode, throwing deep to Moss and getting a pass-interference 
call against Dallas safety Kenny Wheaton, who was caught with a handful 
of Moss' jersey. The 55-yard play gave Minnesota the ball at the Cowboys' 
12 and, on the next play, Hoard, who replaced Robert Smith, ran the 
ball in for a touchdown. Moss caught a pass for the 2-point conversion, 
and the Vikings were ahead by 32-19 with less than a quarter and a 
half to play. The Cowboys blew a great opportunity late in the third 
quarter after Izell Reese intercepted a Cunningham pass and returned 
it to the Vikings' 32. The Cowboy offense moved the ball to the 17, 
and there was nearly a first-and-goal from the 7 after a pass from 
Aikman to receiver Billy Davis. But the play was wiped out when Dallas 
guard Flozell Adams was penalized for a chop block. The 15-yard penalty 
moved the ball to the 32-yard line, and Dallas wound up settling for 
a 48-yard field goal by Richie Cunningham that made it 32-22. The 
Vikings made the Cowboys pay for that underachievement on the next 
possession, when Cunningham and Moss hooked up again. This time it 
was a 56-yard touchdown pass play that helped make it 39-22 near the 
end of the third quarter. The Cowboys were running out of time, but 
it did not matter, because they could not keep pace with the Vikings' 
fast-break offensive attack. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>