<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981126.2000.0647 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Backin London, all eyes are on Home Secretary Jack Straws, who will 
make the final call on the Pinochet extradition request. He's been 
due to decide by Wednesday, but he's now asking the courts to give 
him another week to make up his mind. THE WORLD's Alan Dow reports 
from the British capital. When Jack Straw was a university student, 
he was a left-wing campaigner, possibly not that different from the 
Chilean student activists tortured and murdered under Pinochet. Now 
as Britain's senior Cabinet minister responsible for law and order, 
Straw is faced with a difficult decision according to the "London 
Times" diplomatic editor, Michael Binyon. Up till now, the government 
has been able to portray this simply as a judicial matter, one where 
the government itself had very little say in whether or not Mr. Pinochet 
would be sent back to Chile because the law had to take its course. 
Now it's clearly a political decision, and it's come very much into 
the British domestic arena. And, of course, in the Labor Party, there 
are a very large number of people who feel very strongly about General 
Pinochet and about what happened in Chile 20 years ago, and I think 
the outcry from domestic support for human rights advocates would 
be enormous if Mr. Straw were to make a decision that would send Mr. 
Pinochet back to Santiago. Britain's Labor government headed up by 
Prime Minister Tony Blair and his foreign secretary, Robin Cook, has 
promoted what it calls its ethical foreign policy and defense of human 
rights. But the Pinochet affair says Binyon of the "Times" has put 
the British Cabinet in a real jam. I think the foreign office would 
very much like to have as little to do with this as possible, to limit 
the damage this might cause. The foreign office is very keen and has 
been from the start to shuffle off responsibility, to say that this 
is actually a matter for the judiciary, a matter for the Home Secretary, 
nothing to do with British foreign policy. This is a bit disingenuous. 
I mean, it's clearly a difficult issue. It's one that could cause 
a lot of embarrassment, which ever way the decision goes. But the 
situation that Britain's Labor government now finds itself in may 
not be that unusual. True, the case of Pinochet is high profile since 
it involves a former head of state, but according to Jeremy Corbin, 
a left-wing Labor member of parliament, extradition is, by it's nature, 
controversial. There's always a problem about the separation of political 
and legal powers, and they always come together on extradition. In 
all countries, extradition law, the final say, is held by the government, 
who have the ability to take political considerations into view on 
this. And they have to take account of both the legal process, the 
strength of the case against the individual, in this case, Pinochet, 
and the political situation elsewhere. Straw will spend the next several 
days talking to representatives from various groups, including supporters 
and opponents of Pinochet's extradition. But the British judiciary's 
decision that the Spanish claims for extradition are lawful could 
send a shiver down the spine of every potentate on the planet. The 
message that the Pinochet ruling sends is that if you've committed 
a really serious crime against humanity anywhere in the world, watch 
out. Sydney Jones is the director of Human Rights Watch Asia. I think 
it means that anyone responsible for really serious crimes, crimes 
against humanity and so on, for example, in Cambodia or Burma or Indonesia, 
would face real serious problems if they went to Europe or the United 
States or Australia or countries which allow for the prosecution of 
these crimes. Augusto Pinochet could still avoid the Spanish courts. 
Jack Straw will have the final say. Whatever the outcome, it's hard 
to imagine many former dictators doing their Christmas shopping in 
Britain this year. For THE WORLD, I'm Alan Dow in London. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>