<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981126.2000.2999 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
On this Thanksgiving Day, the whole world can be thankful for America's 
contributions to music: ragtime, blue grass, jazz, soul, rock and 
roll. And the music that's the foundation for them all: the blues. 
Marco Worman tells us about a master American blues man who hears 
the blues all over the world. Take a large dose of the blues, then 
hand it to a man who isn't satisfied with just one musical style, 
a man who says that all you need to be a musician are an undersized 
ego, a child-like sense of humor, and a little talent. That man is 
Bob Brozman, a guitarist who most record stores can't decide whether 
to file under blues, folk, jazz, or world music. If I didn't have 
music as an outlet, I would clearly be in the nut house. Brozman is 
on the road nearly 300 days a year, traveling through a score of countries, 
playing with musicians from Greece to Ghana. And he seems to evoke 
the same reaction from just about every spot on the globe as much 
for the way he looks, for the way he plays. I've been called the Groucho 
Marx of the blues in about a dozen languages, and I guess I have a 
pretty distinctive set of eyebrows. And I'm not quite sure why people 
universally compare me to that, but I come from a left-wing New York 
Jewish family, and I'm a little guy, so kind of Woody Allen and Groucho, 
you know. Being a wise guy is a very useful defense tactic. It's not 
as it Brozman gets into a lot of rumbles, but he does say that his 
toughest audiences are right here in the United States where listeners 
have rigid ideas about what blues guitar is supposed to sound like. 
I made it into this book called "A Thousand Great Guitarists," and 
in my little paragraph, it says, "Brozman will never be very well 
known because he plays too many kinds of music." I mean, I've played, 
you know, some blues festivals and things like that, but it's always 
a little dangerous. You know, if you're about to do Robert Johnson's 
"Come On in My Kitchen" and you tell the audience, "Well, in 1936, 
good interior decorators were hard to find in Mississippi, so when 
Robert Johnson had his kitchen redone, he was really proud of it and 
wanted to share it with the world." Well, obviously, that's a joke, 
but some people really get the hair up on the back of their neck with 
those sort of things. Bob Brozman can move effortlessly from a 12-bar 
blues like "Come On in My Kitchen," to Hawaiian slack key style, or 
a rusty Mexican tango. Even before Brozman gets on stage, his audiences 
are often fascinated by the dozen or so guitars from around the world 
arranged near his empty chair. As a slide guitar master, Brozman's 
partial to the national resonator, a gleaming hand tooled six pin. 
Like his guitar collection, Bob Brozman is all over the musical map. 
I've just sort of generally expanded to lots of different kinds of 
music which a lot of Americans find very difficult to deal with. The 
blues community only wants you to do blues. They don't understand 
why do I do Hawaiian music. Well, the connection with all this music 
is basically I do a music of colonized people. What intrigues you 
about colonialism? Well, for me, you know, I find a lot of interest 
in the clashing of musical cultures, and the best music happens usually 
during the process of collision. For example, with Hawaiian music, 
Hawaiians originally only had chanting and drumming. And we Americans 
decided we owned the place, and the Hawaiians didn't want to work 
for the Americans, so the land owners brought in Mexican cowboys. 
They brought the cows with them about 160 years ago. And Hawaiians 
took the guitars and tuned them a different way, and a few years later, 
one of them carried it on his lap, and started playing with a slide. 
On the emotional side, also, I just feel like colonized people have 
a lot to get over, a lot to overcome, and their music helps them. 
So I'm just generally - And any kind of music sort of attracted to 
the cry of the tortured human soul. That's where all the good music 
is for me. I'm doing a project in Athens, Greece right now with some 
Greek musicians where we're combining Rambetica and blues, while socially, 
Rambetica and blues are exactly the same thing. Blues songs are all 
about drinking and women. Rambetica songs are all about smoking hash 
and women. And I've just returned from Calcutta, India where I'm recording 
and performing with an Indian slide guitarist named Dabashish Akasharia. 
And some of the Indian modes are also very decidedly major and deeply 
sad. So I have to admit I'm kind of attracted to passion and sadness 
in music and not feel sorry for yourself crying in your beer, but 
just the human being is capable of such explosive levels of passion. 
That's what I'm attracted to. And if you ask him what it is about 
American blues, Hawaiian blues, and Indian blues that moves people 
in the same way, Bob Brozman replies with a little seminar on neuro 
biology and the workings of the human brain. You're taking basically 
a calcium bucketful of salt water that's run by a weak electrical 
signal, and you're using it to move your flesh around in order to 
manipulate an instrument which disturbs air molecules between you 
and the listener, and then the listener's ears picks up those disturbed 
air molecules which generates a weak electrical signal to their calcium 
bucketful of salt water and make you feel a feeling. That's miraculous, 
and that's where I live, and it's a most wonderful job in the world. 
For THE WORLD, this is Marco Worman. Bob Brozman brings this Thanksgiving 
Day edition of the program to a close. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>