<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981126.2000.2534 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For THE WORLD, this is Clark Boyd. And now the answer to today's geography 
stumper. We were looking for an ancient city in a land whose people 
gave us some of the staples of our diet like turkey, corn, tomatoes. 
Here with answer is Chef Arron Sanchez from Eradrai in New York City. 
Chef Sanchez, what's the answer. It's Eltijuacan, the ancient city 
of that name, which is located in what's now Mexico, right? Yes, it 
is, right outside Mexico City region. And it's 30 million or so people. 
yes, it is. Very near to Eltijuacan and probably very proud of the 
fact that most of the things that we regard as American foods really 
came from Mexico. Yeah. It's come to know that, you know, the French 
have devised a whole system of gastronomy and negosas coffeeyay but 
what a lot of people fail to acknowledge is that Indians were cultivating 
corn and using cooking methods a long time before the French even 
considered using some of these methods. So we should take notice of 
that and pay homage to that sometimes, especially during the holidays. 
Well, we're certainly paying homage to the turkey, but you've got 
a suggestion for how to keep on paying homage to the turkey even the 
day after, right? Exactly, I do. And it's a very simple recipe, and 
it's called flautas de pavo, which is turkey in Spanish. And it basically 
just consists of taking some leftover turkey, whether it be breast 
or leg meat, and shredding it in a skillet or a deep sauce. You start 
sauteing some onions and some garlic, and you make those translucent, 
cook them for about five minutes, and then you add in some of the 
shredded turkey, and you cook for another additional five, ten minutes. 
And you season with salt and pepper and finish with some cilantro. 
I mean, you have some sort of filling and you set it aside to cool, 
and you can wrap it in corn tortillas. We should explain that for 
those who just think that tortillas is tortillas, that there are several 
kinds, and that the corn ones are the smaller ones usually, right? 
Exactly. They're the smaller ones and they come in many different 
sizes. They make them with blue corn. You can have different tints. 
There's such a thing as red corn tortillas. So in this particular 
case, you can just use regular yellow corn tortillas. And you dip 
them in some warm oil to make them pliable, and then you can just 
actually roll them up with that turkey filling I mentioned earlier 
and put a tooth pick through like this little rolled taquito or flauta 
and you can actually fry it in a shallow sauce pan with a good amount 
of oil, maybe two cups of oil. And you get a nice crispy tortilla 
shell, as well as this nice warm filling, and you can serve it with 
whatever you like, whether it be guacamole, tomato salsa. Excuse me 
while I stop drooling here. There's some questions I want to ask you. 
There's some people who claim that turkey is actually something that 
tastes better the next day because the major flavors of Thanksgiving 
are the stuffing and the cranberry sauce, and the turkey in and of 
itself doesn't have an incredibly strong flavor. I think marination 
is a key to maximizing the flavor out of a particular protein, whether 
it be fish, chicken, meat. I don't think you necessarily want to masquerade 
the flavor of something like that 'cause you want turkey and that's 
what you want to taste. Right. But a lot of times when I make soups 
at the restaurants, the soups get better the next day 'cause the flavors 
have a chance to develop and they meld together, and it really starts 
forming an identity the day after it's prepared. It's like the refrigerator 
as the slowest cooking device there is, right? Exactly, exactly. And 
you serve them up the next. Well, for those who would like to take 
you up on your offer and prove to themselves how easy it is, they 
can get the recipe online at www.theworld.org. Mr. Sanchez, thank 
you so much for letting us know how to enjoy not only our Thanksgiving 
but the day after. Thank you. Arron Sanchez is the executive chef 
at the Eradrai Restaurant in New York City. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>