<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981126.2000.0375 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The fall out continues from the ruling that Augusto Pinochet does 
not have immunity from a Spanish judge's attempt to bring him to trial. 
Britain's House of Lords yesterday ruled that the former Chilean dictator 
could be extradited to Madrid, where he's been charged with genocide 
and torture. In London, as we'll hear shortly, Britain's interior 
minister has asked for an additional week to consider Spain's extradition 
request, and British officials are preparing for the arrival of Chile's 
foreign minister, Jose Miguel Insulsa, who says he's willing to meet 
anyone to put forward the Chilean government's view. We are not willing 
to accept that another court in another country tries the case that 
occurred in Chile. We think that's not proper and no country should 
do that. Earlier, I spoke with THE WORLD's Alejandra Martins in Chile's 
capital, Santiago, as she watched a demonstration outside the country's 
armed forces headquarters. There is a small group of demonstrators, 
around 80 people, who come here to demand stronger actions from the 
armed forces. They want the armed forces to do more to bring General 
Pinochet back to Chile. But we have to emphasize that this is a small 
group, and the majority of Chileans are trying to solve this peacefully 
and just want to put an end to the whole Pinochet episode. So Alejandra, 
putting it in context for us, this is not a big protest, at least 
as of now. Does it reflect anger at the decision of the British yesterday, 
or is it more about a desire to return to the way things used to be 
in Chile. There is a lot of anger that's within this small group. 
And I think it's crucial to point out that the armed forces gave the 
full support to the actions of the government. And this is very important, 
because at this volatile time when you have people, even small groups, 
asking for the stronger action by the armed forces, it is crucial 
that the armed forces are saying, "We are giving a full support to 
the government. We are acting as one." On the other hand, Alejandra, 
is it possible that the government is saying what it's saying in order 
to go along with the Army not to alienate the Army? The feeling here 
is that there is no need for the government to do that or to appease 
to military. But on the other hand, the government wants to show that 
percentage of the population that wants General Pinochet back that 
it is doing something. And many observers are saying that actually 
the trip of the foreign ministers to Europe is more to convince people 
here in Chile that the government is doing something. What the trip 
can achieve, that is difficult, and it's debatable. The government 
said yesterday that Foreign Minister Insulsa will once more repeat 
the arguments that are well known, that the government in Chile thinks 
that General Pinochet deserves sovereign immunity. Alejandra, we know 
something of the people who were hurt and who were victims of Pinochet's 
regime, but tell us something about the people who are in favor of 
Pinochet and of his return in safety to Chile. Well, many people who 
are in favor of the return of General Pinochet are those who look 
back at 1973, the time of the coup and say, "General Pinochet saved 
us from the chaos of a socialist government. And also, look at the 
chance we have now. It's one of the better economies in Latin America," 
and they think that in that sense, General Pinochet's responsible 
for somehow the modernization of Chile. Are all of these developments, 
Alejandra, making Chile into a more polarized society? Is the tension 
growing, or is this something that's likely to go away? It will take 
a long time for these kind of divisions to go away and to heal, but 
on the other hand, there might be something positive coming out of 
all this polarization. We have presidential elections next year. There 
is going to be a huge electoral debate in the country. And at least 
now, all the main issues that have to be debated are on the table. 
If maybe the episode of General Pinochet in jail had not taken place, 
it would have been very difficult to debate the issue of human rights. 
And there is an agreement among many people here in Chile that at 
least it has to be addressed. It was somehow swept under the carpet 
to insure a peaceful transition, but time has shown that Chileans 
have to face the issue of human rights, at least to decide what they 
are going to do about it. Are they going to look for the truth? Are 
they going to bring people to justice? But they have to debate it. 
Alejandra, thank you very much. Thank you, Tony. THE WORLD's Alejandra 
Martins speaking with us from Santiago, Chile. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>