<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981126.2000.1259 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Tomorrow, you better start thinking about what toys to get your children 
for the holidays. If "Bug's Life" video games, air hog foam planes, 
and Teletubbies dolls leave you a little less than thrilled, then 
perhaps you could get some ideas from the Fifth Doors of Perception 
Conference in Amsterdam. Beginning today, computer scientists, philosophers, 
and gamesters meet in the Dutch capital to discuss this year's conference 
theme, which is Play. Also in attendance in "New York Times" Cyber 
Times reporter, Lisa Napoli. Lisa, we've got some of the THE WORLD's 
best grown-up tech minds there in Amsterdam. Are they having fun yet? 
No, they're very serious. It's almost like talking too much about 
sex. They are just spending way too much time talking about play and 
not doing it. One example is a fellow named David Vogler, who works 
with Nickelodeon and he's a games designer, and he did a delightful 
presentation of some of the crazy games that he's invented for Nickelodeon, 
including something called Gak, which is a very unappealing, fluorescent 
colored goo which, as he described is a delight to children but a 
menace to parents. But unfortunately, there he is showing slides and 
a video presentation of an advanced Gak gizmo, and my friend and I 
stood in the audience and said, "Why can't we play with this stuff? 
We want to go buy some of it now." If they're so serious about a subject 
like play, then perhaps it's because they're thinking that there's 
money in it. I mean, is this partly a discussion about how to use 
play with all this new technology so that people will buy products 
or maybe even use it as an educational device? Probably more the latter 
so far. And because this is sponsored by the Netherlands Design Institute, 
there is a big emphasis on the design aspect of things. But so far, 
it's not so much how to make a buck as much as it is that we should 
be infusing an element of play in everything we do. Tell me what the 
participants may or may not have in common in terms of what they're 
bringing to the conference or what they want. You've got computer 
scientists who presumably would be the people who might design games 
of one kind or other. You've got philosophers. You've got the people 
who just simply are willing to spend their money to play these games. 
Well, they're all here because they're technology and Internet junkies. 
They're devotees of the new culture of technology and how it is changing 
play. There have been some historical looks at how play has evolved 
through the ages, you know, from hundreds of years ago to now. But 
basically the thing that's unifying everyone is that they get that 
the computer is the root of our future and the root of the present, 
of course. And that seems to be the through line. Well, these people 
who are in attendance in the conference are sort of pushing the envelope 
and trying to get more exciting technology and even greater use of 
games and all kinds of things, but what about the backlash, Lisa? 
We've been hearing that some people are concerned that if a child 
is exposed too early to dependence on computers in the Internet for 
entertainment, they actually lose some very important cognitive skills 
and developmental moments. There's actually - They're looking at how 
wiring schools is obviously a huge trend in the states and around 
the world, but they're going to discuss whether that's actually a 
smart thing and what are the benefits of doing it. Lisa, you mentioned 
one fellow who tried to remind folks that play is about playing and 
brought in some Gak. Now have there been any other outstanding speakers 
or presenters? So far, I've been really surprised at how very, very 
scholarly this crowd has been, even though they're not all academics. 
The most interesting part of this conference is looking at the 1100 
people who've gathered. It's a very hip Internet crowd, so we have 
a lot of men running around looking like Austin Powers and a lot of 
very hip looking women wearing big clunky shoes. I see, right. Lisa, 
thank you so much of the "New York Times" and "Cyber Times" reporter, 
Lisa Napoli in Amsterdam. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>