<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981126.2000.2027 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The case of Jonathan Pollard has long been a thorn in the side of 
relations between the United States and Israel. Pollard, an American 
Jew, is serving a life sentence in a North Carolina prison. His crime: 
spying for Israel. This year, 14 years after his capture, the Israeli 
government acknowledged that Pollard was its agent. Israel is now 
publicly urging that Pollard be released and allowed to come to the 
Jewish state where he's been granted citizenship. THE WORLD's Richard 
Myron reports. Esther Pollard commutes between Toronto, where she 
lives, Jerusalem where she works, and North Carolina, where her husband's 
serving a life sentence for spying. She's a woman with a cause to 
free Jonathan Pollard. This is not only important to the citizens 
of Israel, it's critical to the citizens of the United States. It's 
important to anyone who believes the issue of equal justice is of 
paramount importance, that there should be similar punishments for 
similar offenses. It's critical to the special relationship between 
Israel and the United States because Israel is not being treated as 
an ally, so we have two equals: the issue of equal justice in America 
for all American citizens, and the issue of equal treatment of Israel 
as an ally. After Jonathan Pollard was arrested in 1984, the Israeli 
government denied he was an Israeli agent, claiming he was part of 
a rogue intelligence gathering operation. Successive Israeli governments 
have quietly lobbied Washington for his release, but the current prime 
minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, admitted earlier this year that Pollard 
had indeed been an Israeli spy. Dr. Yassi Alfa, head of the American 
Jewish Committee in Israel says the move has accelerated public calls 
for Pollard's release. There is certainly a movement afoot in recent 
years to make Pollard a kind of hero. Under Netanyahu, the profile 
has been raised considerably. I think a key here was Netanyahu's decision 
to inform the United States that the Israeli line with regard to responsibility 
for Pollard's operation had changed, and that Israel was prepared 
to acknowledge that this was not a rogue operation, that he had operated 
on behalf of the state of Israel. This in turn has enabled Netanyahu 
to try to lobby for his release at a much higher, much more public 
level. Defense Minister Yitzhak Mordecai recently lauded Jonathan 
Pollard on a primetime TV talk show. Mordecai described Pollard as 
a Zionist and a Jew, and urged that he be set free. Ironically, the 
prospects for Pollard's release in the near future appeared to have 
diminished since Benjamin Netanyahu tried to link the spy's fate to 
the Israeli Palestinian peace deal signed at Wye River. President 
Clinton rebuffed the Israeli leader and the head of the CIA, George 
Tenet, threatened to resign if Pollard was set free. But Esther Pollard 
says that Israel must continue to press her husband's case and get 
him released. Israel must bring Jonathan Pollard home as an agent. 
Why? Because if the government of Israel is allowed to sacrifice one 
Israeli agent on the altar of American foreign aid and American weaponry, 
then no citizen of Israel is safe. If anything, Jonathan is the Litmus 
test of the true nature of the relationship between Israel and the 
United States. Many here in Israel would rather forget about Jonathan 
Pollard because they consider him an embarrassment. They may sympathize 
with his motives to help Israel, but they worry more about the tensions 
his case has created with the United States. But as long as Jonathan 
Pollard remains in jail, his supporters will try to keep his name 
in the headlines whatever the consequences for the relationship with 
Washington. For THE WORLD, this is Richard Myron in Jerusalem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>