<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981126.2000.0916 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The voting begins today for the 1998 Sports Jerk of the Year. It's 
an annual contest posed by veteran sports announcer, Tank McNamara, 
in his syndicated cartoon. And it would be hard to argue with last 
year's winner, hot-headed basketball star, Latrell Sprewell, or the 
1996 jerk, Expectorator Roberto Alomar of the Baltimore Orioles. So 
who is this year's Sports Jerk of the Year? My nomination for Sports 
Jerk of the Year is Belvino Galvez, a Dominican pitcher for the Yamiyori 
Giants, the biggest team in Japan. Jim Allen of the "Yamiyori Daily 
News" in Tokyo. This summer, he was angered about being squeezed in 
his strike zone and not getting a called strike three and giving up 
a home run on the next pitch. But when his manager pulled him physically 
off the mound, he kept the ball. And when he got to the dugout, he 
turned around and fired it at the umpire. Missed him, though. So his 
control was off that day. I would nominate Ishar Verank, who is one 
of the best French writers. Francois Inazone writes for the French 
sports magazine, "Le Peep." He was competing at the Tour de France. 
He's very well known in France. He's our little what we could call 
"Shufu." It's a cute guy, nice guy that's very talented, but this 
season, he didn't admit to have taking even though his trainer admits 
at having dopes his writer. And he even saw three of the guys of the 
same team, which is the Festina Team have officially admitted having 
been doped. So, yes, I should - I would nominate Ishar Verank the 
jerk of the year. Dominican sports commentator Johnny Naralco has 
a fairly obvious choice for Sports Jerk of the Year. Dennis Rodman 
of the NBA. It seems that he's quite a character, and he kicked a 
photographer, you know, in one of the games. I mean, he's a very conflicting 
personality, I would say. He just got married a few days ago, and 
he was drunk when he got married, I read in the paper. He's a good 
candidate, let me put it that way. David Beckham, the England mid-field 
player for lashing out in the World Cup against Argentina and getting 
himself sent off. That nomination comes from Ben Williams, a BBC Sports 
producer who watched the soccer player behaving like a real jerk. 
Beckham gets knocked over on the ground, it's a hard tackle, but when 
he's on the ground, he lashes out with his foot right in front of 
the referee, kicks some of the Argentinean players, and gets sent 
off the pitch. Absolutely stupid incident, complete rush of blood 
to the head. England go down to ten men, manage to get to the end 
of the game without conceding an extra goal. But by the end, they're 
absolutely exhausted, and people here who follow England know that 
they're awful at taking penalties, often get knocked out in penalties. 
And that's exactly what happened. So yet again, England gets knocked 
out of the World Cup by Argentina, and that's one thing that's going 
to qualify anybody for Jerk of the Year is getting your team knocked 
out of the World Cup. Well, those are a few possibilities. Alas, there 
are plenty more. The voting begins today for the Sports Jerk of the 
Year. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>