<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981126.2000.2324 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
If you're watching TV today, chances are you've run across a football 
game or two or three. But in Singapore, football fever of a different 
sort has gripped the nation. Twenty-one soccer teams from the Asia 
Pacific region have gathered at the National University of Singapore 
to compete against each other in a unique tournament. It's not the 
World Cup. It's Robocup. THE WORLD's Clark Boyd reports. The game 
starts. OK, maybe it's not quite as exciting as last summer's World 
Cup final between Brazil and France, but the Robocup in Singapore 
might be more intellectually compelling. On a field the size of a 
ping pong table. Teams of five small robots dance and weave, duck 
and dribble. Well, sort of. As organizer Trigal Trony explains, these 
robotic Reynaldos are controlled by cameras hung over the field. They 
have actually two cameras overhead, each taking a measure of half 
the field and sending them back to a central computer whereby. There 
is two defenders. As far as I can see, there's two attackers and one 
Coquitos. The Asia Pacific Robocup is part of something called the 
Robot World Cup Initiative. The idea behind it is to use these soccer 
playing bots to develop our understanding and use of artificial intelligence. 
It's the brain child of Japanese researcher, Dr. Hirohaki Catano, 
who says robotic soccer is not just a game. We have several possible 
application and one of the things - We have the art pick. We have 
the light skill disaster. We'd like to have a autonomous robotic system 
to go into the disaster side and then rescue the people. And the other 
thing will be intelligent traffic system, and probably in the future, 
we're going to have a lot of synthesis in the camera on highways and 
on city street. And then we like to control the traffic flow much 
better so that we can significantly reduce the traffic congestion. 
Robo soccer is certainly a hit in Singapore. Every university and 
technical college in the country is fielding a team in the tournament, 
and robotics classes are creeping into Singapore's high schools. Tshua 
Yau Chung explains why Singaporeans are Robocup crazy. Singapore is 
also currently promoting a lot of artificial intelligence and trying 
to build the island to so-called intelligent islands, a lot of information 
technology. And Robocup is seen as something that is able to - a layman 
is able to associate with so they will enjoy the game. Where on the 
other hand, the researchers in Singapore will be able to try out their 
research in the lab onto something that the public can see. And if 
the public doesn't think that the mechanized soccer action is as fast 
and furious as the real World Cup, Dr. Catano says just give them 
some time. Down and low, like five years and ten years, I think the 
performers be much better, and also, we probably seen legs all over, 
which is a two leg and a four leg must like humans or a dog. And then 
the door was pressed up in football. I think that will be marvelous 
entertainment. In fact, Dr. Catano hopes that the Robot World Cup 
initiative will eventually produce full-size humanoids that will challenge 
the likes of Brazil's Reynaldo, Italy's Roberto Baggio and Germany's 
Yuergen Clinton. Well, let's just hope that by the time Cyber Cup 
2010 rolls around, Robo hooligans aren't wandering the streets itching 
for a fight. Of course, we could always call in Robocop. Your move, 
creep. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>