<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981126.0500.0684 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is VOA News Now. I'm Paul Westfeeling in Washington. This past 
year has been a traumatic one for the world's petroleum industry with 
crude oil at it's lowest price in twenty years. Amy Becker in this 
report from Hong Kong, says well the situation spells trouble for 
oil producing countries, the low oil prices are easing the economic 
pains experienced in some Asian countries. Members of the Eleven Nation 
Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries have gathered in Vienna 
to figure out how to boost the sagging price of oil. It's a meeting 
which Asian government are watching closely. Oil prices have fallen 
dramatically, down by nearly 50% this year. Well, OPEC's decision 
last winter to boost production is one reason for the glut, falling 
demand in Asia is also part of the problem for the world's oil producers. 
But for Asia's economies, cheap oil is providing some relief. John 
Russell, a Bangkok Base economist with the Research Group Petroleum 
Economics explains the slump in oil acts as a counter balance to the 
fragility of many regional currencies. The weakness in the double 
denominated price of oil um, as far as the oil import bill is concerned, 
um has offset the weakness of local currencies. This, obviously is 
very important in a sense it is, um, immediate in some extent um the 
impact of the economic financial crisis in the region. Especially, 
of course, for oil imported countries, such as Thailand. Mr. Russell 
says that most Asian governments had based their 1998 budget on a 
much higher oil price. So, the stubbornly low price of oil has provided 
some much needed relief. Analysts estimate that India may save for 
more than one billion dollars on oil imports in the year to March. 
While the cost of South Korea's oil imports for September, were down 
42% from a year ago. But this slide in the price of oil coupled with 
a drop of demand across Asia is bad for Indonesia. As Jakarta-based 
analyst Hasan Yukim explains it's one of the few net oil exporters 
in the region. Previously in the past, we've been uh relying on our 
oil export, right. And, our basically the development of the country 
depending on the strength of the oil price. But, right now uh with 
the lower oil price, it will giving us more burden. Mr. Yukim says 
low oil prices coupled with high inflation are making it harder for 
the government to keep up with interest payments on loans. Indonesia's 
oil minister says the price of oil is too low and want OPEC to find 
ways of increasing the price. But, Mr. Russell of Petroleum Economics 
does not expect OPEC to cut production any time soon. In our rough 
estimate, present arrangement, will do nothing to mix the price of 
oil and in fact, it seems that it is more likely that if produces 
take no further action to reduce the level of oil to buy. And, the 
underline oil price uh will continue to weaken. Well, a continued 
fallen oil prices will hurt Indonesia, it could greatly support other 
Asian nations which remain in the grip of the economic crisis. Amy 
Becker for VOA News, Hong Kong. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>