<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981126.1600.0675 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Domestic violence is a common problem in Zambia just as in many other 
nations. Critics charge that the country's laws against wife beating 
often are ignored. They say domestic violence is so prevalent that 
the location of the only battered women's shelter in the entire country 
must be kept secret to protect the women from further violence. Lisa 
Schlein visited the shelter, which offers a temporary refuge to women 
who are in a desperate situation often in fear for their lives. The 
Young Women's Christian Association, the YWCA opened the only battered 
women's shelter in Zambia in 1993. And it makes sure the shelter's 
location is a deeply kept secret. The facility is located in a middle-class 
area of Lusaka, surrounded by a high fence with an electronically 
monitored gate. A counselor, Gertrude Shikala notes the shelter must 
keep a security guard on duty day and night. The shelter is a confidential 
place in that there are some men who are very violent and if they 
knew where the shelter is, they can be able to come in and cause trouble. 
Gertrude Shikala says domestic violence is common in Zambia, and she 
says women who are beaten often have no where to go. As a married 
woman, first of all if you have problems with your husband, you should 
go to - first of all the women who goes in-between. Then if she can't 
solve your problems than you go to your husband's relatives. If they 
can't solve your problem, then you go to your own relatives. And usually 
when you go back to your relatives, they will send you back to your 
husband. They will ask you whether he looks after you well, he looks 
after the children. If you say yes, even if he is beating you, you 
know, they will just say you go back to your husband, unless he's 
the one who brings you back. The YWCA's shelter for battered women 
in Lusaka is spacious and comfortable. It has room for 15 women and 
their children, sometimes more in an emergency. The shelter offers 
battered women a temporary refuge for about three weeks. During that 
period, the women have a chance to recover, get some counseling, and 
think about what they will do when they leave. About 50 percent of 
the women return to their husbands. The others either go to live with 
a relative or decide to live on their own. Women in the shelter tell 
stories of years of misery and abuse that led them to seek help at 
the YWCA facility. One of them is Ann. Ann is a journalist by profession, 
so is her husband. She says she stopped working upon her husband's 
insistence. Ann says her husband began verbally and sexually abusing 
her three years after they were married. She says he refused to give 
her any money, and allowed his relatives to physically abuse her. 
I've been beaten, stripped naked in my own yard by my husbands young 
brother, which I reported to him but he never did anything. He says 
blood is thicker than water. All I have to do is comply with whatever 
they want in the house. They can come and get whatever they want to 
do, because they are his relatives. They are free to do whatever they 
want in the house. Another battered women, Regina, says she began 
having trouble with her husband three years into their marriage. Regina 
has been married for 23 years, and has seven children ranging in age 
from 5 to 19. She describes years of verbal and physical abuse in 
which her husband used to beat her with hard objects and knives. She 
said once he even poured gasoline over her. Regina says she ran away 
to her relatives several times but they always sent her back to her 
husband. Even the police turned her away. A journalist with the Zambian 
Daily Mail Newspaper, Calvin Chongo, says society and the law in Zambia 
are weighted against battered women. Rape is not as punished in marriage, 
because traditionally our culture is that we have to follow our traditional 
beliefs. And in our culture, once a women is married, that can never 
be rape, because she belongs to the husband. Like they say once you 
are married, you become the property of your husband. This is why 
that it is difficult and doesn't exist. But Mr. Chongo believes the 
issue of wife battering is becoming better known in urban areas. He 
says there are groups, which are working to educate people about domestic 
violence and about women's rights. However, he says the learning process 
is very slow, especially in Zambia's rural areas. Lisa Schlein, for 
VOA News, Lusaka. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>