<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981126.1600.2959 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In business news, World banking and monetary officials are holding 
a series of consultations regarding preparations for what's come to 
be known as the year 2000 problem. On New Years Eve of next year, 
the dates on most computers will go from 99 to 00, an impossibility 
from a computer standpoint, that could lead to massive systems crashes 
worldwide. Michael Beauman reports US banking officials met this week 
in Miami with colleagues from Latin America to discuss efforts and 
progress in dealing with the problem. No one knows how much chaos 
the year 2000 problem will bring. But several economists have suggested 
the event could produce enough upheaval and loss of output to push 
the United States into a recession. Some apocalyptic social commentators 
have gone so far as to prophesize the ungluing of modern civilization, 
with all commercial activity and government services screeching to 
a halt. The Chairman of the Joint Year 2000 Council, Roger Ferguson, 
says dire predictions are unwarranted. Launched just seven months 
ago, the council is comprised of banking, insurance, and securities 
regulators, and overseers from more than 100 countries. A member of 
the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, Mr. Ferguson 
says there is no need for panic regarding the year 2000, but stresses 
the financial sectors of all countries must make a concerted effort 
to address the looming computer problem. The clock will continue to 
move, and the century date change is inevitable. Therefore preparations 
must continue to be a top priority. Speaking at the conclusion of 
a council meeting with members from 27 nations throughout the Americas, 
Mr. Ferguson said all financial institutions, even those lagging behind, 
can still address the year 2000 problem. Some have said, that for 
any firm that has not started this process, it is already too late. 
I would say that even if a firm is not as advanced as it should be, 
it is still important to identify and start to work on mission-critical 
systems. Mr. Ferguson says the year 2000 problem could provoke a slight 
dip in US productivity, and could shave one tenth of one percent from 
the US gross domestic product, for the year 2000. But he said economic 
disruptions arising from the phenomenon will likely be small, manageable 
and short-lived. Mr. Ferguson adds, technical problems are not uncommon 
in global finance, and long-term harmful effects are rare. To some 
extent we have already lived through small disruptions. We've had, 
as you know, problems with electricity in telecommunications in Wall 
Street. The world continued to function quite smoothly. We've had 
ice storms in London, and again, the world continued to function smoothly. 
And what we've discovered is that the world economy in those circumstances 
is quite resilient. Mr. Ferguson says he would expect the world economy 
to display similar resilience in bouncing back from any computer problems, 
once the year 2000 dawns. Michael Beauman, VOA News, Miami. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>