<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981126.1600.3165 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Base baritone Simon Estes first sang with tenor Plicido Domingo 27 
years ago. Now, after many performances together around the world, 
the two renowned opera singers have rejoined here in Washington. This 
month, Washington Opera Artistic Director, Placido Domingo, has invited 
Simon Estes to sing the title role in Giuseppe Verde's opera, Simon 
Beauchanegra. Although Mr. Estes has sung 100 operatic roles, it is 
the first time he has sung the part of Simon in the Verde opera. Ray 
Freeman has details. Listening to Simon Estes sing the tile role of 
Simon Beauchanegra with the Washington Opera. It's hard to believe 
it is the first time he has sung the role. Mr. Estes' deep booming 
voice reverberates through the hall, as he acts out the role of Genoa, 
Italy's leader. Although he finds the Verde opera challenging and 
satisfying, he acknowledges that it's not among the Italian composer's 
most popular works. I think it's one of the most beautiful operas 
that Verde wrote. It's an opera that we don't think of a real famous 
soprano, mezzo, tenor, baritone, base aria. It's almost like a symphony, 
because it doesn't have these great well known arias. As you know, 
he revised the work, and I think one of the reasons, perhaps, it is 
not done as often as some of the other operas, it is a very complicated 
story. Simon Beauchanegra is indeed a complicated story, involving 
political dealings, revenge, and murder. But the opera's main theme 
is Simon Beauchanegra's relationship with his long lost daughter, 
Maria. The father is portrayed sympathetically, something Simon Estes 
admires. I like the character of Simon. I've sung Fiesco before. But 
I love the character of Simon, because he really is, I think, a very 
good person. And quite often bases, we sometimes have to play villains 
and bad people. I mean this opera he is certainly a wonderful father. 
And he is a humanitarian. I think he's a man who is really trying 
to make peace. He's trying to help bring people together. It's been 
a very interesting, very challenging, very beautiful experience to 
do this role. As much as Mr. Estes enjoys portraying the role of Simon 
Beauchanegra he will probably be always known as the quintessential 
interpreter of the operas by Richard Wagner. Lasting more than three 
hours, the Wagnerian operas are considered among the most difficult 
to sing. Yet among the general public, base baritones such as Simon 
Estes receive relatively little acclaim. But the Iowa-born African 
American singer takes it in stride, wishing the best for the celebrated 
Three Tenors, including his friend Placido Domingo. The tenors and 
sopranos have, throughout history received a little more recognition 
than the other vocal categories, I would say. I'm happy, very happy 
for Placido, and Luciano, and Jose Paredas for what they have done, 
and the contributions they have made to opera, classical music. And 
also getting more people interested in opera, lets say, and classical 
music. It isn't that I want to receive the spotlight or praise. Sometimes 
we would like to be, maybe be a little more, what shall I say, recognized. 
But that's the reality of it. I mean opera belongs to all of the vocal 
categories, but the Sopranos and tenors are still number one. Base 
baritone Simon Estes, who is singing the title role in Verde's opera, 
"Simon Beauchanegra, along with Soprano Callin Esperian at the Washington 
Opera, this month. I'm Ray Freeman. Isn't that beautiful music from 
Verde's opera, Simon Beauchanegra and an appropriate name for the 
person singing there, Simon - slightly different pronunciation - but 
Simon Estes. Very nice way to end the hour on VOA News now. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>