<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981126.1600.2150 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
I'm Tony Riggs along with Erin Brummett, this is VOA News Now. Well 
today here in the United States, it's what we call Thanksgiving Day. 
It's the one holiday that is commonly celebrated by most Americans 
regardless of race, religion, or culture. Today families are gathering 
around the table for the traditional Thanksgiving Turkey feast. But 
many Americans feast every day, and as a result too many are overweight. 
This habit is beginning to spread to other countries thanks to American 
fast food and changing lifestyles. Obesity and Affluence is the subject 
examined on today's addition of Dateline. Here's VOA's Carolyn Weaver. 
American humorist Art Buchold is fond of saying that Thanksgiving 
is the one day of the year when Americans eat better than the French. 
He should know, he lived in France for many years. But American cuisine 
has improved dramatically, due in part to the influx of immigrants 
from all over the world, who have introduced such standards to the 
American diet as pizza, tortillas, sushi and cappuccino. In the face 
of unlimited choice and quantify, however, Americans appear to be 
losing the battle to control their weight. According to new government 
guidelines issued last June, 55 percent of the US population is over 
weight. Eric Rim of the Harvard School of Nutrition says there are 
many reasons for this rising statistic. Even though there have been 
plenty of messages put out about eating a healthier diet and exercising, 
a larger percentage of the population continues to put on weight and 
be obese. There are many issues. One is finding a way to incorporate 
exercise into our daily routine, and finding exercise routines that 
we enjoy doing. And the other is, other maybe as important is finding 
diets that we like, and that we want to eat, but are also healthy 
and can help us lose weight. Mr. Rim says people trying to lose weight 
should not be fooled by the new so-called low fat processed foods. 
For 10 or 15 years, the strongest message and the message that was 
heard by most is that you have to have a low fat diet. And because 
of that the manufacturers produced foods which were low fat foods. 
But unfortunately a lot of those foods, they have taken the fat out 
and added back simple sugars. And so the total caloric content of 
the food may be similar or even higher now that they've taken the 
fats out of the foods. There is a lot more that we are starting to 
understand about biologically how those non-fat food, those foods 
that are high in sugar but low in fat, how they effect us. And how 
they may lead to increased rates of obesity. Eric Rim of the Harvard 
School of Nutrition in Boston, Massachusetts. With American fast food 
chains expanding over seas, other countries also are experiencing 
increases in obesity rates. Even countries long considered thin cultures. 
Reporter Lisa Schlein talked with Chi Zero Nushita of the World Health 
Organization in Geneva about why some cultures are thin and others 
fat. It's difficult to say though whether it is a cultural thing or 
not. I think there are a lot of different elements to it. Like modernization 
helped brought a lot of convenient things. But then, at the same time 
it created a sedentary lifestyle. And Japan, it used to be a thin 
culture, but then there is increasing problem of overweight, especially 
among children. Why is this, take Japan, take some other countries 
around the world that were traditionally thin, and now they are getting 
fatter. Does it have anything to do, for instance, with American fast 
foods sweeping the world? Yes, the so called American fast food is 
coming into a lot of different countries. There are a lot of combining 
elements. Fast food has become very popular. Those are a very energy 
dense diet. But then, at the same time, people's lifestyle have changed 
also. Now a days, people consume a lot more meat, for example, which 
depending on how it gets cooked, like, their intake of fat has increased 
quite a bit, even at home. So, it's not only the fast food per se. 
But the dietary habits have changed, there are more and more people 
who eat more meat rather than fish, for example. Like physical activity 
is another one. And modernization has brought in more machinery, and 
people have less physical activity. And transportation has been introduced, 
people walk less. People drive cars rather than walking to work or 
school. The United States is celebrating Thanksgiving, and there are 
other cultures around the world that big eating holidays and so forth. 
Is it necessarily a bad thing to let your hair down, and to eat a 
great deal on one day, if you then go back to, sort of, good normal 
way of eating afterwards? Well, I think that's OK. When you look at 
American society, though - actually I just came back from Washington 
last week. And every time when I go to the states, I'm just so amazed 
at the amount of food they are consuming every day at every meal. 
There isn't anything called bad food. You have to really look at the 
amount of what you are eating as well. And sometimes you may want 
to eat a bit more, but then, again, it's a balance. It's an energy 
input, and then output. If you consume a lot more and do not burn 
them out, then you will accumulate the fat. Other foreign foods like 
French, or oriental food had a big influence upon the American diet 
in a positive or a negative way, as far as you can see? Looking at 
from the variety of food, I think it's good. But then French good 
is not necessarily fat free, and so is Chinese, or Italian in that 
sense. You can't really say that French food or American food is bad, 
or any other food is good, it is just amount you consume and you have 
to look at the quality of the diet. Che Zera Nushita of the World 
Health Organization speaking to Reporter Lisa Schlein in Geneva. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>