<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981126.0500.2709 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is a national holiday in the United States, Thanksgiving Day. 
When families gather together for traditional feasts but while Thanksgiving 
is the nations largest harvest celebration, it is by no means the 
only one. Many communities also celebrate with church gatherings and 
bake sales called bazaars. The United Methodist Church, in the mid-western 
city of Blare, Nebraska, the fall church bazaar's the center of a 
long tradition of baking a holiday delicacy called Mincemeat. Carolyn 
Johnson has the story. The church is filled with the mingled sense 
of cinnamon, nutmeg, apples, and beef. The apple has to be translucent. 
See the trunks? That's raw apple. This is more like what you want 
to see. It's dark, juicy and see through the apple and kind of smells 
wonderful and tastes even better. And you love Mincemeat. I love Mincemeat, 
especially this. Pam Whelham is in charge of making the Methodist 
Mincemeat. On tables on the kindergarten Sunday school room in eleven 
electric roasters steam and bubble with a glossy mahogany and gold 
colored concoction. Years ago, uh a lady name Zulu Ventum uh started 
this Mincemeat project. And she had the recipe and she kept it a secret. 
That was more than 50 years ago. And Zulu Ventum's recipe isn't much 
of a secret anymore. It was past on to Zulu's daughter-in-law who 
passed it on to the Blare United Methodist women. Now, in the church 
kitchen Whelham and her crew of about 20 other women have spent all 
morning grinding chunks of roast beef and fruit, mixing it in wash 
tubs and pouring it into the cookers. It has, uh, raisins, currants. 
Each batch has a couple of bushels of apples, uh corn and we take 
off the spots that we grind them then, still with the skins on so 
that we have the color and nourishment and um it has cherries, cider, 
vinegar, grape juice, it has white sugar and brown sugar and molasses, 
not fattening at all. In all, the recipe calls for about twenty ingredients, 
including cinnamon nutmeg, all spice, genter and cloves. Many of the 
ingredients are donated for this one day of cooking and canning and 
sealing into glass jars for sale at the annual bazaar. Most of the 
women that work here are a long time in the tradition. Like Georgia 
Matson. I started when I was young and I'm no longer young. Matson 
can remember when the Mincemeat sold for $3.50 a quart. A few years 
ago the ladies raised it to $7.00. The profit goes to Methodist missions 
but Sue Gerda says there's more to the Mincemeat project than the 
money it raises. I love Mincemeat. That's number one. And it's fun 
getting together with all the people. We come we have lots of fun. 
We tell stories, things that have happened or just whatever. How long 
the assembly line of women's hands handling hot jars, hot lids and 
hot Mincemeat. The conversation ranges from family and friends to 
politics and cooking. When the last roaster is nearly empty, Pam Whelham 
calls it a day and scoops the last small helpings of rich brown Mincemeat 
into plastic cups for everyone to sample. Well, it taste a little 
sour, a little sweet. You taste the apples a little bit, a little 
bit of meat. It's wonderful. You never taste anything like our Mincemeat, 
I tell you. In fact they used to call it Marvelous Magnificent Methodist 
Mincemeat years ago. In some circles, they still do. Mincemeat made 
by these Nebraska women will be found in pies and other sweet dishes 
at many traditional Thanksgiving dinners in the area. For VOA News 
Now, I'm Carolyn Johnson in Blare, Nebraska. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>