<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981126.1600.1329 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The native Americans of the eastern band of the Cherokee nation in 
the US state of North Carolina, are survivors. They survived disease 
brought on by their first contact with the white man. They hid in 
the mountains when most of their tribe was forcibly removed to Oklahoma 
in the 1830s. 12,000 Cherokees remain in their ancestral home in North 
Carolina, where Roseanne Skerbal spoke to some, about what it means 
to be a Cherokee today. Our community is the basis of what we are. 
Lynn Harland is the director of cultural affairs for the eastern band 
of the Cherokee Nation, and explains what it was like growing up Cherokee. 
When I grew up, we weren't based on a material culture. We watched 
very little TV. Basically we got up in the morning and we were outside 
all day. We were somewhere in the hill, on the hill, at the creek. 
We were doing something, there was a group of us together. It's not 
a nuclear family, it's an extended family, and it's everyone in the 
community. We're all related. I was away from, when I graduated college 
about eight years, and it really isn't a decision to come back, if 
there is something here that holds you here. Another colleague of 
mine best expressed it that you have to come home and be recharged. 
It's like your Cherokee battery is running low, and you have to come 
home and kind of eat Cherokee food, and kind of hang out and gossip 
at the grocery store. And do those kinds of things to be part of the 
community again, and it recharges you. I am Joyce Duggan, Principal 
Chief of the eastern band of Cherokees. What does it mean to me to 
be a Cherokee? To me it means a strength of spirit that has never 
been broken, no matter how much adversity has come at us. We have 
a strong history, a strong resilience that no matter what was brought 
against us, in trying to either annihilate us, assimilate us or acculturate 
us. Whatever was tried in the past, we are still here and we are still 
a force. And that spirit is made up of culture, our traditions, our 
language. That has brought us forth even though many of those, we're 
at risk of losing. And going into the future, if we don't protect 
and preserve, and do everything we can with that culture, that has 
made us unique, then we will become non-Cherokees. One of our jobs 
is to try to maintain that length to your culture and your heritage. 
Ken Blankenship is the Director of the Museum of the Cherokee Indian 
in Cherokee. It's one thing we're going to try to help them with in 
the future, because our next project is to put in a full education 
department here. And we're probably going to add some space to the 
building to do that. And there is things we want to start teaching 
here, some of the culture, the heritage, the language, the basketmaking, 
the pottery too will help teachers understand the Cherokee history, 
so it is taught better in school systems. My name is Robert H. Bushihead. 
When I was growing up, we spoke only the Cherokee language in the 
home. And my mother was my teacher, an excellent teacher. I don't 
believe that at my age I'll ever become a fluent speaker. Jean Bushihead 
and here 85-year-old father, Robert are leading the effort to teach 
the Cherokee language in the schools. Jean Bushihead was denied the 
opportunity to learn the language as a child. And her father who spoke 
only Cherokee at home was punished for speaking it, when he attended 
a boarding school run by the Bureau of Indian Affairs. I would have 
liked to have had the choice, when I was a child, of whether I wanted 
to speak it or not. And I feel that I can help and give the children 
a choice of whether they want to speak it once they learn it. Right 
now, in the school systems that the children are learning who they 
are. And that's Cherokee. And the language plays a very, very important 
part in who you are, how you say things, how you think things. And 
I just think that without their language, they are still lacking in 
their culture being whole. I might add to what she said, that when 
a person loses his identity, to me he doesn't exist, he's nobody. 
In growing up I always knew I was Cherokee first, and then a Cherokee 
lady on top of that. And I think that that has given me my identity. 
I think that that has certainly given me a very good outlook on life. 
I feel very confident in who I am, because I know who I am. That Cherokee 
lady is Jean Bushihead, a teacher. You also heard the voices of: Robert 
Bushihead, a tribal elder; Ken Blankenship, director of the Museum 
of the Cherokee Indian; Joyce Duggan, Principal Chief of the Eastern 
Band of the Cherokee Nation, and Lynn Harland, Joyce Duggan's Cultural 
Affairs Director. I'm Roseanne Skerbal. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>