<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981126.0500.0530 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The United Nations Secretary General Kofi Annan says he is considering 
a visit to Libya to resolve the dispute over the trial of two Libyan 
accused of bombing a Pan American airliner over Scotland in 1988. 
U.N. Correspondent, Matt Rustin has details. Mr. Annan says he is 
now considering whether a visit to Libya would help resolve the outstanding 
issues in the dispute over the two alleged terrorists. He says U.N. 
officials have had very with Libyan lawyers and he says he hopes to 
bring the issue to closure by the end of November. If Mr. Annan visits 
Libya, he will do so during a visit to North Africa scheduled to start 
next week. The two Libyan men at the center of the dispute are alleged 
to have bombed Pan American Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland in 
1988 killing all 259 people on board, and 11 people on the ground. 
Libya has refused extradition requests from Britain and the United 
States where the two men have been indicted and has faced international 
sanctions as a result. But Libya has agreed in principal that the 
two men be tried before a Scottish court under Scottish law in a third 
country. The U.N. Security Council has made arrangements for such 
a trial to take place in the Netherlands. And, for sanctions against 
Libya to be lifted as soon as the two men are delivered to that country. 
Libya has raised a series of objections. It has requested guarantees 
the men will be allowed visitors and that their religious rights will 
be protected. It has objected most strongly to Britain's insistence 
that the two men if convicted serve their sentences in Scotland. British 
Diplomats say they will not compromise on that issue. U.S. Ambassador 
to the United Nations, Peter Bearly says he would welcome a visit 
by Mr. Annan to Libya if it helps secure an agreement on a trial. 
If, uh, the Secretary General feels he can be useful uh and play a 
positive role, he has been playing such a positive role, he and his 
legal advisor for these many weeks, we of course, would welcome that. 
Diplomats say if Mr. Annan chooses not to travel to Libya for talks 
on the issue, he may arrange meetings with Libyan officials at that 
countries border with Tunisia. Mr. Annan had tentatively planned a 
meeting with Libyan officials during his visit to North Africa earlier 
this month. Those plans were cancelled when he cut that trip short 
to return to New York to deal with the crisis of a weapons inspections 
in Iraq. Max Rustin, VOA News, United Nations. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>