<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981126.0500.2513 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Here in the United States, assistance suicide doctor, Jack Kevorkian 
has been charged with murder and violating the U.S. State of Michigan's 
ban on assisted suicide. The charges follow a nation-wide broadcast 
this past Sunday of a video tape showing Dr. Kevorkian euthanizing 
a terminally ill man. We get more from Michael Leland. On Sunday, 
Dr. Kevorkian said he gave a videotape of the euthanasia to the CBS 
television program, 60 Minutes, to challenge Michigan prosecutors 
to file charges against him and settle the issue of assisted suicide 
once and for all. Dr. JACK KEVORKIAN: I've got to force them to act. 
They must charge me. Because if they do not, that means they don't 
think it's a crime. Because they don't need anymore evidence, do they? 
On Wednesday, Oakland County Prosecutor, David Gorseka gave the doctor 
what he wanted. We have today issued a three count felony warrant 
against Mr. Kevorkian. Count one for first degree premeditated murder, 
count two for criminal assistance in a suicide and count three delivery 
of a controlled substance. Mr. Gorseka says he made the decision to 
file charges after watching an unedited copy of the euthanasia video 
tape and reviewing the autopsy of patient Thomas Youk. Mr. Youk suffered 
from Lou Gehrig's Disease and is seen on the tape giving Dr. Kevorkian 
permission to inject him with the chemicals that would end his life. 
Kevorkian did by means of poison and with premeditation and deliberation 
inject Mr. Youk with poisonous levels of a controlled substance with 
the intent to kill. Notwithstanding Mr. Youk consent, consent is not 
a viable defense in taking a life of another. The State of Michigan 
enacted a law banning assisted suicide on September 1st and a few 
weeks ago, Michigan voters rejected a referendum question that would've 
legalized assisted suicide in the state. A former Kevorkian lawyer, 
Michael Shwartz, says the doctor feels its time for the courts to 
settle the matter for good. Really what he's doing he's forcing the 
law to come to this case and to say, "This is either something that's 
going to be allowed or this is something we're going to oppose. Now, 
Dr. Kevorkian's idea is if it's opposed and he's successful then that 
should put an end to it. Dr. Kevorkian has said that if he's convicted 
of killing Mr. Youk, he'll starve himself to death in prison. Dr. 
Kevorkian turned himself into police in a Detroit suburb Wednesday 
afternoon to be formally charged. Michael Leland, VOA News, Chicago. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>