<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981126.1600.2695 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Thanksgiving may be the one day Americans are entitled to ignore the 
advice, not to overeat. After all having a big turkey dinner is a 
national tradition. But that doesn't mean everyone knows how to prepare 
that bird. More than 200,000 cooks in charge of thanksgiving dinner 
have telephoned for advice from a team of 48 dietitians standing by 
at the 1998 Butterball Turkey Talk Line. Health reporter Jane Hughes 
spoke with talk line supervisor Marge Clendara. She stresses the importance 
of keeping food poisoning off the Thanksgiving menu. Never thaw at 
room temperature, because you are holding the turkey too long then 
at what we call the danger zone, which is between 40 degrees Fahrenheit 
and 140 degrees. And that's the period when you get rapid bacterial 
growth. And so room temperature is a no no. Either the refrigerator, 
or you can defrost in cool water. Leave the turkey in a bag, and the 
plastic bag it comes in. Immerse it in cool water and you'll need 
to change that water every, about 30 minutes. So, you keep the cool 
water. That's so the skin will stay cool? Right. And 140 Fahrenheit 
is around, I guess, 50 centigrade? Now, you read a lot about poultry 
juices contaminating cutting boards, and other foods, and your hands. 
What is your advice on this? Well, if you handle it carefully you 
should be just fine. Certainly try not to splash those raw juices 
on any foods that is not going to be cooked, you know, such as your 
salad or something of that kind. And then clean up any raw juices, 
after you've done your preparation, with hot soapy water. You could 
use a little bit of disinfectant, a little bit of chlorine and a little 
water would be good. Because the juices contain bacteria. Right, that's 
what carries the salmonella. Yes. Now, the cooking itself, how long, 
what temperature, and how can you tell if it is properly cooked if 
you don't have a thermometer? If you don't have a thermometer, you 
can use a couple of little tests. One is you can squeeze the meat 
on the thigh. And it should feel quite soft to the touch. Another 
is you can prick the skin in that same dark meat area there, and the 
juices should be clear, no longer pink. Generally speaking we want 
you to use 325 degrees Fahrenheit for your temperature. That's about 
170 degrees centigrade. OK. Turkey is really not a difficult preparation, 
if you just follow some simple rules. Now, I have a question for my 
sister who is cooking Thanksgiving dinner for the whole family. She 
wants to know about the stuffing. She has always put the stuffing, 
the dressing, inside the turkey and cooked it there. But, I've been 
reading a lot, that it's better to cook it outside. And what is your 
advice. Well, the advice we give, is if you handle it properly it 
is perfectly safe to put it into the turkey. You want to be sure that 
it is - you don't stuff it ahead of time - you stuff it just before 
you put it into the oven. And that you cook it to the proper finished 
temperature, which should be 160 degrees Fahrenheit. That's again 
75 degrees centigrade. Butterball Turkey Advisor Marge Clendara warns 
against dressing the turkey early and chilling it before cooking. 
She says that could mean the dressing will not reach a high enough 
temperature during the cooking process to kill the salmonella bacteria 
inside the turkey. And by the way, Marge Clendara says more and more 
men are calling in. They report they are doing the cooking, not because 
they have to, but because they want to. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>