<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981126.0500.2133 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Many legal scholars believe the ruling on General Pinochet has implications 
for the conduct of international law. American University professor, 
Michael Tigar tells VOA's Bill Rogers he believes the ruling will 
make it more difficult in the future for dictators to escape prosecution 
for their crimes. You know it's one thing to have a principal that 
a head of state is not immune from prosecution for these serious crimes. 
That principal has existed for a long time and was formalized in the 
London Agreements that led to the Nuremberg Tribunal. It is quite 
another thing to recognize that principal and put it into applications 
to say that even if you are a head of state, you will be held liable 
when somebody starts proceeding. And it's the recognition and application 
of the principal, I think, that makes a difference. So, we could see 
more cases like this coming up in the future against uh against other 
dictators? Well, I think you can. The United Nations resolutions that 
established the Rwanda and Yugoslav Tribunals expressly provide that 
there is no immunity by virtue by whatever governmental position you 
might have held and that of course the modern trend. And, I think 
that although individual states such as Spain will be hesitant to 
use their power in this way, uh, once the ball gets going, as we see, 
there are seven or eight others that have also issued proceedings 
against Pinochet and eventually we'll have an international criminal 
court. And that will provide a forum where uh more of these cases 
can be heard and that would perhaps deter the kind of conduct that 
led to today's ruling. You can run but you can't hide. Right. Let 
me ask you, sir, um what recourse do the does the legal team representing 
Pinochet have now? Well, they under the Extradition Act, as each of 
the Lords that gave an opinion was careful to point out, the British 
Minister, the Secretary of State has some grounds on which extradition 
could be refused. That they can do. Um, and so, they'll make representations 
to the Blare government. The wisest thing for them to do would be 
to try to negotiate with the Spaniards, the French, and with authorities 
in Chile to set up some kind of tribunal that would judge these things 
in a way that would be acceptable to all sides. Michael Tigar of the 
Washington College of Law at American University in Washington D.C. 
spoke with VOA's Bill Rogers. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>