<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981126.0500.3040 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Americans spent more than they earned in October for the second month 
in the row. Analysts say the spending spree should continue through 
the holiday shopping season that formerly gets underway the day after 
Thanksgiving. Usually it's the biggest shopping day of the year and 
is sometimes referred to as Black Friday because it begins the season 
in which retailers make their profits for the year and sitting in 
the black. In Chicago, VOA's Michael Leland found that experts believe 
retailers should be happier this year. On State Street in downtown 
Chicago, shoppers dash from store to store with their loaded bags. 
Shekal Wilson of Chicago expects this year's holiday shopping bills 
to be a bit higher than last years. I think I'm going to spend a little 
just a little bit extra more money. Because of the age of my children 
um the quality of the merchandise and everything. Economist Diane 
Swank at Bank One in Chicago says that Ms. Wilson is like many Americans 
in planning to spend more than last holiday season. And that's why 
she's predicting U.S. retail sales will be up nearly six percent this 
year. One reason is low unemployment is resulting in increasing salaries 
giving many Americans more holiday cash. You know this is the first 
time in three decades that consumers have actually had money in their 
pocket. And I think that it's just very bad to bet against consumers 
when they've got money in their pocket. What we've got is in a very 
real sense um the best well being on a personal finances side of it 
outside of recent stock market that really consumers have seen in 
over three decades. Diane Swank of Bank One says the so called big 
ticket items such as furniture, appliances and vehicles continue to 
sell well and boost the holiday spending forecast. But, she also expects 
strong sales of clothing, another traditional holiday items in the 
weeks ahead. We also expect to see a lot of strength this Christmas 
in consumer electronics. Much of the price cutting from problems in 
Asia is still ahead of us and as that comes through consumers will 
continue to buy computers in particular with Bandam um, but also a 
lot of consumers like electronics from Asia... One problem some retailers 
will face this holiday season is finding enough workers to handle 
the larger crowds. Ms. Swank says the low unemployment rate will leave 
some stores short handed and others paying more than they'd like for 
short-term part-time help. Michael Leland, VOA News, Chicago. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>