<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981126.0500.0883 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Here in the United States, the New York Based Committee to Protect 
Journalists has presented it's Eight Annual International Press Freedom 
Awards recognizing Journalists from five countries for courage and 
independence in reporting the news. Correspondent, Barbara Shatsau 
reports from New York. Only two of the five recipients of the 1998 
International Press Freedom Awards attended the ceremony in person. 
Gray Mabukar the owner of an independent radio station in Neshere 
and Gustabo Golite of Peruvian Investigative Reporter who currently 
works in Panama thanked the committee to protect journalists for giving 
support to their efforts to report the news independently. A third 
winner Indonesian news magazine publisher, Ganawan Mahamad chose to 
stay home because of the current turmoil in Indonesia. He explained 
his absence in a video tape message to the audience. The current situation 
in -- in Indonesia that's not allowed me to leave the country. Not 
because I have the illusion that I can save the country from further 
turmoil. But because today in Indonesia a journalist has to do many 
things besides writing. For his repercussion remains strong and may 
need to strike back. For this reason, the journalist has to be in 
control, at least temporarily, with a broader effort to prevent to 
power. A spokesperson for the Committee to Protect Journalists says 
the two remaining winners were prevented from attending the ceremony 
for the very reasons that explained while such recognition is necessary. 
Ruth Semone an press correspondent is in jail in. In Belarus, newspaper 
editor, Pavo Sheramid is serving a suspended two-year jail sentence 
but is not allowed to leave the country. Earlier this week, the U.S. 
State Department issued a statement criticizing the government of 
Belarus for trying to silence reporters and for denying Mr. Sheramid 
fundamental rights such as the right to travel. The Committee to Protect 
Journalists also honored two previous winners at the 1998 ceremony. 
Cris Inuaju of Nigeria, 1997 recipient and Duan Vaeduat who won in 
1993 were both released from jail this year. The Inuaju of Nigeria, 
1997 recipient and Duan Vaeduat who won in 1993 were both released 
from jail this year. The ceremony was briefly interrupted by a group 
calling for the release from jail in the United States of a former 
radio reporter and member of the radical black panthers group who 
was convicted of killing a Philadelphia police officer in 1981 and 
sentenced to death. Barbara Shutsau, VOA News, New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>