<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981126.0500.3219 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
You're listening to VOA News Now. I'm Paul Westfeeling, Washington. 
American pianist and composer, Scott Joplin is remembered as the father 
of rag time. A syncopated style of music, first heard a century ago. 
Joplin's efforts led to what we know today as jazz. He was born 130 
years ago this week and died in 1917. Composer and Jazz pianist, Marcus 
Roberts pays tribute to Scott Joplin with a new album called The Joy 
of Joplin. VOA's Doug Lavine spoke to Roberts about the collection. 
What was it about Scott Joplin that influenced your music so much? 
He really had such a profound influence because of how his melodies 
are so clearly syncopated in nature but also so that you know that 
gives you this happy feeling, joyous feeling. But then it's balance 
with the real sense, too, of the struggle in life. So you have the 
balancing of those two emotions that you can feel through the rhythms 
of the melodies. Would you say that he set the course or set the stage 
for the beginnings of Jazz music as it is today? I would say so. Because 
see, you could also play any good music and put any jazz flavor that 
you would want on. In other words, it's just naturally. It has uh 
a way that it can be shaped uh through any influences that came after. 
So, would you say that Scott Joplin was ahead of his time? And the 
people eventually caught up with his music long after he had passed 
on? Yeah. I would say that's perfectly accurate. Uh, I really think 
that it was several decades before especially the public at large 
really got back in to what he'd done. Now the entertainer is a classic 
of ragtime music. Would you say that it is one of the standard ragtime 
compositions? There's something about just hearing that opening theme, 
da da da di da di da di, da da de po po de po de de. It's a very, 
very happy joyful rhythmic. You're not going to hear that and think 
that is was written by a German composer. Okay. Or, you know, when 
you hear it, it's so native American. It's like when you hear the 
"Star Spangled Banner" or something. It -- it has an American zeal. 
Very thankful to the rest of the world for checking Scott Joplin as 
well as and many of the classic American heroes that we've produced 
that gives part of us a lot of inspiration and ultimately I sense 
will be digging this music for many more centuries to come. Pianist 
Marcus Roberts new CD is called "The Joy of Joplin," a Sony classical. 
November 24th marked Scott Joplin's 130th birthday. I'm Doug Lavine. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>