<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981126.0500.1337 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is Thanksgiving Day here in the United States. A day for feasting 
with friends and family. The official holiday dates to 1863 but most 
Americans associate Thanksgiving with the pilgrims who arrived in 
what is now Massachusetts in the year 1620. They came from England 
via the Netherlands in search of religious freedom. Plymouth Plantation 
a living history museum about an hour south of Boston recreates the 
17th century English colony they founded here allowing visitors to 
travel back in time to see just how the pilgrims lived. VOA Susan 
Louge takes us there. In the village of Plymouth Plantation it's only 
1627. The English settlers have been living here for seven years in 
small cottages with thatched roofs and fenced in gardens. Throughout 
New Plymouth, the pilgrims are doing their daily chores, tending their 
sheep and cattle, gardening, cooking and sewing. But, they're never 
too busy to answer a question from a visitor. Is this your house? 
This belongs to some other fellow. Where is he at? Uh, I don't know. 
Did you look inside? He's not home. No? Um. He may be in the fields.. 
I shall take myself to my fields when I finish shoveling this tool. 
Across the path from Samuel Fuller's house, two men are building a 
new structure. This shall be a man's house. But now it is part of 
the frame of it. That's Steven Hopkins, one of the founders if New 
Plymouth Colony who arrived on the Mayflower in 1620. When he paused 
in his work to take a break, I asked him if the colonist often socialized 
with the Natives. And he told me of a feast held in 1621. At the end 
of the first autumn here, we had a great sort of harvest feast. As 
it's called back home, um, we had gotten all of our corn and we saw 
the winter coming upon us and we were quite pleased that God had smiled 
on us such that we could survive here. And in during that uh celebration, 
I supposed, there were also 80 or 90 of uh who came to join with us. 
And they're Sachun, the Great Sachun, he did send out some of his 
archers. They came forth with four or five deer that were done butchered 
and eaten. They stayed on for some several days. That of course, was 
the inspiration of the modern American Thanksgiving Holiday. But Scott 
Altwood who has been portraying Steven Hopkins for 10 years at Plymouth 
Plantation says three days of eating and socializing would hardly 
constitute a Thanksgiving to the pilgrims. In the to the pilgrims, 
Thanksgiving is more a day of fasting and prayer and being thankful 
to the Lord. Although that term was used for these kinds of feasts 
that occasionally happened uh, in old England. But it wasn't held 
at a holiday or at all. I think it was associated with um the pilgrims 
and Plymouth for since the Nineteenth Century sometime when that became 
when the pilgrims became lionized as founding fathers and all. And 
this was mentioned even then. Because it's in the historical records. 
It's in journals that were kept by pilgrims themselves that there 
was this great feast. Journals and letters provide first hand material 
for historic interpreters like Scott Altwood to prepare for their 
roles. Accuracy is important at Plymouth Plantation. And there's an 
intensive training program. There's, um, dialect sessions where you 
learn particular regional accents from England. And, there's, oh, 
lessons in deportment, how to behave yourselves, who to tip your hat 
to, who to bow to, and sort of thing. Um, and the general world view 
at that time. But, also, the foods, food ways and uh everything that's 
eaten and prepared um, agricultural things. Just the language itself, 
the different word for everything. For the feast such as lively as 
ours, that's uh, the best... The language may make it difficult for 
modern visitors to understand everything the pilgrims say especially 
when they speak to each other. But along with the period costumes, 
architecture, plants and animals, it helps bring the past to life 
in the present. And the pilgrims become real people instead of merely 
participants in the first Thanksgiving. Thanksgiving may be the pilgrims 
claim to fame, but life in 17th Century New England was certainly 
not one big party. The colonists worked hard to make a new life in 
America. Plymouth Plantation in Massachusetts gives modern visitors 
some insight into what that life was like. I'm Susan Louge. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>