<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981011.1830.1462 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Finally tonight, some prospective on the president's problems from 
one of the president's men. I began by telling the president that 
there was a cancer growing on the presidency. 1973, John dean became 
the first member of Richard Nixon's inner circle to turn against him 
and testify that the president was in on the cover-up. Dean had been 
a Washington wunderkind. Named counsel to the president when he was 
just 31, by age 35, he was in prison, serving four months for his 
role in the cover-up, which included arranging hush money for the 
Watergate burglars. Barred from practicing law, today, he is a private 
investment banker in Los Angeles. How does the current scandal look 
to someone who was in the middle of the last one? To find out, ABC's 
Judy Muller sat down for a conversation with former Watergate conspirator 
John dean. I don't think anyone ever contemplated this type of activity, 
this type of aggressive pursuit of a president where we really have 
the equivalent of a mafia strike force that we've placed on the presidency, 
trying to find that president doing something wrong. This scandal 
at its worst would involve perjury, lying about consensual adult affair. 
This appears to be private behavior which is being inflated to look 
much more serious than it really is. Now, it's not -- doesn't mean 
that it's not serious misconduct. What I'm saying is though, when 
you compare it to what the Congress reluctantly went to with Watergate 
to find to be impeachable offenses, and you try to put this in the 
same category, they don't fit. And the Clinton situation is different 
how? Well, it's much different. Whereas Watergate reached out throughout 
the entire top of the Nixon White House staff, some of the most senior 
advisers, his chief of staff would go to jail, his top domestic adviser 
would go to jail, his former attorney general would go to jail. And 
his counsel of the president, yours truly, would plead guilty and 
go to jail. Those are serious problems. In your letter to Monica Lewinsky 
that you had published in "the New York Times," you said, "if Congress 
proceeds, you should fight for closed hearings." Congress is entitled 
to your testimony, but you're entitled to your privacy. Do you think 
there's a chance that Monica Lewinsky could testify in private before 
Congress after all this? Well, if the Watergate precedent is followed, 
yes. Because the Watergate hearings before the impeachment inquiry 
were closed hearings. I think if this committee is really interested 
in finding facts and not putting on a political show, there will be 
closed hearings. This will be a very early test of whether this is 
pure politics or they're really trying to find some answers. But isn't 
it already too late for that? We're off to a bad start. And once the 
impeachment process starts, it's like a battleship. And it's going 
to be very hard to turn it, to change it or to stop it. Can you at 
all relate to the people around the president now who feel betrayed? 
It's very disheartening to learn that a person you respect is not 
everything you hope that person to be. But, you go on. And you hope 
that you don't find more. My problem with Richard Nixon was I kept 
finding more and more and more that I found deeply troubling. And 
I hope that isn't the case here. The legacy of Watergate, what did 
it give us that was good? I think right now we're going to find out 
if Watergate really had any lasting lessons that's going to be found 
out in how we handle this procedure today. Did we learn anything from 
the way we went through it last time? We'll know in a few months from 
now if we've learned anything from Watergate. A conversation with 
Watergate conspirator John dean. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>