<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981011.0191 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Let's cut to impeachment's chase. Impeachment myth No. 1: Congress 
will never vote to impeach or remove a president in the teeth of opinion 
polls. Reality: Here comes the impeachment election. If Democrats 
take the House, Clinton's conduct is effectively condoned. Contrariwise, 
if Republican majorities grow, that vote would stand as the voice 
of the people no matter what opinion polls show. 2. The shortened 
attention span of the American people dictates Henry Hyde's ``New 
Year's Resolution'' _ hasty hearings and a snap decision from this 
Congress this year. No Thanksgiving break? No Christmas? This sordid 
story is hungry for heroes, and as Congress provides new household 
names, a new cast of characters _ white hats as well as villains _ 
will achieve fame and fascinate us all. The civic debate should become 
more elevated and less prurient as weighty constitutional issues unfold 
on television. 3. The Judiciary Committee will limit itself to digesting 
and acting upon only the evidence submitted so far by the independent 
counsel. A Republican House ignoring new information about abuses 
of power in Travelgate and Filegate and obstruction in Whitewater? 
A newly expanded Judiciary staff refusing to examine evidence of bribery 
(a most impeachable offense) in illegal campaign fund-raising from 
Asia? C'mon. 4. People are tired of lies about sex and want to move 
on. That may be what people say while transfixed by the drama of egregious 
misconduct at the top. Sex perjury by itself may not be cause enough 
to remove a president, but abuses add up, and the prospect of Jane 
Doe No. 5 or Intern No. 2 or some other ``harassed from the past'' 
gives Democrats the Willeys. 5. Democrats will call Ken Starr as a 
witness and turn hearings into a circus investigating the investigator. 
The maligned independent counsel may turn out to be a cool, persuasive 
witness and not a priggish Savonarola. Monica may exhibit unexpected 
dignity. And if prosecutor and chief witness are called before Congress, 
why not the grand jury forewoman _ on the theory that seeking truth 
about a potential presidential conspirator takes precedence over indictments? 
6. The simple pleasures of Monicagate can't hold a candle to the serious 
abuses of Watergate. That's because we've only just begun. Watergate 
is remembered for Nixon's cover-up that came to light long after a 
break-in he knew nothing about. Starr has much to report or miscreants 
to indict after Nov. 3. The committee has not yet started taking depositions, 
and President Clinton cannot claim privilege for aides like Lindsey 
and Blumenthal, or his lawyers' hired privacy-penetrators Terry Lenzner 
and Jack Palladino, without adding fuel to the impeachment fires. 
7. Democrats will easily find 34 loyalist votes in the Senate to resist 
removal in the spring. The most ominous sentence of last week came 
from the veteran Democratic Sen. Robert Byrd, leading preserver of 
the legislative branch's prerogatives. After Clintonites foolishly 
tried to assemble 34 senatorial signatures to prejudge and moot a 
House impeachment inquiry, he warned: ``Don't tamper with this jury.'' 
On constitutional matters, Byrd has a small but respectful Democratic 
following in the Senate club; they are not in anybody's bag. 8. With 
Asia and Russia in economic turmoil, refugees about to freeze in Kosovo 
and Saddam building weapons while thumbing his nose at the United 
Nations, we cannot afford the distraction of firing our reckless leader. 
A superpower should be able to walk and chew up a president at the 
same time. Turn the myth on its head: Clinton, who studiously avoided 
dealing with these crises before the impeachment inquiry, may finally 
have an incentive to address them _ if only to look presidential. 
Advocates of his ouster will support him _ if only to appear nonpartisan. 
9. Cool heads will prevail to levy punishment short of removal. Congress 
may cluck-cluck at, but is forbidden to punish, a nonmember. Clinton, 
who still thinks he can deny his way out of anything, will not further 
weaken the presidency by bargaining for extra-constitutional humiliation. 
He stands ready, to his credit, to take his chances on a Senate trial. 
If he loses, he will gain what he has sought all his life: a unique 
and indelible place in American history. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>