<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981011.0162 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After a year of economic despair, relentless criticism and mounting 
doubts about his leadership, Hong Kong's chief executive, Tung Chee-hwa, 
finally got a break last week. Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain, 
making his first visit here since this former British colony reverted 
to China, praised Tung for how steadily he was leading Hong Kong through 
the Asian financial crisis. That the chief executive's most prominent 
defender these days is the former colonial ruler of this territory 
must be cold comfort to Tung, a 61-year-old former shipping tycoon 
who took over Hong Kong when it was the pulsing heart of the Asian 
economy and has watched as it has gone into cardiac arrest. ``Am I 
frustrated?'' asked Tung in a rare interview Friday. ``At times, I 
would say. But the important thing is to zero in on the things you 
can do, and also zero in on the longterm perspective, because the 
turmoil will be over.'' As if to underscore his point, Tung showed 
off a scroll that China's president, Jiang Zemin, painted and gave 
to Hong Kong as a gift during the handover. ``Hong Kong will be better 
tomorrow,'' it says in Chinese calligraphy. To many people here, however, 
the economic crisis has settled into a debilitating illness, with 
little hope of a cure. Hong Kong's stock market has fallen by roughly 
half since its peak in August 1997, property prices have plummeted 
by as much as 60 percent, and unemployment is soaring. ``People respect 
Tung as a sincere, elderly person,'' said Joseph Cheng, a professor 
of political science at the City University of Hong Kong. ``His heart 
is in the right place, but people are looking for results.'' As the 
man China chose to run Hong Kong, Tung faces a quandary unique among 
Asian leaders. He does not have a popular mandate, yet he must serve 
two very different constituencies: the 6.6 million people of Hong 
Kong and the Communist bosses in Beijing. Unless he comes to grips 
with the economic crisis, his critics say, Tung risks losing the faith 
of both groups. With its economy in a free-fall, some observers said 
they also feared that Hong Kong was turning away from the global market. 
In August, the government intervened massively in the stock market 
in order to foil overseas hedge funds, which it accused of improperly 
manipulating Hong Kong's markets. In defending the intervention, senior 
officials played heavily on fears of unnamed ``foreign traders,'' 
while a prominent member of the Legislature referred to foreigners 
by a derogatory Cantonese word. Tung said such remarks reflected public 
``frustration'' with the hedge funds, which he said had destabilized 
Hong Kong's economy. But as someone who lived in Boston and New York 
for nine years and watches the football games of his favorite team, 
the San Francisco 49ers, on videocassette, Tung seemed disturbed by 
suggestions that Hong Kong had become xenophobic. ``The whole of Hong 
Kong overwhelmingly understands that Hong Kong is an international 
city, and the future of Hong Kong, the success of Hong Kong, is closely 
tied to being an international city,'' he said. When it comes to domestic 
issues, critics said Tung seems to miss the forest for the trees. 
In his annual policy address last week, the chief executive proposed 
to turn Hong Kong into a center for Chinese medicine, but offered 
no major remedies for restoring the property market. During a radio 
call-in show with Tung after the 135-minute speech, one caller bluntly 
told him to resign. ``Obviously, you can understand it when the public 
is unhappy,'' Tung said. But he added, ``Hong Kong is a very free-market 
economy, and what the government can do is really not a lot.'' Some 
politicians here said Tung may be miscast in his role. Before the 
handover, when Hong Kong was booming, a conservative businessman might 
have seemed an obvious choice to keep the cash registers ringing. 
Now, with the economy in a shambles and Hong Kong's confidence shaken, 
people here are yearning for more than Tung's grey-flannel style. 
``He would make an excellent chief executive in Singapore, where the 
people are Chinese, but are more old-fashioned,'' said Martin Lee, 
Hong Kong's most prominent pro-democracy politician. Unlike his British 
predecessor, Christopher Patten, who was a Tory party leader before 
coming to Hong Kong, Tung does not relish kissing babies, glad-handing 
on the street or racing to the scene of accidents. ``This is one area 
in which I really have to learn a whole lot more _ transforming myself 
from a businessman,'' Tung said. ``Could I communicate better? Yes, 
I can and I will communicate better.'' But while Tung wants to hone 
his political skills, he is not about to embrace the rough-and-tumble 
of democracy. Hong Kong held direct elections for one-third of the 
seats in its legislature last May, and pro-democracy candidates, who 
did well, are pressing for a speedier transition to full democracy. 
Tung, however, said the economic crisis made him more determined than 
ever to stick the existing timetable, which would not put his job, 
or the full legislature, up for election until after 2007. ``Right 
now, we just have too many things going on,'' he said. ``If you look 
at the changes that are around us, we need a stable environment.'' 
In the final analysis, Tung's future depends on his relationship with 
the leaders in Beijing. And despite Hong Kong's travails, there is 
no evidence yet that he has lost their faith. Likewise, Tung's support 
among Hong Kong's powerful property tycoons remains generally solid. 
Tung has worked hard to establish his credentials as the leader of 
a Chinese city. In his speech last week, he said Hong Kong people 
should be inspired by their brethren in China, who labored to build 
earthen walls to hold back the waters during the recent epic floods 
on the Yangtze River. As critics point out, however, the flood would 
not have been so calamitous if China had protected its environment. 
Hong Kong, they said, needed policies that avoid disaster, rather 
than appeals to heroism after disaster has already struck. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>