<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981011.0233 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When the designated hitter was introduced into the World Series in 
1976, the Yankees were thought to have an advantage because they and 
their players, after all, had experience with the role. But the Yankees 
died with their d.h.'s, while the Cincinnati Reds, with no d.h. experience, 
thrived. Dan Driessen, performing as a d.h. for the first time, collected 
five hits in 14 at-bats for a .357 average. Carlos May didn't get 
a hit in nine at-bats for the Yankees, whose designated hitters over 
all had one hit in 16 at-bats for an .063 average. Flash forward to 
this postseason, and nothing had changed. In the division series against 
Texas, the Yankees' hitters-only, Chili Davis and Tim Raines, had 
two hits in 10 chances. In the first three games of the American League 
Championship Series against Cleveland, the same players had two hits 
in eight at-bats. Nowhere in there had a Yankees' designated hitter 
driven in a run. Then Davis made a breakthrough in Game 4, helping 
turn a 1-0 lead into a 3-0 lead by driving home a run with a double 
and positioning another runner to score on an ensuing sacrifice fly. 
That effort, however, turned out to be only a prelude for his performance 
in Game 5 on Sunday. Supplying the offensive punch the Yankees had 
lacked for all but one inning in their two postseason series, d.h. 
Davis singled home two runs in the first inning and hit a home run 
in the fourth as the Yankees trimmed the Indians, 5-3, and took a 
three-games-to-two lead home to New York. By driving in three runs, 
Davis produced more runs than the Yankees had scored in three of their 
previous seven postseason games. ``We needed to score early,'' Davis 
said later. ``We had to have them play catch-up baseball, and we did 
exactly that.'' His first-inning single drove in the Yankees' first 
two runs and his fourth-inning home run produced the last. The Indians 
played catch-up, but they didn't catch up. Davis, whom the Yankees 
signed 10 months ago as a free agent, was injured in the second game 
of the season and didn't catch up to his new teammates until mid-August. 
An operation reconstructed a tendon and ligaments in his right ankle, 
and he missed 118 games. He didn't start his first game as a Yankee 
at Yankee Stadium until Aug. 24. ``I'm glad it happened earlier rather 
than later,'' Davis said. ``This club played excellent ball without 
me. I wondered if I was even needed here. It's nice to be able to 
contribute at any time, no matter what you've done in the regular 
season, if you've played or not.'' The Yankees indeed did not miss 
Davis, even though they had added him to the team to be the full-time 
designated hitter. They had Darryl Strawberry and Tim Raines for the 
d.h. spot when either wasn't playing left field, and they kept winning, 
so they didn't need the 38-year-old, switch-hitting Davis. But they 
sure needed him Sunday. When he went to bat in the first inning against 
Chad Ogea, the bases were loaded and the Yankees had one out. He drilled 
a shot that Richie Sexson, the Indians' 6-foot-7-inch first baseman, 
dived for but couldn't snare. The ball skipped off his glove and scooted 
into right field as Chuck Knoblauch and Paul O'Neill raced home. ``He 
likes his change-up,'' Davis said of Ogea. ``He has a good fastball. 
You have to pick out one of the two. I really wasn't sitting on a 
change-up, but he threw one and got it up, and I wanted something 
up to keep off the ground. He got it up and I hit it pretty good. 
He made a pretty good play to knock it down. If he doesn't, it could've 
gone down the line.'' Davis was not so pleased with his at-bat in 
the second inning. The Yankees had scored their fourth run earlier 
in the inning, and Jaret Wright, whom Ogea had replaced in the series 
starting rotation, replaced Ogea in the first relief appearance of 
his five-year professional career. Davis grounded into an inning-ending 
double play, courtesy of a fine defensive play by Omar Vizquel, the 
Indians' talented shortstop. ``I was trying to get a pitch I could 
hit in the air,'' Davis said. ``It was first and third and one out. 
I had never faced Jaret before. The first pitch he throws probably 
was 98 miles an hour. I got on top of it and hit it on the ground. 
Omar makes a barehanded play. If he catches that ball with his glove, 
I think I have a chance to beat it at first. I was disappointed that 
I hit the ball on the ground.'' But when he batted the next time, 
in the fourth inning, Davis corrected the Wright problem. ``I'm just 
looking for something out over the plate,'' related Davis, who hit 
two home runs for Minnesota in the 1991 World Series. ``I know the 
young man throws hard. In fact, I found out the next time up. He blew 
me away. But there I'm just looking for something out over the plate 
to drive to the big part of the field. He threw a change-up middle 
in, and I stayed with it and got the big part of the bat on it.'' 
Davis knows his limitations. ``There are certain things I can't do, 
certain pitches I can't hit,'' he said. ``You stay away from them. 
You try to wait for pitches you can hit. The bat speed isn't what 
it used to be. You make up for it by using your head, working counts, 
getting ahead in counts and getting pitches to hit and hitting them 
hard.'' His veteran knowledge far outdid his aging limitations on 
Sunday. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>