<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981011.0209 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As U.S. bombers landed in Britain for a buildup of NATO forces ready 
to strike against Slobodan Milosevic, Richard Holbrooke, the U.S. 
envoy, Sunday pressed the Yugoslav leader for a sixth day to back 
down in his confrontation with the West over Kosovo. The pressure 
on Milosevic is expected to reach its peak on Monday when the 16 representatives 
to NATO in Brussels are scheduled to approve an activation order, 
authorizing the use of air strikes against Yugoslavia, which consists 
of Serbia and Montenegro. Once the activation order is approved, the 
supreme allied commander of NATO, Gen. Wesley Clark of the United 
States, can order the deployment of forces at any time. As NATO raised 
the stakes against Milosevic, a senior Russian military official broached 
the possibility that Moscow would assist Serbia if it is hit by NATO 
air strikes. The Russian government, a traditional ally of Serbia 
because of common Orthodox and Slavic roots, called its ambassador 
to Brussels and its NATO representative back to Moscow over the weekend. 
The head of Russia's Defense Ministry's department for international 
cooperation, Gen. Leonid Ivashov, said Russia would have the right 
to a ``full-scale military cooperation'' with Serbia if NATO attacked. 
One of the major sticking points in the talks between Holbrooke and 
Milosevic appeared to be winning the Yugoslav leader's agreement to 
an international force in the province of Kosovo, where Serbian forces 
have waged a brutal offensive against ethnic-Albanian separatists. 
Before meeting Milosevic on Sunday morning, Holbrooke said he was 
trying to get him to agree to a ``fully verifiable compliance system'' 
as an alternative to NATO strikes. After more than 10 hours of talks, 
Holbrooke declined to talk to reporters. He spent considerable time 
in between his two sessions with Milosevic talking by telephone to 
Washington, apparently sorting through possibilities for a monitoring 
force in Kosovo that would be tough enough for the West but still 
acceptable to the Yugoslav leader. The West has stressed that it doubts 
Milosevic's pledges about withdrawing troops and storing heavy weapons 
and says an international force is required to check his compliance. 
But the composition of the force _ civilian or military, or a mixture 
of the two; European or American, or a combination _ still appeared 
to be a matter of discussion, not only with Milosevic but also within 
the Western alliance. The Clinton administration's national security 
adviser, Sandy Berger, said in an interview on CNN that ``we have 
no plans for United States combat forces'' in Kosovo. He added, however, 
that ``the verification mission on the ground'' in Kosovo would consist 
largely of civilian monitors with ``some NATO.'' A NATO official said 
in Brussels on Sunday that Milosevic had made plain in his talks with 
Holbrooke that he did not want NATO troops in Kosovo. The Yugoslav 
leader has suggested that he would agree to about 1,600 unarmed civilian 
monitors from the 29-nation Organization for Security and Cooperation 
in Europe, which has monitored progress toward peace and organized 
elections in Bosnia-Herzegovina. Administration officials have said 
an unarmed international presence would not be sufficiently serious 
to deal with the Yugoslav Army and units of the Serbian Interior Ministry's 
police in Kosovo, which Milosevic has ruled repressively since stripping 
the ethnic-Albanian majority there of virtual autonomy in 1989. Washington 
was still working on ``what they can afford politically'' to contribute 
to a monitoring mission, the NATO official said. Washington would 
like Europe to take the lead, but is aware that the less the Americans 
contribute to the mission, the more reluctant the Europeans would 
be, the official said. NATO's military commanders have drafted plans 
for a series of options in Kosovo, including a ground force that would 
enforce a ceasefire. Last week, Secretary of Defense William Cohen 
said he opposed using U.S. troops in such a force, and it remains 
unclear whether the military operation force would come under the 
command of NATO or of some other international or European organization. 
Pentagon officials said Sunday that the military deployment Holbrooke 
was discussing in his weekend meetings was much smaller than a top 
option of 26,000 mostly NATO troops. It was also envisioned, the NATO 
official said, that the international mission in Kosovo could be involved 
in assisting relief agencies helping refugees get through the coming 
winter. About 250,000 ethnic Albanians have fled their homes in the 
face of a Serbian offensive in the last three months. Many of those 
refugees are afraid to return to their villages because of the continuing 
presence of the police. The pressure on Milosevic seemed carefully 
orchestrated Sunday, as six A-10 Thunderbird jet fighters flew from 
Germany to Aviano Air Base in Italy and six B52 bombers landed at 
Fairford base in Britain. The landings were widely televised, both 
in Serbia and elsewhere. The British foreign secretary, Robin Cook, 
who has been among the staunchest European advocates of using force 
if Milosevic does not meet Western demands, said Sunday that NATO 
unity was ``complete.'' If Holbrooke cannot produce results from Milosevic, 
NATO will act, he said. On CNN, Berger had similar words: ``The ball 
is in Milosevic's court. He can come into compliance or he can face 
NATO military action.'' And in a show of support that did not please 
Serbia or Russia, the presidents of Bulgaria and Romania, both former 
Soviet-bloc nations, said Sunday that they would make their air space 
available for NATO planes involved in missions against Serbia. The 
departing Cabinet of Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany was scheduled 
to meet on Monday to approve participation in NATO strikes, NATO officials 
said. Once Germany does that, the 16 representatives to NATO will 
meet to approve the activation order, they said. Milosevic's government 
remained mostly silent about the drama. But in an effort to reassure 
the population that Serbia was not without friends, state-controlled 
television has featured reports in the last three nights that tell 
of Russia's support. Privately owned BK Television, often sympathetic 
to Milosevic, aired a Russian television interview with the Russian 
foreign Minister, Igor Ivanov, about Kosovo. In the rebroadcast here, 
Ivanov's statement that the Serbian leadership was also responsible 
for the conflict in Kosovo _ along with the ethnic Albanians _ was 
censored. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>