<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981011.0159 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For a piece of history, the building is not much to look at: a glass-sided 
ergonomics furniture showroom with a stucco facade. It sits along 
a fast road crowded with shopping plazas, office parks and condo developments, 
commanding as much attention as a 7-Eleven. Still, the building, officials 
of this sprawling city of 75,000 next door to Palo Alto say, is nothing 
less than the ``Birthplace of Silicon Valley.'' No matter that Palo 
Alto has already claimed a site _ the one-car garage where Bill Hewlett 
and William Packard hatched their electronics empire _ as the Birthplace 
of Silicon Valley (complete with a plaque and a state historic-site 
designation). Or that Stanford, home of the first research park in 
the valley, unofficially claims the title. Mountain View has applied 
to the state to make the ergonomics store building a state historic 
site. Meanwhile, later this month, the City Council is planning to 
declare the building a historic site. ``We're so proud that this is 
where it all started, ``said Ralph Faravalli, Mountain View's mayor 
and the president of the historical society. ``Palo Alto may say it 
has the birthplace, but we know better.'' Sparring over the Birthplace 
of Silicon Valley is a sign of the times. There is a growing movement 
throughout the valley to step back, catch a breath and marvel at the 
institutions that helped shape what has become a high-tech world of 
mythic proportions (a place so central to life as we know it that 
Microsoft, which is in Redmond, Wash., is building a 32-acre corporate 
campus here just to be in the thick of things). The biggest, splashiest 
manifestation of this is the $91 million Tech Museum of Innovation, 
set to open in San Jose at the end of the month. The museum, financed 
in part by Silicon Valley's biggest wigs, promises to trace the history 
of the gadgets and gizmos that, its press release says, ``put Silicon 
Valley at the leading edge of the technological revolution.'' And 
more and more, Silicon Valley is officially recognizing the sites, 
often lowly buildings at the edges of civilization, where technological 
innovations occurred. Palo Alto already has three official Silicon 
Valley-related historic sites: the Hewlett-Packard garage, an early 
Pioneer electronics research laboratory, and the Fairchild Semiconductor 
building. There is talk of recognizing at least three more places: 
the Stanford laboratory of Fred Terman, who conceived the idea of 
turning the valley into a world of research and innovation; the garage 
where Apple Computer Inc. was born, even the Wagon Wheel restaurant, 
the Mountain View watering hole where Fairchild Semiconductor's scientists 
kicked back at the end of their long days. Mountain View's claim stems 
from the glass and stucco building's incarnation as Shockley Transistor 
Co. William Shockley, one of the inventors of the transistor, relocated 
here after leaving Bell Labs in New Jersey in 1956. He then recruited 
some of the best scientists in the country. When eight of Shockley's 
employees defected to Fairchild Semiconductor, they invented the integrated 
circuit, which spawned the computer revolution and the big boom in 
the Silicon Valley universe. Mountain View officials want to place 
a standing plaque at the site, if not a boulder, something big that 
will command the world's attention. ``We've wanted to do this for 
a long time,'' Faravalli said. Actually, 11 years ago, when Jacques 
Beaudouin, a retired Stanford University engineer who had worked for 
Shockley, first proposed the idea of recognizing the lab, he was ignored. 
Beaudouin says he tried again a few years after Shockley died in 1989 
of prostate cancer; nothing happened then, either. At that point, 
Shockley, who had shared in the Nobel Prize for the transistor, was 
far better known for his racist genetic theories claiming that blacks 
are inferior to whites. That, Beaudouin says, tainted any efforts 
to recognize his scientific legacy. ``I've always said that the one 
thing should have nothing to do with his scientific contributions,'' 
Beaudouin said, as he walked through the cavernous ergonomics furniture 
showroom, reminiscing about the old days. No one disputes Shockley's 
contribution to Silicon Valley. But Steven Staiger, the historian 
for the Palo Alto Historical Association, said calling Shockley's 
lab, or even the Hewlett-Packard garage, the birthplace of Silicon 
Valley might be a stretch. ``Since Silicon Valley is an idea rather 
than a thing, and historical landmarks tend to be things, how do you 
put the two together?'' he said. To really recognize the birthplace, 
he added, one would have to visit the grave of Fred Terman, or the 
house where he was born. ``He was really the one who came up with 
the idea of Silicon Valley. And if you start recognizing places like 
the Wagon Wheel, then where will it end?'' The possibilities, like 
those in Silicon Valley itself, may be limitless. As Beaudouin put 
it when he heard that the Wagon Wheel Restaurant might be recognized 
as a historic site: ``If you recognize the Wagon Wheel, then what 
about Kirk's Burgers? That's where Bill Shockley liked to eat lunch 
all the time. He would take us there to eat and take out a napkin 
and start scribbling formulas. Ideas were born in that burger joint.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>