<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981011.0198 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Was it really only three months ago that the economic sky was blue? 
That life was lush? That everything was coming up roses, even in the 
asphalt jungle of New York? Now, storm clouds seem to be piling up 
on the horizons of many New Yorkers, especially the well-to-do suits 
who populate much of Manhattan. Vacations are being postponed, apartment 
prices are being cut, purchases are being put off. The elegant Four 
Seasons restaurant is trying to come up with a cheaper menu. The cause 
of all this anxiety is, of course, Wall Street, which is suffering 
one of its worst patches in a decade. Blue-chip stocks have fallen 
more than 15 percent since July, bond markets around the globe have 
imploded and some big Wall Street firms have admitted to losing hundreds 
of millions of dollars in the last three months. Things have suddenly 
gotten so bad in the world of stocks and bonds that Merrill Lynch, 
a major New York employer and the biggest brokerage firm in the country, 
is widely expected to announce this week that it will lay off 1,000 
workers or more. Other firms are expected to follow suit next week. 
(Spokespeople for the firms declined to comment.) This is bad news 
in a city where securities firms employ almost 164,000 people in the 
metropolitan region. While these workers account for less than 5 percent 
of the labor force here, they make an enormous amount of money (an 
average of $172,000 a year, as opposed to $43,000 for the average 
worker in other industries, according to statistics from the governor's 
office). That money gets spread around through the taxes they pay, 
the things they buy, and the restaurants and bars they frequent. And 
many New Yorkers work at companies that do a lot of business with 
Wall Street firms. Accountants, office cleaners, lawyers, printers, 
caterers, limousine drivers, computer technicians, temporary workers, 
all depend in large part on financial firms for their livelihoods. 
From 1995 to 1997, the boom of Wall Street resulted in $1 billion 
of additional sales for suppliers and created 7,800 jobs outside the 
securities industry, according to a recent report by the state comptroller's 
office. Even those whose jobs have little to do with Wall Street may 
well be feeling gloomy over the stock market's malaise. Almost half 
of Americans have some money in the stock market, directly or through 
their retirement plans. For the first time in many years, their accounts 
are starting to show big losses, which are prompting a decline in 
consumer confidence among the well-to-do, according to surveys that 
track American sentiment. Anyone who owns a co-op apartment in Manhattan 
is probably aware of the effect Wall Street's gloom is having on the 
high-end housing market. In September, sellers cut their asking prices 
on 1,292 apartments _ almost 19 percent of the listings of the Corcoran 
Group, a real estate brokerage. The mood among sellers has changed, 
said Barbara Corcoran, chairwoman of the company. Although few are 
jumping at the low bids put in by potential buyers, at least now they 
are listening, she said. ``Before, they weren't even civil.'' The 
declines on Wall Street may even affect people who are impoverished 
or otherwise in need. That is because many charities in New York depend 
heavily on donations from the financial sector. The American Red Cross 
of Greater New York, for one, is definitely worried about the state 
of its donors. ``If they feel less wealthy, they feel less able to 
make major gifts,'' said Dolores Swirin, the senior director of development. 
``We are counting on the stock market, which until now was making 
people feel more charitable.'' Stores that sell expensive items, from 
silk ties to personal computers, are already seeing a decline. Sales 
at Neiman Marcus, which also owns Bergdorf Goodman, fell more than 
7 percent last month. Some of the art auction houses are expecting 
strong sales of masterpieces, which is how they make most of their 
money. But they are worrying about what, for their customers, are 
almost impulse purchases. ``The real question is not how the great 
Renoir will do, but how a good Renoir, at a half million, will do,'' 
said Diana Brooks, the chief executive of Sotheby's. New Yorkers appear 
to be cutting back on other luxuries, like the rare cigars that Richard 
Hu sometimes gets in stock at his shop, Wall Street Humidor. In August, 
Hu said, he was able to unload a shipment by calling just seven of 
his best customers. But in recent weeks, he has had to make 25 or 
30 calls. ``A lot of my investment bankers are starting to worry about 
their jobs,'' Hu said. This sudden surge in gloom may prove to be 
an overreaction to temporary trouble. After all, some firms on Wall 
Street, including Lehman Brothers and the giant Morgan Stanley Dean 
Witter, say they have no plans to cut jobs. It may simply be that 
New Yorkers are coming down to earth, with a bit of a Champagne hangover, 
after an astounding period in which hundreds of Wall Street executives 
received annual bonuses of $1 million or more. Sales of luxury cars 
at BMW of Manhattan, which stalled in August and September, are now 
now on an upswing as new models come in, though customers are in a 
slightly more cautious mood, said William Kehoe, president and general 
manager. ``We don't notice people looking for less expensive models,'' 
he said, ``but they are a lot more calculating and conservative in 
shopping. Some economists and government officials argue that all 
this emphasis on Wall Street is overblown. Sure, businesses that depend 
on financial firms for orders will be affected, as will those that 
depend on spending by people with very high incomes, said Stephen 
Kagann, chief economist for Gov. George E. Pataki. ``But not by a 
long shot does that define the typical New York City resident,'' Kagann 
said. Nevertheless, there is no denying that in lower Manhattan, anxiety 
is on the rise. Richard Nemeroff of Garden City, N.Y., who works in 
technical support at Merrill Lynch, said on Friday that he is not 
sure whether he will take his wife on a vacation to Key West in Florida 
early next year. ``I'm going to hold off and see what happens in the 
fourth quarter,'' he said. And among the investment bankers and hotshot 
traders, the mood is more like panic. Not only have securities firms' 
profits tumbled, chopping the money available for bonuses, but their 
stock prices have plunged by more than half since July. This comes 
as a blow to executives, who have much of their net worth tied up 
in their employers' stocks. ``Everybody lost their bonus in August, 
and they can't believe it,'' said one executive, who spoke on the 
condition that neither his name nor his firm appear in print. He had 
just come from a meeting in which he was told his division was cutting 
back on hiring and was ``reviewing staffing,'' which he said was code 
for contemplating layoffs. A sort of defiant gloom has set in among 
some of Wall Street's younger workers, like the young men drinking 
late on Friday night at the Cub Room, a popular SoHo nightspot. ``I'm 
an analyst at Merrill Lynch, and I'm sure I'm going to lose my job 
next week _ positive,'' said one man, who would not give his name 
because, he said, appearing in the newspaper would doom any chance 
that he would keep his job. ``I don't care if they fire me,'' he added. 
``I'm just going to go to law school. I'll be making money again in 
another few years.'' John Cogland said that his firm, which he would 
not name, is not firing people, but he has heard rumors of layoffs 
elsewhere on Wall Street.``Maybe I should make dinner tomorrow night 
and save some money, just in case,'' he said. ``I probably should 
_ but I won't.'' Those who have been watching Wall Street the longest 
sound the gloomiest. This month's round of layoff announcements ``will 
be neither the last nor the largest,'' said John Keefe, a former Wall 
Street analyst who now works as a consultant to the securities industry. 
``It'll continue for some time, all over different companies, different 
departments, big people and little.'' Isn't that forecast a little, 
well, dire? ``I've seen it before,'' Keefe said. And, in fact, the 
financial firms did slash employment after 1987, when the stock market 
fell 20 percent in one day, and made further cuts after the bond market 
collapsed in 1990. Between July of 1987 and January of 1990, Wall 
Street employment fell by 20,000 jobs, to 142,000; by October of 1991, 
employment dropped by an additional 14,000 jobs, to 128,000. The city 
suffered, too. Overall employment in the private sector fell from 
more than 3 million in 1987 to about 2.7 million in 1991. Businesses 
failed, stores went bankrupt, office towers stood empty. Pessimism 
seemed almost universal. Those days may seem long gone, but in some 
parts of New York, they are hard to forget. Take Delmonico's, the 
fabled restaurant on Beaver Street in the financial district that 
folded in 1990, in part because its Wall Street customers could not 
pay their tabs. After reopening five months ago, the restaurant has 
been doing a booming business, though lunch was a little slow late 
last week, said Patricia Economo, the catering manager. This time, 
the restaurant is being very careful about allowing young traders 
to open house accounts, she said, adding, ``You know these guys _ 
they take some big risks.'' The Four Seasons in midtown is far less 
dependent on Wall Street for its customers, who have been packing 
the place, said Julian Niccolini, one of the restaurant's owners. 
Nevertheless, on Friday he met with his chef to discuss a new menu 
for the grill room, where a prix fixe meal costs $75, a price he hopes 
to bring down to between $55 and $65. The reason for the change, Niccolini 
said, was his experience after the stock market crash of 1987, when 
his sales fell substantially. ``In the past, we waited too long to 
react,'' he said. ``And we had a very hard time.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>