<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981011.0180 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Kang Kyong-shik used to have South Korea at his fingertips, and as 
deputy prime minister and a renowned economic planner he enjoyed influence 
and glory that seemed able to take him anywhere. They did _ to prison. 
After South Korea's economic collapse late last year, the country 
turned angrily on its top economic officials, and Kang was arrested 
for economic mismanagement and neglect of duty. Now he is on trial, 
facing the possibility of many years in jail. Kang, 62, released on 
bail in September, is a broken man. Puzzled by the country's ire, 
and deeply hurt by it, Kang has spent many days asking God why he 
is being vilified for what he remembers as the most hectic and productive 
eight-and-a-half months of his public service life. ``People are fingering 
me; it's very convenient for them,'' said Kang, his voice measured 
and filled with resignation as he spoke in his fluent English. ``I 
lived through those times, anyhow. And I still succeeded in keeping 
my health.'' Kang's trial underscores not only the depth of suffering 
and anger in South Korea, as it struggles to comprehend how a miracle 
economy faltered, but also the efforts of a young democracy to figure 
out how to apply the rule of law, even to its leaders. It would be 
difficult to imagine a U.S. Cabinet official going on trial for policy 
failures, but South Korea has already sent two former presidents to 
jail for corruption and is reluctant to accept excuses for catastrophes. 
So prosecutors have charged Kang on several counts, focusing on neglect 
of duty while he ran Korea's economy but also including abuse of power, 
for pressuring a bank to lend to his friends. South Koreans seem to 
feel overwhelmingly that Kang is partly responsible for the country's 
pain and that he should bear the penalty. ``We think that we could 
have escaped economic disaster if the then-government had had the 
right direction, made the right decisions in the economic crisis,'' 
said Chung Dong-young, the spokesman for the governing National Congress 
for New Politics. He insisted that it was appropriate for Kang to 
be tried. Newspaper editorials have excoriated him, unemployed workers 
blame him for their predicament and even scholars argue that the nation's 
elite bureaucrats _ long protected and insulated from insult and injury 
_ should be held more accountable for their actions. Kim In-ho, the 
former chief economic secretary to the president, is facing similar 
criminal charges. ``Kim Dae-jung inherited a very difficult situation,'' 
Kang said, referring to the new president, who took office in February. 
``It's quite natural he should find someone to blame for the economic 
situation. Kang, a solid man who is very subdued these days, asked 
that this interview be held in his office in the National Assembly. 
He said it was the first time in many months that he had come to his 
office, and he wore a somber black suit, a drastic change from the 
blue uniform, with No. 1199 sewn onto it, that he wore for 110 days 
in prison. He had his own cell, and his wife, Cho Sam-jin, 58, brought 
him books every day _ gifts of food were not allowed _ and took his 
laundry to spare him the task of having to wash it himself. During 
those dreary days, Kang says, he pored over economic literature to 
see if scholars believed that Korea's economic crisis was the result 
of his actions. He says he was deeply relieved that experts did not 
seem to blame him. Still, many Koreans say that he lied to the nation, 
painting a picture of a basically healthy economy just as it was falling 
apart beneath him. Some say that he delayed confronting the problems 
and seeking help in part to improve the prospects that his party would 
win the presidential elections last December. If this was his intention, 
it failed. He was fired in late November as the economy continued 
to sink, and in December, South Korea reached agreement on a $58 billion 
economic rescue package from the International Monetary Fund. Partly 
as a result, Kang's party lost power and Kim Dae-jung became the first 
Korean opposition leader to be elected president. ``Koreans feel that 
he deceived the public by telling them that Korea would not have to 
go to the IMF, even though he knew clearly then that Korea was headed 
that way,'' said Hwang Joo-hwan, a 36-year-old advertising account 
executive. For some, though, putting Kang and Kim In-ho on trial sets 
a frightening precedent and could potentially inhibit policymakers. 
Others say that some compromise should be attempted. ``I am very much 
perplexed,'' said Moon Chung-in, a politics professor at Yonsei University. 
``We've got to see bureaucrats held accountable, so this sends a very 
good political signal. But on the other hand, was it fair to arrest 
him and put him in jail?'' As for Kang, one of his frustrations is 
that the focus on him and Kim In-ho is drawing attention away from 
tackling the reforms needed in the economy, and he worries that very 
little political effort seems to be going in that direction. ``If 
I go through these difficulties and we go to the right track, then 
I'll accept the difficulties,'' Kang said. ``This is the most frustrating 
to me. Even though I have a hard time, this difficulty is not contributing 
to the good of the future economy. It's only a waste.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>