<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981011.0136 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
NEW YORK _ ``You simpleton! You missed the point.'' That's telling 
him. The man at whom these words are yelled, in the latest play from 
the Blue Light Theater Company, is named Oedipus, and no one, of course, 
is more famous for missing the point until it's way too late to do 
anything about it. Misreading auguries, refusing to look for answers 
inside himself, delegating blame like the paranoid head of a Fortune 
500 company: the unfortunate habits that characterized Sophocles' 
mother-loving monarch are to some degree shared by the title character 
of Dare Clubb's ``Oedipus,'' a serio-comic meditation on destiny and 
its discontents. But this younger, callower variation on the man whose 
name has been immortalized as a Freudian complex gets things wrong 
in ways that would make his classical prototype blush. Unlike the 
Sophocles character, who worked overtime to escape his predicted fate, 
this Oedipus is so eager to embrace his that he rushes to commit crimes 
that could be classified under the rubric ``Sorry, wrong mother.'' 
Yes, the poor doofus kills the wrong man and beds the wrong woman: 
they're his adoptive parents, not his biological ones. There's a certain 
collegiate glee in this antic scrambling of mythic literature, and 
the company of actors in ``Oedipus,'' which features the seriously 
talented movie stars Frances McDormand and Billy Crudup and is directed 
by Clubb, brings undeniable zest to the interpretation of it. But 
don't go to the Classic Stage Company, where the work is being performed, 
expecting just fractured theogony tales. Clubb's play is as earnest 
as it is irreverent. Oedipus' road to self-knowledge has never been 
so long and winding, an itinerary that takes more than four hours 
and includes many detours through a world that is bleak, brutal and 
uncontrollably talky. In tone and structure, the play aspires more 
to Voltaire than to Sophocles. Indeed, Crudup's Oedipus is first cousin 
to Candide: innocent, literal-minded and disastrously harnessed to 
a philosophy that the world around him keeps refuting. Or, as one 
character says late in the third and final act: ``The gods don't frighten 
me. Men frighten me. Men with concepts.'' Actually, another character 
says much the same thing in the first act. Despite its narrative sprawl, 
``Oedipus'' is essentially a one-idea play, a series of riffs on a 
single moralizing theme. Clubb creates a lineup of terminally self-involved 
creatures, out of touch with natural human feelings and paralyzed 
by a mindless devotion to theology and ideology. They range from Oedipus' 
adoptive mother, Merope (Ms. McDormand), whose more than maternal 
emotions inspire her to Byzantine, Phaedra-like speeches of self-disgust, 
to a manic-depressive woodsman (Jon De Vries), eternally brooding 
over an oracle's pronouncement that he has no fate of his own. The 
play's central metaphor for all this circular, sterile thought is 
found in a scene in which the wandering Oedipus and his best friend, 
Teiresias (Jeffrey Donovan), find only saltwater to quench their thirst 
but drink it anyway. Clubb has come up with some appealingly goofy, 
deadpan jokes that play off the work's tragic antecedents. (``We'll 
suffer for this, probably,'' says Merope, after making love to young 
Oedipus, ``but so what?'') The script also reaches dangerously for 
real poetry, to an eloquence that tries to rival classical eloquence 
even as it parodies it, a little in the manner of T.S. Eliot, whose 
``Prufrock'' poem is alluded to here. So we get high-flown lines like 
``Even the afternoon silences in your light-filled rooms have the 
shape of music,'' and ``If there's no single truth, only a million 
versions of the truth, then what is beauty?'' Now imagine lines like 
this multiplied to fill four hours. The actors have been directed 
to pace the stage as they voice their characters' convoluted thoughts, 
which may be symbolically appropriate but is wearying to watch. There 
are some isolated, ingeniously staged touches, as when two anonymous 
figures in raincoats point out a raving madman with voyeuristic hisses 
and when a troop of bloodthirsty mercenary soldiers emerges from beneath 
the stage, but the production needs many more. It is daunting to imagine 
what sitting through ``Oedipus'' would be like without the exceptional 
cast with which Clubb has been blessed. Ms. McDormand, the Oscar-winning 
star of ``Fargo,'' brings a hypnotic intensity to Merope, even if 
the monologues finally get the better of her, and her brief, incisive 
appearance as the riddling Sphinx, in the show's wittiest scene, is 
delicious. And while passive, Candide-like figures are seldom rewarding 
to actors, Crudup, the fine-featured star of the movie ``Without Limits,'' 
winningly walks the line between spoof and solemnity, finding astonishingly 
varied line readings in his one-note character. All the actors, including 
such gifted young New York stage regulars as Camilia Sanes, Johanna 
Day and Alan Tudyk, give off a charming air of being glad to be doing 
what they're doing here, shifting through multiple roles and giving 
diverse life to an elaborate story. They certainly provide the best 
argument for staying awake during this epic-length ``Oedipus.'' They 
even, from time to time, make you forget that although their characters 
cover many miles, the play in which they appear remains firmly lodged 
in one place. PRODUCTION NOTES: `OEDIPUS' Written and directed by 
Dare Clubb; sets by Narelle Sissons; costumes by Christianne Myers; 
lighting by Christopher Landy; sound by Obadiah Eaves; production 
stage manager, Tripp Phillips; hair stylist, Richard Stein; technical 
director, Peter Barbieri Jr.; associate producer, Jeff Breithaupt; 
artistic associate, Carl Forsman. Presented by the Blue Light Theater 
Company, Greg Naughton, actor-manager; William Doble, general manager. 
At CSC Theater, 136 E. 13th St. With: Frances McDormand (Merope and 
Sphinx), Billy Crudup (Oedipus), Johanna Day (Periboea), Jeffrey Donovan 
(Teiresias), Lawrence Nathanson (Herdsman and Man on Road), Jon De 
Vries (Hunter and Hephaestus), Camilia Sanes (Io), Kevin Geer (Polynices), 
Alan Tudyk (Eteocles), Alex Draper (Palamon and Man Who Sneezes), 
Jonathan Fried (Laos and Second Man) and Carolyn McCormick (Io-caste). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>