<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981011.0105 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
James Michaels has never been known for his mild-mannered demeanor. 
Office folklore has it that the 77-year-old editor of Forbes magazine 
even fired one of his employees _ whose wife was pregnant _ on Christmas 
Day, back in the 1970s. Surely, no one could be such a Scrooge. So 
it's thoroughly surprising that when asked about the incident, the 
elfin Michaels tilted back in his chair, adjusted his black-rimmed 
glasses and said, ``In those days, well, it might have been Christmas 
Day.'' A pause. ``But it wasn't, actually. I think it was sometime 
during the holiday season.'' Call him a grinch or an eminence grise 
of financial journalism, but Michaels' transition _ from editor of 
Forbes for 37 years to overseer of related editorial projects, a change 
announced last week by Steve Forbes, the chief executive of Forbes 
Inc. _ is notable for a universe of reasons. Not the least is that 
Michaels has long been known as a contrarian fixture of financial 
journalism, who is fond of quoting himself: ``If we're saying what 
everybody else is saying, then we're not going to bother saying it.'' 
With Forbes' father, Malcolm Forbes, he conceived the Forbes 400 list 
of wealthiest Americans and established it as a benchmark of American 
affluence. He was the face behind the late Forbes' public one, shying 
away from the social circuit, choosing to remain an objective journalist 
rather than socializing with the people he was covering. But the changing 
of the guard _ Michaels will be replaced by William Baldwin, Forbes' 
47-year-old executive editor _ is not just one of generations, but 
of taste and consumer sensibility; in an attempt to play a game of 
catch-up with Business Week and Fortune magazines, Forbes will more 
closely associate itself with the booming technology industry. In 
so doing, Forbes will heighten its competition with Fortune _ which 
is published by Time Warner's Time Inc. and is considered to have 
a strong grasp of Silicon Valley commerce _ as well as with McGraw-Hill's 
Business Week. Baldwin is a well-known technophile. And with cooperation 
from Richard Karlgaard, the new Forbes publisher since July, the magazine 
is marking a course toward the warm rays of Silicon Valley, exploring 
not only the pockets of technology advertisers, but stories as well. 
By November, the Forbes Silicon Valley office in Burlingame, Calif., 
will have about 40 staff members, including both editorial and advertising 
staff for Forbes and Forbes ASAP, a technology supplement formerly 
edited by Karlgaard. While Fortune and Business Week have both had 
bureaus in Northern California for several years, Forbes opened its 
office there only last year with seven employees. Karlgaard, in fact, 
will also keep his office there; it may be the first time a New York-based 
magazine has asked its publisher to maintain his primary office on 
the opposite coast. Despite the recent flurry of reports about dismal 
advertising prospects from the technology industry, Karlgaard has 
remained optimistic enough to expand the staff of the Silicon Valley 
outpost so that it will rival in size the staff of The Wall Street 
Journal's San Francisco advertising office and news bureau, which 
covers Silicon Valley. On the editorial side, Forbes has hired three 
new technology writers in the last few months, and Michaels estimated 
that ``one out of three'' covers in the last year has focused on technology. 
Karlgaard said: ``You have to have a holistic way of looking at technology. 
In our editorial coverage, in the category of advertisers we pursue 
and in how we operate the company.'' Industry consultants say that 
Forbes seems to have made the strongest recent commitment of any of 
the general-interest business magazines toward identifying itself 
as a technology-driven publication. ``They've probably looked at Wired, 
Fast Company and Business 2.0 and said, `Well, we're not going to 
quite become them, but there's a changing focus in what American business 
is really concerned with,''' said Martin Walker, a magazine consultant. 
But those who know how to read the tea leaves at Forbes are not sure 
if its technology coverage is as hard-hitting as Forbes' other articles 
have been in the past. Several former staff writers pointed out that 
a July 27 cover article titled ``Masters of the ... New Universe'' 
_ in which several Internet entrepreneurs like Amazon.com's Jeffrey 
Bezos and Yahoo's Jerry Chih-Yuan Yang posed with surfboards _ had 
an uncharacteristically light touch. ``That got a lot of mail from 
Geekland,'' Baldwin said, pointing at the cover. ``And the guys all 
had fun posing with the surfboards and everything.'' But, he admitted 
with a shrug of the shoulders, ``It was a sympathetic story about 
the Internet.'' And Michaels remarked that the article was ``not a 
typical Forbes story.'' In light of recent belt-tightening at Ziff-Davis, 
a technology publishing subsidiary of Softbank at which the dismissal 
of 10 percent of the employees was blamed in part on decreasing technology 
ad sales, Karlgaard's particularly focused mission as publisher will 
be to fatten advertising pages. ``Computer product advertising is 
down in the computer magazines,'' Walker said, referring to Ziff-Davis' 
closing of three computer-oriented magazines. ``But it's still a real 
opportunity category for the business magazines. They have lots of 
room to grow. Forbes is not PC magazine.'' ``Clearly, there's a slump 
as we sit here today,'' said Alan Jurmain, director of media services 
at Lowe &AMP; Partners/SMS, an advertising agency. ``But I suspect 
everybody will pull through over time, and I see nothing on the horizon 
as potent as technology advertising.'' But Forbes will meet the other 
business biweekly, Fortune, in battle over technology coverage. They 
have long fought over staff, and this year Fortune _ which also has 
several Forbes alumni _ hired three writers away from Forbes. Fortune's 
sister publication, Money, has hired away two Forbes staff writers 
this year. It is arguable that John Huey's 1995 promotion to editor 
of Fortune sparked a fire beneath Forbes. Michaels keeps a note pinned 
to the wall in his office _a quote from Huey _ that reads, ``Forbes: 
They're Nasty, Venal People.'' ``He said that about us once, and I 
just thought it was terrific, '' Michaels said. Huey described the 
rivalry this way: ``It's a bit like professional wrestling. We have 
to snarl at each other once in a while.'' He added: ``They've always 
said nasty things about Fortune. But Fortune used to be run by a bunch 
of gentlemen who would never say anything back. Until I came along.'' 
Huey said that he felt Forbes was too ideologically skewed to be his 
direct editorial competitor. ``They want to return to the gold standard 
and like to write stories about how to avoid paying taxes by moving 
to an island somewhere,'' he said. But Huey said that his advertising 
sales staff considered Forbes a direct competitor. And while Forbes 
maintains that its growth in technology advertising exceeds that of 
both Fortune and Business Week, data from the Publishers Information 
Bureau indicate that it still lags behind the competition. The bureau 
estimates that so far this year the top 10 leading national advertisers 
in Fortune includes three technology advertisers. There were five 
technology companies in Business Week's top 10. However, there was 
only one in the top 10 of Forbes. In fact, among the top 10 Forbes 
advertisers for 1998 to date are three Forbes affiliate companies: 
Forbes Magazine Conferences ranks highest (at 32 pages for the year 
to date), the Forbes Stock Market Course, and Forbes Magazine OnLine. 
``That's Forbes giving money to Forbes,'' Walker, the consultant, 
said. And it's a way, he said, to inflate the number of ad pages the 
magazine reports each year. Nevertheless, Forbes and Fortune remain 
neck and neck in terms of circulation, as they have for the past few 
years. When Michaels joined the Forbes staff as a reporter in 1954, 
circulation was around 325,000, according to a Forbes spokeswoman. 
In June 1998, the magazine had an average paid circulation of 784,220, 
according to the most recent figures from the Audit Bureau of Circulations. 
(In the Oct. 19 issue, the Forbes ownership statement gives its current 
average paid circulation as 806,447.) By comparison, Fortune's most 
recent circulation figure is 767,148. Five years ago, in 1993, Fortune's 
circulation for the second half of the year was 786,777. Forbes' circulation 
for the same period was 770,008. In the current year through Sept. 
30, ad pages for Forbes were down slightly: 3,002 pages in the first 
nine months, a five-tenths of 1 percent drop from 3,016 pages in the 
comparable period last year, according to the Publishers Information 
Bureau. But ad revenue in the same period rose 5.2 percent, to $165.9 
million, from $157.7 million in the year-earlier period, according 
to estimates from the bureau. For Fortune during the same period, 
ad pages grew 16.5 percent, to 2,702 from 2,319, and revenue advanced 
16.7 percent, to $173.5 million from $148.6 million. It's unclear 
whether Michaels' transition will affect editorial morale at Forbes; 
neither he nor Baldwin are known for warm and fuzzy personalities. 
``Baldwin knows the pH of human blood,'' said one former staff writer 
who requested anonymity. ``He knows at what temperature liquid nitrogen 
freezes. He knows the 17th root of 4 trillion. He is a machine.'' 
And despite Michaels' cantankerous demeanor _ so crotchety that his 
editorial remarks on reporters' copy were turned into an advertising 
campaign earlier this year _ his concise, if brutal, editorial hand 
will be missed. One staff writer said that Michaels could still edit 
a 10,000-word article in two hours. And Richard Behar, a staff writer 
at Fortune magazine who spent six years at Forbes, summarized the 
feeling at the Forbes office when he was there: ``It was always said 
that Michaels could edit the Lord's prayer down to six words and nobody 
would miss anything.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>