<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981011.0122 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For several weeks, the basement of Tony Shafrazi's SoHo gallery has 
been transformed into a makeshift photography studio where scores 
of high-wattage lights and large-format cameras mingle with paintings 
of mostly distorted, screaming figures. The paintings are unmistakably 
by the hand of Francis Bacon, the Irish-born artist best known for 
his macabre, twisted images, according to two leading Bacon experts. 
There is Bacon's well-known figure of a pope boxed inside the canvas, 
crying out as if trapped in his own anxiety; there is also a triptych 
of blurred wrestling figures, half human, half animal, and a brilliantly 
colored landscape that recalls the flat, heavy brush of van Gogh. 
The subjects are familiar; variations on these Bacon paintings hang 
in the collections of major museums around the world, and in the last 
decade some have fetched as much as $6 million at auction. And the 
works at Shafrazi's gallery are considered an important find, although 
the circumstances of their discovery are mysterious. The artist was 
thought to have destroyed some of them before his death in 1992. Some 
were found rolled up in his cluttered London studio, others at a local 
framer where Bacon used to store paintings and supplies. Their existence 
has been a carefully guarded secret for nearly two years. John Eastman, 
the lawyer for the Bacon estate, said he did not want to let the world 
know about the works until he had a plan for how to handle them. Many 
will go on display on Oct. 31 at the Tony Shafrazi Gallery on Wooster 
Street. Besides Shafrazi, who was recently asked to represent the 
artist's estate along with the well-known London gallery Faggionato 
Fine Arts, only the artist's friend and sole heir, John Edwards, Eastman 
and two of the world's leading Bacon experts have seen the paintings. 
Ten are from the 1950s, one is from the 1960s and the rest are from 
the 1980s and 1990s, including the triptych of abstracted figures. 
David Sylvester, an English art historian, curator and author of a 
book of penetrating interviews with Bacon, who recently saw 11 of 
the 17 works, said, ``Two are absolute masterpieces, and most of the 
rest are very interesting.'' One of those two is ``Study After Velazquez,'' 
a 1950 image of a screaming pope set against a gray striped background 
that resembles a curtain. The other is ``Study for Landscape After 
Van Gogh,'' from 1957. Sam Hunter, a professor emeritus of art history 
at Princeton University who has written extensively about Bacon, said 
he was thunderstruck when he saw some of the works. ``They're very 
powerful,'' he added. ``I think these works are a real find.'' Sylvester 
said he believed many of the newly discovered paintings were works 
the artist considered unfinished. For that reason, other experts who 
have not seen the works question how important they are, believing 
that some may be paintings the artist discarded. Bacon was often dissatisfied 
with his work, and until the 1960s he routinely destroyed some of 
his best paintings, Sylvester said. It seems strange that they have 
been revealed only now, six years after Bacon's death. Stranger still, 
many experts say, is the choice of Shafrazi as the dealer handling 
the estate, instead of the Marlborough Gallery, which had represented 
Bacon since 1958. Edwards is notoriously reclusive and speaks through 
Eastman, a Manhattan lawyer whose clients include Paul McCartney, 
his brother-in-law; Rosie O'Donnell; and Billy Joel. Eastman also 
represents the estate of painter Willem de Kooning. ``Eighteen months 
ago, these works were uncovered and sent to Marlborough, who immediately 
turned them over to John Edwards,'' Eastman said. Since then, the 
lawyer has taken charge of putting things in order. In August, the 
estate gave the contents of Bacon's London studio, in a mews house 
in South Kensington, to the Hugh Lane Municipal Gallery of Modern 
Art in Dublin, where the studio is to be recreated and opened to the 
public in 2001. Shafrazi became the estate's dealer at the request 
of Edwards, Eastman said. The two first met in 1970, and both were 
friends of Robert Fraser, a London dealer, who died in the late 1980s. 
Among contemporary art experts, both the choice of Shafrazi and the 
reason Marlborough lost the estate and the artist are a source of 
curiosity and speculation. No one close to the estate was willing 
to speak for attribution. Officials at the Marlborough Gallery have 
little to say. A spokeswoman in New York said, ``Marlborough's association 
with Francis Bacon came to an end with his death.'' She added, ``Marlborough 
International has the largest stock of top-quality paintings by Bacon 
in private hands, which they acquired directly from the artist during 
his lifetime.'' The directors of Marlborough's New York and London 
galleries would not comment further. Eastman also declined to discuss 
the change of galleries. Shafrazi, born in Iran, wanted to be an artist 
and studied at the Royal College of Art in London before coming to 
New York in 1969. In the 1970s, he helped Cameron Diba, the director 
of the Tehran Museum of Contemporary Art, put together its vast collection. 
In 1974, he became notorious as the artist who walked into the Museum 
of Modern Art and spray-painted the words ``Kill Lies All'' across 
Picasso's ``Guernica.'' He was charged with criminal mischief. In 
1979, Shafrazi opened his first gallery, and within a few years he 
had made his reputation handling talents like Donald Baechler and 
then-hot graffiti artists like Jean-Michel Basquiat, Keith Haring 
and Kenny Scharf. ``Last night I stayed up until 4 in the morning 
poring over pictures,'' Shafrazi said recently, gazing at the lineup 
of Bacons on his basement walls. He also has boxes of carefully preserved 
and documented photographs from Bacon's studio, which have become 
a source of information about the paintings. ``Every day I discover 
new things,'' he said. ``So much of this is uncharted territory.'' 
Shafrazi said he was not sure how many works he would show until he 
actually began installing the exhibition. But among the most important 
will be two 1950s studies after Velazquez. One is the image Sylvester 
calls a masterpiece; the other shows a screaming man sitting with 
his legs crossed, an outline of his foot drawn as if it were kicking 
out of the canvas, perhaps the artist's metaphor for the soul. Also 
on view will be the ``Landscape After Van Gogh,'' as well as ``Two 
Figures in the Grass,'' also from 1950, a frenetic painting of crouching 
figures contained in a box-like configuration, a well-known spatial 
device in Bacon's work. As in the studies after Velazquez, the foreground 
has long streaks of paint like a curtain. A white arrow points toward 
an unrecognizable head. Arrows and circles _ devices the artist used 
to lead the eye _ keep cropping up as Shafrazi studies the paintings. 
``The longer you look at these, the more you see,'' he said. A tattered 
cover of an old magazine that features Ayrton Senna, the Brazilian 
race car driver, haunted Shafrazi, who recognized Senna's face in 
the last figure of Bacon's 1991 triptych. ``Bacon was one of the first 
artists who acknowledged the cinema and photography,'' he said. ``As 
early as 1949, he was looking at the world through magazines. The 
next artist to do that was Warhol.'' Like Warhol, Bacon was surrounded 
by mystery and myth. He had a dark view of life. (One of his best-known 
sayings was ``You can't be more horrific than life itself.'') This 
view was reflected in his sharp wit and the twisted figures he depicted 
on canvas. Stories and speculation about Bacon's work _ how much of 
it he destroyed, what remains that hasn't already been snapped up 
by a museum or major collector _ and sordid tales about his private 
life have continued since his death. A new film, ``Love Is the Devil,'' 
starring English actor Derek Jacobi as Bacon, has stirred up more 
interest, although it deals little with art and more with Bacon's 
penchant for masochistic homosexual relationships, drinking and violence. 
As is generally the case with artists' estates, no one will say precisely 
how much art is left, both in the estate and in Marlborough's stock, 
for fear of devaluing the work. But people close to Bacon's affairs 
estimate that Edwards inherited art worth $100 million. These values 
vary depending on where the artist's work is on offer. Though long 
heralded in Europe as one of the greatest postwar artists, Bacon has 
never been so popular in America, despite several major exhibitions 
here. Two years before his death, a retrospective of his work opened 
at the Hirshhorn Museum in Washington, then traveled to the Los Angeles 
County Museum of Art and to the Museum of Modern Art in New York. 
In January, another retrospective, with 74 works, organized by the 
Trust for Museum Exhibitions in Washington, is to open at the British 
Center for Art in New Haven, Conn. It is to travel to the Minneapolis 
Institute of Arts, the California Palace of the Legion of Honor in 
San Francisco and the Modern Art Museum of Fort Worth. Shafrazi and 
Eastman see their job as giving Bacon more exposure in the United 
States. ``This is an estate post-taxes, so it's not a matter of creating 
a market to raise money,'' Eastman said. As a result, few of the works 
in Shafrazi's show are for sale. Rather, both dealer and lawyer see 
the exhibition as public relations. ``It's about showing the public 
what we've discovered,'' Eastman said. ``And about creating an aura.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>