<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981011.0220 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Now, Texas is a state that likes a good political brawl almost as 
much as a slice of mesquite-smoked brisket smothered in sauce. Yet 
here it is, a month before the election, Gov. George W. Bush is about 
50 points ahead in the polls and seems set for a big wet kiss from 
voters on his way to a possible presidential run in 2000. So where's 
the rumpus? Not at the top of the ballot, it seems, but far, far below, 
well under the public radar, where the juiciest and most far-reaching 
race may be the one for control of the once-obscure Texas State Board 
of Education. A coalition of Christian conservatives, who have gradually 
gained members on the board since 1992 and transformed it into the 
state's most reliable producer of political theater and partisan discord, 
have a solid shot at becoming a majority on the 15-member board, which 
oversees the nation's second-largest public school system, 3.9 million 
students strong. The prospect is unnerving some Texas politicians, 
leading others to talk about disempowering or abolishing the elected 
board and causing discomfort to a governor who has made public education 
the centerpiece of his campaign and who does not really need right-wing 
members of his own party berating his administration for being insufficiently 
committed to the conservative cause. A little more sauce on that brisket, 
honey? Jack Christie, the Republican chairman of the state board, 
says he considers himself a devout Christian and an ardent conservative, 
but he has had about enough of the hard-line Christian conservatives 
he works with. ``It's a waste of time trying to placate these people,'' 
he said. ``I was in Israel recently on a trip with a diverse group 
of Christians and Jews. We met with the No. 2 guy in the PLO, and 
I felt, when I was sitting there, that I could negotiate better with 
him than I could with some of these people on the board.'' The conservatives 
respond that they are interested only in high standards, local school 
control and fiscal accountability; prayer in the schools and creationism 
are not their main focus. ``The education establishment is totally 
unaccustomed to anyone who is not a part of their inside loop,'' said 
Donna Ballard, a conservative housewife who is trying to reclaim a 
spot on the board after giving up her old seat, in suburban Houston, 
when her husband, a preacher, moved the family to West Texas. ``We're 
holding them accountable, which they're furious about.'' In the last 
two years, right-wing members of the board have chastised the governor 
for lack of leadership and Lt. Gov. Bob Bullock for ``meddling'' in 
education issues; frequently criticized the appointed state education 
commissioner; demanded Christie's removal as board chairman; been 
called racists by other members of the board; publicly ripped up a 
textbook they considered too easy; demanded the sale of more than 
$40 million of Disney stock from the permanent education fund, and 
altogether transformed the board into a great big thorn in the establishment's 
side. ``I have said before that I thought they were an embarrassment 
for the state of Texas and the Legislature and the governor,'' said 
State Sen. Bill Ratliff, a Republican and former chairman of the Senate's 
education committee. ``And I happen to believe that public education 
is suffering from it. You just can't have a board that runs amok.'' 
Critics on the board and in state government say the hard-line conservatives 
are insatiable, dissembling and utterly resistant to compromise. ``I 
believe their hidden agenda is to make public education look as bad 
as possible so they can get support from citizens of Texas for a full-blown 
voucher system,'' said Rene Nunez, a Democrat who after 10 years on 
the board finds himself in a tight race with Mrs. Ballard in West 
Texas. ``That's just a bunch of name-calling,'' said Bob Offut, a 
leader of the board's right-wing bloc. ``We're five people who are 
not into the Austin bureaucracy's political gamesmanship. We're pretty 
ideological-type of people who, just because the governor calls and 
asks for support, doesn't mean that it's going to happen. They are 
driven by their hatred of us.'' Those close to the governor describe 
him as annoyed, even angry with the activities of right-wingers on 
the board who might, paradoxically, find their numbers increased in 
November on Bush's coattails. But they say that the rancor does not 
indicate any significant gap between the governor and the party's 
overall right wing. Karl Rove, a top Bush adviser, said that Bush 
had been ``unremittingly conservative'' as governor and had put together 
a ``broad coalition'' of Republicans that included prominent members 
of the far right. The extreme attitudes of hard-line conservatives 
like those on the education board represent only a tiny percentage 
of Republicans, he said. ``I thought I was a right-winger, but these 
people are far out there,'' said Rove, who described the tension between 
the governor and the board's conservatives as a minor sideshow. ``In 
the carnival of life,'' he said, ``they are in a very distant booth.'' 
The once obscure Texas education board has crept gradually into the 
spotlight in the six years since Offut became the first member of 
the conservative voting bloc to be elected to it. Shortly afterward, 
Offut said he decided that his best path was to try to recruit like-minded 
conservatives to run for seats on the board in other districts. By 
1996, there were six in Offut's voting bloc on the board, including 
Mrs. Ballard, whose move to Midland reduced the bloc to five. But 
Offut said the bloc was certain to increase by at least one in November 
because ``another one of us won a primary and is unopposed'' in the 
Texas Panhandle. And Offut said he had strong hopes that Mrs. Ballard 
would rejoin the board by beating Nunez. Then, they would need to 
win only one more race, perhaps in East Texas, or to convince one 
of the more moderate Republicans already on the board to join their 
bloc, to make up a majority of the 15 members. Only five seats are 
up this year, as the terms are staggered. State Sen. Elliot Shapleigh 
spoke last week to a few dozen supporters of Nunez who were munching 
tamales on a flag-draped veranda beside the Rio Grande in El Paso. 
Shapleigh said he intended to do as much as he could to get Nunez 
re-elected. ``The consequences on this state are huge,'' he said. 
``We cannot allow the reckless right to handicap our public education.'' 
Mrs. Ballard said she intended to campaign as a concerned housewife 
and mother and resented efforts by opponents to demonize her by linking 
her to a right-wing conspiracy that she said did not exist. ``I don't 
have horns,'' Mrs. Ballard said. ``And I don't see why they keep trying 
to make this a religious issue. We all go to different churches. One 
of us doesn't go to any church at all. The thing that threads us together 
is a real determination to save our future.'' As a result of the efforts 
of her and others, she said, ``discipline and phonics are not dirty 
words anymore'' in Texas schools and there is the beginning of a return 
to higher standards. (The right-wingers on the board joined governor 
Bush last year in calling for a rewrite of a first draft of the new 
standards for Texas schools, going as far as to pick their own consultants 
to help, but then they stunned the board and enraged the governor 
by announcing at the last minute that the rewritten standards were 
still insufficiently tough for their taste. ``These people cannot 
take yes for an answer,'' one state official said.) ``What we have 
here are two different philosophies,'' Mrs. Ballard said. ``One says 
that we tell children what is right, how to spell a word, what the 
correct answer is. The other is that we're going to have general statements 
and let children discover when they're ready to learn.'' It has nothing 
to do with secret religious conspiracies, she said. ``I had four children 
in four years,'' Mrs. Ballard said. ``I put a list on the refrigerator, 
what they got a swat for and what they didn't get a swat for. Those 
were the rules of the house. You obeyed those rules or you didn't. 
There were times you could show mercy, but you must have that structure. 
That's not heartless. Sometimes, it takes a mom to figure that out.'' 
Brenda Welburn, executive director of the National Association of 
State Boards of Education, said that similar battles were being fought 
in many states where social conservatives have recognized that low-profile 
school-board races are an easy gateway into government and a prime 
platform for pushing the issues dearest to them. Colorado, in particular, 
may well see religious conservatives become a majority on the state 
education board in November, she said. But the trend is not entirely 
one-sided. Moderates appear to be staging a comeback in some states 
where there had been conservative inroads in the 1990s. ``If anything, 
I see a swing back to the middle,'' Ms. Welburn said. In other states, 
like Delaware, where officials have grown weary of partisan bickering 
over education, state boards have seen their powers whittled back. 
In Minnesota, the Legislature has voted to abolish the state board 
next year. This is similar to the path that officials have taken in 
Texas. In 1995, the Legislature voted to severely curtail the board's 
powers, particularly taking away the power, cherished by the social 
conservatives, of editing textbooks. Since this has done little to 
quiet the rancor on the state board, some Texas officials are now 
arguing that its powers should be even further curtailed in the next 
legislative session, perhaps even transforming it into an appointed 
board. It all could depend on whether the conservatives win a majority 
on the board in November. If they do, several state officials predicted, 
legislation will be pushed through to further limit the board's role. 
``I personally don't think they're going to win a majority this election,'' 
Christie said. ``I think the pendulum is going to swing back instead.'' 
In that case, he said, the Democrats and moderate Republicans on the 
board will simply continue with a strategy that they believe was beginning 
to work in recent board meetings. ``We tried to get along with them, 
but we gave up,'' Christie said. ``We've gotten word from the upper 
echelons of state government that we should just go ahead and not 
worry about these sideshows.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>