<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981011.0177 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The global financial crisis and the plunging stock market are beginning 
to unnerve the nation's more affluent families and make them more 
cautious in their spending. Consumer spending, particularly among 
families with annual incomes above $50,000, is far and away the biggest 
source of economic growth in the United States. Through months of 
turmoil, this consumption has remained strong, even as other pillars 
of economic growth have faded: exports and profits, for example, and 
spending on the machinery and equipment that allows business to thrive. 
Now the first crack has appeared in the will to spend. The crack is 
most evident in recent consumer surveys that ask specifically about 
a household's ``financial situation''; that is, its savings, stock 
portfolios and real estate holdings _ its wealth _ as well as its 
income from wages. Over the last several months, families with lower 
incomes, and little exposure to the stock market, have showed no change 
in their level of optimism. In sharp contrast, households with incomes 
above $50,000 were optimistic about their financial situation before 
the summer's sharp selloff in the stock market, but then in September 
their optimism fell significantly. ``We are starting to see consumers 
who feel nervous about the stock market and are becoming more cautious 
in their spending behavior,'' said Richard Curtin, director of the 
University of Michigan's Consumer Surveys, whose monthly polls are 
widely followed by economists as the most reliable indicators of consumer 
sentiment. ``What we have found consistently over the years is that 
such changes in sentiment precede significant changes in actual spending 
by six to nine months.'' As such, this would point to a considerable 
slowdown in the economy sometime next spring. The consumers in question 
are people like Ellen Elias, a partner in an upscale Manhattan appliance 
store, Elgot, a woman in her forties who says she ``owns enough stock 
to be concerned.'' She is hoping that stock prices will rebound by 
the time she needs the money. Since mid-July, when the selloff began, 
American stocks have lost $1.5 trillion of their value, Alan Greenspan, 
chairman of the Federal Reserve, estimated last week. If this decline 
continues, Ms. Elias said, she may have second thoughts about some 
of her spending. Doubt has already touched Andrew Kozinn, a 46-year-old 
men's suit manufacturer and haberdasher, with a store on Manhattan's 
Park Avenue. He has a stock portfolio approaching seven figures, he 
says, but he lives within his annual income from his business, not 
his stock market gains. Besides, he said, his stocks are still worth 
more than they were a year or so ago, before the big run-up in stock 
prices that ended in July. Still, Kozinn admits to a glimmer of uneasiness. 
``I have just bought a new car, and I am putting a new bathroom in 
my summer home,'' he said, ``and you start to wonder what you should 
have done.'' Higher-income families, the people who invested most 
heavily in stocks and felt wealthier as stock prices rose, account 
for only 28 percent of the nation's households. The remaining 72 percent, 
all families earning less than $50,000 a year, invest their savings 
mainly in their homes, not the stock market, various studies show, 
and their feelings about their financial situation have not shown 
any change in recent consumer polls. But they are not the biggest 
spenders. Higher-income households are. Those with incomes above $50,000 
a year account for nearly half of all consumer spending, the Census 
Bureau and Labor Department report. Households earning above $70,000, 
while representing less than 20 percent of all households, account 
for nearly 30 percent of all the spending. When signs of economic 
trouble appear, their mood swings are much more pronounced than those 
of the poor. During good times, more affluent families are notably 
more optimistic about the economy than lower-income Americans, according 
to Thomas Riehl, a partner at Peter Hart Research Associates, a public 
opinion polling firm. In June 1997, for example, Hart Research found 
that only 12 percent of those earning $50,000 to $100,000 a year expected 
a recession in the next 12 months, while 25 percent of those with 
incomes under $20,000 saw recession around the corner. The 12 percent 
shot up to 33 percent in a similar poll last month, but the outlook 
among poor families hardly changed. Twenty-seven percent saw recession 
within a year. ``When a good period for the economy ends,'' Riehl 
said, ``optimism at the high end comes down closer to what lower-income 
people express, even in the best of times.'' And high-end spending 
is the first to be affected. The nation's total consumption is still 
strong, and many luxury goods _ Volvos and Mercedes-Benz cars, for 
example _ are still being snapped up. But hints of weakening at the 
high end have begun to appear. Discount stores, catering mainly to 
the less affluent, reported last week that September sales climbed 
smartly. But stores like Saks Fifth Avenue and Neiman Marcus that 
sell more luxury goods said sales had fallen last month. Land's End, 
whose catalogues offer high-priced casual wear, says its sales, after 
posting strong gains earlier in the year, ``have been relatively flat 
in recent weeks.'' The ISI Group and Goldman Sachs &AMP; Co., Wall 
Street firms that track retail sales on their own, both report a softening. 
And the U.S. Home Corp., headquartered in Houston, which builds 9,000 
homes a year at an average price of $176,000 apiece, says that while 
sales are still rising, they are doing so ``at a declining rate of 
increase.'' ``The traffic count of potential customers through our 
model homes is down, and we are not converting as many of them to 
buyers,'' said Robert Strudler, chairman of U.S. Home. ``With mortgage 
rates so low, that is more a reflection of a decline in consumer confidence 
than affordability.'' Curtin, director of the University of Michigan 
survey, agrees. The nation's two major consumer confidence surveys, 
Michigan's and one conducted by the Conference Board, a business organization, 
both find that while consumer confidence is still at a high level, 
there were significant declines in August and September. Curtin blames 
the September drop on families with annual incomes above $50,000. 
All year, he notes, more than 60 percent of the households in this 
category had expressed optimism about their own financial situation. 
And then in September, the percentage suddenly fell to 50. That mood 
change did not show up among households earning less than $50,000. 
From January through August, the proportion of optimistic households 
in this category ranged between 40 percent and 48 percent, and in 
September the number was a typical 46 percent. ``For the less than 
$50,000-a-year crowd,'' Curtin said, ``their primary concern is not 
the stock market, but the impact from falling exports and layoffs, 
and that they have not felt yet.'' The main issue for this group is 
jobs, and the demand for workers until now has been quite strong. 
Layoffs have begun to pick up lately, but the nation's unemployment 
rate is still at an unusually low 4.6 percent. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>