<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981011.0200 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Since Darryl Strawberry, the 36-year-old Yankees outfielder, had surgery 
to remove a cancer from his colon on Oct. 3, his doctors and the Yankees 
have painted an optimistic picture of his chances for a long-term 
cure. However, a number of cancer experts not connected with Strawberry's 
case were more cautious in their optimism about his future, because 
the detection of cancerous cells in even one of the 36 lymph nodes 
removed from his abdomen during the operation meant the cancer had 
spread. The finding meant Strawberry's post-operative course would 
include chemotherapy; if none of the lymph nodes had shown evidence 
of cancerous cells, presumably Strawberry would not have needed chemotherapy. 
The finding also substantially reduced the odds of a five-year cure, 
from the approximately 90 percent that could have been expected if 
the cancer had not spread. Strawberry, described as ``still weak'' 
Sunday by Dr. Stuart Hershon, the Yankees' team physician, remains 
at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center. Hershon, a specialist in 
bone and joint surgery, said Strawberry ``needs to get his strength. 
He'll go home when he's ready.'' Hershon said an earlier news release 
from Columbia-Presbyterian that said Strawberry would leave the hospital 
Sunday should not have said that. In the same news release, the hospital 
said that ``doctors are optimistic that he will make a complete recovery 
and return to full activities including playing major league baseball 
next season.'' There was no statistical information about his future. 
Cancer experts, when asked about the odds of Strawberry's longer-term 
survival, said they appeared to be in his favor. But they gave widely 
ranging figures _ from 75 to 35 percent _ for the prospects of Strawberry 
being cured of colon cancer in five years. The figures were based 
on large studies of patients with colon cancer. Dr. Stanley Hamilton, 
head of pathology at the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer 
Center in Houston, and Dr. Alfred Cohen, a colon cancer surgeon at 
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan, said that Strawberry 
had a 70 percent to 75 percent five-year survival rate with adjuvant 
chemotherapy and about a 60 percent rate without such therapy. However, 
Dr. Harmon Eyre, chief medical officer of the American Cancer Society 
in Atlanta, gave a survival rate of 50 percent to 65 percent. Dr. 
Mark Arnold, a colon cancer surgeon at Ohio State University Hospital 
in Columbus, gave a 35 percent to 50 percent figure. Other cancer 
experts who asked not to be identified gave figures similar to those 
offered by Eyre and Arnold. The wide variation reflects several factors. 
One is that the odds depend on specific factors involved in a particular 
case. Strawberry's doctors at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center 
in Manhattan have not discussed his case publicly, and news releases 
from the medical center have given few medical details of the type 
that doctors generally rely on in making such prognoses. Most important, 
predicting an individual patient's prognosis is an inexact science 
because it can be extremely difficult to apply information derived 
from studies involving large numbers of patients to one person. ``There 
are clearly people who are in the highest adverse group who survive 
and people who are in the highly favorable group who do not,'' Hamilton 
said. ``We all get fooled,'' he added. Nevertheless, Eyre said that 
even the limited available information about Strawberry's case makes 
his ``a very serious tumor.'' Strawberry's doctors have said they 
expect him to play next season. However, at what point in the season 
that might happen remains to be determined, because Strawberry will 
be taking chemotherapy over the next six months and it is possible 
that he will experience unwanted symptoms from the anti-cancer drugs. 
In one sense, the finding of only one cancerous lymph node among the 
36 was good news for Strawberry because it indicated that the spread 
was limited. However, the spread to just one node has put Strawberry 
in a more serious category of the standard cancer staging systems 
than his wife, Charisse, said they expected before the operation. 
At that time, Charisse Strawberry said the doctors expected Darryl 
to be in one of the two most favorable categories _ A or B (or I or 
II in another, more commonly used system). Such staging can be made 
only after pathologists examine the cancer and other tissue removed 
in surgery. A news release from Columbia-Presbyterian last Thursday 
citing the doctors' optimism did not cite the staging for Strawberry's 
cancer. But by definition, the detection of just the one cancerous 
node put him in the third-worst category _ either C or III, depending 
on the system. Doctors rely heavily on such staging systems to give 
prognoses. For example, Ronald Reagan's colon cancer was classified 
as a B when it was removed while he was president in 1985. The colon 
cancer is not known to have recurred. Strawberry's case of colon cancer 
has drawn exceptional attention because he is so young. Colon cancers 
are rare in people his age. Only 1,700, or 2.5 percent, of the 62,900 
colon cancer cases expected to be diagnosed in men in this country 
this year will be among men 40 and under. Although Strawberry had 
experienced abdominal cramping pains for several weeks, his cancer 
was detected and removed within the space of a few days just before 
the start of the major league baseball playoffs. Not only was Strawberry 
forced out of the lineup at a crucial stage in the season, but it 
jolted his teammates. Also, publicity about Strawberry's case comes 
at a time when scientists are calling for larger budgets for cancer 
research. But Congress and the White House are pressing cancer doctors 
to show what has been done with the billions of dollars that taxpayers 
have invested in cancer over recent decades. The outlook for individuals 
with colon cancer has improved as the death rate has declined over 
the last two decades, the American Cancer Society said. Nevertheless, 
the estimates are that more than 130,000 Americans will be diagnosed 
with colon and rectal cancer this year and that they will cause 47,700 
deaths. When dealing with publicity about serious illnesses of celebrities, 
doctors and hospitals are mindful that such patients and their families 
will read or hear news reports about their cases. And sports organizations 
like the Yankees often try to put a favorable spin on the news for 
morale reasons. With respect to the sketchy news releases in Strawberry's 
case, Hamilton said: ``Very obviously, it is not a complete picture. 
They have filtered what they want'' to disclose. One hospital news 
release said that there was no evidence of cancer in the margins of 
the 16-inch piece that was removed from Strawberry's colon. But that 
was to be expected because if cancerous cells were present at the 
margins, the surgeons would have just removed a longer piece. Cancer 
experts said it was more important to know about the margins of the 
cancer itself, whether the cancer had penetrated deep into the walls 
of the tubular bowel or through it into adjacent tissues. But that 
information was not disclosed. Before the operation, Charisse Strawberry 
said Darryl might need ``a sprinkling'' of radiation. However, the 
news releases have said nothing about radiation. The news releases 
said nothing about special tests that pathologists can perform on 
the cancerous tissue removed to determine special characteristics 
of its basic molecular makeup. Strawberry's prognosis could be slightly 
better depending on the findings from such tests, Hamilton said. Arnold 
said that for Strawberry ``it was better to have cancerous cells in 
one node instead of five or six.'' Arnold said that while he understood 
that people wanted Strawberry to have a favorable prognosis, he suspected 
``it is not as good as they said.'' The news releases said Strawberry 
is expected to take adjuvant chemotherapy. It is aimed at destroying 
any cancer cells that doctors could not see in the operation but that 
might remain in his body. A few years ago, doctors began prescribing 
adjuvant therapy for patients with type C or III colon cancers because 
that group has shown substantial benefit, Hamilton and Cohen said. 
A current standard course of adjuvant chemotherapy for colon cancer 
includes a six-month course of two drugs: 5-fluorouracil and leucovorin 
for six months. Cohen of Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center said 
that the drugs could be taken either once a week, or for four or five 
consecutive days once a month. Many people tolerate adjuvant chemotherapy 
with fewer unwanted side-effects than standard chemotherapy. But some 
do not, and the symptoms usually include nausea, vomiting and diarrhea. 
The symptoms can often be moderated by reducing the amount of the 
drugs. Strength usually is regained quickly after the therapy is stopped, 
Cohen said. If Strawberry suffers such symptoms, they might be alleviated 
by reducing the amount of the drugs. Strawberry's chemotherapy could 
be expected to begin in November. If Strawberry begins chemotherapy 
next month and suffers symptoms from it, it is questionable whether 
he would play in spring training. The Baltimore Orioles' Eric Davis, 
who grew up with Strawberry in Los Angeles, underwent surgery for 
colon cancer last year and came back to play for the Baltimore Orioles 
three months later, while still undergoing weekly chemotherapy treatments. 
If colon cancer recurs, it is generally within the first five years 
of diagnosis, and usually within the first three years. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>