<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981011.0098 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Despite test marketing in two cities that did not appear to be a runaway 
success, the national rollout is underway for Divx, a disk-based recorded 
movie format intended to compete with rental videocassettes and the 
emerging DVD digital disk format. At the same time, industry rivals 
have gone on the counterattack with newspaper ads in several major 
cities that extol DVD while obliquely panning Divx _ a DVD hybrid 
that allows viewing of a recorded film only for a limited time, unless 
buyers pay additional fees. The ads were placed by video-rental dealers 
and Warner Home Video, a major producer of DVDs that also holds a 
financial stake in the format. In June, Circuit City Stores Inc., 
the consumer-electronics retailer that is the primary backer of Divx, 
began selling players for the disks and a few dozen Divx recorded 
movies in San Francisco and Richmond, Va. The consumer appeal of the 
format is supposed to be that the disk does not need to be returned 
after viewing, since it simply will not play after an initial 48-hour 
period unless the consumer pays additional fees via a telephone line 
to have it reactivated. ``Nearly everyone knows the hassles of renting 
movies: late fees, rewind charges and not being able to get new releases 
because they are already rented,'' the company's promotional material 
says. Through the summer, Circuit City solicited additional investors 
to help pay for the national debut of the format, since the start-up 
costs of Divx have been a heavy drag on the company's bottom line. 
Circuit City has a two-thirds stake in Divx, and a Los Angeles law 
firm holds the other third. No other investors were found, suggesting 
that potential investors had not been overly impressed with the test-market 
results. In a conference call with financial analysts last month, 
Richard Sharp, chief executive of Circuit City, said the company had 
seen ``reasonable results out of our two launch markets.'' Nonetheless, 
the company said it was forced to scale back its national promotional 
budget to $60 million from $100 million. A Circuit City spokesman 
said the company was planning ``a soft national launch'' for Divx, 
primarily using newspaper ads. In the test-market cities, the company 
aired several television ads. Manufacturers of regular DVDs, the CD-size 
digital disks that hold a feature-length movie, see Divx as a grave 
threat. So do operators of videocassette rental and sales shops. The 
manufacturers say they are afraid the differing formats will confuse 
consumers and take sales away from them. Videotape dealers worry that 
Divx owners will bypass their stores to buy Divx disks elsewhere. 
None of the dealers have agreed to sell Divx disks, meaning that Divx 
owners have to go to a Circuit City location or a handful of other 
consumer-electronics stores to buy Divx movies. Time Warner, which 
owns Warner Home Video, has been encouraging video dealers to rent 
DVDs alongside videotapes, to promote the format and act as a counter 
to Divx. Until recently DVDs have been available only for sale, at 
a price of about $25. But Time Warner reported last week that 5,000 
of the nation's 20,000 video dealers nationwide are now stocking rental 
DVDs. Every movie studio but one, Dreamworks, issues movies in the 
DVD format. Most of the studios, though not all of them, also issue 
Divx disks. Not surprisingly, Warner Home Video is not cooperating 
with Divx; nor are Sony's studios. Sony is another stakeholder in 
DVD. Circuit City offered all of the studios large cash advances to 
join the Divx fold. Time Warner and the software dealers ran their 
ads in The New York Times, as well in Los Angeles, San Francisco and 
Chicago newspapers. ``Don't let anyone feed you a line,'' the ad declared 
at the top, just above a photo of hand holding the dangling end of 
a telephone line. (Divx players must be connected to phone lines so 
the company can activate the disk for additional viewings and keep 
track of the pay-per-view charges.) The ad never mentioned Divx by 
name, but it did list all the things that the open-format DVD offers 
that Divx does not, including: ``No phone hookup necessary; no extra 
charge for repeated play; wide-screen picture with exclusive behind 
the scenes footage.'' To anyone unfamiliar with the DVD-Divx battle, 
the ad may have seemed obscure. By the end of this month, Circuit 
City said, Divx players and disks will be available in 800 consumer-electronics 
retail stores nationwide. Divx players, costing about $100 more than 
conventional DVD players, are being manufactured by three companies: 
Zenith Electronics; Panasonic, a unit of Matsushita Electric Industrial, 
and Thomson. These companies are promoting their players, but all 
of them also sell regular DVD players. As a result, the manufacturers 
have not been outspoken Divx proponents. About 150 movies are available 
in the format, compared to more than 2,000 for regular DVD. A Divx 
disk costs $4.49, allowing a 48-hour viewing period. Extending the 
period requires paying an additional fee of about $3.50. In most locations, 
a regular DVD is being rented for two nights at $2.99. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>