<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981011.0133 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In his 31 years as president of the Brooklyn Academy of Music, Harvey 
Lichtenstein infused an institution founded during the Civil War with 
so much of his own vision that it was almost as if he created the 
place. So one question lingered after last week's announcement that 
he would step down next summer from an organization he transformed 
from an artistic wreck to an international showcase: How do you replace 
a legend? The short answer in this case is that it should be easier 
than the history of other institutions might suggest. Lichtenstein 
handed over power to two longtime collaborators in an orderly, structured 
transition that seemed a model of smart organization building. But 
the longer answer is more complicated. When an institution has been 
dominated by and identified with one person for decades, succession 
can be full of perils even in the best circumstances. And if the Brooklyn 
Academy makes a smooth transition from Lichtenstein's era to its next 
one, Lichtenstein will have pulled off a final and extremely difficult 
coup _ building an organization that can move along just fine without 
him. The academy announced on Thursday that Lichtenstein, who assumed 
his post in 1967, would step down as president and executive producer 
on July 1. The academy's executive vice president, Karen Brooks Hopkins, 
will succeed him as president, in charge of finances, fund raising 
and operations. The producing director, Joseph Melillo, will become 
the new executive producer, in charge of the artistic side. Artists 
and arts executives familiar with all three say it is an ideal situation 
because the three have worked together for years, know the organization's 
board and share a common vision for what the Brooklyn Academy of Music 
should be. ``You're talking about three people who have worked together 
for a very long time, who've been together so long they're almost 
a family,'' said Nathan Leventhal, president of Lincoln Center. ``I 
assume it will be as smooth a situation as you could possibly imagine. 
It looks like a model for a sensible and efficient transition. It 
does not often work out that way.'' In fact, other arts institutions 
are full of models for transitions that proved to be much rockier. 
The figure Lichtenstein is most often compared to is Joseph Papp, 
who directed the New York Shakespeare Festival for 37 years, during 
which he became synonymous with it. Papp, ill with cancer, apparently 
offered the job of succeeding him to at least four people from outside 
the organization before naming JoAnne Akalaitis as festival head in 
1991, shortly before his death. Unable to emerge from his shadow and 
widely seen as lacking the personal charisma and forcefulness he brought 
to the job, she was replaced by George Wolfe after 20 months. Other 
dominant figures have also been difficult to replace. Fred Sherry 
became artistic director of the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center 
in 1988, succeeding Charles Wadsworth, who founded the society in 
1969. His moves to bring in newer musicians and more contemporary 
music rankled some subscribers, subscription sales fell and he stepped 
down after the 1991-92 season. Don Scardino in 1991 replaced Andre 
Bishop, who had headed the Playwrights Horizons nonprofit theater 
for 17 years. He was soon accused of failing to come up with hits 
as often as Bishop, whose achievements included ``Driving Miss Daisy,'' 
``The Heidi Chronicles'' and ``Sunday in the Park With George.'' He 
left ``by mutual agreement'' in 1995 after his contract expired. The 
situation at the Brooklyn Academy is different because of the length 
of time the three have worked together and the power-sharing management 
structure Lichtenstein leaves behind. Many artists associated with 
the academy have working relationships with Melillo comparable to 
the ones they have had with Lichtenstein. ``I've known Joe as long 
as I've known Harvey,'' choreographer Mark Morris said of Melillo. 
Morris' Dance Group has appeared at the academy since the early 1980s. 
``They don't have identical tastes, but they have compatible esthetics. 
I can't see any problems. I'd just tell them to keep up the good work 
and don't get scared.'' But that does not mean the transition is without 
perils, particularly at an venture that has always steered a risky 
course, with less margin for failure than some wealthier, more established 
organizations. All three say Lichtenstein will be able to pass on 
the authority to run the academy and still remain as a consultant. 
``I have his verbal commitment he will not meddle with our tenure,'' 
Melillo said. ``And he's just not the kind of person who would work 
against you. I don't expect a left hook.'' But it is unusual for a 
figure as powerful and forceful as Lichtenstein to stay on. And while 
the academy would surely benefit from his presence in two major projects 
_ its new film program and its ambitious plans to redevelop the surrounding 
neighborhood _ it could make it difficult for his successors to put 
their stamp on the organization. In addition, Lichtenstein has left 
behind a management structure that artfully uses the talents of Ms. 
Hopkins and Melillo. Though Ms. Hopkins has the title of president, 
the two are described as having equal power, both reporting to the 
board. But other arts figures say a joint leadership agreement can 
be hard to pull off. In the past, when artistic and financial concerns 
clashed, Lichtenstein was a final, magisterial arbiter. Now Ms. Hopkins 
and Melillo will have to thrash out disagreements between them. The 
academy's leadership has taken knotty, high-risk situations to its 
board in the past, and it will surely do so again. But having two 
heads instead of one responsible for administrative decisions can 
add complications. ``Becoming two people instead of one is difficult 
automatically,'' Morris said. ``I don't foresee it getting ugly in 
any way, but it's something they'll have to work out.'' There is another 
risk that is almost inevitable. Lichtenstein revitalized the academy 
by reinventing it as a haven for experimental music, art, opera and 
dance. Since then, institutions like the Joyce Theater and programs 
like the Lincoln Center Festival have been offering in Manhattan the 
kind of fare associated with the academy, making its mission somewhat 
less singular and distinctive. Ms. Hopkins and Melillo can stay the 
course and risk being seen as mere keepers of the flame, or they can 
change course and run the risk of being seen as people who tried to 
fix something that wasn't broken. In either case, it can be riskier 
to inherit a successful enterprise than a flagging one. Ms. Hopkins 
stressed that most of the issues that would arise were ones that she, 
Lichtenstein and Melillo have dealt with before. And she said she 
and Melillo were acutely aware of the need to respect what they have 
helped build, while pushing it in new directions. Melillo, for instance, 
is interested in a more international and far-flung approach to seeking 
adventurous art and in younger artists working with new technology. 
And, if only because he is 18 years younger than Lichtenstein, he 
represents a generation with very different experiences. But after 
acting as Lichtenstein's artistic alter ego since 1983, he is not 
expected to lurch in wildly unexpected new directions. ``Obviously, 
Joe and I love this place,'' Ms. Hopkins said. ``So we want to both 
keep a good thing going and put our imprint on it. We feel that the 
BAM we've built is the right BAM, but we also know we have to keep 
it fluid and free, so it can keep on reinventing itself. We do what 
we do with great deference to what's gone on before. But anyone who 
thinks Joe and I will just be caretakers doesn't understand our role 
here.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>