<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981011.0145 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Slender birch trees, their leaves turning gold and orange in the early 
autumn air, line roads leading to this humble, fraying town about 
50 miles southeast of Moscow. But closer to Voskresensk, the fresh 
country air turns acrid with the noxious odor of fumes belched from 
smokestacks atop one of Russia's largest fertilizer plants. Menatep, 
a Moscow bank that is now insolvent, bought the decrepit plant in 
1995 and was supposed to modernize it, bringing it into the vanguard 
of Russia's march into modern capitalism. But little has changed. 
``I've worked here a long time, and it's never gotten better, no matter 
who owns it,'' said Vasily Yevdokimov, 70, a machinist who has worked 
at the plant, now know as Voskresenskiye Joint Stock Co., for 50 years. 
``They haven't spent anything renovating this factory.'' There are 
legions of workers across Russia who can make the same claim. When 
Russia began a vast selloff of formerly state-owned companies three 
years ago, Russian banks were among the biggest buyers. Today, there 
is little evidence to suggest that banks did anything other than use 
the factories to fill their own coffers. Indeed, many in Russia suspect 
that more money was taken out of the companies than was ever put in. 
Modernizing Russia's antiquated industrial base is in fact a Herculean 
task. Many factories are too outmoded and have long since passed the 
point of becoming profitable. And decades of state subsidies for workers 
and their families in factory towns cannot be undone without creating 
wrenching social problems. Even so, Russian banks accepted these challenges 
when they began buying the factories, and Voskresensk, a town of about 
150,000, is one example of the human impact of this squandered opportunity. 
``Sometimes I visit my friends working there, and it's gotten much 
worse since I left,'' said Alexander Devyatkin, who worked at the 
fertilizer plant from 1994 to 1996 and is now a fireman. ``The air 
was very polluted and it was very hard to breathe. Acid was everywhere. 
I think you make a lot of money if you own the factory but not if 
you work there.'' Menatep, and Mikhail Khodorkovsky, chairman of Rosprom, 
the holding company that controls the bank, declined repeated requests 
for an interview. The management of the fertilizer plant refused requests 
for a tour. Voskresensk is a well-known hockey town, and residents 
proudly remind visitors that Igor Larionov left here to become a star 
center for the Detroit Red Wings. When Menatep bought the fertilizer 
plant, it also got the title to Khimik, the local hockey team. An 
outwardly impressive hockey stadium dominates the center of town and 
residents' social calendars. But Khimik is struggling from a lack 
of funds. Inside the hockey stadium, above large, colorful murals 
depicting the team in action, tiles are peeling away from the ceiling 
and pockmarks are visible in parts of the roof. A regional governor 
recently took over the team, promising, residents said, to spend more 
money on it. ``This is the only thing in town that we take pride in,'' 
said Vladimir Vasilyev, the hockey team's coach. ``There is nothing 
to be proud of about the chemical plant. The most important thing 
in Russia now is to be paid, and the plant is hardly paying people 
anything.'' Yevdokimov, the machinist, said that the average salary 
at the fertilizer factory is the equivalent of about $100 a month, 
although he said he is paid about $47 a month. Or at least that was 
what he was once paid. Yevdokimov said his wages are now a month overdue. 
He also said that about 50 percent of the plant's 5,000 workers had 
been laid off since Russia's economic crisis began in mid-August, 
a much larger number than the town's elders acknowledge. Yevgeny Simonov, 
Voskresensk's mayor, said that only about 100 people had been laid 
off from the plant. ``People are worried, but at the same time I'm 
an optimist,'' he said brightly. Simonov enthusiastically distributes 
a brochure published by the fertilizer plant. The leaflet shares the 
mayor's rosy outlook, noting that the factory houses ``remarkable 
imported equipment and state-of-the-art technologies.'' Yet while 
Simonov notes that a French company took over a nearby concrete factory 
and made great strides modernizing it, he is hard pressed to offer 
comparable examples of how the Voskresenskiye plant has been upgraded. 
Indeed, Simonov eventually became angered by repeated requests for 
a tour of the plant and hustled visitors out of his office. But walks 
around the outside of the sprawling factory, and interviews with residents 
of Voskresensk, indicate that there is very little that is state of 
the art about the plant. Large parts of its superstructure are rusting 
and some heavy equipment visible through the gates looks as if it 
has been idle for a long time. ``Things are very hard because of the 
ruble's collapse, and now less people are working at the factory,'' 
said Yevgeny Ovsyankin, another fireman who knows workers at the plant. 
``It is not an up-to-date factory. It has lots of problems.'' Now, 
with most of the country's largest banks insolvent and the overall 
economy in tatters, it is unlikely that Russia will have the resources 
it needs to do anything with its sagging factories and the towns they 
anchor. Russians have a well-known ability to endure both disappointment 
and hardship, and few of them seem surprised that the country's factories 
were poorly served by the banks that still own them. After all, many 
Russians note, there is very little they can do about it anyway. ``Menatep 
was supposed to invest money in the plant, but they took money out 
of it,'' said Vladimir Petrov, who sells construction materials in 
Voskresensk. ``But what can we do? We can't force them to give the 
money back.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>