<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981011.0227 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As if Yankees players did not face enough pressure playing for George 
Steinbrenner, a deal to sell the team to Cablevision Systems could 
bring Steinbrenner more money depending on how the Yankees fare in 
the post-season. A baseball official familiar with Steinbrenner's 
negotiations with Cablevision said Sunday that the company's offer 
is based on the Yankees' performance. ``There's so much for the division 
series, so much for the league series, so much for the World Series,'' 
said the official. ``It's not cumulative. There's a certain amount 
for each level.'' Steinbrenner, without offering specifics, acknowledged 
the existence of different levels of payment in the offer Cablevision 
has made but said: ``It's based on having a deal, and I don't have 
a deal. We don't have any agreement. In the future that may be in 
there, but it's not in there for this year unless we have a deal, 
and we don't have a deal.'' Another baseball official who knew about 
the outline of the multiple-tiered offer said he had heard the price 
could go from $500 million to $650 million depending on how the Yankees 
did in the post-season. Another official said he had heard the figures 
could go from $600 million to $900 million. The status of the talks 
between Steinbrenner and Cablevision, the Long Island-based company 
that owns Madison Square Garden, has been the source of intense speculation. 
One person close to the Yankee organization said he had been told 
the deal was complete and would be announced after the World Series, 
but none of the officials who discussed the sale prices knew whether 
the deal was that far along, and Steinbrenner flatly denied it. Complete 
or not, a sale now seems more likely than ever, as hard as that might 
be to believe for people who know Steinbrenner's passion for the Yankees. 
Everyone who discussed it Sunday said the sale appeared to be inevitable; 
they all spoke on condition of anonymity. It appeared that a deal 
would provide for Steinbrenner to continue running the team. One of 
the officials who discussed the sales figures said the deal was structured 
for the 68-year-old Steinbrenner to run the team for three years. 
Another official said he understood that the sale had not been completed 
but that a tentative understanding about a procedure involving Steinbrenner 
had been reached. A corporate executive who knows both Steinbrenner 
and Charles F. Dolan, the head of Cablevision, said there was no question 
they had been working on a deal. Dolan, the executive said, would 
have no trouble letting Steinbrenner run the team and would not interfere 
with him in that role. A team that is doing well is always more attractive 
than a loser and understandably commands a higher price, but a multiple-tiered 
purchase price would be novel in the sports world. Dolan is willing 
to pay more for a league or World Series champion because it will 
be a more attractive television commodity. Cablevision, through its 
purchase of the MSG Network, has rights to the Yankees for two more 
seasons. If the Yankees' post-season success created higher ratings 
for their cablecasts on MSG, Cablevision could command higher rates 
for commercials. Buying the Yankees makes sense for Cablevision because 
it would give the company television rights to the team as long as 
it was the owner. The existing contract pays the Yankees $486 million 
for 12 years, and Dolan might figure that if he would have to pay 
more than that in a new agreement, he might as well buy the team, 
not just television rights. Although Steinbrenner has rejected offers 
for the Yankees over the years, it makes sense for him to sell the 
team now, considering his age. He has acknowledged that neither of 
his sons, Henry and Harold, nor his son-in-law, Steve Swindal, has 
expressed an interest in owning the team. Henry Steinbrenner, who 
is known as Hank, was briefly involved in the Yankee operation about 
a dozen years ago. Harold Steinbrenner and Swindal are general partners 
of the Yankees but have played no visible role in the operation of 
the club. Steinbrenner has been the principal owner for 26 seasons. 
When he led a group that bought the Yankees for $10 million in 1973, 
he owned less than a majority, but he and family members now own 60 
percent. The limited partners reportedly have heard from Steinbrenner 
about a possible sale, but he is also said to have warned them not 
to talk to anyone about it. One person close to the Yankees said he 
understood that most of the limited partners supported the idea of 
a sale. However, one limited partner who was reached Sunday said he 
had not heard anything from Steinbrenner and did not know the status 
of a possible sale. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>