<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981011.0202 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Jets' worst turnover performance in the Bill Parcells 
regime sent Glenn Foley to the bench and handed the Rams a 30-10 victory 
Sunday. The loss ended a modest two-game winning streak. And unless 
Parcells is able to stanch the speculation, the defeat could create 
a week of quarterback uncertainty as the Jets (2-3) prepare to face 
the New England Patriots (4-1) next Monday night in Foxboro, Mass. 
The Rams benefited from five turnovers, all of them leading to points 
_ 27 from three touchdowns and a pair of field goals. The Jets were 
without Curtis Martin, the running back who had starred in consecutive 
victories with 100-yard performances, with Vinny Testaverde at quarterback. 
While Foley was able to return on Sunday from a rib injury, Martin 
remained back in New York with a thigh bruise. Leon Johnson had his 
usual versatile offensive day, including 56 yards on 13 carries. But 
the Jets couldn't get the ball often enough. By the time Parcells 
had decided to bench Foley late in the third quarter, Foley had tossed 
two interceptions, fumbled once and completed only 5 of 15 passes 
for 76 yards. The Jets got only a field goal during his two-plus quarters. 
Once again Foley failed to execute a start-to-finish victory. He is 
now 1-7 as a starting quarterback. The triumph gave the Rams (2-3) 
to their first home victory after eight straight losses dating to 
last season. Amp Lee, playing a prominent role at running back because 
of injuries to other players, ran for two touchdowns, St. Louis played 
turnover-free ball and its quarterback, Tony Banks was 18 for 24 for 
171 yards and a touchdown with 15-straight completions in one stretch. 
Lee, normally the Rams' third-down back, got every-down status after 
Robert Holcombe strained his Achilles' tendon and Jerald Moore hurt 
his shoulder, even though both eventually returned. Lee finished with 
53 yards on 9 carries, plus 6 catches for 62 yards. The Jets, the 
league's third-best yardage producers coming in to the game, couldn't 
generate much of anything after losing the ball three times in the 
first half. The Rams gained a 17-3 lead, with all their scores coming 
following Jets' turnovers. Until those moments, the crowd at Trans 
World Dome made little noise. But sound is magnified here, especially 
when cannons reverberate after a Rams' score. There wasn't much noise 
when the Jets opened the scoring on John Hall's 54-yard field goal 
in the first quarter. Even that shot wasn't solely a result of the 
Jets' offense. The Jets were going to punt on fourth down, but benefited 
from an offside penalty that moved the ball 5 yards closer. From there, 
Hall kicked the longest field goal anyone has ever kicked against 
the Rams franchise. In his two-season career Hall has attempted six 
field goals from the 50 to the 59 and has converted five of them. 
But he never got another chance the rest of the half, from any distance. 
Later in the quarter, Foley was hit by Todd Lyght at the Jets' 14, 
fumbled and lost the ball to Mike Jones. Foley missed a tackle, and 
Jones was stopped at the Jets' 7 by Johnson. Banks soon hit Derrick 
Harris on a 7-yard scoring pass. Foley got the Jets back down to the 
St. Louis 27. He was looking for Wayne Chrebet in the end zone, but 
Kevin Carter tipped the pass and it was picked off by Eric Hill. A 
face-mask penalty by Chrebet was tacked on. The turnover led to a 
52-yard field goal by Jeff Wilkins. Even a positive moment for the 
Jets was turned into a negative before halftime. Banks, running, was 
hit and fumbled. Mo Lewis retrieved it. He did not appear to have 
solid possession, though. He attempted to run, was hit and lost the 
ball on the Rams' 39. From there St. Louis began a drive that ended 
with Lee's 1-yard scoring run. The Rams finally got points they created 
on their own with a third-quarter drive that led to a 30-yard Wilkins 
field goal and a 20-3 lead. Within minutes, though, another interception 
of Foley, by Dexter McCleon, positioned yet another score _ and signaled 
the end, for Sunday at any rate, of Foley. The Rams turned that interception 
into a 34-yard field goal and a 23-3 edge. These were hardly the Jets 
of the previous two games, when Martin generated 100-yard rushing 
performances and Testaverde benefited by having defenses not knowing 
whether to be aggressive or passive. Testaverde, who came in late 
in the third quarter, didn't do much better, going 9 of 18 for 96 
yards and another big turnover. Desperate to get back into the game 
on his first drive, the Jets tried a pitch back, Johnson to Testaverde. 
But before the quarterback could find a receiver he was hit by two 
Rams and lost the ball, which was recovered by D'Marco Farr, who returned 
it 16 yards to the Jets' 11. This, one, too, was converted into a 
score as Lee eventually went over from 2 yards out early in the final 
quarter. But on the following kickoff, Glenn returned the ball 55 
yards, giving the Jets a rare glimpse of life in Rams' territory. 
Testaverde (9 for 18 for 96 yards) and Johnson took advantage of the 
look as they teamed up on a 16-yard touchdown pass. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>