<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981011.0118 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Microsoft's legal department could keep a travel agent fully occupied 
these days. In addition to dispatching lawyers from Redmond, Wash., 
to federal court in Washington, D.C., the company is currently defending 
itself against lawsuits filed by software companies in San Jose, Calif., 
Salt Lake City and Bridgeport, Conn. Although Microsoft has said these 
three other suits are without merit, it has so far been notably unsuccessful 
in its efforts to have them dismissed or delayed _ or to have a change 
of venue to the presumably less burdensome and friendlier environs 
of Redmond. And the possibility exists that any evidence dug up in 
these corporate suits could reinforce the government's case. Whatever 
the differences among the three competitor suits, all make the same 
contention that lies at the heart of the federal-state antitrust suit 
against Microsoft: They argue that the company has tried to use its 
dominance to forestall competition. The oldest of these three pending 
suits was filed in July 1996 by Caldera Inc., of Orem, Utah, which 
sells DR-DOS, a competitor to Microsoft's MS-DOS, the operating system 
underlying Windows. The next, filed in October 1997, came from Sun 
Microsystems Inc., of Palo Alto, Calif., the creator of Java, a programming 
language. The most recent, filed in August, was brought by Bristol 
Technology Inc., of Danbury, Conn., which makes software tools that 
enable programs originally written to run on Windows to also run on 
other operating systems. Like any large corporation, Microsoft over 
the years has been the subject of many legal actions. It has won some 
of these _ notably in 1992, after years in court, when a judge ruled 
against Apple Computer Inc.'s claim that Microsoft's Windows software 
infringed on Macintosh copyrights. The software giant has lost some 
_ like tiny Stac Electronics Inc.'s 1994 claim for patent infringement, 
which resulted in Microsoft's settling the matter by buying a majority 
interest in Stac. And Microsoft has settled others, most recently, 
for undisclosed terms, a licensing dispute with AT&AMP;T over access 
to the programming code underlying Microsoft's Windows NT software. 
But it is the pending the suits by Caldera, Sun and Bristol that are 
most noteworthy right now because of their parallels with the federal-state 
antitrust case. Caldera filed its antitrust suit against Microsoft 
on July 24, 1996, the same day it completed the acquisition of the 
DR-DOS product from Novell Inc. (Novell had acquired the program's 
creator, Digital Research Inc., in 1991.) Although DR-DOS essentially 
duplicated the functions of MS-DOS, Microsoft could never challenge 
the product on legal grounds because MS-DOS itself was derived from 
CPM, an older operating system created by Digital Research. Any chance 
for competition in desktop computing between MS-DOS and DR-DOS is 
now history. But Caldera officials see a market opportunity for DR-DOS 
in small hand-held devices, where their product competes with Microsoft's 
version of Windows for consumer-electronics products, called Windows 
CE. And Caldera's suit alleges that Microsoft used its market power 
to thwart sales of DR-DOS through unfair pricing practices and license 
agreements, as well as false statements and ``vaporware'' announcements 
suggesting that improved versions of MS-DOS were forthcoming. ``We 
felt as a smaller company we were in a unique position to bring the 
lawsuit forward,'' said Bryan Sparks, chief executive of Caldera, 
which is majority owned by Raymond J. Noorda, former head of Novell. 
``We weren't beholden to Microsoft for anything,'' Sparks said, ``so 
if they were to retaliate, they couldn't do much.'' One of the more 
striking claims to come from Caldera's suit is the testimony leaked 
to the news media that is said to have been given in the deposition 
of Stefanie Reichel, a former Microsoft account manager in Germany. 
According to lawyers familiar with her testimony, Ms. Reichel's deposition 
alluded to the destruction and withholding of evidence that would 
have been relevant to the Justice Department's previous investigation 
of Microsoft, which the company settled in 1995. At a hearing in Salt 
Lake City on Sept. 28, Microsoft requested that Caldera be served 
with a contempt order, claiming it was illegally sharing confidential 
information safeguarded by protective order. But U.S. District Judge 
Ronald Boyce granted Caldera the right to attempt to substantiate 
Ms. Reichel's testimony. The judge also denied Microsoft's request 
for a 120-day delay of the trial, which is scheduled to begin next 
June. Microsoft contends that MS-DOS has been totally subsumed by 
the Windows 95 and Windows 98 operating systems and that any competitive 
issues with DR-DOS were covered in the 1995 Justice Department settlement. 
But Caldera officials assert that MS-DOS is alive and well and running 
under Windows 95 and 98 _ just as it did under earlier versions of 
Windows. ``We can run Windows 95 or 98 on top of DR-DOS; they are 
absolutely separable,'' Sparks said. ``Windows 95 is essentially a 
walking antitrust violation because it ties together two products 
with no benefit to the consumer.'' nn In the case of Sun Microsystems, 
which filed its suit on Oct. 7, 1997, the issue is breach of contract 
and false advertising, not antitrust. And yet, this suit, too, accuses 
Microsoft of anti-competitive behavior. Sun's suit, filed just two 
weeks before the Justice Department set in motion the legal events 
leading to the impending government antitrust trial, stems from a 
license Sun granted to Microsoft in 1996 to use and distribute Java 
_ a Sun technology and programming language for use on the Internet. 
One of the key features of Java is that programs written with it are 
supposed to work with any operating system. But Microsoft made modifications 
to the Java code that allows its version of Java to work only with 
Windows computers. In Sun's view, this Windows tailoring negates the 
cross-platform purpose of Java and violates the terms of Microsoft's 
license. Last March in San Jose, U.S. Judge Ronald Whyte made an interim 
ruling in Sun's favor, issuing a preliminary injunction that forbids 
Microsoft from using a Java-compatible logo on its products. Sun is 
now seeking to block all Microsoft shipments of Java-based products 
that do not meet its compatibility tests. At a hearing in San Jose 
on Sept. 10, Sun's attorney, Lloyd ``Rusty'' Day, argued that Microsoft 
wanted ``to kill cross-platform Java and grow the polluted Java market'' 
by encouraging software developers to abandon its cross-platform ability. 
Day focused his remarks on a Microsoft Java product called VJ (plus 
plus) 6.0, a new software ``tool kit'' for creating Java-based programs. 
VJ (plus plus) 6.0, he said, forces outside software developers to 
create Java programs that are ``locked into the products that Microsoft 
alone distributes.'' But Microsoft's lawyer, Karl Quackenbush, said 
the case was fundamentally about a contract, in which he said ``Microsoft 
got broad rights to modify, adapt, create, derivative works of the 
technology.'' Quackenbush said the features added to VJ (plus plus) 
6.0 did not violate the licensing agreement because software developers 
were free to turn them off if they wished and to create Sun-standard 
Java programs with the product. ``Maybe Sun wishes Microsoft would 
not have gone forward and made these enhancements,'' he said. ``That 
doesn't mean it's a breach of contract.'' The most recent suit alleging 
anti-competitive behavior against Microsoft came from Bristol, which 
filed on Aug. 18. The suit contends that Microsoft injured Bristol 
and the rest of the software industry through ``predatory'' control 
of the Windows application programming interfaces _ the bits of codes 
that outside programmers use to assure that their products will work 
properly with the Windows operating system. At issue is Bristol's 
product Wind/U, a program that lets Windows programs run on computers 
that use the Unix operating system. Bristol executives said they had 
initially developed Wind/U without access to Microsoft application 
programming code, but modified it after Microsoft granted Bristol 
a license in 1994. Although Microsoft then publicly endorsed Bristol's 
products for several years, Bristol said Microsoft was now refusing 
to update the license to cover Microsoft Windows NT 4.0, Windows NT 
5.0 and subsequent releases _ at least not under terms that Bristol 
says are technically or economically viable. ``I think that what happened 
was NT got this big share of the market, then Microsoft said now that 
we've got this foothold we no longer want people to run Windows applications 
on Unix,'' said Keith Blackwell, Bristol's president and chief executive. 
Microsoft, however, says that Bristol's private antitrust suit, like 
the government's case, is groundless. Jim Cullinan, a Microsoft spokesman, 
said Bristol had sought to license Windows NT 4.0 and 5.0 at the same 
terms as it paid for NT 3.0, even though the later programs are considerably 
larger. ``We thought negotiations were ongoing until Bristol filed 
this suit,'' Cullinan said, adding that Bristol's primary competitor, 
Mainsoft Inc., ``has signed a contract accepting terms very similar 
to what we offered Bristol.'' Bristol seeks an injunction, pending 
a trial, that would prevent Microsoft from blocking Bristol's access 
to Windows source code. A hearing in Bridgeport is scheduled for this 
Wednesday; Microsoft's trial is set to begin in Washington next Monday. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>