<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981011.0168 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Five months ago, people here triumphantly celebrated in the streets 
when the Hindu nationalist-led government conducted nuclear tests. 
In recent days, thousands of Delhiites have again poured into the 
streets, but this time they are cursing the very same political party. 
The issue that angers them and that threatens to topple Hindu nationalist 
state governments in Delhi and Rajasthan in November elections has 
nothing to do with nuclear politics and everything to do with the 
stomachs and tastebuds of voters. It is the price of the lowly onion 
_ an essential ingredient of the flavor base, or masala, of almost 
every dish cooked here _ which on some days has touched a record 60 
rupees a kilo, or about $1.45 for 2.2 pounds, a price that is seven 
times higher than it was this time last year. In a desperate effort 
to appease angry voters, the state and national governments, both 
headed by the Bharatiya Janata Party, are selling a limited supply 
of onions in New Delhi from flatbed trucks and government-run cooperative 
stores for just 10 rupees, or about 25 cents, a kilo. The national 
government also decided on Thursday to import 10,000 tons of onions 
from the Middle East and to suspend exports temporarily. But shoppers 
on long lines waiting to buy the subsidized onions are still spitting 
mad. Most of the hundreds of people who mob each truck and store earn 
only a few dollars a day. Often, they have to wait two, four, even 
six hours in the onion lines to save $2 on their 2 kilo allotment, 
about a week's supply for a typical family _ and sometimes the onions 
sell out before they get to the head of the line. ``I'm sweating here 
just to buy the bloody onions and I didn't even get any,'' said Gursharn 
Kaur, a 56-year-old housewife whose husband works in a bottle cap 
factory, as the truck pulled away. ``The prime minister has eaten 
them all.'' People are so restive and angry that on Thursday the city 
began sending police escorts to guard each truck. At one site, policemen 
waved their lathis _ thick bamboo sticks _ at the crowd that surged 
to the front of the line, even as they unloaded their own private 
stores of onions from the truck into a police jeep. The price of onions, 
a staple food of all classes, castes and religions, has an almost 
mystical political significance here. Indira Gandhi, defeated after 
she suspended democracy from 1975 to 1977, swept back into power in 
1980 by turning the price of onions into a populist rallying cry. 
Waving garlands of onions at political gatherings, she assailed the 
government for its failure to control prices. This year, it is not 
just the price of onions that is up, but also that of cauliflower, 
peas, coriander, chilies and other vegetables. An unusually hot summer 
and late monsoon rains have damaged harvests and contributed to shortages. 
The state and national governments here have responded with the heavily 
subsidized onions, which newspapers are calling a sop to the voters. 
Many economists consider the move a gimmick that could artificially 
lower the price of onions, discouraging farmers from planting more 
of the crop next season. But the politicians know their audience. 
Surveys over the years have consistently shown that inflation is the 
most important issue for voters, a sort of proxy measure of economic 
well-being in a country where money is the scarcest commodity for 
most people. ``Onions are a metaphor for the world turned upside down,'' 
said Yogendra Yadav, a political scientist at the Center for the Study 
of Developing Societies, a research institution in New Delhi. ``They 
become a symbol of what is happening to the basic things of life.'' 
The November elections are the first to take place since the Bharatiya 
Janata Party came to power in March in New Delhi and Indira Gandhi's 
daughter-in-law, Sonia, became president of the opposition Congress 
Party. The Hindu nationalists face tough races in the contested elections 
in both Delhi and Rajasthan, the states where they hold power _ two 
of the four state elections being held in November. Polls taken last 
week by the Center for Media Studies, a New Delhi-based organization 
that does random-sample surveys, show them losing decisively to the 
Congress Party in both places. The high price of vegetables, as well 
as a shortage of drinking water and electricity, weigh more heavily 
with voters than either the nuclear tests or the Hindu nationalists' 
brand of cultural politics, the poll takers found. Earlier in the 
decade, the Hindu party effectively used the crusade to build a temple 
to Lord Rama, an incarnation of the Hindu God Vishnu, on the site 
of a 15th century mosque as a vote-getting issue, but it has been 
unable to pursue that agenda now that it is in power because of resistance 
from its often cranky, demanding coalition partners. Jagjit Kaur, 
a government clerk waiting in an onion line last week, said she supported 
the nuclear tests, but would still vote against the Hindu nationalists 
this time because of the price of onions. ``How do the nuclear blasts 
affect our day-to-day life?'' she said. At a rally in Jodphur last 
weekend to launch the Hindu party's state elections in Rajasthan, 
Prime Minister Atal Behari Vajpayee boasted that the nuclear blasts 
staged in the state's Pokhran desert had raised the country's international 
prestige, but as he spoke, The Hindu newspaper reported, there was 
a rumbling in the audience about the price of onions. While the November 
elections are only for state offices, political analysts say that 
a rejection of candidates from the governing party would be a sign 
of its declining popularity, even among its core supporters, who are 
drawn from the ranks of middle class, upper-caste Hindus. The party's 
promise that it would bring effective governance has been undermined 
in New Delhi by persistent, lengthy power outages, water shortages, 
a rising crime rate and news that mustard oil, a favorite cooking 
ingredient, had been widely adulterated with oil from the seeds of 
a poppy plant, causing more than 60 people here to die of dropsy. 
Over the weekend, wholesale onion prices did come down somewhat, and 
the weather will also cool off in coming weeks, lessening the pressure 
on the city's overwhelmed power grid. ``By voting time, we will overcome 
the people's anger,'' said Mange Ram Garg, the party's president in 
New Delhi. There is a lot of it to overcome. At the Super Bazaar, 
a federal government cooperative in New Delhi, hundreds of people, 
many mothers toting small children, waited for hours in the sun on 
a recent day, sweat pooling on their upper lips and streaming down 
their faces. When lunchtime arrived, the government workers behind 
the counter pulled down the rattling metal shutter on the shop and 
took a nearly two-hour-long break while the people outside were unable 
even to go the bathroom for fear of losing their spots in line. After 
more than an hour with no onion sale, the crush of people began banging 
on the closed metal shutter. When the government cashier finally raised 
it, revealing piles of bulging burlap sacks, the maddened crowd roared 
for onions. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>