<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981011.0143 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Chicago Marathon demonstrated emphatically Sunday that the marathon 
is really two races, with the first 20 miles bearing little resemblance 
to the final 6.2 miles, when aching bodies grow exhausted and resolve 
can sag as the temperature rises. In the 26th mile, just when it looked 
as if he would have to settle for the anonymity of second or third 
place, Ondoro Osoro of Kenya weaved his way through a group of wheelchair 
racers and suddenly found himself in the lead. He had never run a 
marathon before, but once he got to the front he knew exactly what 
to do. Pulling away from the defending champion, Khalid Khannouchi 
of Morocco, Osoro won in 2 hours 6 minutes 54 seconds, the third-fastest 
marathon ever. It was also the fastest debut marathon in history and 
the fastest marathon ever run in the United States. His time was 49 
seconds off the world record of 2:06:05 set on Sept. 20 at the Berlin 
Marathon by Ronaldo da Costa of Brazil. Khannouchi, who trains in 
Ossining, N.Y., had patiently stayed with the lead pack, then made 
a break and surged into first place by running Mile 22 in 4:42, but 
he could never shake the cluster of African runners behind him. As 
the temperature rose to 60 degrees on a humid morning, Khannouchi's 
lead over Osoro was only five seconds after 25 miles, and he seemed 
to be limping and listing slightly to his left. The Kenyan darted 
past him and did not relinquish the lead. While Osoro seared through 
Mile 26 in 4:48, Khannouchi struggled through in 5:08. Khannouchi 
finished second in 2:07:19, but left the finish line on a medical 
cart. Gert Thys of South Africa took third in 2:07:43. Joseph Kahugu 
of Kenya finished fourth in 2:07:57. It was the first time four runners 
had gone under 2:08 in the same marathon. The women's race produced 
an even more startling finish as Joyce Chepchumba, 28, of Kenya made 
up a 19-second gap in the 22nd mile to overtake Colleen de Reuck of 
South Africa. Chepchumba ran Mile 22 in 5:28 to take the lead and 
began steadily drawing away to win in 2:23:57, the 15th-fastest women's 
marathon ever. De Reuck took the lead in Mile 3 and built a margin 
of 39 seconds over Chepchumba after 19 miles. But de Reuck then began 
to run heavy-legged, and when Chepchumba made her move, the South 
African had nothing in her reserve tank and finished second in 2:27:04. 
The Americans produced what has become unfailing disappointment in 
the marathon. Jerry Lawson of Jacksonville, Fla., had expected to 
break the American record of 2:09:35 and collect a $1 million bonus 
from the New Balance athletic shoe company. But Lawson aggravated 
an injury in his right hamstring muscle at Mile 4 and dropped out 
at Mile 6. The top American finisher was Rod DeHaven of Madison, Wis., 
who finished 15th in 2:13:01. Instead, the race was left to a 30-year-old 
Kenyan rookie, Osoro, who trains in Boulder, Colo., and who shocked 
the more seasoned contenders in his debut. ``It's amazing that a first-time 
marathoner ran as fast as he did,'' said Keith Brantly of Fort Lauderdale, 
Fla., a 1996 Olympian who dropped out Sunday just before the midpoint. 
``It truly blows me away.'' He added: ``It's really nice to be naive 
sometimes and run like it's a distance run and sprint at the end.'' 
Osoro's victory was worth $105,000 in prize and bonus money. The flat 
course perfectly suited his background as a track, cross-country and 
road runner. In 1991, he won a bronze medal in the African Games at 
5,000 meters. But his career had been seriously threatened on May 
30, 1995, when Osoro was involved in a head-on collision with a 12-ton 
truck in Kenya that left him unconscious briefly and hospitalized 
for two weeks. He suffered a broken arm, deep head cuts and a chest 
injury that gave him problems breathing in cold weather. It was not 
until February 1997 that Osoro began running seriously again. He set 
a world record for 10 miles on a loop course of 45 minutes 36 seconds, 
but this year, when his agent suggested that he run the Chicago Marathon, 
Osoro balked. He had never run a marathon, so he would not rate an 
appearance fee, and he decided he would not run 26.2 miles for nothing 
more than travel expenses. He reconsidered, though, and when Khannouchi 
lagged Sunday, Osoro pounced. He knew Khannouchi's speed well from 
the road-racing circuit, and his plan was to hang back then make a 
decisive move so that Khannouchi's finishing kick would be futile. 
The plan worked perfectly. ``When I do something,'' Osoro said of 
his decision to enter Chicago, ``I do it to the maximum.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>