<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981116.1830.1458 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The millennium is also very important to many Christians, who believe 
that the Bible should be taken literally. The original millennium 
is a prophecy. In revelation chapter 20 about a period of bliss at 
the second coming of jesus, when Jesus will come back, cast satan 
into a bottomless pit. There will be another battle. The good guys 
win and then comes the true last judgment. But even for the absolute 
believer, it's hard to put an exact date on the millennium without 
an exact date of what happened at the beginning. Still, here's our 
religion editor, Peggy Wehmeyer. As the year 2000 approaches, many 
Christians are filling church prophecy conferences to learn what they 
can about when the world might end. But when he comes to the earth 
a second time, people the globe around will see him. The difference 
is not for the first time people believe Jesus is coming back. What's 
different is that there are a large number of people who have a Sense 
of the imnens of the return of Jesus. There's a new fascination with 
the new testament book of revelation. It describes the end of time 
as a series of natural disasters and wars -- seven years of misery 
that will culminate in the battle of Armageddon. That's when the Bible 
says Jesus will return and triumph over satan. I think it's all going 
to happen, literally, just like it says. Kelly brown and her family, 
like many evangelicals, believe something very dramatic will happen 
first. Millions of people are going to disappear, and those are going 
to be the believers who are taken up to heaven. And the ones left 
behind are going to face all kinds of tribulation. It's the lord himself 
who comes to judge. The belief that Christians will be snatched by 
God up into heaven and spared all the pain is called, "the rapture." 
This isn't some wild idea, some fanatical extremism. This is solid 
truth from the Bible. It's being preached across the airwaves, on 
the Internet and through books that are fast becoming best-Sellers. 
This fictional series called, "left behind," is so popular, it's rivaling 
sales of a John grisham novel. Believers who looked for the second 
coming of Christ at the end of the last millennium were disappointed. 
Still, critics say this theology serves a purpose. It answers the 
great questions of life. Where do we come from and where are we going? 
It provides the greatest comfort of all, because it tells us where 
we're going, if you can be so certain to believe it. And millions 
of Americans do believe it. But many church leaders are quick to warn 
them not to focus on the year 2000, because Jesus himself said no 
one but God can know the day or hour of his coming. Peggy Wehmeyer, 
ABC News, Dallas. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>