<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981116.0473 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Israel on Monday withdraw from its promise to begin a West Bank troop 
pullback later this week, with Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu saying 
he and his Cabinet would first have to decide whether the Palestinians 
violated the peace accord. Netanyahu is upset over recent remarks 
by Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat who has renewed a pledge to declare 
independence in May and said that ``our rifle is ready'' to defend 
Jerusalem. Netanyahu called Arafat on Monday to seek clarifications, 
but was not satisfied with Arafat's responses, Israel radio said. 
Palestinian officials confirmed the phone call, but refused to discuss 
its contents. However, in an attempt to soften Arafat's words, two 
senior aides said the Palestinians were committed to the peace agreement 
and that talk about statehood in May was intended to prod Israel into 
not dragging out negotiations on a permanent peace agreement. Palestinian 
negotiator Hassan Asfour accused Netanyahu of trying to wriggle out 
of his commitments. ``I urge Mr. Netanyahu to stop trying to evade 
the agreements by using excuses,'' Asfour said. Netanyahu spokesman 
Michael Stoltz said the Cabinet would meet on Thursday to decide whether 
Arafat's statements were a breach of the agreement and whether to 
go ahead with a first troop withdrawal from 2 percent of the West 
Bank that was to be completed by Friday. Netanyahu did not refer directly 
to a possible suspension of a withdrawal. ``If they fulfill their 
part, we will fulfill our part. At this moment, there are of course 
clear demands that we will make, and they will have to fulfill them,'' 
he said. A group of 30 Jewish settlers, meanwhile, set up two mobile 
homes on a remote West Bank hill west of the Jewish settlement of 
Kedumim on Monday, a day after Israeli Foreign Minister Ariel Sharon 
encouraged settlers to seize as much land as they can before the troop 
pullback. Settler leader Daniela Weiss said the action came in direct 
response to Sharon. ``We understood that the attitude of the Israeli 
government is that he who holds the land determines policy and we 
are acting accordingly,'' Weiss told Israel radio. Both sides have 
been trading inflammatory remarks in recent days that have raised 
questions about whether the land-for-security agreement will be carried 
out on time. Despite the latest row, it appeared unlikely the agreement 
would collapse. Implementation has been held up by Israel repeatedly, 
but with some U.S. prodding Netanyahu has moved ahead. As part of 
the deal, Israel is to withdraw from 13 percent of the West Bank by 
the end of January, in exchange for a Palestinian crackdown on Islamic 
militants. U.S. officials said it was time for Israelis and Palestinians 
to cooperate. ``We have repeatedly called on both sides to refrain 
from provocative language,'' said Larry Schwartz, spokesman of the 
U.S. Embassy in Tel Aviv. On Monday afternnon, Israel's parliament 
was to begin its two-day debate of the agreement on Monday afternoon 
with a major policy speech by Netanyahu. A vote was expected Tuesday, 
with at least 90 of 120 legislators likely to support the agreement. 
Under a time table worked out Sunday night, Israel was to withdraw 
from 2 percent of the West Bank and release 250 Palestinian security 
prisoners by Friday. Sharon said Monday that Arafat was close to provoking 
Israel into walking away from the agreement. ``If the Palestinians 
keep the agreement, they will receive what was promised,'' Sharon 
told American Jewish leaders. ``If they don't keep it, they won't 
receive anything, and I think that this week, they brought the situation 
in which they will not receive very much closer,'' Sharon said. The 
Palestinians, in turn, responded angrily to Sharon's calls to Jewish 
settlers to grab West Bank hilltops now before the two sides reach 
a permanent territorial agreement over the area where the Palestinians 
want to build their future state. Arafat said Sharon's remarks constituted 
a violation of the peace accord. Asfour accused Sharon of incitement 
and demanded an apology from Netanyahu. Sharon stood by his statement. 
``If we are talking about seizing the hills, there are ... hills that 
dominate the existing settlements, state land, and this is aimed not 
at increasing tension but on decreasing tension in the future,'' Sharon 
said. In recent weeks, Jewish settlers have taken over several West 
Bank hills and set up mobile homes there. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>