<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981116.0217 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Investors who claim to have been cheated out of millions of yuan (millions 
of dollars) have staged protests in several Chinese cities, including 
Beijing. Several dozen Beijing residents gathered near the U.S. Embassy 
Monday, planning a demonstration to demand that the American government 
take action against a company they said had defrauded them of a total 
of 10 million yuan (dlrs 1.21 million) in money spent on fake land 
sales in Florida. The group had prepared banners and placards accusing 
Income Investment Properties and its representatives of fraud, and 
demanding compensation. Police forced the group to disperse before 
it had moved into a street near the embassy. Embassy officials contacted 
for comment did not return the calls. Chinese citizens appear increasingly 
willing to defy the government's ban on unauthorized protests to express 
their anger over money lost to unscrupulous businesses. Investors 
who said they lost money to a group of investment companies shut down 
by authorities in May protested for five hours Sunday in Zhengzhou, 
in central Henan province, local police said. A police official who 
gave only his surname, Jia, said the group was dispersed peacefully. 
But he denied a report by a Hong Kong-based human rights group that 
2,000 people had joined in the demonstration, saying that there were 
fewer than 100 protesters. The protesters, who accused local officials 
of helping the companies dupe them by allowing them to advertise in 
official publications, were seeking help in regaining their lost investments, 
he said. According to the Hong Kong-based Information Center of Human 
Rights and Democratic Movement in China, more than 10,000 people in 
Zhengzhou had contributed a total of 3 billion yuan (dlrs 360 million) 
to the funds, some of which is now alleged to be missing. In June, 
a month after local authorities closed down the companies, several 
thousand investors protested outside Zhengzhou's city hall, the group 
said. Similar protests have been reported throughout the country. 
In Beijing last week, dozens of investors bilked in a futures swindle 
mobbed China's official Xinhua News Agency demanding government help 
in retrieving their losses. The protesters claimed to be customers 
of the failed Xinguoda Futures Brokerage Co. Ltd. The company stopped 
trading in August and its chairman disappeared, leaving thousands 
of investors with tens of millions of dollars in losses. Authorities 
have reacted mildly to most protests. But organizers of the demonstration 
against Xinguoda said Monday they had decided to suspend their public 
demonstrations after some of their group were detained by police. 
The disputes over lost investment funds highlight the Chinese government's 
difficulties in policing its fledgling financial markets. Unscrupulous 
operators have moved into everything from financial securities to 
door-to-door sales, often preying on China's struggling working class. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>