<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981116.0244 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Hoping to restore confidence in a region of the world suffering through 
its worst economic crisis in decades, U.S. Vice President Al Gore 
declared Monday that ``economic recovery can and must start in Asia.'' 
In another positive development, U.S. officials said that Japan and 
America were close to agreement on a plan to provide additional financing 
to cash-strapped Asian nations. The initiative would tap resources 
from the World Bank, the Asian Development Bank, and Japan to restructure 
corporate and financial debt, the officials said on condition of anonymity. 
Gore, a last-minute stand-in for President Clinton, arrived in this 
Asian capital along with many other world leaders to attend the 21-member 
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum meetings. He will deliver 
a message of assurance that the United States, as the world's largest 
economy, stands ready to try to help its allies out of a serious economic 
difficulties. Clinton canceled his trip to this year's APEC summit 
at the last minute on Saturday because of the showdown with Baghdad, 
during which he considered a military attack on Iraq to punish it 
for once again expelling U.N. weapons inspectors. While the president 
is scheduled to still make official visits to Japan and South Korea 
later this week, Gore was sent in his place to the APEC meetings in 
Kuala Lumpur. The vice president kept the president's schedule on 
Monday, which included a series of bilateral meetings with Chinese 
president Jiang Zemin and Thailand's leader, Chuan Leekpai. In a speech 
later Monday to an Asia-Pacific business group, Gore sought to explain 
a U.S. strategy to stabilize shaken financial markets and restore 
growth to Asian nations whose economies have been leveled by plunging 
currencies and stock values. ``This much is clear _ just as the global 
crisis started here in Asia, the global economic recovery can and 
must start in Asia as well,'' Gore said in prepared remarks. U.S. 
officials traveling with Gore said that the United States and Japan 
were near an agreement on a Clinton proposal to provide more financial 
assistance to the region's debt-strapped corporations and banks. The 
Clinton plan would also provide increased support to social safety 
net programs to help the millions of people who have been plunged 
into poverty by the crisis, the officials said. Japan has offered 
its own dlrs 30 billion assistance package for troubled economies, 
and the expectation was that the final agreement would see Japanese 
officials pledging that part of their resources would be used to fund 
the Clinton proposal. A senior administration official, briefing reporters 
on Gore's speech, said the vice president would use it to allude to 
the situation in Malaysia, where Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad first 
fired and then jailed his one-time protege, former Deputy Prime Minister 
Anwar Ibrahim. While not mentioning Anwar by name, the Clinton administration 
official said the speech would talk of the need to promote democracy 
around the world. But the official, who spoke on condition that his 
name not be used, said the remarks were ``not aimed like a pointed 
finger,'' but rather attempted to make relevant points about human 
rights. As Gore and other Pacific Rim leaders arrived in Malaysia 
for the APEC summit on Tuesday and Wednesday, others seemed concerned 
about the Anwar case and Clinton's absence. Soon after Gore arrived, 
the leader of Singapore suggested that the charisma quotient of the 
APEC forum had just fallen. ``Obviously, when we sit down we are all 
equal,'' Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong of Singapore told reporters. 
``It is the quality of ideas which counts.'' But Goh also said that 
Clinton had probably reduced the amount of coverage the APEC summit 
would get by sending Gore in his place. ``Of course, some leaders 
are more charismatic, and the press is more interested in them,'' 
Goh said. Malaysia, the host of the APEC forum, also took at swipe 
at the United States, depicting Clinton as Rambo in a cartoon in the 
government-backed New Straits Times newspaper on Monday. At the bottom 
of the cartoon, one small snake said to another, ``Clinton is threatening 
war on Iraq!'' The other replied: ``An excuse not to attend the APEC 
summit.'' Like Gore, man other APEC officials spent the day conducting 
bilateral meetings with other leaders. On Monday, anti-government 
protesters threatened to demonstrate at the auditorium where Gore 
was to deliver his speech. Over the weekend, the foreign ministers 
of Canada, Australia and the United States angered the Malaysian government 
by meeting with Anwar's wife, Azizah Ismail. They expressed concern 
over the fairness of Anwar's trial on corruption and sex charges. 
For the first time since APEC summits began in 1993, human rights 
concerns were being discussed by the leaders, whose goal is to promote 
free trade in the region. During his meeting with Mahathir on Monday, 
Australian Prime Minister John Howard expressed concern about Anwar's 
treatment and trial. And New Zealand Prime Minister Jenny Shipley 
said she planned to do that on Tuesday. Gore and Canadian Prime Minister 
Jean Chretien have refused to meet privately with Mahathir because 
of his standoff with Anwar. On Sunday, the APEC nations failed to 
achieve a landmark agreement to reduce tariffs covering dlrs 1.5 trillion 
in global trade, but did manage to keep the effort from totally collapsing. 
The fight now goes to the 124-nation World Trade Organization, where 
the hope is to eventually overcome stiff Japanese resistance to cutting 
tariffs in two sectors it considers politically sensitive _ wood and 
fish products. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>