<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981116.1122 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Here's a big game no one anticipated: Arizona and Jake Plummer at 
New Orleans and Kerry Collins on Dec. 20, with the winner getting 
the last wild-card slot in the NFC. That's what makes the NFC in its 
down cycle so easy to predict. The NFL passed the 10-game mark Sunday. 
That's usually the time the contenders in each conference become pretty 
clear, or the situation looks pretty muddled. In the NFC, it's clear; 
in the AFC, it's muddled. ``Our long-term goal is to play them again 
_ in the playoffs,'' Plummer said after the Cowboys barely held off 
a late charge by the Cards. Plummer, who threw for 465 yards to lead 
the nearly successful comeback from a 28-0 deficit, is right, and 
the Cardinals could see the Cowboys again. A look at the playoff picture, 
starting with the clearer (and weaker) NFC: NFC Only five of the 15 
teams are over .500 and only two more, the Saints and Cardinals, have 
broken even. Consider the plus-.500 teams that are in: Minnesota (9-1), 
Atlanta (8-2), San Francisco, Green Bay and Dallas (7-3). Leave the 
final wild card to the Saints and Cardinals and give Tampa Bay (4-6), 
an outside chance in a conference where 8-8 might make it. The Bucs' 
toughest remaining games, Green Bay and Pittsburgh, are at home; an 
0-5 road record means they can lose anywhere outside of Tampa. Detroit 
(3-7) has a track record of making late charges, but there's no way 
the Lions win five or six more with a schedule that includes games 
at Tampa, Jacksonville and San Francisco and home games with Pittsburgh 
and Atlanta. More important are the seedings. Dallas has all but clinched 
the inept East, two games ahead of the Cards with a tiebreaker because 
it's beaten Arizona twice. With a less than awesome schedule, the 
Cowboys could get a first-round bye, particularly if they can beat 
Minnesota at home on Thanksgiving, Nov. 26. The Vikings are off to 
their best start since 1975, when they began 10-0. If they can beat 
Green Bay at home next week, they should win the division. But that's 
a big if. The Packers feel a lot better about themselves after thrashing 
the Giants 37-3 Sunday. Yes, the Giants have given up, but the Packers 
finally looked like the Packers. ``This was a big game for us, more 
so from a confidence standpoint,'' said tight end Mark Chmura. ``If 
we execute like we did today, we're going to beat most teams.'' Atlanta, 
in a curious twist, plays the rest of its game in domes as it attempts 
to hold its one-game lead over San Francisco in the West. Its toughest 
game appears to be its finale, at home against Miami. But are the 
Falcons really good enough to cruise into New Orleans or Detroit and 
breeze out? In other words, look out for premature celebration _ playoffs, 
yes; division title, not yet. ``We've been in far worse shape before,'' 
49ers quarterback Steve Young said after losing the Falcons on Sunday. 
``We've won all kinds of ways. We'll just have to find another way 
to win it this year.'' Yes, the 49ers are a flawed team. But they're 
a flawed team with a dangerous attitude. AFC Eleven of the 15 teams 
have at least some hope of making the playoffs and only two truly 
seem safe: Denver, of course, and Jacksonville (8-2), which has a 
two-game lead over Pittsburgh and Tennessee in the Central. Miami 
(7-3) leads the Jets and Buffalo by a game, still must play at New 
England, Atlanta, and Oakland and at home for the Jets, Oakland and 
Denver. The Denver game, on Monday night Dec. 21, could be riveting 
if the Broncos are still unbeaten and shooting to become the first 
team to go without a loss since the 1972 Dolphins. In fact, looking 
at schedules is tough because everyone plays everyone else. The odd 
team out in the East is probably the Patriots (5-5), who must win 
home games with Miami and Buffalo the next to weeks to remain a legitimate 
contender. All this, of course, makes the wild-card race a jumble. 
The Raiders (7-3) have the edge. Although they have to go to Denver 
next week, they seem to have enough winnable games left to get to 
10 and maybe 11. One key game: The Jets and Oilers (both 6-4) at Tennessee 
next week. Tennessee's playing consistently well, the Jets are coming 
off a disaster in Indianapolis, which means Bill Parcells will have 
them roaring. A guess would give the Broncos and Jaguars their divisions, 
with four more playoff teams being Miami and Oakland, plus some combination 
of two from among the Jets, Oilers, Bills and Steelers. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>