<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981116.2100.1961 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It's been widely reported that the U.S. came within 30 minutes of 
executing an order to attack Iraq at 9:00 A.M. eastern time on Saturday. 
Nowhere was the tension as high as the deck of the massive U.S. aircraft 
carrier Eisenhower, the heart of the battle group this time in the 
gulf. NBC news correspondent Jim Maceda was on board for the entire 
drama, and tonight reports from the Eisenhower. They train every day 
for five months across the atlantic, the adriatic, and now the Persian 
gulf. But finally, this is it. Strikes into Iraq will commence tonight. 
It's 1600 hours on board the nuclear carrier the U.S.S. Eisenhower 
tworks hours from strike time. Jet engines tweaked, guided missiles 
locked in place. 500-pound smart bombs adrezzed personally to Saddam 
Hussein. Lieutenant Max Shuman paces near his F-18 psyching up for 
what he calls the big game. I was about as sure as I ever was that 
it was going to happen. Enching was poised. Only minutes before the 
attack is to begin, a new ord comes down -- everyone on 24-hour hold. 
There is no first strike for now. Only more waiting. Once again, Saddam 
Hussein, they learn, has flinched, buying more time. 19-year-old airman 
Wayne mahrenholz doesn't like it. He's done this to us over and over. 
I think we ought to just go in and get the problem resolved with the 
means that we have. Many others on board share his frustration. We'd 
shown up for the world series, and it had been rained out. But there's 
little time for letdown. The strike again is on, this time at 1,800 
thundershowers Sunday. Getting through Saturday night won't be easy. 
Few can sleep. Routine used like a drug. Jet fighters polished and 
repolished. Letters, maybe last letters, written home. Sunday morning, 
and church services help lift spirits but not for long. Shortly after 
the strike force refuels and the sun sets, the latest order comes 
down -- hold is now stand down. It's kind of like emotionally having 
the rug pulled out from under us. From Bosnia to Baghdad, master chief 
Doug anstereau has seen it all. He shares those lessons with his young 
crewmen, reminding them the job is to deter war, not to make it. Coming 
off an adrenaline high, they'll go through a quick stage of disappointment, 
which really isn't disappointment, because we're not warmongers and 
don't live to drop ordnance on anybody. 90,000 tons of diplomacy holding 
its course. After two days of tension, pilots again get to do what 
they want most to do, to fly, but not under fire. Combat is not for 
now. But as the cat and mouse game continues, it could be coming soon. 
Jim Maceda, NBC news, on the U.S.S. Eisenhower, in the Persian gulf. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>