<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981116.2100.1057 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As we mentioned a short time ago in this broadcast, for the first 
time in his four-year term as independent counsel, Ken Starr will 
discuss his case and take questions on the case against the president 
when he testifies before the house Judiciary committee on Thursday. 
Again, two hours for an opening statement, then every member has the 
ability to question him. In the meantime, this week's issue of "Newsweek" 
is reporting that the justice department is close to launching, believe 
it or not, an investigation of the investigator, whether Starr's prosecutors 
discouraged monica Lewinsky from calling her attorney when they first 
questioned her. An emotional moment, as you may remember, from the 
transcripts. With us this evening, Dick thornburgh, former U.S. attorney 
general and governor of Pennsylvania. He is with us from Washington. 
And former Watergate assistant special prosecutor, Richard Davis, 
a current practicing lawyer in New York. Gentlemen, welcome. Dick 
thornburgh, let's begin with you. A lot of viewers have, understandably, 
taken a holiday from this story. And would that it were true. What 
is going to happen now? Thursday they really begin in earnest. Is 
there really going to be just one witness? Do the democrats have the 
abilities to call as many as they want? Do the republicans? Do you 
expect this to be two days? Two weeks? Two months? Well, it seems 
to be the usual state of disarray on the hill among the democrats. 
You've already referred to some of the desires expressed to have Ken 
Starr and his whole staff troop in. On the other hand, Gephardt said 
it would be a mistake to spend any time on the methods utilized by 
the independent's counsel. For Ken Starr, it represents a wonderful 
opportunity for him to for the first time be able to respond to questions. 
He's been the subject of an unrelenting attack on him and his staff 
and his tactics since the investigation first began. And while he's 
winning all his cases in court, he still seems to be in disfavor among 
the professors and the pundits and the partisans. So, he'll have a 
chance to answer those questions, and I suspect he'll do pretty well. 
Richard Davis, sheer accountability wise, don't you want to know how 
the money was spent? Don't you want to let the constituents back home 
hear every step along the process? After all, this gentleman, Starr, 
has been the focus of so Mitch of this kind of thing -- media attention 
and hatred on both sides. Well, I don't think it's a question of knowing 
all the steps. I think what the people want to know and what they 
really have questions about now is that he's conducted this investigation 
in a fair and impartial manner, because integrity and sense of fairness 
on the prosecutor is always important. And it's critical when you're 
investigating the president and you're involved with a process involved 
with the political aspects of impeachment. So, I think that's what 
people want to know and want to test out, because in addition to the 
constituencies that Dick thornburgh referenced, I think the public 
has also developed these questions about Ken Starr. General thorn 
Berg, we have no special master in this country that decides was it 
well done, is it good or bad. It's all going to be viewed through 
the prism of hill politics, then through the media, and seen however 
the viewers want to see it. Well, we live under the rule of law, and 
for all the attacks that have been made on Ken Starr and the fact 
that every one of the people involved in these matters has been represented 
by counsel and were able to go to the courts 24 hours a day and show 
no reluctance to raise these objections, when they come before the 
courts, Ken Starr wins nearly every time. And maybe that -- maybe 
that is not digestible by the political community, but he's not really 
appointed to serve the political community. But as a prosecutor, he 
serves the rule of law. Richard Davis, who is talking in this case? 
Is the house talking to the Senate? Are senators talking to the White 
House? Is somebody in the house saying to the senator, look, we're 
going to draw up one or two articles of impeachment. The Senate? Well, 
I think everybody's talking to everybody else. Everybody's talking 
publicly using a series of trial balloons. But I think the real talking 
comes, frankly, after this witness, after a Little time, probably 
afterthanksgiving, when you get those important back-channel discussions 
at the leadership level, at the senior levels of the White House to 
see if something can be done and this can be resolved before Christmas. 
Governor thornberg, is there anything we don't know? Do you know what 
I mean? Anything anticipateable that we don't know, a sardine can 
that you know about? Nothing that I know about. But you never know 
in these investigations. I think what is transpiring here pretty clearly 
is that the members of congress are casting about for some way for 
them to express their dissatisfaction, their outrage over the president's 
conduct. They know that there aren't 67 votes in the Senate to remove 
him from office. The impeachment process, however, was begun by an 
almost unanimous vote in the house. There were only five people who 
didn't want an impeachment proceeding to go forward in one form or 
another. And I believe that will run its course and prompt some very 
serious discussions about a possible censure, denunciation on a bipartisan 
basis in both houses. Gentlemen, thank you very much for coming on 
tonight. You're welcome. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>