<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981116.1830.0067 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Saddam Hussein has dodged the bombs and the bullets once again, and 
what happens next is entirely up to him. President Clinton said today, 
"the world is watching to see if he follows the words he uttered with 
deeds." In other words, complete and unfettered access for the U.N. 
weapons inspectors. If not, this is what's already in place in the 
gulf region -- all of that will stay in place until it's clear Saddam 
is living up to the agreement. Over the weekend he came within minutes 
of a major attack, until he backed down and made the agreement to 
let the inspectors back in. Tonight, NBC's Andrea Mitchell on how 
the guns of war were loaded and ready to fire. It is 7:00 A.M. Saturday 
here in Washington. In the Persian gulf Saturday afternoon on board 
the USS Eisenhower. Fighters armed and loaded. The carrier's crew 
combat ready. The command center issues an order to eight ships. The 
order -- launch in three hours. Strikes into Iraq will commence tonight. 
Overhead, AWACs -- advanced warning planes -- circle on the lookout 
for Iraqi jets. Below the surface, the nuclear attack submarine "Newport 
news" also ready to launch deadly cruise missiles. Then, only 15 minutes 
before the point of no return, the order to abort. On board the "Eisenhower," 
disappointment. We'd shown up for the world series and it had been 
rained out. How did the U.S. come within minutes of striking, only 
to back down? It begins 14 days earlier in Baghdad, Saturday, October 
31st -- halloween. Iraq cuts off all access to U.N. weapons inspectors. 
To save the sovereignty of Iraq and the right of the people to live. 
That day, 7:30 A.M., the situation room, the White House nerve center, 
officers alert national security adviser Sandy Berger. He briefs the 
president. Monday, November 2nd, the day before the election. In Baghdad, 
U.N. inspectors start packing. At the White House, the first crisis 
meeting with the president. Decisions -- send defense secretary William 
Cohen to ask Arab leaders to support a strike against Saddam, and 
keep the rhetoric low-key. Until the inspectors are back on the job, 
no options off the table. Sunday, November 8th. By now, democrats 
have done surprisingly well in the election and John glenn has landed 
safely. At camp David, the foreign policy briefs the president on 
military options. They agree to move the guided missile cruiser anzio 
to the gulf. Clinton vows no negotiations with Saddam. Tuesday night, 
November 10th, the U.N. the U.S. warns chief inspector richard Butler, 
"get all your people out of Baghdad now." Wednesday, November 11th, 
veterans day. FT. bliss, Texas. Patriot missile crews get their orders, 
"ship out for the gulf." 11:00 A.M. the president's last warning to 
Saddam to back down. We must be prepared to act if he does not. Thursday, 
November 12th. Baghdad, 8:00 P.M. Iraq responds to Clinton. He and 
his government are the problem, not Iraq. But for the first time since 
the gulf war, eight Arab neighbors side with the U.S. against Saddam. 
11:00 A.M., on board the "USS bataan," Norfolk, Virginia. Friday, 
the 13th, decision day. 10:30 A.M., the state department. Members 
of the security council have tried to persuade Saddam to understand 
the simplicity -- Obviously we're experiencing technical difficulties. 
Obviously at the very last moment, there was an agreement that was 
reached with the assistance of the office of the U.N. secretary-general 
Kofi Annan. The attacks were turned away again on Sunday. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>