<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981116.1830.0319 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The White House insists it is not back to square one for Saddam Hussein. 
Presidential advisers are saying he may have avoided an attack this 
time, but the rules have changed. More on that tonight from NBC's 
Claire Shipman. Tom, the U.S. strategy, tonight, for making this new 
deal work is a combination of military muscle and shifting the Burden 
of proof to the iraqis. As one adviser put it, the Iraqis will have 
to produce the evidence or face the consequences. Humanitarian relief 
workers head back to Baghdad. Tomorrow, U.N. inspectors will follow. 
Saddam Hussein proclaims victory to his revolutionary council. A familiar 
scenario. But President Clinton insisted again today, this time is 
different. The world is watching to see if Saddam Hussein follows 
his words with deeds. Our forces remain strong ang ready if he does 
not. a threat reinforced by the secretary of defense. I think he has 
had more than sufficient warning. I don't think any additional warning 
is required. And America's staunchest Ally -- The next withdrawal 
of cooperation and he will be hit. But the question remains, how can 
the U.S. and the U.N. inspectors effectively demand, and measure, 
Iraqi compliance? Sources tell NBC the inspectors will look for the 
following early signs -- full cooperation with spot inspections of 
new sites. Documents detailing current and past weapons stocks. One 
dealing with chemical weapons was discovered by inspectors, but immediately 
taken back by the Iraqis. We need documents from Iraq. If they can 
provide us documents that will be a clear indication that they are 
serious about cooperating. The U.N. would also like Iraq to provide 
an accurate accounting of their chemical and biological stocks which, 
if found inaccurate, could be grounds for punishment. The real fear 
here tonight is that Iraqi cooperation will prove superficial which 
would make military action difficult with the inspectors are still 
there working. What about a timetable. How will they know if Iraq 
is living up to this agreement? They're trying to map out some of 
the specific things we just talked about. What they'll do is with 
each step, with each visit, they'll be reporting to the allies and 
back to the United States and explaining the level of cooperation. 
They say there may be some superficial level of, they may have some 
superficial problems. But they think if the Iraqis don't cooperate 
on the major areas, they'll pull the inspectors out and we'll be in 
the same place we were a few days ago. Thanks, Claire Shipman. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>