<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981116.0492 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In its first crackdown on political opponents since taking office 
six months ago, the government of President B.J. Habibie is interrogating 
prominent critics and banning them from leaving the country. The targets 
include two respected former generals who also had opposed former 
President Suharto, and Megawati Sukarnoputri, a sister of one of Habibie's 
chief political rivals. A police spokesman said more interrogations 
would follow. Government critics said Habibie was betraying his promises 
of political openness and was resorting to the tactics of intimidation 
employed by his predecessor, Suharto. Together with aggressive actions 
against student protesters last week, the interrogations show a rough 
side to Habibie's government as it faces its first major crisis. The 
interrogations follow huge anti-government demonstrations in recent 
days in which at least 16 people, including eight students, were killed 
and scores were wounded. It was the worst violence here since citywide 
rioting last May helped bring down Suharto. On Saturday, Habibie announced 
that he had ordered the military to take firm action against what 
he called ``subversive movements.'' The interrogations began soon 
afterward, with some of the targets taken from their homes late at 
night. In a speech Monday, Habibie said, ``With concern, we see how 
certain political groups have tried to use the student movement to 
topple the legitimate government, obstruct the reform agenda and damage 
people's trust in the government.'' A spokeswoman for the president, 
Dewi Anwar Ibrahim, told reporters Monday that Habibie's government 
is genuinely concerned about subversion by its opponents. Since Habibie 
took office, succeeding Suharto from his vice presidential post, critics 
have challenged his legitimacy to lead the country. He has thin public 
support and shares a delicate balance of power with the military. 
A parliament session last week scheduled a new election for next spring, 
to be followed by an electoral assembly that would name a new president. 
But Habibie's opponents want to remove him immediately. Most of the 
people summoned for questioning signed a communique last week calling 
for Habibie to be replaced by a transitional government led by a presidium 
of community leaders, followed immediately by elections. Some, but 
not all, of the student demonstrators supported this agenda. In a 
show of solidarity with the military, which has come under harsh public 
criticism over the shooting of demonstrators, Habibie addressed the 
nation standing side by side with his military chief and defense minister, 
Gen. Wiranto. Adnan Buyung Nasution, a prominent human rights lawyer, 
said the government's harsh stance against its critics was likely 
to heighten tensions. ``I fear the students will take to the streets 
again, even more brutally,'' he said. One of the targets of the interrogations, 
retired Gen. Kemal Idris, entering the police headquarters Monday, 
said: ``Whoever thought the intention of the communique was an act 
of subversion is crazy. The purpose of the communique was as a critique 
of the situation.'' Others who have been questioned include Sri Bintang 
Pamungkas, a former political prisoner who is close to the student 
movement; Lieut. Gen. Ali Sadikan, a former Cabinet minister and Jakarta 
governor; Hariadi Dharmawan, head of the alumni association of the 
University of Indonesia, and Meilondo Suwondo, a close aide to Ms. 
Megawati, the opposition leader. They also include Ms. Megawati's 
sister, Sukmawati Sukarnoputri. Both women are daughters of Sukarno, 
Indonesia's first president. The national police chief, Lieut. Gen. 
Rusmanhadi, said the 11 people questioned would not be held in custody. 
He said more people would be interrogated soon. A police spokesman 
said that those interrogated would not be allowed to leave the country. 
Education Minister Juwono Sudarsono, a respected political analyst, 
said he believed that the protests had been organized by ``radical 
groups'' who observed and directed the demonstrations from nearby 
buildings. He said these organizers had deliberately placed young 
students on the front lines of confrontations, hoping to stir public 
anger when they were killed or injured. Public anger has been aroused, 
and Jakarta was tense and uneasy Monday as several small student marches 
wound their way through the streets. Protests have also broken out 
elsewhere, with hundreds of students demonstrating in the central 
Java city of Jogjakarta and thousands more occupying the parliament 
building in the eastern city of Palu. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>