<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981116.0345 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Microsoft Corp. researchers have developed a software technique that 
improves the appearance of fonts displayed on color liquid-crystal 
display screens to a level that approaches the visual quality of text 
printed on paper. The announcement of the new technology, which could 
help spawn a generation of portable devices for publishing electronic 
books and periodicals, was the centerpiece of a presentation by Microsoft 
chairman Bill Gates on Sunday here at the Comdex computer industry 
trade show. Gates predicted that the advance would speed the shift 
from paper to computerized storage and display of information. Because 
Microsoft's new font software improves the resolution of color flat-panel 
displays, the kind used by most notebook computers, by as much as 
300 percent, Gates said he believed that it would foster the acceptance 
of a new generation of electronic books, or e-books. In the future, 
Gates suggested, Microsoft might be able to apply the technology to 
icons and graphics as well as to fonts. The new software, called Cleartype 
font technology, will be integrated into Microsoft's Windows 98, Windows 
NT and Windows CE operating systems during 1999, Gates said. Industry 
executives said that Microsoft was highlighting the new font software 
to demonstrate its ability to develop new technologies internally. 
The company, which is now spending $3 billion annually on research 
and development, has been widely criticized for borrowing technological 
innovations from competitors. Several technical analysts said Monday 
that Cleartype echoed earlier work done by Apple Computer Inc.'s co-founder, 
Stephen Wozniak, in the 1970s. Wozniak obtained a patent covering 
color and resolution enhancement for the Apple II computer, said Auri 
Rahimzadeh of Envisioneering Inc., a computer industry consulting 
firm. Wozniak applied techniques that are similar to those used in 
Cleartype to color cathode-ray tube displays, he said, adding that 
the patent had expired. In an impromptu discussion with reporters 
after his Comdex presentation, Gates said that researchers had been 
able to take advantage of the fact that color LCD screens have a red, 
green and blue component for each picture element, or pixel, that 
makes up the display. By systematically and selectively highlighting 
specific colors on the edges of characters displayed on a screen, 
Cleartype software offers the effect of increased resolution. In the 
past, font and display developers have used a variety of techniques 
to correct the jagged appearance of small computer-generated text 
on displays. However, these techniques, known as ``anti-aliasing,'' 
work by actually blurring or smoothing the edge of a displayed character 
rather than by sharpening it. The Cleartype technique will work on 
existing as well as on future higher-resolution LCD displays, but 
not on the television-like cathode-ray-tube monitors that are used 
with most desktop computers today. That is because on a standard monitor 
it is not possible to separate individual red, green and blue components 
of individual pixels, Microsoft executives said. The impetus for the 
new Microsoft software technology came about six months ago when Bill 
Hill, a font researcher, sent e-mail to Gates asking him for a new 
challenge. Microsoft's chairman directed him to begin working with 
Dick Brass, a company executive who has been leading a group in Microsoft's 
research division to develop e-books. Technology was not the only 
thing on Gates' agenda Sunday night. At the start of his presentation, 
he acknowledged that this had been ``an exciting year'' and then proceeded 
to show a video recap of Microsoft mishaps. These included a Justice 
Department news conference in May announcing a new antitrust suit 
against Microsoft, a product demonstration that crashed during the 
announcement of Windows 98, and Gates getting a pie in the face while 
on a visit to Belgium. After his presentation, Gates declined to accept 
questions about the antitrust lawsuit under way in Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>