<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981116.0324 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Although the $195 billion economic stimulus plan announced by Japan 
Monday is the largest ever announced here, many investors yawned and 
shrugged. They have been disappointed in Japan so many times that 
they are hard to impress. Stocks rose modestly with the announcement. 
The benchmark Nikkei index of 225 shares ended at 14,428.27, up 160.06 
points, or 1.12 percent. But many critics called the package misguided 
and shortsighted. Some contend that the answer to Japan's problems 
lies not in throwing money at them, but rather in undertaking structural 
changes to create more of a market economy. Other critics say that 
money might indeed solve the problems, but that the economy is sinking 
into such a big hole that it would take a huge stimulus effort just 
to return to the starting point. An important problem is that the 
government's credibility is as fragile as the economy. Officials have 
promised recovery so many times that no one knows whether to believe 
them this time. In any case the government finds itself having to 
outdo its previous record stimulus package, $137 billion in April, 
to demonstrate that Japan is going to buoy growth. The new package 
brings total spending on stimulus since 1992 to more than $800 billion. 
``It's a kind of treadmill,'' Peter Morgan, an economist at HSBC Securities 
Japan Ltd., said. ``They keep moving the goal posts. They get locked 
into these large packages to just stay neutral.'' Prime Minister Keizo 
Obuchi's announcement Monday included a giant package of tax cuts, 
spending and lending. It is an ambitious grab bag of measures that 
includes $10 billion to promote housing investment, $8 billion to 
create one million jobs, another $8 billion to assist other Asian 
nations in crisis and $48 billion in financing to alleviate a nationwide 
credit squeeze. The underlying problem for Japan has been that corporate 
profits, consumption and corporate spending are all sliding, while 
unemployment is rising. The package may not appear large enough to 
turn around those problems. Despite the earlier package many economists 
are predicting an economic contraction of 2 percent for the year that 
ends on March 31. And notwithstanding the new plan, to be carried 
out in the next fiscal year, a number of economists are also expecting 
a small contraction then, too. Economists and executives also have 
other concerns about what the plan does not include. Some had hoped 
for a rollback in the 5 percent consumption tax. But the director 
of the Economic Planning Agency, Taichi Sakaiya, ruled that out for 
now. Other figures had hoped that the long-term tax cuts of more than 
6 trillion yen, or $50 billion, would be put into effect immediately. 
But taxpayers may not feel the effects until they submit their tax 
returns for 1999. Moreover, some economists argue that money is not 
the only way to resolve the economic problems and that too much government 
spending may create a backlash. They say consumers may fear that the 
huge spending package will lead to bigger government deficits and 
tax increases. ``The Japanese consumer is not confident about the 
future,'' said Hiroyuki Inoue, an economist at the Japan Center for 
Economic Research in Tokyo. This year, with tax revenues sliding because 
of the weaker economy and with the big spending packages and tax cuts, 
the budget deficit is ballooning to 10 percent of total economic output. 
That is the highest among the Group of 7 major industrial countries. 
It has some economists worried that Japan may be becoming fiscally 
negligent. The economists say the government has to devise a longer-term 
plan to strengthen its economy, so that when growth takes hold it 
will be sustainable. Sakaiya of the Economic Planning Agency did try 
to highlight the long-term characteristics of the plan, which he called 
the ``road map'' to the future. He suggested that much of the 8.1 
trillion yen, or $66 billion, that is to be spent on public works 
would go to build a social infrastructure like optical fiber lines 
and a high-technology highway with electronic toll gates. But some 
economists were skeptical. ``All these measures can increase domestic 
demand in the short term, but it's like giving a painkiller when the 
patient is crying for help,'' Teizo Taya, an economist at the Daiwa 
Institute of Research, said. ``The right objective is to stimulate 
the kind of domestic demand that can be sustained from the long-run 
point of view. To that end we have to give the freedom of choice to 
the consumers.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>