<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981116.0313 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The curtain rose at 7:40, but the Stratford Festival did not unveil 
its capabilities until an hour later. The moment of revelation came 
when William Hutt, the celebrated Canadian company's Old Reliable, 
an actor in his late 70s with the savoir-faire that comes with age, 
made the force of his presence felt in Shakespeare's ``Much Ado About 
Nothing.'' The troupe has brought the play to City Center for a two-week 
run in repertory with its production of Moliere's ``Miser.'' Hutt, 
portraying Leonato, father to Hero, the ingenue, and uncle to Beatrice, 
the sharp-tongued cynic, steals an inherently funny drinking scene 
with his descent into good-natured inebriation. Dangling a martini 
glass, Hutt turns the leonine patriarch into a figure out of Noel 
Coward, supplying dry-as-vermouth commentary as the other men spin 
lies about the love Beatrice (played by Martha Henry) has for Benedick 
(Brian Bedford), all of which Benedick overhears while hiding behind 
a plant. The scene is so effortlessly charming, and Hutt so delightfully 
lightheaded, that you wouldn't mind if someone turned off the play 
and allowed the banter to go on and on. The trouble is that once the 
scene ends, the party is essentially over. Its conclusion marks the 
passing of the only truly sparkling encounter all evening. The Stratford 
Festival, which draws tourists and rabid theatergoers to a small town 
in Ontario for an immersion in the work of Shakespeare and other old 
hands, has come to City Center with a sampling on the first of what 
it hopes will be an annual occasions. The company, quite sensibly, 
arrived in New York, where the classics only sporadically enthrall 
the hometown crowds, with a pair of audience-pleasing comedies by 
dead playwrights with whom the ensemble is nonetheless on intimate 
terms. Surprisingly, the shows are short on laughs and long on _ well, 
they're just kind of long. Based on the dubious rewards, potential 
ticket buyers might be better served by waiting to see what Stratford 
plans for next year. These are technically proficient productions, 
directed by Stratford's artistic director, Richard Monette, but without 
virtually any remarkable aspects, from the sterile sets by Guido Tondino 
and Meredith Caron to unappealing costumes by Ms. Caron and Ann Curtis. 
Though there are nimble performances by a few of the older actors, 
like Hutt (in both plays, but more memorable in ``Much Ado'') and 
the always resourceful Bedford (also in ``Much Ado''), the level of 
performance is for the most part standard issue, especially among 
the younger players. The overall impression is of a ``Much Ado'' ultimately 
thwarted by odd casting decisions and a ``Miser'' undermined by a 
precious and debilitating concept. Monette's modern, cosmopolitan 
``Much Ado'' is the livelier of the evenings. The setting is the Italian 
seacoast just as World War I is ending, in Leonato's luxurious palace, 
where the fellow at the baby grand plays music inspired by Gershwin. 
The play takes place at what would have to be twilight. As portrayed 
by the mature Ms. Henry and Bedford, the old antagonists are a lot 
older here than audiences are used to. This is a cooler, sexually 
mellower sparring match, between an unregenerate spinster and a confirmed 
bachelor. But age is not really the confounding characteristic. In 
fact, the line readings have a nice twist in this ``On Golden Pond'' 
pairing. ``My dear Lady Disdain, are you yet living?'' Bedford, in 
ascot and whiskers, sneers at Ms. Henry, whose casual retort, ``I 
know you of old,'' sounds more like an insult than an observation. 
The severe-looking Ms. Henry, playing Beatrice as a kind of bookish 
smarty-pants, is best in the early scenes, when Beatrice is at her 
most smug. But the badinage goes nowhere. Dressed in what look like 
outfits from the Queen Elizabeth II Reject Shop _ check out the ghastly 
kimono and cap she wears in the wedding scene _ Ms. Henry reveals 
little affinity for Bedford. That they end up together seems a random 
result. In another break with tradition, the audience is not actively 
engaged in the rooting for their union. Whatever happens to them, 
you're reasonably certain that these two survivors will, indeed, survive. 
Surrounding the two leads are an assortment of supporting players, 
only a few of whom, like James Blendick as Don Pedro, are more than 
satisfactory. Tom McCamus' villainous Don John is a blank in black, 
and the overdone Dogberry of Stephen Ouimette should be wearing a 
sign that says, ``Look at me, I'm funny.'' ``The Miser'' is a more 
troubled import. The adaptation by Miles Malleson plays as virtually 
a sendup of Moliere. The actors are encouraged by Monette to indulge 
in patently silly and wholly unnecessary antics, as when a pair of 
identical, gnomish servants, starved by their niggardly master, Harpagon, 
kill and eat a housefly in unison, or when members of the household 
carry a screaming piglet to slaughter. Making the joke on Moliere 
seems the height of hubris. The employment of such embellishments 
is not justified by this affected version, whose chief attraction 
remains Hutt's Harpagon. It's not nearly as sly or subtle as his suave 
Leonato. You never quite believe this cranky miser would sacrifice 
anything for money. But he is nonetheless a fitting foil for the pranks 
of his staff and family. Despite his best efforts, though, Hutt's 
sourpuss is powerless to dilute the production's bitter aftertaste. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>