<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981116.0412 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A judge has refused to ban a much-disputed procedure used by the Los 
Angeles district attorney to conceal from defendants the fact that 
some cases originated in wiretap surveillance from other investigations. 
Under the procedure, known as a handoff and used dozens of times in 
recent years, investigators who hear of criminal activity while listening 
to a wiretapped conversation pass that information to a second set 
of officers without identifying its source. Those officers then establish 
independent probable cause for an arrest and the defense is never 
told of the existence of the wiretap and the tip. Criminal defense 
lawyers contend that the procedure violates defendants' rights to 
due process and discovery rights by precluding them from challenging 
the evidence in court. They also say that it violates state and federal 
laws that say evidence derived from a wiretap cannot be admitted unless 
the existence of the wiretap is disclosed. Prosecutors contend that 
they are entitled to conceal the existence of a wiretap if revealing 
it would render it useless in another investigation. The public defender's 
office here sought a ban on the procedure and also asked the court 
to order the notification of all defendants charged with crimes based 
on concealed wiretaps. Further, the public defender requested documentation 
of wiretap applications, orders and transcripts so that new trials 
could be sought for all those convicted as a result of tips obtained 
from the wiretaps. But in a ruling last Thursday, Judge Larry Fidler 
declined to bar prosecutors from using the procedure. He said, however, 
that prosecutors must inform all defendants when their cases are generated 
by wiretap surveillance, unless doing so would jeopardize an ongoing 
investigation, in which case they must get a judge's permission to 
conceal the source of their information. ``We view it as an affirmation 
that we were doing the right thing,'' William Hodgman, who oversees 
the narcotics division of the district attorney's office, said of 
the ruling. Kathy Quant, a deputy public defender, said she would 
appeal the judge's ruling. In June, District Attorney Gil Garcetti 
acknowledged the hand-off procedure had been used to conceal wiretap 
evidence in 58 cases since 1993, and agreed to inform all defendants 
affected by the procedure. The hand-off procedure came to light for 
the first time in March, when lawyers for three men charged in a cocaine 
trafficking case filed a routine discovery motion and were surprised 
to find prosecutors seeking confidential hearings with the judge, 
who ultimately ruled that the wiretap evidence had to be turned over 
to defense lawyers. That led to a series of hearings in which defense 
lawyers questioned police and prosecutors about how long and how frequently 
they had used the procedure. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>