<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981116.0207 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the Greek myths, a terrible price is always paid by humans who 
seek to live forever, as if to discourage people from even the thought 
of sharing in the defining attribute of gods. Tithonus, a youth with 
whom Aurora, the goddess of the Dawn, fell in love, was granted immortality, 
but as he grew more bent and decrepit longed only for one other gift, 
the relief of death. Chastened by such cautionary tales, we meekly 
accept that death is as inevitable as the dawn, knowing that our bodies 
will run down like an aging automobile when they exceed their design 
limit. So it was almost disquieting rather than uplifting to hear 
scientists at Geron Corp. in Menlo Park, Calif., talk about ``immortalizing'' 
certain cells that they hoped to derive from the recently isolated 
human embryonic stem cells. Surely the scientists were speaking metaphorically. 
They were not. The study of aging is undergoing a possibly profound 
change, and a handful of biologists, whose hubris has not yet been 
punished with a thunderbolt from Mount Olympus, are beginning to think 
about interfering with the mechanisms that make the body mortal. Immortalizing 
a cell is of course very different from making an individual live 
forever. But because people are made of cells the two concepts have 
a deep and maybe exploitable link. For decades biologists have known 
that the body's mortality is mirrored on the cellular level by an 
immutable rule called the Hayflick limit. Dr. Leonard Hayflick, now 
of the University of California, San Francisco, discovered that when 
tissue cells are taken from the body and cultured in a laboratory 
dish, they grow and divide about 50 times _ the number varies with 
the kind of tissue _ and then lapse into senescence. In January, Geron's 
biologists announced an electrifying finding: They had learned how 
to make human cells break the Hayflick limit. The physical basis of 
the Hayflick rule is a section of DNA known as the telomere, which 
gets shorter each time the cell divides. When the telomeres reach 
a certain minimum length, the cell is thrown into a terminal crisis. 
All cells possess a gene, known as the telomerase gene, which can 
restore the telomeres to their youthful length. But in most cells 
the gene is permanently repressed and inactive. Geron's discovery 
was that by inserting a copy of the telomerase gene in active form 
into cells, it could make them grow and divide indefinitely. For cells, 
the ability to divide indefinitely into two identical daughter cells 
is immortality. (The cell's atoms and molecules are continually being 
replaced, but its structure and informational content are unchanged 
from day to day.) For an individual, making clones of oneself in perpetuity 
would hardly count as living forever. What stands between a person 
and immortality is that almost all the body's cells are mortal and, 
though they turn over, eventually cease to replace themselves efficiently. 
Two categories of body cell, however, are immortal in the cell's sense 
of being able to divide indefinitely. One is the essence of life, 
the other of death. Cancer cells eventually learn how to unlock the 
bolted down switches on the telomerase gene, and with this last defense 
in their hands can defy all the body's careful control mechanisms 
and run rampant. The other kind of immortal cell is the all-purpose, 
embryonic stem cells from which the whole organism develops. In embryonic 
stem cells, too, the telomerase gene is active, and the cells can 
divide indefinitely as long as they remain embryonic. As the fetus 
develops, however, the embryonic stem cells differentiate, meaning 
that they progress down a variety of different pathways to become 
the specialized cells that form each of the body's different tissues. 
In the biologist's view it is differentiation, not expulsion from 
Eden, that makes us mortal. As cells differentiate, they repress the 
telomerase gene. Some, like most brain and heart cells, seem never 
to divide again once the organism has reached maturity. Others, like 
skin and blood cells, can regenerate from stem cells specific to their 
tissue, but these tissue stem cells, descendants of the embryonic 
stem cells, also have a finite lifetime. How then are embryonic cells 
generated from parents whose cells are irreversibly differentiated? 
In the embryo, a small number of stem cells are set aside, before 
embryonic development begins, and protected from differentiation. 
These special cells, known as embryonic germ cells, migrate to the 
developing ovary or testis, where they generate the egg or sperm for 
the next generation. Thus there is a special lineage of cells that 
permanently resist terminal differentiation, cycling indefinitely 
from embryonic stem cell to embryonic germ cell, to oocyte or sperm, 
to fertilized egg and embryonic stem cell again. At each cycle the 
cells spin off a new body as the temporary vehicle to carry them forward 
on their unending journey. Geron's second amazing advance of the year 
was the isolation of human embryonic stem cells by two groups of researchers 
whom the company financed. One reason for its success was that under 
its visionary founder, Michael West, the company worked with leading 
academic scientists in the telomere field. Because the embryonic stem 
cells were known to maintain permanently youthful telomeres, the company 
was drawn into the stem cell field and repeated the coup of signing 
up many of the leading university scientists in the field. With its 
human embryonic stem cells and its telomerase gene, Geron has acquired 
two scientifically fascinating properties, though of course commercial 
pay-off may be years away. What the company hopes to do is to guide 
the embryonic stem cells down specific paths of differentiation toward 
becoming the specialized cells of heart, blood or any other desired 
tissue. Before being injected into a patient, these specialized cells 
could be immortalized by adding the telomerase gene in active form. 
The tissues they formed in a patient would then be permanently youthful. 
(There would of course be a problem of immune rejection, which Geron 
has not yet addressed. West, now at another company, said last week 
that he hoped to sidestep rejection by generating embryonic stem cells 
from the patient's own body cells; their differentiated state would 
be reversed by fusing the cell with a cow's egg.) If biologists can 
immortalize some of the body's cells by the Geron method, could they 
in time learn how to immortalize them all? Dr. William Haseltine, 
chairman of Human Genome Sciences in Rockville, Md., believes a solution 
lies with the tissue stem cells that provide for the regeneration 
of tissue like blood and skin. Tissue stem cells, descendants of the 
embryonic stem cells, may exist for many or all tissues but only a 
few have so far been identified. These tissue stem cells also get 
old in time and start to generate tired or compromised cells. Haseltine's 
idea is to replace them, before they start to do harm, with tissue 
stem cells immortalized with telomerase. All the body's tissues would 
thus be continuously and reliably regenerated from permanently youthful 
tissue stem cells. ``This is a clearly articulated vision of human 
immortality that will be introduced slowly over the next 50 years,'' 
Haseltine said. Dr. Thomas Okarma, Geron's vice president for research, 
commented sternly that his own company had no such plans. Making the 
body immortal ``is indeed fanciful and certainly something we don't 
even contemplate here,'' he said. ``We are much more interested in 
dealing with the 20 or so degenerative diseases that have no present 
treatment and could be addressed with immortalized cells.'' The embryonic 
stem cells, immortal seeds in our mortal bodies, have a pedigree that 
stretches back more than 3 billion years to the first cell. Their 
survival mechanisms are sophisticated. Even the telomerase system 
is far from understood. Still, the cell is a mechanism and, absent 
the gods' fury, it can one day be made to operate closer to our desire 
than evolution's uncaring design. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>