<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981116.0490 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A few years back, when they envisioned their retirement, John and 
Mary Greenan saw themselves relaxing on Cape Cod's pristine sands 
in the summer and viewing Vermont's glorious foliage in the fall. 
With wise investments and their monthly Social Security checks, the 
Greenans, of this Westchester County city, were able to indulge their 
passion for travel. In addition to Cape Cod and Vermont, there were 
trips to Florida, Maryland, Virginia and the Outer Banks of North 
Carolina. But now the trips will be fewer, and the Greenans' dreams 
for a retirement spent roaming the country seem out of reach. By year's 
end, the couple will spend thousands of dollars a year on a new insurance 
policy because their insurer, a Medicare HMO under Oxford Health Plans, 
will stop covering them and thousands of other elderly people. ``They 
call these the golden years,'' said Mrs. Greenan, 68, a youthful-looking 
woman who before her retirement was a registrar for Mount Vernon Hospital. 
``But I don't see it. To me, they're all tarnished.'' While being 
forced to switch health insurance can be an inconvenience to healthy 
young and middle-aged adults, it can be even more traumatic and burdensome 
for the elderly, particularly the frail elderly, many of whom see 
several doctors for different ailments. So when Oxford announced in 
October that it was ending its Medicare health-maintenance organization 
in 23 counties in New York, New Jersey, Connecticut and Pennsylvania, 
the news sent elderly people scrambling to find alternative coverage. 
As of Nov. 2, 26,601 clients had received notices in the mail that 
they would be dropped on Dec. 31; subscribers in New York City will 
still be covered. ``Think about having to choose a new doctor, being 
old on a limited income, and having multiple illnesses,'' said Jane 
Rosenblum, program coordinator of the Health Insurance Information 
Counseling and Assistance Program in Rockland County, which helps 
older people explore their options. Some people like the Greenans, 
who have soured on HMOs, have decided to spend several thousand dollars 
more on supplemental insurance to fill the gaps in traditional Medicare. 
Others are searching for health-maintenance organizations that are 
taking new clients. Still others will fall back on basic Medicare 
coverage. For Allen Martin, 70, who lives in Dobbs Ferry and is insured 
by Oxford, there is slim hope that he will find another HMO that will 
enroll him. He has renal failure and receives kidney dialysis three 
days a week. According to health-insurance specialists, health-maintenance 
organizations are not required to accept kidney-dialysis patients. 
``I've tried seven or eight HMOs, but no one will take me,'' said 
Martin, a retired electronics-store manager. ``It's like taking a 
man and throwing him to the wolves. I have no idea how I'm going to 
pay for dialysis. It's all I think about: Dec. 31. That date is coming 
up. It's very depressing.'' Actually, Martin's wife, Philomena, 71, 
has done the bulk of the shopping for a new health-maintenance organization. 
``First I called Blue Choice and I was told I would be accepted but 
he couldn't,'' she said. ``Then I called Physicians Health Care. Both 
told me, `We don't cover people with pre-existing renal disease.''' 
``I'm sure there are so many people in our position,'' she said. ``But 
everywhere I go, I get the same thing: We feel sorry for you, but 
we can't do anything for him. I feel like we're being put out to pasture.'' 
More and more people face similar plights. Dozens of other health-maintenance 
organizations, citing similar financial hardships, are terminating 
roughly 440,000 Medicare beneficiaries in the New York region and 
across the country. The companies say they are losing money on Medicare 
in part because government rates or premiums, which used to go up 
about 8 percent each year, are now capped at a rate of 2 percent per 
year for five years by the Balanced Budget Act. The Greenans had little 
time to decide what to do about their health insurance, because soon 
after they learned that they would no longer be covered by Oxford, 
Greenan, 73, a retired greeting-card company executive, had an emergency 
angioplasty and Mrs. Greenan has spent most of her time nursing him. 
``I've had no time to think about it,'' she said a few days after 
her husband's surgery. ``Oxford has added stress to the situation.'' 
Instead of joining another health-maintenance organization _ the Greenans 
now consider them all shaky _ they signed up with the American Association 
of Retired Persons Medigap program, a supplement to the traditional 
Medicare fee-for-service program. It will cost the Greenans $163 more 
a month than Oxford did and it will not cover prescription drugs. 
According to the American Association of Health Plans, the co-payment 
for an office visit in 97 percent of HMO Medicare plans is $10 or 
less, and in 82 percent of HMO Medicare plans, the co-payment is $10 
or less for prescription drugs. Between them, the Greenans take nine 
medications each day, and while those cost them about $100 a month 
on the Oxford managed-care plan, they will now cost them about three 
times as much. Together, the Greenans said, the increased insurance 
and medication costs will eat away at their long-planned dream of 
traveling in retirement. ``We'll really have to buckle down,'' Greenan 
said. When health-maintenance organizations were introduced to elderly 
citizens, many customers and advocates for the elderly were leery 
of them. They worried that the companies would court only healthy 
patients and ignore the very sick, and they warned that if profit 
margins shrunk, the companies would drop the Medicare business altogether. 
Still, many older people reluctantly made the switch from traditional 
Medicare _ in some cases abandoning longtime doctors _ for the promise 
of new ones who would cost them less. Now these customers find themselves 
dreading yet another upheaval in their lives. ``They have to make 
a change,'' Ms. Rosenblum said. ``It's another decision they have 
to make. They have enough changes in their life already with losses 
_ the loss of friends, relatives, spouses, even children sometimes.'' 
People being dropped by their Medicare HMOs have three basic choices. 
They can enroll in another health-maintenance organization if one 
is available in their area and if it has room to take new clients. 
Or they can do nothing and be automatically enrolled in Medicare, 
the federally financed health-insurance program for people 65 or over 
or under 65 and disabled. But Medicare's traditional fee-for-service 
program carries a much higher out-of-pocket cost. The third option 
is Medigap, the supplemental insurance that customers can buy to fill 
gaps in Medicare coverage. But Medigap insurance can cost a few thousand 
dollars a year for the deductibles, co-insurance payments and other 
outlays that traditional Medicare does not cover. And in any event, 
there is no guarantee that older people can obtain Medigap insurance 
that covers prescription drugs, one of the biggest medical expenses 
for elderly people. The average cost per year for prescription drugs 
for the elderly is $351, according to the American Association for 
Retired Persons. Laura Bolotsky, coordinator of the Health Insurance 
Information Counseling and Assistance Program in Westchester, said 
she was struck by how little time older citizens have to find a new 
insurer. ``You have Thanksgiving in November and Christmas in December,'' 
she said, noting the end-of-year deadline. ``This has come as a shock 
to them,'' she said. ``They say: `We have to make all these calls. 
I asked for an application for another HMO and I never got it.' The 
important thing is for them not to make themselves sick. Stress can 
do that.'' Murray Ornstein, 68, a retired product manager and an Oxford 
Medicare HMO customer who lives in Hartsdale, is looking for a health-maintenance 
plan that accepts both his primary-care physician and his dermatologist 
(the latter to treat chronic psoriasis). If his internist, who is 
considering joining Physicians Health Plan, does so, Ornstein will 
be able to keep both doctors. ``I've investigated eight or 10 HMOs,'' 
said Ornstein, who initially found out he was losing his insurance 
coverage while watching a television news program. ``I felt annoyed 
that the government didn't say we are dealing with a group of people 
who have a relationship with their doctors. I'm easy to deal with 
medically. But what about the older people who have serious conditions 
and have to go to a new primary-care physician and new specialists?'' 
While picking new health insurance is difficult for many elderly people, 
it can be particularly trying for those who live alone, who do not 
have a husband, wife or child to help them navigate the bureaucracy. 
``Certainly, any decision that has to be made is more difficult when 
there isn't a family member to talk to about it,'' said Alice Deak, 
coordinator of the southwestern Connecticut region's Connecticut Health 
Insurance Outreach Information Counseling Eligibility and Screening 
program, which helps the elderly make decisions about health insurance. 
For their part, health-maintenance organizations say they are reducing 
service areas or pulling out of Medicare because of federal regulatory 
burdens and because the payment they receive from the federal government 
is inadequate to cover services. ``There is a lot of paperwork and 
a lot of jumping through hoops,'' said Susan Pisano, a spokeswoman 
for the American Association of Health Plans. Ms. Pisano said that 
one Medicare HMO reported that it took 200 people just to complete 
the application to take part in the Medicare program. Another Medicare 
HMO that plans to leave some communities, Allina Health System of 
Minnesota, reported that implementing government regulations cost 
between $1 million and $2 million per year, she said. In many instances, 
Ms. Pisano said, companies are losing money on Medicare HMOs. But 
Ornstein is skeptical. ``All these executives drawing tremendous salaries 
is contributing to it,'' he said, still nervous about his own uncertain 
health-care situation. ``I'm worried that I'll find another HMO and 
down the road they'll go out, too.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>