<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981116.0417 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Breaking free of the restrained, statesmanlike demeanor that has recently 
characterized his public persona, Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat 
this weekend threatened another Palestinian uprising, complete with 
rifles, if the peace effort stumbles. Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin 
Netanyahu, in turn, demanded a public disavowal of violent threats, 
saying he would freeze the return of the next chunk of the West Bank 
to the Palestinians. And, feeling particularly provoked, Israeli Foreign 
Minister Ariel Sharon went so far as to advise Jewish settlers in 
the West Bank to grab every possible hill before the withdrawal of 
Israeli troops begins. To hear the war of words these last few days, 
one could have been led to believe that the Israeli-Palestinian peace 
accord was in jeopardy. But even as the words were flying fast, the 
Israelis and the Palestinians were moving closer than ever to carrying 
out the land-for-security plan that they signed at the White House 
last month. The Israeli Parliament, which began a rowdy debate Monday, 
is expected to approve the peace agreement on Tuesday by a significant 
majority. An airport named after Arafat is expected to open this week 
in Gaza, equipment permitting. And with bypass roads under construction 
now, the first part of the West Bank is expected to be turned over 
to the Palestinians by Friday. Nonetheless, as their subordinates, 
with the help of American envoys, negotiated crucial technical details, 
both the Palestinian and the Israeli leaders were playing to the home 
front with tough talk. Arafat was facing down his critics by dusting 
off his revolutionary words. And Sharon and Netanyahu, forced to respond, 
were at the same time trying to convince the settlers that they have 
not been abandoned by the right-wing leadership. ``These are words 
meant to distract from the reality of the moment,'' said Yossi Beilin, 
a Labor Party member of Parliament and an architect of the peace effort. 
``And the reality of the moment lies in the maps.'' Beginning at the 
Wye Plantation in Maryland, Arafat donned the cloak of elder statesman, 
and he had remained calm in the face of every Israeli delay and even 
what his aides aides saw as direct provocations. When the Israelis 
packed their bags as if to stomp off from the American-mediated peace 
talks, when they postponed carrying out the accord, and even when 
they took the first steps last week toward constructing a new Jewish 
neighborhood in southeastern Jerusalem, Arafat soaked it all up, as 
if he were above the fray. But last weekend, at a rally in Nablus, 
a party meeting in Ramallah and a Voice of Palestine radio broadcast, 
Arafat feinted back to the hard line in the face of internal dissent. 
First, he told a cheering crowd of thousands in Nablus that he still 
intended to establish a Palestinian state by May, when the nearly 
five-year-old Oslo interim peace accord _ the framework for the recent 
memorandum signed in Washington _ expires. ``We will declare our independent 
state on May 4, 1999, with noble Jerusalem as its capital, whether 
they like it or not,'' Arafat said. Then, on the radio and in Ramallah 
on Sunday, he said ``the path of peace'' would be abandoned if the 
Israelis did not honor their commitments. ``Our rifles are ready.'' 
Until last weekend, Arafat's eye, it had seemed, was fixed on the 
prize: the handover of 13 percent of the West Bank to Palestinian 
civil control, and the transfer of 14 percent more from Palestinian 
civil control to complete Palestinian control. So his words took the 
Israelis by surprise. They immediately responded with demands for 
an apology and threats of reprisal. They said if statehood really 
was declared, they would feel free to annex parts of the West Bank. 
Addressing a Parliament of hecklers Monday, Netanyahu said that if 
Arafat did not take back his words, the first pullback of Israeli 
troops would be threatened. ``I do not intend to implement any withdrawal 
under such conditions,'' he said. Late Monday evening, Arafat summoned 
Israeli reporters to his offices in Jericho and said he remained committed 
to a peaceful resolution of the conflict. ``For us, peace is a strategic 
choice, and we will not shift course,'' he said. David Bar-Illan, 
a spokesman for Netanyahu, said the Palestinian leader's response 
was ``neither a retraction or a disavowal.'' He said the decision 
on whether to turn over the land would be made on Thursday by the 
Israeli Cabinet, which ratified the agreement last week in an 8-to-4 
vote, with 5 abstentions. Like Arafat, the hawkish Sharon, who was 
appointed foreign minister to placate the right, had been soft-spoken 
through the negotiations. Meeting with a group of settlers on Sunday 
night, however, after Arafat's speeches, Sharon sallied forth with 
his most provocative comments since he assumed the post. The remarks 
were broadcast on Israeli radio Monday. ``Everyone should take action, 
should run, should grab more hills,'' said Sharon, a longtime advocate 
of the settlers who now feel betrayed by him. ``We'll expand the area. 
Whatever is seized will be ours. Whatever isn't seized will end up 
in their hands.'' At the same time, though, Netanyahu received an 
unexpected present from the party that supposedly represents the settlers. 
The National Religious Party voted late Sunday to stay in his coalition 
for the moment, which helps protect him from being toppled. Even as 
the verbal sallies were launched, though, the Israelis and the Palestinians 
were negotiating the nitty-gritty of the first steps of carrying out 
the accord. The Israelis were showing maps to the settlers. Bypass 
roads were being cut through Arab land. And the American envoys, Dennis 
Ross and Aaron Miller, were helping iron out the latest practical 
and diplomatic wrinkles. ``On the one hand, there's a certain amount 
of kabuki theater here,'' said Larry Schwartz, a spokesman for the 
American Embassy in Tel Aviv. ``They're all doing their C-Span lecturing 
to an empty theater so the public can know where they stand. ``On 
the other hand,'' he said, ``a regrettable amount of hostile rhetoric 
has seeped into the public conversation, and even if the forward motion 
is there, it creates a nasty climate.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>