<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981116.0427 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Giants Coach Jim Fassel said Monday that he had not decided whether 
to bench the starting quarterback Danny Kanell, but people in the 
organization indicated he was leaning toward replacing Kanell with 
Kent Graham against the Philadelphia Eagles this weekend. Fassel called 
his team's performance Sunday against the Green Bay Packers pitiful 
and said he was considering changes at several positions. He also 
said such changes would be made ``with an eye on the future.'' While 
that might not explain why he would remove the struggling Kanell, 
who will turn 25 on Saturday, for Graham, who is 30, there appears 
to be a consensus among the offensive coaches that Kanell has become 
so harried in the pocket that his skills are regressing. Kanell's 
long-term development, at least in theory, could be advanced by the 
chance to get out of the line of fire for a week or more. Fassel and 
his coaches were particularly distressed by Kanell's hurried, and 
ultimately poor, decision-making that led to two interceptions Sunday, 
and caused Kanell to squander a good chance for a touchdown pass early 
in the Packers' 37-3 victory. On the first interception, which came 
after a missed Green Bay field goal in what was still a 7-0 game, 
Kanell overlooked a wide-open Gary Brown to throw into coverage and 
was intercepted by the Packers' Leroy Butler. Kanell made a similar 
mistake on what became Butler's second interception in the third quarter. 
In the second quarter, on a third down at the Green Bay 7, Kanell 
ignored wide receiver Amani Toomer, who was open in the end zone, 
and instead threw into double coverage toward Ike Hilliard. The pass 
was incomplete, and the Giants settled for their only score of the 
game, a field goal. ``I'm not going to make any statements about who's 
starting,'' Fassel said. ``Danny did not play as well as I hoped he 
would. Right now, he's not functioning, but he's not getting a lot 
of help around him either.'' Fassel believes Kanell's pass protection 
has been woefully inadequate, and when Fassel replaced Kanell with 
Graham in the third quarter of Sunday's game, he also benched right 
tackle Scott Gragg and left guard Greg Bishop. But Fassel seems to 
be wondering if Kanell has lost some confidence, and the people familiar 
with his thinking, who insisted on anonymity, say that may prompt 
the coach to go with Graham. ``Right now, in some aspects, he's trying 
to survive,'' Fassel said of Kanell. ``There were some times in that 
game that he had time to make a play, but he has come off real quick. 
Whether it was a lack of confidence, I don't know, but he made some 
mistakes. I'm going to sit down and have a long talk with him and 
see where he is.'' Fassel planned that meeting for Monday afternoon. 
He said he would make his decision on whom to start at quarterback 
against the Eagles Monday night. Since the players are off Tuesday, 
that decision will probably be announced Wednesday when the team resumes 
practice; the play repetitions in practice for the starting quarterback 
are usually five times those taken by the backup. The third-string 
quarterback Mike Cherry isn't a likely option to see time yet. He 
has yet to attempt a pass in two NFL seasons. Graham started three 
games as a rookie in relief of the Giants' Jeff Hostetler in 1992, 
and one game in 1994 as Dave Brown's replacement. He started eight 
games with the Arizona Cardinals in 1996 when Fassel was the team's 
offensive coordinator and six more games with the Cardinals in 1997 
after Fassel left. Signed as a free agent by the Giants last winter, 
Graham said Monday that he was preparing to start Sunday even though 
he didn't know which way Fassel would go. ``I'm not lobbying for the 
job,'' said Graham, whose record as a starter is 5-13. ``But I want 
the opportunity. I want to play. Then you see what happens. I want 
the shot to prove I can do it.'' Asked if starting Graham might provide 
a spark for the team, Fassel said: ``It could. I'm not ruling that 
out at all. But there are a lot of considerations in doing that. I'll 
evaluate that and see.'' Kanell was not available for comment Monday. 
He was not in the locker room before the players gathered for their 
private team meetings inside Giants Stadium. It's possible that Fassel 
may decide that Kanell's confidence could be boosted by playing against 
a struggling team he may have success against like the 2-8 Eagles. 
If Kanell failed again, then Fassel could always replace him with 
Graham. Fassel, however, clearly hasn't given up on Kanell. ``For 
young quarterbacks to progress, those guys need a supporting cast,'' 
Fassel said. ``Don't forget that last year, in his first year starting 
in the NFL, he may not have put up dramatic numbers, but we won. His 
supporting cast was playing a lot better than they are right now. 
He was getting a lot more help, and I protected him to a degree better.'' 
Beyond quarterback, there are positions where auditions are likely 
to begin Sunday, though it's possible Fassel may put these players 
into the game as it progresses rather than alter the current starting 
lineup. At left guard, since Greg Bishop has been a disappointment 
most of the season and will be a free agent after the season, the 
Giants will probably turn to Lonnie Palelei in an attempt to determine 
Palelei's value for next season. Palelei, 28, who started 14 games 
for the Jets last season, played Sunday in relief of Bishop. At center, 
Derek Engler, a second-year player and former starter, may see his 
role increased at the expense of the starter, Lance Scott. Also, the 
rookie safety Shaun Williams, who regained his post as the team's 
nickel defensive back Sunday, could play at strongside safety in place 
of Percy Ellsworth, who is out of position there. Ellsworth could 
then replace or split time at free safety with Tito Wooten. EXTRA 
POINTS The Giants said linebacker Jessie Armstead reinjured the right 
ankle sprain that plagued him earlier this season. But Coach Jim Fassel 
didn't think Armstead would be seriously inhibited against the Eagles 
Sunday. The report was similar on linebacker Corey Widmer, who sustained 
a concussion against the Packers. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>