<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981116.0312 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
All Lord Irvine wanted was the right to change his pants. He found 
the slim black breeches that went with his job as lord chancellor 
outdated and a little bit embarrassing, he said. Nor did he like the 
black stockings and buckled dancing-type slippers that completed his 
official outfit in the House of Lords, making him look like a dark 
version of the frog footman in ``Alice in Wonderland.'' ``I feel that 
for male adults of sound mind like myself _ I hope I am _ the days 
of breeches, tights and buckled shoes should go,'' he told a parliamentary 
committee recently. But change comes slowly to the House of Lords, 
and Irvine's modest plea for the right to dress down generated an 
unusually impassioned debate there Monday, as peers from across the 
political spectrum discussed the semiotics of fancy costumes, the 
unbearable heaviness of full-length wigs and the potential erosion 
of standards in a place traditionally defined by extravagant symbolism 
and high ceremony. If the issue seemed utterly frivolous, the philosophical 
differences underlying it were not. On the one side was Irvine, a 
Cabinet member, the nation's top judge and the speaker of the House 
of Lords, dressed in a 17th-century costume and sitting on the Woolsack, 
a big, square bench filled with British wool that is meant to represent 
the country's trading prosperity. As comical as he might have looked, 
he was arguing on behalf of the Labor government's desire to modernize, 
to put an end to many of the archaic customs that sometimes seem to 
make Britain more of a quaint old theme park than a country on the 
brink of the 21st century. On the other side were the men and women 
of the Conservative opposition, sitting on red leather benches in 
business suits and dresses, arguing strenuously on behalf of tradition 
and formality, of maintaining the mysterious trappings of the institution 
they hold so dear. ``The office of lord chancellor is one of the highest 
in the land,'' said Earl Ferrers, a Conservative lord who led the 
offensive against Irvine's sartorial proposal. Speaking of the lord 
chancellor's outfit, he added, ``It is a reminder to all of us, and 
members of the general public, of the stature, dignity and indeed 
the awe in which the office of lord chancellor is held.'' At the end 
of the day, the vote was 145 to 115 in favor of letting Irvine dress, 
if not completely normally, then at least seminormally. He will be 
allowed to jettison the half-pants, the stockings and the patent-leather 
slippers in favor of regular black trousers, socks and well-polished 
black shoes, the peers decreed, but when he is presiding over the 
lords, he will still have to wear his long, heavy wig and his long, 
heavy robe. Although he has complained bitterly about the wig _ it 
``weighs an absolute ton and is very uncomfortable,'' he said last 
week _ Irvine graciously agreed to continue wearing it whenever he 
sits on the Woolsack. But, when he is sitting with the rest of his 
party during discussions of bills in which he is taking the lead, 
he will now be allowed to dispense with the costume altogether, and 
appear in a simple business suit along with everyone else. It was 
the prospect of change from past custom and a belief in the trappings 
of office, rather than an overwhelming love of silky stockings on 
men, that seemed to so exercise the peers who spoke against the proposal 
Monday. With many of them facing enforced retirement soon _ it will 
only be a matter of time before the government enacts its plan to 
remove the right of hereditary peers to sit and vote in the lords 
_ the House of Lords is extremely sensitive to anything that might 
chip away at its dignity and power. In truth, the ditching of the 
lord chancellor's breeches is but one in a series of similar changes 
proposed, or already enacted, by the Labor government. Recently, it 
decided to shorten the induction ceremony whereby new peers enter 
the House of Lords, an elaborate ritual that involves bowing on numerous 
occasions while dressed in a voluminous robe and floppy cap. It has 
also pared down the trappings of the annual state opening of Parliament, 
another tradition-clogged ceremony, by, for instance, eliminating 
the role of someone known as the silver stick in waiting (Andrew Parker 
Bowles, former husband of Prince Charles' companion, Camilla, once 
held that job). In addition, the lord chancellor will no longer be 
required to walk backward down the steps away from the queen; instead, 
he will be allowed to turn around and walk away in the regular manner. 
It is such changes that particularly upset people like Baroness Young, 
who spoke against the proposal Monday. ``This is a very good example 
of salami-slicing,'' she said of Irvine's proposal, meaning that as 
each new slice is removed, the salami of tradition gets smaller and 
smaller until nothing is left. ``We've had this today _ what will 
come tomorrow?'' she added, speaking ominously of ``dress-down Friday'' 
and peers in jeans and T-shirts. Lord Waddington agreed, saying, ``I 
can see no advantage to the queen or the public if the lord chancellor 
removes his tights.'' He added: ``I think this is neither the beginning 
nor the end. If we accede to his request, we just add fuel to the 
flames and encourage more and more modernization. Personally, I think 
this modernization has gone far enough.'' But Baroness Thornton, speaking 
in support of Irvine, noted that many traditions were ``accidents 
of history'' plucked indiscriminately from one era or another in a 
nation with a millennium's worth to choose from. As much as he hated 
his outfit, she said, the lord chancellor should be relieved that 
he never had to wear a little tunic and a chain-mail shirt. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>