<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981116.0355 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Bill Gates, the chairman of Microsoft Corp., stubbornly debated the 
meaning of words like ``we'' and ``concern'' during an hour of his 
videotaped deposition shown in court Monday. Even ``market share'' 
seemed a curiously alien term to a man whose company owns just about 
all of the market in major product categories of the personal-computer 
software business. Most significant for the antitrust case against 
his company, Gates said that he did not recall what he was thinking 
or what he meant when he wrote in a January 1996 e-mail to top aides, 
``Winning Internet browser market share is a very, very important 
goal for us.'' The government used the Gates tape _ the third excerpt 
from his deposition shown in the Microsoft trial _ to attack Microsoft's 
defense that it decided to fold Internet browsing software into its 
Windows operating system to improve its centerpiece product, Windows. 
Its main rival in the browser market, Netscape Communications Corp., 
may have been harmed, Microsoft argues, but its actions were guided 
mainly by its desire to improve its product and to benefit consumers. 
The Justice Department and 20 states suing Microsoft contend instead 
that the decision was an illegal scheme to use Microsoft's monopoly 
in operating systems to increase its share of the browser market, 
and to stifle competition. Microsoft said Monday that the government's 
tactic of repeatedly showing portions of the taped deposition is turning 
the trial into a ``sideshow'' _ a personal attack on Gates, the nation's 
richest person. But the government argues that the Gates tapes provide 
important context for its case by showing what Gates, the central 
actor at Microsoft, did and what he said about it. The deposition 
excerpts, culled from more than 20 hours of tape, have been selected 
by the government, though some questions and answers Microsoft wanted 
to show have been included. The government insists that Microsoft's 
defense is an exercise in revisionist history. When presented with 
internal company e-mail and documents from a couple of years ago, 
the prosecutors say, Gates' evasive performance at his deposition 
shows the weakness of Microsoft's defenses. ``What we saw today shows 
that Microsoft was quite concerned about Netscape in early 1996, and 
that Microsoft was not merely trying to improve its product,'' said 
David Boies, the Justice Department's lead trial lawyer. Gates has 
a reputation as a brilliant, hands-on executive whose fingerprints 
are on every major decision made at Microsoft. Yet his deposition 
performance is so at odds with that reputation, professing to be forgetful 
and only vaguely aware of key decisions in the browser market, that 
it does seem to cast doubt on his credibility. But Microsoft's legal 
advisers say that in his deposition, Gates was merely taking a characteristically 
competitive and combative approach to what deposition witnesses are 
supposed to do _ to try to narrow the questions asked, fence with 
interrogators and avoid broad or responsive answers. ``A lot of time-consuming 
jousting goes on in depositions,'' said Joseph diGenova, a former 
U.S. attorney who is a Microsoft legal consultant. ``A deposition 
is fundamentally an ugly thing.'' Still, Gates' determined resistance 
to the questions asked by Boies at his deposition apparently struck 
even legal veterans as unusual. Judge Thomas Penfield Jackson chortled 
and shook his head at some of Gates' replies. Microsoft's lawyers 
laughed a few times. Even Gates flashed a tight smile, once or twice, 
as he seemed to be enjoying the give-and-take when he felt confident 
he was giving nothing. Gates paused before answering questions for 
even longer periods, up to 30 seconds or so, than he had in the earlier 
excerpts shown. At times, he played a waiting game with his interrogator. 
At one point, Boies asked, ``Do you understand the question, Mr. Gates?'' 
``I'm pausing to see if I can understand it,'' Gates replied. At another 
point, Boies said he would ask another question, since Gates did not 
have an answer to his previous question. ``I have an answer,'' Gates 
replied quickly. ``The answer is I don't remember.'' Later, Gates 
was asked about his e-mail on Jan. 5, 1996, in which he wrote that 
increasing browser market share was a ``very, very important goal 
for us.'' Boies asked, ``So you don't remember what you were thinking 
when you wrote it and you don't remember what you meant when you wrote 
it; is that fair?'' Leaning forward and grinning, Gates replied, ``As 
well as not remember writing it.'' The verbal fencing over terms like 
``market share'' relates to the antitrust case because the government 
is trying to demonstrate that regardless of Microsoft's courtroom 
arguments, the company regarded its Internet Explorer browser as a 
separate product, marketed separately and measured separately. Microsoft 
says that Internet Explorer is a ``feature'' of its Windows operating 
system, and not a separate product. Indeed, a U.S. appeals court ruling 
in a related case agreed that Microsoft should be free to determine 
what software is included in its operating system as long as there 
is some consumer benefit from the integration. After the Gates deposition, 
the government's fifth witness, Glenn Weadock, a computer consultant, 
took the stand to be cross-examined by a Microsoft lawyer, Richard 
Pepperman. Weadock's testimony, submitted in written form last Friday, 
is that many companies, like Boeing, find Microsoft's practice of 
tightly folding its browser into Windows to be a costly inconvenience. 
This is especially true, he testified, if corporate customers want 
to use the Netscape browser with Windows, since Microsoft's browser 
software is deeply embedded into recent versions of Windows. Under 
questioning, though, he did say that there is plenty of debate within 
the industry about what should and should not be in an operating system. 
Weadock also said some companies undoubtedly find having the browser 
integrated into the operating system to be an advantage. The issue, 
he said, was whether consumers had a choice. ``Nowhere in my testimony,'' 
Weadock said, ``did I say there are no companies that find the integration 
of Internet Explorer appealing. But there are those who don't, and 
they can't get rid of it.'' In court on Monday, the government also 
introduced many new documents into evidence. For example, one internal 
e-mail from Gateway Inc., a large personal-computer maker, described 
a conversation with a Microsoft executive in February 1997, suggesting 
that Microsoft used its market muscle to force PC makers to adopt 
Internet Explorer. The Microsoft representative, according to the 
Gateway executive, mentioned Microsoft marketing and sales campaigns 
to promote Gateway machines, but ``they won't do it if they see Gateway 
is anything but pro-Microsoft'' on the browser. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>