<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981116.0405 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For most Americans, impeachment is a dead issue. But that is not the 
reality in Washington. Republicans on the House Judiciary Committee 
are pressing on, by all signs as determined as ever to approve an 
impeachment resolution. This week the committee holds hearings with 
Kenneth Starr as the main, perhaps only, witness. Think about what 
an extraordinary proposition that is: as if, in a criminal trial, 
the jury heard only opening and closing speeches from the prosecutor. 
Starr is an able and experienced advocate who will no doubt be impressive. 
But he has no firsthand knowledge of anything. His testimony will 
be another stage in his single-minded campaign to persuade the country 
that President Clinton should be removed from office _ a campaign 
that he has carried on by leaks and disclosure of grand jury material 
to Congress. The committee chairman, Henry Hyde, has made it extremely 
difficult for the Democrats on the committee to question Starr about 
the only subject on which he does have firsthand knowledge: his methods. 
There is evidence that those methods include abuse of witnesses, violation 
of Justice Department regulations and lawless leaks. Hyde has blocked 
many Democratic requests for relevant documents and witnesses, and 
Starr's office has refused to supply others. One request was that 
some of Starr's principal deputies be called to the hearing as well 
as he. The deputies have been involved in well-known instances of 
bullying, such as the surprise confrontation of Monica Lewinsky last 
January and the attempt to get her to sign an immunity agreement without 
the advice of a lawyer. Again, the Democrats unsuccessfully asked 
chairman Hyde to join in requesting documents about contacts between 
the Office of Independent Counsel and Paula Jones' lawyers. There 
have been reports of such contacts before the date on which Starr 
first said he heard about the Monica Lewinsky business, Jan. 12. The 
Democrats may even be barred altogether from asking Starr about his 
staff's reported abuses. There are unconfirmed reports that Hyde will 
forbid such questions. If that happens, Democrats will be unable to 
get into a highly significant aspect of Starr's performance: leaks. 
That is the subject of an investigation by the Chief Judge of the 
U.S. District Court in Washington, Norma Holloway Johnson, and a special 
master whom she has appointed. Judge Johnson found prima facie evidence 
that 24 stories carried by the four television networks, The New York 
Times, The Washington Post and other newspapers and magazines were 
based on leaks from Starr's office. They attributed facts to unnamed 
sources with such descriptions as ``prosecutors'' and ``lawyers close 
to the investigation.'' Rule 6(e) of the Federal Rules of Criminal 
Procedure forbids government lawyers to disclose grand jury material. 
Starr said last February: ``I have made the prohibition of leaks a 
principal priority of this office. It is a firing offense.'' It is 
also punishable as criminal contempt. In the new issue of the magazine 
Brill's Content, Steven Brill chides the press for not covering Judge 
Johnson's leak inquiry more enthusiastically. Reporters will not answer 
if asked who their sources were, arguing that they agreed to hide 
the identities. But Starr could be asked whether he will release reporters 
from any such undertakings to members of his staff _ if chairman Hyde 
does not block the question. Hyde's apparent strategy to protect Kenneth 
Starr from vigorous questioning indicates the intensely partisan nature 
of this impeachment process. Barring some sudden change of mind, the 
Judiciary Committee will vote out an impeachment resolution. On the 
House floor, the Republican majority may well approve the resolution 
_ despite the election, despite public opposition. That would mean 
a trial of President Clinton in the Senate, with Chief Justice William 
Rehnquist presiding. For months, all three branches of the United 
States government would be paralyzed. Will the Republicans find a 
way to change this disastrous course _ disastrous for the country 
and for them? It is still an open question. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>