<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981116.0321 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the six years since Hurricane Andrew devastated this agricultural 
city south of Miami, officials here have struggled to jump-start the 
economy. But nature seems to be against Homestead, again, as plans 
for turning the closed Homestead Air Force Base into a commercial 
airport _ a major project that could bring dollars and jobs _ have 
bogged down over the possible environmental damage to two nearby national 
parks. After first winning approval from the Federal Aviation Administration, 
the airport plan is now undergoing further study to address concerns 
about how Biscayne National Park, two miles east of the base, and 
Everglades National Park, 10 miles to the west, would be affected 
by noise, air and water pollution from their new neighbor and the 
development expected to surround it. Plans call for the airport to 
handle more than 200,000 flights a year for passengers and cargo and 
attract new industry. Miami-Dade County officials have promoted the 
airport plan as a way of relieving some of the traffic at Miami International 
Airport, 30 miles to the north, while helping to revitalize the area. 
In 1992, Hurricane Andrew inflicted more than $400 million in economic 
losses to the region; the Homestead Air Force Base, which provided 
about 5,000 military and civilian jobs, was so badly damaged that 
it had to close. In 1994 the base was converted into an Air Force 
Reserves installation with about 2,000 people that now occupies about 
a third of the former base's 3,000 acres. ``We were crippled twice, 
all in one night,'' said Homestead Mayor Steve Shiver, who governs 
this city of about 25,000 residents in the heart of Miami-Dade County's 
farmland. ``It's extremely important,'' he said, referring to the 
airport. ``It's not the single savior but it definitely puts us on 
the right track.'' Federal studies to transfer 1,600 acres of the 
base to the county found the site compatible with a commercial regional 
airport, and the redevelopment plans won Miami-Dade County approval 
in 1996. But the federal government's environmental report came under 
attack from conservationists for failing to adequately address the 
effects on Biscayne National Park, a 180,000-acre aquatic park that 
is almost entirely under water, and Everglades National Park, a wilderness 
park on 1.5 million acres of sawgrass marshes, pineland, and mangrove 
and cypress swamps. Critics see the airport proposal as undermining 
the federal government's own multimillion-dollar restoration project 
to preserve the Everglades. The opponents, including the Sierra Club 
and the National Audubon Society, contend that noise from passenger 
jets would surpass what the National Park Service considers acceptable. 
They also worry about degradation of water quality in Biscayne Bay, 
fuel dumping and collisions with birds. Already, they note, the air 
base is undergoing a petroleum cleanup after the U.S. Environmental 
Agency placed it on a priority list of polluted properties in 1990. 
Airport proponents counter that today's environmental laws would prevent 
such contamination again. Joseph Browder, a longtime Everglades conservationist 
who now lives in Washington, says the county should promote the area's 
natural offerings through eco-tourism and develop hotels and homes 
and the kind of tourism facilities that one would expect to find in 
such a place: ``Instead of capitalizing on a location with two world-class 
national parks, the county wants to turn that area into an industrial 
complex.'' The environmental concerns have led the Air Force and the 
FAA to review the project again, and the scope of the new study has 
been expanded to consider adverse effects on agriculture and tourism, 
air travel safety and traffic. The study is also looking into alternative 
uses for the site, including a theme park, a marine research center, 
a space launching facility, and other government and military use. 
Public hearings will be held on the study when it is completed, sometime 
next year. Miami-Dade County officials say they still hope to achieve 
their goal, with minimal impact to the surroundings. They say they 
have been looking for 14 years for a site to accommodate overflow 
from Miami International but have not found it. None of the county's 
three general aviation airports, which include one in Homestead, can 
be expanded, they said, because of their proximity to residential 
and business areas. The county has committed $25 million to the Homestead 
airport project for a new terminal and renovations. ``You already 
have an airfield there,'' said Sandy O'Neil, an adviser to Miami-Dade 
County Mayor Alex Penelas. ``It's not like we're going into the middle 
of the forest to build an airport.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>