<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981116.0350 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Hours after his swift emergence last week as the presumptive new Speaker 
of the House, Rep. Bob Livingston telephoned an old friend, former 
Rep. Jimmy Hayes, for advice. He did not ask Hayes how best to keep 
his Republican flock in line, or for counsel on issues. Instead, he 
quizzed his fellow Louisiana Republican about how he could best build 
a relationship with Rep. Dick Gephardt, the Democratic leader. ``He 
said, `Tell me about Dick Gephardt the person,''' recalled Hayes, 
a onetime Democrat who is close to both men. ```I want to know more 
about this guy.' ``Livingston was saying, `I know he listens great. 
I want him to talk more.''' That Livingston wants to talk at all to 
Gephardt, who hungers for his job, underscores the bipartisan, accommodationist 
approach of the new leader. The man Livingston will replace, Newt 
Gingrich, had considered Gephardt so irrelevant that he rarely spoke 
to him. Gingrich and Livingston, both Tulane graduates, are vastly 
different. While Gingrich built his career as a rebel, Livingston 
has always reached across the aisle. Both are conservatives, but Gingrich 
is ideological and Livingston is pragmatic. While Gingrich has called 
himself ``a transformational leader,'' Livingston is not known for 
his vision, intellect or ego, and until he was elevated to chairman 
of the Appropriations Committee, was not considered a heavyweight 
in Washington, or back home. ``I'll bet there are a lot of people 
in New Orleans, still, who wouldn't even recognize him if you showed 
them Livingston's picture,'' said Ed Renwick, who heads the Institute 
of Politics at Loyola University. In an era in which Speakers have 
been defined by belligerent partisanship _ particularly Gingrich and 
the Democrat he hounded from office, Jim Wright _ Livingston represents 
an older strain of conservatism. While Wright and Gingrich were tainted 
by scandal, Livingston has not been. And while Gingrich had long predicted 
greatness for himself, and plotted for years to become speaker, there 
are no such stories about Livingston. ``I don't think it ever entered 
his head,'' said Fred Carroll, an investment banker and a friend for 
more than 40 years. Livingston is perhaps best known on Capitol Hill 
for his incendiary outbursts on the House floor and in private meetings 
(he cools down quickly). ``He has a huge temper,'' said Rep. W.J. 
(Billy) Tauzin, another Louisiana Republican. ``He's going to have 
to learn to use it and control it.'' The incoming speaker has a gift 
for timing, a relentless and plodding nature and a gangly, even awkward 
demeanor that has led many to underestimate him. Even his closest 
friends say they never considered him likely to become one of the 
most powerful men in the nation. ``This is a guy who has been there 
at the right time, time after time, and he's always taken advantage 
of it,'' said John Bolles, a former classmate and close friend for 
four decades. ``This is not a terribly complicated guy. This is not 
a guy with a lot of hidden agendas. He's got a good, healthy ego, 
but no delusions of grandeur.'' Livingston, 55, who has represented 
Louisiana's relatively affluent 1st District since 1977, pursues what 
he wants with the same single-mindedness that he brings to his hobbies: 
playing the harmonica, doing impersonations and becoming a black belt 
in Tae Kwan Do. ``When he got that black belt, in the first minute 
of the test he broke his big toe on a board but he just kept right 
on going,'' said Quin Hillyer, an editorial writer at The Mobile (Ala.) 
Register, who was the congressman's press secretary. ``You know how 
painful that is? He's tough. He's got a very strong will.'' Livingston 
has carried that strong will to Congress. He was appalled when the 
Federal Election Commission conducted a random audit of his first 
successful campaign. Ever since, he has crusaded against the agency, 
slashing staff members and starting investigations. With similar zeal, 
Livingston sought the speakership. Earlier this year, he announced 
that he would seek the post whenever Gingrich stepped aside. But in 
the wake of the Republicans' net loss of five House seats on Nov. 
3, Livingston turned on the man who had been his mentor. ``He's going 
to meet with us more often and talk about process,'' Gephardt said 
of his new sparring partner. But the Democratic leader, in perhaps 
an unintended compliment to Gingrich, said: ``Newt's great strengths 
were that he had both a vision and an ideology and a set of issues 
and thinking that he could express, at least to some people, in a 
compelling way _ and that's important in a leader. You have to be 
able to express ideas. And I don't know whether Bob can do that or 
not.'' Robert Linlithgow Livingston was born in Colorado Springs, 
Colo., where his mother's family lived. Eventually, the family settled 
in New Orleans, where his father took a job with National Distillers. 
The job did not last long, and neither did the marriage. In 1951, 
when Robert (``It wasn't until he became a politician that he became 
Bob,'' Carroll said) was 7 years old, his father walked out on the 
family. ``He turned out to be an alcoholic,'' said Livingston's mother, 
Dorothy Billet, who stayed in New Orleans, got a divorce and a job 
at the Avondale Shipyards. She remarried after her son and daughter 
grew up. Billet later learned that her first husband had settled in 
Spain and died at 55. ``Of course, Robert was very upset by his father 
going away like that,'' she said. Friends, though, said the young 
man rarely mentioned it. ``I'm sure it had a negative impact,'' Bolles 
said. ``But he never talked about it.'' Billet settled Robert and 
his younger sister into a modest home in New Orleans' Uptown neighborhood, 
a couple of blocks from Tulane University. One important effect of 
the departure of Robert's father was that the family was always strapped. 
Young Robert helped out financially. Always among the youngest and 
tallest in his class, Robert Livingston was a shy boy, his mother 
said. ``I remember when he was 124 pounds and 6 foot 4,'' she said. 
``He wanted to be the athletic type. He really wanted to be. But he 
was always a year behind in athletics.'' Billet, an active Episcopalian, 
received partial scholarships for her children from the church that 
allowed them to attend St. Martins Episcopal School, one of New Orleans' 
most prestigious schools. At 14, Livingston worked cleaning up after 
elephants at the New Orleans Zoo. For several summers, he earned college 
money at the Avondale Shipyards, ending up as a welder's assistant. 
After Livingston, like many of his Uptown friends, settled on Tulane, 
his life nearly came unstuck. ``What happened is that he went to college 
and got in with a group of guys who liked to party, including me,'' 
Bolles said. Livingston joined the Delta Kappa Epsilon fraternity. 
Robert's fraternity brothers rechristened him Doc (as in, ``Dr. Livingstone, 
I presume'') and many still call him that. After only one year at 
Tulane, Livingston was asked in 1961 to take a sabbatical from the 
university, Bolles said, explaining that school authorities complained 
that he and his friends partied too much. Livingston joined the Navy, 
serving for two years, and returned from his military tour a subtly 
changed man. ``The Navy straightened him out,'' Bolles said. ``He 
kept on partying with us, but he was more able to handle the partying 
and the classes together. He had more confidence, was more focused.'' 
He began to talk about law school. Livingston also met and married 
his wife, Bonnie, a Louisiana State University student. They have 
three sons and a daughter. In 1968, Livingston graduated from Tulane's 
law school and took a job at a civil law firm whose partners included 
David Treen, a Republican who later was elected governor of Louisiana. 
``He was interested in a political career right from the beginning,'' 
Treen said. Treen said he advised Livingston to establish himself 
as a success in some career before running for office. The young man 
agreed and, after two years with the firm, asked Treen to help him 
get a job as an assistant U.S. attorney. The hard living continued 
in his early years as a prosecutor, his friends said, when he would 
often go out drinking in the French Quarter to celebrate a victory 
or unwind. Late one night, Livingston came home to find that his wife 
had placed his dinner _ the entire place setting, from water glass 
to cutlery _ neatly on the front step, where it was swarming with 
vermin. Friends said the incident contributed to his slowing down 
the fast life. When a seat opened in the 1st Congressional District 
in 1976, Livingston was not the Republican establishment's first choice. 
But after one potential candidate developed financial difficulties 
and a second declined to switch his party affiliation, the Republicans 
approached Livingston, who eagerly agreed to run. He was defeated 
by a Democrat who, within months, was investigated and eventually 
jailed for campaign finance irregularities. In a special election 
in 1977, Livingston, untainted and fresh in the voters' minds, easily 
won election to the seat he has held ever since. The only other race 
Livingston lost was when he ran for governor in 1987. Even then his 
accommodationist inclinations were apparent. After a bitter contest 
in which Livingston and a rival, Tauzin, who was serving in the House 
as a Democrat, lost in their parties' primaries, Livingston took the 
unheard of step of raising money to help pay off Tauzin's debt. ``Bob 
felt it would be the right thing to do because it was not good for 
a member of our delegation to be so preoccupied with debt,'' said 
Tauzin, who became a Republican years later. Livingston had planned 
to retire from Congress this year to pursue a career as a lobbyist 
and make more money. But Gingrich was among those who convinced him 
to stay. And Livingston would never have been in a position to drive 
Gingrich from office had the speaker not chosen him over others with 
more seniority to preside over federal spending as chairman of the 
Appropriations Committee in 1994. He has been a tough-minded chairman, 
battling Democrats who want to spend more as well as Republicans who 
want to deliver projects to their districts. He displayed his bipartisan 
bonafides _ and outraged some conservatives _ by keeping several Democrats 
on the committee staff who had held their jobs before the Republicans 
took over Congress. Yet Livingston did not waver from traditional 
Republican goals, like slashing billions of dollars from the federal 
budget and eliminating hundreds of federal programs, while resisting 
reductions in military spending. ``I wouldn't call him a social activist,'' 
said Jimmy Hayes, the former congressman. ``The only theme that fits 
Bob is the fiscal conservatism.'' As he angled to move up the hierarchy, 
Livingston established his own political action committee, dutifully 
raising money for colleagues.He also became known for quickly getting 
to the bottom line. Rep. Joe Scarborough, a R.-Fla., recalled being 
dressed down by the chairman after he opposed a measure to increase 
spending for House operations and delivered a speech that was criticized 
as being unduly self-righteous. ``He told me he was offended by my 
speech and basically told me that I needed to work with the team _ 
or not expect the team to work for me,'' Scarborough said. ``I respect 
somebody who tells me straight instead of someone smiling, patting 
me on the back, and then trying to do me in. With the last group, 
regrettably, you had a hard time filtering out what to believe.'' 
When Gingrich named Livingston to head the committee, they had struck 
an implicit bargain: The new chairman would work with the leadership. 
But as time wore on, Livingston began to chafe at the speaker's tight 
rein. In a letter to Gingrich on Nov. 6, Livingston _ in what amounted 
to a cry for a return to the tradition of powerful barons presiding 
over their committees _ outlined 15 demands, including that he be 
given the freedom to ``run the committee as I see fit.'' Hours later, 
Gingrich announced his resignation, pushed out by his once-loyal protege. 
Now, it will be Livingston's turn to run the House and, like his predecessor, 
to try his hand at the ultimate challenge: building a record of legislative 
accomplishment while satisfying a chamber of restive partisans. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>