<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981116.0226 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Adolf Hitler is often referred to as a madman, in part because most 
people are loath to accept such enormity of evil as anything other 
than the byproduct of psychosis. Yet just how ``mad'' Hitler was, 
and how much of the evil he perpetrated can be attributed to illness, 
either physical or mental, has been a subject of disagreement among 
historians. The publication this week of the first comprehensive medical 
and psychological biography of the Nazi leader, ``Hitler: Diagnosis 
of a Destructive Prophet'' (Oxford University Press, $35), is likely 
to intensify the debate. In it, Dr. Fritz Redlich, a neurologist and 
psychiatrist, concludes that though Hitler exhibited many psychiatric 
symptoms, including extreme paranoia and defenses that ``could fill 
a psychiatry textbook,'' he most likely was not truly mentally ill. 
Hitler's paranoid delusions, Redlich writes, ``could be viewed as 
a symptom of mental disorder, but most of the personality functioned 
more than adequately.'' Hitler, he added, ``knew what he was doing 
and he chose to do it with pride and enthusiasm.'' And while the Nazi 
leader was afflicted with a variety of physical ills, both real and 
psychogenic, he suffered from nothing severe enough to take the blame 
for his crimes. Redlich, professor emeritus of psychiatry at both 
Yale University and the University of California at Los Angeles, began 
his research 10 years ago as an effort to refute assertions made by 
some so-called Holocaust revisionists, including that Hitler was manipulated 
by his personal physician, Theodor Morell. But when Redlich discovered 
that there were few substantive works on Hitler's medical condition, 
the psychiatrist says, he decided to go further, constructing what 
he calls a ``pathography,'' or ``study of the life and character of 
an individual, as influenced by disease.'' The result is an exhaustive 
text that meticulously weighs and considers virtually every aspect 
of the dictator's psyche and every detail of his physical health. 
Redlich based his conclusions in part on Hitler's own statements, 
but he also spent a decade examining medical records, including diaries 
kept by Morell, and conducting interviews with surviving sources. 
The litany of Hitler's physical ailments is long. He experienced severe 
abdominal spasms, as well as belching, bloating and constipation. 
Beginning in the 1930s, he complained of buzzing and ringing in his 
ears. He was afflicted with hypertension, headaches and heart trouble. 
And he had problems with his vision: After a mustard gas injury in 
World War I, he experienced two episodes of ``blindness,'' at least 
one of which Redlich judges to have been hysterical, and in later 
years Hitler described eye pain and hazy vision, ``as if he was viewing 
objects through a thin veil.'' Toward the end of his life, the Nazi 
leader also suffered from Parkinson's syndrome. Redlich adds several 
new medical diagnoses to the list. He believes that Hitler probably 
had both spina bifida occulta _ a not uncommon hereditary condition 
that is largely symptomless, but can cause difficulties in urination 
and frequent bladder infections _ and hypospadia, an abnormally placed 
urethra. Redlich made these diagnoses by piecing together information 
from Morell's diaries, and from interviews with Henriette Hoffman 
von Schirach, daughter of Hitler's photographer, and Ernst Gunther 
Schenck, a doctor and former Nazi who was the author of a German medical 
biography of Hitler. Redlich learned, for example, that Hitler had 
mentioned both conditions to Morell, leading the author to believe 
that they had been diagnosed earlier by another doctor. If the Nazi 
leader did have these abnormalities, Redlich argues, it might help 
explain his sexual inhibition, and the frequent hand washing that 
other authors attributed to psychological compulsion. Redlich also 
offers the opinion that Hitler probably suffered from temporal or 
giant cell arteritis, an autoimmune disease associated with inflammation 
of the arteries. A diagnosis of giant cell arteritis, Redlich asserts, 
would explain many of Hitler's complaints, including his headaches, 
cardiac symptoms and vision problems. A commonly repeated notion is 
that Hitler had only one testicle, an assertion made in the autopsy 
report filed by Soviet pathologists who examined bodies removed from 
shallow graves in a garden near Hitler's bunker, including one the 
Russians concluded was Hitler's. Various historians have either accepted 
this finding or rejected it as an attempt by the Bolsheviks to portray 
Hitler as sexually defective. Redlich remains neutral on this question, 
though he points out that monorchism, as the condition is called, 
is sometimes associated with hypospadia. And there is no evidence, 
the author writes, to show that Hitler had syphilis, despite persistent 
rumors that he contracted the disease from a Jewish prostitute. Hitler's 
personal physician, Morell, to whom the Nazi leader was devoted, has 
always been a controversial figure. Some biographers have deemed him 
a charlatan and an exploiter. Others have said that he deliberately 
tried to harm his patient. Redlich concludes, in contrast, that while 
Morell was ignorant and made mistakes _ at one point he gave Hitler 
both very potent laxatives and opiates, a dangerous combination _ 
he ``was proud of his historical role,'' enjoyed the perquisites it 
provided and never caused deliberate harm. Was Hitler a drug addict? 
Redlich thinks not. Morell did prescribe amphetamines for Hitler, 
but this was a common practice at the time, the author says. ``I think 
he took drugs, but he did not become addicted,'' Redlich said in an 
interview. ``And when he realized they were harmful, he stopped.'' 
He added that Hitler was a teetotaler, and fiercely opposed to the 
use of nicotine. In the end, Redlich concludes that ``Hitler's crimes 
and errors were not caused by illness.'' Hitler scholars who have 
reviewed the new book said they were impressed with the scope and 
detail of the author's research. Dr. Ian Kershaw, a history professor 
at the University of Sheffield in England, whose own biography, ``Hitler 
1889-1936: Hubris'' (W.W.Norton, $35), will be published in January, 
has called the book ``the most thorough investigation yet undertaken 
of Hitler's medical condition.'' Dr. John Lukacs, a retired historian 
and author of ``The Hitler of History'' (Knopf, $25.50), calls Redlich's 
work ``a great contribution.'' Yet the psychiatrist does not limit 
himself to a discussion of Hitler's physical self. In the last section 
of the book, he goes beyond that, delving into the Nazi leader's psyche 
and constructing what amounts to a psychiatric profile. Psychoanalyzing 
Hitler has been a popular endeavor ever since the U.S. government's 
Office of Strategic Services commissioned a psychological profile 
of Hitler in hope of finding novel ways to defeat him. After Hitler's 
death, efforts to explain his behavior in psychological terms proliferated. 
Among them are Rudolph Binion's 1976 biography, ``Hitler Among the 
Germans'' (Northern Illinois University Press), which traces Hitler's 
aggression to his rage at his mother's doctor, and Robert Waite's 
``The Psychopathic God: Adolf Hitler'' (Da Capo Press; $16.95), which 
concluded that Hitler was sexually perverse. Indeed, Dr. William McKinley 
Runyan, a professor in the school of social welfare at the University 
of California at Berkeley, said Nazi Germany became, in a sense, ``a 
test case'' for the budding genre of psychohistory. ``Most people 
who write about psychohistory end up writing about the Nazi era,'' 
Runyan said. For his part, Redlich does as much to temper what he 
considers exaggerated interpretations by previous biographers as he 
does to add his own psychiatric insights. Though his own training 
is psychoanalytic, Redlich says he is dubious about how much psychoanalysis 
can contribute to an understanding of Hitler: There are simply not 
enough available data. ``I find these psychoanalytic treatises are 
too simplistic,'' he said. ``To blame the Oedipus complex or the castration 
complex for Hitler's problems _ these are universal concepts and you 
need something much more specific.'' Yet unlike some historians, who 
distrust any application of psychological theory to historical figures, 
Redlich believes one cannot adequately assess Hitler's actions without 
taking into account not only the historical facts, but the Nazi leader's 
``psychological reality.'' For example, Hitler believed that his father 
was half-Jewish and had died of syphilis. These beliefs, the author 
argues, may have affected the Nazi leader's behavior, whether or not 
they were true. (There is no clear evidence, Redlich writes, to support 
either claim.) Redlich theorizes that Hitler may have thought his 
physical abnormalities _ his hypospadia and spina bifida occulta _ 
were signs that he had inherited syphilis from his father. And his 
rage at this may have fueled his anti-Semitism, and his obsession 
with syphilis as a ``Jewish disease,'' a theme he dwelled upon for 
10 pages in ``Mein Kampf.'' One of the most puzzling aspects of Hitler's 
childhood is that investigators have been able to find little there 
to foreshadow the adult he would become. He did not torture animals 
(though there is a single, often repeated, story about a billy goat), 
and from the little that is known, he seemed a fairly normal child, 
though sexually shy in adolescence. ``Psychohistorians assume that 
the child had troublesome, deep conflicts (including ambivalent feelings 
about his mother and father),'' Redlich writes. ``I am more impressed 
with the fact that useful data about eating habits, sleep disorders 
and toilet training are lacking.'' Indicators of Hitler's peculiarities 
in later adulthood, of course, are abundant, from his sexual inhibition 
(he may never have had sexual intercourse with Eva Braun, Redlich 
writes) to his phobias of disease, his explosive rages, his delusions 
and his conviction that he would die at an early age (he died at 56). 
In his book, Redlich runs through a list of psychiatric symptoms _ 
paranoia, narcissism, anxiety, depression, hypochondria, to name a 
few _ and finds some evidence for every one. Proof that Hitler was 
overtly self-destructive or sexually perverse is sparser and less 
compelling, the author says. Yet Redlich concludes that attaching 
a formal psychiatric diagnosis to the Nazi leader is not very useful. 
When applying such diagnoses, he writes, he often feels ``as if I 
were in a cheap clothing store: Nothing fits, and everything fits.'' 
Ultimately, the psychiatrist portrays Hitler as a man who was more 
than the sum of his pathology, entirely responsible for his actions. 
Some have argued that any attempt to explain Hitler is wrong, because 
understanding inevitably breeds excuse. Redlich disagrees: ``I tried 
to put myself as far as I could into Hitler's shoes, to study him 
as a psychiatrist would study a forensic patient, to understand what 
makes him tick,'' he said. ``Empathy is not the same as sympathy.'' 
In fact, there is little possibility that in trying to fathom Hitler's 
actions this particular author could also forgive him. Redlich, 88, 
is himself an Austrian of Jewish descent, who trained in Vienna before 
the war and fled the Nazis for the United States in 1938. ``This book,'' 
he said, ``is in a way my answer to Hitler.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>