<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981116.0413 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Vaguely worded clauses in labor contracts that require submitting 
workplace disputes to arbitration cannot be invoked to deprive individual 
employees of the right to bring employment discrimination cases in 
federal court, the Supreme Court ruled unanimously Monday. Ruling 
in one of the more closely watched discrimination cases of the current 
term, the court stopped short of answering the obvious next question: 
Would an explicitly worded arbitration clause, reflecting a clear 
intent to channel discrimination claims as well as other issues into 
arbitration and out of court, be enforceable? Because the union in 
this case had in fact not clearly waived the right of its members 
to go to court, there was no need to answer that question, Justice 
Antonin Scalia said in his opinion for the court. But at at a minimum, 
he said, ``the right to a federal judicial forum is of sufficient 
importance to be protected against less-than-explicit union waiver'' 
of the right to go to court. The decision, Wright vs. Universal Maritime 
Service Corp., No. 97-889, overturned a 1997 ruling by the 4th U.S. 
Circuit Court of Appeals in Richmond. That court interpreted an arbitration 
clause in a collective bargaining agreement between the International 
Longshoremen's Association and the Port of Charleston, S.C., as having 
stripped a longshoreman, Caesar Wright, of his right to sue under 
the Americans With Disabilities Act. The clause provided for a grievance 
and arbitration procedure for all ``matters under dispute between 
the parties,'' without referring explicitly to rights under the federal 
statutes that prohibit discrimination in the workplace on the basis 
of race, sex, age or disability. Nonetheless, the Fourth Circuit said, 
Wright could not go to court with his claim of disability discrimination 
because his union had effectively waived that right when it negotiated 
the arbitration clause. Charles Stephen Ralston, a senior staff attorney 
with the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, which represented 
Wright, said Monday that the Supreme Court's decision could have a 
significant practical effect, despite the fact that the justices were 
silent on whether an explicit waiver of the right to sue could be 
enforced. Although arbitration clauses are common in collective-bargaining 
agreements, Ralston said, few of them explicitly waive rights given 
under federal anti-discrimination laws, and so would not be enforceable 
under the test the court set on Monday. The Clinton administration, 
along with many civil rights and labor groups, filed briefs on behalf 
of the longshoreman, as did the National Academy of Arbitrators. The 
group, which represents professional arbitrators, told the court that 
the traditional function of arbitration in the workplace was to resolve 
disputes over the interpretation and application of the contract. 
Unmistakable evidence of the intent of the parties should be required 
before extending an arbitration clause to a case involving individual 
rights, the arbitrators' brief said. Employer groups including the 
U.S. Chamber of Commerce and the National Association of Manufacturers 
filed briefs for the employer. As Scalia acknowledged Monday, the 
court's precedents on arbitration in the labor-management setting 
have been to some degree inconsistent. A 1974 case, Alexander vs. 
Gardner-Denver, held that employees covered by arbitration clauses 
retained the right to go to court for individual discrimination claims. 
A 1991 case, Gilmer vs. Interstate/Johnson Lane Corp., upheld the 
enforceability of arbitration provisions for such cases in securities 
industry agreements that applied to stockbrokers. ``There is obviously 
some tension between these two lines of cases'' that remains unresolved, 
Scalia said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>