<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981116.0319 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The streamlining of corporate Germany, which has been under way in 
fits and starts for several years, has accelerated. In the last two 
weeks, three of the biggest conglomerates have announced plans to 
spin off huge chunks of their empires, which employ tens of thousands 
of people. First came Siemens AG, the giant electronics and engineering 
company, which announced on Nov. 4 that it would spin off businesses 
accounting for more than $10 billion of its $70 billion in annual 
sales and with that, 60,000 workers. Then Viag AG, which owns everything 
from electric utilities to chemical plants, announced plans on Nov. 
9 to sell companies with about $9 billion in revenue and 13,000 workers. 
And last Friday, the nation's biggest retailing company said it too 
would slim down. Metro AG, which is second to Wal-Mart as an owner 
of stores, said it would sell a collection of chains that generate 
$9.6 billion in sales and employ 34,000 people. Three companies do 
not necessarily add up to a trend, and each company was motivated 
by different reasons. But analysts said the flurry of revamping reflected 
growing pressure on European conglomerates to shed businesses that 
drag down overall profit. ``Each case is specific, of course,'' said 
Mark Davies-Jones of Salomon Smith Barney in London. ``But I think 
there is a general trend, as well. What we are seeing are the effects 
of globalization, both of their markets and of their investor base.'' 
Until recently, most of the restructuring in German industry has been 
achieved through cost-cutting. Textile companies like Hugo Boss shifted 
production to low-wage countries in Eastern Europe and Asia. Machine-tool 
and engineering companies made their assembly lines more efficient 
and flexible. Steel companies merged and shut down factories. Banks 
have begun merging and closing branches. Only a handful of companies 
have rethought their central strategies. Daimler, which just completed 
the takeover of Chrysler, abandoned unsuccessful acquisitions in aircraft, 
insurance and other industries. Veba AG, a conglomerate involved in 
chemicals, packaging, telecommunications and electric-power generating, 
has sold scores of small businesses since 1993. This year alone, it 
is spinning off businesses with sales of more than $5 billion. Hoechst 
AG has been trying to put itself through a more radical transformation, 
though its success has been mixed at best so far. The company, based 
in Frankfurt, is systematically selling or spinning off its chemicals 
businesses while pushing further into pharmaceuticals and buying its 
way into agricultural products. More companies are listing shares 
in the United States or borrowing money in international bond markets. 
Siemens, based in Munich, had been frustrating investors for years 
with mediocre profits. With businesses as far flung as semiconductors, 
mobile phones, power-plant construction and medical-imaging equipment, 
the company has been trying to shave costs and streamline its organization. 
But while Siemens abandoned businesses in dental equipment, military 
electronics and personal computers, analysts complained that it had 
never confronted its structural problems. That changed two weeks ago, 
when Siemans chairman Heinrich von Pierer announced plans to spin 
off units with one-seventh of the company's 416,000 employees, including 
the chip-making division. That marked a big departure from past strategy 
because Siemens had always argued that it had to have a strong presence 
in computer chips if it was going to succeed as a manufacturer of 
electronic equipment that relied on such chips. The reorganization 
at Metro AG, based in Cologne, was also drastic. The company owns 
a vast array of retailing companies, from department stores and discount 
warehouses to chains of shoe stores. Two years ago, Metro typified 
the push toward sheer bigness by merging with two other large retailers. 
But analysts said that the combinations turned out to be disappointing 
and that competition was intensifying. In an abrupt reversal, the 
company announced it would spin off divisions accounting for about 
a sixth of its $38 billion in sales. Those businesses are to be folded 
into a new holding company that will be organized by Deutsche Bank. 
The idea is to then list as many as six of these companies on the 
stock exchange. For Metro, the move is an attempt to refocus its capital 
on its supermarkets and hypermarkets as European retailers cross national 
borders. Analysts said the move was also a response to bruising new 
competition, including from Wal-Mart, the biggest American retailer. 
``Retailing is one of the last segments to go international,'' said 
Nick Jones of Goldman, Sachs in London. ``A lot of retailers, within 
and without Germany, have growth ambitions. As individual subsections 
of the industry become more and more concentrated, companies are either 
forced to keep diversifying or to go abroad.'' In Metro's case, diversification 
seemed to bring confusion rather than strength. ``The conglomerate 
didn't evolve as part of a coherent strategy,'' Jones said. ``There 
was no guiding principle behind it.'' Metro is now expected to concentrate 
on such businesses as its Galeria department stores, Saturn electronics 
dealers and Praktiker home-improvement stores. Some experts caution 
that German companies are not necessarily embracing Wall Street pieties 
about increasing ``shareholder value.'' That may be the case with 
Viag, which announced plans to spin off its interests in logistics 
services, shipping and steel-trading businesses that have sales of 
about $9 billion. Viag has annual sales of about $30 billion. But 
Lynn Reinhardt, head of equity research in Merrill Lynch's Frankfurt 
office, maintained that the moves primarily reflected the change in 
leadership at Viag, where Wilhelm Simson became chairman in July. 
And some of the changes were practical: Viag's decision to sell its 
30 percent stake in a shipping company called Kuehne &AMP; Nagel came 
after it failed to persuade the company's controlling shareholder 
to sell his stake. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>