<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981116.0401 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Defense Secretary William Cohen told the president to attack Iraq. 
Secretary of State Madeleine Albright, who was then en route to an 
economic summit in Malaysia, would agree. But it was President Clinton's 
national security adviser, Sandy Berger, serving as the conduit between 
the senior officials and the president, who prevailed. Spurred by 
a vague bulletin on CNN, Berger advised Clinton on Saturday morning 
to hold off. Only 15 minutes before 300 cruise missiles were to rain 
down on Baghdad, Clinton called off what would have been the deadliest 
military attack of his presidency, according to a reconstruction of 
this weekend's events, based on interviews with several of the participants 
who insisted on anonymity. ``It was very close, as close as it could 
possibly come,'' said Cohen. The attack was set to begin at 9 a.m, 
ET, on Saturday. A few minutes past 8 a.m., the phone rang in Berger's 
Washington home. The galvanizing news came not from the CIA, but CNN, 
reporting from Baghdad that Iraq had blinked. The Iraqis had sent 
a letter to the United Nations agreeing to allow weapons inspectors 
to resume their work. The president would have to decide whether to 
call off the attack or kill an unpredictable number of Iraqis, including 
civilians, even as Iraq was appearing to capitulate. Armed only with 
this secondhand information, Berger raced to the White House, arriving 
in his office in the West Wing at about 8:15. Nobody knew what the 
Iraqi letter said. And even if the Iraqis had agreed to allow the 
resumption of arms inspections, why should the United States trust 
them this time? ``It was touch and go,'' said a senior administration 
official. ``Sandy's saying, `Get me the text of that letter right 
now! Get what you can off the wires right now! We've got 60 minutes, 
45 minutes left.' And the president had to sit there and stare at 
the phone and make the decision.'' Clinton sat by a phone in his residence 
on the second floor of the White House. With only minutes to go, Berger 
called the Pentagon, the State Department and the office of Vice President 
Gore, asking all to offer advice on whether the president should delay 
the attack. Berger felt the attack should be delayed to study the 
Iraqi offer. Cohen thought the attack should go forward, and that 
the Iraqi letter was too late and too confused. Senior aides who had 
spoken to Albright, who was then flying to Malaysia for a summit meeting 
of Pacific Rim leaders, said that she would also want the attack to 
proceed. Gen. Henry Shelton, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, 
said in an interview on Monday that ``all the pros and cons were discussed'' 
and that the military had been ready to carry out president's orders. 
Aides to Clinton said he was troubled by Pentagon estimates that several 
thousand Iraqis, including civilians, would be killed in the airstrikes, 
a death toll far greater than from any other American military strike 
since the Gulf War. ``Can you order a military mission that kills 
thousands of people if there is the possibility that your adversary 
is giving in to your demands?'' asked a White House official. ``To 
my mind, he had no choice but to delay this thing.'' Clinton picked 
up the phone, called Cohen, and called off the attack. By the time 
the president's order reached seven B-52 bombers nearing Iraq and 
14 warships in the Persian Gulf poised to fire nearly 300 cruise missiles, 
it was 8:45 a.m. _ fifteen minutes to go until an assault that could 
have killed thousands of people. Clinton realized that he was about 
to make war on a nation that might have just sued for peace, his aides 
said. ``The president decided at that point to halt _ to put a pause, 
actually _ in the operation to see what that response was,'' another 
senior administration official said. Thus began a day and a night 
of non-stop talks in secret counsels within the White House and around 
the world. The argument swung back and forth. The attack was rescheduled 
for Sunday. But after receiving assurances from the Iraqis and Kofi 
Annan, the secretary-general of the United Nations, that that the 
ousted weapons inspectors could return to work unhampered by Saddam 
soldiers and spies, the president decided there would be no war. It 
was a little after 3 a.m. Sunday. Less than 40 hours before, Clinton 
had ordered the Pentagon to bombard Saddam's strongholds. ``We were 
going to give it to him with both barrels,'' one administration official 
said. Then Saddam tossed a monkey wrench into the war machine, in 
the form of a four-page fax to Annan. A copy of the letter reached 
the White House at mid-morning Saturday, as the president, Gore and 
the government's top national-security officials convened in person 
and by telephone at the White House situation room. The meeting went 
on into late afternoon. They studied the letter and decided it might 
be another Iraqi ruse. ``The more we looked at it, the less we liked 
it,'' one senior official said. ``The president said `I'm not prepared 
to accept this.' '' The war plans were back on. Saturday afternoon, 
in the White House situation room, the director of central intelligence, 
George Tenet, offered the CIA's opinion that if Iraq readmitted the 
weapons inspectors, Saddam would probably cooperate for a few days, 
perhaps a few weeks _ unless the inspectors found his a cache of biological 
or chemical weapons materiel. But sooner or later, the CIA's analysts 
predicted, the Iraqi leader would return to his old ways of concealment 
and deception, blocking the inspectors' work. Saturday evening, two 
more letters arrived at the White House. They had been sent to the 
U.N. Security Council by the Iraqi ambassador, Nizar Hamdoon. At 7:20 
p.m., the Iraqis offered unconditional cooperation with the weapons 
inspectors. By telephone, the British prime minister, Tony Blair, 
weighed in, saying Iraq should specifically renounce its Aug. 5 and 
Oct. 31 refusals to comply with the weapons inspectors. A second letter 
from the Iraqis followed at 9:06 p.m. It met Blair's demand. At this 
point, the United States thought it had what it sought, an unconditional, 
unequivocal statement that Iraq would let the weapons inspectors do 
their work. But the argument continued through the night: should the 
attack plans be called off? Should a lesser attack proceed? Could 
the Iraqis be trusted in any way, given their record of breaking agreements 
with the inspectors? Clinton returned to the Oval Office shortly after 
9 p.m. He spent most of the next five hours on the telephone with 
Gore, who was in Air Force One, on his way to Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia; 
with Albright, who already had arrived there after a 20-hour trip; 
with Cohen, Tenet, Shelton, Blair and the French leader, Jacques Chirac. 
``Everybody's exhausted,'' one senior official said. ``The stakes 
are high. There were some very emotional moments. It was an all-nighter. 
Sandy never left the office. Albright didn't get any sleep. She and 
Sandy spoke I don't know how many times. There was still a commitment 
to thinking it through, consulting everybody.'' Ultimately, senior 
officials said, the consensus was that the United States could not 
strike Iraq if the Iraqis had essentially done what Washington had 
demanded. At 3 a.m. on Sunday, Berger talked to Annan in New York, 
trying to make sure that they were agreed on what the Iraqis' statements 
meant. They did. A few minutes later, Berger called Shelton at the 
Pentagon and transmitted an order from the president: cancel the attack. 
Now the decision had to be explained to the American people. Senior 
administration officials, including Berger, had been saying privately 
all week that the U.N. weapons inspections program was essentially 
dead, killed by Saddam's intransigence. The weapons inspectors had 
not conducted a thorough search since August; 100 days had passed, 
allowing Saddam to hide evidence of his suspected biological and chemical 
weapons programs. Now the United States had to strike Iraq swiftly 
and severely or lose all credibility, they argued. Clinton evidently 
disagreed. On Sunday, he called the weapons inspectors' ability to 
return to Iraq ``the best outcome'' of the crisis, the saving grace 
of the frustrated war plans. Bombing Iraq, he argued, probably would 
not have achieved that result. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>