<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981116.0234 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
John McPhee, 67, a New Yorker writer best known for taking long looks 
at small things, has recently published ``Annals of the Former World,'' 
a 696-page look at the geologic history of a large thing: North American. 
In that work, which took McPhee much of the last 20 years to produce, 
he and other geologists travel from the Newark Basin to the San Andreas 
Fault as they uncover the prehistory of the land. The book is published 
by Farrar, Straus &AMP; Giroux ($35). McPhee spoke with Science Times 
recently from his offices at Princeton University, where he is a professor 
of nonfiction writing. He said he devoted himself to the Annals because 
he found geologists and what they do a ``completely engrossing subject.'' 
Q. (italics)How did a 20-year book project on geology change your 
perception of the world?(end italics) A. I came to look at rocks literally, 
specifically. For instance, looking at an outcrop by a road: It's 
not what it appears to be. It's not what it used to look like. Its 
history is embedded in its rocks. Another thing that changes on a 
project like this is your sense of time. We live in such a whisper 
of time. Developing a sense of geologic time is frightening. Initially, 
you come up against numbers that are so large that they don't really 
mean a lot to you _ even if they differ by millions of years. But 
once you get a sense of that, when you realize that one million years 
is really a short unit in the history of the earth, that the earth 
is marching along and constantly changing in its own time scale, you 
come to feel absolutely insignificant. The other side of that is that 
you feel a little less disturbed about the human condition. I think 
it helps in your contemplation of death. Q. (italics)Science writers 
often have trouble making the vastness of time comprehensible to readers. 
How did you do it?(end italics) A. You use analogies, a lot. Also, 
if you just live with this problem long enough, you come to see it. 
You realize that the time of the dinosaurs is very, very recent, comparatively. 
It's only 65 million years ago. The earth is 4.6 billion years old. 
Once you've grasped that, you can close your eyes and really sense 
the motions of collision and mountain-building and oceans appearing 
and disappearing. You can see it going by, in your mind. Q. (italics)Give 
us a geologic description of the place we're talking from this moment: 
East Pyne Hall, in Princeton, N.J.?(end italics) A. Well, Princeton 
is in something called the Newark Basin. Two hundred million years 
ago, there was country here that was part of a super continent and 
got active and started to pull apart. The earth's crust pulled apart 
here and broke into blocks separated by basins, and the largest separation 
is now 3,000 miles wide: the Atlantic Ocean. All up and down Eastern 
America are places where the earth pulled apart and basins formed 
and sediments poured into them from all sides. The Newark Basin is 
one of them. The rock surrounding the Newark Basin is 400 million 
years old, or older. This rock here in Princeton is only a 150 million 
years old because it's the sediment that fell into the basin. Most 
of it fell into a great big lake that formed here in the basin and 
lasted eight million years. Nassau Hall, the building next door, is 
made of Stockton sandstone, which came from down the hill by the lake 
a mile away and was quarried in 1756 or something like that _ very 
local rock. It was stuff that fell into that lake that I've been describing. 
The library is Wissahickon schist and it doesn't come from here. It 
was lugged in trucks from Pennsylvania. Q. (italics)When you walk 
around town, or drive on a road, do you now deconstruct the composition 
of every building you see?(end italics) A. Do I do that? Yeah. Ask 
my wife. She says she'll allow me to do that 10 minutes a day. Q. 
(italics)Tell us about geologists _ you hung out for two decades and 
traveled from coast to coast with them _ is there such a thing as 
a geology-type?(end italics) A. Well, beyond the fact that they tend 
to carry hammers, wear railroad engineers' hats and wool shirts and 
jeans and scuffed boots and carry Brunton compasses, no. One generalization 
I will make is that geology often enough attracts people who originally 
were trained in another science. They seem to get drawn to it because 
geology is eclectic. Geology involves physics, biology, chemistry. 
Jason Morgan, one of the signal people in this or any other science, 
got his PhD in physics. He's one of the cornerstones of plate tectonics. 
Ken Deffeyes, who I did much traveling with, was a chemist and then 
became a geochemist. Q. (italics)One gets the sense that within the 
academy, geology is looked at as a slightly inferior science because 
it is not so theoretical _ it is, in fact, quite earthbound.(end italics) 
A. Well, that could be, although that aspect is arresting. On the 
other hand, geologists developed plate theory in the 1960s. In a period 
of eight years, a series of papers were published that absolutely 
revolutionized our understanding of the earth _ completely. Before 
that, nobody knew that mountains were built by intercontinental collisions, 
that oceans were formed by extensional disassembling of a piece of 
the earth, which eventually opens up like the Red Sea. Anyway, this 
stuff was unknown before these people performed the scientific revolution. 
But, supporting your theory, the number of geology majors in many 
a university's undergraduate population probably will be influenced 
by the price of oil. The fact that this subject is so interesting 
per se does not cause universities to roll over and increase their 
budgets for geology departments. Academic geology is very much related 
to the world of mining and oil and so forth. Q. (italics)You seem 
to enjoy geology-humor. Do geologists have a witty side?(end italics) 
A. Geologists are fond of puns. And it doesn't seem to be very conscious. 
I've pointed this out to some of them, and they scratch their heads. 
For example, one of their primary journals is called GSA Today. Q. 
(italics)Why do they refer to the Pocono Mountains as ``the so-called 
Pocono Mountains?''(end italics) A. They don't. I do. In my book. 
Because they aren't mountains. The Poconos are a flat-lying plateau 
that's dissected by streams. The Catskill story is the same. Q. (italics)Is 
it difficult to develop narratives about rocks?(end italics) A. I 
find it very difficult. Well, I find it very difficult to write about 
anything. It's particularly hard when you are trying to grasp something 
that is virtually in another language and then try to describe it 
in a way that will make sense to someone else not trained in the field. 
Q. (italics)Is it true that in your past you'd tie yourself to a chair 
in order to write?(end italics) A. Once. In the 1950s. I had a captain's 
chair with spindles and I sat in there by a typewriter and tried to 
write. One day, I took the sash from a bathrobe and tied it between 
the spindles and then around my waist. I did it three or four times. 
I abandoned that. It didn't work. Q. (italics)Back to geology, do 
you think most modern city-dwellers underestimate nature?(end italics) 
A. Oh yeah. The seashore is full of people trying to stop nature in 
her tracks, and she doesn't want to stop. Coney Island wants to go 
South. Hatteras Light is sitting on ground that wants to move. But 
we feel it's a National Historic Site _ so we're spending millions 
of dollars to fight a battle that probably is not winnable. Q. (italics)When 
you think about all this, does it make you religious?(end italics) 
A. I'm really impressed. This subject that I have worked on for 20 
years is nothing more or less than describing the earth and the people 
who study it. And why am I doing that? Well, this is the only earth 
I'm ever going to live on, and I find it an interesting place. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>