<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981116.0456 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
They were not considered serious troublemakers, these five teen-agers. 
They had middle-class upbringings in small-town southeastern Wisconsin. 
The few times they did attract the attention of the authorities, it 
was for minor infractions, ``just regular teen-age stuff,'' a police 
detective said. But Monday, police said that these five boys were 
plotting to shoot and kill their high school principal, the assistant 
principal, a teacher, a police officer stationed in the school and 
as many as 20 students. On Sunday night, police, tipped to the suspected 
plot, arrested the five boys _ two freshman, two sophomores and a 
junior, all 15 or 16 years old. Three of them appeared in juvenile 
court Monday and were ordered held on charges of conspiracy to commit 
murder. The other two, who told the police they had backed out of 
the plan, were released to their parents, but prosecutors said they 
might also face charges. It was a chilling scheme that seemed to have 
scant motivation, police said. ``Amazingly, what they said was that 
these are just kids they didn't like,'' said Assistant Police Chief 
Gary Large. ``When we tried to pressure them further on that, they 
said, `No, we just didn't like them.' Why didn't you like them? `It's 
because they picked on us, because they made fun of us in the past, 
and therefore we've targeted them.''' Currents of fear and disbelief 
ran through Burlington, a town of about 9,200 people some 25 miles 
southwest of Milwaukee, ringed by gently rolling dairy and corn farms, 
where a sign at the start of Main Street informs visitors that they 
are entering ``Chocolate City, U.S.A.'' But police and school administrators 
Monday described the plot as an elaborate plan, one that in some ways 
seemed eerily similar to the shootings last year at a middle school 
in Jonesboro, Ark. In that case, two boys tripped the school's fire 
alarm so that their classmates and teachers would be forced to leave 
the building, and then they gunned down four students and a teacher. 
Detective Mike Wiskes said that the teen-agers, whom he declined to 
name, had planned to take rifles, shotguns and handguns that belonged 
to the father of one of the boys. At the last minute, however, that 
teen-ager backed out of the scheme, leaving the rest looking for other 
ways to get weapons, Wiskes said. Dick Peterson, the assistant principal 
of Burlington High School, who was apparently one of the people the 
teen-agers told the police they planned to kill, said that the plan 
called for the teen-agers to take him hostage at gunpoint and force 
him to announce an emergency code over the loudspeaker that would 
instruct teachers to keep all students inside their classrooms. A 
friend of one of the teen-agers, who said he had been told about the 
plot at a party on Friday night, said the group intended to force 
Principal Jose Martinez and other administrators to provide the class 
schedules for between 15 and 20 students. The friend, David Carroll, 
a 15-year-old sophomore, said the teen-ager told him, ``We're going 
to go into the office, get Dr. Martinez, and then we're going to hold 
him hostage, and then we're going to have someone get the schedules 
for the kids that they wanted to kill and then we're going to bring 
them down to the office and shoot them all.''' Carroll also said, 
as did prosecutors Monday, that the group had described the plan as 
a ``suicide mission,'' figuring that they would get caught and killed 
or jailed. Carroll said he was not sure that his friend was serious 
about the plot, but just in case, he told another friend not to go 
to school on Monday. Carroll described his friend, a sophomore, as 
an intelligent, but somewhat troubled youth who had had some violent 
fights with his parents in the past and was about to be sent to a 
foster home in another town. Wiskes said that the plot was hatched 
on Thursday night, and that the police received a tip about it on 
Saturday night. According to Carroll, the teen-agers told some of 
their girlfriends and other students of the plan so that they would 
not be at school that day. He said that a girlfriend of one of the 
teen-agers told her parents and they called the police. Wiskes said 
that two of the teen-agers had been in trouble with the law before, 
and were now on juvenile probation, one for misdemeanor theft and 
one for misdemeanor disorderly conduct. He called these violations 
``just regular teen-age stuff.'' He added that ``some of them had 
family problems, but not all of them.'' Assistant district attorney 
Richard Barta said Monday that his office might seek to charge the 
three teen-agers as adults and might also seek to prosecute the other 
two. Wiskes and several students at the school described the teen-agers, 
all of whom lived in or just outside of Burlington, as a loose group 
of friends who generally stuck to themselves and were absorbed with 
punk music. A few of the five were considered ``Goths,'' youngsters 
who wear black, paint their nails and listen to the dark, screeching 
rock music of Marilyn Manson. Vikki Hatch, a sophomore who said she 
was a friend of the five, said they were part of a group known in 
school as ``the freaks'' and ``the Satan worshipers.'' Wiskes said 
that one of the youths was carrying a copy of ``the Devil's bible'' 
when he was arrested, but he and Vikki Hatch both said the teen-agers 
were not believed to be heavily into Satanic rituals. Vikki Hatch 
and other students said the group was teased by other cliques, one 
of them called the ``preps'' and the other known as the ``hillbillies'' 
or the ``hicks.'' School administrators planned to meet Tuesday night 
with parents. Martinez and School Superintendent Ron Jandura sent 
parents a note assuring them that the five teen-agers were either 
in jail or suspended, and would not be in school Tuesday. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>