<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981116.0436 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Pharmaceutical companies are increasingly souping up their advertising 
for prescription drugs in a style more commonly associated with products 
sold from open shelves in drugstores and supermarkets. Consider the 
blow-ups of Joan Lunden, a former host of ABC's ``Good Morning America,'' 
elbowing aside other drugstore displays in a promotion for Claritin, 
an allergy treatment. Ms. Lunden is also featured in television commercials 
for the drug _ the first TV celebrity endorsement of a prescription 
drug. Schering-Plough Corp., which makes Claritin, has even handed 
out leaflets inviting customers to try Claritin and enter a contest 
to win a vacation in Hawaii. Merck &AMP; Co. has also joined the promotional 
fray, offering a money-back guarantee in full-page newspaper ads to 
customers who are not satisfied with Zocor, a cholesterol-lowering 
drug, after six months. Pharmaceutical analysts said the offer was 
yet another first for prescription-drug advertising. Spending on consumer 
advertising has exploded since the Food and Drug Administration in 
August 1997 loosened longstanding restraints on television commercials 
for prescription drugs. Consumer advertising for prescription drugs 
rose to $100 million a month this year, almost five times the total 
only three years ago, according to Competitive Media Reporting, a 
marketing research firm. The ads have paid off for a number of drugs, 
particularly allergy treatments, whose sales have surged. But the 
demand generated by consumer advertising has raised questions about 
how such ads are changing the practice of medicine. Some physicians 
contend that the ads artificially stoke demand for the most expensive 
treatments and waste time for both patients and doctors. And insurers 
complain that the demand is inflating their pharmaceutical budgets. 
Nearly three patients in 10 who had taken any prescription drug said 
they had talked with their doctors about a drug they saw advertised, 
according to a survey of 2,015 people in June by Louis Harris &AMP; 
Associates for the Harvard School of Public Health, Andersen Consulting 
and London &AMP; Associates. But only 40 percent said the doctor had 
prescribed the drug they had discussed. ``The Harvard study means 
half the effort caused by the advertising is probably wasting the 
doctor's time and wasting expense within the HMO, which drives up 
the cost for everybody,'' said Stephen Schondelmeyer, a professor 
of pharmaceutical management and economics at the University of Minnesota. 
The most successful ads have been for treatments for allergies, stomach 
problems, and impotence _ conditions that are apparent to the sufferers, 
unlike, say, high blood pressure. Indeed, sales of three allergy treatments 
_ Claritin, Hoechst Marion Roussel Inc.'s Allegra and Pfizer Inc.'s 
Zyrtec _ have risen sharply this year, according to IMS Health, a 
health-care information company. Claritin was the No. 1 prescription-drug 
advertiser in the first half of the year. Its sales rose 32 percent, 
to $912.5 million, for the six months from the similar period a year 
ago, said Neil Sweig, a Wall Street analyst at Southeast Research 
Partners. Allegra sales doubled to $186 million in the first half 
of 1998, while Zyrtec sales rose 56 percent, to $178 million. Over 
the same period, spending on consumer advertising for the three products 
jumped 15 percent, to $132 million from the first half of 1997, before 
the FDA lowered some barriers on commercials, according to Competitive 
Media Reporting. Strong sales gains were also shown by Zyban, Glaxo 
Wellcome PLC's new smoking-cessation treatment; Prilosec, Astra Pharmaceuticals 
LP's treatment for stomach problems; and Paxil, SmithKline Beecham 
PLC's anti-depressant, also showed strong sales gains. The new drug 
commercials are following temporary guidelines issued by the FDA in 
August 1997. The guidelines allow drug makers to name their products 
and discuss their effectiveness without including a full list of possible 
side effects. Only doctors can prescribe the products, and the agency 
requires advertisers to tell consumers that they can get more information 
by consulting a physician, a print ad or a Web site, or by calling 
a toll-free number. Drug manufacturers say their advertisements are 
educating consumers and empowering them to discuss useful treatments 
with their doctors. Indeed, market-research surveys affirm the effectiveness 
of drug ads in alerting prospective customers. But no one has measured 
precisely how many people visited a doctor solely to ask about an 
advertised condition, compared with those who broached the subject 
during a visit scheduled for other reasons. Still, some health-care 
economists contend that the advertising is fueling a renewed upswing 
in drug costs, which rose 12 percent to 15 percent this year and are 
projected to be even higher in 1999, according to Watson Wyatt, a 
management consulting firm. To be sure, drug costs have also been 
pushed higher by the introduction of dozens of effective new drugs 
and the growing reluctance of embattled HMOs to anger members by denying 
their requests. But ads ``are essentially encouraging the more expensive 
drugs within a category,'' said Dr. Thomas Simmer, medical director 
of the Health Alliance Plan of the Henry Ford Health System in Detroit. 
Patient visits to doctors increased 2 percent between January and 
September but visits for allergies rose five times as fast, said Scott-Levin, 
a drug marketing research firm. Looked at another way, the number 
who got in touch with a doctor after seeing an antihistamine ad increased 
to 9 percent in 1998, from 7 percent in 1997 and 5 percent in 1996, 
when Claritin began its consumer advertising, said Market Measures 
Inc., another drug market research firm. In seven heavily advertised 
groups, there were 3.2 million, or 22 percent, more new patients in 
the first half of 1998 than in the first half of '97, according to 
IMS Health. The areas were cholesterol problems (Pravachol), smoking 
cessation (Zyban), osteoporosis (Evista), hair loss (Propecia), ulcers 
(Prilosec), postmenopausal problems (Premarin) and depression (Prozac). 
There was a cost for a doctor's time, and at least half the consultations 
motivated by drug ads did not result in a prescription for the drug. 
A recent study by Princeton Survey Research Associates for Prevention 
magazine said 54 million people had spoken to their doctors about 
a medicine they had seen advertised. Fee-for-service physicians often 
charge more than $100 for a routine visit. Employers and employees 
often divide that cost. A visit to a managed-care doctor costs less 
_ about $60, on average, said Gary Lin, an actuary with Watson Wyatt, 
ranging from $40 in a health-maintenance organization in Minneapolis 
to $70 in some New York health plans. And insurers say that growing 
demand for heavily advertised drugs is inflating health-plan pharmaceutical 
budgets. ``Except for antibiotics, we are spending more money on runny 
noses than anything else,'' said Mark DiGiorgio, a spokesman for Cigna 
Healthcare, a big health-maintenance organization. It spends 10 percent 
of its $250 million pharmacy budget for allergy and sinus drugs, a 
Wall Street analyst estimated. Some employers and health plans plan 
to buck the trend by paying for only 60 percent of the price of expensive, 
advertised drugs in some cases, if other equally effective, less costly 
drugs are available, said Helen Darling, a health-care expert with 
Watson Wyatt. Health plans typically pay all but a nominal amount 
for drugs on their approved lists. A daily dose of Claritin, Allegra 
or Zyrtec can cost $2 or more, while Tavist, an over-the-counter allergy 
treatment costs about 96 cents a day, pharmacists said. (Tavist, made 
by Novartis, is more likely to cause drowsiness.) Spokesmen for drug 
makers and advertisers say that many medicines, however costly, reduce 
costs by keeping patients out of hospitals. ``We are all eager to 
attempt to address the major problems _ underdiagnosis and undertreatment 
of disease,'' said Alan Holmer, president of the Pharmaceutical Research 
and Manufacturers Association, a trade group. ``All the consumer ads 
are doing is to empower the patients so they can have a more informed 
conversation with their doctors.'' And such conversations can have 
unexpected benefits. The study by Prevention also showed that one 
in 20 patients who spoke to a doctor about an advertised medicine 
were found to have a different problem that might otherwise have gone 
untreated. If advertising ``leads to a discussion, that's fine,'' 
said Dr. Phil Manning, an associate vice president of health affairs 
at the University of Southern California. But he is concerned that 
insistent demands by patients ``open the door to injudicious use of 
certain drugs.'' Indeed, almost three in 10 respondents in a recent 
market survey for Time Inc. said they would consider switching doctors 
if they did not get a prescription they requested. Health-plan officials 
said that some drug companies were brandishing the statistic in an 
unsubtle sales pitch. But Caryn Klein, associate director of research 
at Time, said she was not satisfied with the finding, because respondents 
were not asked about specific drugs and maladies. ``The patient is 
not an educated consumer,'' said Dr. Brian Strom, chairman of epidemiology 
and biostatistics at the University of Pennsylvania. ``The patient 
is really an unwitting tool of the manufacturer's marketing department.'' 
Nancy Ostrove, chief of marketing practices at the FDA, said the agency 
was evaluating consumer ads to see whether they were undermining physician-patient 
relationships, promoting ``inappropriate prescribing'' or otherwise 
affecting public health. She said the increased costs, if any, generated 
by the ads were not within the FDA's purview. The lowering of barriers 
to medical marketing _ once confined largely to professional journals 
and visits to physicians by salespeople _ has not been limited to 
TV. For their blockbuster products, drug makers have Web sites where 
prospective customers are offered referrals to doctors, information 
about medical problems and personalized newsletters. And as drug makers 
pursue new marketing opportunities, they are also continuing their 
longstanding tactic of dispatching thousands of salespeople to visit 
doctors. Industry analysts expect the FDA to revise the guidelines 
within a few months. But unless the rules are drastically tightened, 
aggressive campaigns to reach consumers are expected to continue, 
even though many physicians object. ``Pharmaceuticals are not toothpaste 
or types of cereal,'' Strom said. ``If a patient isn't bothered by 
a problem, why create demand by driving them to the physician? We 
spend too much on health care. The focus nationally is on trying to 
reduce health costs.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>