<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981116.0421 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times says in an editorial Tuesday, Nov. 17: The deal 
negotiated by eight state attorneys general and the tobacco industry 
would do far too little to combat teen-age smoking, the primary goal 
that any legal settlement should advance. Instead, this proposal is 
mostly a financial agreement in which the companies would pay off 
state lawsuits for Medicaid costs incurred for smoking-related diseases. 
The states that were not at the negotiating table have been given 
until Friday to accept the settlement. That is an unreasonably short 
time for the public to review a deal of this magnitude. At a minimum, 
there needs to be opportunity for comment and input from health experts. 
For small states, a quick settlement may be hard to resist. But for 
big states like New York and California, which are both participants, 
giving up the right to sue _ a condition of the settlement _ means 
handing over to the tobacco industry the big legal cudgel it fears 
most. Many observers believe the industry would not have agreed to 
any deal without the two big states' participation. New York state's 
attorney general, Dennis Vacco, helped negotiate the proposed settlement, 
which could reportedly bring the state $25 billion over 25 years. 
The money is enticing, but the deal, which has not been subject to 
any public debate, does not look good enough for New York to abandon 
its lawsuit. Although Vacco has the power to make this deal, the lawsuit 
cannot be withdrawn until the court overseeing the case approves the 
settlement. There is good reason for public health advocates to argue 
before the court that the public should have some say in whether New 
York goes forward with this deal. The odd political circumstances 
also militate against a rush to settlement. Eliot Spitzer, who is 
locked in a tight election vote count with Vacco and may yet win the 
New York State attorney general's office, is one of those who opposes 
the settlement as too lax on public health measures. The proposal 
would pay the states roughly $206 billion over 25 years. Minnesota, 
Florida, Texas and Mississippi, which have already settled their suits 
for a total of more than $40 billion, would not be part of this deal. 
Apart from the money, the industry would agree to some advertising 
restrictions, such as bans on billboard ads and promotional gifts. 
The plan would set up a foundation to reduce teen-age smoking and 
offer funding for a smoking-cessation campaign. But these measures 
are fig leaves for a plan that would have very little impact on tobacco 
use. Tobacco companies would have no trouble shifting the nearly $6 
billion a year they spend on marketing to formats that are not prohibited. 
The total settlement is expected to raise cigarette prices by 35 cents 
per pack over five years. Health economists argue that the cost must 
increase by $1.50 to $2 a pack to have a significant impact. The plan 
contains no industry penalties if teen-agers' consumption continues 
to rise. New data show that youth smoking has soared in the past decade, 
a reflection of tobacco marketing efforts. The plan's elements are 
not ambitious enough to attack this trend. Significantly, the public 
health community was not allowed at the negotiating table. If the 
states reject the deal, they can still seek individual settlements. 
Indeed, Minnesota achieved a substantial settlement on its own. It 
will receive $6.1 billion, along with a billboard and promotional 
product ban, a ban on placing tobacco products in movies shown nationwide, 
more lobbying disclosure and a decree banning industry misrepresentation 
of health risks. Evidence from the Minnesota trial, which forced the 
industry to settle, will be useful in trials elsewhere. There is something 
to be said for a uniform nationwide deal. But the health-related benefits 
must be greater than what Vacco has bargained for. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>