<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981116.0072 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When the Kremlin finds itself in a tight economic squeeze, it acts 
a lot like the sheriff in the Mel Brooks comedy ``Blazing Saddles.'' 
Pursued by a furious lynch mob, the sheriff puts a gun to his own 
head and threatens to pull the trigger if the crowd doesn't back off. 
As a bitter winter closes in, Russia has again tried to take itself 
hostage. Kremlin aides have drawn ghastly scenarios of the troubles 
that they say will swamp their nation if the West refuses to supply 
billions in fresh aid. Rubles will roll off the printing presses, 
they warn, spurring hyperinflation. The nation will default on billions 
of dollars of foreign loans, leaving Western banks high and dry. The 
oratory has even been salted with talk of the collapse of the Russian 
state and the breakdown of nuclear controls. This time, however, the 
scare tactics have not worked. Call it tough love, Russia fatigue 
or a simple capitulation to domestic U.S. political pressure: For 
the first time in President Boris Yeltsin's tenure, the United States 
seems prepared to let his government fall flat on its face. This is 
not to say that Washington has turned its back on Russia. It is still 
spending hundreds of millions of dollars to help safeguard nuclear 
materials. It is also sending $625 million worth of food to keep Russians 
from going hungry and prevent a breakdown of the social order. But 
having addressed the most serious security and humanitarian problems, 
Washington is no longer pressing the International Monetary Fund to 
provide billions of dollars in new assistance or trying to prop up 
the Russian government. The Clinton administration's hands-off approach 
has been spelled out in a series of speeches by top State and Treasury 
department officials. ``International macroeconomic support of the 
kind we provide through the IMF must wait until the Russian government 
shows itself willing and able to make the difficult structural adjustments 
necessary for recovery and growth,'' warned Deputy Secretary of State 
Strobe Talbott. ``Money from outside will do no good if it is inflated 
away or it if pauses only briefly in Russia before ending up in Swiss 
bank accounts and Riviera real estate,'' he added. In political terms, 
the Clinton administration's response is hardly surprising. For most 
of the Yeltsin years, the Clinton administration was closely identified 
with the market reformers in the government like Anatoly Chubais, 
Sergei Kiriyenko and Boris Nemtsov. Talbott went so far last year 
as to proclaim that Russia had begun to turn the corner under their 
guidance. The West did more than talk. A three-year, $10-billion-dollar 
program of IMF assistance was announced in 1996 just in time to boost 
Yeltsin's re-election prospects. When that was not enough, the West 
cobbled together a $17 billion rescue plan in July to help buttress 
the ruble. But Washington's expectations were shaken when the rescue 
plan failed. Russia's reformers were forced to devalue the ruble and, 
in a dubious bit of policymaking, slapped a 90-day moratorium on the 
repayment of foreign debts held by Russian banks. Soon the reformers 
were out, Yevgeny Primakov was prime minister and a new coalition 
government seeded with Communists began to talk about the need for 
greater state control of the economy and issued a litany of potentially 
costly promises. Having spent billions trying to support Russia's 
free market proponents without a clear victory, the West was not rushing 
to spend billions more _ at least not until Primakov's team drew up 
a detailed budget and economic plan. The Western response has been 
a rude shock for the Russians. Viktor Gerashchenko, the Communist 
now in charge of the Central Bank, and Finance Minister Mikhail Zadornov 
came to Washington last month with only the vague outlines of an economic 
plan, hoping to line up billions in IMF aid. They returned emptyhanded. 
Whether the Clinton administration's tough approach represents a thorough 
rethinking of Russia is another matter. Critics say the administration 
is rightly wary of bailing out Russia, but note that the crisis came 
to a head when the U.S.-backed reformers were in the saddle. ``There 
is no self-analysis in Talbott's speech, as if we did not play a role 
in what happened in Russia,'' said Thomas Graham, a senior associate 
at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace and a former U.S. 
diplomat in Moscow. It is too soon to say if the Kremlin is really 
prepared to take the tough steps that would be required to pry loose 
the IMF funds. To try to soften up Washington, the Primakov team has 
pushed for ratification of the Start-2 treaty slashing long-range 
nuclear arms. It has also promised to limit the printing of new rubles 
and pledged budgetary discipline. So far, however, the Russia's economic 
strategy is mostly just talk. A test may come next month when the 
government outlines its 1999 budget, which will show how it plans 
to deal with its huge deficit. ``They have not done a lot of the things 
that worry us the most,'' said the U.S. official. ``But no one has 
seen next year's budget and it is still not clear who is really calling 
the shots.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>