<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981116.0483 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A federal judge struck down New York City's law governing permits 
for parades and rallies Monday, saying it was unconstitutional because 
it lacked firm guidelines for when police must respond to requests 
for permits. Judge Leonard Sand of U.S. District Court in Manhattan 
ruled that the city law violated First Amendment guarantees of free 
speech because, without safeguards like specific time limits for a 
response to applications, the law does not sufficiently restrict the 
risk of censorship by city officials. The decision came in a case 
brought by a group called the Million Marijuana March Organization, 
which had applied unsuccessfully for a parade permit early this year 
to lobby for decriminalizing marijuana use. The decision is the third 
by a federal judge in the last four months that has faulted the Giuliani 
administration's handling of parade permits. Previous court rulings 
on such permits took issue with the way the city had applied the law. 
Sand's ruling Monday was the first to declare the law itself unconstitutional. 
The latest decision came as New York was honoring Sen. John Glenn, 
D-Ohio, with a parade up lower Broadway that was planned and approved 
within just a few days last week. Sand, who made no reference to Monday's 
event in his 29-page decision, said the fundamental defect of the 
city's approach was that, without time limits, the city had complete 
control over how quickly it chose to respond to requests for permits. 
He said the Police Department sometimes granted such requests rapidly, 
while other applicants, like the marijuana-march organizers, often 
endured months of delays. The judge said he was ``particularly troubled'' 
by extensive delays in the Police Department's handling of two requests 
earlier this year for parades to protest police brutality. ``A scheme 
such as this one, where the Police Department may routinely grant 
applications either immediately or only after extensive delays, is 
dangerous precisely because it lacks consistency and predictability,'' 
Sand wrote. ``The absence of standards, whether in the text of the 
statute or by the creation of consistent practice,'' the judge continued, 
``hinders a reviewing court's ability to determine whether content-based 
considerations have infected the permit application process and results 
in a danger of censorship that the First Amendment does not tolerate.'' 
The case involved a request filed last January by Robert MacDonald, 
a member of the Million Marijuana March Organization, for a permit 
to hold a parade from Washington Square Park up Fifth Avenue to 96th 
Street on May 2 of this year. After the Police Department failed to 
respond to the permit request for two months, MacDonald filed his 
lawsuit on April 1. The city denied the permit six days later, offering 
an alternative route, said MacDonald's lawyer, Richard Wilson. The 
parade never took place. In the suit, MacDonald argued that the permit 
law was unconstitutional because it represented a prior restraint 
on speech. Sand ruled in June against two of MacDonald's claims, saying 
that the city's law did not put excessive discretion in the hands 
of the police commissioner and that it did not restrict free speech 
based on the speech's content. But Sand had reserved decision in June 
on MacDonald's third assertion: that the absence of time limits for 
the Police Department's response to parade applications risks the 
indefinite suspension of permissible speech. In his ruling Monday, 
the judge analyzed 30 parade requests in the last two years. He said 
that in most instances, police gave a timely response to applications. 
But he also noted a half-dozen instances in which groups filed requests 
months before a planned event, only to receive a response from police 
a day or two before the scheduled parade. Sand said he was particularly 
troubled by the Police Department's handling of two marches to protest 
police brutality. A group called the Coalition Against Police Brutality 
was denied a request to parade on March 30, the day before the planned 
event, the judge said. In the other case, a group called the October 
22nd Coalition waited more than a month for police to reject its application 
to march against police misconduct on Oct. 22. The group filed a lawsuit, 
and Judge John Martin Jr. of U.S. District Court in Manhattan ordered 
the city to grant the parade permit, saying the delay in responding 
to the application was ``unconscionable'' and gave rise to the inference 
that the delay was caused by the content of the group's message. City 
officials declined to respond to Monday's decision. Marilyn Mode, 
a spokeswoman for Police Commissioner Howard Safir, said, ``We have 
just received Judge Sand's decision, and we're reviewing it.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>