<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981116.0430 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With Kenneth Starr set to lay out his case against President Clinton 
for the House Judiciary Committee on Thursday, the White House was 
told Monday that it will have 30 minutes to cross-examine the independent 
counsel and Democrats signaled that they intend to focus as much on 
the prosecutor as on Clinton. In a flurry of publicly released letters 
and statements, the committee's Republicans and Democrats maneuvered 
furiously for advantage before the high-stakes appearance of the independent 
counsel. Starr, who advised Congress that there is ``substantial and 
credible evidence'' of 11 impeachable offenses by the president, could 
well turn out to be the lone witness to testify before the panel. 
Republicans are hoping that Starr, an experienced litigator, will 
present a forceful case against Clinton and refocus the public on 
the questions of whether Clinton lied under oath and obstructed justice 
in his efforts to hide his relationship with Monica Lewinsky. They 
also want to give Starr a chance to rehabilitate his image after months 
in which his role as a prosecutor has left him unable to make public 
appearances. But the Democrats are seeking to make Starr's own tactics 
an issue. In a letter Monday to Starr, Rep. John Conyers Jr. of Michigan, 
the ranking Democrat on the committee, demanded reams of phone records, 
messages, letters, notes, evidentiary materials and FBI reports that 
could help Democrats question whether the prosecutor himself broke 
rules as he investigated the president. Conyers also called for four 
senior deputies to Starr to appear along with him for questioning. 
The Democrats' request came as law enforcement officials with the 
Justice Department said that aides to Attorney General Janet Reno 
had, for the first time, asked Starr to turn over information about 
whether his office improperly put pressure on Ms. Lewinsky into cooperating 
at the outset of his inquiry last January. In a statement Monday, 
the Justice Department said it had already reviewed and dismissed 
a number of accusations raised by Clinton's lawyers and others against 
Starr. The statement did not specify those accusations deemed not 
warranting ``further inquiry.'' Law enforcement officials said that 
a review found no evidence that Starr had acted unethically or withheld 
pertinent information about the timing of his initial contacts with 
witnesses like Linda Tripp when he asked the Justice Department to 
expand his inquiry to include the Lewinsky matter. Those circumstances 
surrounding Starr's application to broaden his inquiry and his relationship 
with Mrs. Tripp are among the pieces of information sought by the 
Democrats. They are also seeking documents about the Independent Counsel 
Office's relationship with a circle of conservative lawyers and lawyers 
for Paula Corbin Jones and any notes or interviews with former Arkansas 
state troopers. Charles Bakaly III, a spokesman for Starr, called 
charges against Starr groundless and accused the Democrats of trying 
to turn attention away from the president. ``We believe we have been 
the victims of a series of allegations intended to challenge prosecutorial 
authority,'' he said, ``and shift the focus from the facts and evidence 
that we gathered during the investigation to the practices of the 
prosecutor.'' The Democrats made their requests public just hours 
after Rep. Henry Hyde, R-Ill., the committee chairman, told Starr 
that he would be willing to accept such information in closed session 
provided that it would not damage continuing investigations. Hyde 
also alerted the White House that a lawyer for Clinton would be given 
a half-hour to question Starr after his two-hour presentation. Republican 
and Democratic investigative counsels will also be granted a half-hour 
each and the committee's 37 members will each get five minutes to 
ask questions. In a letter to Hyde, Starr agreed to provide certain 
materials sought by the Democrats. But he said he would hold back 
two documents concerning his request to Reno to expand his investigation 
because they ``may interfere with an unrelated ongoing criminal investigation'' 
by the Justice Department. He did not elaborate. He also declined 
to turn over FBI notes of interviews. Monday night, Hyde, in a response 
to the Democrats, said the impeachment inquiry was not an appropriate 
forum to investigate Starr's actions, and said Reno had the authority 
to dismiss Starr but had not done so. And he signaled that he would 
not press for Starr's deputies to appear on Thursday. After weeks 
of suspended animation, the Judiciary Committee is now pushing toward 
a vote next month on whether to recommend articles of impeachment 
against Clinton. If the committee votes for impeachment, the full 
House is expected to take up the issue before the end of the year. 
Although many lawmakers now believe there may not be the votes in 
the House for impeachment, even Democrats are not ruling out some 
punishment of the president. ``What the president did was very wrong 
and reprehensible,'' Rep. Dick Gephardt, D-Mo., said Monday after 
he was re-elected House minority leader. ``I believe that some action 
should and will be taken. I'm not ready to conclude what I think should 
be done.'' The White House is expected to respond on Tuesday to the 
offer of 30 minutes to question Starr. And for the first time, the 
public on Tuesday will hear the voice of Ms. Lewinsky as the committee 
releases Mrs. Tripp's secretly recorded tapes. The Democrats are likely 
to try to question Starr about other investigations into the actions 
of his office. Those outstanding inquiries include: _ An inquiry into 
charges that Starr's deputies improperly disclosed federal grand jury 
information to news organizations. The investigation is being conducted 
by John Kern III, a senior District of Columbia judge. _ An examination 
of whether David Hale, an important Whitewater witness, received payments 
from political adversaries of Clinton. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>