<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981116.0484 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After months of angling for a lucrative book deal and a television 
forum, Monica Lewinsky has finally signed agreements for an interview 
with Barbara Walters of ABC News and for the publication of a book 
from St. Martin's Press tentatively titled, ``Monica's Story.'' Ms. 
Lewinsky's lawyer said Monday that on Friday, she settled on both 
British and an American publishers to tell her side of the scandal 
that followed her affair with President Clinton, but at a price that 
was more modest than the millions once predicted _ a $600,000 advance 
plus bonuses for bestseller rankings. The book, which will be published 
in February, will be written by Andrew Morton, the author of a best-selling 
book about Diana, Princess of Wales. Ms. Lewinsky's interview with 
Ms. Walters, for the program ``20/20,'' will most likely be broadcast 
in February. Ms. Lewinsky will not be paid for it, Ms. Walters said. 
Ms. Walters said she had met with Ms. Lewinsky twice, both times within 
the last couple of weeks. Their agreement, which Ms. Lewinsky signed 
Friday, gives Ms. Walters exclusive rights to the first television 
interview, and prohibits ABC from selling that interview outside North 
America, so that Ms. Lewinsky's representatives can negotiate other 
interviews for her in other countries and grant exclusivity in those 
countries. Ms. Lewinsky's lawyer, Richard Hofstetter, said that ``Monica 
received offers of more than $5 million and turned them down.'' He 
would not identify the companies that had made such offers, but there 
were reports that Ms. Lewinsky's representative had gone far in negotiations 
with the tabloid show, ``Hard Copy,'' the day-time talk show host, 
Oprah Winfrey and News Corp.'s Fox Broadcasting. Fox executives said 
that she had asked for $2 million, but they were willing to pay less 
than half that. Ms. Walters said that Lewinsky will reveal a side 
of herself that has not been apparent from the reams of grand jury 
testimony that has was released by prosecutors. ``She is not silly. 
She is well-spoken. She is intelligent,'' Ms. Walters said, adding, 
``There's a lot not in the record _ what this year has been like for 
her, what it felt like when the president made his statements, her 
reaction, her views on the various people involved, the jokes.'' It's 
not clear if there are any restrictions on Ms. Lewinsky that would 
limit her from speaking out. In an immunity deal she signed with prosecutors 
last summer, Ms. Lewinsky agreed that she would not speak to any news 
organizations without the consent of the independent counsel while 
the inquiry into President Clinton's actions was proceeding. Recently 
Ms. Lewinsky, who has faced mounting legal bills, had renewed her 
request to the independent counsel's office for permission to grant 
interviews. Charles G. Bakaly III, a spokesman for the prosecutor's 
office, declined to comment Monday on whether Ms. Lewinsky would be 
allowed to speak now or under what conditions. St. Martin's Press, 
which has paid more for books like ``The Arthritis Cure,'' reached 
an agreement with Ms. Lewinsky after a week-long flurry of negotiations 
for the book. ``The general theme will be how a young woman comes 
to Washington, has a relationship with the president and then what 
she went through from there, said John Sargent, the chief executive 
of St. Martin's Press, who described Ms. Lewinsky as a ``pawn in Washington 
power games.'' The project grew out of a torturous and often public 
search for a publisher that would pay handsomely for Ms. Lewinsky's 
story and ended with a deal at St. Martin's Press. The deal was struck 
despite Sargent's public comments ten months earlier that he didn't 
think her tale merited a book. ``Do you want to read a whole book 
by Monica?'' he asked in February. At various times, Ms. Lewinsky's 
asking price for a book varied from $2 million to $10 million depending 
on which trial balloon surfaced in various publications. Judith Regan, 
the maverick publisher of Regan Books, had estimated that the title 
could command an advance up to $5 million and until recently she was 
negotiating a deal that would have included books and television rights. 
But most of the top publishing houses that could afford a generous 
advance remained reluctant to sign a book because of fears that she 
had nothing left to reveal, particularly after the publication of 
the report by the office of the independent counsel and the events 
that followed. The book deal finally came together through the efforts 
of a British publisher, Michael O'Mara Books, which sold St. Martin's 
Press the rights to publish the book in the United States while retaining 
the rights to publish the title in the rest of the world. The company 
publishes the books of Morton, whose book about Diana candidly described 
her unraveling royal life. Michael O'Mara, the publisher, said that 
initially he was not interested in publishing a book about Ms. Lewinsky. 
The idea was first broached to him by a British television program, 
which was seeking to package a television interview along with a book 
to be written by a ghost writer that he characterized as a ``nobody.'' 
After he declined to participate, O'Mara said that Ms. Lewinsky's 
attorney, Hofstetter, called him about a week ago to ask him about 
the rejection and then the conversation shifted to other potential 
authors, such as Morton, who, as it turns out, was interested. Early 
last week, Morton and O'Mara met Ms. Lewinsky at the officers of her 
lawyer in New York. ``We had one terrific discussion and we discussed 
that Monica Lewinsky as a human being is actually completely a different 
person: lively, intelligent, very well-spoken, a typical American 
girl. They clicked, very loudly, and they were making progress on 
the book before he signed,'' O'Mara said. Several publishing executives 
with knowledge of the negotiations said that O'Mara had approached 
other publishers to gauge their interest. Her advance for North American 
rights, the primary market for a book by Monica Lewinsky, amounted 
to more than $600,000 against royalties, a sum that could climb to 
a million if the books earns bonuses for making bestseller lists. 
At St. Martin's Press, the publisher will be rushing to produce the 
book as fast as it can, according to Sargent, who said the book will 
essentially be Morton's view of what happened to Ms. Lewinsky. Morton 
will be the sole author. Ms. Walters made it clear that Ms. Lewinsky 
is not getting any form of compensation for her appearance. ``No money, 
no other deals,'' said Ms. Walters. ``No Disney movie, no show on 
Lifetime, and not for putting out any videos. We were very meticulous 
because we knew we'd be scrutinized and we read all the rumors'' about 
potential under-the-table compensation for Ms. Lewinsky, she said. 
Ms. Walters said it was her belief that Ms. Lewinsky had spurned ``enormous 
amounts of money'' from Fox. ``No one is giving her credit for doing 
this interview out of desire to maintain her credibility and for turning 
down millions, millions from Fox,'' she said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>