<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981116.0489 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Hoping to recapture the New York region's pre-eminence as the United 
States' center of medical and biological research, Mayor Rudolph Giuliani 
is expected to announce Tuesday that the city will commit $12 million 
to a major research study on cancer that will involve 300,000 residents 
whose health and lifestyle will be tracked for two decades. The study, 
called the New York Cancer Project, is the first major initiative 
of a newly created consortium of the region's 25 leading medical schools, 
hospitals and academic institutes. They have been longtime rivals 
but are now eager to take advantage of a boom in federal grant-giving 
and to lure the nation's best scientists to the region. During the 
last 15 years, New York state has slipped from its perch as the top 
recipient of grants from the National Institutes of Health, the country's 
largest and most prestigious source of biomedical research money. 
The state is now third, behind California and Massachusetts. New York 
City is second among cities, behind Boston. New York's turf-conscious 
medical and academic establishment for years paid little notice to 
the decline. But it was jolted into action when the federal government 
recently announced that it would double the NIH research budget during 
the next five years. ``For the first time,'' Giuliani said, ``the 
city is providing seed money that will launch a major cancer research 
project that will bring together the unparalleled resources of New 
York City's medical community in the fight against cancer.'' Officials 
said every member of the consortium would play a role in the cancer 
project, with each institution contributing its expertise. ``It is 
the perfect project to ask for the cooperation and collaboration of 
all the institutions, because it's quite clear that no one institution 
could accomplish the ambitious goal they have in place,'' said Dr. 
Arnold Levine, president of Rockefeller University, which will work 
on the identification of new genes that predispose people to cancer 
and develop ways to prevent the cancer. The cancer project, which 
appears to be the largest population-based study in the nation, is 
unique among such studies because of its size and scope, officials 
said. The study will include the collection of blood and urine samples, 
extensive face-to-face questioning of participants about their health 
behavior and an intensive public education campaign about cancer. 
``That sounds very big to me,'' said Dr. Brenda Edwards, the associate 
director for cancer surveillance research at the National Cancer Institute, 
which is part of the NIH and sets aside 80 percent of its budget for 
external grants. ``I would think they are positioning themselves to 
be very competitive.'' The New York cancer study is one of a number 
of long-term, population-based studies under way across the country. 
Others have recruited a smaller number of people. A model for the 
New York project is the Framingham Heart Study, which has followed 
the health of more than 5,000 residents in a middle-class Boston suburb 
for 50 years, and in doing so, advanced the nation's knowledge of 
heart disease. With cancer expected in a few years to overtake heart 
disease as the leading cause of death, the New York study will follow 
residents to see which ones develop cancer and which ones do not. 
Because of the city's richly diverse population, the project is expected 
to yield new findings about the genetic and environmental factors 
related to various types of cancers and other diseases, and lead to 
better methods for early detection and treatment. ``We will be able 
to look at whatever cancers are most prevalent in ethnic groups and 
try to understand why that's the case so we can ultimately develop 
treatment,'' said Dr. Maria Mitchell, the president of the consortium 
and a former chairwoman of the Health and Hospitals Corp. board. ``Historically, 
a lot of research has been done in more homogeneous groups.'' The 
project will take place in two stages, with the first phase seeking 
to recruit 5,000 healthy New York City residents for an initial two-year 
period. The project will then grow to include 300,000 New Yorkers. 
The huge volume of information from study participants, whose ages 
will range from 35 to 64, will be overseen by the consortium, which 
was formed a year and a half ago as Amdec, for Academic Medicine Development 
Co. City officials anticipate that the cancer project will have substantial 
economic benefits for the city, generating $500 million over the life 
of the 20-year project. The city's investment of $12 million from 
the Economic Development Corp. for a two-year pilot project is likely 
to lead to $200 million from the federal government to finance the 
full term of the project. In addition, hundreds of millions of dollars 
in financing is expected from philanthropic foundations, businesses, 
large drug companies and venture capital. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>