<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981116.0496 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Orpheus Chamber Orchestra, a conductorless ensemble from New York, 
performed before sold-out audiences last weekend at the newly refurbished 
Hanoi Opera House. It was the first American orchestra to play in 
this country since the Vietnam War ended in 1975. The concert on Saturday 
was a high point of the social season in Hanoi, like opening night 
at the Met with bottled water instead of champagne. The opera house, 
a scaled-down version of the Palais Garnier in Paris, built by the 
French colonial administration at the turn of the century, was splendidly 
refurbished last year by the Vietnamese government. Its facade was 
brilliantly lighted as the audience arrived turned out in its fanciest 
Western-style clothes. The most compelling proof of the event's symbolic 
significance was the presence of Gen. Vo Nguyen Giap, who led the 
Vietnamese Army to victories over both France and the U.S.-backed 
regime in Saigon. When Giap arrived wearing a faded, humble blue suit 
of the Ho Chi Minh era, audience members in the lobby bowed and softly 
applauded. The program comprised selections from Beethoven's ballet, 
``The Creatures of Prometheus''; Haydn's Sinfonia Concertante, Barber's 
Adagio for Strings and Prokofiev's ``Classical'' Symphony. The Barber 
was well known to the audience from the soundtrack of ``Platoon,'' 
since Hollywood films about the war are among the most popular titles 
on Vietnam's pirated-video market. But Julian Fifer, the founder and 
president of Orpheus, said the piece had been selected before Hanoi 
was added to the tour itinerary, because of a perceived need to include 
an American work that would not be too challenging for audiences in 
Southeast Asia. It is perhaps fitting that the first American orchestra 
to perform in the Socialist Republic of Vietnam, one of the world's 
last remaining outposts of communism, should be Orpheus. The ensemble 
operates as a collective, its musicians sharing equally in running 
its programs. The players arrived in Hanoi on Thursday, just after 
Veterans Day had been celebrated in the United States. It was a particularly 
emotional experience for Fifer, who called it ``the realization of 
a lifelong dream.'' As an undergraduate at Columbia University in 
the early 70s, Fifer was a leading member of the student anti-war 
movement. Before organizing Orpheus, in 1972, he formed a group called 
Music for Peace, which performed chamber music at the fountain in 
Lincoln Center Plaza to raise money for the cause and handed out anti-war 
pamphlets. ``The orchestra and I are thrilled to be here,'' Fifer 
said, ``to communicate directly through music making, the best bridge 
that can be built and the best statement we can make about our common 
humanity.'' Saturday's concert and one on Sunday were the centerpiece 
of Orpheus' eight-country tour of Southeast Asia; today the group 
was to perform in Kuala Lumpur, the capital of Malaysia. The Vietnamese, 
ordinarily reserved, welcomed the orchestra effusively. The demand 
for tickets was great, so much so, said Bui Gia Tuong, a cellist who 
studied with Mstislav Rostropovich at the Moscow Conservatory, that 
it would have taken some half-dozen concerts in the 700-seat opera 
house to accommodate everyone who wanted to attend. The tickets cost 
as much as $30 each, an amount far out of the reach of most Vietnamese 
people. The orchestra therefore invited the students and faculty of 
the Hanoi National Conservatory of Music to a rehearsal on Saturday 
morning. Orpheus may be conductorless, but it is far from leaderless: 
in theory, each of the 26 members of this musical collective is a 
leader, free to critique the other players and help shape the overall 
interpretation. As a result, rehearsals sometimes devolve into musical 
brawls. ``I don't know how we've got this far,'' said David Singer, 
a clarinetist who has performed with Orpheus since 1977. ``In rehearsals, 
we all have this fantasy that we can say something that will make 
a difference. It's crazy. Sometimes it's like the Knesset, everybody 
hollering at the same time. We've had chairs thrown.'' The Hanoi rehearsal 
on Saturday was a sedate affair by Orpheus standards, perhaps because 
of the audience, which nearly filled the opera house. The session 
began with a run-through of the Haydn Sinfonia Concertante in B flat, 
which sounded ragged to these ears, but at the end of the first movement, 
the audience, heedless of etiquette, burst into excited applause. 
As the players thrashed out fine points in the score, the musicians 
in attendance raptly witnessed a process that could in no way have 
resembled the orthodox rehearsals they were accustomed to at the conservatory. 
Four hours later, most of them were still there for a question-and-answer 
session. Some seemed befuddled as to how the orchestra could exist 
without an authoritarian artistic leader. But when a young woman said, 
``After hearing you play, I am a little concerned about the future 
of conductors,'' laughter and applause rippled through the house. 
Orpheus performed the Haydn work with elegance and wit, but the Beethoven 
ballet sounded small, because of the hall's dry, distant acoustics. 
The audience reacted warmly if a bit tentatively, seeming not quite 
sure of itself. Musicians from the conservatory who were in attendance, 
however, offered unrestrained praise. ``It's amazing that they can 
play together so well without a conductor,'' said Kim Xuan Hieu, a 
horn player and first-year instructor. ``They play like a family.'' 
The audience responded with increasing enthusiasm as the evening wore 
on, rising to a whooping ovation for the first encore, the Overture 
to Rossini's ``Barbiere di Siviglia.'' At the end, a slim young woman 
dressed in a hot pink ao dai, as the snug-fitting shift suit that 
is the national costume of Vietnamese women is called, went onstage 
to present a huge bouquet of flowers _ to whom? She stood at the center 
of the semicircle, where a podium might have been but wasn't, flustered 
and blushing as brightly as her dress, until Eric Wyrick, the concertmaster, 
graciously took the flowers off her hands. As the audience cheered, 
she bowed low and beat a hasty retreat. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>