<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981116.0330 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
I had never been on a cruise, so the idea of sailing the Caribbean 
on the largest passenger ship in the world, the new 109,000-ton Grand 
Princess, seemed irresistible. My husband, considerably less enchanted, 
voted to stay home. ``Wasn't Titanic once the largest passenger ship 
in the world?'' he said. Undaunted, in July I tried to book on the 
ship's first seven-day Caribbean voyage in early October. The Grand 
Princess was sold out, but for her cruise two weeks later, I could 
have a private portside cabin with an obstructed view for $2,267.10, 
including round-trip air fare from New York to Fort Lauderdale, Fla. 
I took it, and giggled when the agent told me that I was No. 223 on 
the waiting list for the second dinner seating. Welcome to life on 
the world's biggest ship. The aptly named Grand, which made her debut 
last May in the Mediterranean, is big in almost every way you can 
imagine, from her 951-foot length, the equivalent of almost three 
football fields, to her 118-foot breadth, too wide to squeeze through 
the Panama Canal. When the Grand Princess is filled, her 2,600 passengers 
and crew of 1,100 could qualify as a small town. Part of the Grand's 
vastness is taken up by amenities the Princess line claims no cruise 
ship has ever offered, including an enormous 24-hour buffet, a wedding 
chapel, a virtual-reality arcade and a digital photography studio, 
where you can have your picture inserted, Zelig-style, next to John 
F. Kennedy or Elvis or on a surf board atop a 20-foot wave. Beyond 
that, there's just more of everything you'd expect _ three capacious 
dining rooms with assigned seating, two smaller restaurants requiring 
reservations, 11 bars, five swimming pools, nine hot tubs, three theaters, 
a sprawling casino, a library, a gym, a spa and a glassed-in disco 
suspended like a gigantic space capsule over the ship's rear deck. 
Even the classic teak deck that rings the ship is so generous you 
need to circle it just over two and a half times to walk a mile; on 
many ships, a mile is four circuits, according to the cruise line. 
I was eager to sample the Grand because big boats seem destined to 
be cruising's future. By this time next year, at least two equally 
gigantic ships will sail, and more ultra-mega ships are planned. The 
law of economics is partly responsible: It costs less to accommodate 
2,000 passengers on one colossus than to divide them between more 
intimate vessels. Large ships can also provide lots of things to do 
and see. But will you ever meet the captain? It was impossible not 
to gape as our bus from Fort Lauderdale-Hollywood International Airport 
pulled up alongside the ship in Port Everglades. With endless rows 
of navy blue windows and a hulking white frame, the Grand, built by 
Fincantieri, the Italian shipbuilder, looked like a skyscraper on 
its side. The vessel loomed more than 12 stories above and dwarfed 
the icily air-conditioned warehouse nearby where I checked in with 
surprising speed and received a blue plastic ``cruise card.'' Emblazoned 
with an image of the Grand, the card doubled as a credit card for 
shipboard purchases and a room key (``Stick it in the door slot bow-side 
first,'' the clerk instructed). I was ready to board in less than 
15 minutes. The gangway opened onto an expansive three-story atrium 
that looked like the glitzy lobby of an international chain hotel, 
with pale maple-paneled walls, curving marble stairs, peach-colored 
club chairs and two glass elevators. As a pianist at a white baby 
grand played ``Wind Beneath My Wings,'' passengers milled about, most 
casually dressed in shorts and many clutching maps. Crew members in 
spotless whites offered directions by the elevators, but nearly everyone 
I saw looked a little lost. I certainly felt lost. Although the layout 
is supremely logical, it took almost the entire week for me to figure 
out where everything was. ``There's just so much here,'' I overheard 
a puzzled looking woman say. Fortunately, I managed to find my cabin, 
E-629, without too much difficulty. On the elevator, a woman's recorded 
voice silkily announces each floor (I was on Emerald _ the 8th of 
17 floors). And though the well-lighted hallways that run the length 
of the ship look like bowling alleys, each corridor is carpeted in 
a different color (your map includes an illustration of the carpet 
in front of your cabin). My luggage was waiting outside the door, 
and I had just begun to unpack when it was time to sail. Consulting 
a map, I headed to a huge open deck, where hundreds of people sipping 
drinks stood near the varnished wood rails and lounged on merrily 
striped chaises by an enormous pool. With a vigorous blast of the 
horn and ``Celebration,'' the old Kool and the Gang song, blaring 
from the loudspeakers, the Grand Princess pulled away. On shore, several 
big condos flashed their lights as we passed. From the start, the 
cruise organizers showered us with shopping tips and touring details 
for the three ports we'd visit _ St. Thomas, St. Martin and Princess 
Cays on Eleuthera in the Bahamas. But the ship was clearly the star 
attraction. Its decorators seemed to have two main goals _ create 
distinctive High Nineties interiors with a touch of camp and whimsy, 
and make barn-size spaces seem cozy. For the most part, they succeeded. 
Instead of the hard-edged chrome and glass identified with cruise 
ships, there are acres of light-colored woods, satin-finished brass 
and custom fabrics in rich colors. The decks, pools and mosaic-sided 
hot tubs came in classic cruise hues _ blues and whites. The custom 
carpets included a jaunty jumble of sapphire and green planets in 
the futuristic disco, and fanciful lions, leopards and monkeys in 
the Explorers lounge, where the bartenders wear pith helmets. Efforts 
to minimize vast spaces were obvious in the dining rooms, Da Vinci, 
Michelangelo and Botticelli. Da Vinci, where I had snared a place 
at the second seating, held several hundred, but multiple levels, 
small groupings of tables and discreet placement of wood waiter stations, 
effectively divided up the room. Tiny twinkle lights winked from the 
ceiling. And in case you forgot in whose honor your dining room was 
named, you needed only to look at the walls, which were adorned with 
enormous contemporary renderings of Renaissance masterpieces, like 
Botticelli's ``Venus.'' I liked my assigned dinner companions, seasoned 
cruisers who seemed a microcosm of the passengers. They included a 
couple from Memphis, with grown grandchildren (23rd cruise), a middle-age 
couple from Rockland County, N.Y. (6th cruise), a couple in their 
20s from San Francisco (2nd cruise) and a grandmother from Cape Town, 
South Africa, who went dancing every night after dinner (10th cruise). 
``A cruise is supposed to be a little bit elegant,'' the woman from 
Memphis observed, noting with approval that everyone we could see 
wore evening clothes on the two formal dress nights. Like my dining 
companions, the ambitious cooking served at our nightly six-course 
meals represented several generations' tastes. Caviar, escargot, beef 
Wellington, king crab legs and lobster shared the menu with vegetarian 
offerings (Moroccan vegetable ragout, broiled eggplant with pistachio 
mint salsa) and low fat, low cholesterol selections (mahi mahi with 
asparagus, fresh fruit with Armagnac). The dinners reminded me of 
hotel banquets _ perfectly acceptable but not memorable. But the desserts 
_ profiteroles drizzled with chocolate, white chocolate mousse, cherries 
jubilee _ were divine. I was pleased to see a poster announcing that 
the pastry chef was employee of the month, though I'd also have nominated 
our waiter, Pepe. When a woman at our table broke her glasses, he 
dashed to his cabin and returned, a bit breathless, with a tube of 
Super Glue. Because the dinners were so rich, I was grateful for other 
eating options. I visited the 24-hour buffet, which was embellished 
with ice sculptures and carved fruit, whenever I wanted potato salad, 
a late breakfast (great corned beef hash, so-so pancakes), chocolate 
cake at midnight or a chance to eat alone and read. Pizza, hot dogs 
and hamburgers were available at two poolside stands all day. There 
were also two small specialty restaurants, one Italian, one Southwestern, 
that everyone talked about. Reservations cost $3.50 a person, and 
were so hard to get that I never succeeded. I wanted to spend my days 
at sea doing whatever I couldn't do at home, and so did the other 
passengers. Sun-bathing was a high priority for most, judging from 
the crowds around the pools, where it was hard to find a free chaise. 
My favorite pool was in the Conservatory, which had a retractable 
glass ceiling, potted palms, mosaic pillars adorned with ceramic fish 
and live music from a Caribbean steel band. But I wanted exercise 
and opted for the daily three-lap walk on the breezy deck and a sprint 
up nine flights of stairs. My first walk effectively chased away all 
twinges of cabin fever _ the air, the teak below my feet, the view, 
even the ship's gentle rocking were infectious. I did the Mile Walk 
daily, in part to earn enough Cruise Coupons to get a free T-shirt. 
Coupons were given out after the aerobics classes, too, which were 
basic but easily adaptable for any fitness level. Below a 10-lap-to-the-mile 
track, the huge, two-room gym was magnificent, with mirrors, marble 
and exercise machines overlooking the water. The classes were full 
but not crowded, though there was a sign-up sheet for the treadmills. 
I also took a free merengue lesson, had a rather perfunctory $50 pedicure 
in the spa, borrowed a Walter Mosely novel from the library, watched 
the Flip, Flop and Fly contest (10 hefty passengers trying to make 
the biggest splash in the pool) and caught parts of recent movies 
like ``The Truman Show'' in the Princess Theater. Most nights before 
dinner, I curled on a leather sofa at the Wheelock Bar to hear John 
de Haas, a cabaret pianist, play his own intriguing New Age compositions, 
as well as show tunes. After dinner, there were at least three entertaining, 
if very mainstream, shows _ Broadway revues with singers and dancers, 
and variety shows with comedians, magicians and acrobats. If one theater 
was full, I'd visit another. A sweet surprise was that I rarely stood 
in line for anything. The other surprise, considerably less sweet, 
was shipboard fees. Coffee, tea, iced tea and water were free, but 
there was a fee, and a 15 percent service charge, for all other beverages, 
even soft drinks at dinner. Those $1.50 fruit punches, $2.50 Haagen-Dazs 
milk shakes and $3 drinks of the day (margaritas, rum punches and 
a weird Kah-lua-and-banana concoction) added up. So did tours of the 
ports _ for $22, I had an enjoyable bus tour of St. Martin _as well 
as visits to the Virtual Reality arcade, digital photo studio and 
putting green. I paid $47.50 for a five-minute call to New York; at 
least the connection was excellent. I didn't spend a lot of time in 
my cabin because the rest of the ship was more interesting. Though 
more than 700 of the ship's 1,300 cabins have balconies, mine didn't; 
instead, a large orange and white life boat was parked outside my 
window, obstructing the view, as I had been warned. My crisp blue 
and white room was comfortable _ for one person, at least _ and I 
liked the huge mirror framed in the same pale stripe fabric as the 
curtains. The room opened onto a compact dressing area with narrow 
floor-to-ceiling shelves and an open closet with removable wood hangers. 
Unfortunately, there was no place to store a large suitcase. The tiny 
bathroom consisted of a stall shower, toilet and sink. (Larger cabins 
had bathtubs with showers.) Handsome wood moldings softened the room's 
sharp edges and accented the night stands and desk. A built-in corner 
cabinet hid the mini-fridge and had shelves for glasses and a television, 
which received two 24-hour movie channels, among others. Two twin 
beds were pushed together to form a queen on the opposite wall, where 
bedside panels controlled the lights. The service was excellent. The 
extra blanket I requested arrived promptly, fresh towels appeared 
twice a day, and though I twice forgot to hang my breakfast request 
on the front door at bedtime, my coffee, cranberry juice and three 
little raisin danish arrived shortly after I put out the card. I had 
worried about getting seasick, but our cruise was remarkably calm, 
due in large part to the ship's stabilizers. I was shocked to discover 
just how turbulent the water really was the day we took tenders to 
St. Martin and I almost fell out. Back on the ship, however, everything 
was smooth, with just a slight sway that was alternately unnerving 
and soothing, even while moving at 22 knots _ faster than most cruise 
ships, the line says. I also relished the special moments that came 
without warning, like the night I saw a silvery sliver of moon from 
the deck or the dramatically blustery day I watched the sky turn inky 
blue at dusk. By the end of the trip, I'd even found several quiet 
places to curl up with a book and forget that 2,599 other passengers 
were on board. My favorite was the disco on the top floor, a fantasy 
room where Star Wars meets the Starlite Lounge that you'd find only 
on a cruise ship. I liked the teal club chairs sprinkled with silver 
stars. And I loved the view of the foamy turquoise stripe the ship 
left behind as it sailed. Most of all, I liked the fact that the ship's 
noisiest spot by night was one of the quietest by day. A big impersonal 
ship could, in fact, be homey. By the end of the cruise, I had even 
begun to see passengers I recognized. But I never did meet the captain. 
$2,267, plus Cokes Though many people book cruises through travel 
agents, I called the Princess Cruise Line directly to book my cruise 
at (800) 774-6237. My $2,267.10 fare for the seven-day cruise in October 
included an outside cabin for one, round-trip air fare from New York 
to Fort Lauderdale, Fla., port fees and cancellation insurance. There 
is a charge for any extras like soft drinks, alcoholic drinks or ice 
cream outside of meals. I spent an additional $208.15 on these and 
such activities as a tour of St. Martin ($22), a pedicure ($57.50) 
and an international phone call ($47.50). The Grand Princess sails 
the Caribbean until she crosses the Atlantic May 23, then cruises 
the Mediterranean starting June 7. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>