<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981116.0471 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Bryan Cox stood in the middle of the Jets' locker room Monday afternoon, 
calmer than he had been on Sunday after the Jets' unexpected loss 
to the Indianapolis Colts. Still, the 30-year-old linebacker was perturbed. 
``I'm frustrated, and angry,'' Cox said. After that great victory 
in the rain on Nov. 1 in Kansas City and the wonderful performance 
a week later against Buffalo at home, what does a loss to the lowly 
Colts say about the Jets? ``It says we're immature,'' Cox said. ``That's 
my honest opinion. As a group, we are immature. We got some people 
on this team with learning disabilities: They just don't understand. 
Sometimes you get some guys who think they're still on scholarship 
and don't understand this is how they feed their families.'' Despite 
Cox's terse words and coach Bill Parcells' anger on Sunday and Monday, 
the Jets' locker room was upbeat Monday. Players were walking tall 
and talking in relaxed, easy tones in the confident manner of a team 
still in the thick of the playoff race. Maybe it was this easy manner 
that disturbed Cox, an eighth-year National Football League veteran 
and first-year Jet, who knows how fragile success can be, how thin 
the line is that separates making it from not making it. The Jets, 
who were sitting pretty at 6-3 before Sunday's game with the Colts, 
are now sitting more precariously at 6-4. ``We could have put ourselves 
in position in our division to be coming down to those last games 
with New England, Buffalo and Miami sitting 5-0,'' said Cox, referring 
to the Jets' record in the American Football Conference East, which 
now stands at 4-1. ``Yesterday's loss was brutal on us. But the thing 
that was most upsetting to me was that a lot of guys yesterday before 
the game _ and coaches _ recognized the fact that in the locker room 
we weren't ready to play.'' Not every Jet shares Cox's view of the 
ship. Aaron Glenn, whose 104-yard return of a missed field-goal attempt 
for a touchdown appeared to be a knockout blow for the Jets, said 
the defeat was a loss, not a statement from an oracle. ``When you 
start getting on a roll, a lot of people expect you to go out there 
and win every game,'' Glenn said. ``Sometimes in this league, things 
don't go your way.'' Perhaps Cox and Parcells should arrange a midweek 
field trip for the Jets to Giants Stadium. Let the Jets observe the 
Giants' dismal locker room; let them see firsthand how fragile success 
can be, how dreams so quickly can turn to ashes. Last year at this 
time, the Giants were rushing toward an improbable division title 
under the first-year coach Jim Fassel. Fassel booted out Dave Brown 
and enthusiastically installed the exuberant Danny Kanell as the Giants' 
quarterback. With six weeks left in this season, however, the Giants 
are a disaster area. Fassel was forced to re-evaluate Kanell on Sunday 
as the coach himself was being scrutinized. Why have there been such 
dramatic changes? Cox said the reason was parity. ``We can't afford 
to take a week off,'' he said. ``No one in this league can afford 
to take a week off. Anybody can beat anybody in this league. ``It's 
not like in the past, before free agency, when you knew San Francisco 
was going to go 12-4 or 11-5. In this league, you can see a 4-8 team 
be an underdog and win by 30 points.'' But maybe there's something 
more insidious than mere parity. Free agency has had an exciting but 
unsettling effect on the ecosystem of the game. Free agency, and the 
escalating coach-hopping, affects the normal growth process, in which 
players mature and jell, with a sort of growth hormone. Players play 
and then leave. Free agents are quick fixes that allow teams to go 
from good to bad, bad to good. At every level the margin for error 
is narrower. Fassel makes one seemingly innocuous decision to let 
Jason Sehorn run back kickoffs. Just like that, Sehorn is lost for 
the year with a knee injury in a preseason game, and the Giants' season 
is turned upside down. Now Kanell, the player Fassel thought could 
take the Giants to the next level, may be on the bench and Fassel 
is on the hot seat. The Giants' lessons can be compressed into the 
last six weeks of the season for the Jets. They have Tennessee coming 
up on the road and also have games against division rivals New England, 
Miami and Buffalo. The difference between ending up 12-4 and 6-10 
rests on that thin line the Jets keep straddling and the Giants have 
already crossed. The thinnest line of all separates the Jets from 
the Giants. The Giants lost all their illusions a few weeks ago; now 
their dreams are crushed as well. The Jets still have a few illusions 
left, and lots of dreams. A couple more weekends like Sunday in Indianapolis, 
however, and they'll have plenty of blues, too. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>