<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981116.0238 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Vice President Al Gore rebuked the Malaysian government for suppressing 
freedom and championed the growing protest movement here Monday as 
tensions between the United States and Malaysia boiled over at a meeting 
of Pacific Rim countries. Gore, standing in for President Clinton 
at the annual meeting of the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation forum, 
praised Malaysians who have rallied against Prime Minister Mahathir 
Mohamad as ``brave people.'' ``Democracies have done better in coping 
with economic crises than nations where freedom is suppressed,'' Gore 
said in a speech. ``Democracy confers a stamp of legitimacy that reforms 
must have in order to be effective.'' ``And so, among nations suffering 
economic crises, we continue to hear calls for democracy, calls for 
reform in many languages _ people's power, doi moi, reformasi,'' he 
said, referring to the slogans of reform movements in the Philippines, 
Vietnam and Malaysia. ``We hear them today, right here, right now, 
among the brave people of Malaysia.'' ``Reformasi,'' or reform, is 
the rallying cry of protesters who are demanding the resignation of 
Mahathir. The Prime Minister has been the object of searing criticism 
for ousting and imprisoning his reform-minded deputy, Anwar Ibrahim, 
who is being tried on sex-related and corruption charges. Though few 
protesters have taken to the heavily guarded streets of Kuala Lumpur 
this week, the Anwar case has poisoned the atmosphere at a meeting 
of leaders who were trying to focus on the crushing economic crisis. 
Gore's broadside against his Malaysian hosts eclipsed his announcement 
that the United States and Japan would jointly pledge $10 billion 
in financing to help rebuild Asia's shattered banks and corporations. 
The plan is the first major collaboration of the United States and 
Japan in confronting the Asian crisis. And it comes after the two 
countries sparred over lowering trade barriers in the region. On Monday, 
though, the rancor was entirely between the United States and Malaysia. 
Prime Minister Mahathir and other top officials were in the audience 
during Gore's speech, and his words drew a sulfurous reaction. ``It 
was the most disgusting speech I've heard in my life,'' Rafidah Aziz, 
the Malaysian trade minister, said to a group of reporters afterward. 
The ill will between the United States and Malaysia has been building 
since this meeting began. When Clinton, who started these gatherings 
six years ago, canceled his visit because of the Iraq crisis, some 
people here interpreted it as a convenient excuse to avoid coming 
to a country in disfavor. On Sunday, Rafidah clashed publicly with 
Secretary of State Madeleine Albright, who met with the wife of Anwar, 
Wan Azizah Wan Ismail, during her 24-hour visit here. At a news conference, 
Albright expressed ``great concern'' over Anwar's treatment. After 
insisting that Anwar would receive a fair trial, Rafidah said she 
would like to meet Kenneth Starr, the independent counsel who is investigating 
Clinton, on her next visit to the United States. ``He's not in jail,'' 
replied a stone-faced Albright. American officials are not the only 
visitors who have sought to make an issue of Anwar's plight. The President 
of the Philippines, Joseph Estrada, met with Anwar's wife Monday, 
and on Saturday, the Canadian Foreign Minister, Lloyd Axworthy, also 
met Wan Azizah. Mahathir has bitterly criticized visitors for meddling 
in Malaysia's internal affairs, and people who watched him Monday 
night during Gore's speech said he appeared deeply offended by the 
Vice President's remarks. Although several hundred people milled outside 
the convention center while Gore spoke _ a typical prelude to a demonstration 
in this country _ the crowd did not coalesce and eventually dispersed. 
Red water-cannon trucks were parked prominently around the building. 
After Gore's speech, American and Japanese officials struggled to 
switch the focus to their new financing package. Under the terms of 
the plan, the United States has pledged to contribute $5 billion worth 
of trade financing and insurance to help bolster the efforts of governments 
in Thailand, South Korea, and Indonesia to recapitalize their debt-stricken 
banks and companies. Another $5 billion is to be provided by a separate 
Asian recovery fund, officials said. Japan has agreed to commit $3 
billion to that fund, which is also to include money from the World 
Bank and the Asian Development Bank. The United States has rebuffed 
previous Japanese proposals for an Asian recovery fund. But officials 
of both countries noted that the nature of the financial crisis has 
changed from a panic-inducing meltdown of currencies and government 
reserves to a more chronic, grinding recession. To revive commercial 
activity, Gore said the United States needed to work with Japan and 
other countries. ``Just as today's economic crises are global in scope, 
the solutions must be global as well,'' Gore said. A senior American 
official conceded, however, that it would be several more weeks before 
the United States and Japan even agreed on the mechanics of the plan. 
And given the scope of the economic devastation, he said the plan 
should not be regarded a silver bullet to solve the crisis. ``This 
is not going to be a `Big Bang' solution for the region's problems,'' 
said the official, who spoke on condition that he not be identified. 
``It is a modest, quite sensible set of proposals.'' With its emphasis 
on recovery rather than rescue, the proposal is in keeping with the 
tone of this meeting, which, aside from the political pyrotechnics, 
has been marked by subdued reflection on the costs of the Asian crisis. 
President Kim Dae Jung of South Korea said his country had to bear 
much of the responsibility for its currency collapse in July 1997, 
which devastated Korea's economy and left it within a whisker of defaulting 
on its loans. ``We now know why and how the crisis came,'' Kim said 
candidly. ``It was because of the collusive ties between politics 
and businesses, government-controlled financing, and widespread corruption.'' 
Western business leaders exhorted Asian countries not to give up on 
reforming their economies. But they acknowledged that the United States 
and Europe bore some responsibility for the crisis. Jon S. Corzine, 
the co-chairman of Goldman Sachs &AMP; Company, said developed countries 
must rein in the vast, unpredictable flows of capital in and out of 
emerging markets. Corzine even called for government regulation of 
hedge funds, which contribute to these sudden surges. But after Gore's 
speech it is not clear that Kuala Lumpur will be a place for earnest 
discussions of global finance. Asked Monday evening about the American 
commitment to provide $5 billion in financing to Asia, Rafidah said: 
``I don't care. To me, it's not worth five cents.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>