<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981116.0325 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In a muted reprise of last year's ultimately failed tobacco settlement 
deal, state officials Monday unveiled a new $206 billion proposal 
here designed to end all state lawsuits against cigarette makers to 
recover the cost of treating smoking-related illnesses. Last year, 
at an emotionally charged news conference, state attorneys general 
disclosed a sweeping $368.5 billion settlement plan intended to change 
the nation's tobacco landscape through measures like federal nicotine 
regulation and the payment of fines by the industry if youth smoking 
did not decline. But the setting for Monday's announcement _ a room 
at the National Press Club here with a ceiling that barely cleared 
the head of the tallest participant _ symbolized the scaled-back goals 
of the newest plan. The $206 billion, which is to be paid over 25 
years, does include financing for measures like advertisements and 
research to deter youth smoking. And cigarette makers have also agreed 
to end the use of tobacco billboards and other marketing practices. 
But because the agreement represents the settling of lawsuits and 
does not require congressional approval, it does not include measures 
like nicotine regulation. Still, it appears that the new plan will 
succeed where the earlier one failed. So far, more than a dozen states 
have publicly announced their support for the proposal and most others 
are expected to sign on by Friday, when officials must indicate whether 
they will participate in the proposal or continue with lawsuits against 
the industry. Christine Gregoire, the Washington state attorney general 
and a lead negotiator of the new plan, said she believed that the 
time had come to ``stop the legal bickering and move the tobacco fight 
out of the courtroom and into the streets.'' If finalized, the plan 
would entail the largest legal settlement in this country's history 
and would cover 46 states that have either sued the industry or have 
yet to file a claim. (Four states _ Florida, Minnesota, Mississippi 
and Texas _ have already settled lawsuits in deals worth some $40 
billion over 25 years.) Attorney General Mike Fisher of Pennsylvania 
said that fees for lawyers hired by states to pursue tobacco claims 
would most likely not exceed 5 percent of the settlement deal. Even 
at that level, those fees, which would be paid by cigarette makers, 
could reach $10 billion. The producers participating in the plan are 
the Philip Morris Cos.; R.J. Reynolds Tobacco, a subsidiary of RJR 
Nabisco Holdings Corp; Lorillard Tobacco, a subsidiary of the Loews 
Corp., and Brown &AMP; Williamson Tobacco, a subsidiary of BAT Industries 
PLC. Under the proposal, New York state would receive $25 billion, 
New Jersey would receive $7.6 billion, and Connecticut would receive 
$3.6 billion. Both Attorney General Dennis Vacco of New York, a plan 
negotiator, and Attorney General Peter Verniero of New Jersey said 
Monday they would back the deal. Attorney General Richard Blumenthal 
of Connecticut said he was still studying the proposal. Tobacco producers 
have not said how many states must participate in order for them to 
finalize the deal. But Attorney General Jeffrey Modisett of Indiana 
said he had spoken to other state officials and believed that support 
for it was overwhelming. Modisett said the most likely holdouts were 
Maryland and Massachusetts. Both Iowa and Arizona, states once cited 
as possible opponents of the plan, have announced their support for 
it. On Monday, President Clinton applauded those involved in negotiating 
the deal, calling it an important step. But he, state officials and 
public health groups called on Congress Monday to pass legislation 
when it convenes in January that would allow the government to regulate 
tobacco products and permit measures like stronger warning labels. 
The new plan may prove less costly to the tobacco industry than envisioned. 
For example, should Congress approve new tobacco excise taxes and 
pass some of that money on to the states, producers' payments under 
the settlement plan would be reduced. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>