<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981116.0494 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
If Bernie Williams' ultimate intent is to re-sign with the Yankees, 
he may be running out of time. The Yankees may replace him in their 
lineup by week's end, with slugger Albert Belle. Yankees' general 
manager Brian Cashman met with Belle and his agent in Tucson, Ariz., 
Monday afternoon, and a baseball official familiar with the negotiations 
said that Belle hopes to conclude a deal either with the Yankees or 
the Boston Red Sox by the weekend. The Yankees' aggressiveness in 
negotiating with Belle could be read merely as a feint in their negotiations 
with the free agent Williams: The Yankees don't want Williams and 
his agent, Scott Boras, to drag out contract talks and simultaneously 
drive up the center fielder's asking price. By appearing as if they 
are serious about Belle, the Yankees can at least attempt to force 
Williams to accelerate his timetable. But the Yankees, leery of waiting 
too long and being left without a hitter to adequately replace Williams' 
presence in their lineup, seem to be wholly serious about Belle. The 
team has been engaging in the background checks that are typical before 
any player is acquired, and Yankees' manager Joe Torre has told others 
in the organization that he would love to have Belle's production 
and is confident he would be able to cope with whatever complications 
Belle's petulant behavior may create. Belle, 32, batted .328 with 
49 home runs and 152 RBIs for the Chicago White Sox last season, the 
seventh consecutive season he drove in more than 100 runs. His defensive 
skills as a left fielder have improved, and he is undoubtedly one 
of the greatest offensive players of his era. A right-handed hitter, 
he would fit in neatly in the Yankees' cleanup slot, between the left-handed 
hitters Paul O'Neill and Tino Martinez. How he would fit into the 
harmonious Yankees' clubhouse is another matter altogether. Belle 
has a long history of disciplinary action taken against him, for everything 
from throwing a baseball at a fan in the stands to leveling Milwaukee 
second baseman Fernando Vina on a tag play, and his contentious relationship 
with the news media is well known. More pertinent to the Yankees will 
be Belle's ability to exist with the structure of a team, and as they 
check around, this is what they are probably hearing: that Belle is 
self-absorbed and sometimes bizarre, that his antics can be a great 
distraction at times, but that he shows up ready to play every day, 
that he is smart and extremely intense in all his at-bats. There is 
also the question of how much Belle wants the Yankees or the Red Sox 
to pay him. Executives with other teams have heard that Belle hopes 
to be the game's highest-paid player and is asking for a contract 
equal to or greater than the one Mike Piazza recently signed with 
the Mets (seven years, $91 million); if that is so, it seems unlikely 
the Yankees will be willing to bid that high. On the other hand, the 
Yankees might be willing to make Belle a lucrative offer of, say, 
four years, for $10 million to $14 million a season. Belle, working 
within a monthlong contractual window, must decide by Dec. 2 whether 
he wants to sign with another team or resume his current contract 
with the White Sox, which has three years and $30 million remaining. 
Williams will be making a swing to the East Coast, as well, meeting 
with the Red Sox later this week and then, at an undetermined time, 
with the Orioles. Yankee officials will meet Wednesday with Brian 
Jordan, a free-agent outfielder, but Jordan is in the vortex of a 
bidding war among Baltimore, Atlanta and the Yankees, and whoever 
signs him may have to pay him as an upper-echelon player, for $8 million 
to $9 million a season. Baltimore may be the front-runner in the financial 
jousting for pitcher Todd Stottlemyre, making what one club official 
said was a four-year, $26 million offer. At least five other teams 
are involved in the bidding for the right-handed Stottlemyre, and 
the Yankees, who initially expressed interest, have been informed 
that they will need to weigh in soon. The Yankees, too, are among 
the teams competing for the services of left-hander Scott Radinsky. 
Boston and the Chicago Cubs are also in the running. The Mets, who 
had been wrestling with the status of General Manager Steve Phillips, 
postponed their initial offer to B.J. Surhoff, the veteran outfielder. 
Baltimore slightly increased its three-year offer to Surhoff, to $12.75 
million from $12 million, with some of the money to be paid out in 
deferrals that do not bear interest. The Yankees completed a minor 
trade with Minnesota, swapping minor league infielder Allen Butler 
for Dan Naulty, a 28-year-old right-hander with a history of injury. 
Naulty, who has 97 career appearances, went 0-2 with a 4.61 ERA for 
the Twins last season. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>