<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981116.0433 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
All of the weaponry that the United States was prepared to let loose 
against Iraq on Saturday remains in the Persian Gulf and could be 
used to strike again within hours of receiving notice, senior administration 
and Pentagon officials said Monday. Although the Pentagon announced 
on Sunday that it would suspend the deployment of dozens of additional 
warplanes and ground troops, the attack that President Clinton called 
off 15 minutes before it was to begin relied entirely on forces already 
in the region, the officials said. The planned attack, they said, 
would have involved a first strike of nearly 300 cruise missiles fired 
from eight warships in the gulf, followed by bombing raids by dozens 
of F-14 and F-18 fighters aboard the aircraft carrier Dwight D. Eisenhower, 
the officials said, speaking on the condition of anonymity. Gen. Henry 
Shelton, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said the proposed 
strike was ``still a valid operational plan,'' and for that reason 
he declined to discuss the matter further except to say that the United 
States was prepared to strike almost immediately. ``He saw this time 
how fast our response came,'' Shelton said in a telephone interview, 
referring to President Saddam Hussein of Iraq. ``The next time it 
could come faster.'' At the Pentagon as elsewhere in official Washington, 
there was deep frustration that the United States had once again geared 
up for a military strike only to see Saddam reverse course and pledge 
anew to abide by U.N. resolutions. And there was almost universal 
agreement that Hussein would provoke a confrontation again. Defense 
Secretary William Cohen warned Saddam Monday that this latest confrontation 
was ``the last go-around.'' He strongly suggested that the United 
States would react swiftly and without warning if Iraq once again 
ended cooperation with international arms inspectors. ``I think he 
has had more than sufficient warning,'' Cohen said at a ceremony swearing 
in the new Navy secretary, Richard Danzig. ``I don't believe that 
any additional warning is required.'' The United States still has 
nearly 200 aircraft in the Persian Gulf and 23 Navy vessels, 14 of 
them combat warships, as well as more than 20,000 soldiers, sailors, 
airmen and Marines. A second aircraft carrier, the Enterprise, is 
scheduled to arrive in the gulf in a week, replacing the Eisenhower, 
though for a time both will be there. After the last confrontation 
with Iraq in February, the United States sharply reduced its forces 
in the region but, significantly, doubled the number of Tomahawk cruise 
missiles kept aboard Navy cruisers, destroyers and attack submarines 
plying the gulf. Those missiles and the carrier's strike fighters 
allowed the administration to prepare an attack with less buildup 
than those for previous strikes. And the officials said they could 
rely on those missiles and fighters again. Of the 139 additional aircraft 
that Clinton sent to the region on Wednesday, only 23 completed the 
trip, including four B-1 bombers and seven B-52s. Another 53 planes, 
including three squadrons of fighter jets, went as far as bases in 
Spain, Italy and Germany before the attack was called off. The rest 
never left the United States, though they remain on standby. The nearly 
4,000 additional Army troops who were to have gone will also remain 
in the United States. None of the aircraft being sent to the Gulf 
were involved in the strike that was aborted on Saturday morning _ 
not even the B-52s. They left air bases in Louisiana and England on 
Friday night and were flying at the time toward Diego Garcia, the 
British island in the Indian Ocean, where they remain. Under the Pentagon's 
attack plan, the B-52s and the other planes headed to the region would 
have taken part in follow-up strikes that were to have lasted a number 
of days, the officials said. Cohen said he would recommend recalling 
the forces extra that had been sent. ``They will be at the ready and 
can be called back at a moment's notice,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>