<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981116.0322 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
United Nations workers began to head back to Iraq on Monday to open 
yet another act in the long and stormy drama between the Baghdad government 
and the people who enforce U.N. rules. After a weekend that brought 
the United States and Britain close to a major attack on Iraq, the 
workers returned to see whether the Iraqis would honor a renewed commitment 
to cooperation that narrowly averted air strikes. The first inspectors 
who have been at the center of this and previous standoffs are to 
fly back on Tuesday from Bahrain. The trip was preceded by the return 
of more than 150 relief workers who had been staying in a hotel in 
Jordan and returned Monday to posts that they had left Nov. 11, when 
the crisis began to reach a danger point. An urgent first order of 
business, U.N. relief officials said, is to untie logjams at border 
crossings that threatened to disrupt internationally monitored food 
deliveries. The jams, involving 75 trucks that are carrying wheat 
from Syria and an additional 59 that are trying to enter from Zakho, 
on the Turkish border, started when U.N. contract workers left their 
posts on the border on Friday for what their British employer, Lloyds 
Register of Shipping, described as safety reasons. Most of those 53 
inspectors, too, headed back to their jobs at four crossings, U.N. 
officials said. But like the stalled weapons inspections, the stalled 
food deliveries are a reminder of the breadth of U.N.-supervised operations 
in Iraq and their vulnerability to flaring tensions. Despite the weekend 
delays a spokesman for the United Nations in Baghdad, Eric Falt, said 
U.N.-supervised stocks of food and medical supplies there remained 
satisfactory and were not in danger of running out. Still, U.N. officials 
did not disguise their frustrations. ``There is an urgent need to 
resolve this potential disruption of the oil-for-food program,'' the 
undersecretary in charge of the plan, Benon Sevan, said. Sevan said 
he feared further delays could affect shipments of perishable goods. 
The border inspectors are a crucial link in the oil-for-food deal, 
which provides limited relief from the U.N. sanctions imposed shortly 
after Iraq invaded Kuwait in 1990. The plan allows Iraq to sell $5.25 
billion worth of oil every six months to buy what are classified as 
necessities for its people. But the United Nations has final say on 
all contracts, and the border inspectors certify that the goods have 
arrived before the suppliers are paid. More than 200 U.N. workers 
in northern Iraq and other locations outside the capital worked throughout 
the latest crisis. U.N. officials who insisted on anonymity suggested 
that the Lloyds staff, on the borders with Jordan, Syria and Turkey 
and at the port of Umm Qasr on the Persian Gulf, should have stayed 
on the job despite the risk of a military attack. But in Baghdad a 
skeleton staff of 57 was permitted to remain. The U.N. staff has more 
than 300 non-Iraqis. Those who were evacuated included all 103 weapons 
inspectors, whose job since the Persian Gulf war in 1991 has been 
to insure that Iraq fulfills its commitment to end its production 
of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons. Their work, a source 
of tension with Baghdad for more than eight years, was stalled again 
on Aug. 5, when Iraq limited U.N. inspections, and was halted altogether 
on Oct. 31, when Iraq cut all ties with the inspectors. A first wave 
of 84 inspectors is to fly back here on Tuesday morning from Bahrain, 
the field office director, Goram Wallen, said. A number of staff members 
spent Monday preparing for the inspectors' return, reaffixing license 
plates and flags to U.N. vehicles, which many feared would not outlast 
Western air strikes. The return will present the first real test of 
Iraq's pledge this weekend to resume full cooperation, the promise 
that succeeded in staving off the American and British air strikes. 
President Clinton has insisted that Baghdad ``live up to its obligations,'' 
and United States and British forces remain in position to retaliate 
if the pledge proves hollow. In contrast to the work of the weapons 
inspectors, U.N. officials have said that observation of the oil-for-food 
program continued even over the weekend, albeit at a reduced level. 
Among the 151 workers who returned from Amman on Monday, a 30-member 
advance party was permitted to fly. The rest traveled by car on bus 
600 miles across the desert. U.N. officials said the return would 
quickly allow relief operations to resume fully. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>