<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981116.0419 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial on Tuesday, Nov. 17: The days 
ahead must see the resumption of an aggressive program of weapons 
inspections in Iraq. That is the only way to test Saddam Hussein's 
latest pledge of full cooperation with United Nations investigators 
responsible for uncovering and eliminating Baghdad's chemical and 
biological weapons and missile delivery systems. There can be no return 
to last spring's misguided American policy of reining in the inspectors 
to head off objections from Iraq or its allies. Inspections can be 
a more effective disarmament tool than air strikes, but only if U.N. 
specialists can look wherever they need to and get honest answers 
about what Iraq has done with its mass-destruction weapons, many of 
which it acquired before the Persian Gulf war. The benchmarks President 
Clinton set on Sunday make clear what Iraq has to do. It must give 
the inspectors access to every laboratory, factory, presidential palace, 
computer hard drive and desert hiding place they need to see. It must 
hand over every pertinent document the inspectors request. It must 
satisfactorily answer all the inspectors' questions about what has 
become of weapons ingredients. Iraq must also accept the inspectors' 
independence from political control and fully abide by all Security 
Council resolutions requiring the destruction of its terror weapons 
and long-term monitoring of its weapons activities. Much of the drama 
surrounding the inspections has come from Iraqi attempts to bar investigators 
from entering buildings where crucial records or other evidence may 
be hidden. Surprise inspections and vigilant monitoring of weapons 
plants remain essential. An intensive effort must now be made to track 
any equipment that may have been moved or modified while the inspectors 
were kept at bay in recent months. Iraq's promises must also be tested 
by early visits to buildings run by Iraq's Special Security Organization 
and Special Republican Guards where Baghdad's weapons concealment 
effort is believed to be centered. But an even bigger problem has 
been Iraq's withholding or falsification of information about the 
biological and chemical ingredients it has assembled over the years. 
Iraqi authorities must be asked directly about some 2,000 gallons 
of deadly anthrax bacteria and nearly 5,000 gallons of botulinum toxin 
that have never been adequately accounted for. They need to explain 
what has become of this material and back up their assertions. Baghdad 
has also failed to produce records for its production of VX nerve 
gas for part of 1989 and all of 1990, a period in which it is known 
to have been running production lines in preparation for and after 
the invasion of Kuwait. Those records must now be handed over. Iraq 
must also account for some 200 tons of missile propellant it bought 
from the Soviet Union that can be used only to power the kind of long-range 
missiles Baghdad is no longer allowed to possess. If these answers 
and access are not provided, Washington will have to turn anew to 
the option of military force. In the absence of effective inspection, 
the only way to control Iraq's weapons development is with a sustained 
campaign of bombing and missile strikes. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>