<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981116.0475 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We see it all over the television set _ morning, noon and night _ 
real people admitting just about every sin and character flaw, sometimes 
to the face of the person they harmed, in the name of healing for 
the parties involved, to say nothing of high ratings. But what was 
to be gained from Steve Phillips going public about his extramarital 
affairs? This question was repeatedly raised Monday during a news 
conference at Shea Stadium when the general manager of the Mets ended 
his eight-day leave of absence. Phillips insisted it had been his 
idea, and that of his wife, to admit his mistakes, in view of an expected 
charge of harassment from a woman who used to work for the Mets. While 
it is not normally the business of journalists to propose a cover-up, 
in this case it seems there could have been some way to limit the 
public awareness to admitting the one relationship, whether consensual 
or under duress from an executive to an office worker. A quarter of 
a century ago, M. Donald Grant, who ran the Mets, forced his left 
fielder, Cleon Jones, to publicly apologize, in front of his wife, 
for being caught in a compromising situation. I don't see the current 
Wilpon-Doubleday ownership forcing Phillips into a public confession. 
If there is some bigger organizational cover-up, we shall find out 
soon enough. If it is the matter of one fallen human trying to save 
the marriage he jeopardized, did we really need to know all this? 
``I thought it was appropriate to do after discussing it with my wife,'' 
Phillips said, conceding he had caused ``a significant wound in my 
family life.'' Phillips had taken the temporary leave of absence just 
before the baseball meetings in Florida, and Frank Cashen had temporarily 
come out of retirement. ``Rather than make up a story about why I 
was away, it was better to tell the truth,'' Phillips added. There 
is no indication that a baseball general manager who cheated on his 
wife would necessarily cheat his fellow general managers, or mislead 
the owners, or lie to a ballplayer. Last May Phillips seemed legitimately 
aghast at having assured Todd Hundley there would be no deal for Mike 
Piazza, only to be overruled by ownership. Being a veracious general 
manager is quite a different role from being a faithful husband. My 
own reaction from watching a stunned Phillips was that in the first 
days of tears, rage and grief, he and his wife had agreed that the 
truth must come forth, if healing was to even begin. However, most 
treatment programs generally advise people not to make major life 
decisions for at least a year, as they discover their new stable personality. 
This kind of confession might best have been made in the tense emotional 
circle of a support group. ``I wasn't necessarily thinking of myself,'' 
Phillips said. ``The pain was going to be more with my wife and my 
kids. One has to accept responsibility for the choices you make. I 
told the truth. With that come the consequences.'' Phillips did not 
discuss his marriage Monday, except in hopeful terms of trying to 
heal it, without any guarantees. He merely said he now has time to 
go back to work. ``In fact, it was advisable,'' said David Howard, 
the senior vice president for business and legal affairs. Unfortunately 
for Phillips, his very public leave-taking demanded a very public 
return, with more glare, more questions, even a very public address 
from somebody else's lawyer. Toward the end of Monday's conference, 
a man introduced himself as Dominic Barbara and claimed to represent 
a client who had been involved with Phillips. Barbara announced he 
had been prepared to read a statement, but claimed he had been so 
``impressed'' with Phillips' demeanor that he was not going to read 
it. However, Barbara added, he was still going to litigate against 
Phillips. Barbara, who has previously represented clients such as 
Jessica Hahn and Joey Buttafuoco, then strode out of the conference. 
Some people said Phillips even nodded as if to thank Barbara for what 
might have sounded like words of praise. Phillips, who put himself 
in this public forum, first by his disloyalty to his family, and later 
by his purported need to ``tell the truth,'' seemed too numb to react 
viscerally to the intrusion from this litigator. There is no judgment 
here of any legal issues. As for the scrutiny of his character, Phillips 
said, ``There are people who will make judgments; that is not unfair.'' 
Phillips will not discuss his problem any further. It is time for 
him to shore up the Mets in public, and try to save his marriage in 
private. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>