<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981116.0435 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A week after the Mets surprised the baseball world by announcing that 
General Manager Steve Phillips was taking a leave of absence to deal 
with problems caused by a series of extramarital affairs, the team 
came up with another surprise Monday: Phillips is back on the job. 
The return of the 35-year-old Phillips was announced at a press conference 
at Shea Stadium that was not attended by the team's owners, Fred Wilpon 
and Nelson Doubleday, who instead issued a statement in which they 
said they remained ``steadfast in our belief'' that Phillips was the 
right person to run the Mets' baseball operations and that the best 
thing for the Phillips family and the Mets was for ``Steve to get 
back to work.'' Phillips himself spoke forthrightly about the problems 
he had created for his family and said that getting everything back 
in order in his personal life was ``going to be a lengthy process.'' 
But the press conference ultimately took on a bizarre tone when a 
lawyer, Dominic Barbara, stood up, disrupted the proceeding and let 
it be known that he represented a former Mets employee who intended 
to sue Phillips for sexual harassment. In itself, the stated threat 
of a suit didn't come as a surprise because an allegation of sexual 
harassment had been cited by the Mets when Phillips took his leave 
of absence a week ago. At the time, the team said it had investigated 
the allegation and found that it stemmed from a consensual affair 
between Phillips and a former employee at their Port St. Lucie complex 
in Florida and that there was no basis for the harassment charge. 
But whatever the Mets' position, the issue hasn't gone away. That 
became clear Monday when Barbara, a Long Island-based attorney whose 
clients have included Joey Buttafuoco and Jessica Hahn, got to his 
feet, pointed to a folded piece of paper in his breast pocket and 
said he had a statement he had been prepared to read. However, he 
said, having listened to Phillips talk openly of the damage he had 
done to his own family life, he said he believed Phillips was truly 
contrite and that he would therefore not read the statement. ``I will 
vigorously fight for my client,'' Barbara said. ``But I believe Phillips 
is very sincere in what he's saying. That said, I will litigate like 
I always do.'' Polite as always, Phillips actually thanked Barbara 
as the attorney walked out of the room with a contingent that included 
two Miami-based lawyers _ Stephen Malove and Michael Kaufman _ who 
are believed to be involved in representing the Florida woman at the 
source of the original sexual harassment allegations. As Barbara departed, 
half of the reporters present got to their feet and chased him to 
the elevator. The other half remained to listen to Phillips. And no 
one was talking about trades or free agents. Those who pursued Barbara 
were unable to get him to acknowledge the identity of his client, 
or whether he represented more than one person in his threatened action 
against the Mets. When asked when he intended to file a suit, he said, 
``Probably by Wednesday.'' Those who stuck around to listen to Phillips 
and David Howard, a Mets vice president and the team's chief legal 
counsel, heard Howard state he had been aware along that Barbara planned 
to attend the news conference. ``We weren't going to stand at the 
door and bar him from entering,'' said Howard. ``I knew he was going 
to be here. I didn't know he was going to make a comment.'' So it 
went on a day when other major league teams were presumably busy trying 
to improve their rosters. The statement by Wilpon and Doubleday ran 
three paragraphs. ``We have expressed our strong opinion about the 
inappropriateness of his conduct, both publicly and privately to Steve,'' 
the statement said. ``Right now the best thing for the Phillips family 
and the New York Mets is for Steve to get back to work.'' In the statement, 
the owners said the leave of absence had come about primarily to allow 
Phillips to get his personal life back in order and that discussions 
with Phillips and his wife and family counselors had led them to conclude 
he should return to his job. In his own statements Monday, Phillips 
addressed the question of why he had chosen to disclose a whole series 
of extramarital affairs when the leave of absence was first announced. 
``Rather than make up a story of where I was, I thought it was important 
to tell the truth,'' Phillips said. ``I needed to make my family situation 
a priority and be home to deal with the problems I caused.'' ``And 
in those last two weeks, we've started the process. I'm not back up 
here with my collar buttoned down and my tie in place saying that 
everything is back in order. This is going to be a lengthy process. 
And I don't know what the ultimate result will be.'' Phillips said 
his comments about his personal life would be the last ones he would 
make and that he would be available again, beginning Tuesday, to talk 
about baseball subjects. In his absence, the Mets made one significant 
move _ acquiring former Met Bobby Bonilla from the Los Angeles Dodgers 
in exchange for Mets reliever Mel Rojas, a deal Phillips had worked 
on before the leave of absence was announced. In fact, the Mets had 
scheduled a press conference Monday to reintroduce Bonilla to New 
York but had to cancel it to make room for the Phillips announcement. 
Phillips said he did not think his weeklong absence would have any 
adverse affect on his dealings with other general managers and with 
player agents. However, it's possible that the distraction created 
by Phillips' problems may have enabled the Colorado Rockies to lure 
away a valuable Mets bench player _Lenny Harris. And it also may have 
kept the Mets from making a contract offer Monday to B.J. Surhoff, 
whom the Mets appear to be interested in making their starting left-fielder. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>