<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981116.0224 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Hollywood is once again sending young Americans a pernicious message: 
Smoking is OK. It relieves anxiety and tension, breaks the social 
ice and, if Holly Hunter is an example, helps a woman maintain a stick-thin 
figure. After seeing Ms. Hunter's new movie, ``Living Out Loud,'' 
in which she plays a chain-smoking divorcee, I had to hold my breath 
as I plowed through a horde of cigarette-smoking teen-agers gathered 
outside the theater. Even as the 34-year decline in the proportion 
of adults who smoke continues, youngsters are taking up this addictive 
habit at an unprecedented rate. Every day in the United States, more 
than 3,000 teen-agers start smoking. Since 1991, after a decade of 
little or no change, cigarette use by high school students has risen 
by 32 percent. These are the young people who will be inflating the 
smoking statistics _ and resulting illnesses, health care costs and 
premature deaths _ in the years to come. As a nation with laws and 
policies that promote clean air and clean lungs, we are now running 
backward. Few young people appreciate how quickly a person can become 
hooked on nicotine and how hard it can be to break the addiction. 
Most youngsters who start smoking as a means of looking ``cool'' and 
fitting in with their peers expect they will be able to quit long 
before it is too late to preserve their health and protect their future 
children. Unfortunately, relatively few who become daily smokers in 
high school succeed in quitting when they finally decide to try. A 
new national survey of 250 current and 251 former adult smokers commissioned 
by the Hazelden Foundation of Minneapolis revealed that former smokers 
had tried to quit an average of 10.8 times before succeeding. The 
process of quitting for good took an average of 18.6 years, by which 
time irreparable damage could have been done to the smokers' bodies 
and lowered their chances of living out a normal lifetime. Current 
smokers in the survey averaged 3.4 attempts to quit. ``These numbers 
reflect the serious nature of nicotine addition,'' said Carol Falkowski, 
a senior research analyst for Hazelden, which runs addiction control 
programs. ``Nicotine is a powerful drug, just like alcohol or heroin, 
and those who want to quit often relapse in spite of their good intentions.'' 
Most smokers in the survey said stress was their primary obstacle 
to quitting. Others said they enjoyed smoking too much to give it 
up or that the craving for cigarettes proved stronger than their will 
to quit. Surprisingly, only 5.4 percent of current smokers cited a 
fear of weight gain for their failure to quit, although those who 
run smoking-cessation programs say that weight gain is a major factor 
among women who fail to quit smoking. But even if all adult smokers 
were able to free themselves of nicotine addiction, progress in eliminating 
this health-robbing habit would be stymied by the millions of youngsters 
now galloping toward adulthood, cigarette in hand. A future smoke-free 
society will depend on keeping youngsters from starting to smoke in 
the first place and helping those already smoking to quit before cigarettes 
become a permanent part of their persona. It may surprise parents 
to learn, as a recent study of 276 smokers in New Hampshire high schools 
indicated, that grades in school and parental level of education have 
little or no bearing on the likelihood that a youngster will become 
a smoker. Nearly three-fourths of the youngsters had not tried to 
quit and 82 percent expected to still be smoking a year later. The 
primary goal, then, is to keep kids from starting. In his helpful 
little book, ``How to Raise Nonsmoking Kids'' (Byron Preiss Multimedia 
and Pocket Books, 1997, $7.95), Dr. Neil Izenberg, a pediatrician 
in Wilmington, Del., advises parents to begin reinforcing the anti-smoking 
message very early. He suggests explaining to preschoolers how tobacco 
advertising manipulates people into thinking that smoking is cool, 
socially acceptable and image-enhancing. I played a valuable game 
with my own sons when they were young: Uncover the hidden message 
in advertisements and tell me how the advertisement is trying to persuade 
you to buy or use the product. Later we played a similar game with 
peer pressure: What were other people trying to get you to do or believe? 
Because peer pressure is widely considered the major factor that starts 
kids smoking, learning how to identify and resist it is a most valuable 
asset. Another helpful tactic is to appeal to youngsters' natural 
desire for independence by emphasizing their ability to rise above 
the influence of peers and advertising and think for themselves. Essential 
to bringing up children who can think and act for themselves is fostering 
in them a healthy self-image. Youngsters with a strong sense of themselves 
are best able to resist noxious outside influences and more likely 
to be leaders, not followers, among their friends. A valuable lesson 
I learned from the late Dr. Haim G. Ginott, author of ``Between Parent 
and Child'' (Avon, 1969) is never to criticize the child, only the 
child's behavior. Instead of saying ``You're a bad boy, good boys 
don't do things like that,'' you should say ``What you did is wrong 
and hurtful.'' Fostering involvement in sports, especially competitive 
sports, is also helpful, because it is easy to convince youngsters 
that smoking robs muscle cells of oxygen, interferes with lung function 
and impairs performance. And because all smokers smoke for the immediate 
rewards bestowed by cigarettes and few youngsters are willing to worry 
about their health decades down the line, it helps to emphasize the 
immediate negative aspects: a noxious odor that permeates the hair, 
clothes, skin and breath; stained teeth; poor physical endurance, 
and lots of money going up in smoke. Far less is known about effective 
stop-smoking techniques for teen-agers than for adults. As you might 
predict, those who smoke the least, which means they are less hooked 
on nicotine, have the easiest time quitting. In other words, kids 
should be told that they are most likely to succeed if they quit while 
they're behind _ in the number of cigarettes they smoke. Dr. James 
Sargent and colleagues at Dartmouth Medical School found in their 
study of the New Hampshire adolescent smokers that effective quitting 
was unrelated to socioeconomic status, school performance, alcohol 
consumption or any of several predicted psychological characteristics. 
The most important factor was the teen-agers' belief that smoking 
was not going to be part of their future. However, the survey also 
found that most of the teen-agers were not sure whether or not they 
would be smoking in a year's time, while only a small percentage thought 
they definitely would have quit. Although the study showed that even 
highly addicted youngsters were sometimes able to quit, the researchers 
suggested that success in quitting may be enhanced by nicotine replacement 
therapy. Youngsters trying to quit should also be told that withdrawal 
symptoms are at their worst in the first three days. And for most 
people, quitting cold turkey works best. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>