<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981116.0458 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As taxi accidents have risen steadily in New York City over the past 
decade, the most recognizable image of the danger has been that of 
a yellow cab wrecked on a Manhattan sidewalk, debris strewn about, 
perhaps a pedestrian pinned against a light pole. But an analysis 
of newly released accident data shows that car services and livery 
cabs are actually responsible for the increase. The New York Times 
analysis of more than 100,000 accidents reported to the state found 
that crashes involving livery vehicles _ which include call-for-pickup 
car services, corporate ``black cars,'' some commuter vans and vans 
for the handicapped _ increased by 60 percent from 1990 to 1997. The 
number of yellow-cab crashes in the city, the analysis found, has 
dropped significantly since 1994 after rising during the early '90s 
and is now only slightly above what it was at the start of the decade. 
Serious injuries in yellow-cab accidents are down by more than 20 
percent since 1990, even including the rash of disfiguring facial 
injuries caused by partitions affixed to the driver's seat since they 
became standard equipment in yellow cabs in 1994. The number of livery 
cars has increased significantly over that period while the number 
of medallion cabs is up only slightly. On a per-cab basis, livery-car 
accidents were still up 25 percent while yellow-cab accidents were 
virtually the same in 1997 as in 1990. The analysis sheds light on 
an overlooked sector of the transportation industry that does most 
of its business in the boroughs outside Manhattan and that regulators 
have only recently begun to take seriously, even though livery cars 
outnumber yellow cabs more than three to one. The diverging trends 
had been hidden because the State Department of Motor Vehicles lumps 
all vehicles for hire together as ``taxis'' and because the city's 
Taxi and Limousine Commission did not track accidents at all from 
1990 until it passed a broad package of new rules in May. The state 
agency turned down repeated requests from The Times for data on individual 
accidents for eight months, saying that generating the data would 
require an extensive computer run beyond the requirements of the Freedom 
of Information Law. It finally released the data last week, but still 
has not furnished it to the taxi commission. Earlier this year, the 
only data available from the state showed a 40 percent increase in 
accidents involving all ``taxis'' from 1990 to 1996. This, along with 
several high-profile yellow-cab crashes, prompted a spate of news 
articles, including several in The Times, and helped spur a crackdown 
by the city that included a ticket-writing blitz against yellow cabs 
and much steeper fines and insurance requirements for all kinds of 
taxis. But the trends are sharply different in various parts of the 
city. In Manhattan south of 96th Street, where yellow cabs predominate, 
accidents involving all ``taxis'' have increased 17 percent since 
1990, although in recent years the numbers have declined. But outside 
Manhattan, where yellow cabs are seldom seen except at the airports, 
accidents involving all cars classified as ``taxis'' have increased 
by 53 percent since 1990. ``Taxi'' accidents in Brooklyn have jumped 
even more dramatically, by 81 percent over the decade. Experts and 
officials offered several possible explanations for the accident pattern. 
Livery cars, which are only allowed to pick up riders by prearrangement, 
have been far less regulated over the years than yellow cabs, which 
can cruise for fares, and several police and taxi commission initiatives 
during the '90s have applied only to yellow cabs. And Bruce Schaller, 
a former regulator for the taxi commission, has produced a study showing 
that the economic boom of the last few years may have done more to 
increase wages for yellow cabbies than for livery drivers, leading 
them, he concluded, to drive less recklessly. Eugene Pero, the president 
of the Livery Owners Coalition of New York, said that much of the 
increase in livery accidents was due simply to the increase in livery 
cars _ to about 41,000 in 1997, up from about 32,000 in 1990, according 
to the commission. (There are 12,187 yellow cabs, up 400 since 1990.) 
But the increase in accidents has outpaced the growth in the fleet. 
The accident rate per car for yellow cabs is somewhat higher than 
that for liveries, but most yellow cabs are driven round the clock 
while most livery cars are driven less than 12 hours a day. Whatever 
the reason, the analysis was greeted with an ``I-told-you-so'' by 
yellow-cab executives, who, along with their biggest insurer, American 
Transit Insurance Co., asserted for months as they fought the new 
rules that yellow-cab accidents were dropping. ``I think we've been 
unfairly blamed and targeted,'' said Ronald Sherman, president of 
the Metropolitan Taxicab Board of Trade, which represents big fleet 
owners. ``We would hope that the TLC and the city adjust their enforcement 
accordingly.'' But the chairwoman of the taxi commission, Diane McGrath-McKechnie, 
said the agency would not change course. ``This is not a numbers game 
for the TLC,'' Ms. McGrath-McKechnie said. ``This is about public 
safety. Whether the numbers go up a little bit or down a little bit, 
there are still too many accidents, and we need safe drivers for medallion 
cabs and for livery vehicles.'' The police department, however, said 
it would consider cracking down on livery cars. This spring, when 
attention was focused on taxi dangers, a special police department 
unit that focuses on yellow cabs stepped up its enforcement sharply; 
tickets written by the unit rose 36 percent for the first eight months 
of this year over the same period in 1997. ``We have had focused enforcement 
on livery cabs and will continue to do so,'' said Lt. Stephen Biegel, 
a police spokesman. ``We'll also review the data and see if a formal 
unit would be in order.'' Ms. McGrath-McKechnie said the commission's 
new rules, most of which apply equally to yellow and livery cabs, 
should bring the two industries into line with each other. And she 
said she planned to call for votes at the next commission meeting 
on Thursday on the two proposed rules that the commissioners balked 
at passing in May. One would require all yellow-cab owners to post 
a $100,000 bond for accident victims to collect against. The other 
would lower the penalty-point threshold at which drivers lose their 
licenses. The Times analysis found that yellow-cab accidents reported 
to the state increased from about 3,850 in 1990 to a peak of about 
4,850 in 1994, then decreased to about 3,950 last year. Accidents 
involving livery cars, which far outnumber yellow cabs, rose steadily 
from about 6,300 in 1990 to about 9,050 in 1994 and 10,150 last year. 
The analysis used statistical methods to estimate the distribution 
of accidents where data was incomplete. Serious injuries in livery 
accidents, including severe cuts, broken bones, and other internal 
injuries also increased during the decade, to about 800 in 1997 from 
675 in 1990. During the same period, serious injuries in yellow cabs 
dropped to about 350 in 1997 from about 450 in 1990. The Times analysis 
found that in 1994, when the partitions became standard, the number 
of yellow-cab accidents in which the most serious injury was to the 
face or eye jumped dramatically, to 81 from 52. But those accidents 
represent such a small portion of the total _ 2 or 3 percent _ that 
the increase was swallowed up by the overall decrease. And by the 
end of 1997, yellow-cab accidents in which the most serious injury 
was to the face or eye had dropped below the 1990 level of 46, to 
36, due at least in part to an aggressive campaign by the taxi commission 
to get passengers to wear seat belts. Fidel Del Valle, the chairman 
of the taxi commission from 1991 to 1995, said that until the new 
rules were passed, most of the enforcement against livery cabs consisted 
of making sure the cars were properly registered and were not cruising 
for fares. He said that holders of livery licenses often allowed friends 
or relatives to work their cars when they were not using them, whether 
or not they had hack licenses. ``Until the recent rules,'' he said, 
``there have been no real rules as to the behavior of for-hire vehicle 
drivers.'' Yellow cabs, meanwhile, have been held to a standard that, 
whatever its shortcomings, has become more strict over the course 
of the decade. In 1990, the commission began a persistent-violator 
program for yellow cabs that has resulted in hundreds of suspensions. 
In 1995, the police took over enforcement against yellow cabs from 
taxi commission inspectors and began writing what many yellow-cab 
drivers complained was a blizzard of nuisance tickets for minor infractions. 
In 1996, the commission passed a rule requiring owners to buy new 
cabs every four years at most. Some livery drivers, Pero said, keep 
their cars on the road for up to 15 years. ``I see cars on the road 
in the livery industry that I'd be ashamed to put in my fleet,'' said 
Pero, who runs a fleet of 42 car-service and black cars. Pero agreed 
that regulation of liveries had been too lax, but like many yellow-cab 
owners, he said that the commission and the police had gone overboard 
since the new rules were passed in the spring, and he said he was 
worried that it could get much harder for him to make a living. ``What 
has happened in past administrations is that they haven't corrected 
the industry,'' he said. ``The TLC hasn't protected the public until 
now. But all of a sudden they implement this stuff on both industries 
and it becomes chaotic.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>