<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981116.2000.0375 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After the weekend's 11th hour resolution to the crisis with Iraq, 
Secretary of Defense William Cohen said today that the United States 
will halt its military buildup in the Gulf. But he was quick to add 
that the hardware already in place was enough to strike Iraq if necessary. 
As The World's Mary Louise Kelley reports, there remains profound 
skepticism about whether this weekend's deal will mark the end of 
the conflict with Iraq. Another month, another crisis with Iraq. Or, 
so it seems. Now at the end of yet another cycle of confrontation 
and retreat with the Iraqi President, Saddam Hussein. Even U.N. Secretary 
General, Kofi Annan, says he's not entirely confident that this weekend's 
deal will mark the end of the U.N.'s difficulties with Iraq. I cannot 
give you any guarantee that this agreement would work. People have 
asked me: what happens if there is a next time? I sincerely hope that 
there will not be a next time. And I'm not sure that if there is a 
next time, we would even have time for further diplomatic initiatives 
and appeals. Many believe Saddam Hussein has simply made yet another 
tactical retreat. And is now free to provoke a new crisis when it 
next suits him. Today, Western leaders were scrambling to insist that 
Iraq had not, once again, outmaneuvered the Security Council. Today, 
British Prime Minister Tony Blair was talking tough to his Parliament. 
Insisting that the international community had finally succeeded at 
cornering Saddam Hussein. The U.S. and the U.K., with far greater 
international support than ever before, now have set in the same trap. 
If he again obstructs the work of the inspectors, then we strike. 
No warnings, no wrangling, no negotiations, no last minute letters. 
The next withdrawal of cooperation and he will be hit. All eyes are 
now on the weapons inspectors. When they resume their work in Iraq 
tomorrow. They'll be testing the latest Iraqi promises for free and 
full cooperation. But many observers suspect that political support 
for the inspections is already waning. The inspectors themselves have 
admitted that it's hard to see an end to their work. Both, because 
it's unlikely that Iraq will ever truly cooperate. And because it's 
nearly impossible to be sure that every weapon has been eliminated. 
George Joffey Middle East analyst at the Royal Institute for International 
Affairs in London says the weapons inspection program has been rendered 
ineffective. There is an fundamental incoherence in western policy. 
The United States and Britain relinquished their ability to manipulate 
sanctions to enforce weapons controls two years ago when they accepted 
the offer through programs. And in a sense; therefore, they can only 
now enforce the weapons destruction programs by the threat of military 
action. Doubts over the effectiveness of the Weapons Inspection Program 
have led some to question whether U.S. policy toward Iraq is suddenly 
shifting. And to wonder, whether the real way to break the cycle is 
to get rid of Saddam Hussein. President Clinton announced this weekend 
that he plans to strengthen Washington's efforts to see a change of 
government in Iraq. This, he said, would be the best way, in the long 
run, to bring about peace in the region. But Leith Kuba, a spokesman 
for the Iraqi Opposition in London, disagrees. The shift in policy 
is towards putting more pressure on Iraq. Which is not a bad thing. 
But putting pressure on Iraq ought to be part of a clearer vision 
to what end this pressure is exerted. The ultimate goal must be to 
make things better and bring change. Not to get rid of Saddam at any 
cost. If the cost is civil war or destabilizing the whole region, 
then certainly there is something wrong in the thinking and in the 
strategy. George Joffey is even more blunt. The fact is, that if you 
get rid of the Saddam Hussein regime in Iraq, then you must rely either 
on the bath party or the army to provide an alternative. That alternative, 
given conditions inside Iraq at the moment in the attitude of the 
population there. Is likely to be no better in terms of western objectives 
than the one that went before it. It remains to be seen whether President 
Clinton's call for a new government in Iraq represents a real shift 
in policy. Or, whether he's just trying to rattle the Iraqi regime. 
And it's even less clear whether he'll win backing from the three 
members of the Security Council who continue to oppose military force 
against Iraq: France, Russia, and China. What is clear is that the 
crisis with Iraq, whether military or political, is far from over. 
For The World, I'm Mary Louis Kelley, reporting. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>