<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981116.2000.2637 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Today has been a landmark day at the War Crimes Tribunal in the Heig. 
Three Bosnians, two Muslims, and a Croat were found guilty of committing 
atrocities against Serb prisoners in 1992. It is the first time the 
Tribunal has dealt with Serb victims of the Bosnian conflict. And 
the first time the Tribunal has determined a superior officer is responsible 
for actions committed by his subordinates. Reporter Lauren Komoto 
is at the Heig now. Lauren, the trial was a pretty important one. 
Can you outline exactly what happened for us today? The Telebichi 
case gets its name from the Telebichi Camp. And that's where Serbs 
where held prisoners by Bosnians, Muslims, and Croats. So, on trial 
over the past twenty months, have been the commander of the camp, 
the deputy commander, a prison guard, and also a regional military 
commander. The regional military commander was acquitted. Judges ruled 
here that he had no responsibility for what went on in the camp. That's 
a judgment that prosecutors are going to appeal against. But then, 
the camp commander was found guilty and sentenced to seven years. 
And then the prison guard and the deputy camp commander were both 
charged with actual murder and rape. And one got 15 years, and one 
got 20. And in terms of significance of the sentence, tell us more 
about that. It's called here, command responsibility, in legal terms. 
And what the court ruled was that - and this is for the first time 
since World War II - that commanders are responsible for the crimes 
of their subordinates. That they should know about them, and they 
should stop them. And if they don't stop them, then they're guilty. 
And indeed one man was found guilty. And another important aspect 
of that ruling and that he was a civilian leader, not even a military 
commander. And the court clearly ruled that civilians with authority 
are responsible for the crimes committed by the people under them. 
So the court is basically saying: you didn't have to conduct the crime 
yourself to be found guilty of it. And I wonder what kind of importance 
that might carry as the War Crimes Tribunal continues. I feel it's 
going to carry a lot. Because a lot of people here, especially in 
some of the upcoming trials, people charged with genocide, aren't 
necessarily directly responsible. They haven't raped themselves. But 
people under them did, so this will definitely set an important precedent 
in future convictions. The other point we mentioned, the trial illuminates 
the fact that there were atrocities committed against all sides, by 
all sides in the war. This, as we said, being the first trial for 
crimes against Bosnian Serbs. A fact that some are pointing to as 
a sign of the fairness of the court. The Tribunal say they're not 
a political court. But they do work, clearly in a political world. 
And prosecutors were even careful to point out today, that this case 
does demonstrate the even-handed approach of the Tribunal. That they're 
going to try everyone. Regardless of their political or ethnic persuasion. 
And in handing down the sentence, I think that it will help the court. 
That they won't be left open to criticisms - that they're only trying 
one side. And in fact, the deputy prosecutor said there would be more 
trials where Serbs are the victims. Well, this trial has deliberately 
dealt with Serb victims. The most wanted war criminal, Radavan Karadich, 
remains at large. What steps are being taken that you know of at this 
point, to try and bring him to trial? I don't think the steps that 
are being taken are here in the Heig. I think it's out of the Tribunal's 
control. It's a political decision that will have to be made by political 
leaders. But the Tribunal here, leaders here, are always very optimistic 
we'll get him here one day. This will be Bosnian Serb leader Radavan 
Karadich and his general, Rosno Eladich. But I think one of the important 
things about this Tribunal is when it started this trial, this trial 
started almost 20 months ago. They only had six men in custody. And 
now they have 26. And even though everyone focuses on Karadich and 
Eladich, but I think that if anything, this whole length of this trial 
shows that this Tribunal has definitely moved a long way. Lauren Komoto 
has been covering the War Crimes Tribunal for the past two years. 
Thank you very much for speaking to us. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>