<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981116.2000.3000 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Movie star and Scottish Nationalist, Sean Connery, is reported to 
be negotiating for a Hollywood-style film studio. To be built in his 
native Scotland. According to British press reports, Secret Agent 
007 is holding secret talks with Sony Corporation about a $100 million 
project. If the deal materializes, it could prove a propaganda boost 
for the Scottish National Party, which is locked in a tight election 
struggle with Britain's Labor Party. For control of the New Scottish 
Parliament. The Scottish Nationalists are campaigning to pull out. 
Not just of the United Kingdom, but of NATO. The World's Steven Beard 
has a report on the politics of the former James Bond's plans for 
a Highlands Hollywood. Sean Connery can be relied on to liven up any 
production. And the same goes for his occasional appearances on the 
Scottish political scene. The man, who for many is James Bond, cannot 
resist putting the boot into the British establishment. His latest 
move certainly could leave Prime Minister Tony Blair with his nose 
out of joint. Connery is keeping the government out of the deal to 
bring Britain's first joint venture Hollywood studio to Scotland. 
Mike Russell, chief executive of the Scottish National Party, or SNP, 
is jubilant. Sean is a man of tremendous talent, tremendous vision. 
A man who passionately believes that Scotland can do as well as any 
other country. Not better, just as well. We are very pleased that 
he is so much and so strongly in support of the SNP. And is a very 
strong member. But I'm even more pleased that somebody like Sean Connery, 
who has made it all the way to the very top in the international film 
industry sees a potential in his own country to play a part in that. 
And wants to make that happen. Whether or not he pulls off the studio 
deal, Connery remains a major asset for the Scottish National Party: 
a powerful voice for independence. During several general elections, 
he's brought his rugged charisma to bear on the Nationalist campaign. 
We need a real Parliament to represent the real Scotland and the wide 
range of people who have made their homes here. We need independence. 
He's not, perhaps the ideal advocate of independence for Scotland. 
For one thing, he doesn't live there. His media interviews on the 
subject are usually conducted by phone from abroad. Here he is, speaking 
from his home in the Bahamas. I've never made any secret of my association, 
affiliation with the Scottish National Party. And here, from another 
of his homes in Mar Bayos, Spain. We can make our mark if we want 
independence. And the time is now. Especially with the whole European 
situation. And when nobody seems to know in Westminster, really, who's 
who and what's what. Connery is clearly not the most cogent spokesman 
for Scottish independence. But, he's got the government a little rattled, 
not to say shaken and stirred. I don't think he spends a great deal 
of time in Scotland. I don't know how familiar he is with the Scottish 
scene. The government's most senior minister for Scotland, Donald 
Doer, trying to brush off the Connery threat. I imagine that the vast 
majority of people in Scotland look at the arguments. And consider 
whether they think breaking up Britain is going to solve our problems. 
I think I know the answer to that. And I don't think Mr. Connery will 
really be able to change their minds. But the depth that the British 
government's concern about Connery became apparent earlier this year. 
As one of Britain's most successful movie stars, he was in line for 
an honor, and was going to receive a knighthood. In the event, he 
was denied that prize. It's believed, because the government didn't 
want to give its blessing to a Scottish Separatist. If Connery pulls 
off his studio deal, the Scottish National Party will portray him 
as a national hero. That'll be embarrassing for the British government. 
It's tried to deflect demands for independence by setting up a Scottish 
Parliament with similar powers to an American State Legislature. Elections 
are due next year. If the Nationalists do very well, Britain could 
be on the road to breakup. Support for independence does seem to be 
growing in Scotland. But political columnist Ed Pierce is not convinced. 
Unlike your average Bond girl, he says Scotland won't go all the way. 
The skirt has a way of riding up the thighs in the most interesting 
fashion. And then she crosses her legs. Scotland is a flirt and a 
tease. She loves to play with going the distance. And then she decides 
to wash her hair. Sean Connery, the world's first 007 was once voted 
the Sexiest Man Alive. Scottish voters, may in the end, also find 
the romantic appeal of independence impossible to resist. For The 
World, this is Steven Beard, in London. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>