<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981116.2000.1259 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The U.S. State Department warns Americans traveling to Mexico, that 
crime has reached critical levels in Mexico City, and is at serious 
levels elsewhere in the country. Although the Mexican government provides 
few statistics, Mexican officials agree that crime has become a serious 
threat to citizens and tourists. The government is considering forming 
a new national police force to combat crime. Armed robberies and assaults 
are so prevalent in the capitol that the private security industry 
there is thriving. The World's Frank Contreras has this report. Most 
anywhere you go in this vast city of 23 million people, you can find 
someone who has fallen victim to criminals. No one is exempt. Poor 
people are robbed at gunpoint while riding public transportation. 
Rich people fall victim inside their own homes. That's what happened 
to Juana. Who out of fear, refuses to give her last name. I was robbed 
at gunpoint two years ago, three years ago. I really prefer not to 
think when it was. I opened the investigation. I gave a description 
of the guys as good, as well as I could remember them. I did everything. 
And nothing happened. They never called. They never asked. They never 
came. And that's what's happening. In fact, 90 percent of all crimes 
reported in Mexico City remain unsolved. Still, every day police receive 
nearly seven hundred crime reports involving weapons. Many more incidents 
go unreported. While murder remains rare, violent assaults have become 
more and more common. Newspapers are filled with stories of kidnappings, 
in which criminals demand high ransoms, and to show they are serious, 
they sometimes cut off their victims' ears. Few residents in Mexico 
City trust the police to provide protection. The situation has gotten 
so out of control, that those who can afford it are opting to pay 
private companies to help keep them safe. Here in the test labs of 
Mendahez Indomundo, a sales staff member fires a powerful nine millimeter 
handgun to show off the company's bulletproof windshields. Mendahez 
charges from $30-$70,000 to customize cars, turning them into armored 
vehicles. The company's owner, Abraham Cliff, points to a 1998 Cadillac 
that is being completely torn apart and rebuilt with bulletproof protection 
that includes the car's underside. Some people are mainly concerned 
because of a grenade. Because of the little pieces that come out of 
the grenade. Shrapnel. Shrapnel? Maybe that's the word. And this protects 
against bombs - small bombs and grenades? Mainly grenades. Not really 
bombs. If it's a bomb, there's nothing to do. A car will not be protected 
against a bomb. For grenade, enough to be protected. You have the 
rules of the car also protected. We'll have spectra shield and stainless 
steel. Cliff says sales are booming. And the competition is tight. 
Other companies specializing in car alarms, spotlights, and electric 
fences, all are also doing a brisk business. But should all this security 
fail, some firms are even offering to negotiate the release of kidnap 
victims. MORTON PALMER, CHROLOGARIS SERVICES A MEXICO I can't give 
any recent ones, because I've been avoiding doing any kidnap negotiation 
myself. I hate doing it. Because each time you do it, it takes away 
a piece of your soul. Morton Palmer, of Chrologaris Services a Mexico, 
says on average, there are two kidnappings a day in Mexico. With most 
families paying anywhere between $10-30,000 to win the release of 
their loved ones. But he adds, most of the company's business comes 
from teaching people how to avoid becoming a victim in the first place. 
The possibility of something happening to you is greater here than 
it is in Washington or Detroit, or New York, or wherever. The probability 
of being hurt in the process is lower, by the same token, you can 
behave dissuasively here. In ways that you can't think about doing 
in the United States. Dissuasive behavior means staring the would-be 
criminal down before he assaults you. Some Mexicans pay dearly for 
this kind of advice. But for most, it simply remains an unaffordable 
luxury. There's a growing national movement to pressure the government 
to take action. Anti-crime rallies in Mexico City have attracted thousands 
of middle-class citizens. President Ernesto Servia has responded with 
legislation, making it harder for criminals to plea-bargain their 
way out of jail. But even he admits that police corruption is a big 
part of the problem. It is cause for profound indignation when police 
officers and law enforcement agents - instead of preventing, investigating, 
and prosecuting crimes, and protecting the population - are the cruelest 
and most dangerous criminals. Because they act with impunity. In all 
honesty, we must admit that where public safety is concerned, those 
of us in all three branches of government, have failed our citizens. 
The government's efforts to combat crime are further complicated by 
the weak economy here. With so many people still turning to crime 
to make a living, the demand for private security services is certain 
to grow. For The World, I'm Frank Contreras, in Mexico City. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>