<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981116.2000.2326 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
One of the contributions to the Russian language to the lexicon of 
bartenders and the rest of the world for that matter, is the word: 
vodka. Vodka literally means: small water. Somewhat appropriate, since 
some Russians do have a reputation for drinking vodka like it's water. 
And historically, the value of vodka in Russia has surpassed that 
of water. Before Paristroyka, the proceeds from vodka sales in the 
Soviet Union actually kept the government afloat. Most of the alcohol 
industry has since gone into private hands. Along with almost all 
of its revenue. And now the Russian government wants some of it back. 
Anna Ardiva reports from Moscow. Even in the worst times in Russia, 
when food shelves are empty, you never have to go far to find alcohol. 
These days, local markets may have little to offer. But liquor remains 
cheap and plentiful with the one liter bottle of vodka. Selling for 
about $2. Most of it's illegal. In fact, bootleggers are thriving 
in Russia. But that may be changing as the government steps in to 
tighten controls on the industry. Andre Korokov, head of the government's 
information department, says it's a protective measure. On the one 
hand, the main goal is to regulate this kind of activity. On the other 
hand, it is to prevent the market from delivering low quality products. 
But the government also needs the money. In Soviet times, alcohol 
taxes made up about 30 percent of the federal budget. Today, the proceeds 
amount to only 2 percent. The government says about half of the alcohol 
consumed in the country goes untaxed. The Topaz alcohol factory produces 
around four million bottles of vodka a month. The company's owner 
supports government regulation, hoping it will push out illegal competitors. 
Igor Tachartika is the commercial director at Topaz. He says legal 
producers, like his company, are losing the battle with bootleggers. 
The bootleggers sell the vodka cheap. And Topaz pays the bill, through 
high taxes. Illegal vodka producers influence all legal producers 
by creating low prices. They focus directly on the consumer. Our people 
don't live very well today. And they're not able to buy vodka for 
more than ten rubles. The existing tax system does not allow us to 
sell it at that price. Still, Tachartika admits that the vodka scheme 
might wind up on the rocks. These days, there are two different markets. 
And however strongly the government may want it, taxes from vodka 
sales just can't make up 30 percent of the budget. ARDIVA: The stakes 
are high. If the government's new plan works, it could mean $1 billion 
in revenues this year. Officials say the proceeds will help pay long 
overdue state wages and pensions. But the conscious former Tax Chief 
and Deputy Prime Minister Boris Federoff is skeptical about the vodka 
scheme. I think it is very naive. It can't mean, if you mean in rubles, 
more revenues. But in the longer term, not immediately, and definitely 
not enough to repay that you have to pay in the pensioners and wage 
earners for pay from the budget. Meanwhile, foreign alcohol producers 
who have made significant ingrowths into the Russian market are scratching 
their heads. Stephan Roche represents Alcohol Importers, who put western 
brands like Absolut and Filangia on Russian shelves. He says importers 
fear the government's plans could mean more red tape. We are concerned 
because when you operate, when you have a business to run, who would 
not be worried? In the end, most people agree it's unlikely vodka 
will be the economic savior the government would like. But one thing 
is predictable. No matter who controls the industry, vodka will always 
remain a Russian favorite. In good times and bad. For The World, I'm 
Anna Ardiva, in Moscow. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>