<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981116.2000.0896 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Today, Indonesian police questioned ten opposition politicians. In 
connection with last week's violence between students and security 
forces. Which claimed at least fourteen lives. And in a nationally 
televised address, President B.J. Habibi promised a thorough investigation 
into the clashes. The worst in Jakarta since May. When rioting preceded 
President Suharta's resignation after three decades of rule. In today's 
speech, Habibi accused unnamed political groups of manipulating the 
student movement as part of the plot to overthrow the government. 
The BBC's Jonathan Head reports from Jakarta. There's anger and there's 
grief. Students have been rallying inside their campuses across Jakarta. 
To denounce a government which allows soldiers to fire on their own 
people. But there's been little official acknowledgment of the scale 
of Friday's tragedy. President Habibi is blaming the deaths, not on 
the soldiers who directed a barrage of gunfire into the students for 
several hours. Instead, he's accusing a group of political opponents 
of using the students to try to topple his government. His spokeswoman 
is Davie Fortunaenwa. That evening, if maybe during the clash, the 
President and the attack had been on one of the members of the assembly, 
with everybody who is anybody in the land was sitting in that assembly. 
Maybe there was some kind of a panic. Maybe those soldiers, who you 
know, had been guarding the streets for the past five days. The cold, 
the rain, some say they had not even had their dinner by ten o'clock 
that night. They were standing there. And maybe they were genuinely 
afraid that if they were not able to stand up to the mobs, the mobs 
would be able to manage into the assembly. And disrupt the entire 
process. And I think that was the worst-case scenario that could have 
happened. Ten of those accused of involvement in the alleged plot 
have been detained for questioning. One of them, Strepentam Kanumptas, 
who was jailed by former President Suharta, and then released only 
six months ago, found himself behind bars once again. From there, 
he directed a defiant message to President Habibi. What happened right 
now, the killings against the students, and the decision of some of 
us planning a plot, something like that, is a kind of boomerang. That 
sooner or later, Habibi, some of them, that policy you know. Just 
like a year ago, when the students started to protest against Suharta, 
then later on we saw that Mr. Suharta stepped down. And the same thing 
will happen with Habibi. The levels of force used by the military 
against unarmed students has left Indonesia in a state of shock. Most 
people thought they'd put such scenes behind them with the fall of 
Saharta, back in May. But Human Rights campaigner Mahasir Hiderosman 
believes that while much else may have changed in Indonesia, the attitude 
of the armed forces has not. It's unexplainable. It's unexpected. 
And the only way to start to make sense of it is that the security 
of both parties, the whole mind set has not changed as far as the 
armed forces is concerned. One of the most controversial decisions 
of last week's assembly - one that most angered the students - allowed 
the military to remain involved in politics. After their behavior 
on Friday, their reputation has sunk to an all-time low. But Davie 
Fortunaenwa argues that Indonesia has no choice but to proceed with 
extreme caution in trying to push the troops back into the barracks. 
I think that a lot of us would have rather unpleasant feelings in 
our stomach. But at the same time, we just have to be realistic. The 
military is still the strongest force in the land. And there is really 
no advantage in enforcing a showdown. Because as you know, the transitional 
process is always the most dangerous process. Many countries have 
failed. Many newly emerging democracies in Eastern Europe have not 
managed very well. Here, the moment is how to do this as painlessly 
as possible. Without causing too much instichment between the civilians 
and the military. Because any country needs a military. And we need 
to have a disciplined and loyal military. The last thing we want is 
a military that feels cornered. The violent events of last week are 
a serious setback to Indonesia's efforts to restore stability after 
the fall of Suharta. The path toward democracy next year looks likely 
to be a very rocky one. That's Jonathan Head reporting from Jakarta, 
on PRI. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>