<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981116.2000.0642 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The threat of a massive air attack on Iraq has been averted for now. 
And U.N. weapons inspectors and relief workers are returning to Baghdad. 
Which is where the BBC's Richard Dows is now. Richard, is the average 
Iraqi aware of just how close to the brink Iraq came over the weekend? 
In other words, did they know that the planes were actually on the 
way? No they don't. I think there is a small group of people, a very 
small echelon of society which has access to international satellite 
television. Which has good radios to capture international radio signals. 
They were aware that something was up. There was probably also an 
awareness in senior government circles that something was serious 
and something was imminent. Some people have gone as far as to say 
that maybe the Iraqis had some advance intelligence before they sent 
that infamous letter. When they said that they were going to allow 
the U.N. inspectors unfettered access again. But I don't think that's 
true. I don't think they had advance intelligence. I think anybody 
watching television - international television in particular - would 
know that something was going to happen. And going to happen soon. 
But I think even they - even those people at the top of the regime 
here - were probably surprised by the fact that it was, from what 
we gather, an hour or two away. And so, how about in terms of military 
readiness? Was there any kind of visible movement by the Iraqi military 
indicating that it might be prepared for some kind of attack and was 
ready to respond to it? Well, this is the bizarre thing. There wasn't 
massive movement of troops. As you would've probably would have expected. 
There wasn't a reinforcement of any garrisons. There was a nonchalance 
about the way Iraqis were dealing with this particular confrontation. 
That probably belied underlined fears that they felt. But there were 
no signals from the government here for people to prepare themselves. 
There were no signals that there was a major confrontation in the 
offing. And so as a result of that, I think people went about their 
normal business. They didn't get too excited. And then afterwards, 
there was a sort of mood of quiet joy, if you like. It was certainly 
calm. And there was relief. But there was no wild celebrations - people 
shooting off guns in the streets - as has happened before. A very 
peculiar crisis. And perhaps the Iraqi people are wiser than we give 
them credit for. Maybe they know that this crisis is not over yet. 
Interesting. And it's also interesting just to see the kind of disconnect 
from what they might be hearing in terms of the government sponsored 
media. I mean, they're hearing apparently - and you can confirm this 
- that the United States was humiliated into backing down. And I wonder 
if that differs at all from what the average Iraqi - to the extent 
that you can talk to them - to what the average Iraqi is saying. Iraqi 
people are very wary of talking to foreign journalists. They're well 
aware that they're watched. They can't really talk freely. However, 
you do discern a certain glint in the eye. You do discern a certain 
way that they speak to you. That makes you understand that they knew 
that the Iraqi regime was backing down. They couldn't actually say 
it to articulate those words. I think it's too dangerous for people 
to say that here. But you could see it in their eyes. And you could 
see it in their demeanor. And you could read in between the lines 
of what they were saying. Are U.N. weapons inspectors expected to 
resume where they left off? And how soon should the inspection teams 
be expected to remobilize in Baghdad? The weapons inspectors will 
be back on Tuesday morning, Baghdad time. Their first task, as we 
understand it from comments from a number of people there, will be 
to check the monitoring equipment they left behind. These are the 
cameras, the gas sensing devices. These are based at various, quite 
sensitive sites, where it has in the past been confirmed that Iraq 
has manufactured various weapons. They will be checked to make sure 
they're still working. And frankly, the spotlight of the world is 
going to be on the weapons inspectors. If the weapons inspectors say 
at any stage that they're being obstructed or hindered in their work. 
Well then, according to Prime Minister Tony Blair from Britain, and 
indeed President Clinton from the United States, severe retributive 
action will be taken against the Iraqi regime. And that is a rather 
sobering thought now. The BBC's Richard Dows speaking to us from Baghdad. 
Thank you, Richard. Thanks very much, Lisa. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>