<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981116.2000.2027 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
While most eyes have been focused on the crisis with Iraq, new wrinkles 
have appeared in the Middle East Peace Process. On Israeli Radio today, 
Foreign Minister Ariel Shiron reiterated a call for the expansion 
of Israeli settlements in the West Bank. "The government decided," 
the Israeli Foreign Minister said, "that existing settlements must 
be bolstered, expanded, and developed." Shivon's words came as Prime 
Minister Benjamin Ehtanyahu declared that he is suspending an Israeli 
troop pullback scheduled for later this week. The World's Richard 
Myrons' been following the events in Israel. Richard, what's being 
made of the comments like those that we just heard from Ariel Shiron? 
And how do they fit with the announcement by Ehtanyahu to suspend 
the scheduled troop withdrawals? Well, clearly these comments have 
been met with fury by the Palestinian side. They said their incitement 
is deeply unhelpful to the atmosphere. The Israeli Prime Minister, 
Benjamin Ehtanyahu took his move, he said, because of comments made 
yesterday by Yasir Arafat in which Yasir Arafat said: "Our rifles 
are ready." And he renewed a vow to declare a state, a Palestinian 
state, in May of next year when the Oslo Peace Accords will conclude. 
So, clearly there's a cycle here. Of flinging epithets in each direction. 
What has come out of these various comments thrown in each direction 
is that it's poisoned the atmosphere here. There wasn't much good 
will to begin with. And certainly, it's made the Process harder to 
get on with. As you mentioned, the incrementation of this first stage 
of the Wide Accords has been suspended by Prime Minister Ehtanyahu. 
Until he says he receives a retraction from Yasir Arafat, of his comments 
made. So, have we heard any kind of response on the other side from 
Yasir Arafat today? Yes. Yasir Arafat says that his comments are being 
misinterpreted. He says that he has always maintained that it is an 
option. And that Palestinians want to declare an independent state. 
And they want that to happen in May of next year. In conclusion of 
the Oslo Accord. They want to negotiate the declaration of Palestinian 
state. And the Israelis are taking this out of context. But there 
were some very hard remarks said by Yasir Arafat yesterday. They could 
or renew the as I mentioned earlier. They said: "Our rifles are ready." 
And this is language, which obviously angers enormously the Israelis. 
And they interpret it in a particular fashion, which they say is war-like. 
And the Palestinians say, no it's not. You're inciting us. Because 
you're telling your people you sent us to go out and grab every hilltop. 
You heard that from Ariel Shiron. And what about that call by Ariel 
Shiron. The public call for Israeli settlers to basically grab as 
much land as possible before the troop pulled back. Is that kind of 
call heated? Does that bring about any sort of response on the hilltops 
where the settlers are? We've seen in the last couple of weeks, that 
five new hills, according to certain experts who monitor the situation. 
There have been new caravans that have appeared on them in the last 
two weeks. They say this was in the existing boundaries of settlements. 
The boundaries of settlements can go on for a long way beyond the 
actual houses themselves. And there is a certain imperative by some 
circumstances to go out there, as you say. And just get them while 
they're there. Secure them, and make sure they have markers on the 
lands. They say, of course, that they're establishing their presence 
on land which is already theirs. But we are seeing a movement in that 
direction. Which Ariel Shiron certainly seems to want to continue. 
Well, they are very harsh statements. Perhaps not very unusual in 
this situation where there has been a dirth of good will all along. 
But I wonder to what extent is this considered a serious setback for 
the implementation of the Y agreements ? Or is it more of just another 
small hitch among the way? It's very hard to know at this stage. One 
gets the sense that with America standing over both Yasir Arafat's 
and Benjamin Ehtanyahu's shoulders, there is a certain momentum which 
is already started which will continue. And we keep hitting these 
potholes or these obstacles. And somehow finding our way around them. 
But it is worrying. Whenever an Israeli Prime Minister, or indeed 
a Palestinian leader were to say: Hold on, we're not carrying on with 
this. So we have to certainly be worried about this. But I would think 
that there is a certain momentum to this. Especially considering that 
the United States is part of the disagreement to make sure that it 
succeeds. But though obviously, there's something the Israelis want 
to see out of the Palestinian side, before they do indeed proceed 
with this first stage. Which is due to happen over the next few days. 
The World's Richard Myrons, speaking to us from Jerusalem. Once again, 
thank you, Richard. Thank you, Lisa. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>