<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981112.0591 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Two Asian officials criticized Japan on Thursday for opposing a proposed 
free-trade agreement supported by the United States, saying Tokyo 
could deeply divide Pacific Rim leaders as they meet to discuss the 
global economic crisis. ``Maybe a dramatic breakthrough will happen'' 
before leaders of Japan, the United States and 19 other Asia-Pacific 
nations hold their sixth annual summit in Malaysia next week, ``but 
I don't think so,'' a South Korean official said in Kuala Lumpur. 
He spoke on condition of anonymity. The United States, Australia and 
Canada are pushing the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation trade summit 
on Tuesday and Wednesday to finalize a pact to lift tariffs in nine 
sectors covering dlrs 1.5 trillion in global trade by 2020. The industries 
would be chemicals, forest products, medical equipment, energy, telecommunications 
equipment, environmental goods and services, gems and jewelry, fisheries 
and toys. Tokyo says it can't accept a fixed schedule for opening 
its forestry and fishing sectors, two industries that Japan's governing 
party appears determined to protect on behalf of its supporters. APEC's 
aim is free trade among the developed member nations by 2010 and developing 
countries by 2020. On Thursday, senior APEC officials began a two-day 
meeting to hash out the agenda that Cabinet ministers will approve 
this weekend for the summit meeting by the 21 leaders. The group adjourned 
late Thursday night with no agreement, and some other countries also 
finding problems with some of the sectors, officials said. A senior 
U.S. official said they discussed the possibility of extending deadlines 
for Japan and other countries to liberalize the two contentious sectors. 
``There's a lot of discussion of flexibility,'' said the official, 
speaking on condition that he not be identified. But he said Washington 
isn't willing to permit Japan to refuse liberalizing its fishing and 
forestry sectors altogether. Earlier in the day, a Japanese official 
said Tokyo would not budge. ``Japan won't change its position on the 
forestry and fishing sectors,'' he said, speaking on condition of 
anonymity. ``We won't compromise, either.'' Japan confirmed Thursday 
that it was working on a plan to help Asian nations develop their 
fishing and forestry industries. But a Japanese delegate said the 
aid was in no way aimed at winning support from Asian nations for 
Japan's insistence on retaining its fishery and forestry tariffs. 
U.S. Trade Representative Charlene Barshefsky has accused Japan of 
trying to derail the pact, saying it would fall apart unless the world's 
second-largest economy approved all nine sectors. The South Korean 
APEC delegate said his government supports the free-trade agreement, 
but could have trouble selling it back home if Japan refuses to open 
its fishing market. South Korea, one of worst victims of the Asian 
economic crisis, relies as heavily on fishing as Japan does, and its 
fishermen often share the same waters. The official said other countries 
in the region that support the pact could end up in arguments over 
its nine sectors during the APEC summit, given how much their countries 
already are suffering under Asia's 16-month-old financial crisis. 
Australian Trade Minister Tim Fischer warned Thursday that Japan's 
approach could unleash protectionist forces. ``I think the threat 
of slippage with regard to trade worldwide is very real,'' Fischer 
said in Canberra, Australia. ``I think that would be a disastrous 
course, which would merely extend the present economic difficulties.'' 
After the APEC summit, U.S. President Bill Clinton plans to travel 
to Tokyo to meet with Japanese Prime Minister Keizo Obuchi. Just like 
last year's APEC summit in Vancouver, Canada, the discussions in Malaysia 
will be dominated by a financial crisis, which also has hurt Russia 
and is threatening Latin America. The United States has battled to 
keep the APEC response to the crisis on the free-market road that 
the International Monetary Fund has been urging countries to pursue. 
However, this year's host, Malaysian Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad, 
is expected to lead a counter assault on this free-market philosophy, 
arguing that the IMF prescription has failed to halt the crisis and 
has instead left many countries in deep recessions with little prospect 
of an early recovery. Mahathir would like an endorsement of Malaysia's 
approach, which imposed currency controls to keep speculators away 
from its financial markets. ``We hope we'll decide what needs to be 
done on currency trading,'' Mahathir told reporters Thursday. APEC 
comprises Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, China, Hong Kong, Indonesia, 
Japan, South Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, 
the Philippines, Singapore, Taiwan, Thailand and the United States. 
Russia, Peru and Vietnam will join at this summit. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>