<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981112.0301 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Yelling pro-democracy slogans, at least 15,000 students pushed through 
rows of riot officers near Parliament Thursday in the biggest day 
of protest so far against a government assembly on political reform. 
Vastly outnumbered, police and soldiers with sticks and shields retreated 
before crowds of marchers, many chanting ``Let us through'' and waving 
red and white Indonesian flags. Thousands of troops remained in place 
around Parliament, where the nation's highest legislative body met 
to plot Indonesia's transition to democracy. Students, however, accuse 
the People's Consultative Assembly of trying to hinder reforms. Fearing 
violence, banks, shops and offices closed their doors and sent workers 
home early. Streets in the usually traffic-clogged, tropical capital 
were clear. There were no reports of clashes, but the mood recalled 
deadly riots in May that shook Jakarta and helped oust former President 
Suharto after 32 years of authoritarian rule. This week, several protests 
have ended in violence pitting students against riot police and military-backed 
civilian guards. In a move likely to further anger students, government 
leaders said that 1999 parliamentary elections were likely to be delayed 
until July, two months later than President B.J. Habibie had promised. 
Marzuki Darusman, a leader of the ruling Golkar party, cited tie-ups 
in drafting electoral laws. Activists are skeptical that assembly 
delegates are willing to shake off their legacy as Suharto proteges 
and implement democratic reforms. The 1,000-member assembly is Indonesia's 
highest legislative body and includes all 500 members of Parliament. 
Convening in the green-domed legislative building, delegates debated 
whether to escalate an investigation of Suharto, who is accused of 
human rights abuses and enriching his family at state expense. A minority 
faction in the assembly, the Muslim-based United Development Party, 
argued in favor of approving a decree that would authorize an investigation 
of Suharto's wealth. Such a decree would bolster an investigation 
of Suharto's business holdings that is under way, but government prosecutors 
say they have found no wrongdoing. Students say the government, which 
is filled with former Suharto loyalists, is too compromised by its 
links to the former president to properly investigate him. At the 
street rally, students in brightly colored university jackets shouted 
slogans including, ``Habibie must step down and Suharto must take 
responsibility.'' Thousands of people stood by, watching the marchers 
and occasionally clapping and cheering. The students took a circuitous 
route toward Parliament along main roads, some in densely populated 
poor areas. ``We will keep on protesting if our demands are not fulfilled,'' 
said demonstrator Lufti. Near Parliament, one group of students broke 
up a police line by driving slowly through in buses. Others wearing 
headbands gunned motorcycle engines and sang protest songs. Violence 
erupted Wednesday when a car carrying student activists plowed into 
a group of riot officers, injuring nine and prompting enraged soldiers 
to fire warning shots and to club protesters. Military chief Gen. 
Wiranto apologized for the beatings of several protesters and three 
local news photographers, one of whom he visited in a hospital. Some 
30,000 police and soldiers are on duty in the capital this week. Habibie, 
who has legalized political parties and made other democratic reforms, 
opened the four-day assembly meeting Tuesday. Critics suspect that 
Habibie, who is expected to run for president next year, may be maneuvering 
to consolidate his power. Factions of the assembly, which includes 
parliamentary legislators and presidential appointees, are also discussing 
whether to scale back the armed forces' prominent role in politics. 
Students want the military, which has 75 appointed seats in the 500-seat 
Parliament, to be banned altogether from the chamber. The unrest in 
May erupted after military personnel fatally shot four student protesters. 
The tumult was fueled by discontent over Indonesia's worst economic 
crisis in decades. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>