<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981112.0320 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Serb police detained 20 Albanians on Thursday and warned them that 
they would be ``liquidated'' unless two abducted Serbs were released, 
a Kosovo Albanian organization said. The Kosovo Information Center, 
which reflects views of the main Albanian political party in the southern 
Serbian province, said the 20 were taken off a bus from nearby Montenegro, 
the smaller of the two republics, along with Serbia, that make up 
Yugoslavia . The two Serbs were apparently abducted Wednesday by separatist 
guerrillas in Kosovo's central Drenica region, the center said. There 
was no independent confirmation of the report by the center, which 
is close to Ibrahim Rugova, the U.S.-supported leader of Kosovo's 
majority Albanians. Rugova's camp is at odds with the Kosovo Liberation 
Army guerrillas. Both factions want Kosovo's independence, but Rugova 
opposes the KLA's armed struggle and is prepared to settle for a return 
of autonomy for Kosovo, as outlined in a U.S.-sponsored plan accepted 
Oct. 12 by Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic to evade threatened 
NATO air strikes. On Thursday, a pro-KLA Kosovo Albanian political 
coalition warned Rugova against plans to organized a predominantly 
Albanian police force for Kosovo as foreseen by the October plan. 
The coalition said the KLA was already policing Albanian areas of 
Kosovo and ``statements about forming another police force ... would 
lead to factionalization'' of Kosovo's Albanian entity. The pro and 
anti-Rugova factions are already deeply split. Earlier this week, 
Adem Demaci, the guerillas' spokesman, bluntly warned Rugova to stay 
out of organizing police, saying that was the KLA's business. Also, 
the time had passed for any attempts to paper over differences with 
Rugova, he said. Even if Serb authorities cooperate, Kosovo Albanian 
differences could sour internationally backed attempts to implement 
the October plan and start the process of Albanian autonomy in Kosovo. 
In the Netherlands, meanwhile, the U.N. war crimes tribunal said investigations 
of alleged war crimes in Kosovo during the nearly eight-month crackdown 
would continue, despite obstruction by Serbian authorities. Chief 
tribunal prosecutor Louise Arbour canceled a trip to Serbia last week 
after authorities refused to grant her a visa to visit Kosovo. The 
Hague-based tribunal maintains it has the U.N. Security Council's 
blessing to investigate alleged atrocities committed by the Yugoslav 
army and Serb police that left hundreds dead _ mostly Albanian civilians 
_ and hundreds of thousands of others homeless. After meeting a Kosovo 
Albanian delegation on Wednesday, ``the prosecutor indicated that 
she intends to continue her investigation notwithstanding the recent 
hiccups with the visas,'' said Deputy Prosecutor Graham Blewitt. Kosovo's 
violence has continued past the Oct. 12 agreement by Milosevic to 
sharply reduce the number of police and soldiers in the province. 
In the past week, at least two Serb policemen have been killed and 
three injured, while six guerrillas of the Kosovo Liberation Army 
have died from police gunfire. Police accuse the rebels of attacking 
to try to provoke a harsh response that could prompt world leaders 
to order military strikes. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>