<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981112.0580 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After ratifying the latest peace accord with the Palestinians, Israel 
announced Thursday it would begin construction of a large Jewish neighborhood 
in a sector of Jerusalem claimed by the Palestinians as a future capital. 
Palestinian negotiators denounced the construction plans, as well 
as a decision by Israel's Cabinet to attach a series of conditions 
to the accord signed in Washington on Oct. 23. They demanded the United 
States intervene. U.S. Mideast envoy Dennis Ross is returning to the 
region to supervise implementation of the land-for-security agreement. 
His first stop is a meeting Friday with Palestinian leader Yasser 
Arafat. ``It is now crucial to have the American side join us ... 
to oversee implementation of the agreement,'' Palestinian negotiator 
Saeb Erekat said. ``We will not accept any post-agreement negotiations.'' 
Still, Arafat was pleased when Israel approved the accord after two 
weeks of delay. Arafat broke into a huge smile and gave a thumbs up 
when his aides told him of the Cabinet vote late Wednesday, said Jerusalem 
Post editor Jeff Barak, who was attending a briefing with Arafat at 
the time. Israel is to withdraw gradually from 13 percent of the West 
Bank by the end of January, in exchange for a Palestinian crackdown 
on Islamic militants. In a first stage, Israel is to withdraw from 
2 percent of the West Bank on Monday. However, Israeli officials said 
the withdrawal would be delayed until the end of next week, following 
a parliamentary vote scheduled on Tuesday. The accord has wide bipartisan 
support in the Knesset, unlike in the Cabinet where it was approved 
by only eight of 17 Cabinet ministers, with four opposed. Five ministers, 
all members of Netanyahu's Likud Party, abstained. On Thursday, there 
were signs that the accord was being implemented. Israeli and Palestinian 
officials practiced checking arriving passengers at a Palestinian 
airfield, which the agreement allows in the Gaza Strip. Israeli officials 
watched as Palestinians checked luggage and passports at the site, 
to be open next week. On Wednesday, thousands of settlers staged a 
protest rally, with many speakers calling for Netanyahu's ouster. 
In an attempt to blunt the criticism, the government on Thursday published 
bids for the construction of 1,025 homes in what is to be a large 
Jewish neighborhood, Har Homa, in traditionally Arab east Jerusalem. 
Eventually, 6,500 apartments are to be built in Har Homa, known in 
Arabic as Jabal Abu Ghneim. Arafat adviser Ahmed Tibi warned of a 
``serious response'' if construction actually begins. In March 1997, 
when Israel broke ground for Har Homa, the Palestinians suspended 
all contacts with Israel. In ratifying the agreement, the Cabinet 
threatened to annex parts of the West Bank if Arafat carries out a 
plan to declare independence on May 4, the end of the five-year autonomy 
period. In his meeting with Barak and other Israeli journalists, Arafat 
signaled he was not seeking a confrontation. ``May 4 is the end of 
the five-year period we agreed upon in Oslo. If there are other ideas, 
I'm ready to listen,'' Arafat was quoted as saying. The Palestinian 
leader also appeared ready to bend on another issue, the procedure 
for annulling clauses of the PLO founding charter that call for Israel's 
destruction. Israel stipulated Wednesday that the clauses could only 
be revoked by a formal vote of the PNC, while the Palestinians have 
maintained that their April 1996 voice vote was sufficient. ``Has 
the Knesset ever voted twice on an issue?'' Arafat asked rhetorically 
when asked by the Israeli reporters about the PNC vote. However, he 
added: ``If it is necessary, we will do it.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>