<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981112.0295 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Serb police detained 20 Albanians on Thursday and warned them they 
would be ``liquidated'' unless two Serbs apparently abducted by separatist 
guerrillas were released, a Kosovo Albanian organization said. The 
Kosovo Information Center, which reflects views of the main Albanian 
political party in the Serbian province, said the 20 were taken off 
a bus coming from Montenegro. The bus was detained near the border 
to Montenegro, which makes up Yugoslavia along with Serbia, said the 
center, adding that the two Serbs went missing on Wednesday in the 
central Drenica region. There was no independent confirmation of the 
report by the center, which is close to Ibrahim Rugova, the U.S.-supported 
leader of Kosovo's majority Albanians. Rugova's camp is at odds over 
the Kosovo Liberation Army guerrillas. Both factions want Kosovo's 
independence from Serbia. But Rugova opposes the KLA's armed struggle 
and is prepared to settle for a return of autonomy for Kosovo, as 
outlined in a U.S.-sponsored plan accepted Oct. 12 by Yugoslav President 
Slobodan Milosevic to evade threatened NATO air strikes. On Thursday, 
a pro-KLA Kosovo Albanian political coalition warned Rugova against 
plans to organized a predominantly Albanian police force for the province 
as foreseen by the October plan. The coalition said that the KLA was 
already policing Albanian areas of Kosovo and ``statements about forming 
another police force ... would lead to factionalization'' of Kosovo's 
Albanian entity. In reality, the pro and anti-Rugova factions are 
already deeply split. Earlier this week, Adem Demaci, the guerillas' 
spokesman, bluntly warned Rugova to butt out of organizing police, 
saying that was the KLA's business. And he said the time had passed 
for any attempts to paper over differences with Rugova. Even if Serb 
authorities cooperate, Kosovo Albanian differences could sour internationally 
backed attempts to implement the October plan and start the process 
of Albanian autonomy in Kosovo. In the Netherlands, meanwhile, the 
U.N. war crimes tribunal said that investigations of alleged war crimes 
in Kosovo during the nearly eight-month crackdown would continue, 
despite obstruction by Serbian authorities. Chief tribunal prosecutor 
Louise Arbour canceled a trip to Serbia last week after authorities 
refused to grant her a visa that would permit her to visit Kosovo. 
The Hague-based tribunal maintains that it has the U.N. Security Council's 
blessing to investigate alleged atrocities committed during the nearly 
eight-month crackdown by the Yugoslav army and Serb police that left 
hundreds dead _ mostly Albanian civilians _ and hundreds of thousands 
of others homeless. After meeting a Kosovo Albanian delegation on 
Wednesday, ``the prosecutor indicated that she intends to continue 
her investigation notwithstanding the recent hiccups with the visas,'' 
said Deputy Prosecutor Graham Blewitt. Kosovo's violence has continued 
past the Oct. 12 agreement by Milosevic to sharply reduce the number 
of police and soldiers in the province. In the past week, at least 
two Serb policemen have been killed and three injured, while six guerrillas 
of the Kosovo Liberation Army have died from police gunfire. Police 
accuse the rebels of attacking to try to provoke a harsh response 
that could prompt world leaders to order military strikes. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>