<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981112.0306 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Roy Evans was expected to step down as co-manager of Liverpool on 
Thursday, leaving Frenchman Gerard Houllier in sole charge of the 
struggling Premier League club. British newspapers reported that Evans, 
who has been with Liverpool for 33 years as a player, coach and manager, 
reached a settlement to leave the club in a meeting Wednesday night 
with chairman David Moores. An official announcement was expected 
Thursday that Evans was leaving by ``mutual consent.'' The papers 
said Evans declined an offer to accept another position with Liverpool 
and instead negotiated severance terms to cut his links with the club. 
Evans' assistant, Doug Gilmore, was also expected to leave. The move 
will leave Houllier, the former French national coach and technical 
director, in charge for Saturday's home game against Leeds. Houllier 
will be the first foreigner to have full control at Anfield in the 
club's 106-year history. He is expected to bring in fellow Frenchman 
Patrice Bergues, a Liverpool coach, as his assistant. Houllier will 
be the second Frenchman in sole charge of a Premier League club, joining 
Arsene Wenger, who guided Arsenal to the League and Cup double last 
season. Evans departure appeared inevitable after Tuesday night's 
humiliating 3-1 home defeat to Tottenham in a League Cup game. That 
followed last Saturday's 2-1 defeat at Anfield to Derby, leaving the 
Reds in 11th place in the bottom half of the Premier League standings. 
To make matters worse, 18-year-old striker Michael Owen could be out 
for up to a month after suffering a hamstring injury against Spurs, 
and midfielder Steve McManaman is sidelined for at least six weeks 
with an Achilles problem. Houllier will face a huge challenge in trying 
to recapture the glory days at Liverpool, one of the world's most 
famous and decorated clubs. The Reds have won a record 18 English 
league championships, five FA Cups, five League Cups, four European 
Cups and two UEFA Cups. But Liverpool has been eclipsed in the 1990s 
as England's top club by Manchester United, league champion in four 
of the last six seasons. Evans took over as Liverpool manager in January 
1994 after the resignation of Graeme Souness. The only trophy won 
by Liverpool during Evans' reign was the lightly regarded League Cup 
in 1995. Speculation over Evans' position grew when the club brought 
in Houllier this summer to work alongside him in the unusual arrangement 
of co-manager. Since going to the top of the table on Sept. 9, the 
Reds have won only three games _ against Fulham in the League Cup, 
Kosice in the UEFA Cup and Nottingham Forest in the Premiership. Evans 
admitted Wednesday that the pressure was taking its toll. ``The speculation 
has been very difficult to live with,'' he said. ``I have done this 
job with honesty and integrity and seeing the club suffer does affect 
me badly.'' Evans' departure signals the end of the ``Bill Shankly 
era'' at Anfield. Shankly created a dynasty that produced a string 
of successful managers such as Bob Paisley, Joe Fagan, Kenny Dalglish 
and Ronnie Moran. Evans' depature marks the fourth management shakeup 
in the Premier League this season after changes at Tottenham, Newcastle 
and Leeds. Dalglish was fired as Newcastle boss and replaced by Ruud 
Gullit, George Graham left Leeds to take over for Christian Gross 
at Spurs, and David O'Leary succeeded Graham at Leeds. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>