<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981112.0885 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
GELSENKIRCHEN, Germany (AP) - After two meets in North America, the 
figure skating Grand Prix Series returns to Europe with Russians looking 
to continue their domination of the lucrative competitions with world 
champion Alexei Yagudin leading the way. The Nations Cup which begins 
Friday is the third in the International Skating Union's that features 
Olympic-eligible skaters. The first two events, Skate America and 
Skate Canada, had four Russian victories in the eight events. Yagudin 
was the men's singles winner in Skate America. With a new coach and 
a new presence on the ice, he looks to dominate this season with three-time 
world champion Elvis Stojko still slow in coming back from the groin 
injury. Olympic champion Ilia Kulik of Russia is taking the year off 
from these kind of international competitions to earn money in shows 
and pro-am events. Still the Russians are deep. Alexei Urmanov, the 
1994 Olympic champion, is back skating but his place on the Russian 
world team is not secure. Yevgeny Plushenko won Skate Canada. Alexander 
Abt of Russia was third at the European championships but could not 
gain a spot at the worlds or Olympics. He is competing in the Nations 
Cup and could challenge Yagudin. Yagudin, however, has shifted coaches 
from last year and is now with Tatiana Tarasova, who guided Kulik 
to the Olympic gold medal. Tarasova knows how to bring out the best 
in skaters. In her 32-year career, her students have collected 33 
gold medals, seven in the Olympics and the rest in World and European 
championships. She worked with Yagudin in New Jersey, where she transferred 
from Marlborough, Massachusetts. ``After a few practice sessions I 
saw he had a great talent as an actor,'' Tarasoava said. ``So I made 
a short program to bring out those talents.'' Yagudin's short program, 
to be skated on Friday, has a circus theme with him showing juggling 
and other circus acts. Yagudin was tight-lipped about the forces that 
move him away from his long-time coach, Alexei Mishin, who also coaches 
Urmanov and Plushenko. ``Let's just say I'm old enough to put myself 
in my own hands,'' said Yagudin, who turned 18 in March, just a few 
days after winning his world title in Minneapolis. In the women's 
competition another Russian, Maria Butyrskaya, is also looking for 
for her second victory after winning Skate America. Yet another Russian, 
Yelena Sokolova, finished second at Skate America and could challenge 
for the victory after many feel she had the better free skate in Detroit, 
Michigan. Sokolova, 18, is one of a half-dozen Russian skaters, all 
with medals from world junior and senior championships, who could 
fight for spots for the Russian team. With Olympic champion Tara Lipinski 
leaving the eligible ranks and world champion Michelle Kwan taking 
the year off from these competiitons, a place on the Russian team 
should mean a medal. Butyskaya was third at the world last year behind 
Kwan and two-time European champion Irina Slutskaya. Russian World 
champions Angelika Krylova and Oleg Ovsiannikov make their season's 
debut in the ice dance competition. Krylova and Ovsiannikov moved 
to the top after two-time Olympic champions Pasha Grishuk and Yevgeny 
Platov stopped competing and eventually split up. Krylova said they 
are not taking it easy, even though they are the world champions. 
``Each season we start from level zero,'' Krylova said. ``And we have 
to work very hard for every competition.'' Canadians Shae-Lynn Bournes 
and Victor Kraatz, fresh from a victory at Skate Canada where the 
top Russians didn't compete, are present in Germany to challenge Krylova 
and Ovsiannikov. The pairs field is weak here with Germany veterans 
Peggy Schwarz and Mirko Mueller the top-couple. Winners of the events 
receive dlrs 30,000. The next event is the Lalique Trophy in Paris 
next week. The series culminates with the March final in Russia, two 
weeks before the world championships in Finland. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>