<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981112.2100.0815 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With the prospect of a U.S. air strike before too long, we are joined 
tonight by a man who knows Iraq's weapon capabilities well. Scott 
Ritter is a former member of the U.N. weapons inspection team. He 
is currently an MSNBC analyst, with us tonight from our NBC studios 
in New York. What signs will be you looking for to tell you this is 
close? I think we're already seeing most of the signs, the withdrawal 
of the inspectors and the signing of the deployment order by President 
Clinton. I think the United States has made it clear in the past they 
do not want to play the game of escalation and backing down. Once 
committed to deploying forces into the region, that's a clear signal 
that the United States is finally serious about using military force 
against Saddam. So I would say, minus my dramatic breakthrough on 
the diplomatic front, it'S' foregone conclusion that Iraq will be 
hit with some military force, probably something very significant. 
Of course, having said that, that has happened before, and we're back 
to this. So how is this going to differ? Well, this differs because 
of the April 1998 policy review that was undertaken by the administration, 
which led, on the one hand, to a Restraining of weapons inspectors 
to avoid confrontation with Iraq, because they knew that confrontation 
would lead to the requirement for escalation of military force, something 
they didn't want to do haphazardly. I think the United States has 
made it clear they will not allow Iraq to dictate the expenditure 
of up to $1.5 billion every time he wants to create a problem. If 
the United States is to deploy forces into the region, it's for serious 
business, not just to respond with a show of force, but actually to 
use force. And how would the target list, perhaps, differ from the 
last few times? In other words, it's very likely that when the smoke 
clears, the last aircraft pull out and the last missiles have been 
fired, there are still going to be remaining problems, targets, and 
the cynics will say we'll be back in three years. Well, these are 
outstanding questions that I think the president should be asking 
his national security team tonight and hopefully has been asking -- 
what is the end game? What do we want to achieve with the strikes? 
What I've heard is to degrade Saddam's military infrastructure and 
to send a signal to Saddam that we're serious, we'll strike you hard. 
But after we send that signal, then what? Containment through continuation 
of sanctions? I don't think that's a sustainable policy, and I would 
strongly urge people to think about what's going to happen when the 
smoke clears, what is the end game? How badly can we hit what has 
already been damaged? They have rebuilt fairly well to the point of 
being able to provide at least basic human services. You were there 
not too long ago. Well, I think, again, this is speculation, but I 
would think based upon what I know that the intent this time isn't 
to refight the gulf war. There won't be 60,000 missiles flown over 
all of Iraq. There will be a few thousand focused in on the area of 
Baghdad and maybe some other areas in Iraq, an intensive display of 
firepower, severe firepower sent down on the immediate vicinity of 
Baghdad. And the target deck will be focused on strictly the critical 
military industries and leadership targets. I think Baghdad, when 
they wake up from the days of intensive bombardment, will realize 
this wasn't desert storm for Baghdad. This was something much worse. 
When the gulf war was over, we learned that two pieces of ordnance, 
two specific bombs were dropped with the intent, perhaps, of killing 
Iraq's leader Saddam ssein. Do you think if that is one of the collateral 
pieces of damage, to put it in a flip way, that would be something 
the U.S. wouldn't mind hearing? Well, everybody should realize that 
it is Saddam Hussein who is the problem, and that ultimately it's 
Saddam Hussein who holds the key to any solution, whether he on his 
own volition agrees to fall into compliance with security council 
resolutions, or he is removed. I don't think anybody would shed tears 
in the United States if one of those pieces of ordnance happen to 
strike a place where he was residing. But I don't believe that, given 
the difficulties there are in targeting saddam Hussein, and maybe 
some of the legal problem acts of targeting him, that he himself represents 
a target. They are going to target the infrastructure surrounding 
Saddam Hussein, the leadership foundation, but not Saddam himself. 
Scott Ritter, we'll continue to talk to you in the next several days. 
Thank you very much. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>