<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981112.2100.2005 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As the U.S. continues to prepare nor another confrontation with Iraq, 
President Clinton must consider the reaction that any kind of military 
action would have on Capitol Hill. That also raises questions of advice 
and consent. With us tonight, republican senator Sam Brownback from 
Kansas, who chairs the Senate foreign relations subcommittee with 
jurisdiction over Iraqi, is with us from Topeka, Kansas, tonight. 
Senator, you just heard of the story coming out tonight for tomorrow's 
"Financial times." What's your reaction to the allegation? Well, I'm 
not surprised. I don't know when we've been told a straight story 
from Iraq or from any of the Iraqi leadership for that matter. So 
while I'm designed, I'm certainly not surprised. You know, you just 
heard Mr. Thomson say Europeans generally regard the U.S. as gung 
ho and certainly aren't that way about this attack. What do you think 
the White House owes you when we use terms like advice and consent 
before anything happens? I think they owe us to get in contact with 
plenty of lead time to be able to discuss what the options are, what 
they think we need to do. Most importantly, what's the long-term strategy 
here? The thing that a lot of members of Congress had with last time 
around was when the administration talked about bombing, and then 
we asked them, OK, if Saddam Hussein doesn't open up for inspections 
after we bomb, then what? And they couldn't answer the question of 
then what? What we need to do right now is, if we're going into a 
military campaign, be able to answer the then what strategy. If he 
doesn't open up after we bomb, then what are we going to do? That's 
what the White House owes us. Senator, as a member of foreign relations, 
you have not heard from a White House state defense staff member about 
anything that may be on the way? No, I've heard. And we've had these 
very discussions that I'm talking about here. And I voiced my concern 
that if we go in and bomb, the only way that this can be done is if 
we have a long-term strategy. If he doesn't open up for inspections, 
do we remove Saddam Hussein from power over a long period of time? 
How do we limit his influence? A lot of us have been pushing a proposal 
we passed in Congress, that the president signed into law, the Iraqi 
freedom act, that would limit Saddam hussein on the north and on the 
south, let the opposition groups build up, provide some excess military 
equipment to those opposition groups, and really try to put in place 
a long-term strategy to remove Saddam Hussein from leadership? Iraq. 
So would that be your call if you were making the call here? Go ahead 
and go on with the bombing mission this time, the cruise missile mission, 
but when the smoke clears, be sure you have a policy, in this case, 
you seem to be saying arm the local insurgery incidents inside so 
that they can, in effect, settle things themselves? I do not think 
we can just say, we're going to launch a few cruise missiles and that's 
it, that's what our strategy is. I think we have to go in with it 
saying, if we're going to bomb and then he does not open up, here's 
what we'll follow up with on a long-term strategy. My suggestion for 
them would be what we've passed in the Congress, what the president 
signed into law, that of limiting Saddam's movement on both the north 
in Iraq, on the south in Iraq, making him effectively more of a mayor 
of Baghdad, letting the opposition groups grow, and that, over a long-term 
period of time, providing the instability in the region, to remove 
Saddam hussein. That's what we need to get. As long as he's in power, 
we're going to have trouble. Let's talk about the president as commander 
in chief. In this case, regarding this mission, do you trust him? 
Do you support whatever move he makes militarily over there? Well, 
I think we have to have a lot of advice and consent. And I've said 
this to the administration officials as well. Given the situation 
that we're in, given the situation the president is in, i think he 
needs to consult with the Congress a great deal at an early phase 
and have a lot of communications. I'm encouraged that this time around 
we're getting those earlier communications, like what I've received 
and other members have received, to engage this. This should not be 
a partisan issue. It should not be an issue of questioning the president's 
leadership. But to make sure that doesn't take place, I think it needs 
to involve a Broad base of people in the Congress in this advice and 
consent. That, thankfully, has started, and we need to continue that. 
Let me try part of that again. Do you trust the commander in chief 
in this case? Well, I trust the president. To do what's right. My 
role is advice and consent, I want to be able to give that in a timely 
fashion when it's still useful A. Senator has been joining us tonight 
in Topeka, Kansas. Senator Sam Brownback, thank you very much. We 
may be speaking to you again in the days ahead. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>