<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981112.2100.2533 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The C.I.A. may be the most controversial arm of the U.S. government, 
and what you're about to see in our next report is, in its own way, 
about as remarkable as the fall of the Berlin wall. 30 years ago, 
C.I.A. recruiters couldn't even tell their families where they worked. 
Well, today, the agency uses advertising agencies to spread its own 
message. In the course of coming in from the cold, the C.I.A. has 
admitted to some accusations it has long denied, further proof that 
it is a whole new world. Fred Francis has more. There's something 
new at job fairs across the country. Add to the alphabet soup of corporate 
recruiters, these three letters -- c.i.a. C.I.A. is an organization 
with probably something on the order of 15,000 employees, of whom 
maybe 400 or 500 are field intelligence officers. That's 500 out of 
15,000, 3% of C.I.A. actually does spying operations. Enter Mark. 
Not his real name, and we can't show you his face because he's a U.S. 
spy. This is not just a regular job. Being an operations officer or 
a clutch management officer for the C.I.A. and director of operations 
is a way of life. Mark has an unusual assignment, to travel the country, 
convincing the best and brightest on America's college campuses, the 
life of a covert operative is the one for them. It's not the kind 
of job that's ever going to bore you. You're never going to wake up 
saying, what am I doing? I sold another 10 widgets today. This is 
the information age. You can't expect people to work for your information 
if you don't tell them what they're going to do. We go into a fair 
amount of detail on that. But the C.I.A.'s legendary culture of secrecy, 
where even the agency's honored dead can't always be identified, doesn't 
always mix well with the information age. The job of an operations 
officer overseas, you're working in a U.S. embassy overseas, living 
overseas as a diplomat. You've got a passport and immunity, diplomatic 
immunity is something we don't abuse, but it's nice to have if you 
need T. my job is to recruit and then to handle or to meet foreign 
agents. These are people who have agreed, for me, to commit espionage, 
to provide me with secret information about their country. If they 
get caught, they're going to jail for the rest of their life. They 
might get killed. They're certainly going to be in very serious trouble. 
If I get caught, I'm going home. I'm getting put on a plane and go 
home. I'm not going to jail. I'm not going to be killed probably. 
What you just heard from Mark was an extraordinary revelation, not 
lost on his audience. I was surprised. I was surprised that they were 
as open about some of the clandestine and covert functions, as they 
were. He has reason to be surprised. What you just heard is a public 
admission, after decades of denial by the c.I.A., that its officers 
routinely work as diplomats in U.S. embassies abroad. It's disconcerting 
for me being filmed talking about my job is something that normally 
would get me thrown in jail. But the man we call Mark needs to talk 
and persuade if he wants to go head-to-head with the fortune 500 in 
the tightest job market employers have seen in decades. I'm going 
to send you overseas to work as a diplomat. He is the Van guard of 
the biggest recruitment drive in C.I.A. history aimed at boosting 
the number of U.S. spies overseas, a group Tom Clancy called field 
spooks who were decimated by the end of the cold war and reliance 
on satellites and electronics eavesdropping. It's called human intelligence. 
All a satellite picture can do is show you the roof of buildings. 
You can count tanks. But it doesn't tell you what's going on in here 
in a human mind somewhere. And the 30,000 resumes sent to the C.I.A. 
every year still aren't enough. That's why they're here and in magazines, 
newspapers, even on the Internet to sell a profession that has always 
been a secret. And the C.I.A. has plenty to sell. A life of intrigue, 
patriot service, and an one dated mission for the 1990's. Chase Brandon 
used to do it for a living. We have a very clear mission. In many 
ways it's probably more profound in the post-cold war era during the 
cold war period, because the great Soviet dragon has been slained. 
Now we have a tangle of little poisonouser is pants. Brandon points 
out for all we hear about the agency's failures, the nature of its 
businesses prevents the C.I.A. from trumpeting itses. We're kind of 
like a baseball team in effect. If you're a good baseball player, 
you go to the all-stars, well, we probably hit eight out of 10, but 
the two we foul off break the neighbor's windows. With some students, 
the C.I.A.'s message and the elite fast-moving image found its Mark. 
One of the things I liked about it is the mobility. Your job is never 
the same. It's never boring. They have a lot more to offer than G.E. 
or I.B.M. can't offer you. But the pitch fell short with others, especially 
those already started by corporate America. You know, I talked with 
Oracle and G.E. and caterpillar and here's the c.i.a. Is there anything 
else I should be getting involved in or should be doing? The career 
path of the 1990's is changing jobs and leveraging experience here 
and, you know, moving up there. It's not really like you can do that 
in a political organization. Plus they don't pay a ton. It's such 
an extreme commitment that they ask of you. And so, you know, which 
is fine, but it's also being 21 or however old all four of us are. 
It's pretty nerve-wracking. You're selling a job that is seven days 
a week, 24 hours a day for a little more than $30,000 a year. Well, 
if you broke it down per hour, I mean, you might not be working for 
much more than peanuts. But you're working for so much more in general 
anyway. You're working for the sense of purpose that comes from being 
part of this very wonderful organization and being part of a community 
of people whose levels of integrity and professionalism and bravery 
and honesty are really beyond reproach. But you can't tell anybody 
about it. no. Just take my word for it. And a whole new generation 
of C.I.A. spies may do just that. Fred Francis, NBC news, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>