<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981112.2100.0197 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We have for you now a late look at the deployment of forces as ordered 
by the secretary of defense today. 84 additional combat aircraft, 
including stealth fighter bombers, will bolster the strength in the 
Persian gulf region. 3,000 additional troops will join the 1,500 ground 
forces already in kuwait. Two additional patriot missile batteries 
will join the region, joining the three that are there are there. 
They are set up to defend against missiles. There are also the U.S.S. 
enterprise carrier battle group already on its way to the Persian 
gulf, carrying more combat aircraft and more personnel on board those 
various vessels. As we'll shortly hear, the word from the Pentagon 
apparently is that it could take place any time. Other strikes have 
been launched, other strikes have been a punishes effect on Iraq and 
its people. How will this be different? Pentagon correondent Jim Miklaszewski 
with us tonight from our Washington bureau. What do you know tonight? 
Well, Brian, what should be still one more ominous sign for Saddam 
Hussein, U.S. military forces have been put on alert tonight in the 
Persian gulf. That means they're ready to strike. All it will take 
now is the order from President Clinton. Today at fort bliss, Texas, 
the crew got their orders to ship out for the gulf. The additional 
firepower, now headed to Iraq, bombers and stealth fighters, is a 
sure sign the U.S. is preparing for a massive sustained bombing campaign. 
The planes begin arriving in 48 hours, but U.S. forces don't have 
to wait that long to strike. Missiles launched from ships already 
in the gulf would lead the attack, then pinpoint bombing runs against 
command facilities Saddam Hussein's services and special police. Military 
officials also report this time Baghdad itself would be a primary 
target. Baghdad will be struck much more violently, much more comprehensively 
than anybody in Iraq, I think, believes. But during the gulf war, 
60,000 combat air strikes failed to make a serious dent in Saddam 
Hussein's weapons program. Now, armed with information from seven 
years of U.N. weapons inspections, the U.S. military has a better 
idea of what targets to hit and where. But military officials admit 
there's still no chance air strikes alone can wipe out Saddam's weapons 
of mass destruction. But there's more at stake here than simply punishing 
Saddam Hussein or taking a hit. At his chemical and buy logical weapons 
program, the very U.S. credibility is on the line here, which could 
be a powerful incentive for president clinton to go ahead and order 
those air strikes. Brian? It's note worthy you're not working late 
at the Pentagon tonight. What is the latest guidance on the record 
or on background you're getting from the Pentagon as to the timing 
of this? Brian, you know, it's possible there could be some last-ditch 
diplomatic deal that Saddam Hussein, as one Pentagon official told 
me tonight, could come to his senses. But all the signals out of Baghdad 
tonight are that appears unlikely. I can tell you that it makes air 
strikes very much likely, perhaps as early as this weekend. You list 
a very compelling figure in your setup piece, and that is 60,000 strikes 
from the air failed to really cripple, apparently, Iraq's ability 
to make weapons again. So the only thing we could hope for going about 
it again is that new data from those who've been on the ground and 
seen it could help pinpoint things, correct? That's exactly right. 
During those air strikes, of course, they weren't specifically targeting 
the chemical, buy logical and nuclear weapons program. They did target 
some, but not specifically. This time they'd be going after several 
hundred targets that are believed to be suspected sites for his weapons 
of mass destruction, Brian. Jim Miklaszewski, who will be back at 
work before too long in our washington bureau for us tonight, thanks. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>