<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981112.1830.0070 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. The message to Iraq tonight could not be more clear. 
Major, sustained airstrikes are headed your way unless Saddam Hussein 
allows U.N. weapons inspectors back into that country. Furthermore, 
a number of Arab states today openly warned Saddam that he is responsible 
for any consequences of the military action. In other words, he's 
on his own. Meanwhile, the U.S. buildup in the Persian gulf continues. 
Already in the gulf region tonight -- including ones in Kuwait and 
Saudi arabia. And 23 ships, including 1 aircraft carrier and more 
than 300 tomahawk missiles. And more is on the way. We begin our coverage 
tonight at the White House with NBC's David Bloom. David, what's going 
on there tonight? Tom, tonight at the White House the president's 
national security team is meeting, in part to give final approval 
to specific Iraqi targets. All indications are that any U.S.-led military 
attack will not take place until tomorrow night at the very earliest. 
In Iraq today, more defiance -- from Iraq's deputy prime minister 
today, a Highly personal attack on President Clinton, Tariq Aziz blaming 
this latest crisis on Mr. Clinton's refusal to free Iraq from crippling 
economic sanctions. That road is being blocked continuously, stubbornly, 
illegally by his government. He and his government are the problem. 
Not Iraq. But Iraq's argument was significantly undercut today when 
eight arab nations issued this statement, warning that Iraq must act 
"to avoid military confrontation" and that if it fails to do so, "the 
Iraqi government will be solely responsible." There is nothing to 
negotiate. They have a simple choice to reverse course or face the 
consequences. Of refusing. But tonight, as the president's national 
security team meets, U.S. and U.N. officials say any attack is not 
likely until at least tomorrow evening. why? Because U.S. bombers 
and fighters are not yet in striking position, because it's already 
Friday -- an Islamic holy day in Baghdad. And because U.N. secretary 
general Kofi Annan is set to meet tomorrow afternoon with the U.N. 
security council. I have no plans to go to Baghdad at the moment, 
but I need to talk to the council members. Tonight, senior U.S. officials 
insist President Clinton still has made no final decision authorizing 
the use of force. It can end peacefully, which is to say Saddam comes 
back into total and prompt compliance. Deputy secretary of state Talbott 
warned of a series of military strikes lasting a week or more. But 
it's not at all clear the White House or the American people have 
the stomach for such a sustained attack and the civilian casualties 
sure to follow. tom? NBC's David Bloom at the White House tonight. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>