<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981112.0293 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When the natural order of a food chain is upset, the battle for survival 
intensifies. Such is the case in the nation's grocery business. This 
Darwinian struggle has its roots in two evolutionary shifts. First, 
discount giants like Wal-Mart have leapfrogged into a powerful position 
by becoming big sellers of groceries as well as garden hoses. And 
second, regional supermarket chains like Kroger Co. are in a frenzy 
of consolidation, merging to create national chains able to compete 
head to head with the discounters. As these giants battle it out, 
manufacturers, wholesalers, distributors and independent grocers risk 
being trampled if they can't learn the new rules and adjust to the 
new order quickly enough. The biggest change? While retailers used 
to take many of their marching orders from food suppliers, the balance 
has tilted, with some retailers now so big that they often call the 
shots. All these forces converge in the story of James McCoy. McCoy 
is president of John C. Groub Co., which runs a 30-store grocery chain 
in southern Indiana that was sold to Kroger earlier this year. In 
his 33 years at Groub, McCoy never expected his company to lose its 
independence. Then Wal-Mart's Supercenters, which sell food and general 
merchandise under one roof, moved in. ``They had been coming for five 
years, and we had been very successful in competing with them in the 
beginning,'' recalled McCoy, whose stores go by the names Jay C Food 
Stores and Food Plus. ``But as time went on, we began to feel the 
effect because they were going into smaller and smaller towns.'' And 
this, he went on, was ``the profit lifeblood of our company.'' Making 
matters worse, manufacturers of everything from paper towels to soup 
began requiring ever-larger orders in return for the best prices. 
``It was all brought about,'' McCoy said, ``because of the pressure 
Wal-Mart brought to bear on P&AMP;G, Campbell's etc. to become more 
efficient.'' So when he was approached by Kroger, the nation's largest 
food retailer, it was as if a big brother had arrived to stare down 
a bully. Kroger, he said, is committed to retaining the stores' small-town 
flavor. ``If you accept the fact that it would only be a matter of 
time and we would either have closed some stores or laid people off,'' 
McCoy said, ``the communiy is going to benefit.'' In Indiana as elsewhere, 
this power shift is taking place far from shoppers' view, but the 
impact will be felt from stockroom to checkout counter. Supermarket 
operators and suppliers insist that customers will be the biggest 
beneficiaries, and at least in the short term that seems likely, as 
competitors clamor for consumer loyalty. Safeway Inc. chief executive 
Steven Burd said, ``If done well, it lowers the operating expenses 
for those companies, which allows them to be in a better position 
to compete with some of the emerging formats out there that typically 
have lower costs.'' If the recent mergers fail to produce cost savings, 
of course, the long-term benefit will be minimal. The chains, though, 
are betting big on the power of size. In addition to buying Groub, 
Kroger announced plans last month to acquire Fred Meyer in a $13 billion 
deal that will create the largest supermarket chain in the country, 
with 2,200 stores in 31 states and combined annual revenue of about 
$43 billion. In other recent deals, Albertson's plans to acquire American 
Stores; Royal Ahold bought Giant Food, Stop &AMP; Shop and Bi-Lo chains, 
and Safeway absorbed Vons and Dominick's. All of which is not necessarily 
good news to distributors. ``The retailers are going to be a little 
stronger and have a little more muscle in the marketplace,'' said 
former Agriculture Secretary John Block, who is president of Food 
Distributors International, a trade group. Already the changes are 
exacting a toll. ``Twelve years ago we had more than 300 full-line 
wholesalers,'' Block said. ``Today we're down to 97, and 12 of them 
do 80 percent of the business.'' Though he sees advantages for the 
most efficient suppliers, ``I don't see any end in sight to the consolidation.'' 
What is more, competition from discounters is likely to hit food retailers 
even harder. Kmart, for example, has said that it is converting nearly 
2,000 stores to formats that include grocery sections and is considering 
a merger with a major supermarket chain or wholesaler. As the market 
becomes more crowded, small independent grocers will have an even 
tougher time holding on. Many lack the resources to compete with megastores 
that sell 20 kinds of olives and practically give away orange juice 
to lure shoppers. ``The mom-and-pops, the independent, the life of 
those people is really very short,'' McCoy said. There was a time 
when family-owned, one-store grocers were the driving force in the 
business. Grocers date back to the days of the tea merchants of the 
late 1800s and came into their own in the 1930s. Over several decades, 
independents and mostly regional chains filled in the growing suburban 
landscape. The 1970s and '80s brought new formats, like convenience 
stores and warehouse stores. A wave of consolidation hit in the 1980s, 
when chains became more aggressive about expansion. Now, many of them 
control entire regions and are seeking to become national in scope. 
While some food suppliers are folding under the pressure, others are 
finding new ways to squeeze profits from, of all things, sardines 
and cream of asparagus soup. A wholesale company called One Source, 
for instance, buys and stocks slow-selling items for chains. The arrangement 
frees retailers' warehouse space for better-selling products like 
Tide and Coke and enables One Source to receive volume discounts. 
In most stores, ``chicken noodle soup and tomato soup fly off the 
shelf, but cream of asparagus probably doesn't move a case a month,'' 
said Jack Haedicke, chief operating officer for One Source, a division 
of C&AMP;S Wholesale Grocers in Brattleboro, Vt. ``If you've got a 
warehouse full of slow movers and grab from enough retailers and put 
them in one centralized location, they are not slow movers any more.'' 
In fighting back against discounters like Wal-Mart and Costco, supermarket 
operators have been forced to reduce costs sharply, invest in money-saving 
technology and remodel or close outdated stores. Then, as leaner, 
more efficient operators, they have begun to focus on growth, snapping 
up rivals to expand beyond saturated markets and to benefit from economies 
of scale. Now the larger chains have the size to steamroll over weaker 
competitors and to demand that manufacturers and distributors bend 
on everything from promotions and product packaging to shipment schedules 
and fees for shelf space in order to shave costs further. ``There 
is an entire supply chain out there that talks about all the costs 
embedded in moving product from the manufacturer's truck to the trunk 
of the customer's car,'' said Burd of Safeway. ``We've gotten very 
good at our element of the food supply chain, and we're looking forward 
to working with vendors on their side of it.'' Of course, the largest 
manufacturers and wholesalers are the least affected by the new industry 
demands. After all, even Kroger and Safeway must sell Campbell Soup 
and Crest. And the makers of these and other top-selling brands were 
the pioneers of many changes now driving the retail business. Companies 
like Procter &AMP; Gamble and Colgate-Palmolive were among the first, 
for instance, to invest in the technology that retailers now use to 
track product sales by store, manage inventory and billing and control 
distribution. When retailers demanded Colgate's new Total toothpaste 
as soon as it rolled off production lines last year, the company used 
technology-driven distribution to get it on store shelves nationwide 
in less than a month _ half the time it would have taken a decade 
ago. Backed by a $100 million marketing budget, the largest in the 
company's history for a new product, ``Total was in your face from 
a consumer point of view, but it was also in your face from a retail 
point of view,'' said Ian Cook, president of Colgate U.S. In four 
years, the company has cut its shipment time in half _ to 6 days from 
12 _ and increased its on-time delivery rate to 97 percent from about 
92. This enables it to meet the greater demands from retailers. In 
the case of Total, it helped catapult the product into a top-selling 
brand within months. Manufacturers and retailers that lack the size 
of a Colgate or Wal-Mart are seeking strength in numbers. The membership 
of the Independent Grocers Alliance, or IGA, has declined to 2,000 
from 2,700 over the past decade as more independents have folded into 
chains or closed altogether. But those grocers that remain are increasing 
their sales volume, thus swelling the consortium's marketing and purchasing 
power. The average revenue of an IGA store increased to $5.2 million 
last year from $3.3 million a decade ago. Smaller grocers like these 
are also trying other ways to fight back. They say they are putting 
renewed emphasis on details that big chains tend to overlook. One 
scrappy independent, David Skogen, who owns six stores in La Crosse, 
Wis., says he is going ahead with plans to expand by two stores a 
year even though Wal-Mart recently said it would build a superstore 
in his backyard. Skogen, who owns two Skogen's supermarkets and four 
Festival Foods discount grocery stores, said he would beat Wal-Mart 
and other large chains by continuing to provide ``the things they 
don't mess with.'' His stores hold knife-sharpening promotions, for 
instance, load their parking lots with pumpkins each fall and even 
provide shoppers locked out of their cars with free locksmith services 
and a spare set of keys. ``People don't forget those things,'' Skogen 
said. Skogen says he also relies increasingly on his relationship 
with Flemming Cos., a huge wholesaler, to get the most buying power. 
``We lean on them for retail counsel, financial experts and their 
real estate guru,'' he said. By refining his focus and maintaining 
a neighborly touch, Skogen said, ``we will continue to have a seat 
once the music stops.'' Maybe so. But even if he does, many others 
will be out of the game. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>