<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981112.0457 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Trying to increase control over its U.S. operations, Cable and Wireless 
PLC of Britain is seeking to acquire more than $300 million worth 
of fiber-optic communications lines from Qwest Communications International 
Inc., according to executives close to the talks. The executives said 
that some details remained unsettled and that the two companies were 
six to eight weeks away from an announcement. They added that the 
two sides appeared committed to reaching an accord. There are good 
reasons for both Qwest and Cable and Wireless to seek such an agreement. 
A deal could provide big operating savings to Cable and Wireless, 
enhance Qwest's credibility as a major player in global telecommunications 
and even shake up the mergers-and-acquisitions environment. A Qwest 
spokesman said that his company was already selling some services 
to Cable and Wireless, but refused to comment further. Cable and Wireless 
declined to comment. Last week Cable and Wireless told investors and 
analysts that it had asked U.S. companies to submit proposals for 
selling high-capacity long-distance lines. It was unclear Thursday 
what the potential implications of Cable and Wireless' discussions 
with Qwest were for other carriers seeking the British company's business. 
The executives close to the talks said that Qwest could still lose 
out to another company. It is clear, however, that the talks between 
Cable and Wireless and Qwest highlight the union of two of the most 
basic financial concepts in the telecommunications business. First, 
if a carrier is handling large amounts of communications traffic and 
wants to serve the lucrative Fortune 100 accounts, it almost always 
makes more sense for that carrier to own its network rather than lease 
capacity on a competitor's systems. That is the reality that Cable 
and Wireless is facing. Over the last few years, the company was able 
to grow into one of the largest carriers of long-distance voice traffic 
in the United States while leasing communications lines from others. 
But once Cable and Wireless acquired MCI Communications Corp.'s Internet 
business in July for $1.75 billion, the rationale for the British 
company's buying its own network strengthened greatly. (That deal 
said that Cable and Wireless could lease fiber-optic capacity from 
what is now MCI Worldcom.) Using an owned, rather than leased, network 
not only can reduce operating costs but also increases a carrier's 
ability to win large corporate accounts. With their demands for reliability, 
many big corporations want to be sure that their communications providers 
actually own the systems they use and can be held accountable for 
them. Luckily for Cable and Wireless, it can take advantage of a second 
strategic imperative: Once a company spends millions or billions building 
a communications pipeline, the only way for it to recover its costs 
is to fill it up. An empty network only depreciates. And right now 
there are a lot of empty networks being built in the United States. 
In addition to Qwest, IXC Communications, Williams Cos. and Level 
3 Communications are each building new national communications networks. 
Frontier Corp., which already owns a piece of the Qwest network, also 
has more communications capacity than it needs. (In fact, in recent 
months Cable and Wireless has been mentioned as a potential acquirer 
of Frontier, though that now seems less likely.) All of those companies 
are locked in fierce competition to fill their networks and recover 
their costs, in one sense putting Cable and Wireless in the catbird 
seat. Cable and Wireless will likely buy what is known in the industry 
as ``dark fiber'' optical lines that the company would then outfit 
with its own choice of light-emitting transmission electronics. In 
addition to its ability to pay cash, Cable and Wireless has another 
potential bargaining chip in its negotiations with U.S. carriers. 
With its far-flung global operations, Cable and Wireless could agree 
to swap some of its international network capacity for optical fiber 
in the United States. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>