<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981112.0325 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After months of negotiations, the International Monetary Fund and 
more than a dozen nations are expected to announce loans to Brazil 
totaling at least $42 billion to help stabilize the country's economy, 
according to officials familiar with the plan. The U.S. contribution 
to the package, said to be more than $5 billion, would be the biggest 
commitment of taxpayers' money to alleviate a foreign economic crisis 
since the bailout of Mexico in 1995. The package for Brazil comes 
four months after a Russian bailout that turned into a financial debacle, 
wasting $4.8 billion in IMF funds and touching off a panic among investors 
who pulled their money from other emerging markets, including Brazil. 
As a result, the Brazil bailout carries considerable risks for both 
the IMF and the Clinton administration, which have increased the size 
of the loan package by nearly 50 percent in recent weeks. Final details 
of the deal, which the Brazilian government said Thursday night would 
``probably'' be announced Friday, were worked out in the last few 
days during secret negotiations in Washington. The Treasury Department, 
which has been pressing American allies in recent weeks to contribute 
more to the plan, refused to comment Thursday on the details. However, 
officials from several countries who are familiar with the details 
say that the IMF will offer $18 billion in loans, much of which will 
be made available to Brazil almost immediately. Another $4.5 billion 
will come from the World Bank and a nearly equal amount from the the 
Inter-American Development Bank. The World Bank is primarily responsible 
for anti-poverty and economic development programs, but it has taken 
a larger and larger role in containing the financial crisis that has 
spread around the world; the Inter-American Development Bank plays 
a parallel role in Latin America. At least $15 billion more will come 
from the United States, Britain, France, Germany, Spain, Italy, Canada, 
Japan and several other nations. It is unclear when that money would 
be delivered, but it is expected to carry a relatively high interest 
rate _ as did the $12 billion in U.S. loans to Mexico _ to encourage 
Brazil to repay it quickly. Private banks and other major lenders 
to Brazil, who will number among the biggest beneficiaries of any 
plan that stabilizes the country's economy, will not be directly contributing 
to the program. Under pressure from the United States, however, they 
are expected to commit to maintain or expand lines of credit they 
had extended to Brazil until the crisis that was touched off by Russia's 
default on its loans in August. Unlike past bailouts of Thailand, 
Korea and Indonesia, this one has taken months to arrange _ so long 
that the total amount has been increased, in part so that markets 
are not disappointed by the revelation of a package no larger than 
the one they have expected for so long. ``There is a sense that we 
are we are finally coming out of the financial crisis, but that the 
package had to exceed market expectations,'' said Nicolas Checa, the 
head of the emerging markets division of Medley Global Investors, 
an advisory group to large investors. ``Everyone wanted to exceed 
market expectations so they are not back in the October nightmare,'' 
he said, referring to the huge selloff that occurred after it became 
clear that the Russian parliament was not about to impose any of the 
fiscal discipline required to get the IMF to begin delivering aid 
to the country again. All official loans to Russia have been suspended 
since August, and private lending there has dried up, forcing Russia 
to speed up the printing of money to pay pensioners and even the military. 
Brazil is viewed by most experts as being in fundamentally good shape. 
But inside the U.S. Treasury, there is concern that President Fernando 
Henrique Cardoso may not have the clout necessary to push through 
some of the politically painful spending cuts that the loan package 
requires. Like most IMF aid, the Brazil package will be turned over 
to the country in stages, as the Congress enacts the conditions. The 
U.S. money will probably not be disbursed until Brazil has met many 
of those conditions, according to officials familiar with the plans. 
Administration officials say that while the world economic turmoil 
has abated somewhat in the past three weeks, members of Congress are 
sufficiently scared of the potential effects here of an economic collapse 
in Brazil that they will offer few objections. The chief critic in 
the Senate of the Mexican bailout, Sen. Alfonse D'Amato of New York, 
was defeated in last week's election. ``The politics of this have 
changed,'' one administration official said this week. The distraction 
of the showdown with Iraq, other officials say, may also lessen the 
attention on the U.S. contribution. It is still unclear what Brazil 
will offer for collateral in return for the American loans. In Brazil, 
nervousness about the delay in settling the final details of the agreement 
has been growing daily. In Sao Paulo, the country's industrial and 
financial engine, the Bovespa stock market index dropped 3.76 percent 
Thursday in heavy trading. Foreign reserves, which have fallen by 
more than $30 billion since the crisis began in August, also continued 
their decline, with another $280 million leaving the country Thursday. 
And though the government announced a reduction in interest rates 
Wednesday, the Central Bank's main rate remains a hefty 42.25 percent, 
to the disappointment of business leaders, who are clamoring for any 
relaxation of recessionary pressures. Recent economic indicators have 
shown that Brazil's industrial production is falling sharply, as companies 
feel the impact of the financial crisis. The Clinton administration 
is selling the aid as a program intended to help the country before 
it is forced to devalue its currency or watch the remainder of its 
foreign currency reserves disappear. Nonetheless, a debate has raged 
within the IMF over whether Brazil should devalue its currency now, 
to make its goods less expensive _ and thus more competitive _ on 
world markets. The high interest rates in Brazil are intended to bolster 
the Brazilian real by providing investors with an incentive to keep 
their money in the currency. Many economists believe the latest moves 
will still not be enough. Rudiger Dornbush, an MIT professor with 
close ties to top officials of the IMF, warned at a conference here 
last week that the country's huge debt burden and the unwillingness 
of its Congress to impose fiscal discipline over the past year, leave 
``no reasons to be confident in Brazil.'' He predicted that aid for 
the country may not ``last long'' and would only delay an inevitable 
devaluation of the currency. The IMF's fear is that major banks might 
repeat what they did in Russia and South Korea: Use the brief period 
of stability created by the aid to get their investments out of the 
country. But Brazil is a different case: It still has roughly $40 
billion in foreign currency reserves, and the loan program is designed 
to strengthen the government's hand, so that investors have more confidence 
in the country's ability to emerge from the current crisis. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>