<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981112.0396 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Clinton administration Thursday signed the international agreement 
to fight global warming, affirming a crucial American role in a long 
environmental crusade but not raising any hope of Senate approval 
in the near future. The signing, which the administration has long 
promised, reinforces its commitment to the agreement, which calls 
for sharp cuts in emissions of industrial gases from burning coal, 
oil, wood and natural gas. But the accord is not legally binding unless 
the Senate approves it. Vice President Al Gore said, ``Our signing 
of the protocol underscores our determination to achieve a truly global 
solution to this global challenge.'' But he emphasized that much more 
bargaining lies ahead. Opponents of the agreement in the United States 
immediately raised an outcry, but the step was widely applauded in 
Argentina, where some 150 nations are meeting to debate details of 
how the accord can be put into effect. Stuart Eizenstat, the chief 
U.S. delegate to the talks in Buenos Aires, announced there Thursday 
morning that the United States would sign the pact, which was negotiated 
last year in Kyoto, Japan. Peter Burleigh, the acting U.S. representatives 
to the United Nations, signed it in New York on Thursday afternoon. 
But the administration, as expected, will not yet submit the Kyoto 
Protocol for approval by the Senate, where it faces substantial opposition 
from critics who say the costs to industry of compliance would damage 
the economy. The White House has said all along that the United States 
would sign the accord before the deadline next March, but would not 
ratify it unless key American provisos are accepted. Given the pace 
of the continuing talks, that probably means it will not be approved 
before the 2000 elections. Without the participation of the United 
States, the leading source of the waste industrial gases that scientists 
say cause global warming, the agreement would collapse. The United 
States was the 60th nation to sign. ``Kyoto is a landmark achievement, 
but it is a work in progress and key issues remain outstanding,'' 
said Eizenstat, who is the undersecretary of state for economic affairs. 
In a telephone interview, he said the signing was intended to strengthen 
the U.S. negotiating hand, but critics in Congress, echoing the views 
of their constituents in industries like coal and automobiles, said 
that it would reduce U.S. leverage instead. Eizenstat called the announcement 
a high point in negotiations that otherwise have focused on incremental 
advances toward putting the complex agreement into force. ``I am not 
gilding the lily when I say there was near euphoria among delegates 
here,'' he said. ``They just felt this was a real sign of U.S. leadership. 
I think there was really a doubt that we were really going to pursue 
this, with all the opposition in the Senate and in other quarters. 
The feeling was that perhaps the domestic opposition was so stiff 
that we were going to back off.'' The protocol, which strengthens 
a global treaty negotiated in Rio de Janeiro in 1992 and ratified 
during the Bush administration, would commit the United States to 
steep cuts in its emissions of gases like carbon dioxide, which comes 
from burning fossil fuels. Mainstream scientists say that rising atmospheric 
concentrations of these greenhouse gases, warming the earth's surface 
like an invisible quilt, are threatening to disrupt the planet's climate 
and to cause potentially grave environmental harm. Under the agreement, 
the United States would have to cut its emissions by about 7 percent 
from the 1990 level over the next 10 to 15 years. Since 1990, emissions 
have been steadily increasing, making that target even more ambitious. 
The conditions that the United States is demanding are meant to hold 
down the costs of compliance, and to increase the chances that the 
Senate will eventually approve the agreement. One U.S. condition is 
establishing a system of international trading in emissions credits, 
effectively allowing the United States to buy its way out of meeting 
goals by paying other countries to reduce their emissions further. 
Another is persuading developing nations to take a larger role in 
cutting emissions, encouraging them with financial assistance from 
developed nations who would take emissions credits in exchange. Both 
ideas face strong resistance from some countries that say the first 
steps must be taken by industrial nations like the United States, 
which historically has emitted about a quarter of all greenhouse gases. 
At the same time, opponents of the treaty led by major energy producers 
and consumers are continuing to marshal opposition in Congress, arguing 
that its emissions targets cannot be met without damaging the economy. 
Sen. Joseph Lieberman, a leading proponent of the accord, said in 
Buenos Aires that signing the protocol ``gives us the credibility 
to be at the table'' in the continuing talks. ``That means we can 
not only make sure it happens, but that it happens in the way that 
we prefer,'' he said. But a Democrat who opposes the protocol, Rep. 
John Dingell of Michigan, said that ``the timing of this signing only 
encourages countries who refuse to be part of any effort to limit 
greenhouse gas emissions.'' On Wednesday Argentina pledged to limit 
its emissions, and on Thursday Kazakhstan did the same, but populous 
countries like China and India, whose emissions are growing quickly, 
continue to resist accepting formal limitations. ``The president has 
chosen a risky path both domestically and internationally,'' said 
Connie Holms, the chairwoman of the Global Climate Coalition, which 
represents major industry groups opposed to the treaty. ``Clinton 
has sent the U.S. careening down an endless highway which appears 
on no maps, has no speed limits, no police patrols, and no exit or 
entrance ramps.'' Sen. Chuck Hagel, R.-Neb., who sponsored a Senate 
resolution last year that opposed signing the treaty unless certain 
conditions were met, said the signing ``blatantly contradicts the 
will of the United States Senate'' and dared Clinton to submit it 
to the Senate. A two-thirds majority is required for approval. ``If 
this treaty is good enough to sign, it's good enough to be submitted 
to the Senate for an open, honest debate,'' he said. Environmental 
groups praised the signing, but some complained that so far the United 
States is not doing enough to cut its own greenhouse gas emissions. 
``Without a more vigorous commitment to domestic action, U.S. demands 
for more action by developing countries are like a chain-smoking parent 
telling his children that smoking is bad for them,'' said John Adams, 
president of the Natural Resources Defense Council, an environmental 
advocacy group. He urged the administration to take unilateral steps 
to cut emissions of carbon dioxide from automobiles, power plants 
and other sources. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>