<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981112.0328 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Officials at the National Cancer Institute have begun to express frustration 
over their inability to reproduce the striking discoveries described 
a year ago by Dr. Judah Folkman, the Harvard researcher who reported 
that he and his colleagues had wiped out malignant tumors in mice 
by treating the animals with compounds that destroyed the tumors' 
blood supply. The institute's concerns were reported Thursday in a 
front-page article in The Wall Street Journal stating that Folkman's 
work had not passed an essential test of scientific validity: the 
requirement that it be reproduced by other researchers. In a statement 
issued Thursday after the article appeared, the institute said that 
it would continue to study the compounds, angiostatin and endostatin, 
but it added: ``To date, NCI studies using either the mouse or human 
forms of endostatin have not produced the marked regression of these 
tumors in mice that Folkman's laboratory has reported. Scientists 
from NCI and Folkman's laboratory are working together to resolve 
the differences in their research results.'' Officials of the institute 
declined repeated requests for interviews about their concerns, but 
a spokesman said that institute officials believed The Journal's article 
was substantially correct. The cancer institute was unusually close-mouthed 
today. Folkman also declined to be interviewed, but issued a statement 
asserting basically that research takes time and that it was too soon 
for the institute's scientists, who began their studies within the 
past year, to have mastered the complicated techniques that it took 
his team years to develop. Folkman also said that his own team, as 
well as two others, had confirmed that endostatin was a potent inhibitor 
to the growth of both blood vessels and tumors in mice and rats. Folkman 
said he and his colleagues and scientists from the cancer institute 
``will go to each other's laboratories to transfer the techniques.'' 
The president of Entremed, the company licensed by Folkman to produce 
endostatin, said that more than 20 studies the company had sponsored 
by other researchers in the United States and abroad had confirmed 
Folkman's findings. The official, Dr. John Holaday, said he expected 
to begin testing endostatin in 50 to 100 cancer patients next year. 
Entremed's stock price dropped $7.75 in Thursday's trading, to $24.88, 
a decline of 23.6 percent. But the company's stock had still increased 
by 120 percent this year. Folkman has been studying ways to choke 
off the blood supply to tumors for about 30 years. He described some 
of his work in the journal Nature in November 1997 and it leapt to 
public attention in May when a front-page article in The New York 
Times described the excitement his findings had provoked among other 
scientists. In the study published in November, Folkman and his colleagues 
reported that they had completely eradicated all signs of cancer in 
every mouse they had treated with a combination of endostatin and 
angiostatin. The tumors did not recur, and the animals suffered no 
side effects, they said. The report generated a flurry of studies 
by drug companies, academic laboratories and the cancer institute, 
where the director, Dr. Richard Klausner, said he was ``putting nothing 
on a higher priority'' than developing the compounds into drugs for 
people. Among the companies that sought to duplicate Folkman's findings 
was the biotechnology company Genentech, in South San Francisco, a 
company that is also pursuing other methods of starving tumors by 
cutting off their blood supply. Genentech scientists tried several 
times to produce both endostatin and angiostatin, following the methods 
described in Folkman's scientific papers, and then tested them in 
mice. But the substances did not work. Dr. Arthur Levinson, the chief 
executive of Genentech, said the company's inability to reproduce 
the research did not necessarily mean that Folkman was wrong. Levinson 
said that Genentech's scientists might have erred in the techniques. 
``If we're doing something wrong, I would like to know what it is, 
because we're all hoping he's right,'' Levinson said. ``But things 
like this shouldn't languish too long, because the whole basis of 
science is reproducibility. If they can't be reproduced, at some point 
you have to ask yourself, are the initial claims correct?'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>