<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981112.0431 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial on Friday, Nov. 13: With an 
American strike against Iraq seemingly imminent, the Clinton administration 
must clearly define its goals and the best military tactics for achieving 
them. Although diplomacy now seems exhausted, there is a faint hope 
that Saddam Hussein will blink at the last minute and start honoring 
his international obligations. But if Baghdad remains defiant, President 
Clinton would be fully justified in ordering an attack. The world 
cannot leave Saddam free to manufacture horrific germs and nerve gases 
and use them to terrorize neighboring countries. The primary purpose 
of military action should be to compel the return of U.N. weapons 
inspectors and assure their access to all locations suspected of harboring 
evidence of biological, chemical or nuclear weapons or missiles. Air 
strikes can also destroy at least some of those weapons _ and might 
inflict enough damage to jolt Saddam out of his fantasy that he can 
retain weapons of mass destruction without paying a price or remaining 
much longer under sanctions. To achieve these ends, any new missile 
and bombing campaign must be extensive, going far beyond the pinprick 
Tomahawk missile attacks of the past. That approach failed to produce 
lasting change. A new air campaign will need to be sustained, with 
a regrettable risk of civilian casualties. The campaign should be 
aimed at strictly military targets, including weapons plants and storage 
facilities that can be hit without dispersing dangerous germs and 
gases. Washington should also attack bases of the Republican Guard 
and other forces that Saddam relies on to maintain his grip on power. 
The idea is to make the cost to Saddam so high that he would prefer 
letting the inspectors back to seeing the attacks continue. There 
is an understandable temptation to take on the added goal of politically 
crippling Saddam or even driving him from power. Desirable as those 
results would be, the air and ground campaign required to achieve 
them would inflict unacceptably high costs on the Iraqi people, Mideast 
regional stability and American troops. Even the air campaign carries 
a risk that Iraq could launch Scud missiles against Israel as it did 
during the Persian Gulf War, although U.N. inspectors believe that 
almost all Iraqi Scuds have now been destroyed. Should Israel come 
under attack, its leaders would be wise to let Washington take responsibility 
for Israel's defense. An Israeli military response would probably 
rupture the emerging Arab consensus against Baghdad. The U.N. Security 
Council, including France, Russia and China, is now unanimous in condemning 
Baghdad. Thursday eight Arab countries, including Egypt and Syria, 
demanded that Iraq cooperate fully with the inspectors and warned 
Saddam that any military action would be his fault. Thanks to the 
Clinton administration's diplomacy and Saddam's reckless folly, most 
of the world is now more willing to accept American military action 
than at any time in the recent past. Saddam ignores this new reality 
at his own peril. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>