<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981112.0388 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Lawyers for Microsoft Corp. made a broad and aggressive attempt on 
Thursday to discredit an Intel executive who has emerged as an important 
government witness, portraying him as a resentful employee and introducing 
testimony from his own supervisor that differed from his memory of 
events. In testimony early this week, Steven McGeady, an Intel vice 
president, said Bill Gates, Microsoft's chairman, and other Microsoft 
executives had threatened Intel's leaders in 1995 as part of a successful 
effort to push them out of the software-development business, and 
to dissuade them from supporting Netscape Communications Corp., Microsoft's 
major competitor in the market for Internet software. Ron Whittier, 
a senior vice president for Intel and McGeady's supervisor at the 
time, attended some of the meetings where the threats were purportedly 
made, and in his deposition he said he did not remember hearing them. 
But McGeady was unbowed, by this or any other bit of evidence introduced 
Thursday and intended to contradict his account. ``I'm sure Ron's 
telling the truth that he doesn't remember,'' he told Steven Holley, 
a lawyer for Microsoft. Later, when David Boies, the government's 
lead attorney, got another chance to question McGeady, he played longer 
portions of Whittier's deposition intended to show that his failure 
to remember the events in question should not be surprising. The longer 
passages showed that Whittier could not remember much of anything 
about that period. McGeady completed his testimony Thursday evening, 
as the government's antitrust trial against Microsoft ended its fourth 
week. Just before the trial began, Microsoft's lawyers complained 
that the charges involving threats against Intel were new and were 
added to the case at the last minute, and that the company could not 
possibly prepare a defense in time. On Thursday, however, Microsoft 
lawyers presented a voluminous and detailed attack on McGeady, portraying 
him as an arrogant, difficult Intel employee who held a strong personal 
animosity toward Microsoft _ even though he knew that Intel's leaders 
were intent on maintaining a good relationship with the software giant. 
Notes from one meeting showed that another manager had told McGeady 
that he was a ``prima donna.'' But that did not seem to bother McGeady. 
``I've been called far worse,'' he said with a slight smile. As the 
morning advanced and the attacks grew sharper, Judge Thomas Penfield 
Jackson asked Holley: ``What is the point of this? What are you trying 
to accomplish? Are you just trying to embarrass him?'' Holley said 
he did not want to respond in public. But at the end of the day, Microsoft's 
attacks seemed to have had some effect. Holley had worked to show 
that McGeady was a disgruntled employee out of the Intel mainstream. 
And after both sides had finished asking their questions of McGeady, 
Jackson asked the witness if he was speaking for Intel, or just for 
himself. McGeady said the answer was complicated; he was here because 
the government had subpoenaed him to testify. But, he added, he was 
a senior executive directly involved with the issues in question during 
1995 and 1996, when the threats were reportedly made. Sitting in the 
courtroom audience all this week were a senior Intel spokesman and 
a corporate lawyer who had been sent to support him. And it seemed 
clear that while the company wished it could stay out of this case, 
once an executive was subpoenaed, Intel's leaders would back him. 
During his cross-examination of McGeady, Holley introduced several 
e-mail and deposition excerpts intended to demonstrate that the only 
reason Microsoft tried to push Intel out of the software business 
was that the company thought Intel's software was of poor quality. 
But then, when Boies got his turn, he showed his own excerpts that 
seemed to show that Microsoft was most concerned about the threat 
Intel's work posed to Microsoft's control of the software industry. 
The larger impression left by the dueling and electronic-mail snippets 
from Microsoft and Intel files was simply that large corporations 
do not speak with one voice. Still, by the end of the day it was clear 
that McGeady was no fan of Microsoft. In one internal memo he wrote 
in August 1995, McGeady noted that Microsoft had bought rights to 
the Rolling Stones song ``Start Me Up'' to promote Windows 95. McGeady 
wrote that ``Sympathy for the Devil'' might have been a more appropriate 
choice. And in an electronic-mail message to Andrew Grove, Intel's 
chief executive, in December 1996, he wrote that he had ``long taken 
the position that anything that weakens Microsoft without indirectly 
weakening us is good for Intel.'' Asked to explain, McGeady said, 
``Anything that could bring more competition to the software industry 
is good for Intel.'' But then Holley ended his cross-examination of 
McGeady by reading another passage in the note to Grove. In that one, 
McGeady wrote that perhaps ``Microsoft could be goaded into doing 
something really stupid and anti-competitive, finally enraging the 
apparently placid antitrust police.'' With a smile, McGeady observed 
that what he predicted had come to pass. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>