<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981112.0213 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
How popular will the show of Ben Shahn's paintings at the Jewish Museum 
be? Shahn is a special case in American art. If other artists tend 
to be described in terms of the art of their time _ we say Pollock 
emerged out of Thomas Hart Benton and Picasso and Surrealism to put 
Abstract Expressionism on the map _ we think of Shahn's life as encompassing 
an era more or less from Joe Hill through the Rosenbergs to the Rev. 
Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., the signposts of his career constituting 
a virtual American martyrology in the middle decades of the century. 
He made his mark recalling Sacco and Vanzetti in the 1930s, and he 
ended up in the 1960s memorializing King and painting tributes to 
a Japanese fisherman poisoned by fallout from a U.S. H-bomb test on 
Bikini atoll. The present show, perhaps recognizing that times have 
changed and his relevance needs some retuning, steers clear of many 
of the details of old political battles. It stresses what is described 
in the catalog as a quality of introspection in Shahn's later work, 
a general mythologizing and spiritual symbolism that, we are told, 
contrary to the standard view of American art, links him to the Abstract 
Expressionists and other postwar American artists. Shahn is Shahn, 
nonetheless, and nearly 30 years after his death, on the centenary 
of his birth, it's inevitable that the Jewish Museum's exhibition 
will indicate how much people today continue to care about or even 
remember the events and causes with which he is inextricably identified. 
At the start I emphasize his popularity because we easily forget how 
popular Shahn was. With the Pollock and Rothko retrospectives now 
at the Modern and the Whitney, the Shahn exhibition is a useful reminder 
that it was he, more than they, who dominated the country's public 
consciousness at midcentury. Howard Greenfeld, in a new Shahn biography, 
cites a 1947 Look magazine survey of critics, curators and museum 
directors who were asked to name the 10 best painters in the United 
States. This was before any of the Abstract Expressionists had made 
much of a mark. Shahn placed fifth. He was ranked the same when Look 
simultaneously polled artists. (John Marin placed first in both polls.) 
Shahn's retrospective at the Museum of Modern Art had just closed. 
In 1950, the year Pollock reached his peak, Art News magazine said 
Shahn had one of the best shows of the season. In 1954, Abstract Expressionism 
having come to prominence, Shahn and de Kooning jointly represented 
the United States at the Venice Biennale. And by the late-1950s he 
was a celebrity. He was on television. Harvard and Princeton gave 
him honorary degrees. He illustrated magazines and advertisements, 
the way movie stars today endorse products, claiming that commercial 
art was not less dignified than painting, nor was it an ethical compromise 
(which didn't mean he wasn't peeved when detractors implied that he 
was merely an illustrator). He became, in a sense, the country's official 
leftist artist, or at least the official artist for millions of Americans 
leaning to the left, and if American communists grumbled that he was 
not far enough to the left, and conservatives said he was much too 
far to the left, their attacks seemed only to enhance Shahn's position 
and credibility. I suspect that he is the last American artist to 
have bridged the gap between public taste and the taste of art critics 
so successfully. Grandma Moses and Andrew Wyeth might have had wider 
popular appeal during the 1950s, but critics condescended to them. 
During the 1960s, the cognoscenti embraced Warhol, but Warhol was 
infamous as opposed to famous with the public. Powerful critics like 
Clement Greenberg occasionally attacked Shahn, but it was only in 
Shahn's last years, if at all, that his stature seemed to dim: John 
Canaday lamented after Shahn's death in 1969 that ``his technical 
facility and his strong feeling for decorative pattern gave to his 
work a quality of elegance, almost of chic, that offended former admirers 
who expected him to maintain into old age the fervor of youth.'' ``Thus 
he suffered, ironically, from comparison with himself,'' Canaday added. 
But then he used Shahn as a cudgel with which to beat younger artists 
at the time who, he said, failed to recognize ``the difference between 
propaganda for a cause believed in, and rabble-rousing.'' And today? 
From a distance of several decades, we see Shahn with some curiosity. 
He was a talented draftsman and photographer who left behind a few 
indelible images, but ultimately he seems a minor painter, narrow 
in scope, tethered to a moment that has passed. I was struck at the 
Jewish Museum by how little, formally speaking, his art changed over 
the years. Consistency can be a virtue but repetitiousness is not. 
There is a formal distance between the early Social Realist mural 
he did for the Jersey Homesteads, a Jewish community, in the mid-1930s 
and ``Maimonides,'' which he painted in 1954, but the distance isn't 
great. The ambiguity of his later works, involving sometimes obscure 
symbolism (his ``Age of Anxiety'' is one example), didn't change the 
basic way the pictures were organized. Using tempera, Shahn stuck 
to a few canny devices: meaty hands, patchy colors, a mix of deep, 
telescoped space and flat, collagelike elements (a Surrealistic device 
derived from Giorgio de Chirico, even though Shahn always insisted 
he had little patience for Surrealism) and, famously, a catchy shorthand 
means of drawing faces and heads. Collectively they defined a brand, 
like Rothko's rectangles or Pollock's drips. For Rothko and Pollock, 
being pigeonholed by a signature style became a problem. Shahn evidently 
felt it was OK. Greenberg once described ``a poverty of culture and 
resources'' on Shahn's part. That seems right. It was said, to underscore 
Shahn's integrity, that he was fiercely independent of trends in modern 
art, but he learned from many modern artists (Cezanne, Roualt, Grosz, 
Picasso, Calder, Leger), and he also passed ideas on to people whom 
you might not expect: Warhol and Pollock are two examples (see Pollock's 
``Portrait and a Dream''). Stylistically, if not politically, Shahn 
positioned himself in the middle, which accounts for his appeal. It 
is, of course, still deeply impolitic to criticize him, his admirers 
interpreting criticism as an attack on what he claimed to stand for, 
as if, to reverse the equation, revering Velazquez meant advocating 
monarchism or praising Picasso meant condoning misogyny. We forget 
how much taste in art became a grave moral matter in Shahn's day and 
no doubt remains so among many of his followers. At the time, Shahn 
represented an alternative to abstraction, whose meaning, being difficult 
to grasp, seemed morally suspect. He made people feel ennobled because 
through him they could associate themselves with causes that they 
considered just. Or put differently, he confirmed what they already 
believed. I find this a little peculiar considering the tone of much 
of his work. He might have hated the comparison, but it occurred to 
me that Shahn isn't unlike Andrew Wyeth because of the precise, obsessive 
way they both paint some details and the lonely, pessimistic mood 
they commonly evoke. They share a strangely silent, anti-heroic view 
of America. We are inclined to imagine Shahn as a witty or at least 
a satirical painter, but aside from early works like ``Myself Among 
the Churchgoers'' and a few other pictures, he isn't. Partly it's 
because he painted subjects like the Holocaust and nuclear war. Mostly 
it has to do with his righteous attitude: once upon a time, meaning 
during the 1950s, endearingly humorless painters earnestly cited scripture 
and philosophy to explain the symbolism and value of their work, the 
way young artists today describe the influence of television and comics. 
The prescriptive aphorism in Shahn's ``Maimonides'' (``Teach thy tongue 
to say I do not know and thou shalt progress'') is a good example 
_ and interesting because for his part Shahn rarely seemed to express 
any doubts about what he believed or why, which may be said to have 
cost him in terms of his work's development. For better and worse, 
Shahn remained quintessentially a painter of his time. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>