<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981112.0400 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Mets' altered contingent left for home Thursday with 
one expected trade made (Bobby Bonilla) and one expected trade not 
made (Todd Hundley). Their New York Yankee counterparts left having 
conducted no business, but confident that the upstart Arizona Diamondbacks 
had not blown them out of the uncharted Bernie Williams waters. Brian 
Cashman, the Yankees' general manager, actually left the Ritz-Carlton 
Hotel after the general manager meetings ended without knowing for 
sure if the Diamondbacks had really offered Williams $100 million 
for seven years, as a television report had proclaimed. But, he said, 
he did not care. ``It doesn't matter if I believe it or not,'' he 
said when he was asked if he believed the report. ``We'll do what 
we're comfortable with and not be governed by what any other club 
might do. We'll compete for this player in the area we're comfortable 
with.'' Shortly after Cashman left to drive north to Tampa and a meeting 
with his boss, George Steinbrenner, the man who supposedly had made 
the eye-popping offer to Williams said he had made no offer at all. 
``We can start and end it with we did not make an offer to Bernie 
Williams or Scott Boras,'' Jerry Colangelo, the Diamondbacks' managing 
partner, said in a telephone interview, including the center fielder's 
agent in his characteristically direct response. ``None. No offer.'' 
The Mets have received offers of another kind for Hundley, but they 
have not liked any of them enough to trade their erstwhile catcher, 
and the teams that have made the offers have not liked what the Mets 
have requested. ``We came here and I would have said the absolute 
chances of him being traded at this meeting are very, very good,'' 
said Frank Cashen, the Mets' interim general manager. ``As each day 
passes, they become somewhat slimmer that we do it. The next step 
would be the winter meetings.'' Cashen said about six teams have expressed 
serious interest in Hundley, including the Baltimore Orioles and the 
Los Angeles Dodgers. The Dodgers have offered second baseman Eric 
Young; the Mets have asked for Darren Dreifort, a starting pitcher. 
The talks with the Orioles have centered on relief pitching. A member 
of the Orioles' organization said the Mets asked for two relievers, 
Armando Benitez and Arthur Rhodes, plus a third player. The Orioles 
would be willing to trade one of them, especially after reaching agreement 
Thursday with a free-agent reliever, Mike Timlin, on a four-year, 
$16 million contract. If they had to settle for one, the Orioles believe, 
the Mets would prefer Rhodes, a hard-throwing left-hander. Cashen, 
without discussing other players, said the teams were not close on 
a deal. Even if they were to agree on players, the Orioles would want 
extensive medical data on Hundley's surgically repaired right shoulder 
before completing a trade. ``If this was April 1,'' Cashen said, ``there 
would be a better chance because a lot of people would like to see 
him play before they invest that kind of money.'' Hundley has $11.7 
million guaranteed for the next two years. Would it be to the Mets' 
advantage to wait? ``I was prepared to do it now,'' Cashen said. Cashen 
said some clubs have inquired about Hundley only to learn they were 
on his list of 12 teams he could not be traded to. Cashen did not 
identify them, but Anaheim, Toronto and Milwaukee fit that category. 
``Some of them have very serious interest and were kind of taken aback 
that he didn't want to go there,'' the unretired executive said. The 
Yankees have not been mentioned as a team interested in Hundley, but 
they are not on his no-no list, and the general manager of another 
club suggested how Hundley could get his wish and be traded to the 
other team in town. It could happen, he said, if the Yankees became 
desperate to acquire center fielder Jim Edmonds to replace Williams, 
and the Angels asked for Jorge Posada. That would open a spot for 
Hundley. It is highly unlikely, however, that the Mets would take 
a chance on having Hundley stay in town. Another center fielder came 
up in a conversation the Yankees had Thursday. Walt Jocketty, the 
St. Louis general manager, met with Cashman to ask about pitching, 
but the only player the Yankees would want from the Cardinals is center 
fielder Ray Lankford, and Jocketty again said he was not available. 
Cashman said he spoke with Boras Thursday, but he divulged nothing 
of their conversation, including whether they talked money. Colangelo 
spent much of the day Wednesday with Williams in Phoenix and had dinner 
with him. ``We talked about everything but money,'' Colangelo said. 
``I wanted to find out what Bernie is about, what are his motivations. 
He wants to see what's out there. He hasn't eliminated any options. 
He has great respect for what the Yankees have accomplished and his 
part in that. I don't rule out the strong possibility that he winds 
up back where he is. He didn't say he's gone or he's going anywhere 
else.'' Colangelo said no offer would be made until he heard from 
Boras about Williams' plans and his desire to play for the Diamondbacks. 
If the time comes when he makes an offer, the owner said: ``I'll announce 
it. ``I don't want to compete dollar for dollar. There will be a time 
when we do that, but I can't compete now with teams that are much 
further along. If someone likes what we're doing and wants to be part 
of this, I have a great interest in him. But if it's someone who wants 
to go to the highest bidder, I pass. With Bernie, I think he wants 
to take a look.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>