<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981112.0234 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The rodeo in Daniel Bergner's ``God of the Rodeo'' is the annual competition 
held among the inmates of Angola, Louisiana's notorious maximum-security 
prison. It is a bloody competition, known as ``The Wildest Show in 
the South,'' that pits untrained convicts against wild bulls, a gladiatorial 
spectacle that routinely results in broken shoulders, wrists and ribs, 
and sometimes death and paralysis. The event's draw, Bergner writes, 
comes from ``the thrill of watching men in terror made forgivable 
because the men were murderers.'' Bergner, a reporter and novelist, 
however, was in search of something more elusive at the 1996 rodeo. 
He was in search, he writes, of redemption, of ``possibilities of 
exaltation, hints of triumphant skill, of tremendous self-control 
in men who'd wound up here because they'd had little self-control 
at all.'' As it turned out, Bergner would stay on at Angola after 
the rodeo, and while his year's visit would not give him the ``soothing 
affirmation'' he sought, he says he would come to understand ``what 
life, what striving, what humanity'' was possible in Angola, ``what 
people pushed to the absolute limit, pushed by their own deeds beyond 
the edge of human society, to a place that felt like the edge of the 
earth, were capable of.'' The result is a harrowing yet humane book 
that gives the reader a compelling inside look at what inmates call 
the ``Louisiana State Penitentiary. LSP. Last Slave Plantation.'' 
Of the 5,000 men incarcerated at Angola, Bergner tells us, 85 percent 
have killed, raped or robbed with violence: ``About 8 in 10 were sentenced 
either to life without parole or to so many years they might as well 
have been.'' Most of Angola's population, we're told, live in cavernous 
dorms where the cots stand two feet apart and where each inmate lives 
out of two state-issued lockers (about 18 by 18 by 24 inches). A single 
television set blares over the sound of industrial fans (used to reduce 
the risk of tuberculosis); the steel toilets are partitionless and 
exposed to the dorm. The inmates are paid 4 to 20 cents an hour for 
their work as farmhands, clerks and orderlies; the few who win release 
are set free with $10 and the price of a bus ticket home. While Bergner 
comes to Angola with admiration for its warden, Burl Cain _ who is 
reputed to have instituted reform and a belief in the possibility 
of redemption _ he soon becomes disillusioned. He says that midway 
through his visit, the warden made ``it plain that my continued presence 
at Angola depended on my paying him,'' and adds that he was eventually 
compelled to take legal action to insure that he could complete his 
reporting. Bergner not only suggests that Cain tried to profit from 
private business deals set up at the prison under his tenure, but 
also argues that many of the more vaunted reforms at Angola (like 
a literacy program, a Toastmasters club and other activities for the 
inmates) were less Cain's doing than that of his predecessors or underlings. 
Although Bergner's assessment of Cain is not terribly rigorous or 
systematic, he is not really interested in writing an investigative 
report on the prison. What he is interested in doing is creating an 
impressionistic picture of life within its walls, and in this he most 
eloquently succeeds. There is a tactile, novelistic quality to Bergner's 
portraits of the inmates he interviews, an attempt to understand both 
how they came to be incarcerated at Angola and how they cope with 
life there _ with little or no prospect of release. Among the inmates 
Bergner profiles, there is Terry Hawkins, serving a life sentence 
for murdering his boss with a meat ax, a crime he relives virtually 
every night, and will try to expiate by attending a Bible study class. 
There's Buckkey Lasseigne, sentenced for shooting a gas station attendant 
while high on PCP, a resigned man who dreams only of winning the all-around 
rodeo prize so he can give the prize-winning belt to his distant 16-year-old 
son. And there's Danny Fabre, a violent inmate who killed a woman 
and drove a stick through her skull, and who now wants to improve 
himself by going to school and learning to give speeches. Most moving 
among Bergner's portraits, however, are Johnny Brooks, a would-be 
cowboy whose submissive demeanor has won him some tiny perks from 
the prison administration (like getting to wear a baseball hat and 
T-shirt of his own choosing); and Littell Harris, a former inmate 
trying to adapt to life outside Angola after serving a 15-year sentence 
for armed robbery. Brooks, we learn, takes great pride in his annual 
chance to demonstrate his riding skills at the annual October rodeo. 
Like many inmates, he regards it as his one chance to win recognition 
from the outside world, and it is through the rodeo that he meets 
his future wife, Belva, who writes him a letter after seeing him perform. 
Soon she is making a two-and-a-half-hour trip to visit him at Angola, 
and within a year, the two are married. Brooks starts dreaming of 
getting rid of his ``alphabets'' (L-I-F-E), and getting some numbers 
(a finite number of years) instead. He dreams of starting a new family 
with Belva and her children, and beginning over. As for Terry Hawkins, 
he does begin to make a new life for himself: after his release, he 
moves to a drug treatment center, and from there to a halfway house. 
When Bergner last checks in with him, he is working for a small trucking 
company, driving a route between Oregon and Georgia. ``In his need 
to `establish' himself,'' Bergner writes, ``he drives at least the 
legal limit of 10 hours per day. He earns 23 cents per mile. He pays 
his expenses on the road. It is not much of a living, but it is a 
living.'' PRODUCTION NOTES: `GOD OF THE RODEO: The Search for Hope, 
Faith and a Six-Second Ride in Louisiana's Angola Prison' By Daniel 
Bergner 297 pages. Crown. $24. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>