<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981112.0383 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Things have been looking pretty dire lately at Federal Express, the 
company that invented overnight delivery. The air-freight carrier's 
3,500 pilots stopped flying overtime this week and will decide on 
Dec. 3 whether to authorize a strike during the peak holiday shipping 
season. Fedex has withdrawn the contract offer it made last month 
and is busy making plans to reorganize so that it can conduct business 
without most of its pilots. Customers are beginning to get nervous. 
And investors and Wall Street analysts are, well, pretty relaxed. 
The stock price of FDX Corp., the holding company that owns Fedex, 
has remained fairly steady in the last few weeks. On Thursday it fell 
68.75 cents a share, to $52.875. ``Unfortunately this is typical of 
labor negotiations for an airline or air-freight company,'' said Keith 
Patriquin, an analyst at Loomis Sayles &AMP; Co., which owns 2.5 million 
shares of FDX, commenting on this week's saber-rattling between the 
union and the company. Is Wall Street onto something? Perhaps it is. 
On Thursday the pilots began toning down their language in an effort 
to lure the company back to the negotiating table. ``It is time for 
both sides to take some logs off the fire,'' said Bob Clement, the 
spokesman for the Federal Express Pilots Association. ``We understand 
the company's resolve. They understand the pilots' resolve. Now is 
the time to make the best decision for Fedex, its customers and the 
country.'' He said that the pilots had sent Fedex a written proposal, 
something the company has been demanding as a condition of its return 
to the bargaining table. The pilots are seeking an increase in wages 
and retirement benefits and some control over how their flying time 
is scheduled. They say the difference between the company's last offer 
and what they are asking for amounts to only $3 million a year over 
a four-year contract. Still, a strike is hardly out of the question. 
Fedex management is known for its fierce pride. The company, which 
has been negotiating with the pilots on and off since 1993, has never 
signed a union contract. Frederick Smith, the former Marine pilot 
who founded Fedex in 1971 and is now chairman of FDX, cannot be happy 
about seeing Fedex operations threatened by anyone. The company appears 
to be moving on a course intended to break the union's resolve. ``The 
conventional wisdom is that a strike doesn't serve either side's interest,'' 
said Scott Flower, the freight transportation analyst at Paine Webber. 
``But nobody wanted to fight World War I either.'' William Margaritis, 
a Fedex spokesman, said that he was not aware of any new offer from 
the pilots. ``We are willing to review and consider any reasonable 
_ and I underscore `reasonable' _ proposal that balances the interests 
of our customers, shareholders and employees,'' he added. The more 
conciliatory tone by the pilots may be a result of Fedex's aggressive 
move to shift deliveries to FDX's trucking subsidiaries and to outside 
cargo carriers. On Thursday, Atlas Air, a cargo airline based in Golden, 
Colo., said that it had leased three 747 freighters to Fedex, complete 
with pilots, maintenance and insurance for use in the fourth quarter. 
Margaritis said the deal was a direct result of the threat of a pilot 
walkout. Industry executives said that Fedex was probably negotiating 
more such leasing deals. Fedex insists that the needs of its customers 
are paramount and that it is confident it can keep its business going 
even if the pilots walk out. But cracks in the company's facade are 
already beginning to show. In a notice to customers on Thursday, Fedex 
said that in the event of a strike it might have to suspend its money-back 
guarantees for overnight service. It also said that it might cut back 
deliveries to some areas and suspend certain services like overnight 
delivery by 8 a.m. United Parcel Service, Fedex's main rival, took 
the opportunity to say on Thursday that it had enough capacity in 
its ground and air-delivery network to accommodate Fedex customers 
during the holidays _ if they shift their business now and commit 
to UPS for the long term. UPS knows how painful a strike can be. Many 
of its customers were surprised last year when it was crippled by 
a two-week walkout by the International Brotherhood of Teamsters. 
They shifted to Fedex and others. More than a year later, the company 
is still trying to lure some of that business back. Many on Wall Street 
think that even if Fedex and the pilots cannot settle their differences 
on their own, they may ultimately be compelled by outside forces to 
reach an agreement. Under federal law, President Clinton has the power 
to order the pilots back to work for 60 days while a special emergency 
board tries to reach a resolution. Clinton used an emergency board 
to halt a strike last year by pilots at AMR Corp.'s American Airlines. 
This summer, Bruce Lindsey, Clinton's close aide, used the threat 
of an emergency board to force a settlement between Northwest Airlines 
and its striking pilots. So far, the White House has kept its distance 
from the Fedex negotiations, waiting to see whether the two sides 
could work things out. But an administration official who requested 
anonymity said that the White House had been briefed by federal mediators 
who have been talking to the company and the union. Analysts also 
say, though, that even in the worst case of a strike, the damage to 
the company would not have a large effect on FDX's prospects. ``If 
there is a strike, based on what has happened at other airlines, it 
is not going to last long enough to have a significant long-term effect 
on the company's customer base and its business,'' Patriquin of Loomis 
Sayles said. ``It will cost a ton of money, but it won't affect the 
long-term cash-generating power of the company, which is what investors 
are looking at.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>