<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981112.0279 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the clearest sign yet of the competition now roaring through Europe's 
telephone industry, Deutsche Telekom AG of Germany said Thursday that 
it would slash its long-distance prices by as much as 63 percent. 
The move comes as Germany's one-time telephone monopoly is rapidly 
losing market share to an army of new rivals. Germany, along with 
most other European countries, opened the doors to competition in 
January. Since then, analysts estimate the company has lost as much 
as 25 percent of its long-distance business to new entrants. Some 
of these new rivals are billion-dollar consortiums that are building 
their own networks, but the vast majority are small companies that 
re-sell Telekom's own services at lower prices. One of the more visible 
newcomers is Mobilcom, a small company that started out by re-selling 
cellular telephone service but has recently begun offering cut-rate 
regular telephone service. Mobilcom, which went public on the Frankfurt 
Stock Exchange earlier this year, reported Thursday that profits in 
the first nine months of the year quintupled to 111.9 million marks, 
or about $66.4 million. The depth of Thursday's price cuts surprised 
investors, even though the company had served notice several weeks 
ago that it would act aggressively. Deutsche Telekom's stock dropped 
about 2 percent Thursday, as company executives warned that the price 
reductions would probably hurt profits in the short term. ``That is 
without question a big dip in our cash till,'' acknowledged Deutsche 
Telekom's chief executive, Ron Sommer, who attributed many of the 
company's problems to hostile decisions by German regulators. Under 
orders from the European Union, most West European governments opened 
their telephone markets to competition last January. Beyond simply 
allowing other companies to offer telephone service for the first 
time, the European Union rules require the traditional monopolies 
to give rivals access to their networks at reasonable rates. German 
regulators have been particularly tough, forcing Deutsche Telekom 
to let rivals use its network for comparatively low prices. Those 
regulatory decisions have attracted a horde of competitors, from giant 
enterprises like Arcor, partly owned by Mannesmann AG and the German 
national railroad, to tiny upstarts. Most of Europe's traditional 
telephone monopolies are under fire from new competitors. But analysts 
said that Deutsche Telekom added to its own problems by being slow 
to revamp its rates, keeping many of its prices too high. Sommer openly 
acknowledged several weeks ago that his company had lost ground. Though 
Telekom reported that earnings had risen 22 percent during the first 
nine months of the year, its revenue has stalled since last summer. 
Company executives have told analysts that about 15 percent of the 
calls over its network last June were actually on behalf of rival 
carriers. Most analysts assume that percentage has climbed to about 
20 or 25 percent since then. Sommer is now waging a vocal political 
and legal campaign to modify some of the government's new decisions. 
Deutsche Telekom has sued to overturn the price regulations and sued 
to block some of its rivals' advertising. In the most recent spat, 
the company sued to block Mobilcom from running television and print 
ads that mimicked Deutsche Telekom's own logos and slogans. Sommer 
is also lobbying the new government under Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder, 
arguing that his company is forced to subsidize competitors and that 
Germany's new and independent telecommunications regulator has been 
one-sided. Among other things, company executives argue that the government 
forced the company to spend billions of marks on a new telephone network 
for eastern Germany as well as new digital phone lines throughout 
the west. That left the company with a huge load of debt, just when 
it was losing its protected monopoly. ``What we are seeing today is 
a price war being waged on Telekom's back,'' Sommer said in a speech 
today. ``The present situation fills me with worry about the future 
of our industry.'' Schroeder's new government appears to be sympathetic. 
Economics Minister Werner Mueller recently said the regulators may 
have been too tough. In an interview last week with the Suddeutsche 
Zeitung, a Munich-based newspaper, Mueller said he saw himself ``in 
the role of defending the ordinary people and Deutsche Telekom employees'' 
who might be hurt by ``the impact of excessively tough regulation.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>