<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981112.0184 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Meryl Streep has made many a grand acting gesture in her career, but 
the way she simply peers out a window in ``Dancing at Lughnasa'' ranks 
with the best. Everything the viewer need know about Kate Mundy, the 
woman she plays here, is written on that prim, lonely face and its 
flabbergasted gaze. Among the five unmarried sisters who are the subject 
of Brian Friel's play (and who are named for his own mother and aunts), 
it is Kate who wears her unmarried status least comfortably. And it 
is Kate who radiates the most wistful, turbulent emotions while watching 
younger, prettier Christina (Catherine McCormack) dance with a lover. 
``Her whole face alters when she's happy,'' Kate whispers about Christina 
in astonishment, speaking almost to herself. It is as if this furiously 
upright schoolteacher, the sister who has taken it upon herself to 
champion rectitude in the small Irish village where Friel's play unfolds, 
had discovered the sweetness of Christina's flirtatious exuberance 
and the chill of her own loneliness as if for the very first time. 
Ms. Streep, who between this film and her performance as a dying mother 
in ``One True Thing'' has had a banner year, conveys all this with 
supreme, heartbreaking economy and without a trace of showiness. Like 
much about the film and its characters, she presents a small, effortless 
epiphany simply by standing still, immersed in the spirit of a lost 
time and place. Set in Donegal in 1936 and made poignant by the hindsight 
of narration, ``Dancing at Lughnasa'' preserves the author's memories 
of a world about to change irrevocably, filled with hints of foreboding 
that made it so powerful an experience on stage. On film, as directed 
handsomely by Pat O'Connor, it makes for a soaringly scenic film, 
yet a slightly more diffuse, less haunted drama. The play, an actors' 
heyday, is rich with memories of the sisters and their camaraderie, 
especially when their fragile fellowship is shaken by the arrivals 
of two men. While the film begins with a rich evocation of the sisters' 
rustic chores and rituals in the beautiful, isolated setting they 
call home, it's clear that these men can change everything. One is 
Father Jack (Michael Gambon), once the family's bright-eyed brother 
and now a broken old man, returning from missionary work in Africa 
and filled with visions of a world his sisters have never seen. While 
Gambon's gently eccentric Jack presides over the story with a mysterious 
intensity, the other male visitor is more mundane. Gerry Evans (Rhys 
Ifans) is Christina's handsome, conventionally romantic beau (and 
the father of Michael, the young man who nostalgically narrates the 
story). The arrival of Gerry prompts the film into the very sorts 
of picturesque rhapsodies that give this opened-up drama its postcard 
appeal while removing the seriousness and sting from events that transpire. 
Though ``Dancing at Lughnasa'' has the fine cast, visual scale and 
resplendent look of a magnum opus, it remains a collection of sea 
changes and splendidly realized small moments rather than a story 
of overarching action. The sooner the viewer recognizes as much, the 
easier it is to discount some falsely inflated sequences here and 
appreciate the keenly observed, wonderfully delicate performances 
on display. Brid Brennan beautifully repeats her Tony-winning performance 
as Agnes, the reticent, hard-working sister at the center of the family; 
Sophie Thompson (sister of Emma) makes herself touchingly headstrong 
and vulnerable as Rose, the sister who is nearly as innocently unpredictable 
as Jack. There's a fine, hearty turn from Kathy Burke as Maggie, the 
house wit and realist, while Ms. McCormack conveys youthful yearning 
for a world beyond small-town values and a sweet, lonely, tiny cottage 
in the countryside. Ms. Streep's Kate remains the most stubborn and 
formidable of the bunch, bringing something especially universal to 
this story of how sisterly wills collide. The time, the place and 
the rousing Irish music (by Bill Whelan, who did ``Riverdance'') may 
be most specific, but there's something timeless in Friel's sense 
of women living at cross-purposes in very close company and feeling 
the tug of change on even the most closely knit of family ties. As 
he did in ``Circle of Friends,'' O'Connor (directing Frank McGuinness' 
adaptation of the play, with lovely cinematography by Kenneth MacMillan) 
creates a quintessentially Irish experience, reveling in the romance 
and beauty of his story's setting. Whatever the material loses in 
claustrophobic tension and foreboding, it benefits immeasurably from 
the glorious, untamed vistas and the quaint ambiance of the little 
Irish village seen here. It's a place that actually happened to be 
named Hollywood. ``Dancing at Lughnasa'' is rated PG (Parental guidance 
suggested). It includes mild profanity and threats of violence. PRODUCTION 
NOTES: `DANCING AT LUGHNASA' Directed by Pat O'Connor; written by 
Frank McGuinness, based on the play by Brian Friel; director of photography, 
Kenneth MacMillan; edited by Humphrey Dixon; music by Bill Whelan; 
production designer, Mark Geraghty; produced by Noel Pearson; released 
by Sony Pictures Classics. Running time: 94 minutes. WITH: Meryl Streep 
(Kate Mundy), Michael Gambon (Father Jack Mundy), Catherine McCormack 
(Christina Mundy), Kathy Burke (Maggie Mundy), Brid Brennan (Agnes 
Mundy), Sophie Thompson (Rose Mundy), Rhys Ifans (Gerry Evans) and 
Gerard McSorley (Narrator). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>