<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981112.0331 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the end, Cheung Tze-keung got exactly the verdict his lawyers feared: 
a death sentence, handed down Thursday by a Chinese court that found 
the 44-year-old Hong Kong crime boss guilty of arms smuggling and 
kidnapping two of Hong Kong's wealthiest tycoons. While the verdict 
is a grim ending to one of the most sensational criminal trials in 
recent Chinese history _ watched with daily fascination by people 
both here and on the mainland _ it has kicked off a fresh controversy 
over whether China is encroaching on the judicial authority of Hong 
Kong. Cheung, 44, committed the bulk of his crimes, including both 
kidnappings, in Hong Kong. Yet he was arrested across the border in 
Guangdong Province and tried in the provincial capital, Guangzhou. 
It was there, early Thursday morning, that the man known as the Big 
Spender got the bad news. Cheung's lawyer, Ivan Tang, fought unsuccessfully 
to have the case moved to Hong Kong. And Thursday, he accused the 
Hong Kong government of buckling to pressure from China, which wanted 
to try Cheung on the mainland, where his crimes carried a more Draconian 
punishment. If Cheung had been convicted of kidnapping in Hong Kong, 
he could have received a life sentence. But in mainland China, if 
the Guangdong court rejects an appeal by his lawyer, Cheung is likely 
to face a swift execution _ probably with a single bullet to the back 
of the head. ``They are not only killing my client, they are killing 
`one country, two systems,''' Tang said, referring to the agreement 
in which Hong Kong has retained control over its affairs after its 
reversion to China last year. Hong Kong officials maintain that because 
Cheung committed some of his crimes on the mainland _ notably the 
buying of explosives _ the Chinese authorities had the right to try 
him there. Six of his accomplices also received death sentences, while 
29 others received varying jail terms. Still, the Big Spender case 
has become an acute embarrassment for a place that prides itself on 
its British-style legal system. On Tuesday, Cheung's mother, Tang 
Sai-mui, went to the offices of Hong Kong's Chief Executive, Tung 
Chee-hwa, to plead for her son's case to be moved. Few politicians 
or legal experts are rushing to Cheung's defense. But they are sharply 
critical of the government for not defending the territory's judicial 
independence. Under Hong Kong's constitution, they argue, Chinese 
criminal law does not apply in this former British colony. ``There 
has been a great outcry, but the government is consistently defending 
the rights of China,'' said Martin Lee, a prominent pro-democracy 
politician here. ``Surely they should be on the side of the Hong Kong 
people.'' Gladys Li, the former chairman of the Hong Kong Bar Association, 
said the blurring of jurisdictions raised alarming possibilities. 
``Could a Hong Kong citizen do something that is perfectly legal under 
Hong Kong law and be prosecuted for it on the mainland?'' she asked. 
Equally alarming, legal experts here say, are the circumstances that 
landed Cheung in a Chinese courtroom. During the trial, Cheung testified 
that he and his gang carried out criminal activities in Hong Kong 
with seemingly blithe disregard for the local authorities. In 1996 
Cheung kidnapped Victor Li, the eldest son of Hong Kong's most famous 
tycoon, Li Ka-shing. While Victor Li was locked in a cramped wooden 
box, Cheung negotiated a $133 million ransom with his father _ whiling 
away the time at the Li family home as the elder Li pulled together 
the money. Cheung also abducted another property developer, Walter 
Kwok. After his family balked at the initial ransom demand, he worked 
out a deal for $77 million in meetings with Kwok's relatives. In neither 
case did the families of the victims call the Hong Kong Police. People 
with knowledge of the Police Department said Li Ka-shing did enlist 
the help of officials in Beijing, who began a vast manhunt for Cheung. 
Authorities here said the lack of a police report weakened their claim 
on the case. ``I worry that a tycoon can pick up the phone and call 
Jiang Zemin to complain,'' said Yash Ghai, a professor of law at Hong 
Kong University, referring to the president of China. ``It's a type 
of forum shopping.'' Hong Kong's legal conflicts with China are not 
likely to disappear along with the Big Spender. Legal experts are 
now focusing on the case of a Chinese man who is accused of killing 
three women and two girls in a Hong Kong housing project. The suspect 
was arrested in mainland China, and will be tried there. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>