<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981112.0455 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With teams of lawyers for Republicans and Democrats haggling over 
each tally and every stray pencil mark, elections officials Thursday 
continued the tense and tedious process of rechecking machines and 
counting paper ballots to determine the winner of the whisker-close 
race for state attorney general. By the end of the day, Democratic 
challenger Eliot Spitzer had increased his narrow lead to 22,000 votes 
over Republican incumbent Dennis Vacco. But with 100,000 or more votes 
still to be counted, the outcome, even nine days after the election, 
remained in doubt. After each day of counting, the State Board of 
Elections releases tabulations received from the 62 counties around 
the state. The latest figures represented a sharp increase in Spitzer's 
lead, which stood at 4,101 votes on Wednesday. Thursday's revised 
totals gave Spitzer 2,006,834 votes, with 1,984,459 for Vacco. But 
Peter Kosinski, deputy executive director of the Board of Elections, 
said much remained to be done. He said there were about 250,000 paper 
ballots from last week's election, including absentee ballots and 
others cast by people in the military or whose voting machines malfunctioned. 
Each county is at a different stage of counting those ballots, Kosinski 
said, adding that several of the largest _ Erie, Nassau, Suffolk, 
Onondaga and all of New York City's, for example _ had reported few 
if any results from paper ballots. ``If you're asking me how much 
is counted and how much is left to count, the simple answer is, I 
don't know,'' Kosinski said. ``I don't have a handle on every piece 
of paper or the percentage of paper ballots that have been counted. 
I am guessing a lot of paper has not been counted. We're asking our 
people around the state to give us information as soon as they can.'' 
Nonetheless, Spitzer's campaign seemed to take delight in the updated 
figures. ``Eliot and the Spitzer campaign have moved from cautious 
optimism to just plain optimism,'' said Steven Goldstein, campaign 
press secretary. ``All the numbers and the indications seem to be 
pointing Eliot's way.'' Messages left for Vacco at his attorney general's 
office and campaign headquarters were not returned Thursday. Much 
of the revision reported Thursday resulted from the recounting of 
totals from the election machines in New York City. The city's Board 
of Elections officials said that after the machines were reviewed 
over the last week, Spitzer's totals were 22,800 votes higher than 
the unofficial figures released on election night. Kosinski said the 
final tally would not be ready for several days. Meanwhile, Board 
of Elections offices in New York City were overrun by hundreds of 
election lawyers, campaign professionals and political volunteers 
who came to oversee and sometimes challenge the counting of the paper 
ballots. In Brooklyn, for example, the 100 or so campaign representatives 
began gathering shortly after the doors at the board's offices at 
345 Adams St. opened at 9 a.m., dividing themselves into warring camps 
of Democrats and Republicans. Ballot by ballot, they began the painstaking 
task of counting, reviewing and challenging the thousands of absentee 
and other paper votes. One lawyer, a Republican, sought to disqualify 
a ballot because of a stray mark outside the designated box. Another, 
representing the Democratic candidate, objected to a signature in 
the wrong place on a ballot for the Republican candidate. It is a 
laborious, highly manual and sometimes confrontational process that 
helps explain why it can sometimes take so long to determine final 
election results in New York. Of course, most elections are decided 
by a wide enough margin that the intricate _ some would suggest Byzantine 
_ work of the Board of Elections barely gets noticed. But the results 
of last week's contest has placed the board's process on center stage. 
The paper ballots represent four different kinds of votes. Some are 
cast by people away from their homes because of their service in the 
military. Absentee ballots are cast by voters who plan to be away 
from home on Election Day. ``Emergency'' ballots are votes cast by 
hand, when the machines in a polling place malfunction. And ``affidavit'' 
ballots are cast by voters whose names do not appear on the rolls 
when they go to the polling place. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>