<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981112.0406 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For all the talk of this city's new civility, its inhabitants have 
not exactly made ``Service With a Smile'' their motto. So it seems 
an unlikely place to find candidates for a job that turns on cheerful 
customer assistance. But there was Kathleen Arnold, perky and self-possessed 
in her navy blue uniform and low-heeled pumps, standing in a basement 
room in a hotel near La Guardia Airport last week, gamely auditioning 
applicants for flight attendant positions with United Airlines. ``This 
is my job _ does anyone want it?'' she asked. The crowd she faced 
was a real slice of the city: male and female, ages 19 to 49 or more, 
heights from under five feet to almost seven, clothes from snappy 
suits to faded jeans, and accents redolent of Brazil, China, the Dominican 
Republic, France, India, Italy, Lebanon, Poland and West Africa (as 
well as the Bronx, Brooklyn, Queens and Manhattan). Indeed, the group 
looked less like the smiling stewardesses featured in airline ads, 
and more like the slightly surly passengers whose plane has just circled 
Newark one time too many. And that was the point. More Americans, 
from all economic and cultural backgrounds, are flying than ever before. 
Airline passenger traffic keeps setting new records: Anyone who needs 
proof can visit the New York region's three major airports around 
Thanksgiving, when more than a million people will be getting on or 
off planes, according to the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey. 
Air travel is no longer the elegant, elitist activity it was back 
in the 1950s and 1960s _ and being a flight attendant is no longer 
the next best thing to being a movie star, as it was back then. So 
in these days of low air fares and low unemployment, airlines are 
frantically trying to find enough flight attendants to serve travelers 
peanuts _ and, more seriously, to help them in emergencies. ``I think 
everyone, all the major carriers, are hiring flight attendants right 
now,'' said Karen Watson, a spokeswoman for Dallas-based American 
Airlines, which stopped actively recruiting in 1993 but is now hiring 
again, in New York and around the country. Because the airlines are 
looking for a more diverse group of flight attendants to match their 
more diverse passenger base, they are seeking employees who speak 
more than one language. That skill is more common in New York than 
in, say, Boise, Idaho, or Burlington, Vt., which is one reason the 
major airlines are recruiting in the city. (Another reason is that 
they want to find more flight attendants who are willing to live in 
New York which many find too expensive or otherwise uncomfortable, 
Ms. Watson said.) Continental Airlines has been doing a lot of interviewing 
at its hub in Newark, where it is starting to fly larger planes that 
take 15 flight attendants, rather than the usual maximum of 10, said 
Jan Bednar, manager of in-flight recruiting for the airline. But finding 
people who meet the airlines' exacting standards _ and who really 
want the job _ is not easy. Last year, United Airlines interviewed 
54,000 people to fill 2,000 jobs, and Ms. Arnold's experience in Queens 
showed why. Of the roughly 300 people who came after seeing newspaper 
advertisements, fewer than a third will go on to a second interview 
in Chicago. ``The average for last week was 33 percent, but in New 
York it was much less,'' said Cathy Kress, manager of flight attendant 
employment for United. One reason for the high rejection rate, she 
said, was poor dependability records at previous jobs. The first hurdle 
for aspiring flight attendants was the audition. Ms. Arnold had each 
of the six groups she interviewed line up and speak for half a minute 
on a topic she chose. The reason, she explained, is that flight attendants 
must demonstrate safety equipment to passengers before every flight. 
``I personally like to see that you can stand up in front of a group 
of strangers and not pass out,'' she said. Quite a few of the applicants 
had trouble following Ms. Arnold's directions, especially in the group 
she asked to describe the last time they had received ``really good 
customer service.'' Several had prepared statements about why they 
wanted to become flight attendants and had trouble switching gears, 
Ms. Arnold noted later. Then there were the folks _ quite a big group 
_ who had trouble coming up with any example of good customer service. 
Several mentioned bus drivers who unbent enough to give them directions, 
or waiters who actually brought them the food they had ordered. A 
couple fell back on random acts of kindness, like the doorman who 
said one of the tenants in his building brought him a roast chicken 
one night when he worked a double shift. The biggest applause went 
to Nicole Taylor, a 20-year-old student from Queens, who praised the 
waiter who first served her a whole lobster _ and sat down at the 
table to show her how to eat it. The job applicants also had to take 
a reading comprehension test, which required them to read a paragraph 
related to the airline business and then answer some multiple-choice 
questions. Many of the New Yorkers performed poorly, Ms. Arnold said 
later, after grading the tests. ``I was really surprised, but in certain 
cities that happens more often than in others,'' she said. Some of 
the candidates were put off by Ms. Arnold's explanation of what the 
job entails. Recruits must spend nine weeks _ unpaid _ at a training 
school in Chicago, where they must pass weekly tests. Then they are 
assigned to one of the 13 bases the company runs across the country, 
from Boston to Seattle, and they have no hope of transferring for 
at least six months. New flight attendants then work ``on reserve,'' 
which means that on the days they work, they are on call from midnight 
to midnight, with no notion of where they are to travel. Depending 
on where they are based, flight attendants can stay on reserve for 
years. Karen De Riso, an office manager from Queens, said she found 
the idea of relocating to parts unknown ``a little disconcerting,'' 
adding that ``it's the not knowing _ but I haven't changed my mind'' 
about the job, not yet. For all of this, flight attendants in their 
first year at United make about $22,000 _ which is probably the most 
generous salary in the industry, according to the Association of Flight 
Attendants, which reports that at some airlines, the starting pay 
is as low as $12,000 a year. Rachel Spearman, a recent college graduate 
from Long Island who is working as an accountant, would also have 
to take a pay cut, she said. But she was excited enough by the prospect 
of becoming a flight attendant that she had even persuaded her mother, 
Alexandria Spearman, to come try out with her. ``My grandmother, who 
paid for my college, would have a heart attack,'' she said, ``but 
I always wanted to be a flight attendant, from when I was 7 years 
old.'' The ``lifelong dream'' theme was common among older applicants, 
who make up a growing number of new flight attendants, according to 
Ms. Kress from United. Mary Gil, 49, has raised four daughters in 
Queens while working several jobs, including as a ticket agent. ``I 
got married and postponed my dream,'' she said, ``but now that my 
kids are grown up, I can pursue it.'' For others, the decision to 
try out for the job was born more of a sudden restlessness. Jean Jason 
of Manhattan was flying back from a vacation in Australia and got 
to chatting with the flight attendants. ``On a 22-hour flight, they 
have a lot of time to spend with you,'' she said. They convinced her 
that, after 16 years in office jobs, she had found the career for 
her. A love of travel lay behind many people's decisions to try out 
for the job. Flight attendants fly almost free; Ms. Arnold told her 
groups of paying $30 to fly from Newark to San Francisco _ in first 
class. Attendants also get scads of time off; they can work only 90 
hours a month at United. That is part of the appeal for Art Titzell, 
a 30-year-old who traveled from his home in southern New Jersey to 
the United auditions. Titzell said he loves his work as a hair colorist, 
but needs to find a job with benefits like health insurance. Since 
flight attendants are allowed to have other jobs, he could continue 
to do hair in his free time. In a sign of how strong the economy is, 
few of the applicants said they really needed a job. One who did was 
Mellisa Sheppard, a 21-year-old from Brooklyn who has two young children. 
``I want to get my life on track and off public assistance,'' she 
said. Her mother had agreed to take care of the children if she made 
it to training school, and their father will help out ``until I get 
on my feet,'' she said. ``I have it all worked out _ a job makes everything 
much better.'' Only the successful candidates will hear from United, 
which will contact them within six weeks to arrange their visits to 
Chicago. That interview will weed out more candidates. Some will prove 
to be too tall (those over 6 feet 2 inches tend to bump their heads); 
others will be too small to reach the safety equipment that is stored 
in overhead bins. Some of the would-be flight attendants will be rejected 
because they do not look ``professional,'' which boils down to just 
a few rules, like ``no visible tattoos,'' Ms. Kress said. A surprising 
number, she added, will fail the criminal background check. In the 
end, United hopes to hire 2,500 flight attendants this year, which 
keeps recruiters like Ms. Arnold hopping. Her next stop was Cedar 
Rapids, Iowa, and after that, Los Angeles. But she, or one of her 
colleagues, will be back in New York in January _ they have 2,300 
more flight attendants to hire next year. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>