<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981112.0309 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
``If the inspectors are not permitted to visit suspect sites or monitor 
compliance at known production facilities, they may as well be in 
Baltimore, not Baghdad.'' Bill Clinton said so on Wednesday, as he 
warned of striking Iraq unless Saddam Hussein permitted inspectors 
to resume the hunt for chemical, biological and nuclear weapons and 
missiles. He was talking about the crisis begun Aug. 5 by Saddam's 
decision to shut down U.N. inspection _ for the third time in one 
year alone. This crisis does not exist by itself but is part of an 
Iraqi strategy of continuous crises that send the inspectors to Baltimore 
when they come too close to his weapon stockpiles and documents. The 
strategy began not that day in August or this year, but eight years 
ago, giving him more power with each crisis. America and the U.N. 
are essential tools to his rolling-crisis strategy to break the inspection 
system. That would leave him free to develop weapons of mass destruction 
with which he will become the major power in the Mideast, the father 
of a new, ultimate world terrorism. Year after year he has seen the 
countries and world organization supposed to contain him accept each 
crisis separately. He counts on that. He knows they will eventually 
settle it by making inspection weaker. That gives him time to manufacture 
the next crisis. Examine the chronology. Under the agreement ending 
the gulf war in February 1991, Iraqis were to supply all information 
about their weaponry, within 15 days. They didn't. In August 1995, 
still hunting, struggling with Iraqi thugs, inspectors followed a 
defector's direction to a cache of one million documents detailing 
Iraq's power, plans and potential for chemical and biological weapons 
and the missiles to carry them. For five years Saddam had insisted 
they did not exist. Instead of filling out an arrest warrant for Saddam, 
in 1996 U.N. officials worked out with Iraq a list of sites where 
inspection access would be restricted to protect Iraq's sovereignty. 
Washington, ever the good sport, accepted. As part of the deal foreign 
diplomats were taken on managed tours of Saddam's many palaces and 
other restricted sites, which had been cleansed of documents. In July 
1997 Richard Butler of Australia became head of the inspectorate. 
By September he told Iraq that the whole cockamamie scheme for soothing 
Saddam's dignity was not working. U.N. inspectors approaching the 
front door would see Saddam's boys stroll out the back door. So, a 
month later, Baghdad ordered U.S. and British members of the inspection 
teams to get out. Butler, not disposed by duty or nature to let Saddam 
run the inspection commission, pulled out inspectors of all nationalities. 
Thus Saddam created the crisis of 1997-1998. U.N. members, carrying 
out their policy with which they met earlier inspection crises, did 
nothing. But in February 1998 enter Secretary-General Kofi Annan, 
to negotiate. With approval of the Security Council, including the 
once-big five, he goes to Baghdad. He tells Saddam where to get off 
_ into a garden abloom with U.N. concessions, new bureaucratic machinery, 
moral equivalency with Iraq's opponents. Annan returns to cheering 
U.N. staff members and his photographs bejeweling the walls, inspiring 
him to proclaim that he could do business with the man. But the inspectors 
had been gaining ground despite Saddam's best harassments. They found 
stockpiles and plans of chemical war weaponry and missiles. They were 
closing in on biological weaponry, so on Aug. 5, Saddam decides to 
send inspection to Baltimore again. For three months, no action against 
him. Nov. 10: U.S. sends Butler ``strong recommendation'' to evacuate 
inspection teams. In a four-hour operation he gets them out to Bahrain; 
no to-do, just professionalism and cool. Nov. 11: Russia, furious, 
calls for Security Council meeting; France suggests concessions, joins 
China and Russia saying bring back Annan. The chronology is not just 
history, but likely will be the future too. Saddam will never give 
up his weapons of mass destruction. So either he is killed in Iraq, 
by Americans, Iraqis or a combination, or millions face death in Baltimores, 
somewhere, someday not far away. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>