<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981112.0389 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For several years, Jim and Peggy Poston have toyed with the idea of 
moving from the working-class neighborhood where they have lived for 
the last 41 years to a more affluent one. But they could never quite 
bring themselves to make the change. The Postons were too attached 
to the community of Lakewood, in southern Jacksonville. It is where 
they raised a son and a daughter, where most of the neighbors know 
each other and where their Yorkshire terrier, Daffy, is a kind of 
mascot for the half-dozen or so children who bicycle, skate and play 
ball on their street. Among those children were Madlyn Rae Clifton, 
known as Maddie, and Joshua Phillips. But the events of the last week 
have severely tested the tight-knit quality of their community. On 
Nov. 3, 8-year-old Maddie, who had been playing in front of a neighbor's 
house just before dinner time, vanished. For days, hundreds of people 
joined in a hopeful search for the child. Now the community has closed 
ranks in grief. On Tuesday, Maddie was found dead, and Joshua Phillips 
is the suspected killer. Joshua, 14, was arrested Tuesday at his school 
after Maddie's body was found ``securely entombed'' under his water 
bed in the house he shares with his parents, Jacksonville Sheriff 
Nathaniel Glover said. Maddie, whose house is cater-cornered from 
Joshua's, had been hit in the head and stabbed numerous times, the 
authorities said. Joshua, who apparently had removed a broken sideboard 
from his bed frame and stuffed the body in the space between the base 
and the platform that holds the mattress, confessed to the killing, 
the sheriff said. Sheriff's office officials said they were also investigating 
earlier burglaries at the Clifton house after finding a stolen photograph 
of Maddie's 11-year-old sister in Joshua's room. Police believe they 
have the murder weapon _ a bat found in the house _ and a multipurpose 
tool, which includes a knife, that was used to stab Maddie after she 
was struck. So far, there is no official explanation for the crime, 
although the unofficial speculation has begun. ``There is some neighborhood 
discussion that he was infatuated with the older sibling,'' said Rick 
Seibler, the sheriff's chief of detectives, who would not say how 
such an infatuation, if it existed, was connected to the crime. Joshua's 
lawyer, Richard Nichols, confirmed local news reports that the boy 
told law enforcement officials he had hit Maddie with a ball while 
they were playing in his backyard, and then took her inside. The lawyer 
declined to offer more details, but said his client ``has acknowledged 
his involvement in that death.'' But Nichols said that Joshua's statement 
to investigators ``does not rise to a confession of first-degree murder,'' 
which he described as an intentional, premeditated killing by someone 
capable of such crime, and said the boy would plead not guilty to 
that charge if he is indicted. Prosecutors said they will announce 
next week whether Joshua would be tried as an adult, in which case 
he could face life imprisonment if convicted, or as a juvenile, which 
would allow a possible release by age 19, if he were found guilty. 
The death penalty could not be invoked because Joshua is under 16. 
``He's a nice 14-year-old boy who's in a horrible situation, and his 
friend is dead, and he's heartbroken about it,'' said Nichols. ``He 
understands what's going on.'' At the A. Philip Randolph Academies 
of Technology, where Joshua was a ninth-grader with a C average and 
had no record of discipline or truancy problems, his arrest caused 
disbelief. ``The students can't fathom him doing something like this,'' 
said Gerome Wheeler, the principal. ``They say Josh? Josh? Josh? like 
they say his name two or three times. They cannot believe this.'' 
Joshua moved to Lakewood with his parents, both computer specialists, 
less than two years ago. He quickly became a familiar figure, walking 
his beagle and occasionally joining games of softball and hockey. 
Neighbors said they thought him polite, if a bit of a loner. Maddie, 
a third-grader at San Jose Catholic school, was born in Lakewood, 
where her parents moved 15 years ago. She was described as a smiling, 
well-behaved, polite child who took piano and dance lessons but was 
as ``tough as nails'' with a passion for touch football and hockey. 
``There's a lot of grief,'' said Larry Grisham, 45, who has lived 
in the neighborhood for 30 years. ``It'll never be back to what it 
was.'' From the start, the investigation focused on Maddie's two-street 
neighborhood because she had been seen shortly before her parents 
reported her missing, sheriff's officials said. For seven days, police 
staked out the area and searched houses while hundreds of volunteers 
combed through woods and swamps and handed out fliers. The Postons 
recalled that Joshua had joined in the search the first night. Grisham, 
who is well known to neighbors because he sometimes played games with 
the children, was questioned by police because he had a criminal record. 
He had been hitting golf balls with Maddie on the afternoon that she 
disappeared. Grisham, who is not a suspect, said Maddie had gone home 
to get more balls, and when she did not return, he assumed her parents 
had kept her home. Around Jacksonville, Maddie's face appeared on 
fliers, hats and T-shirts, and a $100,000 reward was offered. But 
hope for her return ended early Tuesday morning, after neighbors saw 
Joshua's mother, Melissa, apparently distraught, approach the police 
officers stationed on her street. Melissa Phillips had noticed fluid 
on the floor under her son's waterbed. When she pull apart a corner 
of the bed frame that had been taped together, she saw Maddie's legs. 
Glover said his officers had searched the Phillips house three times 
and detected a peculiar smell, but Mrs. Phillips had told them it 
was probably the birds the family kept inside. Lakewood is now filled 
with pilgrims who come to the Clifton's house to drop off flowers, 
stuffed animals and heart-shaped balloons reading ``I love you'' and 
``I'm sorry.'' The yellow ribbons of hope worn on lapels have been 
replaced by purple ribbons of mourning. ``The whole city felt this 
one,'' said Lori McDonald, 35, a legal secretary whose son, 10, and 
two daughters, 12 and 4, attend Maddie's school and brought flowers 
to the Clifton house. But she and other parents said they were not 
sure what lessons to draw from such a tragedy. ``You teach them `Don't 
talk to strangers,''' said Brenda Thomann, 37, who also brought her 
children to the Clifton house. ``You don't say, `Don't play with friends.''' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>