<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981112.0349 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In a last line of defense, riot police officers fired tear gas, water 
cannon and rubber bullets Thursday night to keep student demonstrators 
from invading the grounds of Parliament as they did six months ago 
when they helped force the ouster of President Suharto. Dozens of 
people were reported wounded in confrontations around the city as 
columns of students dodged or just crashed their way through police 
lines. Banks and shops pulled down their shutters in fear of new rioting. 
The demonstrations have built in number and intensity this week as 
Parliament meets to lay the groundwork for a new election that would 
replace the transitional government of Suharto's chosen successor, 
President B.J. Habibie. The parliamentary session is to conclude on 
Friday with a series of strenuously debated decrees that will help 
shape the future of Indonesia's fledgling attempt at democracy. The 
students say they will be on the streets in force, ready to demonstrate 
their opposition. Although the electoral process has been generally 
endorsed by the country's leading opposition figures, it is not enough 
for most of the students, who are demanding an immediate break with 
the past. Riding the momentum of their victory over Suharto in May, 
the students have taken over major streets in the capital this week 
by the tens of thousands, marching and chanting, proud to make their 
mark on history as the revolutionary ``class of 1998.'' ``We have 
proved to the people that we are not just ignorant boys and girls,'' 
said Benny Yuliawan, 23, a philosophy student. ``I have an obsession 
that this week will be as great an event as May, only without the 
riots.'' With their jeans, sandals, long hair and guitars, this is 
a student movement to take its place alongside those of the French 
and the Americans in 1968. Their continuing campus demonstrations 
kept alive the country's timid opposition to Suharto after he was 
anointed for a seventh five-year term in March. And it was the killing 
by security forces of four students at Trisakti University in mid-May 
that set off three days of devastating riots that shook Suharto's 
hold on power. Finally, the students' ebullient and fearless weeklong 
occupation of the Parliament building was the most visible part of 
the end game that forced Suharto to step down. Many people here see 
the students as an essential moral force, assuring that Parliament 
will not back away from its outline of democratic reforms. As the 
four-day parliamentary session continued Thursday, delegates inside 
the building repeatedly asked reporters, ``What's happening outside?'' 
In a nation where all government institutions and almost all public 
figures are holdovers from the 32-year Suharto era, the students are 
the most insistent voice for a genuine change. And in a country that 
does not yet have a true democracy, their voice must be heard from 
beyond the spiked fence that surrounds the Parliament building. But 
they are not a unified movement with clear leaders, and a foreign 
diplomat said that in recent weeks they have increasingly fragmented. 
``Now they are kind of leaderless and some have abandoned their positions 
of nonviolence,'' the diplomat said. ``The movement is fracturing 
all the time.'' Their various agendas seem to converge on a demand 
that the military withdraw from its dominant role in politics and 
that the government investigate Suharto's wealth. Many students are 
demanding the immediate resignation of Habibie, although a split in 
the movement has emerged over that issue. In effect, the students 
are still demonstrating against Suharto and his legacy, demanding 
the completion of Indonesia's revolution. Among the many cheers and 
slogans chanted on the streets this week, the most popular by far 
is ``Hang Suharto.'' ``We will watch the conclusion of the session, 
and if Suharto is not punished, we will be back again,'' said Raja 
Maures, 19, a student of management at Trisakti University. At the 
same time, the student movement is itself a legacy of Suharto, the 
product of the rapid economic development he achieved and the emerging 
middle class that was one of its results. The students, with their 
vision of an open democratic society, are Indonesia's first truly 
middle-class generation. The 23-year-old philosophy student, Yuliawan, 
despite his bold talk of revolution, is fascinated by the centrist 
politics of Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain. ``We realize that 
not all the people agree with us,'' he said of the students' political 
agenda. ``But our role is educational. By staging our protests, we 
are saying to the people that it is possible to speak out. For many 
years, we were held down. Now we break the fence and move forward.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>