<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981112.0436 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
On Wall Street, the Salomon Brothers culture long provoked admiration 
and dread. It was a gambling firm, quite willing to commit large amounts 
of capital on risky trades. That culture spawned John Meriwether, 
whose strategies made huge profits for Salomon while he worked there 
_ and then failed spectacularly when his independent hedge fund collapsed 
this year and was bailed out. It was the culture that allowed bond 
traders to hatch what looked like a conspiracy to corner the market 
in Treasury bonds _ a scandal that almost killed the firm. But Salomon 
also played a vital role that led many institutional investors to 
cherish its presence. If you wanted to unload a lot of securities, 
Salomon would buy them. Not, perhaps, at the price you would like, 
but at a price you could live with. That willingness to take risks 
_ and to do it with enough discipline that most of the time it made 
very good money _ made some bosses nervous. When Warren Buffett took 
control of Salomon after the 1991 Treasury bond scandal, he vowed 
to change things. Salomon did pull back in stock trading, but in the 
end the Salomon culture survived, particularly in bond trading. Buffett 
discovered that it was in trading that Salomon made real money, while 
it was at best a respectable competitor in underwriting securities. 
But now Salomon is dead. The name lives on, as part of Salomon Smith 
Barney, itself a part of the giant Citigroup. But virtually all the 
people who ran the risk-management operation at Salomon Brothers have 
quit or been shown the door as the new management closes or unloads 
the operations, such as bond arbitrage, that once made Salomon rich 
and famous. Citigroup's strategy appears to be to use the combination 
with Citibank to make Salomon Smith Barney a power in underwriting 
that it never used to be, while continuing the successful retail brokerage 
operation but avoiding risky trading. Perhaps it will work. But you 
have to wonder if the $9 billion in stock that was paid for Salomon 
was worth it, given how little of the firm's profitable operations 
has survived. Citigroup may now itself face further dismemberment. 
It is a firm that was spawned by merger upon merger. Travelers, which 
owned Smith Barney, took over Salomon, then merged with Citicorp last 
month. Since then, there have been culture clashes and even a physical 
confrontation between two senior executives. The president was fired. 
Many investment bankers may jump ship early next year, after annual 
bonuses are paid. Even if everyone can learn to get along, Citigroup 
may not endure in its present structure. Unless the law is changed, 
Citigroup will have to get out of either banking or insurance underwriting 
within a few years. For a time this year it looked as if Congress 
would change the law. But that move was blocked by Sen. Phil Gramm 
of Texas, the new chairman of the Senate Finance Committee. In an 
interview, Gramm said he wanted to pass a bill, but it looked as if 
a bill he would accept would be opposed by many others. Would it bother 
him if no bill was passed? ``It is not the be-all and end-all of my 
tenure as chairman,'' he replied. But it could be the be-all and end-all 
of Citigroup as it now exists. If so, the company that killed Salomon 
could itself become a victim. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>