<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981112.0364 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The City of Chicago and Cook County filed a $433 million lawsuit against 
the gun industry on Thursday, charging that a three-month police undercover 
operation found that firearms dealers in Chicago's suburbs were flooding 
the city with illegal guns with the knowledge of nationwide gun manufacturers 
and distributors. The suit, which names 22 manufacturers, 12 stores, 
and four distributors is based on a new legal theory, that the gun 
industry causes a ``public nuisance'' by creating excess costs for 
Chicago's police, fire department and public hospitals. It is expected 
to be the model for suits by Philadelphia, Los Angeles and San Francisco 
in the next few months. Chicago's suit follows another lawsuit brought 
against the gun industry by New Orleans two weeks ago, based on different 
legal grounds, that gun makers manufacture an unsafe product by failing 
to incorporate sufficient safety devices. The lawsuits represent a 
new front for cities in their efforts to reduce urban violence. They 
incorporate legal arguments used successfully by several states in 
suits against the tobacco industry, and come at a time when individuals 
have recently stepped up lawsuits against gun makers who for years 
successfully beat back product-liability suits with the assertion 
that guns do not kill people _ people do. The biggest of these suits 
is to go to trial in January in U.S. District Court in New York. ``Gun 
manufacturers and retailers know exactly what they're doing,'' Mayor 
Richard Daley said Thursday in announcing Chicago's lawsuit. ``They 
knowingly market and distribute their deadly weapons to criminals 
in Chicago and refuse to impose even the most basic controls.'' ``If 
money is the only language they understand, then money is the language 
we will use to make them understand that they have no business in 
Chicago,'' Daley said in announcing the suit at a police building 
on the city's west side. The building is where the police have stored 
171 handguns bought from the suburban gun dealers during the undercover 
operation. Posing as members of street gangs, motorcycle toughs or 
soldiers of fortune in camouflage, the undercover police officers 
were able, they reported, to buy guns from the suburban shops even 
when they did not have a state gun permit, and when they boasted they 
would use the guns for criminal acts inside Chicago. Chicago has some 
of the strictest gun-control laws in the United States, essentially 
banning the private ownership of handguns, and the city's police have 
led the nation in confiscating handguns, seizing and destroying more 
than 178,000 in the past 10 years, the mayor's office said. Despite 
these efforts, Chicago continues to be flooded by new guns, according 
to a 75-page complaint filed in Cook County Circuit Court on Thursday. 
``The gun manufacturers are saturating gun stores just outside Chicago's 
border with far more guns than the lawful gun market could possibly 
absorb, because they know there is a large, illegal market for guns 
in the city,'' said Brian Crowe, the city's corporation counsel. This 
creates a public nuisance in Chicago comparable to a suburban industry 
polluting the city with poison gas, he said. Georgia Nichols, president 
of the American Shooting Sports Council, a trade group, said, ``We 
as an industry really feel there is no basis for a suit against the 
legitimate sale of a product.'' If some rogue dealers are selling 
guns illegally, Ms. Nichols said, they should be prosecuted. ``We 
don't want our guns used for criminal purposes.'' ``But most manufacturers 
sell their guns legally to distributors who in turn sell to the dealers,'' 
Ms. Nichols said, ``so there is not the clear-cut chain'' that the 
lawsuit alleges. The solution to gun violence, Ms. Nichols said, is 
for federal and local authorities to better enforce existing gun-control 
laws. Lawrence Tribe, a professor at Harvard Law School who helped 
prepare some of the successful state litigation against cigarette 
companies, said several of the state suits, including those in Mississippi, 
Florida and Texas, had included arguments about the tobacco industry 
causing a public nuisance. ``One can't know for sure how well the 
theory went'' in winning the cases, Tribe said, but he said he believed 
the public-nuisance argument was helpful. As for the gun makers' argument 
that they could not be sued, because they were several steps removed 
from the actual illegal sale of guns, Tribe pointed out that the cigarette 
companies invoked that argument in vain when they said cigarettes 
were sold by small local stores. ``But it is irrelevant when you are 
seeking to show the harm to a community in the aggregate,'' Tribe 
said. ``You may not be able to trace the straight line from the place 
where the gun is manufactured to the aorta of the victim, but you 
can apply market-share theory,'' Tribe said, as Chicago is trying 
to do, in calculating the gun makers' proportionate share of the market. 
The public-nuisance approach also sidesteps arguments based on the 
Second Amendment right to bear arms, Tribe said, since the constitutional 
guarantee does not protect gun manufacturers. The suit in New York 
brought against 50 companies on behalf of victims of gun violence, 
is based on an argument similar to the one in Chicago, said Elisa 
Barnes, the lawyer representing the victims' families. Ms. Barnes 
argues that the gun companies negligently fail to supervise how their 
handguns are distributed and have oversupplied dealers in states with 
lax gun-control laws, like Georgia, who then sell guns illegally to 
buyers in states with tough gun laws like New York. The suit, Hamilton 
vs. Accu-Tek, will use analysis of statistics recently collected by 
the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms to try to show that the 
manufacturers must have known they were selling far more guns in Georgia 
and other Southern states than there were legitimate local buyers. 
Ms. Barnes said she drew her arguments from cases against pharmaceutical 
companies in which the courts allowed the argument that drug manufacturers 
could be sued as a group for negligence even though it was hard to 
trace whose products had caused harm to individuals. ``I think the 
tide has turned,'' Ms. Barnes said. ``The American public has changed 
and awakened to the idea that manufacturers have a responsibility 
for their products, even gun manufacturers.'' Ms. Barnes said it was 
impossible to tell which legal strategy would succeed. ``There are 
many roads to the mountain top,'' she said. ``So I think it will be 
a combination of everyone pulling together.'' David Kairys, a professor 
at Temple University Law School who helped prepare the Chicago suit, 
said that the gun industry, which is far smaller and less profitable 
than the tobacco industry, may have fewer resources to defend itself 
against multiple lawsuits. But unlike the tobacco companies, Kairys 
said, the gun makers have shown no inclination to settle. ``They are 
going to have to get over their feeling of immunity,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>