<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981112.0208 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Shared Experience has long been in the business of compressing novels 
for the stage, and as with the product of any boutique operation of 
distinction, the craftsmanship shows. Paying its first visit to New 
York, the 23-year-old, London theater company has brought a worthy, 
finely honed adaptation of Tolstoy's ``Anna Karenina'' that thoroughly 
engages the imagination, even if it doesn't do quite as much for the 
heart. The three-hour production, performed with only a few well-chosen 
props on the bare stage of the Brooklyn Academy of Music's Majestic 
Theater, is guided with such intelligence by Nancy Meckler and performed 
with such discipline by the eight-member cast that the pitfalls in 
reducing a voluminous 19th-century Russian novel to two cogent acts 
ultimately seem secondary. Working from Helen Edmundson's psychologically 
sophisticated script, the director and her actors seize on the darker 
elements in the characters' natures _ Anna's self-destructive longings, 
Karenin's coldness, Vronsky's vanity, Levin's fatalism _ to infuse 
this ``Anna Karenina,'' and the marital infidelity at its core, with 
an omnipresent sense of Anna's doom. The troupe's hallmark is its 
Spartan performance style; as adapters of Russian epics go, Shared 
Experience is the anti-David Lean. The actors, uniformly excellent, 
divide 18 roles, as the action shifts from St. Petersburg to Moscow 
to Italy and back again to Russia. Props are limited to wooden chairs, 
used most originally to simulate the bustles of ball gowns, and to 
suitcases, carried on constantly by cast members, that are as likely 
to contain fog, snow or grain as scarves or trousers. The style is 
not as revolutionary as it may have once seemed, but it's hard to 
imagine a company executing it with more aplomb. More impressive than 
the sparing use of scenery, though, is the generous application of 
movement to express a mood, a plot twist, a theme. Ms. Meckler, for 
instance, whips up a steamy encounter between Anna, played by Teresa 
Banham, and her lover, Vronsky (Derek Riddell) in the midst of a day 
at the races. The seduction is both riveting and erotic, their lovemaking 
undulating to the rhythm of the horse race: their passion runs with 
the animals. The physically revealing moments can be as fleeting and 
precise as the one in which plain, burned-out Dolly (Karen Ascoe) 
slips out of a bulky housedress to become the lithe and beguiling 
maiden of 20 years earlier, or as pivotal and harrowing as the concluding 
tableau in which Anna throws herself under the train, her twisting 
body spun by the actors portraying the engine. The second-act opening, 
when Vronsky and Karenin circle the distraught Anna in a kind of competitive 
pas de trois, is perhaps the most thrilling evocation of this technique. 
Unifying these compelling moments in ways that transform a novel into 
stageworthy spectacle is no easy task. Ms. Edmundson gives the play 
over equally to the stories of Anna, the restless wife, and Levin 
(Richard Hope), the rich landowner in agony over his love for Kitty 
(Pooky Quesnel). This parallel structure allows for an ingenious device; 
Anna and Levin, who meet only once, take stock of one another across 
time and space. ``Where are you now?'' they ask each other, in scene 
after scene. The question is above all else an existential one. Anna 
and Levin are absolutists whose quests for happiness are waylaid by 
spiritual and moral ambiguity. In the interior worlds that this ``Anna 
Karenina'' seeks to lay bare, we're meant to witness each step and 
misstep they take, as if gathering evidence for our own post-mortem 
on their tragic progress. As Anna, Ms. Banham has a porcelain beauty 
that can at times seem fragile and at others unbreakable. She lends 
an appealing sense of mystery to the portrayal of a woman whose motives 
and desires are otherwise never much in doubt. Physically, she's well 
matched with the balletic Vronsky of Riddell, although he remains 
a curiously cursory figure here. Hope, who may spark a flicker of 
recognition among ``Brideshead Revisited'' fans as the doltish enlisted 
man, Hooper, under Jeremy Irons' charge, delivers a deft portrait 
of the conflicted Levin. Among the other players, Ian Gelder's proper 
Karenin and Ms. Ascoe's hapless Dolly are vivid bystanders to the 
unfolding tragedy. The technical accomplishments of this ``Anna Karenina'' 
are nearly faultless. The production's power to draw one in, however, 
is limited. So much care and thought has gone into the stagecraft 
that it's disconcerting to discover that the piece doesn't have much 
of a soul, Russian or otherwise. This may simply be a shortcoming 
of the difficult conversion of literary epic to the stage. But even 
so, Shared Experience does what it does so well, you're left eager 
to discover what else the company keeps in its library. PRODUCTION 
NOTES: `ANNA KARENINA' Adapted by Helen Edmundson from the novel by 
Leo Tolstoy; directed by Nancy Meckler; sets by Lucy Weller; music 
by Peter Salem; lighting by Chris Davey; company movement by Liz Ranken; 
production associate director, Richard Hope. The Shared Experience 
production presented by Brooklyn Academy of Music, Bruce C. Ratner, 
chairman of the board; Harvey Lichtenstein, president and executive 
producer. At the Majestic Theater, 651 Fulton St., Fort Greene, Brooklyn. 
WITH: Teresa Banham (Anna), Richard Hope (Levin), Pooky Quesnel (Kitty 
and Seriozha), Simeon Andrews (Stiva, Bailiff and Petritsky), Karen 
Ascoe (Dolly and Countess Vronsky), Katharine Barker (Princess Betsy, 
Agatha, Governess and Railway Widow), Ian Gelder (Karenin and Priest) 
and Derek Riddell (Vronsky and Nikolai). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>