<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981112.0211 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
At the end of the 20th century, the art world is paying close attention 
to the 19th century, as if probing to see what reflections and cautionary 
predictions it might reveal. Victorian painting is enjoying a vogue. 
Retrospectives of worthy footnote-ish figures like Gustave Moreau 
and John Singer Sargent will be arriving in New York. Among young 
contemporary artists, academic figuration is being stylishly retooled. 
The interest extends to non-Western cultures as well. Late Persian 
art, which practically no one has seriously looked at for years, is 
making a splash at the Brooklyn Museum of Art. And this Sunday, an 
ambitious exhibition devoted to the art of the Edo period in Japan 
(1615-1868) will open at the National Gallery in Washington. The Edo 
era (Edo is the original name for Tokyo) and the 20th century weren't 
chronologically contiguous. But modern Japan _ the nation of megacities 
and entrepreneurial acumen, of a brash popular culture and tenaciously 
held traditions _ was basically an Edo creation. The Washington show, 
organized by Robert Singer, curator of Japanese art at the Los Angeles 
County Museum of Art, is drawn almost exclusively from Japanese collections. 
It is a big show, though it doesn't feel that way. The 300 objects, 
ranging from painted screens to samurai swords, ceramics to theater 
costumes, Buddhist sculptures to woodblock prints, are inventive, 
virtuosic and often just plain beautiful enough to keep the eye enthralled 
from start to finish. That said, anyone hoping for sheer razzle-dazzle 
_ a major hit of gilded surfaces, say, or the kind of tumultuous ornamentation 
found at the funerary complex of Nikko, an over-the-top Japanese chinoiserie 
_ may be disappointed. Ostentation has been played down. Only a few 
flamboyant rimpa screens are included. And because the show has been 
organized by theme rather than by types of objects, the sort of impact 
that a roomful of painted silk Noh robes can deliver has been forfeited. 
But the compensations are considerable. Singer's quieter, textured 
approach gives a sense of the variety and ingenuity of an art. And 
it tells the story of a culture that changed shape dramatically over 
two centuries as it kept one foot in the feudal past, the other edging 
toward the modern future. The period began when the warlord Tokugawa 
Ieyasu took control of Japan, established his shogunate capital and 
started shaping the country to his will. He left absolutely nothing 
to chance. He shut the door to the outside world and kept his daimyo 
underlords on a tight leash, requiring them to reside in Edo every 
other year, where he held their wives and children as hostages. The 
rigid structure of Edo society was based on imported neo-Confucian 
values, with the military elite and salt-of-the-earth farmers at the 
top and middleman merchants below. A code of nit-picking sumptuary 
laws dictated who could own and wear what. Among the upper classes, 
competitive extravagance was as much a social responsibility as a 
privilege, and it produced an extraordinary art, as the first section 
of the show, ``Edo style,'' suggests. It is instantly apparent how 
eclectic that style was. And two early 19th-century works seen side 
by side tell the tale: an ink scroll by Uragami Gyokudo, ``Frozen 
Clouds, Sifted Snow,'' and a splendid set of screens by Sakai Hoitsu, 
``Flowers and Grasses of Summer and Autumn.'' (Because of its fragility, 
the scroll will be on view only for the first two weeks of the show's 
run; other light-sensitive pieces will be rotated in January.) The 
paintings couldn't be more different. One is an impressionistic vertical 
landscape in a classical Chinese tradition, an omniscient vision of 
an atomized world in a state of perpetual flux. The other is a close-up 
of natural shapes picked out against a depthless silver-leaf ground. 
Mutability is the theme here, too _ summer lilies give way to autumn 
leaves _ but expressed as pinpoint-fine decorative forms frozen in 
time. This ornamental naturalism, with its optically stimulating patterns 
and hyper-real colors, was an Edo hallmark, and it is everywhere here: 
in the eyelash-thin birds painted on a man's lacquer purse, in the 
stenciled flowers exploding across a silk robe, in a porcelain dish 
the size of a saucer covered with magnified snowflakes. Seen together 
these objects confirm that, in Japan, art and craft were never separate 
categories. Motifs migrated effortlessly from one form to another. 
(Gyokudo's great snowstorm scroll and the little snowflake bowl, stylistically 
so different, are spiritually related). And artists moved with awesome 
ease between mediums, as in the case of the outstanding polymath, 
Ogata Korin, who painted with equal skill on folding screens, ceramic 
pots and ladies outerwear. The military class for whom much of the 
finest early work was produced saw little active duty during the peaceful 
Edo era. But as their professional function turned largely ceremonial, 
their armor grew increasingly fantastic. And one of the show's most 
startling sights comes with a display of such gear on the museum's 
second floor. One full-length suit of armor, with a muscular breastplate 
and a Darth Vader mask sprouting a boar's-hair mustache is truly outlandish. 
(The intention may have been to simulate the appearance of a barbarous 
foreigner.) But in other martial paraphernalia, one finds a fanciful 
delicacy. One helmet is topped by a giant butterfly; another by a 
stylized hollyhock, while a man's saddle is covered with a pattern 
of cosmetic brushes painted in gold lacquer dust. Why cosmetic brushes? 
No one seems to know for sure. But there's no question that the symbols 
of masculine prowess and feminine esthetic sensitivity compressed 
into this equestrian artifact distill the peculiar, macho-poetic essence 
of a samurai mystique. Warriors may have commanded top status in the 
Edo period, but farmers and laborers insured economic stability, and 
they were routinely depicted in art. An early example of such images 
is included here: Kusumi Morikage's 17th-century painting ``Enjoying 
the Evening Cool Under an Arbor,'' a sympathetic portrait of a lower-echelon 
farming couple at ease outside their hut on a humid, moonlit summer 
night. It's a wonderful piece, and such pastoral images continued 
to appear throughout the period. But the social complexion of the 
country was beginning to change. Middle-class merchants were gaining 
economic clout, and it is the art they sponsored that dominates the 
second half of the show. The giddy, cornucopian atmosphere of a dawning 
commodity culture comes vividly to life in a mid-18th-century hand 
scroll, ``Occupations and Activities of Each Month.'' Here a town 
market is shown as a kind of bustling mini-mall of speciality stores 
_ bonsai shops, boutiques, art galleries _ with hawkers, prostitutes 
and religious processions dashing to and fro as if on a suddenly accelerated 
time schedule. Religious art reflects this jumpy, manic energy. Ancient 
icons are given freshly expressive forms in Buddhist figures hacked 
and gouged from wood by the monk-sculpture Enku. Humor and parody 
come into play. A hanging scroll by Ito Jakuchu turns the iconic scene 
of the death of the Buddha into a fruit-and-vegetable still life, 
with the Buddha himself as a giant white radish reclining at the center. 
The Daoist immortals in a screen painted by Soga Shohaku have a hypnotically 
detailed, Zap Comix-style weirdness. Such images, animated by a self-conscious, 
secularized irreverence, made sense for an era that was, on the whole, 
far more concerned with the clamorous here-and-now than with the hereafter. 
The late Edo period was an urban moment; Tokyo in the 18th century 
was the largest city in the world. Class barriers were fluid; money 
was new, loose, plentiful. Downtime became a preoccupation, leisure 
an industry. One of the results was a theater boom. Kabuki, with its 
raucous, topical humor and weepy melodrama was all the rage. Its larger-than-life, 
grandstanding character comes across full blast in Toshusai Sharaku's 
prints of preening and grimacing in-character superstars, and in spectacularly 
witty costumes like the grass-green silk coat in the show's last room 
that has a huge please-hit-me bull's-eye emblazoned in black and gold 
on its back. The tourist trade also flourished, with sightseeing trips 
to this scenic spot or that, and a mass production of souvenirs. They 
ranged from kimonos covered with scenes of Kyoto hot spots (many of 
which are still hot spots today), to snapshotlike prints of Mount 
Fuji, to pictures that caught the erotic buzz of urban pleasure quarters. 
These ``floating world'' images found an enthusiastic audience in 
the West. In part this was because of their subject matter; Miyagawa 
Chosun's swoony scroll painting of a young courtesan, fresh from the 
bath, letting incense smoke waft up through her robes makes most European 
soft-porn of the day look cloddishly overstated. But it was the formal 
daring of Japanese art that fascinated vanguard European painters 
of the late 19th century, and its influence is spelled out in the 
meeting of two works at the National Gallery just now. The museum's 
crowd-pulling ``Van Gogh's Van Goghs'' show includes a Japanese-inspired 
painting by the Dutch artist titled ``The Courtesan'' (1887), and 
a rare copy of the 1820s woodblock print by Keisai Eisen on which 
it is based is on view in the Edo show. The final picture of the Edo 
period is itself complex: it embraces a secular bourgeois society 
with immense wealth and a widening gap between rich and poor; a dynamic 
popular culture shaping art from the bottom up, a growing internationalism 
(the pushy Admiral Perry landed in Tokyo Bay in 1853) accompanied 
by worries about national identity. Sound familiar? The Edo era in 
Japan, particularly in its final phase, has many points of comparison 
with our own end-of-century world. The National Gallery exhibition, 
in a nuanced exploration of its subject, throws these similarities 
into relief. In the process, it also reveals an art of subtle and 
inimitable splendors, perched on the cusp of a very particular ``then'' 
and ``now,'' and gazing avidly and uneasily in both directions. __ 
``Edo: Art in Japan 1615-1868'' opens on Sunday and will remain at 
the National Gallery of Art, Fourth Street at Constitution Avenue, 
N.W., Washington, through Feb. 15. The exhibition is organized by 
the National Gallery of Art in collaboration with the Agency for Cultural 
Affairs, the government of Japan and the Japan Foundation. It is supported 
by NTT (Nippon Telegraph &AMP; Telephone Corp.) and will not travel. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>