<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981112.0445 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Time is running out. And Patrick Ewing is backing into the paint with 
his hands stretched out like a man about to throttle someone. There 
is no mistaking this familiar stance: Ewing wants the ball, and he 
wants it now. For most of his 13 years as the center for the New York 
Knicks, that pass has been delivered to Ewing. On cue, he has plodded 
through this scene without coming up with a career-defining moment 
under pressure. No championship, few last-minute heroics. Now, as 
the president of the National Basketball Players Association, he finds 
himself striking a similar pose as the league's lockout approaches 
a date sometime in the near future that could mean the unprecedented 
cancellation of the season. The next two or three weeks will play 
out like the closing minutes of a critical game for Ewing. Although 
he is neither a lawyer like Commissioner David Stern nor a skilled 
negotiator like the union's executive director, Billy Hunter, Ewing 
is the recognized face of the union. Fair or not, he will be identified 
with the outcome of the current negotiations for a collective bargaining 
agreement. In the end, Ewing could distinguish himself as the leader 
who kept his membership unified, sacrificed a chunk of his own $18.5 
million salary and stood up to the owners in order to strike a solid 
deal for players. Or he could find himself walking away from a shattered 
season, denying the reality of it all by proclaiming his usual mantra: 
``We'll beat them next time.'' So far, Ewing has worn the title of 
union president like his No. 33 jersey. Although he has a very public 
presence, he is still viewed as the aloof superstar who may alienate 
fans but has an aura that goes unchallenged by players around him. 
``As far as the public goes, he is not the one you want carrying the 
banner,'' said one league executive, speaking privately because of 
league rules that prohibit team officials from discussing players 
during the lockout. ``The public sees a superstar making millions, 
and they can't identify with him on any level. Why is he complaining? 
But you have to say this about Patrick, he has kept the players together. 
Out of respect or fear, they have not raised their voice publicly 
to speak out against him.'' Michael Curry of the Milwaukee Bucks said: 
``I think Patrick's done a great job. He has informed everyone and 
kept everyone up to speed. He's led us through a difficult time.'' 
If the players have perceived any flawed moves or public missteps 
by Ewing since he was elected president in September 1997, they have 
nevertheless supported him. They have ignored lapses, such as the 
one he made last season when an arbitrator reduced the punishment 
for Golden State's Latrell Sprewell, who had choked his coach. Two 
days after the ruling, Ewing admitted he had not read the arbitrator's 
decision. After taking a stance against the league's collective bargaining 
proposals this summer, Ewing appeared hypocritical to some by accepting 
a spot as a commentator for a WNBA game, since the women's league 
is run by the NBA. And as the lockout has worn on, fans have bristled 
at some of his comments as well as at the image of Ewing dashing from 
a meeting with a cell phone to his ear. Some of the backlash is not 
Ewing's fault. The task of being the president of any union made up 
of millionaire athletes has historically been thankless. Player representatives 
in baseball such as Atlanta's Tom Glavine found that out several years 
ago when fans booed them. But Ewing, always reluctant to grant interviews 
or provide more than token comments publicly during his Knick tenure, 
has made no attempt to endear himself to the public. During a college 
basketball tournament at Madison Square Garden this week, Ewing was 
booed by fans as he took a seat to watch Georgetown play Temple. ``Those 
were only a few critical voices,'' Ewing said. ``I don't put much 
credibility in that.'' Perhaps Ewing's ability to coat himself against 
fan criticism is one reason he has been able to weather the pressures 
of playing in New York. But some of his comments during the lockout 
_ such as ``We cannot survive if we sign this contract'' _ have served 
only to put another prickly layer between himself and the fans. ``I 
think he's going to be booed when he comes back to the Garden,'' said 
Allen Lox, an insurance consultant, who has had Knick season tickets 
since 1969. ``I know I can't support him. ``I just believe he just 
continues to hurt his image by saying things like `We're fighting 
for our livelihood.' It shows how out of touch he is. I get insulted 
when I hear the stuff that Patrick Ewing has said. Players making 
less than he does are looking up to him, and I really believe that 
he's getting his guidance from David Falk.'' Falk, his longtime agent, 
speaks to Ewing daily. Although no one knows how much Falk has influenced 
the superstar's thinking, Ewing has shown little desire to stray from 
a script that appears written for him. Generally, when he follows 
Hunter at player news conferences, his comments have begun with ``I 
just want to reiterate what Billy said,'' or ``I have nothing to add 
to what Billy said.'' But this lip-synching of the party line may 
belie the way Ewing is handling the inside game. By all accounts, 
he has been a cohesive force within the union and has not been threatened 
by dissenting voices. How things change. Three years ago, Ewing was 
part of the cry for union decertification as an alternative to the 
current collective bargaining agreement. Now he is a union man, through 
and through. But if Ewing can emerge as a leader who preserved some 
semblance of the Larry Bird exception for free agents, if he can rise 
as the player who held everyone together through the adversity of 
the lockout, if he can be seen as the president who did not allow 
a season to be canceled, and if he can pull all this off in the closing 
moments of a collective bargaining confrontation, he will have won 
a very big game. ``It's been a learning experience for Patrick,'' 
said Buck Williams, a former union president and Ewing's Knick teammate 
in the last two seasons. ``He has to answer 400 questions a day and 
cut a deal that's going to make everyone happy. And that's a challenge. 
I think he's beginning to understand some of the difficulties I had 
three years ago. He's learning on the job. ``I do respect the fact 
that now he has jumped in and taken a leadership role. I think he 
and Michael Jordan have done a good job. But it's very difficult.'' 
But Ewing wanted the ball. As always, the players around him delivered 
it by electing him president. For a superstar still searching for 
his defining moment under pressure, this may be his chance to make 
the elusive big play. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>