<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981112.0402 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Their quarterback has been muzzled and their most decorated player 
is a 5-foot-9-inch Argentine-born kicker. Their coach prefers chief 
executive officer-styled power suits over the warmups sported by most 
members of his fraternity. He doesn't eat until midnight, when his 
workaholic day is over, and he acts as if he would rather play the 
most important game in his program's history on Friday. Just the Kansas 
State Wildcats against the Nebraska Cornhuskers in an empty stadium. 
Instead, Bill Snyder and his K-State players have been found out. 
The eyes of the college football world and the national television 
cameras have turned to this windswept prairie town in the northeast 
part of the Sunflower State to see whether the Wildcats are the best 
team in the nation, as the coaches have voted, or a pretty nice squad 
puffed up to 9-0 on a diet of nonconference rice cakes. Everyone will 
know on Saturday, when Kansas State plays host to Nebraska, a team 
that already has two losses this season, but also holds a huge psychological 
advantage over the Wildcats: the Cornhuskers have beaten them 29 straight 
times. ``This is not a make-or-break game for this program,'' Snyder 
said. ``If you lose, it means you're 9-1. If you win, you're still 
undefeated.'' In a profession that finds comfort in cliches, Snyder, 
59, fields questions the way Bill Gates gives Senate testimony: pointedly, 
defiant and utterly confident. In fact, what Snyder has done for Kansas 
State is the college football equivalent of what the Microsoft chief 
did to the computer industry. Ten years ago, Snyder was the offensive 
coordinator at Iowa when Kansas State brought him in to do something, 
anything, for a program considered the worst in college football. 
The Wildcats were 3-40 in the four previous seasons, averaged about 
20,000 in attendance _ less than half of capacity _ and had facilities 
worse than some junior colleges. Snyder rebuilt, however, with attention 
to detail rather than inspired genius. He got his assistants' salaries 
doubled, offered to write a $100,000 check to help fund a new football 
facility and insisted Wildcat football operate on a minute-to-minute 
schedule _ practices, meetings, even pre-game introductions. ``I believe 
we've got it to four and a half minutes,'' Snyder offered, though 
no one asked, on how long it would take to introduce his 25 seniors 
for their final home game on Saturday. In his first season, 1989, 
Kansas State was 1-10. But the Wildcats are 74-27-1 since then, have 
won at least nine games for six consecutive seasons, and have won 
17 consecutive games _ the nation's second longest streak, only one 
behind U.C.L.A.'s 18. Now, KSU Stadium is consistently sold out at 
42,000-plus and soon will be expanded to 50,000 with 31 luxury suites. 
Jack Vanier, a Kansas rancher, came up with the money to build a weight 
room and resource and office center so Snyder didn't have to. Still, 
the Vanier Football Complex is a monument to the coach's fastidiousness, 
down to the doormats ordering visitors to wipe their feet. ``Coach 
is all about business,'' said Martin Gramatica, who is closing in 
on his second Lou Groza Place-Kicker Award, is a consensus all-American 
and has kicked field goals from 55 and 65 yards this year. ``He pays 
attention to things others don't think about. He wants us to do the 
same. I guess you can say we're efficient.'' So far, the Wildcats 
have been deadly efficient. They are ranked in the top 3 nationally 
in special teams and total defense. Their offense, led by the voluble 
and, by all accounts, combustible quarterback Michael Bishop, averages 
478.4 yards, 10th in the nation. On a roster filled with good players 
you've never heard of, Bishop may be the greatest you may never hear 
from _ at least for the rest of this year. He has 10 rushing touchdowns 
and 18 touchdown passes against only one interception and is the nation's 
sixth most efficient quarterback. Last season, at the Fiesta Bowl, 
college fans saw why pro scouts predict a terrific National Football 
League career for the 6-foot-2-inch, 205-pound quarterback. He threw 
for 317 yards and 4 touchdowns and ran for 73 yards and another score 
in a 35-18 victory over Syracuse. One statistic, however, says more 
about Bishop's makeup and is responsible for the silence Snyder imposed 
on him after Kansas State's fifth game this season. Bishop is 44-1 
as a starting quarterback, including two perfect seasons capped by 
national championships at Blinn Community College in Texas. He is 
maniacally competitive. Heading into the Colorado game in Boulder 
last month, Bishop publicly predicted a big day for Wildcat running 
back Frank Murphy, comments that the Buffaloes turned into bulletin-board 
fodder. Bishop proceeded to struggle through a 9-of-25 passing performance, 
throwing his only interception of the year, and the Wildcats barely 
escaped with a 16-9 victory. Worse, in the course of the night, Bishop 
berated himself and his teammates for their poor play. After the game, 
Snyder told him he could no longer talk with reporters. It was not 
the first time Bishop had been silenced. Last year, after a 56-26 
loss at Nebraska _ Bishop's only collegiate defeat _ the quarterback 
questioned his teammates' heart and quickly found his media privileges 
revoked. ``Mike is a super-nice guy,'' said wide receiver Darnell 
McDonald, who leads the team in catches. ``But he is hyper. He screams 
and yells before and, sometimes, during the game. He hates to see 
us play badly. But he's our guy. He's our leader.'' Snyder does not 
apologize for making his leader unavailable, explaining matter-of-factly 
it is a distraction Kansas State doesn't need. There will be no muddy 
footprints trampling on the Wildcats' concentration. His team, too, 
has taken on his businesslike character. None of them were highly 
recruited _ all of them have settled into the anonymity of this town 
of 43,000 at a school more renowned for its veterinary school than 
football. Like Bishop, McDonald came from junior college. Gramatica 
was unearthed in Florida after a single high school season of kicking. 
Both acknowledge the Nebraska game is one they have been waiting to 
play their whole careers. They are locked in on a goal. ``Yeah, people 
don't know who we are and they question our schedule,'' said McDonald, 
referring to nonconference games against Indiana State, Northern Illinois 
and Northeast Louisiana. ``But that isn't what it's about. We're just 
a bunch of fellas who came here to play for each other. We work hard 
and have unity. We know who we are.'' Future national champions? ``We 
win, we're still undefeated,'' said McDonald, echoing his coach. ``We 
got a lot of days left before we can say we took care of that business.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>