<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981112.0226 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Nothing happens without a reason. Depending upon your spiritual outlook, 
this statement is either a profound truth or sentimental pap. But 
when the German bass-baritone Thomas Quasthoff says it, you believe 
it. If he can feel this way, given his life story, who can say otherwise? 
Though Quasthoff is 39 (his birthday was this week), he has been singing 
prominently for only 10 years, essentially since 1988, when he captured 
first prize in the ARD International Music Competition in Munich, 
the same competition that inaugurated the career of Jessye Norman. 
He is now one of the most critically hailed and sought-after singers 
in Europe. He has won some illustrious champions, including the conductors 
Claudio Abbado, Simon Rattle, Daniel Barenboim and Helmuth Rilling. 
To date, Quasthoff's career in the United States has been less extensive. 
His U.S. debut came in 1995 at the Oregon Bach Festival with Rilling 
conducting. But vocal enthusiasts here already know of him from his 
recordings of Schumann lieder and Mozart arias on the RCA Red Seal 
label. Last week he made his debut with the Boston Symphony, performing 
in Mahler's ``Lied von der Erde,'' conducted by another Quasthoff 
admirer, Seiji Ozawa. Thursday night he made his New York debut, performing 
in another Mahler work, ``Das Knaben Wunderhorn'' with the New York 
Philharmonic under Sir Colin Davis, a performance that will be repeated 
Friday and Saturday nights at Avery Fisher Hall. And in January he 
will make his New York recital debut singing Schubert's ``Winterreise,'' 
with the pianist Charles Spencer, on the Great Performers at Lincoln 
Center series. Yet, that Quasthoff has had a career at all is a tribute 
to indisputable talent, almost inexplicable optimism, and sheer tenacity. 
Quasthoff was born in 1959, a period when doctors in Germany as well 
as Britain were espousing the use of a new drug for women experiencing 
discomfort during pregnancy. Generically called thalidomide, the drug 
resulted in some 5,000 babies' being born with physical deformities. 
Quasthoff was one. He stands at just four feet, and has vestigial 
arms, with malformed hands and wrists that appear to come almost directly 
from his shoulders. But, he was also born with a voice, and early 
on acquired the determination to develop it. ``Singing comes form 
the head, the vocal cords and the diaphragm,'' Quasthoff said, ``and 
mine are completely normal.'' Indeed, his broad face, thick neck, 
and ruggedly handsome features suggest the kind of body nature had 
intended his to be. Yet Quasthoff seems to have embraced life without 
regret, or so it seemed recently, when he presided jovially over breakfast 
in an Upper West Side Manhattan hotel. At the table were his older 
brother, Michael, a freelance journalist in Germany; Michael's girlfriend, 
Renata Baumgart, and a friend, Anthony Shalit, an American-born, European-based 
lawyer. Everyone was looking forward to a trip to Ellis Island later 
that morning. Though in performance Quasthoff keeps his arms discreetly 
at his sides, in conversation he underscores his talk with effusive 
hand gestures. He loves the outdoors and is an enthusiastic swimmer, 
he said. When Quasthoff was born in Hildesheim, a town of some 100,000, 
the West German government, overwhelmed with the demands of the thalidomide 
tragedy, did a poor job of placing the children afflicted in appropriate 
schools. Quasthoff was sent to a special boarding school where many 
of the children were suffering from cerebral palsy, which had to have 
had an effect on a child with the quick wit and intelligence of Quasthoff. 
``This was the only possibility my parents had at the time,'' he said. 
And, actually, he added, there were advantages. ``At home, my mother 
was all around me, constantly saying, `Let me do that for you,''' 
he said. ``At school, I was forced to live independently, an ability 
I still have.'' Today, Quasthoff lives alone, self-sufficient, in 
an apartment in Hannover, other than for ``a nice woman who comes 
every other week to clean my dirty place,'' he said. After a few years 
at the special school, the authorities realized that Quasthoff should 
be enrolled in a regular school. Once transferred, he made big advances 
in his education, until he encountered one demoralizing obstacle. 
He applied for admission to a prestigious music school in Hannover 
and impressed the voice faculty greatly. But because of a mandatory 
requirement that all voice students study the piano, he was refused 
admission. ``From the legal point of view, they were right,'' Quasthoff 
said. ``From the moral point of view, well, that is another question.'' 
Today, of course, at least in the United States, such an action would 
violate laws to protect the disabled. Paradoxically that same conservatory 
hired Quasthoff years later as a voice instructor. At the time there 
was nothing to be done. Yet, even this setback, Quasthoff believes, 
had a positive consequence. Instead, he studied with a private voice 
teacher, Charlotte Lehman, with whom he worked, starting at 13, for 
17 years, sometimes every day. He also studied music theory with his 
teacher's husband, Dr. Ernst Huber-Contwig. In a conservatory his 
training would not have been so personal and extensive, and Quasthoff 
attributes his solid technique to this thorough grounding. He also 
credits his parents with unflinching support, despite the distress, 
and, no doubt, guilt, they suffered, his mother, Brigitte, in particular. 
``Who can know what a mother feels?'' he said. ``You want to have 
a second baby, the baby is disabled, and afterwards you know it is 
because you took this medication.'' ``There was not a second in my 
life when I asked, `Mommy, why did you take this tablet?''' he said. 
``Never. People wonder how I can feel this way; but, excuse me, I 
love my mother. My parents gave me the best support imaginable. My 
father, who had a full-time job with the government, drove me every 
week 30 kilometers to my voice lesson and 30 kilometers back. But 
this is simply what he felt he had to do.'' Quasthoff made progress 
as a singer. But, believing that he could have no future as a performing 
artist, he went to law school, and hated it. So he became a popular 
radio announcer in Hannover, and in his spare time sang with a jazz 
combo. But he kept studying voice. In the mid-1980s he started entering 
competitions, and never failed to win a prize. Then, in 1988, came 
the much-publicized Munich victory. ``The next year, I could have 
had 250 concerts,'' he said. ``One day, there were over 80 calls. 
My parents went crazy; they wanted to cancel the phone.'' But Quasthoff 
sensibly learned to say no. He has never performed more than 100 concerts 
in one season, and, today, prefers to keep his schedule closer to 
60 or 70. ``I would be dead without music, I am absolutely sure,'' 
he said. ``But I am not a slave to music, or to my profession. I don't 
want to be on the stage, still singing at 70, one of those singers 
with a vibrato so wide you can throw a medicine ball through it.'' 
Significantly, for almost six years after the Munich competition, 
Quasthoff kept his radio job out of concern that the music world's 
interest in him would be short-lived. He need not have worried. Today, 
Quasthoff derives economic security and personal fulfillment from 
teaching. He holds a professorship for life at the music conservatory 
in Detmold, a 90-minute train ride from his home in Hannover. Quasthoff 
has an elegant, earthen voice with an extensive range and especially 
solid low notes. His diction, both in German and Italian, is impeccable, 
and, judging by his latest BMG recording, Schubert's ``Winterreise,'' 
he has strong interpretive ideas: there are some spacious tempos in 
this performance that enable him to spin out lyrical lines with bold 
expressivity. Reporting on Quasthoff's performance last week in Mahler's 
``Lied von der Erde,'' Richard Dyer, the critic of The Boston Globe, 
wrote: ``There is no room in his experience of life and his insight 
into art for self-pity, dramatization or exaggeration of interpretation; 
this is characterful storytelling, precise picture painting, and pure 
feeling, distilled.'' There have been milestones along the way, chances 
to perform in places and with musicians that had been fantasies when 
he was miserable in law school. Last season alone, he sang in Haydn's 
``Creation'' with the Berlin Philharmonic, conducted by Rattle, gave 
a recital at the Salzburg Festival, performed in Bach's ``St. Matthew 
Passion'' with Ozawa at the Saito-Kinen Festival in Japan, and was 
a soloist in Britten's ``War Requiem,'' also in Japan, conducted by 
Mstislav Rostropovich. ''When I was young it was impossible for my 
mother to imagine that she would ever see me onstage,'' he said. Sometimes 
she still cannot believe it. ``I've sat next to Thomas' mother at 
his important debuts in Cologne, Berlin and other cities,'' Shalit 
said. ``And she would say: `Pinch me. Am I alive? Is this happening?''' 
Quasthoff exudes a quiet confidence about the effect of his art on 
listeners. ``Perhaps it has something to do with my disability,'' 
he said, ``something in the voice which comes through that is special. 
But I do get wonderful reactions from audiences.'' When he sang ``Winterreise'' 
in Rome last year, his Italian agent cautioned him before the concert 
not to expect the kind of responses he had gotten in Germany. But 
when the last chord sounded, at the end of the haunting organ grinder's 
song, Shalit recalled, there was an eerie silence for a full minute. 
Then, the audience erupted with a seven-minute standing ovation. While 
touched by such reactions, Quasthoff is quick to poke fun at himself. 
Shalit, after hearing Quasthoff sing ``Das Lied'' in Boston, with 
the tenor Ben Heppner as the other soloist, said he felt that the 
singers would make a vocally ideal team as Iago and Otello. ``Oh sure,'' 
Quasthoff responded, amused at the idea that his Iago could intimidate 
the husky American tenor's Otello. ``I would be the smallest Iago 
ever!'' When his career started in earnest, Quasthoff assumed that 
performing opera onstage was out of the question. Two years ago, Barenboim 
offered him Rigoletto for a production in Hamburg, which Quasthoff 
turned down. Offering someone with such a disability the role of the 
hunchbacked jester might strike some as insensitive. Quasthoff did 
not take it that way at all. But for him to perform onstage in opera 
would require the right role, a sympathetic director and a sensitive 
production. ``I wouldn't want my disability too much in the foreground,'' 
he said. ``My voice and my interpretation must be in front. The production 
would have to be carefully done. But I would not say it is impossible.'' 
Indeed, it is easy to imagine, say, a stately production of Mozart's 
``Zauberfloete'' in which Quasthoff might be a moving Sarastro. He 
sings Sarastro's arias beautifully on his BMG recording. But if it 
comes, it comes; he is in no hurry. The delay he contended with before 
his career took off may have actually benefited him, Quasthoff feels: 
he kept working with his teacher, did not prematurely force himself, 
like too many young singers, into inappropriate roles, and allowed 
his voice time to settle. ``Nothing happens without a reason,'' he 
said again. QUASTHOFF'S NEW YORK SCHEDULE _ The New York Philharmonic 
will perform Berlioz's ``Roi Lear Overture,'' Martin's ``Petite'' 
Symphonie Concertante and Mahler's ``Des Knaben Wunderhorn'' Friday 
and Saturday at 8 at Avery Fisher Hall. The bass-baritone is Thomas 
Quasthoff, and the soprano is Inger Dam-Jensen. Sir Colin Davis conducts. 
Tickets are $17 to $73. Information: (212) 721-6500. _ Quasthoff will 
appear in Lincoln Center's ``Great Performers'' series Jan. 31 at 
2 p.m. at Alice Tully Hall. He will perform Schubert's ``Winterreise.'' 
The pianist will be Charles Spencer. Tickets: $$32. Information: (212) 
721-6500. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>