<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981112.0470 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In his first two seasons with the New York Islanders, Mariusz Czerkawski 
has grossly underachieved. He possesses the skills of an elite sniper, 
but hasn't showed off those skills often enough. But Thursday night, 
for the first and second times this season, Czerkawski actually had 
something to show for his efforts. He scored twice as the Islanders 
trounced the Montreal Canadiens, 4-0, before 11,470 fans at Nassau 
Coliseum. The Islanders, who have a share of the Atlantic Division 
lead, improved to 8-8. Coming into Thursday night's game, Czerkawski, 
who was a healthy scratch for the first time this season in the Islanders' 
previous game, had no goals and three assists in 14 games. Czerkawski 
scored 26 goals for the Edmonton Oilers in 1996-97, but the often-benched 
right wing managed only 12 with the Islanders last season, 7 of which 
came in the final 12 games of the season. Czerkawksi's fine finish 
to the 1997-98 season led many to believe he would return to form 
this year. Tommy Salo, the Islanders' goalie, earned his league-leading 
fourth shutout. He was outstanding in making 21 saves. Montreal goalie 
Jocelyn Thibault also made 21 stops. For a second straight season, 
the Canadiens are coping with a multitude of injuries. Thursday night, 
the Habs were without Saku Koivu (strained abdominal muscle), Scott 
Thornton (torn abdominal muscle), Vladimir Malakhov (back spasms) 
and Craig Rivet (sprained shoulder). Koivu, the best of the injured 
Montreal players, missed his seventh game. The Islanders dominated 
the first period, but scored only once. Barry Richter, a defenseman, 
backhanded the puck over Thibault's shoulder at 18 minutes 35 seconds 
to give the Islanders a 1-0 lead. It was Richter's first goal of the 
season. Ted Donato, the newest Islander, tallied his first point as 
an Islander in getting an assist. In the second period, just as the 
Islanders' need for a top-notch scorer was becoming painfully evident, 
their forgotten sniper, Czerkawski, scored twice. Czerkawski's first 
goal was a beautiful display of what talent this natural goal scorer 
possesses. With a burst of speed at center ice, he left everyone behind. 
Czerkawski, who was playing on a line with the rookie Mike Watt and 
Sergei Nemchinov, split the Canadiens' defense, skated around Igor 
Ulanov, then rifled the puck over Thibault's shoulder. Czerkawski 
scored his second goal on the power play at 8:56. He jammed the puck 
between the post and Thibault's skate with a backhander. Claude Lapointe 
set up the score with a nifty centering pass. In the opening seconds 
of the third period, Robert Reichel swatted the puck off the stick 
of the Canadiens' Patrice Brisbois and into the Montreal goal, getting 
his fourth goal of the season. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>