<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981112.2000.0375 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The latest crisis with Iraq began two weeks ago when Baghdad halted 
the activities of the UN special commission headed by Richard Butler. 
ONSCOM* had been responsible for eliminating Iraq's weapons of mass 
destruction. Only after that mission was completed, would the Security 
Council lift trade sanctions imposed on Iraq in 1990. But the Iraqi 
government says Butler's ONSCOM Inspectors were spies for the United 
States. And as Deputy Prime Minister, Tariq Aziz, said today. His 
government has run out of patience. We do not see any light at the 
end of the tunnel. There is a tunnel after the tunnel. Each time we 
cooperate and work with Butler and his group, a new tunnel is being 
built after the first one and a third one after the second. But Iraq's 
position is finding little international support even in the Arab 
world. In a moment, we will hear about a warning from eight Arab foreign 
ministers to President Saddam Hussein, but first, The World's Mary 
Louise Kelly reports on the view from the United Nations. Today's 
departure of 25 more UN relief workers from Iraq added to the sense 
that military action is likely. But that hasn't stopped last minute 
diplomatic scrambling at the United Nations. Or pleas from its Secretary 
General, Kofi Annan, for Iraq to back down. Iraq has maintained for 
a long time that it wants to see light at the end of the tunnel. I 
also want to see light at the end of the tunnel and I want to see 
the lifting of sanctions so that Iraq can regain its place among the 
community of nations. As I have said repeatedly, the only way to achieve 
this objective is for Iraq to fully cooperate with the United Nations 
Security Council. That is as far as Annan will go in threatening Iraq. 
The Security Council has yet to endorse military action and there 
are not signs that it will. But, Fred Eckhardt* spokesman for the 
UN Secretary-General says the United States is apparently willing 
to go it alone. I believe that the Americans feel that the existing 
resolutions provide a legal basis for action. And yet, some members 
of the council think that they military option is unacceptable. That 
is a debate that is going on. It is unresolved, but it looks as though 
the Americans are prepared to act without further action by the council. 
That is a change from nine months ago. The most recent time, tensions 
with Iraq reached fever pitch. The divisions within the five-member 
Security Council are roughly unchanged. With the United States and 
Britain moving toward military strikes, and Russia, France, and China 
opposing them. Insiders say the Russians in particular, but also the 
French and Chinese, feel the United States has ignored them. Sirgay 
Lavorov*, Russia's ambassador to the UN, still opposes the military 
option. Our position is that the use of force in this particular situation 
is going to be very dangerous from the point of the UN ability to 
keep its monitoring capacity in Iraq. And also from the point of view 
of the security in the Persian Gulf region and in the Middle East 
area. But Washington knows it count on one ally on the Security Council, 
Britain. Prime Minster, Tony Blair*, insists that Iraqi President 
Saddam Hussein is to blame for the new crisis. I have not doubts at 
all, either, that the international community understands that if 
diplomatic means do not work and he is not prepared to keep to his 
word. Then we cannot allow the agreement to be broken, because it 
is not simply a technical breach. It is a breach of substance. It 
has substantial consequences if he is allowed to break it. The U.S. 
military buildup in the Persian Gulf continues. Officials said today 
that five U.S. Navy warships including an aircraft carrier and a submarine 
are on their way. That is in addition to 23,400 American troops, 174 
aircraft, 21 ships and nine vessels armed with Tomahawk missiles. 
That is more than enough firepower for the United States to strike 
Iraq. But there are differing views as to whether it is enough to 
force Saddam Hussein to eliminate his weapons of mass destruction. 
For The World, I am Mary Louise Kelly reporting. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>