<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981112.2000.2027 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Across the United States, police forces have had to become more inclusive, 
hiring officers who reflect the communities they serve and protect. 
It is a strategy that seems to work when residents of primarily black 
neighborhoods, for example, see a black cop on the beat. They are 
less likely to see an enemy, more likely to see a friend. This next 
story is about another police force that is trying to integrate and 
in doing so, reach out to its community. In this case, the police 
force is the Royal Austere Constabulary. The community is Northern 
Ireland. And the force is trying not to integrate blacks and whites 
but Protestants and Catholics. In her final report from Northern Ireland, 
World Anchor, Lisa Mullins introduces us to a Catholic cop who has 
been doing his job in a Protestant world. OK, we are just coming into 
headquarters, *. The little side road that leads to the main Belfast 
offices of the Royal Austere Constabulary is almost impossible to 
find on your own. Good morning, sir. Have you any identification? 
yes, i do. Right, and who are your visitors? They, sir, are friends 
from the states from a radio station. We are going to do an interview. 
Right, that is fine, sir. Thanks very much. Thank you. The offices 
are nondescript, a maze of plain brick buildings. There is probably 
good reason that headquarters of the Northern Ireland Police Force, 
known as the RUC, are so unobtrusive. Many Catholics here in Northern 
Ireland do not consider the RUC a police force. They consider it an 
occupying force, the most visible presence of the British government, 
oppressive and unaccountable. For that reason, some Catholic groups, 
including the Irish Republican Army, made the RUC police a target 
during the troubles. The IRA has targeted Protestant officers and 
even some Catholics like Kevin Sheehy*. For one thing I am so this 
onyx here where it patrols the RUC pass office. With his ruddy face, 
massive graying curls, and the confident walk of a cop, Kevin Sheehy 
gives off the err of a defender of the peace. He has had a long career 
with the RUC. It began in 1970, just after the troubles did and before 
long, Sheehy thrust himself into the grittiest stuff. Investigating 
bombings, murders and other acts of terrorism here. He even headed 
the drug squad. These days as he approaches retirement, Sheehy works 
in the press office, but even here he is never far from the stark 
realities of the troubles. When you step down into the pressroom, 
the size of a small auditorium, the first thing you see is charts 
of names, dates, and numbers from floor to ceiling. You see, all the 
names of the people that were injured and killed during the Oman bombing. 
The names and of people up there who are sadly deceased and that insolent. 
So it must have been a horrible night to be here. Yes. It was a very 
sad night. Another board you see, the kind of people killed and injured 
since 1969. Now all of this, I imagine you want to have at your fingertips 
for the press when the press comes to call, but it also seems like 
a pretty stark reminder of what has gone on over the past 30 or so 
years. In a sense, it is a very humanizing reminder of what has happened. 
What has happened, 3,200 deaths in Northern Ireland since the troubles 
began in the late 60s. Two hundred of them have been police officers. 
Sheehy vividly recalls what happened when one of his closest friends 
on the force, a Protestant, was shot in the Catholic part of Londonderry. 
Sheehy was one of the first on the scene. When the cop's limp body 
was being taken away, local Catholics, mothers, he says even kids, 
shouted and grabbed at the body, trying to pull it off the stretcher. 
It has been hard enough in places like Londonderry, the scene of the 
Bloody Sunday shootings and countless other horrific acts of violence 
for many Catholics to accept the RUC as a legitimate police force. 
So you can imagine how hard it is for the RUC to recruit Catholics. 
As fair employment laws now require. By joining the RUC, Catholics 
like Kevin Sheehy, put not only themselves in the line of fire, but 
their families. Because once a Catholic puts on the dark green RUC 
uniform, he cannot go home again. Sadly for me, I left behind all 
of my friends, not because they were opposed to me joining the police, 
but being a police officer, it made it the interest to continue to 
trust people. I stopped living at home, I stopped going home too often. 
I wanted to divorce my family from my career. And a great sadness 
to me. I had a lovely Uncle Vincent who immigrated to Australia because 
people knew he was my Uncle and would not employ him. So things like 
that. I cannot imagine what it must have been like in the beginning. 
Especially knowing what it means in terms of putting yourself in danger. 
In terms of putting your family in danger by your fellow Catholics 
if you join the RUC. I mean what did you have to reconcile in your 
own mind to do it? I probably just like every other young recruit. 
It was all very exciting and there I sat, it was very enjoyable as 
well. I saw more in the first three months then most policemen see 
in 30 years. * Then I became hooked on it and the job comes bigger 
than you as a person. I was very lucky I had a very understanding 
and tolerant girlfriend. We were not married but have been together 
for 30 years. By the way, she is a Unitarian. Did you spend most of 
those 30 years worrying about your life. Wondering if you could walk 
in the part of Belfast where you grew up carrying a gun. I do not 
know, maybe you carry a gun now still when you are off duty. Well, 
no, I think what you are doing is you be sensible. You know that your 
path is that you cannot go to socialize. You know you cannot go to 
certain types of football matches. You know that you can only socialize 
for a limited period of time. Now, I joined a drug squad, and became 
quite famous in Northern Ireland because I appeared on TV and so the 
drug people hate me as much as terrorists do. So Belfast for me to 
socialize in Belfast is totally out. Really, you cannot even go out 
to a pub for a drink. Not in Belfast. Time and time again, young officers 
are out having a drink and some guy that recognizes one of us as a 
cop and immediately they are in danger. I can imagine it does not 
happen all the time, though. I mean Northern Ireland is not that big. 
Belfast is certainly not that big. Have you been injured in the past? 
How have you managed to? No, I just be very careful during the troubles. 
Every morning, down on my knees and check under my car and check my 
girl's cars now. I always looked out for people who might be taking 
an interest in me. So one of the mandates of the RUC right now is 
to try and recruit more Catholics, more people like you. Help me understand 
how in a situation where your partner is a Protestant so that probably 
puts her in a certain amount of difficulty in terms of explaining 
to her friends why she is dating a Catholic member of the RUC. Your 
family is Catholic. You cannot go home. You cannot spend a lot of 
holidays there. Your uncle had to leave the country because of your 
job. How do you try and tell other Catholics then, it is OK to join 
the RUC. It is OK to join what I did even though Catholics are still 
so much in the minority. As an organization, this force has never 
ever even hinted discrimination against me. I have met individuals 
who dislike me because I am Catholic, but there are other individuals 
who dislike me for other reasons as well. And those individuals have 
never ever been in the position to damage me, damage my career, or 
damage my reputation. So religion in the force for me is not an issue. 
And it has not been for 25 years of the 27 years I have been a member. 
But religion has been an issue for other Catholics. Only eight percent 
of the RUC is Catholic. Not much different from what it was 30 years 
ago. The Fair Employment Commission says the RUC should be 40 percent 
Catholic, not eight to reflect the Catholic population in Northern 
Ireland. Complicating the problem, if as people here hope, the war 
is over. Then the war machine of the RUC must cut way back. Slicing 
its force of 13,000 police in half. That means while many Protestants 
are being asked to leave, Catholics are being encouraged to take their 
place. No one knows how tough that will be to pull off more than Steven 
White, the RUC Head of Community Affairs because he says the work 
force cannot have a quota for Catholics. We have to work within the 
legislation that exists. It is legally impossible to make redundant 
almost half the force and replace them overnight with more Catholics. 
There should be an exemption in the case of the police. The Fair Employment 
Commission's Bob Cooper. In a tiebreak situation, the Catholic should 
be able to get the job. Because there is such a compelling state interest 
in having a police force which is representative of the whole community. 
It is pretty fundamental to any democratic society. And fundamental 
to keeping the peace in Northern Ireland. The Royal Austere Constabulary 
does not want to hire just Catholics, but it wants political Catholics. 
Nationalists in the ranks. Those who oppose British rule. And since 
the RUC has been synonymous with the crowd, it is now trying to remake 
its image and become your everyday community police force. It is a 
daunting task on unraveling reputations so entrenched that even the 
name Royal Austere Constabulary may have to go. So might the uniforms, 
the oath, and the logo. Heading the commission that will help create 
a new image for the RUC is former British MP, Chris Patton*. It still 
quite a challenge because policing goes right to the heart of a lot 
of things which still divide the community. And Catholic members of 
the community will be the toughest sell says the RUC's Kevin Sheehy. 
You cannot convince them now because it has not quite changed yet. 
We still have rifles and guns and so on and we still travel in the 
land rovers so they look like what we were two years ago. That is 
going to take about a 10-year process for the police to look like 
a police force anywhere else in the world. Now that requires a lot 
change in the part of individual officers, I would think. Because 
they have people like you who are sort of battle weary and even battle 
ready still who have been fighting terrorism. Who have been fighting 
the war against drugs and now are being told that they are going to 
have to work on maybe foot patrolling on a corner in east Belfast. 
Or bicycle safety, that sort of thing, that is a big change. Well, 
* have identified groups of RUC officers who won't be acceptable on 
the new police service. Anyone with my months of service who was involved 
in dealing with terrorist prisoners, investigation of terrorist murders, 
they have this belief that I polluted the loyalist parliamentarians, 
too. That I tortured prisoners and they are not going to find me acceptable 
or accept me on under any circumstances in this new place and dream 
they have. You started your career with the police force at the beginning 
of the troubles and you are ending it in what everyone hopes to be 
the end of them. Yes. It has been actually a privilege and a pleasure 
and I have been remarkably fortunate in that I have been able to see 
the troubles and the pain and suffering, the brutality, at first hand. 
And having seen it, and if everyone had seen what I have seen, they 
would not want a return to that ever again. This is officer Kevin 
Sheehy's future. When he retires next year after almost 30 years in 
the Royal Austere Constabulary, Sheehy will devote his life to these 
critters. Stray dogs and cats who have been brought to this shelter 
outside Belfast. Sheehy is an animal-lover. Always has been. At home, 
Sheehy keeps six abandoned, disabled dogs, a lame horse, and a three-legged 
goat. Kevin Sheehy has seen enough sorrow in his life, now he is looking 
forward to freeing some other souls from their troubles. Now, * what 
about you? Where are you from? Now, see, he is lovely and friendly. 
You are a good dog. Look at you. Look at this, what a beautiful temperament 
that dog. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>