<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981112.2000.0635 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
If Saddam was hoping to count on Arab support for his dispute with 
the United Nations, then today was a rough day for the Iraqi leader. 
The foreign ministers of eight Arab nations issued a statement holding 
Baghdad responsible for the consequences of its refusal to cooperate 
with weapons inspectors. The BBC's Frank Gardner* is in the city of 
Dubai in the United Arab Emirates. Frank, what kind of warning did 
Iraq get from its Arab brothers today and how forcefully did they 
give it to Iraq? Well, it was a pretty forceful warning by the foreign 
ministers of six Gulf Arab states. Mainly, Saudi Arabia, behind Kuwait, 
Cutta*, Uati* and Amman* as well as Egypt and Syria and what they 
basically said is that if this crisis degenerates into military conflict, 
then they will hold Iraq responsible. They have also called on Iraq 
to unconditionally resume its cooperation with UN weapons inspectors. 
I did not think that the Iraqi government in any way were counting 
on support from these particular governments. Possibly a little bit 
from Egypt, but where Iraq is likely to get support and I think it 
will get support, certainly at the street level, is from the poor 
Arab states. Places like Jordan, Libya, Sudan, Yemen, the Gulf States 
have never been particularly friendly with the Iraqi regime but there 
is an enormous profound sympathy on street level. Even here in the 
Gulf with the Iraqi people, if not with Saddam himself. Frank, how 
far is that sympathy that you refer to likely to go militarily? Does 
this, in any way, mean that they would join in a fight against Iraq 
or help to fight it either behind the United Nations or the United 
States? I think it is not politically expedient for any of the Gulf 
Arab rulers to lend their weight and support to a full military attack 
on Iraq. But admit that people in their own country do not want that, 
they feel very aggrieved for a brother Arab nation is suffering so 
badly under UN sanctions under the trade embargo. And most people 
in this part of the world do not actually consider that Saddam is 
actually a treat any longer. They believe that in its years ONSCOM 
must have done its job and that surely if Saddam has any weapons they 
cannot be worth much. However, I think we might see some kind of passive 
support, a kind of shrugging of the shoulders, unless it is their 
attitude that, oh, well, if Washington decides this is what has got 
to be done, we are not going to stand in the way of it. And remember 
that the Gulf States are still going through an ongoing crisis with 
their oil prices, so they have really got their own affairs to look 
after. I do not think that anybody is going to stand up to Washington 
and try to stop the U.S. I think the important thing at this time 
remains*. This is not he third crisis we have had in a year. And I 
think the important thing here is that the U.S. has basically taken 
the military decision that it is going to rely on weapons, which can 
be launched from U.S. aircraft carriers out at sea and U.S. cruise 
missile destroyers. So that it is not contingent upon the political 
will of Arab rulers to launch a devastating attack on Iraq. Well, 
why then, Frank, given all of this, are the Gulf States making any 
statement at all at this point? Is it possible that they did make 
a statement of this kind because they were under some sort of diplomatic 
pressure from the United States to make it? Quite possibly, and the 
Secretary of Defense will in turn, who has been around this area twice 
in the last month. And that is not gone unnoticed by the U.S. Arab 
allies in this part of the world. The U.S. will certainly will be 
putting very heavy pressure on the Gulf States to get some kind of 
support. What it has been trying to do is to convince them that it 
is in their interests, ultimately, to tame Saddam and to keep him 
back in his cage. That if they do not stand up and hand tough with 
him now, then they, ultimately, will be ones that suffer, not Washington. 
And I think that message has probably got home, although at street 
level. I would have to be said that people here do not consider Saddam 
to be the enemy or the threat, they consider Israel to be the danger 
and that has been why the U.S. was able to muster so little support 
from the Gulf States back in February. Frank, thank you very much 
for speaking with us. Thank you. The BBC's Frank Gardner in the city 
of Dubai in the United Arab Emirates. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>