<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981112.2000.0900 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The rebuilding effort to help Central America recover from Hurricane 
Mitch continues to pick up steam. The Rome-based World Food Program 
today announced it is boosting deliveries of rice, corn, fish, and 
oil to Honduras, Nicaragua, Guatemala, and El Salvador. Other UN agencies 
and governments around the world have also promised hundreds of millions 
of dollars in relief. Private humanitarian organizations are pitching 
in, too. The heart of U.S. volunteer aid activity is Miami, where 
as correspondent, William Markez* reports, the Latino community has 
coalesced around the cause. Corrina Maritza Yalla* is one of about 
50,000 Hondurans who live in the Miami Dade area. CORRINA MARITZA 
YALLA Until recently, I had no news about my family. But then, I heard 
that we had lost half our houses and all of our business. The floodwaters 
came right up to the house. Material loss is not so important. At 
least no lives were lost. But I was desperate not knowing anything 
for such a long time. Since the news of the tragedy, Corrina Maritza 
has volunteered her work at the organization of Dominion De Grada 
Francisco Morisan*, one of several relief centers in South Florida 
set up to help the victims in Central America. His particular one 
is in Cerrito, the heart of Miami's Latin Quarter. ORLANDO TARCA, 
RELIEF CENTER Orlando Tarca* directs the cars that drive up to the 
front of the relief center to unload their donations. A line of cars 
is backed up to the next intersection and Orlando complains that the 
police are not doing enough to help with the traffic job. Between 
50 and 60 cars arrive every hour. The sidewalk in front the Francisco 
Morisan Relief Center and nearby parking lot and their main offices 
are clogged with clothes, shoes, baby care goods, canned, and dry 
foods, and medicines which must be sorted, checked for expirations 
dates, packed and labeled. Amy Hayad* from SanPerisolua, Honduras, 
is one of about 60 volunteers working around the clock. There are 
a lot of volunteers, but there is not enough for the amount of things 
that we are receiving and although it is a lot of things that we are 
receiving, we are still lacking for the amount of people that are 
suffering over there. And that is a major problem, it is not, there 
is no limit, you know. We do not know how long it is going to be, 
three months, six months, I do not know. There are volunteers of all 
ages doing different tasks at the Center. Youlang Houlizez* is a young 
girl who was born in the U.S., but whose family still lives in Honduras. 
Since early morning, she has been keeping a close account of what 
is loaded onto the trucks. Right now, I am putting down the numbers 
of like, every box that goes up on the lifts here. So like, they, 
when they get to Honduras, they know how much boxes left from here 
and that we know how much they receive, how much boxes they received. 
Whether the aid is indeed getting to the needy is always a matter 
of concern in relief operations. But no one at the Francisco Morisan 
Center seems to very worried about that. They cannot imagine that 
at such a crucial time, people's evil nature would surface. That goes 
as well for the donors and passers-by who automatically drop a few 
dollars into collection boxes. Miami has a high concentration of Hispanics. 
Close to a million Cubans, about 250,000 Nicaraguans, an equal amount 
of Colombians, and lower numbers of immigrants from every corner in 
Latin America. These communities often bicker among each other, mostly 
over whose got more influence in the city. But this tragedy caused 
by Mitch, has broken down barriers and jealousies. WOMAN I am Cuban 
from Miami, but I do this gladly for the love of Latin people and 
of humanity. We have to unite. We should do it for any country. WOMAN2 
At this painful moment, Hispanics cannot think in terms of nationalities. 
We can unite in this time of need. I am from Nicaragua and my mother 
is in the hospital. But this is no time create any kind of barriers. 
We have to unite as Hispanics to resolve our needs. It is just as 
well that this spirit of unity prevails in Miami, the forecast is 
that this devastation in Central America will generate a tidal wave 
of immigrants. Most of them coming to the U.S. Central American leaders 
have already appealed to industrialized nations to respond with flexibility. 
For The World, this is William Markez, in Miami. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>