<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981112.2000.2997 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is The World, I am Tony Kahn. Today's status report on the Middle 
East peace process is hard to read. Last night the Israeli cabinet 
approved the Y River Land for Security Agreement, but this morning, 
Israel revealed plans to build more than 1,000 homes at a Jewish settlement 
site in Arab east Jerusalem. As the peace process stumbles along, 
many Palestinians and even Israelis have concluded that a Palestinian 
state will some day be created. Many Israelis view the prospect with 
trepidation. But as The World's Richard Myron reports, many Palestinians 
are already getting used to the symbols, if not the reality of statehood. 
Police in blue uniforms chant as they parade in Gaza under the watchful 
gaze of Palestinian leader, Yasser Arafat. They kick up clouds of 
yellow dust as they march past the stand where the dignitaries have 
gathered to watch them. The red, white, blue and black colors of the 
Palestinian flag are in evidence everywhere. Fluttering from flagpoles, 
an on the uniforms of the policemen. Before the Oslo peace process, 
the idea of a Palestine police force being in control of parts of 
the West Bank and Gaza would have been unthinkable. Until a few years 
ago. These areas were under Israeli rule and even the Palestinian 
flag was illegal. Today, the flag and other signs of Palestinian nationalism 
are facts of daily life. Modia Dulhardi* who heads a Palestinian think 
thank, believes they possess great meaning. For the fist time, Palestinians 
are reestablishing their identity, rediscovering their symbols, and 
reeducating themselves and their society about building an independent 
state-owned Palestinian soul. These tools and these symbols are not 
merely just tools or symbols. Symbols in the Arab Islamic history 
and culture are very important and very serious and you cannot underestimate 
them under any circumstances. Can I get one stamp to send to the United 
States, please? And one from here to send to Bethlehem, please? These 
are Palestinian stamps, yes. Thank you. Here in Bethlehem's main post 
office, pictures of Yasser Arafat watch over customers as they go 
about their business. Three years ago Israel controlled this post 
office and this town. Today Palestinian police patrol the streets 
and Palestinian stamps are sold across the counter here. A point of 
pride for residents like Saleem*. It is my stamp from my country, 
not another one. Because we now have Palestinian passports now, you 
know, so I feel where I deal with my government, with my country. 
Palestinians still lack a state to go with the symbols. Symbols and 
all, they mean nothing, they are not important. Siardi Buziad* is 
a member of the Palestinian Legislative Council. But if you connect 
between the symbols and between your business in the ground and what 
you are building on the ground, then they become very important. We 
need to express our presence through these symbols and to emphasize 
our right as a people as a nation and our aspirations to become a 
state. And we consider the symbols as steps on the world to watch 
for independence. Speaking before the Palestinian Legislative Council 
earlier this year, Yasser Arafat said there will be no peace, security, 
or stability without the creation of an independent Palestinian state 
with Jerusalem as its capital. The Palestinian leaders threatened 
to declare statehood in May next year if there is not progress in 
talks with Israel. But when the Israeli cabinet ratified the Y River 
Accord yesterday, it attached a condition that if the Palestinians 
do declare an independent state, Israel will annex parts of the West 
Bank. David Barryland*, the Head of Communications for Prime Minister, 
Benjamin Netanyahu says Israel will act if it has to. It must be clearly 
understood that once the Palestinians scuttle the agreement by declaring 
the state, Israel will have to protect itself from the consequences 
of such acts and it will have to take unilateral actions. But Palestinian 
legislator, Syara Busiad* believes that whatever the Israelis say 
or do, the process of statehood with all its symbols, has begun and 
is unstoppable. We should learn from the history and all it cannot 
stop the process of people becoming a nation, becoming a country, 
achieving their independence. It is a historical process. But what 
Israelis can do, they only can hinder or delay the process and put 
obstacles in front of the process, but I am pretty sure that at the 
end, there will be a Palestinian state. For many Palestinians today, 
there already is one. They have a president, a police force, which 
some call an army, and a quasi parliament. For them, all that is lacking 
are control over more of their land and international recognition. 
And those say many are the next inevitable steps. For The World, this 
is Richard Myron reporting. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>