<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981112.1600.1347 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Walk through a music store anywhere in the United States, and you 
will likely find new released of old recordings that have been restored 
with today's digital technology. Among the most recent additions, 
a compact disc collection that features previously unreleased recordings 
of popular Cuban music from the years leading up to the island's 1959 
revolution. In Miami, home to many Cubans who fled their country after 
that revolution, producers and promoters recently unveiled the compilation, 
"Cuba Es Musica", Cuba is Music. As correspondent Michael Bowman discovered, 
the songs on the new CD transports listeners back to a time when Havana 
flourished as a cultural mecca with a cutting edge music scene whose 
sounds and rhythms have never been stilled. During a trip to Havana, 
Venezuelan born music producer, Alejandro Blanco Urebay, discovered 
a treasure more precious to him than gold. In the archival rooms of 
Radio Progresso, he found performances by many of Cuba's musical legends. 
Mr. Blanco Urebay says the discs were in the storage area. He says 
they were virtually inaudible, scratchy, like the sound of eggs frying. 
Given the poor condition of the discs, Cuban authorities regarded 
them as junk. Since they came from the island's frowned upon pre-revolutionary 
era, authorities willingly gave them to Mr. Blanco Urebay. The music 
producer took the discs to Cambridge, England where a state of the 
art digital studio removed every pop, click, and scratch from the 
recordings. The final product exceeded all of Mr. Blanco Urebay's 
expectations. The result of Mr. Blanco Urebay's efforts, a four-disc 
CD compilation put out by PCM Records based in Bogota, Colombia. The 
songs include examples of the Juaracha, Bolero, Cha Cha Cha, Rumba, 
and Conga performed by dozens of artists and big band orchestras. 
Alejandro Blanco Urebay says he feels the music he helped bring back 
to life is important, both culturally and historically. He admits 
he has a fascination with pre-revolutionary Cuba but says the restoration 
project he oversaw should not be seen as a political statement aimed 
at Cuba. Mr. Blanco Urebay says the patrimony is being saved, and 
that in that regard, politics do not matter. He says what does matter 
is humanities cultural inheritance, adding the more we save, the richer 
humanity will be. Among those attending the "Cuba Es Musica" unveiling 
was Sherry Oquest, an American born middle-aged woman who says she 
finds vintage Cuban music irresistible. It gives you a good feeling, 
more than romantic nostalgia. Like when you sit there and you have 
the grandma on the rocking chair telling you stories of what it was 
like then. This is what this music feels like to me. Those wanting 
to learn more about the "Cuba Es Musica" project may consult the Internet 
Web site, www.cubamusic.com. Michael Bowman, VOA News, Miami. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>