<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981112.1600.2154 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Once again, the United States is threatening to use military might 
against a dictator. Iraq's Saddam Hussein has been told to allow U.N. 
weapons inspectors to do their jobs or face American military attacks. 
But a similar threat against the Iraqi leader earlier this year did 
not materialize, and last month, an air strike threat against Yugoslav 
President Slobodan Milosevic was averted at the last moment with a 
cease-fire agreement. What is the effect on world peace when military 
threats are made then withdrawn? Confronting dictators is the subject 
examined on today's edition of Dateline. Here's Pamela Taylor Iraq 
stopped all cooperation with the U.N. weapons arms inspectors on October 
31 saying there would be no more inspections until there's a definite 
timetable for lifting U.N. sanctions. U.S. Pentagon officials say 
plans are ready to move thousands of ground troops, more missile defenses, 
and several dozen more aircraft to the Gulf. VOA Correspondent Jim 
Randle has more from the Pentagon. Pentagon spokesman Ken Bacon says 
the new forces will give U.S. commanders more flexibility and more 
options if the president decides to bomb Iraq. Eighty four of the 
new planes are combat aircraft including a dozen F-117s that are designed 
to evade radar and strike heavily defended targets. U.S. forces and 
friends in the Gulf will also be getting more protection from Iraqi 
missiles. Three batteries of patriot missiles are already stationed 
in Kuwait, and the crews to operate them will be flown in quickly. 
Two more batteries of patriots will soon be on the way from the United 
States. The patriot missile is intended to block attacks from Iraq's 
ballistic missile forces. Meantime, the highest ranking officer in 
the 1.4 million member U.S. military, General Hugh Shelton, says there 
is no need for further warnings or ultimatums for Saddam Hussein. 
We have tried over the years to get him to comply with United Nations 
resolutions and to honor these commitments, that he does in fact pose 
a threat to an area that is a vital national interest to the United 
States, and that he poses a threat not only to his neighbors but to 
the 20,000 men and women of the United States that serve in that region. 
General Shelton spoke on American television. He says when Saddam 
Hussein lost the Gulf War, one of the conditions for peace was an 
agreement to get rid of his weapons of mass destruction. He also promised 
to allow United Nations officials to check Iraqi facilities to make 
certain the threat to his neighbors was gone. But since the end of 
October, Baghdad had blocked most actions by these U.N. weapons inspectors 
and the inspection teams have packed up to leave Iraq. General Shelton 
and other U.S. officials say no decision has been made to strike Iraq, 
at least not yet. VOA Pentagon correspondent Jim Randle. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>