<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981112.0500.2423 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Elizabeth Dole, the president of the American Red Cross, has gone 
to the scene and talked with VOA's Dave Arlington. She described the 
scene flying over the devastated area in Honduras. As we were coming 
in at night, you see a light all around, and then you'll see a big, 
whole hillside where there are no lights. That's because all the homes 
on that hillside went down. They slid right down to the bottom and 
were covered with mud and the people with them. And you see that in 
many areas. The Red Cross, as we speak, has teams with dogs out trying 
to find the bodies. But you see the suffering of people who desperately 
need purified water, who need food, who have literally nothing left, 
who don't have jobs because 70 percent or higher of the agriculture 
is washed out. I mean, it's just incredible, the twist and wreckage 
of trucks and buses lying buried in the mud, but the real horror of 
this is the twisted wreckage of people's lives. How do you help people 
when you can't reach so many of them Well, they're using helicopters 
now to get in. Now at first, there was a difficulty with that, but 
I understand that that's working out now. The helicopters are distributing 
a lot of the food. We have been assessing the pipeline because this 
morning, for example, Red Cross delivered 40,000 pounds of food, rice, 
beans, also clean up kits, hygiene kids, comfort kits, medicines. 
And obviously it's very important that we do this as efficiently and 
as effectively as possible. We don't want food delayed at the airport. 
And so we're watching that very closely in terms of making certain 
that both the receipt of the goods and the distribution is done well. 
But I understand that the helicopters are able to get back in to a 
lot of the areas now. You've spoken about how people's lives have 
been affected. Do you have any impression of how the nations themselves 
are being affected? Bridges, roads, homes, crops were demolished. 
And in the span of one week, 50 years of the Central American infrastructure 
was simply swept away. There's just going to be an enormous challenge 
for everyone. The estimated deaths right now for Central America is 
14,000, missing persons is still over 26,000. The number affected 
is about 3.6 million people. So you can imagine what a challenge this 
is going to be for a long time to come. American Red Cross president 
Elizabeth Dole speaking from Tegucigalpa with VOA's Dave Arlington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>