<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981112.0500.1825 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Hello, again. I'm Les Carpenter along with Charlene Porter, and this 
is VOA News Now. The U.N. Security Council plans to discuss the Iraq 
crisis with Secretary General Kofi Annan who returns to New York today 
cutting short his visit to North Africa. The counsel held an emergency 
meeting Wednesday and reaffirmed its demand that Iraq resume cooperation 
with U.N. arms inspectors. The United States is continuing preparations 
for possible military action to force Iraq to comply with U.N. demands. 
President Clinton has issued a forceful response to Iraq's position 
warning that the Baghdad government it faces dire consequences unless 
U.N. inspectors are allowed to return. Mr. Clinton spoke out Wednesday 
as the Pentagon stepped up preparations for the possible use of force 
against Iraqi targets. VOA News's Debra Tate reports from the White 
House. The latest standoff with Baghdad was prompted by Iraqi leader 
Saddam Hussein's October 31st decision to halt U.N. weapons inspections 
unless the U.N. sanctions against his country are lifted. On Wednesday, 
Mr. Clinton issued his most forceful response to the Iraqi move, which 
has been condemned by the U.N. Security Council. Now if Saddam Hussein 
is really serious about wanting sanctions lifted, there is an easy 
way to demonstrate that. Let UNSCOM do its job without interference, 
fully comply. In a Veteran's Day speech at Arlington National Cemetery 
outside Washington, Mr. Clinton talked of dire consequences if U.N. 
inspectors are not allowed to return to Iraq. That would open a window 
of opportunity for Iraq to rebuild its arsenal of weapons and delivery 
systems in months, I say again, in months, not years. A failure to 
respond would embolden Saddam to act recklessly signaling to him that 
he can with impunity develop these weapons of mass destruction or 
threaten his neighbors. He added that the demise of the inspection 
system would permanently damage the credibility of the United Nations 
Security Council to act as a force for promoting international peace 
and security. Although U.S. officials say the president has made no 
final decision on the use of force against Baghdad, Washington is 
stepping up preparations for such action. Another aircraft carrier 
is on its way to the Gulf, and U.S. officials say orders have been 
drafted to send hundreds more war planes and thousands of ground troops 
to the region. The chairman of the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff, General 
Henry Shelton, says any air strikes against Iraq would come without 
warning. Debra Tate, VOA News at the White House. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>