<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981112.1600.2697 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A plan to build a new city on a 900 hectare parcel of wooded land 
on the Potomac River near Washington D.C. has been the subject of 
intense debate for several years among residence of Southern Maryland. 
On one side, environmentalists said the project would create suburban 
sprawl with the construction of roads, homes, and office buildings 
on valuable open space. On the other, proponents said the new city 
would bring new economic growth to the region. As VOA's Roseanne Skirbel 
reports, the land was sold just weeks ago to the state of Maryland 
and will remain as green space, but the debate it sparked continues 
to divide neighbors. Fifty-nine year old Lavinia Rawlins spends most 
of her day in the garden. I like to go outside in the morning and 
get my vegetables going, and spraying in the fall. And when she's 
not working in her two hectare garden, the retired government medical 
clerk is fishing in nearby Madawoman Creek. I'm trying to hold on 
to that. This is the type of life that I want to live, and to lose 
that because I failed to, you know, get involved, I would really say 
I'm not doing my job in trying to hold on to what I enjoy. Lavinia 
Rawlins is involved not only in her own back yard, but in her community. 
When she learned a new city was to be built alongside the largely 
African-American neighborhood where her family has lived for generations, 
she stood up in protest. Lavinia Rawlins didn't want the forest cut 
down or the watershed damaged. She spoke out at public hearings, wrote 
letters, and handed out leaflets at community meetings. Lavinia Rawlins' 
political labors bore fruit when just weeks before a tight gubernatorial 
election, the state of Maryland purchased the property. Her sense 
of victory was not by John McWilliams, a neighbor who lives a few 
kilometers down the road. Mr. McWilliams owns the local Ford dealership 
and has watched over the last 30 years as his town of Indian Head 
has lost more business than it has gained. So when Mr. McWilliams 
was asked to serve on a citizen's committee to develop a comprehensive 
development plan for the county, he jumped at the chance. That process 
went through more than a year having to go through the planning office, 
the zoning office, all kinds of public hearings. It had to be passed 
on by all different levels of government. John McWilliams says the 
centerpiece of that plan was Chapman's Landing, a planned community 
of some 4600 homes and over 232,000 square meters of commercial space 
on the Potomac River that he says would have renewed economic life 
in the region. What he hadn't expected was the organized opposition 
from environmental groups and citizen activists like Lavinia Rawlins. 
The crowning achievement was getting our governor who I personally 
heard three times endorse the Chapman's Landing project, turn around 
and abrogate all the things that he'd said before and do what he's 
done I think is astounding. John McWilliams says when the governor 
signed the papers to authorize the state to buy Chapman's Landing, 
he effectively gutted the county's comprehensive development plan 
and he says the goals of the business community in supporting the 
proposed community went well beyond their own self interest. And I 
certainly don't see myself as being someone who is only interested 
in selling a Ford automobile or pickup truck and totally disinterested 
in the community of the mind, or the community of arts, or the community 
of environment, or the community of sports or anything else. John 
McWilliams says he is discouraged that a process he believed in could 
be torpedoed by such a narrowly focused group of people. But it is 
that same democratic process that mobilized his garden-loving neighbor, 
Lavinia Rawlins, into action to campaign against Chapman's Landing. 
I'm Roseanne Skirbel. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>