<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981112.0500.0361 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
More U.S. troops and planes are headed into the Persian Gulf region. 
That, coupled with Wednesday's withdrawal of U.N. personnel from Baghdad 
is heightening expectations of a U.S. military strike. Douglas Roberts 
has more on the latest in this seemingly endless series of crises 
in the Gulf, stemming from Iraq's refusal to resume full cooperation 
with U.N. weapons inspectors. The Clinton administration came under 
sharp domestic criticism following the last confrontation with Iraq 
that show down in February was resolved and a U.S. military attack 
averted when U.N. Secretary General Kofi Annan secured a commitment 
from Baghdad to resume full cooperation with the U.N. Weapons Commission. 
Since then, despite continued provocations from Iraq, the U.S. government 
appeared to be distancing itself from the threat of force to compel 
compliance with U.N. demands for the elimination of Iraq's weapons 
of mass destruction. Critics charge that the administration was in 
effect abandoning its policy on Iraq because they said without the 
threat of force, that policy is simply not viable. The criticism reached 
a crescendo in early August after the seemingly low key U.S. response 
to Baghdad's declaration that it would no longer allow spot inspections 
by members of the U.N. Weapons Commission. Judith Kipper, a Mid East 
analyst at the Center for Strategic and International studies here 
says Baghdad interpreted the U.S. reaction as a sign of weakness. 
I think that this, you know, the August announcement and the more 
recent one of preventing the inspectors from doing their jobs was 
inevitable. The Iraqis have been setting the agenda creating crises 
every three to six months for the last nine years or eight years. 
And I think that this is totally predictable. They keep upping the 
ante to force the United Nations Security Council to make some choices 
about maintaining the sanctions regime, and I think that the Iraqis 
have calculated that a serious military strike is unlikely. But pressure 
for military action has been building in the United States for many 
weeks. Editorials in leading American newspapers say the administration 
must be prepared to use force both to compel Iraq's compliance with 
the demands of the Security Council and to insure that Saddam Hussein's 
government is given no opportunity to rebuild its arsenal of nuclear, 
chemical, and biological weapons. Richard Haas, a top national security 
adviser in the Bush administration, is among many here who maintain 
that Washington needs no further authorization for an attack on Iraq. 
Mr. Haas argues against a limited bombing campaign of a few days or 
more. Once the dust has settled, he says, Saddam Hussein would loom 
larger than ever and there would still be no weapons inspections. 
He says the United States should mount a heavy and sustained campaign 
attacking suspected weapons sites and Iraqi military targets. There 
are indications that at least some U.S. allies in the Gulf share that 
view. There is little public backing for military action against Baghdad 
anywhere in the Arab world, but western officials say that in private, 
some of the Gulf Arab leaders say they would favor an attack as long 
as it is aimed at doing real damage to the Iraqi war machine. The 
Deputy Chief of Staff of Kuwait's armed forces, General Fahadel Amir, 
openly expressed that view in an appearance at Washington's Near East 
Institute on Wednesday. If the strikes come to really to damage Saddam 
Hussein and his arsenal, everybody going for that. If the strike is 
just a matter of showing force, then I believe there are some of the 
countries are not going to support this. General Amir acknowledged 
the widespread sympathy in the Arab world for the plight of the Iraqi 
people and said he hopes Saddam Hussein will back down in his latest 
confrontation with the U.N. in order to spare the Iraqis further suffering. 
Judith Kipper thinks Baghdad may relent once it sees that a military 
strike is imminent. If at some point in the discussions, the Iraqis 
think that a real military strike that would damage the pillars of 
power becomes more of a likelihood, then they of course have time 
to back down. For the moment, at least, there is no sign of a softening 
from the Iraqi leadership, even as the United States once again reinforces 
its military presence in the Gulf. Douglas Roberts, VOA News, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>