<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981112.1600.2316 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
While the White House says President Clinton has not made a final 
decision about using force against Iraq, some officials believe the 
threat is serious this time. Many point to the fact that the United 
Nations has ordered almost all of its staff out of the country. In 
the Balkans last month, NATO backed off its threat to use military 
force against Yugoslavia when President Slobodan Milosevic signed 
a cease-fire agreement. There are reports the Yugoslav leader has 
not fully complied with the agreement, and NATO says the threat of 
strikes is still in effect. But Robert Walker, senior adviser at the 
Rand Corporation in Washington says he doubts NATO will act. There 
continues to be a serious question about whether NATO would employ 
air power or any other kind of military force to back up this agreement. 
I note, for example, that the NATO allies only took the decision actually 
to use force after it had become apparent that there was about to 
be an agreement between the U.S. negotiator, Mr. Holbrooke, and President 
Milosevic. So we still do not know will the NATO allies act if this 
agreement doesn't work. Robert Walker was the U.S. ambassador to NATO 
from July 1993 until January this year. Retired career diplomat Helmut 
Sonenfeld now with the Brookings Institution discussed the reluctance 
to use force when confronting dictators with VOA's Judith Latham. 
Critics of U.S. foreign policy have complained that the United States, 
and particularly this administration, has not been forceful enough 
in dealing with dictators. And they point to Yugoslavia and Iraq as 
instances where U.S. words and actions are not in synch. What is your 
view? There is an autocrat or dictator involved in each of those situations, 
and these people are extremely difficult to negotiate with. But in 
the end, I tend to agree that at least recently, there has been a 
lot of threatening in the hope that the threats will be credible Milosevic 
and Serbia and Saddam Hussein and Iraq will feel sufficiently pressured 
to participate in a reasonable negotiation. And then we have in the 
last year at least tried to avoid as long as possible the actual use 
of military force. And the upshot is that unfortunately, these culprits 
can get away with things that they oughtn't to, and that does leave 
the administration open to the criticism that we're not using sufficient. 
Has U.S. reluctance actually used military force embolden, though, 
Slobodan Milosevic and Saddam Hussein? It's hard to tell what motivates 
people like Milosevic or Saddam Hussein, but I think they're testing 
to see where the lines are, and they push as far as they can. Do you 
think there's any evidence that Saddam Hussein was encouraged in his 
latest defiance of the international community by the way that the 
United States and NATO softened their stance regarding Mr. Milosevic's 
failure to fully comply with U.N. resolutions on Kosovo? Well, I assume 
he felt reasonably safe to not only ignore the resolutions but to 
brazenly flaunt them as far as cooperation with UNSCOM is concerned. 
And, of course, he has sensed also that there are differences in the 
Security Council and differences in the old coalition that was put 
together in the Bush administration at the time of the Persian Gulf 
War in 1990 and '91. In the face of this active Iraqi noncompliance 
the administration did nothing despite its tough words this past February. 
To what do you agree do you think that the back down in August contributed 
to the October defiance? I must say the presumption is very strong 
that the U.S. handling of Iraq this year particularly has further 
complicated the issue, and I think nearly postponed the day when the 
U.S. will have to use massive force. I think in February, the U.S. 
was willing enough to let Kofi Annan give it a try and hold him responsible 
for the agreement if it fails. There are reports now that the United 
States is very close to exercising a military option. There were reports 
like that in the case of Kosovo. The clock is ticking. It's a matter 
of days, not weeks whatever the phrases were. And then there is a 
slight conciliatory move by Milosevic and things are put on hold, 
and who knows. And Saddam Hussein - It's conceivable that the administration 
and the president himself feels there's no alternative but to launch 
a massive attack. I'm hesitant to make predictions because I've seen 
too many of these threats which were then somehow not executed at 
the last minute. In your opinion, what would be the wises course? 
First of all, I think we need to be much more careful about these 
threats and by acting as though they were imminent, and then nothing 
happens. I think we really should not waste credibility. Are you saying 
that threats without follow up are counterproductive? Threats that 
don't produce real concessions and then are not executed I think are 
counterproductive. I think the U.S. has to make an effort to try to 
find a settlement and it has to try to get allies - I think that when 
that effort runs out, I think the U.S. ought to resort to force and 
make very clear with Milosevic and to Saddam Hussein this is going 
to go on continuously or intermittently and will become more and more 
damaging. But I think this hasn't been a good year in terms of threats 
of force. And the only military action that we have taken has been 
in response to the bombing of the embassies in East Africa. But I 
don't think that that really did much good as far as Saddam Hussein 
and Milosevic were concerned in bringing them to a more reasonable 
posture. Helmut Sonenfeld of the Brookings Institution in Washington 
D.C. speaking with VOA's Judith Latham. Confronting dictators was 
the subject of today's Dateline. I'm Pamela Taylor. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>