<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981112.1600.0545 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Turning now to Africa, a major battle between the chief rivals in 
the Angolan conflict may be coming but not in Angola itself, in neighboring 
Congo-Kinshasa. Alex Belida has the story from the Angolan capital, 
Luwanda. Angola sent several thousand of its best trained troops to 
Congo-Kinshasa to stave off a rebel threat to embattled Congolese 
leader, Laurent Kabila. Now, along with forces from Zimbabwe, they 
have moved towards the East of the country in an offensive aimed at 
crushing the rebels. Diplomats and security analysts say Angola's 
commitment of these troops to the Congo conflict has prevented it 
from moving effectively against its own rebels, the Unita movement 
of Jonah Sabimbe. But their recent deployment in the Imbuji Mayi area 
has taken the Angolans into a part of Congo-Kinshasa that is close 
to known Unita rear bases in that country. And there are credible 
independent reports that Unita forces are also on the move in the 
same region. Sources in Luwanda familiar with Angolan military strategies 
say authorities initially hope to use their troops presence in the 
former Zaire not only to shore up Mr. Kabila, but also to wipe out 
these Unita units and support facilities. These sources say that having 
defeated Mr. Kabila's foes and driven Unita from the Congo, Angolan 
leaders then hope to enlist the backing of Zimbabwe and other Southern 
African countries in a subsequent military thrust back inside Angola 
to finish off Mr. Sabimbe. But Angolan officials now appear to be 
having doubts. Sources close to the presidential palace in Luwanda 
say officials suspect a recent lull in Unita attacks inside Angola 
itself could mean that Unita leader, Jonah Sabimbe has dispatched 
even more of its forces into the Congo, and that could mean the Unita 
leader is looking for a major confrontation. Eyewitnesses report Angola 
has begun sending even more troops to the Congo, apparently in response 
to the suspected Unita build up. But security analysts believe the 
expected confrontation could backfire against the Luwanda government. 
They also say it could possibly tip the balance of the conflict in 
Congo-Kinshasa back in favor of Mr. Kabila's rebel foes. South African 
officials have confirmed the involvement of Unita troops in the Congolese 
conflict along with other irregular forces, including remnants of 
the army of former Zairian dictator, Mabutu Sese Seiko and elements 
of the Rwandan Hutu forces responsible for Rwanda's 1994 genocide. 
It is the involvement of these groups along with foreign troops like 
those from Angola, Namibia, and Zimbabwe, as well as Rwanda and Uganda 
that has prompted South Africa's government to warn the Congolese 
conflict could spiral out of control engulfing much of the region. 
Alex Belida, VOA News, Luwanda. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>