<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981112.1600.0749 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Hurricane Mitch is but a few cold gusts somewhere in Northern Europe 
right now, but before it dissipated, it caused considerable devastation 
in Central America. So much so some are calling it the greatest catastrophe 
to strike the region this century. Bill Rodgers traveled to Nicaragua 
to report on the devastation and subsequent aid and relief efforts. 
He's back in Washington and Bill spoke with us about what he saw. 
I think the lasting impression is seeing people who had so little 
to begin with now have nothing, including having lost members of their 
family. These people lived in poverty, especially in the hard hit 
areas of Nicaragua and Northwestern Nicaragua, which was always an 
impoverished area. These people were barely scratching out a living 
to begin with, and now after the destruction of Hurricane Mitch, their 
livelihoods are gone in effect, and in addition to that, so are most 
of their families. You were down on the ground there. You talked with 
a lot of people. Are there any images that remain in your mind, any 
conversations that you had that have stuck with you? Sure, quite a 
number of them. Just to single out one, a grandmother who buried the 
last of her grandsons, sobbing that she had lost her whole family, 
her daughter, her son-in-law, her five other grandchildren. She was 
burying a 12-year-old boy which they had managed to pull out alive, 
and he died a couple of days later of internal injuries. You know, 
Bill, what you're describing could also be taking place in Kosovo, 
where there has been devastation and premature death and deprivation 
on a radical score. And yet there's something of a difference from 
those two parts of the world. We've heard from President Bush and 
from Elizabeth Dole, the head of the American Red Cross when they 
go into Nicaragua, Honduras, they say they find people's sense of 
faith somehow very strong still. In Kosovo, there's a sense of great 
despair. Did you find people in Nicaragua expressing a sense of optimism 
or at least faith different from what you're seeing elsewhere? Well, 
I asked a number of people, "Why, why do you think this happened?," 
and there was sort of a shrugging of shoulders. "Well, it's God's 
will. It's God's will. We just have to put up with it." You talked 
with aid workers as well. How do they respond to a situation like 
that? Aid workers felt desperate. I spoke with one Red Cross worker 
who had returned from the area where this massive landslide had cascaded 
down the side of a volcano there, and he could hear the voices of 
people screaming out way in the interior, apparently people still 
clinging to life on top of a tree and so on, desperately calling out 
for help, and there was nothing that could be done. They could not 
get in there because they would sink deep into the mud themselves. 
And so there was a desperation to it all last week. You were there 
a few day after the initial shock of everything that happened. How 
were people adjusting? How did they seem? Some of them were still 
very much in a state of shock. They spoke about what happened to them 
often in a monotone. Many of them with their skin scraped raw, having 
lost arms or eyes or all kinds of injuries, and many of them would 
repeat their stories, would tell their stories but almost in a mechanical 
fashion as if they still couldn't come to terms with what had happened 
to them. We don't ordinarily ask this question, Bill, but since this 
is such a human story, as a reporter, how does it affect you? I mean, 
you come from a first world country, going to a third world country 
which in its best has serious deprivations compared to the life people 
enjoy here. How do you respond? How do you adjust? It's tough, especially 
speaking with people who have lost their families, and their dissolved, 
they're just crying in front of you. It's very hard not to be unaffected 
by that pain. Yet on the other hand, they want to tell their stories 
in a sense and they want someone to pay attention, someone to put 
it on the record, and that's basically our job. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>