<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981112.0500.0643 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Top leaders from three of the world's economic powers are in Russia 
to learn how officials are handling the country's deep economic crisis. 
Canadian Foreign Minister Lloyd Axworthy and German Foreign Minister 
Joshka Fisher were discussing the crises that has shaken investor 
confidence. Japanese Prime Minister, Keizo Obuchi was already in Moscow 
for talks on the disputed Curio Islands. And they're also discussing 
the economy. We're joined now by our Moscow correspondent, Peter Heinline. 
Peter, these islands off Russia's East Coast have been in dispute 
since World War II. Are there any prospects for a breakthrough now 
some 50 years later. I think there are prospects for a breakthrough 
but it's going to be something that takes time. It's not going to 
happen at this meeting. It may not happen next year. The Russians 
have received a proposal that has been brought by Prime Minister Obuchi, 
but the Russians are now also replying to that, and they're expected 
to give Prime Minister Obuchi a reply during these sessions that are 
being held today and tomorrow. They're suggesting that the Japanese 
side take those proposals home and study them and come back next year 
with an answer. The idea is to see if they can't find one from a number 
of proposals that might be satisfactory because this is a very sticky, 
ticklish dispute that's left over from World War II. Well, there's 
the rub there, Pete, when you say it's going to take time. Well, for 
pity's sake, it's already taken more than 50 years. One wonders what 
might be the thing that would drive it over the top now. Is it going 
to be money and Russia's dire economic situation? Well, for the first 
50 years or so, there was really nothing that the two sides wanted 
to talk about. Of course, most of that time was during the Soviet 
period when the Soviet Union wouldn't countenance any discussion of 
giving up the islands. But Russia is in a different position. Russia 
needs money. Russia needs economic assistance, and Japan can provide 
it. Japan is offering a lot. It's not known exactly what, these negotiations 
are being kept under wraps, but it's a widely - it's a not very well-kept 
secret that Japan is offering a substantial amount of financial assistance 
if Russia will in effect, turn over sovereignty of those islands to 
Tokyo. Any possibility, Pete, that you've heard they might be able 
to work out some sort of compromise? One does something, one owns 
the islands, one works with them or some other way? The Japanese proposal 
is said to envision something like that in which the Russian side 
will give over sovereignty, will acknowledge that the border goes 
around the islands in such a way that they become part of Japan but 
that the Russian side would keep control over them, administer them 
for a certain period. It would be something like what happened in 
Hong Kong where after a time, the British had to return sovereignty 
to the Chinese. What about the economic situation in Tokyo? I understand 
that there are two other G-7 governors there, Mr. Axworthy from Canada 
and Mr. Fisher from Germany. Have you heard anything that they may 
be working on some sort of ironing out the problems with Russia's 
economy and getting money to them? Well, certainly, both sides are 
interested in doing what they can to help Russia, especially at this 
critical time when the Russians are facing a food shortage during 
this coming winter. The Canadians, the Canadian foreign minister, 
Mr. Axworthy, has offered to provide some aid up in the Russian north, 
in the Siberian north, which the Canadians identify with somewhat. 
They say the Scandinavians will take care of part -- That's closer 
to Scandinavia but the Canadians will take care of the part that's 
closer to Canada. So there's something of a division there. The Germans 
have always, however, been Moscow's biggest creditor, and Prime Minister 
or Chancellor Gerhard Schrader is coming here next week, and the foreign 
minister, Joshka Fisher, came to kind of pave the way and to tell 
the Russians that they can count on continued economic support from 
Bonn but only if they continue on the path of market economics. Peter 
Heinline in Moscow, thank you for joining us. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>