<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981112.0500.2664 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Two dozen dogs in Texas have died over the past month after eating 
pet food that included recently harvested local corn. The grain was 
contaminated by Aplotoxin, a poison caused by a fungus that has ruined 
much of the state's corn crop. The summer's drought and weeks of record 
high heat produced the perfect environment for the fungus, and as 
Bill Zebo reports from Dallas, it may now force thousands of Texas 
farmers out of business. This harvested corn field in McKinney, Texas 
looks like most normal fields around the state, a plowed patch of 
brown dirt with bits and pieces of dried corn stalks and leaves. But 
this year's harvest has not been normal. Farmers say they've had to 
burn or bury most of the corn or store it in grain elevators hoping 
to salvage some later. Eighty to a hundred percent of the state's 
corn crop has been infected with Aplotoxin. It's possibly the most 
naturally occurring toxic chemical known. Todd Jones is lab supervisor 
for the Texas Chemist's Office. He says Aplotoxin can be deadly to 
humans and animals in amounts as small as one half part per billion 
in milk. When the count goes higher, the milk gets dumped. Aplotoxins 
can cause tumors in liver. It really depends on the actual species. 
Aplotoxin has been a problem in Texas and other southwest states before 
because of the hot climate. The poison, one of several fungal metabolites 
called micotoxins thrives in water stressed grains and seeds struggling 
in excessive heat. As a result of high Aplotoxin count, Texas farmers 
are struggling to find a market for their corn. Some grain buyers 
are avoiding the Texas product all together, and few farmers are talking 
about the problem because they don't want to frighten the public with 
a food scare, even though that would be unfounded. No Texas corn is 
used for human consumption; it's all animal feed. McKinney farmer 
Butch Aycock, however, wants people to know what he and others face. 
He says between his low yields, a healthy bumper crop up north, the 
distracted Congress, a crippled Asian market, and now this devastating 
Aplotoxin, he's expecting to take a $300,000 hit on his crop. It's 
a total loss almost because elevators are even going. An estimated 
5,000 Texas farmers could go out of business according to the Texas 
Corn Board. Many, including Aycock, are upset with the state's method 
for measuring the toxin. The FDA and Texas Department of Agriculture 
say as few as 20 parts per billion renders the corn unusable for almost 
everything but cattle field. That's one kernel in 380 bushels. State 
chemists who have heard the complaints stand by the testing methods. 
So does the chief of Standards and Procedures at the U.S. Department 
of Agriculture, John Geyler. He's heard the squabbles, too, but says 
the tests are necessary to insure food safety. We found that you certainly 
need a large sample. It has to be a sample drawn from across the lot 
and not necessarily single sampling type of system. In addition to 
Texas, Geyler says Arkansas, Louisiana, Tennessee, Alabama, and parts 
of Missouri were also affected by Aplotoxin this year. State agricultural 
officials say thousands of farmers lost millions of dollars and several 
have already lost their farms. For a while, some of the regions' cotton 
farmers were awaiting their turn to worry. Texas is the nation's largest 
cotton producer, and cotton seed and meal used to feed a variety of 
animals are also prone to the poison fungus. Twenty-eight years ago, 
an outbreak of liver cancer in U.S. trout hatcheries was caused by 
Aplotoxin. The fish were fed contaminated cotton seed meal. But the 
cotton farmers this year may have side stepped the Aplotoxin problem 
only because the drought killed most of the crop before it ever came 
in. I'm Bill Zebo in Dallas. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>