<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981112.0500.3181 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It was 1994. She came out of nowhere. Her name was Sheryl Crow. Her 
first album won a Grammy but she detractors who said her success wasn't 
because of her songwriting or her singing, but because she had a good 
producer and a back up band. The second hit album was met with some 
similar criticisms, but album number three is now out, and VOA's Catherine 
Cole reports "The Globe Sessions" should erase all the doubts about 
Sheryl Crow's talent. Sheryl Crow fans haven't heard much from the 
award winning singer since she opted out of the recent Lilith Fair 
tour in favor of spending more time in the recording studio working 
on "The Globe Sessions." Well, it was apparently time well spent. 
This CD demonstrates that Sheryl Crow is every bit as gifted a singer, 
songwriter, musician, and producer as her peers. "My Favorite Mistake" 
kicks off Sheryl Crow's new CD, and it's probably the bluesiest track 
on the record. That song also fits the tone for most of the songs 
on "The Globe Sessions." This is an album about relationships and 
discontent, songs about love won and lost. In the song, "It Don't 
Hurt," she tells of redecorating her house as a way of erasing the 
memory of an ex-lover. First the wallpaper comes down, then the new 
carpet goes in, but in the end, more drastic measures are called for 
before she can move on. That is Sheryl Crow in "It Don't Hurt," from 
her CD, "The Globe Sessions." This album is more experimental than 
her earlier efforts, and each tune peels off into a different musical 
direction. "It Don't Hurt" is kind of Led Zeppelin meets Fleetwood 
Mac, while the haunting "River Wide" sounds like blue grass meets 
Ravi Shankar playing the Delta blues. Oddly enough, the song that 
sounds most like what we've come to think of as a Sheryl Crow is the 
only non original on the CD. It's "Mississippi," a gift from admirer, 
Bob Dylan. Bob Dylan wrote and recorded that tune but then decided 
it didn't quite fit with the rest of the songs that he put on "Time 
Out of Mind," so he called Sheryl Crow and asked if she'd like to 
record it. She jumped at the chance and even emulates his folk music 
style of guitar playing. "The Globe Sessions" combines Sheryl Crow's 
strong songwriting and singing with some surprising instrumentation. 
She handles most of it playing the guitar, keyboards, percussion, 
violins, and even a pedal steel. It's a pleasure to listen to throughout. 
I'm Catherine Cole. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>