<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981112.0500.1355 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Coming up on ten hours, 23 universal time. U.S. law prohibits the 
military from taking on a domestic police role in all but the most 
extreme circumstances. But in a gritty new film, a rash of terrorist 
attacks bring marshal law onto the streets of New York City. This 
scenario borrows heavily from the headlines and the filmmakers hope 
it generates not just controversy but debate over whether this really 
could happen. Alan Silverman has a look at "The Siege." London, Belfast, 
Beirut. We're not the first city to have to deal with terrorists. 
This is New York City. We can take it. Denzel Washington stars as 
the FBI agent in charge of the bureau's anti-terrorism squad in New 
York when a series of deadly attacks appear linked to U.S. policies 
in the Middle East. He finds himself in an uneasy alliance with a 
secretive CIA officer played by Annette Bening. I think that the fear 
is a real fear. Obviously, the World Trade Center happened. Listen, 
these guys are the real deal. Are they? How do you know? Is there 
a terrorist cell operating in Brooklyn? yes. The acts of terror escalate, 
and with the nation's largest city practically shut down by panic, 
the president orders the Army in to restore order. I'm declaring a 
state of marshal law in this city. Bruce Willis plays the Army general 
in charge. What are you talking about? The time has come for one man 
to suffer in order to save hundreds of lives. One man. What about 
two? What about six? How about public executions, huh? You're free 
to leave whenever you like, Agent Howard. As "The Siege" plays out, 
some constitutional rights are suspended. Because the suspected terrorists 
are Middle Eastern Muslim fundamentalists, the Army rounds up young 
Arabs and Arab Americans and pins them in behind barbed wire in a 
chilling echo of the internment of Japanese Americans during World 
War II. Denzel Washington believes "The Siege" will get audiences 
to question how far a government can or should go in the name of law 
and order. That's an interesting thing about the film. At one point, 
you almost say, "Bring 'em in, yeah." Then they get there and you 
go, "Oh, wait, wait, wait, wait. No, not against me, not against me." 
You know, that's - I don't want to use the word disturbing, but it 
confronts you as "What if? What would you do?" They got Frankie. What? 
My kid's in here, my kid's here someplace. He's only 13. Tony Shaloub 
portrays a senior FBI agent who is also Arab-American. Twenty years 
an American citizen, ten years in the bureau. They knocked me down. 
They took him out of my house. It's going to open up dialogue rather 
than just flat out perpetuate these stereotypes. Shaloub, whose family 
originally emigrated from Lebanon, believes his character defies Hollywood 
stereotypes. It was a consideration, and this was a chance to play 
an Arab character that's presented in a really positive light. However, 
off screen, "The Siege" is drawing fire from Arab-American activists 
who complain that it perpetuates the popular film stereotype of the 
Koran quoting muscle terrorist. Director Edward Zwick denies the accusation. 
He says he made script changes based on concerns voiced by Muslim 
and Arab-American leaders, but Zwick maintains the film, by tapping 
into genuine public concerns, spotlights the dangers of prejudice. 
As an artist, I'm not interested in movies about aliens or asteroids 
or sea monsters. I'm interested about what we really fear. And I think 
to talk about what you fear in a culture is a very important thing 
to do. You know, I believe in talking about something. There's a diffusing 
and even a cathartic element. So I don't have the fear of putting 
it out there in the dialogue. It's there in the culture. There is 
fear. There is prejudice. There is racism. Let's talk about it. And 
that was the theme of this movie. That was its intent. What if what 
they really want is for us to herd our children in the stadiums like 
we're doing and put soldiers on the street, and have Americans looking 
over their shoulders, bend the law, shred the Constitution just a 
little bit? We do that and everything that we have bled and fought 
and died for is over, and they've won. They've already won. The script 
for "The Siege" is by investigative journalist Lawrence Wright. I'm 
thrilled that this movie's going to tell people to talk about what's 
going on in the Middle East, what do we think about Arab-Americans, 
you know, how should we behave in the future. What kind of stereotypes 
do we throw on people? I think that's, you know, exactly what I'd 
like to be involved in. And the 20th Century Fox release was filmed 
on location in New York City. "The Siege" is at North American theaters 
in November. Alan Silverman for the Voice of America in Hollywood. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>