<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981228.0944 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Gale-force winds and high seas battered dozens of yachts in Australia's 
Sydney-to-Hobart race Sunday and Monday. At least two sailors were 
killed as boats capsized or sank, and rescue helicopters hoisted 50 
others to safety. Four other sailors were missing and at least one 
was presumed drowned. Rescue boats battled 90 mph (145 kph) winds 
and 35-foot (10-meter) waves to try to reach other competitors. Early 
Tuesday, the Australian Maritime Safety Authority (AMSA) said that 
one of the three missing from a life raft from the stricken vessel 
Winston Churchill may have been found. It said a person had been spotted 
in seas off the New South Wales south coast and that a helicopter 
crew was attempting to rescue the man. Five-story masts snapped like 
toothpicks and swamped boats wallowed in roiling seas Monday off Australia's 
southeast coast, about 250 miles (400 kilometers) south of Sydney. 
Emergency flares sent streams of red smoke into the air to help helicopters 
find the orange life rafts in the huge swells. The 725-mile (1,166 
kilometers) race continued despite the worst tragedy in its 54-year 
history. Of the 115 yachts that entered, 59 have been forced to seek 
shelter and several boats have been abandoned, race officials said. 
Some 27 navy ships searched Monday for stranded sailors. Two Australian 
sailors were killed when the 40-foot (12-meter) boat Business Post 
Naiad capsized 60 miles (95 kilometers) off the New South Wales town 
of Merimbula: the yacht's owner-skipper Bruce Guy and crew members 
Phil Skeggs. Guy suffered an apparent heart attack during one of the 
boat's two rollovers and Skeggs drowned when he was unable to free 
himself from his safety harness. Their bodies were left on the boat 
but attempts were being made to recover them as soon as possible, 
rescue officials said. ``Dad loved sailing,'' said Guy's son, Mark. 
``He loved the competition. He also loved a beer and a talk after 
the race. Dad simply loved life.'' British Olympic sailor Glyn Charles 
was washed off the Sword of Orion yacht Sunday night and presumed 
drowned. Robin Poke, a spokesman for the maritime safety authority, 
said it was unlikely the 33-year-old Charles could survive more than 
24 hours in the wild seas. ``He will be a superman if he makes it,'' 
Poke said. Six crew members from the Winston Churchill yacht were 
plucked from two life rafts late Monday, but three others were missing. 
Jim Lawler, Mike Bannister and John Dean, all from Sydney, were washed 
out of a liferaft early Monday, rescue officials said. ``We are unsure 
about what has happened to the other three, it appears they were washed 
out of the life raft,'' a spokesman for the maritime authority said. 
Maritime spokesman David Gray said many other sailors were injured, 
with dislocated shoulders, broken legs, cuts and bruises. ``There's 
just many, many injuries on those yachts that got knocked down. A 
lot of them rolled over _ one rolled over twice,'' Gray said. ``They 
really got pounded yesterday.'' Winston Churchill skipper Richard 
Winning, who was rescued off one of the life rafts, told of a frantic 
struggle to stay alive. ``After we got into the life raft and became 
separated from the others, the damned thing capsized twice on these 
great seas at night which is bloody frightening, let me tell you,'' 
Winning said. ``You have got four of us underneath this little canopy 
and the next thing is you are upside down. I wouldn't want to have 
spent another night out there.'' American John Campbell was rescued 
by a police helicopter after being swept overboard when his yacht 
capsized. Campbell was so crippled by hypothermia that Senior Constable 
Barry Barclay had to drop into the large swells from a helicopter 
to rescue him. ``I was definitely worried,'' Campbell said on television. 
``There was a point I didn't think I was going to survive.'' American 
maxi yacht Sayonara, the 1995 winner, was nearing the finish line 
on the Derwent River at Hobart on Tuesday morning and was expected 
to take line honors. Although its early speed had in on track for 
Morning Glory's 1996 record, fading winds meant it finished about 
five hours outside the mark. Brindabella was expected to finish second. 
Sayonara has its owner, Larry Ellison, aboard. Ellison is chief executive 
officer and founder Oracle Corp., one of the largest computer technology 
firms in the world with 8 billion US dlrs in annual revenue. Forty 
boats were holed up in the mainland port of Eden Monday, all with 
broken rigging and other signs of damage. ``Everyone has been really 
quiet Monday since we heard about the deaths,'' said Susie Graney 
from the 40-foot (12-meter) Lady Penryhn. The first recorded death 
in the race, which started in 1945, was in 1984 when a 72-year-old 
yachtsman was washed overboard and presumed drowned. In 1989, a 58-year-old 
man died from head injuries after a gale snapped his boat's mast. 
(djp) 
</TEXT>
</DOC>