<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981228.0728 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
They have a loyal following in Germany's struggling eastern states, 
help run state governments and recently polled their best showing 
yet in national elections. Now the former East German communists say 
it's time for the nation to make its peace with them _ and the regime 
that once killed citizens trying to flee to the West. Yet the reaction 
to their latest call for an amnesty for ex-communist officials shows 
how hard it is for the party to overcome its past and join the political 
mainstream, almost 10 years after the collapse of the Berlin Wall. 
Lawmakers of all stripes denounced the idea Monday, saying it mocked 
the memory of victims who were shot at the Wall or hounded by the 
Stasi, the communist secret police. An amnesty would amount to a license 
to forget the past, said Andreas Schmidt, a lawmaker from the conservative 
Christian Democrats. ``We are not done dealing with East Germany's 
history,'' said Wolfgang Gerhardt, head of the liberal Free Democrats. 
Vera Lengsfeld, a former East German dissident who divorced her husband 
after finding out he reported on her to the Stasi, accused the ex-communists 
of ``the rewriting of history.'' Shunned in the richer west, the ex-communist 
Party of Democratic Socialism regularly wins about 20 percent of the 
vote in the east. It appeals to jobless and others who feel second-class, 
including former East German officials. A key boost came in September 
national elections, where the former communists scored 5.1 percent 
of the vote, their highest since German unification in 1990. Flush 
with success, party officials began talking up an amnesty. PDS chief 
Lothar Bisky said over the weekend that the party would introduce 
a bill in parliament next year to lift court verdicts against former 
East German leaders, soldiers and judges. It would also end current 
trials of such ex-communists. Bisky, in an interview with The Associated 
Press, accused prosecutors of seeking to make up for lax treatment 
of many ex-Nazis after World War II by pursuing East German functionaries. 
In contrast, the ex-communists say, an amnesty would promote national 
healing. But Bisky stepped back from an earlier call by a PDS lawmaker 
for compensation for ex-communists who spent time behind bars after 
unification. All mainstream parties have voiced opposition to an amnesty, 
making the PDS proposal unlikely to go anywhere in parliament. But 
the party's fortunes look different on the local level. In the eastern 
state of Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, the PDS are already mainstream. 
In October, the center-left Social Democrats invited the ex-communists 
to join the state government, returning them to power for the first 
time since the fall of communism. That came despite concerns from 
some Social Democrats that helping the PDS gain credibility was a 
mistake, since they could end up competing for the same left-wing 
voters. Even a leader of the conservative Christian Democrats, Heiner 
Geissler, recently warned his party against a ``blind and fundamentalist'' 
anti-PDS course in the east, saying they had to face the real political 
landscape. But his proposal for a rapprochement has gone nowhere. 
``He stands completely alone in the party with this position,'' CDU 
chairman Wolfgang Schaeuble reiterated Monday in a newspaper interview. 
Critics, especially conservatives, charge the PDS feeds on eastern 
resentment and is merely a lobby for former pillars of an oppressive 
regime. Already, a PDS state lawmaker in Mecklenburg has admitted 
that he was a Stasi informer in his youth. Torsten Koplin, 36, told 
a Sunday newspaper he was ashamed. But he added: ``I'm facing up to 
my personal history.'' Bisky also was facing a bit of history. He 
flew to Cuba on Sunday to attend a ceremony to bury the remains of 
a German girlfriend of Latin American left-wing revolutionary Che 
Guevara. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>