<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981228.0239 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Malaysia's ousted deputy prime minister never agreed to DNA testing, 
a doctor testified Monday in Anwar Ibrahim's corruption and sexual 
misconduct trial. Yet DNA specialists for the prosecution prepared 
to testify in the sensational trial now in its eighth week. Dr. Halim 
Haji Manzar, a pathologist at General Hospital, testified that he 
was ordered to go to police headquarters on Sept. 28 to take blood 
samples from Anwar. The doctor said the blood was to be tested for 
the HIV virus, hepatitis and venereal disease. Anwar, fired by Prime 
Minister Mahathir Mohamad and then arrested Sept. 20, faces abuse 
of power charges and will be tried separately on charges of engaging 
in illegal sex acts. He has denied all the accusations against him, 
saying they were trumped up to eliminate his challenge to Mahathir's 
17-year rule. Defense attorney Gurbachan Singh asked Halim on Monday 
whether Anwar agreed to DNA testing. Halim said Anwar only agreed 
to give the blood for the testing of diseases. ``At no time did I 
ask nor did ... Anwar give his consent for DNA testing,'' Halim testified. 
Earlier, while cross-examining the prosecution witness, defense counsel 
Christopher Fernando asked Halim whether Anwar was unconscious when 
the blood was taken. But High Court Judge Augustine Paul ruled the 
question irrelevant. The defense may be leading to an argument that 
Anwar had DNA samples taken from him by police shortly after his beating, 
while he was unconscious. Fernando then asked Halim whether Anwar 
was fit or ill when he took the blood samples. ``Not 100 percent fit 
and not very seriously ill,'' Halim replied. After Anwar's arrest, 
he was beaten while in custody. The investigation into that beating 
has not yet been released by the Attorney General's office. Anwar's 
wife Azizah Ismail expressed fear shortly after his arrest that police 
might infect him with the HIV virus to prove allegations of homosexuality. 
The prosecution said it would bring in DNA experts to testify on Tuesday. 
Lead defense attorney Abdul Raja Aziz asked the judge to defer that 
testimony until the defense could fly in its own DNA experts. But 
Paul denied the request, saying it would delay the trial and that 
state DNA experts were qualified. Earlier in the day, the defense 
failed to win the judge's approval to begin impeachment proceedings 
against star prosecution witness Ummi Hafilda Ali. The defense contends 
taped conversations between Ummi and a Malaysian businessman show 
inconsistencies in her testimony. The defense team had hoped to play 
the taped recording Monday of the conversation it says would prove 
its theory that there was a conspiracy to ruin Anwar. Ummi, a 31-year-old 
advertising executive, wrote a letter to Mahathir last year alleging 
Anwar committed adultery with her sister-in-law. Much of the prosecution 
case hinges on her testimony and credibility since she also encouraged 
Azizan Abu Bakar, a former driver in Anwar's household, to write a 
declaration that Anwar repeatedly sodomized him. Singh told the court 
Monday that the defense had three additional tapes of conversations 
by Ummi and asked that impeachment proceedings against her be deferred 
until they could complete transcripts of the tapes. But Paul thwarted 
the impeachment process, saying the defense had not proven the tapes 
were unedited or that Ummi's testimony had holes in it. ``We are now 
in a situation where the defense does not have a sense of direction,'' 
he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>