<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981228.0219 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Likud legislator Benny Begin, a staunch opponent of the land-for-peace 
agreements with the Palestinians, announced Monday that he is breaking 
away from the party to run for prime minister on his own slate. Begin, 
a 57-year-old geologist, is a son of Likud's founder and first prime 
minister, Menachem Begin. He served as science minister in Prime Minister 
Benjamin Netanyahu's government, but quit the Cabinet after Netanyahu 
agreed to pull troops out of the West Bank town of Hebron in January 
1997. Begin's chances of becoming prime minister are remote. However, 
he could weaken Netanyahu in upcoming elections by splitting the hard-line 
vote and forcing a second round. In such a case, most hard-line groups 
would support Netanyahu against a centrist or liberal candidate as 
the ``lesser evil,'' said Hanan Porat, a legislator from the National 
Religious Party. Another Likud breakaway, former Finance Minister 
Dan Meridor, is also running for prime minister on a centrist slate. 
Two senior Likud figures and members of Netanyahu's Cabinet, Defense 
Minister Yitzhak Mordechai and Communications Minister Limor Livnat, 
are debating whether to leave the party. Legislators from Likud and 
the opposition Labor Party failed Monday to reach agreement on a date 
for the elections. Labor proposed May 11 and Likud suggested May 25. 
More meetings were scheduled to try to reach a compromise by Tuesday. 
President Ezer Weizman met with Netanyahu and opposition leader Ehud 
Barak to push for elections at the earliest date possible. It appeared 
unlikely that elections would be held before May 4, the date by which 
Israel and the Palestinian Authority were to have reached a permanent 
peace accord. Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat has said he would unilaterally 
declare a state in the West Bank and Gaza Strip on that day. However, 
a Palestinian negotiator suggested Monday that Arafat would not go 
through with the plan if it became apparent such a declaration would 
help Netanyahu get re-elected. The Palestinians have accused Netanyahu 
of making excuses to get out of promises he made to them in peace 
agreements. ``The political leadership will decide on the issue of 
the declaration of the Palestinian state in accordance with the national 
interests of the Palestinian people,'' Hassan Asfour, a Palestinian 
negotiator, told The Associated Press. ``We are looking for a peace 
partner, and at the moment there is no Israeli peace partner,'' Asfour 
said, referring to the Netanyahu government. The Wye River peace agreement 
under which Israel was to withdraw from 13 percent of the West Bank 
by January has been suspended since parliamentary support for Netanyahu 
collapsed last week. During a Likud Central Committee meeting Sunday 
night, Netanyahu said Labor was colluding with Arafat in order to 
topple him. Netanyahu appeared confident and cheerful, a stark contrast 
to his agonized equivocation last week. His apparent weakness had 
unleashed a week of furious speculation that he might not survive 
even as a leader of the Likud. That ended Sunday when Jerusalem Mayor 
Ehud Olmert, his chief rival, decided to bow out of the leadership 
race after failing to enlist the support of Mordechai. The only remaining 
challenger for the Likud leadership is Uzi Landau, 55, the hard-line 
chairman of the powerful Knesset Foreign Affairs and Defense Committee. 
Landau is not likely to win, and has indicated that he knows it _ 
and is hoping to use his bid to force Netanyahu to make hard-line 
pledges during the leadership campaign. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>