<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981228.1600.0338 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu is facing more competition 
in the upcoming national elections. Jerrold Kessel has more on the 
state of Israeli politics. Out, but challenging. Likud party stalwart 
Benny begin announcing he's quitting the party of prime minister Benjamin 
Netanyahu for the express purpose of ousting Mr. netanyahu by outflanking 
him from the right. There is only one alternative today, because there 
are only two possibilities. Either we are dragged down the road, either 
we are dragged down the wye river and give away more territory to 
these hoodlums, or we stand firm. Begin is moving into a crowded Arena. 
He is the sixth candidate already to announce he wants to be Israel's 
next prime minister. Others seek to upset Netanyahu from the center. 
But this move spells something extra -- a symptom of the revolution 
gripping Israeli politics. His father is the legendary right-wing 
leader who surprised by becoming the first Israeli leader to sign 
a land-for-peace deal with the Arabs, and to flourish. But when Menachem 
begin gave up Sinai to Egypt in 1979, it was widely seen as designed 
to save for Israel the West Bank, which right-wing nationalists maintain 
is the heartland of the Jewish state. By contrast, Mr. Netanyahu's 
signing of the wye accord and the subsequent hand-over of even a small 
part of the West Bank to Yasser Arafat was a Momentous turning point 
for the Israeli right, an abandonment of its commitment to the greater 
land of Israel. Some Netanyahu critics are disturbed not only by the 
shattering of ideology, but by the style of Netanyahu's rule. The 
leadership in the Likud now should represent an alternative that would 
provide clean politics, credibility and mutual respect. Benjamin Netanyahu's 
meteoric rise was seen as a revolution. He meshed groups of self-perceived 
have-nots, Israelis who felt politically, economically or socially 
dispossessed by old elites, including the elite of the Likud. Those 
who came to cheer him at Sunday night's Likud rally are forever faithful. 
But can Netanyahu still count on mass support when his critics are 
calling his performance in office flawed and his personality flawed? 
People don't always vote for the man who is good for the economy or 
for the state. They vote for somebody they identify with. He is a 
peronist leader who's talking to the people against the old elites. 
Now, will the people follow the old elites? I don't know. "liar, we're 
sick of you" signs aimed at the prime minister have sprung up along 
Israel's highways. Just one indication of how venomous this election 
campaign is likely to be. Jerrold Kessel, CNN, Jerusalem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>