<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981228.2100.0481 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The 13 House of Representatives impeachment managers led by Judiciary 
committee chairman Henry Hyde will meet tomorrow. They will plan their 
strategy for next year's first order of congressional business, the 
Senate trial. The talk of a side deal for censure and the fact that 
this case really matches nothing else in history means there is little 
or no precedent to guide them. "New York Times" congressional correspondent 
Eric schmitt has written about it. He is with us tonight. Eric, is 
this a closed proceeding or open? What will happen tomorrow? Tomorrow 
is actually a closed meeting of the 12 managers, plus Henry Hyde. 
What they're doing is the first time they've met sips the historic 
impeachment votes in the house. What they'll be doing is going over 
their strategy, examining what the senate rules are, what their roles 
will be as managers, assigning responsibilities among themselves and 
also deciding which witnesses if any to call. Have they gone outside 
the congressional loop for any kind of big hitters of counsel, some 
professional lawyers in Washington? They're going to be tapping in 
for some legal advice but they're pretty much sticking to the counselors 
they have as well as themselves. The 13 managers are all lawyers themselves. 
Three are former federal prosecutors. Three, including Mr. Hyde, have 
managed these kind of impeachment trials before with federal judges. 
So they're all an experienced group. It's kind of like fighting in 
Vietnam while the Paris peace talks were going on. No one wants to 
be the last man killed. There is talk of a censure going on so do 
they have to put blinders on and proceed as if this is going all the 
way to trial and all the way to vote? That's exactly what they have 
to do. They're obviously aware that senators are openly talking about 
the merits of a censure deal. They're having to push ahead with the 
assumption that they have to prepare as if they're going to go to 
trial, looking at witnesses and how they're going to proceed. Let's 
talk about this rehnquist book. We hope to have a quote on it for 
tomorrow night. William rehnquist, chief justice, wrote about some 
famous impeachment cases and folklore has it you can't find a copy 
of this book in Washington. Does he tip his hat anywhere in the text? 
Not really, from what we've been able to read. He is clearly skeptical 
about bringing some of these cases in. But right now there have been 
some lawmakers, including some of the managers I've spoken to, who 
are looking at this -- at the book that the chief justice has written 
to see if they can gain any clues. Right now they're proceeding on 
course as if they're going to be holding a Regular trial. How close 
to ready do you think -- at least what's the public position going 
to be tomorrow? Tomorrow is really just the first organizational meeting. 
They would not be ready to go to trial tomorrow if they had to. They've 
obviously been preparing for several weeks, even all the preparation 
that went into the house debate but they need to focus for a Couple 
more weeks to be ready for a full trial. "New York Times" congressional 
correspondent Eric schmitt kind enough to talk to us tonight. Thank 
you very much. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>