<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981228.2100.0840 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We are joined tonight by a U.S. senator who in a few days will become 
a Juror as the impeachment trial begins. Senator Robert Bennett is 
a republican from Utah. He has been kind enough to join us tonight 
from Salt Lake City. While this will not sadden the senator, we were 
unable to get a democratic senator to appear alongside. What is the 
level of lobbying going on, senator? Well, I'm not getting any lobbying 
from any official source, but as I walked up and down the streets 
during the holiday season, shoppers stopped me and they lobbied hard 
for their position one way or the other. If you had to nail down and 
typify the position of your constituents in what has been a conservative 
state, what would it be? Overwhelmingly the people who talked to me 
want a trial to proceed. They say don't make a plea bargain deal in 
advance of the trial. Most of them then say, and when the trial is 
held vote guilty. Now do you think it's unhealthy to have even talk 
out there of this White House cutting a deal that would cut short 
the trial process? Well, I think we have to proceed with the trial 
for a variety of reasons. Number one, the House of Representatives 
in their constitutional role has voted to impeach the president. And 
I think for the Senate to say, well, we're not going to pay any attention 
to that and we will proceed without even hearing what the house has 
to say and not even hold the trial the constitution calls for would 
be an act of great disrespect for the house and frankly disrespect 
for the constitutional procedure. But we do live in a world of reality. 
Conviction would require 2/3 and if as the trial goes forward, it 
becomes clear that 2/3 is not going to be there, then practical politicians 
will sit down and say well, what else can we do to make it very clear 
that in our opinion, what this president has done is reprehensible 
and needs to have some kind of official action taken? Senator, let's 
turn Devil's advocate-wise that argument on its ear. Some people are 
saying, senator, the house just went through a flawed proceeding. 
This was a tough fight and it was partisan, and it was nasty and what 
we're looking for from you and your 99 colleagues is cool heads and 
dispense with this case quickly and fairly. Well, in the first place, 
I reject the idea that this was a partisan kangaroo court railroading 
the issue through, because if it were, the president would have been 
impeached on all four of the articles that came out of the Judiciary 
committee. Admittedly, the Judiciary committee is the most partisan 
committee in the house, the most firmly divided on partisan lines. 
When it got to the full house, people thought the issue through, came 
to different conclusions, and rejected two of those articles and went 
ahead with the other two. There was thoughtful consideration given 
in the house, and I think we owe it to the house to say we must at 
least hear what you have to say. We can always decide after we've 
heard what you have to say that it's nonsense, but I don't think we 
can appropriately say we won't even listen to you. Now let's go over 
the rules for a second. Can any senator stop it at any time, call 
for a vote to end it and does it just require 51 votes to end it? 
It requires 51 votes to end the case and the motion can be made by 
any senator. Now frankly, I don't know exactly how it would be made 
because we are under the requirement that we can't talk during the 
trial. We can send questions to the chief justice and he asks them 
from the bench and presumably there would be a device where someone 
could make a motion independently of the trial itself. But it would 
require a majority vote. Senator Bob Bennett, republican of Utah joining 
us from salt lake. Thank you very much for coming on the air. My pleasure. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>