<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981228.2100.1945 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With us this evening, Tyler mathisen, financial journalist, co-anchor 
of "Business center." He joins us tonight from the CNBC studios. I 
want to start on her last point, correspondent Anne Thompson that 
is. Convenience, Internet shopping. It was the lead story on the "CBS 
evening news." Is it just the luster of a new toy people have or do 
you think even without the tactile pleasure of seeing garments in 
a store, do you think it really is around to stay? I think it is a 
transformation in the way American companies do business. It is a 
transformation in the way we are going to buy things but I think it's 
going to succeed in many ways the way it has this year on the goods 
maybe you don't need to see or touch, C.D.'s, books, sometimes electronics, 
computers. Those are the things that seem to sell best over the Internet. 
That's not to say that some of the catalog retailers aren't going 
to do well like L.L. Bean has by selling things through pages you 
don't see but that's where the real story is going forward. Americans 
and people are social creatures. They like to go out. They like to 
haggle for bargains. They like to feel and touch. Recently some trade 
publications have been saying that some E grocers have been abject 
failures. Could that be that food shopping is something people like 
to do? In Europe they go every day and they love to go to the market. 
I think most American consumers are similarly disposed. They want 
to see whether the produce looks good. But there is some commodity 
purchases you might go through a grocery store that probably will 
do well on the Internet. Today, gosh, a company called active apparel, 
they sell things, -- all they did today was announce they were going 
to have a web site and their stock shot up 830% today alone. That 
tells you that an awful lot of people are paying attention soon. Coming 
soon, Tyler mathisen.com. since you are a journalist, I will ask you 
about the big hitter analyst you've had on the air recently. What 
are the major forecasts as people look at their stock portfolios? 
What should people think about in 1999? Most of the analysts we hear 
from these days are bullish about 1999. As it turns out, the third 
year of presidential terms traditionally has been a good year for 
the stock market. What about if they're impeached? That one we haven't 
had yet so who knows about that. But traditionally these years have 
been pretty good. The economy is perking along nicely. Inflation is 
low. Corporations seem to be cutting costs. The last time we spoke 
here about three months ago, it was a very different picture. A lot 
of people were worrying about the prospect of recession. Those worries 
seem to have passed thanks to one guy and that's Alan greenspan who 
cut interest rates. Tyler mathisen, happy holidays to you. Same to 
you. Tyler mathisen, thanks. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>