<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981228.2100.0078 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
First this evening there has been another American air strike on Iraq, 
this time following a sudden reminder that tensions remain high there 
in the days following the U.S. air campaign. For the first time today, 
according to the Pentagon, Iraq fired an offensive weapon at an American 
jet flying overhead. The jet came back with company and returned fire. 
It's the kind of thing that could start up again at about any time. 
We begin with the latest tonight from the Pentagon, NBC news Pentagon 
correspondent Jim Miklaszewski. Iraqi TV broke the story today announcing 
that U.S. warplanes attacked an iraqi missile site. At the White House, 
President Clinton quickly shot back, claiming the american pilots 
fired in self-defense. Our pilots have the authority to protect themselves 
if they're threatened or attacked. They took appropriate action today 
in responding to Iraq's actions. The brief firefight took place in 
the northern no-fly zone inside Iraq. U.S. officials report that American 
warplanes were on routine patrol when the Iraqis fired two, perhaps 
three anti-aircraft missiles. The planes took evasive action and were 
not hit. Then turned to fight back. Air force F-16's firing radar 
guided missiles followed by F-15 strike ekeles dropping laser-guided 
bombs just as they did during last week's air strikes destroying the 
missile site. Today Iraq's U.N. ambassador warned Iraq would try to 
shoot the pleaps down. At any point in the future we will try to target 
those planes. In fact U.S. intelligence sources report that in the 
southern no-fly zone iraqi warplanes have been playing a potentially 
deadly game of cat and mouse, attempting to lure American fighter 
planes into firing range of anti-aircraft missiles. But why would 
Saddam Hussein pick a fight with superior American forces? Experts 
believe he's willing to take a beating militarily if it wins global 
sympathy and leads to lifting economic sanctions. The Iraqis know 
militarily they will lose but politically they are likely to gain. 
Administration officials insist they will not let Saddam Hussein drag 
the U.S. into a larger conflict and there are apparently no immediate 
plans for any large-scale retaliation. But privately officials here 
believe that another major showdown with Iraq is inevitable. Jim Miklaszewski, 
NBC news, the Pentagon. We are joined tonight by retired lieutenant 
general Bernard Trainor, 34-year military veteran, served in Korea, 
Vietnam prior to his retirement in 1985 he was deputy chief of staff, 
co-author of "the generals' war." With us tonight from our studios 
in Boston. General, isn't this dangerous in that where these boundaries 
and no-fly zones are concerned it's kind of a game of we said, they 
said? I suppose that's true, Brian. But after all, those no-fly zones 
have existed now for almost eight years and there's been no provocation 
or very little provocation until this time. So I think really this 
is a political move on the part of the Iraqis to provoke us, to test 
us, and to once again present Iraq as being the victim of American 
aggression. Is there a chance that the policy never got that high, 
that this was a Frightened or trigger happy head of one gun battery? 
I suppose there is always that possibility but I would put that in 
the range of 1%. Things don't happen in Iraq without command and control 
on the part of the iraqi high command. I think this was a move to 
provoke us. Is this the kind of thing we're going to be seeing for 
a while, these kinds of skirmishes? We continue our overflights made 
legal by the U.N. and they continue testing? Oh, surely. He's going 
to test us in every way possible to try to break down our resolve, 
to try to isolate us from the rest of the coalition that brought the 
gulf war to a conclusion, to split us from the United Nations and 
the security council, to present Iraq as being a victim and the Iraqi 
people as suffering under the hands of the Americans. He wants to 
keep this on the front burner and the best way to do that is to provoke 
us into action against him, which doesn't hurt him personally, even 
though it may destroy some of his military people and certainly with 
the sanctions hurt the Iraqi people. Note the timing of this as many 
will. This very likely will have a Senate impeachment trial under 
way as the president is perhaps forced to get angry and launch another 
multiple day air campaign against Iraq. Well, there's no question 
he would like to continue to discredit the president and is taking 
advantage of the domestic problems that we have to use that for leverage 
against the president and against the administration. So yes, he's 
going to continue to tweak our nose. Bernard Trainor, as always, offering 
your advice after something like this, thanks. We will probably be 
talking to you in the evenings and weeks ahead. General Bernard Trainor 
joining us from Boston. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>