<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981228.2100.2881 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
No single tobacco company in this country sells more cigarettes than 
Philip morris. That's why Philip Morris made news when it became the 
first and only cigarette maker to run television ads designed to discourage 
teen smoking. But there are, as you might imagine, skeptics wondering 
why they would spend millions to say in effect don't buy and whatever 
you do, don't use or inhale what we make for a living. Our report 
from NBC news correspondent Bob Kur. Have you ever tried cigarettes? 
no. The Philip Morris ads will run on shows popular among teenagers. 
"Dawson's Creek," "baywatch," "saved by the bell," even wrestling. 
What a cross body. They all deal with the same stuff. The ads are 
smooth, capture sounds and scenes familiar to teens. They feature 
the government warning that smoking causes deadly diseases. The theme 
is think, don't smoke. And Philip Morris calls the message positive 
peer communication. So you want to know why I decided not to smoke? 
Which reason would you like? I don't have to smoke to prove myself. 
My coolness is not on trial. I don't smoke because sometimes it's 
what you don't do that makes you who you are. There's been an alarming 
increase in teen smoking over the past few years and studies show 
that the Philip Morris Marlboro brand is by far the one most underaged 
smokers choose. Our campaign strategy is to convince kids that smoking 
isn't cool and they don't need to smoke to define themselves. Critics 
say the Marlboro man has a lot to do with the brand's popularity among 
teens. It's why in their view Philip Morris is not a credible messenger 
with its new anti-smoking ads. You can't spend hundreds of millions 
of dollars promoting the Marlboro cowboy, the symbol of it being cool 
to smoke and then run a series of ads and tell kids it's not. They 
simply won't believe it. We shouldn't believe they're sincere until 
they eliminate the Marlboro cowboy. For their part, Philip Morris 
executives declined to be interviewed. But the company did hand out 
a video news release about its new ads. At Philip Morris, it's important 
for us to tackle the issue of youth smoking because it's important 
to our employees, it's important to our consumers, and frankly, it's 
important to our business. No one really knows whether the new Philip 
Morris ads will do any good. But with underaged smoking now at a 19-year 
high, due in part to big tobacco's aggressive marketing, critics are 
more skeptical than hopeful. Bob Kur, NBC news, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>