<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981228.1830.0950 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
NBC news "in depth." Tonight, the cure for the common cold. Or is 
there? The search has been long, elusive, frustrating and costly. 
According to the most recent figures, Americans miss nearly 21.5 million 
work days each year because of coughs and colds. And we spend over 
$3 billion in over-the-counter remedies. But could the days of sniffling 
and sneezing soon be over? NBC's chief medical correspondent Robert 
Bazell tonight, "in depth." For Dennis meehan, a bad cold means less 
joy this holiday season, missed parties, decorations not hung and 
gifts not purchased. It puts a damper on things, most certainly. For 
many of us the holidays come with a cold. American adults catch an 
average of four colds a year, children eight. And they strike most 
often when cold weather forces us to gather indoors. So are we doomed 
to endless sniffles and sneezes? Dr. Tony fauci is in charge of infectious 
disease research for the government. When he testifies before Congress, 
after the talk of AIDS and other serious diseases, there is a familiar 
question. There's usually a comment as someone is sneezing up there 
and says, "and one other thing. When are you guys ever going to get 
a cure for the common cold?" The answer? Maybe as soon as two or three 
years. Agouron pharmaceuticals, a San Diego company, designed a new 
drug now called ag7088. In the test tube it stops the growth of so-called 
rhinoviruses. They're named for the Greek word for nose, and they're 
responsible for more than a third of colds. The company is now testing 
the drug at a facility like this, where people paid a few hundred 
dollars intentionally get infected with cold viruses. A second company 
called viropharma is testing a different anti-cold virus drug in people. 
The results for both drugs should be available by next year. But scientists 
caution that to win approval, the drugs must prove to be especially 
good. You really need to have a drug that's effective very, very rapidly 
and that's very, very safe. Another promising approach, ignore the 
viruses altogether and concentrate on the body's response the flood 
of fluids that the body sends to try to destroy the virus but leaves 
us stuffed and sneezing. We probably wouldn't even care if we had 
virus in our nose if it wasn't producing symptoms. Antihistamines 
and decongestants already relieve the symptoms somewhat. But several 
companies are looking at drugs that could shut down the symptoms altogether. 
I think this represents the new avenue, if you will, of treatment 
for the common cold. Until these cutting-edge treatments prove useful, 
the old-fashioned advice remains best. To avoid infection, wash your 
hands frequently and stay away from others with a cold. And if you 
get sick, rest and drink lots of fluids. Robert Bazell, NBC news, 
New York. Part of the problem in finding the cure is all the moving 
targets. There are 200 known viruses that cause the common cold. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>