<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981228.1830.0071 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. There has been another American air strike on Iraq. 
This time, following a sudden and violent reminder that tensions remain 
high there in the days following the U.S. air campaign. For the first 
time today, according to the Pentagon, Iraq fired an offensive weapon, 
a missile, at an American jet flying overhead. The jet came back, 
with company, and returned fire. It is the kind of thing that could 
start up again at any time. And we begin with the very latest tonight 
from NBC news Pentagon correspondent Jim Miklaszewski. jim? Brian, 
only a week after U.S. air strikes pounded Iraq, a defind saddam Hussein 
fired at U.S. war planes today. There are serious warnings that both 
say today's shootings won't be the last. Iraqi TV broke the story 
today, announcing that U.S. warplanes attacked an iraqi missile site, 
killing four soldiers. At the White House, President Clinton quickly 
shot back, claiming the american pilots fired in self-defense. Our 
pilots have the authority to protect themselves if they are threatened 
or attacked. They took appropriate action today in responding to Iraq's 
actions. The brief firefight took place in the northern no-fly zone 
inside iraq. U.S. officials report that American warplanes were on 
routine patrol when the Iraqis fired two, perhaps three, anti-aircraft 
missiles. The planes took evasive action and were not hit, then turned 
to fight back. Air force F-16's, firing radar-guided missiles, followed 
by F-15 strike eagles, dropping laser-guided bombs, as they did during 
last week's airstrikes, destroying the missile site. Today, Iraq's 
U.N. ambassador claims the American planes violated Iraq's sovereign 
territory, and warned that Iraq would try to shoot them down again. 
At any point in the future, we'll try to defend our territory by tagting 
those planes. In fact, U.S. intelligence sources report that in the 
southern no-fly zone, Iraqi warplanes have been playing a potentially 
deadly game of cat and mouse, attempting to lure American fighter 
planes into firing range of anti-aircraft missiles. But why would 
Saddam Hussein pick a fight with superior American forces? Experts 
believe he's willing to take a beating militarily if it wins global 
sympathy and leads to lifting economic sanctions. Iraqi's know militarily 
they will lose, but I think politically they are likely to gain. Administration 
officials insist they will not let Saddam Hussein drag the U.S. into 
a larger conflict. There are no immediate plans for any large-scale 
retaliation. But officials here believe that a large-scale showdown 
with Saddam Hussein is inevitable. Brian? Jim Miklaszewski for us 
at the Pentagon tonight, thanks. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>