<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981228.0058 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The words, spoken by a Mississippi congressman during the peak of 
the Reagan era, first to a gathering of the Sons of Confederate Veterans 
and later to a magazine that extols the virtues of the Confederacy, 
hardly have the sound of mainstream politics: ``I think that a lot 
of the fundamental principles that Jefferson Davis believed in are 
very important to people across the country, and they apply to the 
Republican Party,'' the congressman told Southern Partisan magazine 
in 1984. He added that the Republican agenda ``from tax policy, to 
foreign policy, from individual rights to neighborhood security are 
things that Jefferson Davis and his people believed in.'' But as the 
impeachment of President Clinton moves inexorably to the Senate, those 
statements by Trent Lott, who is now the majority leader of the Senate, 
serve as a reminder of a striking link between the impeachment of 
Clinton and the only other presidential impeachment, that of Andrew 
Johnson in 1868. Both played out on a sharp regional fault line. For 
Johnson, the divide reflected the aftermath of the Civil War. The 
issues surrounding Clinton's statements under oath about his relationship 
with Monica Lewinsky have nothing to do with North and South, but 
they come at a time when conservative Southerners hold virtually all 
of the Republican leadership positions in Congress. Southerners have 
also been the prime advocates of impeachment. The revulsion over Clinton's 
conduct crosses both sides of the aisle, and Southerners have no monopoly 
on the sentiment that if Clinton lied under oath, he should be removed 
from office. Still, these two cases of presidential impeachment, 130 
years apart, show how potent the regional political divide can be. 
Last week when New York Gov. George Pataki decried the ``horrible 
blunders'' of Republicans in Washington, he was referring, whether 
consciously or not, to a congressional delegation as dominated by 
angry Southerners as the Republicans of Johnson's era were dominated 
by vengeful Northerners intent on punishing the defeated South through 
Reconstruction. ``I've been surprised that there's been so little 
discussion of how much this whole process has been driven by the Southernization 
of the Republican Party,'' said Dan Carter, a historian at Emory University 
in Atlanta. ``Maybe it's like the purloined letter: It's sitting there 
on the shelf right in front of you, so you don't see it.'' Clinton, 
a Southerner as Johnson was, has his harshest critics in his native 
South, where the values that inflame conservatives are most intense. 
A recent New York Times/CBS News poll found support for impeachment 
higher in the South than in any other part of the country. In the 
Congress that ended with the president's impeachment, the Republicans 
in the House had a speaker, Newt Gingrich, from Georgia; a majority 
leader, Dick Armey, from Texas, and a majority whip, Tom DeLay, from 
Texas. The Senate's majority leader, Lott, won his job by defeating 
the other senator from Mississippi, Thad Cochran. When Gingrich stepped 
down, Bob Livingston of Louisiana was designated to succeed him. Impeachment's 
first and most vocal proponent has been Bob Barr of Georgia, and the 
possibility of censure was ruled out as an option by DeLay, who stepped 
into the leadership vacuum left by Gingrich's decision to step down. 
Livingston has since announced his own resignation after acknowledging 
extramarital infidelities. Independent Counsel Kenneth Starr, a Texan, 
began his tenure amid furious controversy when it was revealed that 
Sens. Jesse Helms and Lauch Faircloth of North Carolina met with David 
Sentelle of North Carolina, Helms' protege and the conservative judge 
who heads the appellate panel that appointed Starr, before Starr was 
named. The only non-Southern Republican who has played a major role 
in the House has been Henry Hyde of Illinois, the chairman of the 
House Judiciary Committee. But Hyde has always voted like a Southerner, 
with a 100 percent rating by the Christian Coalition and a legislative 
career most identified with his support of a ban on abortion. Historians, 
though, tend to see more differences than similarities between the 
two impeachments. Carter of Emory notes that Johnson's impeachment 
revolved around profound national issues, with House Republicans bitterly 
opposing the president's lenient approach to the South's re-entry 
to the Union and his relative indifference to the rights of 3.5 million 
newly emancipated blacks. ``I don't want to denigrate perjury as an 
issue,'' Carter said, ``but I think you have to keep your eye on the 
triviality of the issues here compared to those of 1868.'' Similarly, 
Eric Foner, the Columbia University historian, said both efforts grew 
out of deeply held animus toward the president with impeachment a 
vehicle for much broader divisions. But Johnson's impeachment reflected 
profound political differences, he said. Clinton has largely adopted 
many of the conservative positions of those who detest him, Foner 
said. And he noted that the regional divide now is less North and 
South and more the burgeoning suburbs of the South and West versus 
the older areas of the Northeast and Midwest. Carter said a more revealing 
comparison than Johnson's impeachment was the Democratic Party of 
the 1850s. ``It became so totally dominated by Southerners, it led 
the South to disaster,'' he said. Whether that is a risk for Republicans 
now as they fly in the face of public opinion is something many politicians 
are pondering. Many Southerners revel in the South's new-found Republicanism. 
One T-shirt shows the Confederate battle flag in the form of a Republican 
elephant with the words ``Lincoln's Worst Nightmare!'' The back features 
the flags of the Southern states and the words ``A States Rights Republican 
Majority From Dixie.'' But other Republicans worry about appearing 
too Southern. Some see the likely election of Dennis Hastert of Illinois 
as the next speaker as an attempt, at least in part, to provide more 
balance for the party. Of course, regional passions need not be faulty 
ones. Historians generally think that impeaching Johnson may have 
been a mistake, but the so-called radical Republicans were correct 
in their outrage over his policies. Today's Republicans may be proved 
right for their outrage toward Clinton as well. But whether the current 
cast of Southern Republicans can lead the GOP to long-term majority 
status is another question. ``I don't think you can sell the Republicans 
as the party of Jefferson Davis and have a viable national party,'' 
said Merle Black, an Emory political scientist. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>