<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981228.0293 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When an airplane crashes, scores of investigators descend on the site, 
searching for the ``black box'' and piecing together the wreckage 
in a grim effort to find out what went wrong. The investigators work 
for an independent government agency, the National Transportation 
Safety Board _ not for the company that built the plane, not for the 
airline that flew it and not for the Federal Aviation Administration, 
which gave its stamp of approval to both the manufacturer and the 
airline. Air safety is considered too important, and human nature 
too fragile, to allow the same people who put the plane in the air 
to lead an investigation of a disaster that might ultimately be traced 
back to their own mistakes in judgment. By contrast, when a drug harms 
patients, there is no independent agency to find out what went wrong. 
There is not even a formal program or system in place to require that 
early signs of trouble be reported. Instead, the government relies 
on doctors to report problems voluntarily, and the job of investigating 
then falls to the same people who put the drug on the market in the 
first place: the Food and Drug Administration, which approved the 
drug, and the pharmaceutical company that manufactured it. Writing 
in a recent issue of The New England Journal of Medicine, three doctors 
_ Dr. Raymond Woosley of Georgetown University, and Dr. Alastair J.J. 
Wood and Dr. C. Michael Stein of Vanderbilt University in Nashville, 
Tenn. _ compared airplane safety and drug safety, noting that adverse 
reactions to medication kill 100,000 Americans a year _ vastly more 
than the number who die in plane crashes, which are nonetheless far 
more thoroughly investigated. The doctors suggested that the United 
States needed an independent drug-safety agency, analogous to the 
transportation board, to investigate drug ``crashes,'' and a mandatory 
reporting system to catch adverse drug effects as early as possible. 
The diet drug Redux is a case in point. It was taken off the market 
in 1997, because as part of the weight-loss combination fen-phen, 
it was found to cause heart-valve damage. Millions of people had taken 
fen-phen, but because of the lack of rigorous postmarketing surveillance, 
the authors said, there was little information about how many people 
were harmed, how the damage occurred and whether other drugs might 
cause similar problems. A safety board might have been able to make 
better sense of what happened, Woosley said in a telephone interview, 
``so that when we approve the next obesity drug, we might not be creating 
the same problem again.'' Another drug, Posicor, prescribed for high 
blood pressure, was also taken off the market earlier this year only 
10 months after it was approved, because of dangerous interactions 
with more than 25 other drugs. The FDA had received reports of 400 
health problems and 24 deaths among the 200,000 Americans who had 
taken it, though it was not known whether these problems had actually 
been caused by the drug. The allergy drug Seldane was also taken off 
the market because its interactions with other drugs caused serious 
heart problems. It had been on the market for five years and had been 
used by tens of millions of people. (Late last year, it was reformulated 
and released as Allegra-D.) The proposal to turn over investigations 
of drug mishaps to a new safety board has not been well received at 
the FDA. Officials there issued a statement saying that the agency 
was best equipped to handle the job. ``FDA scientists who review marketing 
applications,'' it said in part, ``have extensive knowledge of the 
products and families of related products, which significantly benefits 
the agency's ability to monitor the products once they are on the 
market.'' But Woosley said that the article was not meant to criticize 
the agency or the drug industry. ``Our intention was not so much to 
find fault as to improve the process,'' he said, adding that a drug-safety 
board could act as an advocate for the FDA and nudge Congress to provide 
more money when needed. The board could help industry, too, he said, 
by providing information about why a drug failed, or data that could 
even help a company defend itself against unfounded liability suits. 
Adverse effects will always show up after a drug is approved, Woosley 
and his colleagues said, writing, ``It is simply not possible to identify 
all the side effects of drugs before they are marketed.'' One reason 
is that some effects may not occur frequently enough to show up in 
studies that include hundreds or even thousands of people. A problem 
that affects 1 percent of patients, for instance, may be easy to miss 
in trials, because only a handful of participants may be affected. 
But if the drug then goes to market and is taken by hundreds of thousands 
of people, 1 percent translates into thousands of cases. In addition, 
people who take a drug after it is marketed may be quite different 
from those in whom it was tested: They may have different illnesses 
and be taking medications with which the new drug has not been studied. 
The net effect is that people who take new drugs may unwittingly become 
subjects in a massive experiment. That experiment needs more careful 
monitoring, Woosley said. Pointing out that the FDA has speeded up 
its approval process, approving 92 drugs from 1996 through 1997, almost 
twice its previous rate, the authors said that better monitoring was 
needed more than ever. Woosley said more and more drugs with interaction 
problems would probably come along. ``I believe the people who make 
decisions at FDA are excellent,'' he said. ``But they shouldn't be 
put in a situation where they have to second-guess their own decisions. 
We don't do it with radiation or airplanes. We shouldn't do it with 
drugs.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>