<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981228.0283 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Global warming is often thought of as a product of the 20th century, 
the result of industrialization that has released more carbon dioxide 
and other heat-trapping gases into the atmosphere. But in fact, the 
world has often gone through warm periods throughout its history. 
Now there is new evidence to confirm one such warming spell _ more 
than 90,000 centuries ago. Researchers from the University of Rochester, 
digging in fossil beds in the Canadian Arctic that date 90 million 
years, have discovered fish and turtles and, most important, the bones 
of several champsosaurs, crocodilelike dinosaurs. The champsosaur 
needed extended periods of warmth to survive and reproduce. Judging 
by the number and size of the specimens found, the researchers, writing 
in a recent issue of Science, estimate that the ancient Arctic must 
have been downright balmy, with summer temperatures in the 80s and 
90s Fahrenheit, and winters that were rarely below freezing. The fossils 
date from a time that followed hard on the heels of a period of intense, 
worldwide volcanic activity that released huge amounts of carbon dioxide. 
Scientists had long thought that this period must have produced warmer 
temperatures, and the fossil find suggests that they are right. Perceptive 
Fish Most creatures judge distance by taking sensory readings of an 
object from different angles. The readings can be simultaneous from 
two or more sensory organs (a human's two, slightly separated, eyes, 
for example) or over time from a sole organ (like receptors on certain 
insects) as the creature moves. But biologists from Germany, France 
and Uruguay have discovered that a type of electric fish can judge 
distance with only one reading from a single group of receptors. It 
would be as if a human had great depth perception with one eye closed. 
The fish, a freshwater, nocturnal species found in Africa and South 
America, produces a weak electric field around it. Nearby objects 
distort the field, and the distortions are detected by electroreceptors 
on the fish's skin. In this way, the fish can ``see'' in complete 
darkness. The problem is: How does the fish determine if a slight 
distortion, say, is caused by an object that is close by, or by a 
larger object that is farther away? The solution, as determined by 
the researchers, is best envisioned by thinking of the distorted electric 
field as a shadow cast on the fish. In this model, an object that 
is close by produces a shadow with sharply defined edges. An object 
that is farther away might produce the same size shadow, but the edges 
will be fuzzier. The fish is able to process these two qualities _ 
size of the distortion, plus how quickly the distortion changes at 
its edges _ to determine distance. New Import: Polluted Air Air pollution 
is the latest import from Asia, say scientists at the University of 
Washington who have tracked small but measurable amounts of carbon 
monoxide and other pollutants reaching the West Coast. Ordinarily, 
air coming from Asia is cleansed as it crosses the Pacific. But the 
researchers found that pollutants can make it directly across, particularly 
when there is a stable zone of low-pressure air over the Aleutians 
coupled with a high-pressure zone over Hawaii. The two air masses 
act like rollers in a conveyor belt, pulling the dirty air across 
the ocean in as few as four days. The researchers cannot yet pinpoint 
the source of the pollution within Asia. And they note that the imports 
pale in significance compared with pollution that is Made in the U.S.A. 
But they warn that the dirty air from Asia could increase with rapid 
industrial growth in the region. Honoring Dr. Chandra The National 
Aeronautics and Space Administration is naming its new orbiting X-ray 
telescope after Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar, the University of Chicago 
astrophysicist and Nobel laureate whose work on the evolution of stars 
pointed to the existence of black holes. Chandrasekhar, who died in 
1995 at the age of 84, was known as Chandra to his colleagues. The 
Chandra Observatory is scheduled to be launched in April. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>