<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981228.0061 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Clinton's predicament with Iraq is painfully familiar to 
anyone who was ever a kid and tried the line, ``If you don't stop 
that, I'm gonna hit you.'' Ideally, the adversary backed down. But 
sometimes he didn't, leaving you no choice but to smack him. And then, 
if he was still at it, you had a problem. Either you went at him again, 
this time for keeps, or you backed down. These are games Middle Eastern 
leaders know exceedingly well, and play with devilish effect. To be 
sure, that is not how the administration is painting its predicament 
in the wake of the 70-hour bombing of Saddam Hussein's Iraq. In a 
speech to the National Press Club on Wednesday, National Security 
Adviser Samuel Berger declared outright victory: ``For Saddam, 1998 
was the year to break out of the box he has been in, the year to end 
containment. He has failed.'' Berger's logic was that the policy of 
containment rested on four pillars: economic sanctions, United Nations 
inspections, the credible use of force and ``diplomacy to sustain 
an international consensus in pursuit of this goal.'' When Saddam 
tried to shake one pillar, the inspection system, he effectively challenged 
them all. So if the United States failed to respond with force, ``there 
would be no deterrence against future aggression, because the threat 
of force would no longer be credible.'' Now, Berger declared, Saddam 
had been shown he could not shake off containment. Therefore, the 
United States had achieved its goal. Berger marshaled considerable 
arguments in support of this contention, from a list of damage done 
by the bombing, to the interesting claim that international sanctions 
have benefited the Iraqi people, because under the policy of allowing 
Iraq to trade oil directly for food, the people were getting food, 
and not tanks, for their oil. The problem with these arguments is 
that the threat of force _ like threatening to smack a pesky kid, 
or building a nuclear deterrent _ works best so long as it remains 
a threat. If used, it had best be used decisively, or the pest may 
prove far harder to dislodge the next time around. The full extent 
of damage to Saddam's military and civil structures is not clear yet, 
and it is possible that the dictator is reeling from a lucky punch, 
or that his opponents now see more clearly the advantages of an Iraq 
without Saddam Hussein. But the information from Washington and Baghdad 
suggests that Saddam is still firmly in place. As a result, two other 
pillars of the U.S. containment policy _ U.N. inspections and international 
consensus _ are wobbling. Saddam has left no doubt that he will not 
let U.N. arms inspectors back in easily, while the growing resistance 
from Russia, China and, to a lesser degree, France will make it harder 
for America to sustain the full range of economic sanctions. ``Yes, 
we showed that we were prepared to use force, but we didn't show that 
we figured out how to use force as part of a larger strategy,'' said 
Richard Haass, director of foreign policy studies at the Brookings 
Institution. ``We haven't lost sanctions, but the 70 hours of strikes 
clearly will lead to a further erosion of support for sanctions. I 
think we can keep the bulk of sanctions _ the ban on military imports, 
international control on revenues _ but increasingly Iraq can export 
whatever it wants, and import much of what it wants. ``So if we add 
it up, by using force without apparent purpose, it's hard to argue 
that the U.S. has gained over the last two weeks. We've lost ground.'' 
The mistake, Haass argued, was not in the use of force, in which the 
United States had no choice, but in trying to play it safe in choosing 
a strike limited in time and scope. The short-term advantage was that 
by defining a limited goal, in this case punishment, the administration 
was certain of success. The very fact of launching a strike achieved 
the stated goal. The disadvantage is that the United States is now 
left with a new range of problems, all of them unsavory. If Saddam 
keeps the door closed to inspectors from the U.N. Special Commission, 
or Unscom, the United States will either have to agree to a different 
and less intrusive form of inspections, or it will have to bash Saddam 
again. Weakening Unscom would almost certainly prompt Saddam to test 
his new limits. If the United States does opt for force, the attack 
is certain to be even less popular than the last one, and Washington 
will be under heavy pressure to set more ambitious goals _ a palpable 
blow to Iraq's arms program, or a firm agreement from Saddam to allow 
unconditional inspections, or his fall. Next, Russia, China and France, 
supported by much of the Third World, would be likely to generate 
pressure at the U.N. Security Council for a loosening of sanctions, 
which Washington is not likely to withstand. That, in turn, would 
tempt Saddam to seek ways of creating more friction in the crumbling 
coalition. Conversely, Saddam also narrows his options every time 
he challenges the United States. The fact that he did not immediately 
take reporters to sites of U.S. bomb attacks suggest they must have 
been effective. And if Unscom is not allowed to inspect suspicious 
sites, the United States will have more incentive, and justifcation, 
to bomb them. As Berger put it, Saddam ``has learned that what cannot 
be inspected can, in many cases, be destroyed.'' A second consequence 
of the raids is that the United States has finally begun talking openly 
of ousting Saddam. In the past, the common wisdom was that toppling 
him in the absence of a viable opposition would create a dangerous 
power vacuum in a pivotal part of the Middle East, in which ethnic 
and religious factions and neighboring states would inevitably fall 
at each others' throats. But as Saddam resists every attempt to curb 
his ambitions, overthrowing him may come to be seen as the lesser 
evil. In his address, Berger conceded that air attacks weren't enough 
to dislodge Saddam, and that the United States was not now prepared 
to pay the high cost of the required military operation d, nor of 
the occupation that would follow. Yet the fact that Saddam can foment 
discord in the Security Council and anti-U.S. sentiments in the Arab 
world has not meant that he is making new friends or allies. Quite 
the contrary: All the disputes over Saddam have been about how to 
make him behave, not about the fact of his misbehavior, and the consensus 
among experts on the Middle East is that leaders the world over, from 
Europe to the Middle East, would now breathe a deep sigh of relief 
if he were toppled. So the standoff continues, with the latest clash 
generating only more unknowns. As a dictator, Saddam probably measures 
success in terms of the confrontations he has withstood and the democratic 
leaders he has outlasted. No doubt he finds it heartening at times 
to tick off the names and fates of Western leaders who have challenged 
him: George Bush, defeated. Margaret Thatcher, defeated. Francois 
Mitterrand, dead. Bill Clinton, impeached. But the United States can 
also find solace in precedent. ``We know from experience that when 
people struggling for freedom gain the moral and material support 
of the American people, they usually prevail in the end,'' Berger 
declared. ``Change will come to Iraq, at a time and in a manner that 
we can influence but not predict.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>