<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981228.0249 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It cannot be easy to go out to dinner if you are Dr. Dean Ornish. 
As a best-selling author and developer of a program that promises 
to reverse heart disease and help people live better, he is recognized 
everywhere. But the real problem with going out to eat, if you are 
Ornish, is what to order. His diet is not just vegetarian. It also 
has no added salt, fat or oil. He allows no sugar, no caffeine. It 
is not easy finding a restaurant that can accommodate him. So, Ornish 
says, he likes to go to places like the Avenue Grill in Mill Valley, 
Calif., where the staff members know him and can prepare the food 
he requires. One evening last spring, Ornish started with Caesar salad, 
which he ordered with dressing on the side. When the salad came, he 
ignored the dressing, along with the Parmesan cheese and croutons 
that were sprinkled over the lettuce. Ornish's ``Caesar salad'' was 
simply a handful of leaves of romaine. His main course was a plate 
of steamed vegetables surrounding a scoop of plain white rice. No 
butter. No oil. No salt. Not even any spices. He drank water. No dessert. 
No coffee. It hardly seemed like enough. But Ornish, who is far from 
gaunt, explained his secret. ``I eat throughout the day,'' he said. 
``I graze.'' The diet, however, is only part of Ornish's program. 
Adherents meditate, practice yoga and exercise. Those who smoke must 
stop. And they regularly attend support groups and learn to manage 
stress, and they are encouraged to develop and nourish close personal 
relationships. It is an intense commitment, requiring at least 12 
hours a week, not counting time to find and prepare the food, according 
to Ornish's publications, and an iron will during holidays when everyone 
around is stuffing down calories as if there were no tomorrow. The 
program and Ornish's tireless quest to publicize it has turned him 
into an American phenomenon. He runs the Preventive Medicine Institute 
in Sausalito, Calif., where he directs weeklong workshops for people 
who want to start his program. In March, Ornish began endorsing a 
line of foods that he helped develop, Advantage/10, with the 10 standing 
for the 10 percent fat in his diet. Ornish's adherents swear by his 
program. Victor Karpenko, 76, from Danville, Calif., said he started 
the program more than 10 years ago. He said he lost 30 pounds and 
avoided bypass surgery, which, he says, his doctor had recommended. 
``I feel great,'' he said. Jack Brandon, 68, from San Rafael, Calif., 
said his family pushed him to start the program two years ago because 
he had had a prostate-cancer scare. Ornish hopes that his program 
will prevent prostate cancer or, if a man already has it, slow or 
reverse the tumor's growth. ``I'm in love with the program,'' Brandon 
said. ``I'm in love with Dean, I'm in love with the world.'' Ornish 
also has supporters in academic medicine. ``Fundamentally, he's right,'' 
said Dr. Lee Goldman, the chairman of the department of medicine at 
the University of California in San Francisco. ``It makes good sense 
and we have been very supportive of his program.'' Dr. William Fair, 
the director of the Prostate Diagnostic Center at Memorial Sloan-Kettering 
Cancer Center in New York, ``a believer'' in Ornish's program, started 
it after he contracted colon cancer. Now he is collaborating with 
Ornish on research into whether the diet can reverse cancer. Meanwhile, 
Fair said, ``I am into the diet, I take soy proteins and vitamin E. 
I am into exercise, into yoga.'' Dr. Claude Lenfant, director of the 
National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, observed that most Americans 
would not want to follow Ornish's strict regimen. Nor would they need 
to. However, he said, Ornish's most recent data, published this month 
in the Journal of the American Medical Association, show that ``if 
one wants to follow this regimen, then it's going to work,'' by slowing 
the buildup of plaque in coronary arteries. But others are not so 
sure. They question whether research supports Ornish's claims for 
his program and look askance at his record as an entrepreneur. They 
wonder if he can be objective about a diet program that has been a 
major source of income and that he travels so vigorously to promote. 
Ornish said that to protect his objectivity, he strives to ``make 
sure I collaborate with people who are the most respected in the field 
and whose biases are often quite different from mine.'' He adds that 
many who look askance at his financial arrangements themselves take 
money from drug companies for research and lectures while they are 
studying the companies' drugs. But Dr. Richard Pasternak, director 
of preventive cardiology at the Massachusetts General Hospital in 
Boston said that Ornish's research did not demonstrate anything, because 
his studies were flawed. ``There's virtually no science here, as far 
as I can tell,'' Pasternak said. And Dr. Paul Thompson, the director 
of preventive cardiology at Hartford Hospital in Connecticut, said, 
``There does come a point where one starts becoming more of a cheerleader 
than a scientist.'' Though Ornish's curriculum vitae lists scores 
of speeches, television presentations and the like, it notes only 
three scientific studies. One involved 10 patients studied for a month. 
Another involved 48 people, who were studied for a month. It showed, 
he reported, that people who followed his program had drops in cholesterol 
levels, less chest pain, and an improvement in heart function. The 
third study began with 53 patients who were asked to follow his program 
and 43 who were asked if they would undergo regular medical assessments 
while having their usual care. But only 28 intervention and 20 control 
patients agreed to participate. One of the intervention patients died 
while exercising, ``greatly exceeding his prescribed exercise,'' Ornish 
says. In a paper published this month in the Journal of the American 
Medical Association, Ornish and his colleagues reported that after 
five years, 20 patients remained in the treatment group and 15 in 
the control group. Those who were in his program, he and his colleagues 
reported, had slightly wider coronary arteries, on average, and had, 
he says, ``dramatically less'' chest pain than those who were left 
to their own devices. One problem with these studies, critics said, 
was their small size. As Thompson put it, ``Rarely have so many conclusions 
been based on so few subjects.'' But Ornish said the size of the study 
was less important than the precision of the results. His measurements 
of changes in the average diameter of coronary arteries were so precise, 
he said, that he could see definitive results with just a few patients. 
But some researchers said Ornish should look beyond this measurement. 
Dr. Robert Eckel, a professor of medicine at the University of Colorado 
Health Sciences Center in Denver and chairman of the nutrition committee 
of the American Heart Association noted that Ornish did not show whether 
people lived longer on his program, or had fewer heart attacks. To 
see such differences, if they exist, typically requires studies with 
thousands of patients, followed for years. Dr. Frank Sacks, a nutrition 
professor at Harvard Medical School and the Harvard School of Public 
Health, noted that Ornish found no improvements in the most narrowed 
parts of his patients' arteries _ where blood clots might be expected 
to lodge and cause heart attacks. And, he added, Ornish has no evidence 
that artery-clogging plaque melted away in patients on his program. 
Ornish said that what mattered most was blood flow to the heart as 
well as heart attacks, hospitalizations, bypass surgery, and chest 
pain. ``We found marked improvements in blood flow and two and a half 
times fewer cardiac events,'' in patients on his program, he said. 
It was almost a matter of happenstance that Ornish found his calling. 
It happened in 1972 when he dropped out of Rice University in Houston 
to recover from mononucleosis and what he describes as a suicidal 
depression. At his parents' home in Dallas, Ornish met Sri Swami Satchidananda, 
who had been teaching Ornish's older sister to meditate. Ornish asked 
the swami to help him, too. ``He said, `Become a vegetarian.''' Ornish 
recalled. ``I said, `Fine.''' He said the swami also told him to meditate, 
practice yoga, exercise and ``always do something to help someone.'' 
The swami ``gave me my program,'' Ornish said. ``I felt better. I 
felt peaceful.'' Inspired by this experience, Ornish began a small 
study several years later, when he was in medical school at Baylor 
College of Medicine in Houston. He would see if the program the swami 
taught him might reverse heart disease. He found 10 patients. Half 
chose to follow his program; the others did not. ``I taught yoga and 
led exercise sessions. I taught nutrition,'' Ornish said. And he led 
the participants in a support group where, he said, they shared what 
he describes as their pain and loneliness. Ornish said the patients 
who followed his program ended up with lower blood levels of cholesterol, 
less chest pain and improved heart function. He followed with his 
one-month study of 48 patients. He wrote a book, ``Stress, Diet &AMP; 
Your Heart'' (New American Library) that came out at the end of 1982, 
just before his 1983 scientific paper describing his findings. In 
1984 he started his Preventive Medicine Institute and began another 
study to see if he could detect an actual reversal of atherosclerosis 
in patients who followed his program. He published a paper in 1990 
while, that same year, he published a book, ``Dr. Dean Ornish's Program 
for Reversing Heart Disease'' (Ballantine Books), which climbed to 
No. 3 on The New York Times best-seller list. Now Ornish is hoping 
that he can show his program can prevent or reverse cancer. And, he 
says, he would like to see it licensed for use across the United States. 
Sacks, for one, questions whether very many patients could stick with 
the program. ``I have extreme skepticism and a lot of experience with 
patients,'' he said. Sacks said he obtained a grant from the National 
Institutes of Health to study Ornish's program, but he had great trouble 
recruiting patients. ``We pulled out all the stops. We had a superb 
staff,'' Sacks said. But few patients agreed to try the program and 
they could not stick with it, he said. Ornish agrees that his program 
is not for everyone. But, he emphasizes, the program is more than 
just a medical treatment for heart disease. He follows the diet himself, 
he says, ``because I prefer low-fat foods.'' And, Ornish adds, the 
program has other rewards. ``Probably the most important reason that 
many people smoke or eat too much is because it helps them deal with 
stress and loneliness and isolation,'' Ornish said. That is where 
stress management and support group meetings come in, he said. Patients 
adhere to his program, Ornish said, because they have gone beyond 
``fear of dying to joy in living.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>