<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981228.0467 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial on Tuesday, Dec. 29: The creation 
of the euro _ combining 11 European currencies, including the German 
mark, the French franc and the Italian lira _ is a historic milestone 
on the path toward European union. It will push European countries 
to adopt more similar economic policies while depriving individual 
nations of significant powers they now enjoy. At best, it will make 
Europe into an economic machine rivaling the United States. At worst, 
it will lead to political strife within the Continent. For a couple 
of years the change will not be completely apparent to travelers, 
for national currencies will continue to circulate. But as of Jan. 
1 those currencies will legally be units of the new euro, as dimes 
are units of dollars. By mid-2002 the old currencies will vanish into 
collectors' vaults, and only euro coins and bills will be legal tender. 
The euro is likely to join the dollar as a reserve currency held by 
central banks around the world, perhaps leading some banks to sell 
dollars and thereby reduce the value of the American currency. But 
the United States and other countries will benefit if the euro helps 
to promote economic growth on the continent. At the same time, the 
change is fraught with peril. National governments have given up substantial 
amounts of sovereignty to make the change, often without real involvement 
by voters. Only two countries chose to put the issue to popular referendums. 
It narrowly passed in France and was defeated in Denmark, which stayed 
out. Other countries approved it through parliamentary votes. By making 
it easier to do business throughout Europe, the euro is likely to 
stimulate mergers, particularly in the financial services industry. 
The euro may encourage countries to compete for industries by offering 
tax breaks, much as the states do in America. Finally, the euro will 
put pressure on governments to relax business regulations. For example, 
companies may henceforth have much greater freedom to dismiss workers. 
Such a course seemed attractive to the conservative governments that 
set Europe on the path to monetary unification, but it is less enticing 
to the more leftist governments that now hold sway in many countries. 
Even as the euro is inaugurated, fights are brewing over the European 
Union's budget, particularly its generous agricultural subsidies, 
and over the amounts paid by each country. Oskar Lafontaine, the new 
German finance minister, is worried about what he calls ``unfair tax 
competition'' from some countries in Europe, and wants European rules 
setting minimum tax levels. That might reduce the risk of Germany's 
losing companies to Ireland, but it would also lessen Europe's international 
competitiveness. The new European central bank, legally independent 
from national governments, faces the difficult job of setting a single 
monetary policy for a diverse continent that could be seeing strong 
growth in one region while another is weak. The challenge for Europe 
will be greatest in the next cyclical downturn. There is a risk that 
one country or another could elect a government that blames its economic 
problems on European central bank policies over which it has no control, 
and threatens to withdraw from the currency union unless changes are 
made. The rules Europe has adopted say that no country can withdraw 
from the union once it enters, so such a threat would create a crisis. 
There is no risk of that in the immediate future. With luck, the arrival 
of the euro will improve European economies, enhance European cooperation 
and promote world growth. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>