<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981228.0347 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
From the neck down, Otto Schily, Germany's interior minister, is very 
much the bourgeois gentleman: pocket watch, tailored suit, elegant 
cuff links, somber tie. But look up at his mischievous eyes and unruly 
hair, and some of the contradictions of the man and his country begin 
to come into focus. Schily, who represents law and order in this most 
ordered of nations, is an iconoclast: a defender of the revolutionary 
Red Army Faction during the 1960s, celebrated lawyer in the 1970s, 
founder of the environmentalist Green Party in the 1980s, tough Social 
Democrat in the 1990s and bon vivant with a love for Tuscany throughout. 
Germany is changing. In place of the monolithic figure of Helmut Kohl, 
with his taste for sausages and his unswerving dedication to Europe 
and the trans-Atlantic alliance, a new class of Germans has come to 
power. They are more checkered in their pasts, more nuanced in their 
allegiances _ and more inclined, like Schily, to love olive oil than 
wurst. Germany is no longer a prisoner of the Cold War. It is ever 
less a prisoner of its past. It is learning, fitfully, to relax and 
is now full of people like Schily, who have walked a long German road 
to emancipation. To allies, including the United States, this change 
is disorienting. It involves a departure from the scene of the predictable 
German _ solid, solemn, unsurprising. But to Schily and his colleagues 
it is a sign of democratic maturity. At the age of 66, the interior 
minister is the doyen of the new ``Red-Green'' government of Chancellor 
Gerhard Schroeder. He is also, in his long journey from protest to 
power, a typical figure. Like the chancellor, a former Marxist, and 
like Foreign Minister Joschka Fischer, a revolutionary agitator in 
the 1960s, Schily once flirted with the far left. ``I am not of the 
1960s generation,'' Schily said. ``I had a steady job as a lawyer 
and a family by then _ but I was drawn in. And I think that even if 
1968 was a failure in the end, it contributed decisively to the birth 
of civil society in Germany.'' And what, then, was the Germany that 
predated this civil society? ``For a long time after the war,'' he 
said, ``we had the old German system of being subject to authority. 
Germany in the 1960s was a repressive society. It took a long time 
even to talk of certain things, and perhaps it is only recently that 
we have achieved a true democratic opening and overcome our fear of 
change.'' As interior minister, Schily will oversee one of the decisive 
changes proposed by Schroeder's government: the scrapping of old immigration 
laws based principally on German stock or bloodlines and the introduction 
of legislation to enable many of the 7.4 million foreigners to become 
citizens. That number now includes many children born to immigrants 
in Germany. This shift, with its implicit acknowledgment of the country's 
multi-ethnic makeup, seems likely, over time, to alter Germany's self-image. 
For Schily, it is a step ``of historic dimensions.'' But he says this 
with a relaxed smile, one that says change is in the nature of democracy 
_ a normal thing, part of the ebb and flow of politics. He is among 
the many Germans who have followed their country from Allied tutelage 
to independent statehood, to the first stirrings of unrest, to Willy 
Brandt's memorable call in 1972 for ``risking more democracy,'' to 
prosperity, unification and, at last, the freedom that lies in the 
conviction that the country has earned the right to chart its own 
course. But that freedom, for the interior minister, clearly comes 
with a keen sense of responsibility. Schily is no starry-eyed reformer. 
Listen to him on the subject of admitting new immigrants: ``We have 
reached the limits, the point where we have to say we cannot bear 
any more. The majority of Germans agree with me: Zero immigration 
for now. The burden has become too great. I would not even dare publish 
the costs that stem from immigration. The Greens say we should take 
200,000 more immigrants a year. But I say to them, show me the village, 
the town, the region that would take them. There are no such places.'' 
In other words, as Germany sets about offering citizenship to foreigners 
already inside the country _ who amount to about 9 percent of the 
population and constitute by far the largest number of foreigners 
in a European state _ it is not about to open its doors to others. 
Germany, for Schily, must be tolerant but not permissive. The interior 
minister has long walked such fine lines, formed by the tension between 
impulse and rigor. Born into a distinguished family _ his father was 
a prominent industrialist and another forebear, Victor Schily, was 
a close friend of Karl Marx _ he spent his adolescence during the 
war in Bavaria. The family opposed Hitler, and Schily recalled the 
Nazis storming into the family home in 1941 and ripping up books. 
After the war he moved to West Berlin, studied law and set up practice 
in a conservative law firm. Here, in the rarefied atmosphere of a 
city that became a magnet to artists and intellectuals, he found that 
the idealistic view of the United States he had formed during the 
war was progressively eroded by Vietnam and by American support for 
what he called ``the shah's police state in Iran.'' On June 2, 1967, 
he went to a demonstration in Berlin against the violation of human 
rights in Iran. A student, Benno Ohnesorg, was shot dead by police. 
Shocked and outraged, Schily, then 34, decided to represent the student's 
family. ``At that time,'' he said, ``an egg on the boot of a policeman 
was officially called a breach of the peace. I felt very critical 
of the whole political situation, and compelled to make a stand.'' 
Notoriety came from the Ohnesorg case. As the Red Army Faction extended 
its insurrectionary operations, Schily emerged as a natural choice 
to defend the likes of Andreas Baader and Gudrun Ensslin. He did so 
with energy and determination, but unlike other defense lawyers _ 
including Klaus Croissant and Hans-Christian Strobele _ he was never 
charged with involvement in the terrorist movement and never arrested. 
``I could have refused,'' Schily said, ``but I still believe that 
people like Ensslin deserved a defense. That was an antiliberal time 
and the atmosphere was very tense. We were under enormous psychological 
pressure, and I still say that these court proceedings had no value 
from the point of view of the rule of law. How can you work in court 
and be made to feel accused yourself?'' Peter Glotz, dean of Erfurt 
University, who has long known the interior minister, said: ``Schily 
accepted the cases through a basic conviction that everyone deserves 
a lawyer. He was always a radical liberal, never a supporter of terrorist 
methods or aims. He also enjoyed being in the public eye, as he does 
now. But principle drove him.'' So, apparently, did ambition. A latecomer 
to politics, Schily worked with Petra Kelly as a founding member of 
the Greens in the late 1970s and was one of the party's three spokesmen 
when it first entered the Legislature in 1983. He had been moved to 
help forge the party by an interest in ecology and a desire to open 
up Germany's relatively closed political system, rather than by strong 
support for the pacifism espoused by the Greens. ``We opened up a 
closed shop,'' he said, ``and that in itself was a critical catharsis 
for Germany.'' But the sharply dressed lawyer, dealing in the real 
world with a strong streak of pragmatism, was always something of 
an anomaly among the tree-hugging Greens. Schily became impatient 
with the party's egalitarianism _ ``Promis'' (prominent people) were 
always suspect _ and with the refusal of the party's ``Fundis'' (fundamentalists) 
to confront the realities of the fight for political power. He finally 
abandoned the Greens in 1989 and joined the Social Democrats. Today, 
his relations with the Greens are uneasy, strained by his hard-nosed 
statements on further immigration. ``How can you be liberal to foreigners 
who are here, and so hard to those who want to come?'' said Cem Ozdemir, 
a Green legislator of Turkish descent. ``Mr. Schily's policy is going 
to create the impression of a double standard, and I fear that prejudice 
will be reinforced.'' But the interior minister seems unlikely to 
change his stance to placate the Social Democrats' junior coalition 
partners. Like Schroeder, he knows that even in a changed Germany, 
the middle ground remains important. To have struggled so long with 
the left is to know the power of German conservatism. ``It is not 
a question of being immigration-friendly, or immigration- hostile,'' 
Schily said, his eyes glinting. ``It is merely a question of reality.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>