<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981228.0315 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Faraway in the cosmos, where everything is separated by distances 
measured in hundreds and billions of light-years, sometimes a galaxy 
or cluster of galaxies in the foreground intersects the light from 
an even more distant object. The conjunction plays visual tricks, 
producing mirages that are becoming a practical tool of astronomy, 
a kind of natural telescope. Aided by more sensitive cameras and advanced 
computer technologies, systematic searches of the heavens are yielding 
an increasing number of examples of such celestial phenomena, known 
as gravitational lenses. Scientists are learning to interpret these 
distorting and magnifying lensing events for revealing clues in the 
most intractable mysteries of the universe. ``Lensing is a really 
explosive area of observations,'' said Dr. Christopher Impey, an astronomer 
at the University of Arizona Steward Observatory. ``For decades the 
theory sat there, but no one could observe lensing. Now we can see 
the universe as one big optics experiment.'' The new observations 
are proving Albert Einstein right, as usual. In 1916, he predicted 
in his general theory of relativity that the gravitational field of 
any mass bends light. Two decades later, he proposed that a massive 
object could thus act as a lens, bending and distorting radiations 
from a more distant object so that it would appear as a ring or arc 
of light. Einstein doubted that telescopes would ever be able to detect 
such faint and rare events, but now looking through gravitational 
lenses, astronomers are exploring a wide range of problems in cosmology. 
They are making new measurements of the age of the universe, looking 
for planets and other unseen objects, and investigating the structure 
and nature of quasars, some of the most distant and enigmatic objects 
in the distant reaches of the cosmos. Of surpassing importance, lensing 
observations are being used to weigh the universe. According to the 
standard theory of big-bang cosmology, luminous matter of stars probably 
contributes less than 1 percent of the cosmic mass, and all ordinary 
matter, seen and unseen, accounts for no more than 5 percent. With 
lensing, astronomers are beginning to find and map the distribution 
of some of the missing mass _ the unknown and invisible dark matter 
that shapes the universe and probably controls its ultimate fate. 
``For the first time we now have a window on the universe that's not 
biased to radiation,'' said Dr. Anthony Tyson, an astronomer at Bell 
Labs of Lucent Technologies in Murray Hill, N.J., who is one of the 
most experienced observers of gravitational lenses. Until now, he 
explained, astronomers looked for evidence of dark matter only through 
its gravitational influence on bright galaxies. This is like searching 
for lost keys only under a lamppost, blind to what might lie in the 
darkness beyond. What if much of the missing mass inhabits the dark 
intergalactic voids? Tyson and colleagues have developed increasingly 
effective techniques for lensing observations to ``see'' dark matter 
in clusters of galaxies. Future surveys beyond the galactic lampposts, 
they say, will demand exceedingly long periods of observations requiring 
the services of a large, new ``dark-matter telescope'' devoted exclusively 
to the task. Knowing the mass density of the universe, in both ordinary 
and dark matter, is a critical issue in cosmology. A lightweight universe, 
which is indicated by other evidence, would force theorists to rethink 
all their models based on reasoned assumptions that the universe is 
delicately balanced between eventual collapse and infinite expansion. 
They have already started. Cosmologists now postulate the existence 
of a pervasive ``dark energy,'' which might make up for any deficiency 
in cosmic mass and also could explain the stunning discovery, reported 
earlier this year, that the universe's expansion appears to be speeding 
up, not slowing down as had been thought. If they still cannot somehow 
balance the books on cosmic mass, theorists may have to turn the page 
to a revised theory. Dr. Dennis Walsh of the Jodrell Bank Observatory 
in England and colleagues saw the first gravitational lens in 1979. 
They noticed two starlike objects where their radio observations indicated 
there should be only one. Further study revealed that these were not 
separate objects but rather that the light from a distant quasar was 
split in two by the gravity of a giant galaxy halfway between the 
quasar and Earth. Slowly, astronomers have discovered a few dozen 
other lensed quasars. But with the development of charge-coupled devices, 
highly sensitive electronic instruments that have replaced photographic 
plates in astronomy, lensing observations are no longer restricted 
to powerful quasars. Lesser radiations from galaxies and even single 
stars can also be seen through gravitational lenses. It is the light 
from these fainter objects, in particular small blue galaxies that 
seem to predominate in the great depths of space and time that form 
the backdrop for Tyson's work. When Tyson saw the first of billions 
of these previously undetected faint blue galaxies toward the limits 
of the observable universe, he recognized this as a breakthrough in 
his dark-matter search. In 1990, Tyson's group began to collect and 
analyze lensed images of these galaxies, reasoning that they would 
shed light, so to speak, on the distribution of dark matter in the 
present universe. Assisted by new computer software, astronomers saw 
in the distorted light evidence of clumps of dark matter not only 
in the lensing galaxy clusters but well beyond their glowing structure. 
Astronomers realized that in looking for mass only in luminous regions, 
they might be missing plenty of mass where there is no light at all, 
and here was an effective way of mapping the wider distribution of 
dark matter. Encouraged, Tyson and an associate, Dr. Gary Bernstein, 
now at the University of Michigan, developed a large-format camera 
with a mosaic of charge-coupled devices. Mounted on a large telescope 
at the Cerro Tololo Interamerican Observatory in Chile, the new camera 
can take single exposures spanning { degree of sky, an area larger 
than the full moon. The camera has enabled astronomers to survey more 
of the sky faster and with greater sensitivity in mapping dark-matter 
distribution. More recently, Tyson and others examined the backdrop 
of blue galaxies through the lens of a cluster of galaxies seen with 
the Hubble Space Telescope. This produced a surprise, reported earlier 
this year in The Astrophysical Journal. In what is called ``the first 
high-resolution mass map of a cluster of galaxies,'' Tyson found, 
contrary to most assumptions, a much smoother and less centrally concentrated 
distribution of dark matter.'' Dr. August Evrard of the University 
of Michigan wrote that if the findings are confirmed and observed 
elsewhere, this ``is likely to produce insights into the mechanisms 
governing galaxy-cluster formation'' and could be ``a clue to the 
very nature of dark matter.'' Tyson called this ``just a brief foray 
into the wilderness of dark-matter structure,'' but the lensing suggested 
that ``there's a lot of mass that we just don't see, because it's 
not coupled with radiation.'' Perhaps, he said, broader lensing surveys 
in time will find at most twice as much dark matter in the universe 
as has been estimated. Even if Tyson should uncover greater amounts 
of dark matter, scientists question whether it would be sufficient 
to meet the requirements of standard theory describing a flat universe 
with enough mass eventually to brake expansion. In this view, the 
universe is neither closed and destined to collapse nor open to endless 
expansion, with galaxies flying outward and ever farther apart into 
a dark, desolate infinity. Writing in the January issue of Scientific 
American, Dr. Lawrence Krauss of Case Western Reserve University in 
Cleveland concluded: ``The standard cosmology of the 1980s, postulating 
a flat universe dominated by matter, is dead. The universe is either 
open or filled with an energy of unknown origin. Although I believe 
the evidence in favor of the latter, either scenario will require 
a dramatic new understanding of physics.'' Tyson's research has concentrated 
on dark matter in the form of exotic particles, relics of physics 
in the earliest moment after the Big Bang. If they exist, these subatomic 
particles must be sluggish and electrically neutral not to be producing 
detectable radiations; hence their designation as WIMPs, for weakly 
interacting massive particles. Some objects like dim stars, failed 
stars, giant planets and other obscure ordinary material may make 
up another fraction of the dark matter. In a playful contrast to WIMPs, 
these are called MACHOs, for massive astrophysical compact halo objects. 
Astronomers estimate that the dark halo around Earth's home galaxy, 
the Milky Way, could contain 10 times more mass than the visible part 
of the galaxy, and MACHOs could account for about half of that invisible 
mass. At the suggestion of Dr. Bohdan Paczynski, a Princeton University 
astrophysicist, a team of astronomers has focused on fields of stars 
near the center of the Milky Way or out in the neighboring galaxy 
known as the Large Magellanic Cloud. If one of these stars suddenly 
brightens and grows fainter in a characteristic way over a period 
of several weeks, this is presumably evidence of some intermediate 
dark mass acting as a lens in the line of sight, possibly a MACHO. 
Several candidates have been identified, though interpretations are 
controversial. The lensing agents could be ordinary stars not previously 
seen or some renegade star population not known, or some of them could 
be dark matter in one form or another, said Dr. Christopher Stubbs, 
an astrophysicist at the University of Washington in Seattle who is 
a member of the MACHO search team, With improved detection instruments 
and methods at a telescope in Chile, Stubbs said that in two years 
the team should be detecting 10 times as many lensing events, enhancing 
prospects for more definitive sightings. Similar experiments could 
also reveal the presence of planets. One such tantalizing observation 
has already been made, he said. When gravitational lensing was in 
its infancy, quasars were merely the bright sources of the light being 
distorted and magnified. Now scientists are testing a lensing technique 
for studying the quasars themselves. American astronomers led by Dr. 
Edwin Turner of Princeton University, working at Apache Point Observatory 
in New Mexico, are monitoring the Einstein Cross quasar, which is 
lensed by an intervening galaxy. They are watching for peculiar perturbations 
and magnifications in the lensed light when a single star in the galaxy 
moves directly into the line of sight. When one is detected, the Hubble 
space telescope in Earth orbit will be focused on the strongly magnified 
target to examine its spectrum of light. Measuring variations in the 
spectral lines over time, scientists say, should reveal the relative 
size and structure of different emission regions in the quasar. This 
would be the most remote remote-sensing mapping enterprise ever undertaken. 
In principle, the spectral maps should define the structure of the 
whirlpool of gas and other stellar matter being drawn inexorably into 
a gravitational sink known as a black hole. Radiations from this dynamic 
accretion disc are the likely source of a quasar's brilliant light. 
``We could find out if this picture of a quasar is right,'' Turner 
said. ``All theorists think so, but this would be a way of checking 
and learning even more about this phenomenon.'' Astronomers from the 
Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics in Cambridge, Mass., and 
the University of Arizona in Tucson are using the infrared and optical 
cameras on the orbiting Hubble telescope to examine the lensing of 
light from two dozen quasars. They are trying a new method of clocking 
the cosmic expansion to determine the age of the universe, another 
fundamental issue of cosmology. The measured velocity of galaxies 
moving apart with the expansion of space-time is expressed as the 
Hubble constant. The higher the value of the constant, the faster 
the expansion rate and thus the younger the universe. Recent research 
using the Hubble telescope has measured the distance to certain stars 
and their recessional velocity and recession of certain stars, translating 
this into a value for the Hubble constant that is uncomfortably high. 
It puts the upper limit of the age of a flat universe at about 10 
billion years, possibly younger than the oldest stars. In the current 
issue of The Astrophysical Journal, astronomers reported somewhat 
lower values _ thus a lower expansion rate _ also using the Hubble 
telescope, but this time observing the lensing of a quasar 10 billion 
light-years away. The gravity of an intervening galaxy split the quasar 
light into four separate images, each of which travels a different 
path and arrives at the telescope at slightly different times. By 
measuring these time delays, astronomers calculated the distance to 
the lens, which is the hard part, and then observed the recessional 
velocity of the object to complete calculations leading to the value 
of the Hubble constant. ``This is a more direct method for determining 
the expansion rate,'' said Impey of Arizona, a member of the research 
team. ``I don't think it's necessarily superior to other methods, 
but it's a critical crosscheck of other results.'' Impey said there 
was a good-news-bad-news aspect to the findings. It was reassuring 
that the results indicate a slow enough expansion rate to resolve 
the age crisis; lensing studies by a group led by Turner has produced 
similarly low values for the expansion rate. The universe appears 
to be somewhat older than the oldest stars, as it should be. The bad 
news, though, is that the solution to the age crisis seems to require 
that the universe has a low mass density. So the results are one more 
example of the potential of gravitational lensing in astronomy and 
another cause for cosmologists to take a hard look at their theories. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>