<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981228.0399 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
American fighter jets patrolling northern Iraq attacked an Iraqi anti-aircraft 
missile battery on Monday after coming under fire themselves, the 
Clinton administration said today. The skirmish appeared to mark an 
attempt by Iraq to provoke a new confrontation with the United States. 
Iraq announced that it had repulsed an attack and ``probably shot 
down'' an enemy aircraft. But the Pentagon dismissed the claims, saying 
that all 27 American and British aircraft operating in or near northern 
Iraq on Monday had returned safely to their base in Incirlik, Turkey, 
after firing in self-defense. The incident occurred just two days 
after Iraq declared it would fire on any aircraft flying in the ``no 
flight'' zones that the United States and its allies created over 
northern and southern Iraq after the Persian Gulf War ended in 1991. 
The aim was to protect minority groups then under attack by forces 
loyal to President Saddam Hussein. These patrols have been routinely 
flown since then. On Saturday, Iraqi anti-aircraft artillery fired 
ineffectually near two British fighter-bombers flying in the southern 
zone, but on Monday the Iraqi forces fired relatively sophisticated 
surface-to-air missiles that can threaten even the best American aircraft. 
Administration and Pentagon officials said they believed Saddam was 
testing American and British resolve after four nights of air and 
missile strikes against military and industrial targets across Iraq, 
which ended on Dec. 19. Far from being cowed by the attacks, Iraq 
has responded with intensifying belligerence. It has threatened to 
cut off all cooperation with the United Nations and, on several occasions 
in the last nine days, has flown its warplanes into the ``no flight'' 
zones, apparently hoping to draw American jets into an attack. The 
Pentagon has drawn up contingency plans for renewed strikes, and many 
officials in Washington say they believe a renewed military confrontation 
is virtually inevitable in the weeks ahead. President Clinton justified 
Monday's strike as self-defense and vowed that American and allied 
jets would continue to enforce the ``no flight'' zones. But he stopped 
short of threatening Iraq with larger strikes if it continued to threaten 
American or British forces. ``They attacked because they were attacked, 
and they did the appropriate thing,'' Clinton said of the pilots during 
remarks at the Old Executive Office Building. ``We will continue to 
enforce the `no fly' zones.'' The United States, Britain and France 
created the ``no flight'' zone in northern Iraq in 1991 to protect 
the Kurdish minority that has long suffered under Baghdad's rule. 
Iraqi aircraft are barred from flying in the zone, which covers the 
area north of the 36th parallel. The ``no flight'' zone over southern 
Iraq was created a year later to protect Shiite Muslims who have been 
waging a low-level insurgency against Saddam. In 1996, the southern 
zone was extended from the 32nd parallel to the 33rd parallel, just 
south of Baghdad. In addition to aircraft, the southern zone also 
prohibits the movement of tanks and other armored vehicles. Monday's 
skirmish occurred just after 1 p.m. in Iraq, or 5 a.m. ET, when Iraqi 
forces fired at least three surface-to-air missiles, or SAMs, at F-15 
and F-16 fighter jets flying near the city of Mosul, about 220 miles 
north of Baghdad, according to Pentagon officials. At least one F-16 
responded immediately with radar-seeking missiles, meant to force 
the missile battery to turn off its radar, sending the SAMs harmlessly 
off course. Three F-15's then counterattacked a few minutes later 
with six 500-pound, laser-guided bombs, the officials said. Although 
the Pentagon has not yet fully assessed the damage, the attack appeared 
to have destroyed the missile battery, they said. In Baghdad, the 
Iraqi government denounced the strikes as an ``aggressive and vicious'' 
act, saying the Americans had attacked first and been driven off. 
A statement released through the official Iraqi news agency said four 
soldiers had been killed and seven wounded in the attack. It was the 
first time since September 1996 that Iraq had fired at allied aircraft 
patrolling the ``no flight'' zone over northern Iraq, though there 
have been several occasions in the north and south when Iraqi air 
defenses aimed radar beams at them. On June 30, an American F-16 fired 
a missile at a battery that had aimed radar at four British jets patrolling 
southern Iraq. In the Pentagon's view, the use of surface-to-air missiles 
represented a serious escalation of the on-again-off-again hostilities 
between Iraq and the United States. Iraq has several Soviet-era missiles, 
including the SA-3, the type that shot down the U-2 flown by Francis 
Gary Powers over the Soviet Union in 1960. Officials said the missiles 
fired on Monday appeared to be SA-3s. During more than 400 cruise 
missile strikes and 250 combat sorties over four nights this month, 
Iraq did not fire its SAM missiles, the Pentagon said, evidently fearing 
retaliation by American and British weapons able to hone in on the 
batteries' radar signals. During those strikes, the Americans and 
British repeatedly targeted SAM sites, but with mixed success, since 
the batteries are mobile and can be hard to spot. According to the 
Pentagon's last public assessment of damage, only half of 16 SAM sites 
attacked were destroyed. Administration officials said it was impossible 
to divine Saddam's motives for attacking on Monday, but they speculated 
that he might be hoping to increase international sympathy and erode 
support for sanctions against Iraq by enduring additional attacks. 
``We thought early on that he wanted us to attack him again,'' one 
official said. ``There's a school of thought that says Saddam believes 
that the more we take military action against him, the more the world 
tires of sanctions.'' The United States and its allies cited U.N. 
resolutions adopted in the aftermath of the Persian Gulf War to justify 
enforcing the ``no flight'' zones, but the Security Council itself 
has never explicitly authorized them. France stopped patrolling the 
northern zone in 1996 and refused to recognize the extension of the 
southern zone to the 33rd parallel, though its Mirage jets still support 
the operations in the zone below the 32nd parallel. The zones are 
by no means sanctuaries. In August 1996, Saddam's ground forces rolled 
into the northern enclave to intervene in a civil war between Kurdish 
factions, and the Clinton administration could do little expect fire 
four dozen cruise missiles against air-defense targets in the south. 
But Clinton defended them on Monday. ``The `no fly' zones have been 
and will remain an important part of our containment policy,'' he 
said. ``Because we effectively control the skies over much of Iraq, 
Saddam has been unable to use air power to repress his own people 
or to lash out again at his neighbors.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>