<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981228.0253 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
While most people are (once again) starting another new year with 
a vow to exercise more, my own New Year's resolution is to exercise 
less. I'm not trying to be contrary. I'm not planning to lie around 
the house all day wolfing down pork rinds, chug-a-lugging eggnog and 
smoking cigarettes. But my running shoes and I deserve a rest. My 
favorite Stairmaster at the gym will have to keep step without me. 
It's time to stop and smell the roses, or at least something other 
than the guy sweating next to me on the treadmill. This resolution 
is new for me. When I was 3, my mother marched me off to ballet and 
modern dance classes, and I've been moving one way or another in the 
three decades since. I've done a world's worth of jogging. I've swum 
the equivalent of an ocean plus a lake or two. I've climbed the equivalent 
of tall buildings in multiple bounds and in teeny, tiny, heart-pumping 
steps. I've been aerobicized, yogacized and wrung through the spinning 
cycle. Can a Saint of Perpetual Motion stop, or at least slow down? 
I think the timing is right for this. I used to love the way my body 
ached after a good, hard workout. It even felt virtuous. Now, it just 
feels annoying. I'm tired of counting laps and my pulse beat afterward. 
I've read the horror stories about how women's knees tend to give 
out, and worse, from overuse. I've met a couple of those casualties, 
and these women are the first to say it was definitely not gain for 
the pain. While someone else might feel euphoric from the endorphin 
rush, I just feel glad that the workout's over, at least for the day. 
It is always better afterward than during. I feel productive because 
I've been out running, instead of, say, sleeping, but that's about 
it. To tweak Dorothy Parker's phrase, I don't always love running, 
but I always love having run. At the same time, working out has become 
perversely necessary to my day. As faithful as a mail carrier, in 
rain or shine, sickness or in health, I've been at it: at the gym, 
on my stationary bike at home or running in the park. But because 
the thrill is going, going, going fast, exercising seems to be taking 
up too much of my time, and getting in the way of my real life. I 
don't need to lose weight or tone up or rev my cardiovascular system. 
The times I've had to cut down on exercising or stop temporarily (childbirth, 
a sprained ankle, several days on a small ship) I've felt great, though 
mildly guilty. What my workouts have done for me is clear my mind 
of all the complications of daily life. It's a meditation with motion. 
And it has always made me feel ready to get on with my mornings, more 
energized than I do after a big cup of coffee. As an A-1 stress reducer, 
it has also taken me through some trying times: a death in the family, 
moving to a new house, long visits from relatives. But with a new 
year dawning it's time to move on, or at least less often. Not sit 
on the sofa and turn into a sloth. But exercise less and enjoy it 
more when I do it. Exercise my, uh, options to stay home when I want 
to. Watch ``Pinky, Elmyra and the Brain'' with my sons, with whom 
I indulge in active fun like ice skating, bike riding, swimming and 
nature walks, instead of watching the clock as I go about my rounds 
at the gym. To meditate without motion. While the President's Council 
on Physical Fitness and Sports advises 30 minutes of daily exercise, 
including everything from gardening to galloping, my own counsel on 
physical fitness has long dictated 45 minutes to an hour each day, 
every day at high intensity. I might as well be yelling, ``Mush!'' 
to my poor, tired dogs. It's this that has to stop. Why not do it 
three times a week at a lower intensity for a shorter time? Or skip 
a day, or (gasp) even a week? Why not, indeed? Fitness trainers and 
gym owners will frown (work those facial muscles!), but I resolve 
in 1999, and maybe for the next millennium, to move less and savor 
more. And so, I bequeath to all those (yes, you) who have taken the 
annual New Year's pledge to hit the gym running: my favorite Stairmaster, 
my pedometer and a well-worn pair of sweat socks. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>