<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981228.0458 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The 12 head coaches who stride into the National Football League playoffs 
are thankful. They look around and see other coaches cut, slashed 
and discarded. Five of their peers were fired Monday, and that devastating 
feeling of being dismissed is not unfamiliar for most of those in 
the playoff group. For all 12, there is concern for their profession, 
for their brethren, juxtaposed against the excitement over Super Bowl 
championship possibilities. Mixing disappointment with excitement 
is the nature of coaching, where even a good thing, under wicked scrutiny, 
can look discouraging. For example, if the current crop of playoff 
coaches listen to the banter that surrounds them, they will think 
this: The New York Jets will play at Denver in three weeks for the 
American Football Conference championship and Atlanta will travel 
to Minnesota for the National Football Conference championship. Denver 
will beat the Jets and Minnesota will solve Atlanta, and that will 
be your Super Bowl XXXIII matchup _ Denver versus Minnesota. Everybody 
else? Please, don't even bother to show. Plenty of predictions flow 
this way, of course, because of the seedings. The Jets and Atlanta 
are seeded No. 2, and Denver and Minnesota are seeded No. 1. Denver 
(14-2) in the AFC and Minnesota (15-1) in the NFC own the best records 
in their conferences and are favorites. They surprise no one. They 
are expected to shine. They should crush those lower-seeded teams. 
The 16-game regular season was supposed to separate the playoff teams 
from the weaklings and then, too, reveal who is supreme among the 
supreme. Upsets, however, make playoff football the most fun. Last 
season Denver won in the playoffs at Kansas City and at Pittsburgh 
and then shocked Green Bay in Super Bowl XXXII. Two years ago in the 
playoffs, Jacksonville won at Denver. Three years ago, Indianapolis 
won at Kansas City. Four years ago, in the AFC championship game, 
San Diego won at Pittsburgh. Five seasons ago, in the NFC championship 
game, Dallas won at San Francisco. Twenty-eight years ago, Baltimore 
beat Dallas in Super Bowl V. Thirty-years ago, the Jets beat Baltimore 
in Super Bowl III. Upsets. They make playoff football the most fun. 
Who will surprise this time? Which lower-seeded teams have a chance 
to turn the 1999 playoffs upside down? Four come to mind: 1. Buffalo 
(seeded No. 4 as the wild-card team) _ This is a nice 10-6 team. Actually, 
the Bills could easily be 11-5, except for that controversial pass-interference 
call in the end zone on a desperation pass at New England that set 
up the Patriots' winning touchdown. No matter. The Bills can run the 
ball, play solid defense and have an X factor in quarterback Doug 
Flutie. Rob Johnson is the best backup quarterback in the playoffs. 
Receiver Eric Moulds is special. Buffalo plays its first-round game 
at Miami and, if it wins there will likely play the Jets at Giants 
Stadium in New Jersey. The Bills are hoping for a third attempt against 
the Jets, who won their first two meetings. They are confident that 
they match up well against the Jets and can finally solve them. If 
the Bills reach the Super Bowl and win it, what a shock. Especially 
after their powerhouse teams lost four straight Super Bowls. Winning 
it with this less-heralded group for Buffalo would be dramatic. 2. 
Arizona (seeded No. 6 as the wild-card team) _ The Cardinals (9-7) 
are in the playoffs for the first time in 16 years. That is nearly 
surprise enough for them. But why not more? They can win at Dallas. 
Arizona quarterback Jake Plummer is playing with style and pizazz. 
The Cardinals know the Cowboys: the teams are division rivals who 
play twice a year every year, so Dallas is not a team that scares 
the Cardinals. If Arizona beats Dallas, it will have to play at Minnesota 
in a game that at first glance will be way over its head. But first 
things first: just winning that first playoff game. The Cardinals 
have not won a playoff game since 1947. 3. and 4. The Jets and Atlanta 
(both seeded No. 2) _ How about both upsetting their conferences and 
reaching the Super Bowl. That sounds absolutely bizarre. But the Jets 
are 12-4, and the Falcons are 14-2. Both are physical teams with stout 
defenses and strong running games that can throw the ball deep. Both 
own the element of surprise in strategy and in style. That makes both 
of Super Bowl caliber. Thus, Buffalo, Arizona, the Jets and Atlanta 
offer the best scenarios for playoff upsets. These four teams will 
bother to show. They might even make the show. They will help make 
playoff football the most fun. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>