<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981228.0456 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Massachusetts courts gave the pseudonym Hugo P. to a 4-year-old 
boy who has a mischievous smile and a wrenching life story that his 
court-appointed lawyers hope will persuade the U.S. Supreme Court 
to change children's rights law in this country. Hugo lives in a frayed 
neighborhood here with his bubbly 6-year-old sister, called Gloria 
by the courts, and a foster mother. Hugo and Gloria are so close that, 
when Hugo has difficulty making himself understood, Gloria sometimes 
speaks for him. Their troubled biological parents were declared unfit 
to raise them, so they are, for each other, all that remains of their 
original nuclear family. But that is to change within days. Under 
an order from the highest court in Massachusetts, Hugo and Gloria 
are to be permanently separated on Jan. 2. Like at least 35,000 brothers 
and sisters across the country who are sent to different foster or 
adoptive homes every year, they are to be raised far from each other. 
Gloria, who was adopted three years ago by their foster mother, is 
to stay here. Hugo is to move in with an aunt in New Jersey who successfully 
fought the foster mother for the right to adopt him. Hugo's lawyers, 
who have worked to keep Hugo and Gloria together in the foster mother's 
house, have asked the Supreme Court to review the case and use it 
to declare a new national rule that brothers and sisters have a constitutional 
right to be together. Their argument, experts in family law say, is 
at the forefront of a growing legal movement that is pressing to change 
the focus in custody disputes. The legal test is always the best interest 
of the child, but these experts say the courts are being asked to 
examine cases less from the perspective of adults who are warring 
over children, and more from the point of view of the children themselves. 
``Once you start to make that paradigm shift, looking at it from the 
point of view of the child, a natural next question would be: Do children 
have a right to remain with their siblings?'' said Martin Guggenheim, 
who is an expert on family and children's law at New York University 
Law School and is not involved in the case. R. Susan Dillard, one 
of Hugo's lawyers at the Massachusetts Committee for Public Counsel 
Services, which is financed by the state, said Hugo's lawyers were 
fighting not only to try to keep Hugo and Gloria together but also 
to establish a principle that might stop other brothers and sisters 
from being separated. ``Common experience,'' Ms. Dillard said, ``tells 
us sibling relationships are at the heart of what our identity is.'' 
The chances of the Supreme Court selecting for full review any one 
of the scores of cases filed every month are small. But some legal 
experts say the issue this case raises is one that is arising frequently 
as American courts are asked to adapt to changing attitudes about 
the family, like a growing consensus among child welfare experts that 
brothers and sisters should be kept together whenever possible. Social 
service agencies and many courts in recent years have said they give 
special consideration to sibling relationships. But agencies say that 
in tens of thousands of cases every year, it is often not practical 
to keep siblings together in adoptive homes. There are many reasons 
for this, including the special care needs of some children. But only 
a handful of judges have begun to suggest that brothers and sisters 
have the same type of constitutional right to be together as parents 
and children. ``Eventually, I think the Supreme Court will have to 
decide this kind of case,'' said Frank Vandervort, managing attorney 
of the Child Welfare Law Resource Center at the University of Michigan 
Law School. Because the case has already been through two appeals 
courts, the fight over Hugo provides an unusual look at the painful 
choices judges everywhere are making daily in what are usually closed 
family court proceedings. Published court decisions in Massachusetts 
describe what a Boston juvenile court judge called a ``heart wrenching'' 
choice over what to do about Hugo. To the children's foster mother, 
Enid L., as she has been called by the courts, the case raises a common-sense 
question. ``Why would you want to separate a sister and a brother?'' 
she asked as the children played outside on a gray December day. A 
53-year-old former school kitchen worker who now earns her living 
as a foster parent, Ms. L agreed to meet a reporter on the condition 
that she and the children be identified only by their pseudonyms. 
According to the court opinions in the case, the children's father 
was a substance abuser with a history of domestic violence and child 
neglect. Their mother, the court opinions said, suffers from paranoid 
schizophrenia. Hugo, the courts said, has a series of problems, including 
slow development of speech and motor skills, that may be the result 
of his mother's use of cocaine while she was pregnant. Hugo's parents 
wanted the aunt in New Jersey, the father's sister, to gain custody 
of Hugo. The aunt, a 43-year-old police administrator's aide in New 
York City, has a teen-age son with similar problems. In March, the 
Boston juvenile court judge, Stephen Limon, acknowledged that Hugo 
might be traumatized by the move away from his sister. But in the 
long term, Limon ruled, it would be in Hugo's best interest to live 
with the aunt, who had demonstrated that she could care for a child 
with special needs. In May, a state appeals court overruled that decision, 
saying it was based on mere speculation. Then, this fall, the Massachusetts 
Supreme Judicial Court reinstated Limon's ruling. In their ruling, 
the seven judges of the Supreme Judicial Court reviewed the complex 
facts of Hugo's short life and his strong ties to Gloria. But, as 
appeals courts often do in dealing with cases concerning the placement 
of children, the court concluded that trial judges are in the best 
position to make decisions based on the facts before them. The court 
did not mention the constitutional assertions made by Hugo's lawyers, 
but said it was important for trial judges to retain flexibility. 
``We are not persuaded in this complex area of familial relationships 
that the judge should have given presumptive weight to the sibling 
relationship,'' the court's decision said. Courts across the country 
have considered arguments like the ones Hugo's lawyers are making, 
but have issued differing rulings. Hugo's lawyers argue that siblings 
should be deprived of their right to be together only if there is 
clear and convincing evidence that separation would be in their best 
interests. That would be the same test the Supreme Court has said 
must be met to deprive unfit parents of their constitutional rights 
to their children. The court has said that parents have a right not 
to be separated from their children unless there is clear and convincing 
evidence they are unfit. The court said that ``liberty'' right was 
derived from the 14th Amendment's guarantee that people cannot be 
deprived of ``life, liberty or property without due process of law.'' 
Hugo's lawyers argue that brothers and sisters, too, have a ``liberty 
interest'' in being together. They should be separated, the lawyers 
say, only if there is compelling evidence that would be in their best 
interests. But Susan Drogin, a court-appointed lawyer for Hugo's father, 
said it would hamstring social service officials and the courts to 
say siblings have constitutional rights to be together. ``Why siblings?'' 
she asked. ``Why not grandparents? Why not uncles and aunts?'' Hugo's 
aunt declined to be interviewed. When asked, Ms. Drogin said the aunt 
had decided not to adopt Gloria for ``personal reasons.'' For child 
welfare officials, Hugo's case points out the extraordinary difficulty 
that issues of sibling placement present. The Massachusetts Department 
of Social Services has sided with Hugo's lawyers through the case. 
But in an interview, Kristen Apgar, the department's general counsel, 
said she did not agree that the courts should declare that siblings 
have a constitutional right to be together. That, she said, would 
add a new layer of legalism to a complex process and would slow down 
adoptions. Among the small group of children's rights attorneys nationally, 
Hugo's case is already being discussed. Patrick Murphy, the public 
guardian in Chicago, heads an office that represents 37,000 children 
annually and handled a case several years ago arguing that siblings 
have a right to be together under the Constitution's First Amendment 
guarantee of free association. Murphy said he would ask for permission 
to file a friend-of-the-court brief if the justices decide to hear 
the case. Murphy said it was important for the courts to clearly state 
that the Constitution gave brothers and sisters special rights, especially 
when parents have been declared unfit. ``All they have left then are 
their siblings,'' he said. ``Take that away as well, and you are punishing 
them for the sins of their parents.'' But in New Mexico, Angela Adams, 
chief children's court attorney for the state's Department of Children, 
Youth and Families, said Hugo's case was a perfect example of why 
family court judges needed flexibility. To declare that siblings have 
a constitutional right to be together, Ms. Adams said, would almost 
certainly mean that some children would end up in homes that might 
not be best for them individually. For now, Hugo and Gloria appear 
to have little sense that they are at the center of a battle that 
could change the law and their lives. When they came in from playing, 
Hugo's mop of brown hair was wild. He was too excited to say much. 
But Gloria, as usual, talked for both of them. With little prompting 
from a reporter, she talked about how they like to play with toy race 
cars together. ``We be riding them and, and we get dizzy,'' she said 
breathlessly. A few days later, according to a schedule agreed to 
by the lawyers, there was a meeting that included Gloria, Hugo, the 
aunt and a teacher. At the meeting, Hugo was given a crayon and paper 
while the adults explained that soon Hugo would be living with his 
aunt. It was not clear, one of Hugo's lawyer's said, whether Hugo 
understood what that meant, or whether he understood too well. Hugo, 
the lawyer said, just kept coloring. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>