<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981228.0380 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Far more polite than he typically is going after the quarterback, 
Michael Strahan waited patiently for Kent Graham to throw another 
bone of humility to the assembled reporters yesterday in the Giants' 
post-season locker room before reaching through the crowd to hand 
the quarterback a white slip of paper containing two telephone numbers. 
Stay in touch, the Pro Bowl defensive end was saying. You're my man, 
until I hear otherwise. ``At this point, if he's the starting quarterback, 
I'm fine with that,'' Strahan said. ``One thing you can say about 
Kent, this is not a guy who is going to go sit in the back of the 
bus. He's going to drive it. He's a leader.'' The question of whether 
he is a Super Bowl-caliber quarterback, or even good enough to be 
the Giants' 1999 starter, was one Jim Fassel later managed to avoid, 
as if his coaching life depended on it. That it well might made it 
all the more prudent for Fassel to step up to his lectern, avoid the 
rush to judgment, take a good, hard look at every available option 
downfield. That means free agency, the draft, a trade or an unexpected 
discovery in space. It does not rule Graham out as next season's starter, 
or in. Like everyone else, he'll have to wait to find out if the Giants 
can do better. ``I'm not going to assume anything about anybody,'' 
said Fassel, having learned from experience, the hard way. Fassel 
stuck by his man this season, gave Danny Kanell an 11-week-long benefit 
of the doubt, and it cost him the playoffs. The Giants punted, fumbled 
and threw away winnable games at Oakland, Tampa Bay, Washington and 
Dallas. Their fast late-season finish under Graham seems to have shifted 
the direction of the quarterback debate, if not the momentum of the 
franchise. The support is now there for Graham, within the Giants' 
locker room and without, in the way it was there for Glenn Foley at 
this time last year with the Jets. Remember the uproar in tabloid 
city when Bill Parcells started that mistake-prone loser, Vinny Testaverde, 
over Foley last summer in the Jets' second preseason game? Foley was 
dazed, his fans confused, but Parcells was admitting in his own loving, 
autocratic way that he didn't know what either guy could do over the 
course of 16 games. He believed in Foley but only enough to give him 
a chance, which didn't amount to half a season. Foley got hurt, returned 
to play poorly. Parcells called for Testaverde, for sturdiness over 
spunk. What ensued was an assault on the Jets' sorrowful history that 
is still in Hollywood-like rewrite. The smart coach knows enough to 
take no one without all-pro credentials for granted, be it under the 
pressure of his personal obsession, or that of his own front office. 
Parcells answers only to the part of himself that is tortured by losing, 
but Fassel, for all his positive reviews, may soon have to convince 
his superiors that the Giants, as he put it, are ``showing progress.'' 
He knew of those five head coaches who barely got their headsets off 
after season-ending games before getting the ax. It wasn't long ago 
that Dom Capers had Carolina and Ray Rhodes had Philadelphia in the 
playoffs, where the Giants went briefly last year. More than ever, 
coaches are ``under the scrutiny of win now,'' Fassel admitted. ``Don't 
mail me the letter, fax it to me,'' he added. ``In today's society, 
we want everything right now. It's where are you going to be in two 
or three years, and that's about it.'' Next year will be Fassel's 
third. The news media and fans have the luxury of going with the flavor 
of the last six weeks. The coach will eventually be held accountable 
if another quarterback flops on his watch. Fassel effectively deployed 
Kanell to get out from under Dave Brown, and similarly used Graham 
to unseat Kanell. But five victories to finish a season already drained 
of expectation are not enough for a career backup to claim the future. 
Not when the coach's job, his first, is heading into the inevitable 
post-honeymoon phase. Fassel's situation is made stickier because 
he has a win-now defense that should be healthier and better next 
year. Can the Giants find someone more talented than Graham or at 
least competitive with him in a Testaverde-Foley way before they commit 
their first-round pick in the draft? If not, is Graham good enough 
to get the Giants into the playoffs while Fassel develops an heir? 
``If he can keep me off the field, I'm for that,'' Strahan said, recalling 
those exhausting afternoons with Brown, with Kanell. These proud Giants 
defenders don't ask for much. They do deserve better. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>