<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981228.0291 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For six decades, conservationists in Illinois tried to save the greater 
prairie chickens that once covered the state like its sea of grass. 
Hunting was banned. Sanctuaries were set up. Predators were driven 
away. Nonetheless, the showy little birds, beloved for their flamboyant 
mating rituals, began a headlong population collapse that saw their 
numbers fall from 25,000 statewide in 1933 to 2,000 in 1962, to fewer 
than 50 in 1993, though they remained abundant in other Midwestern 
states. Now a team of geneticists and ecologists from state agencies 
and the University of Illinois has reversed that decline and, for 
one of the first times in a wild population, documented how inbreeding 
and loss of habitat reinforced each other to create an ``extinction 
vortex.'' They reported their findings in a recent issue of the journal 
Science. Biologists have suspected a genetic bottleneck _ a sharp 
reduction in genetic diversity _ in the decline of other animals like 
the cheetah, the Florida panther and the black-footed ferret. But 
conclusive ``before'' and ``after'' data were not available to rule 
out other possibilities like natural disasters, isolation or hunting. 
In the case of the prairie chicken, said Dr. Alan Templeton, professor 
of biology and genetics at Washington University in St. Louis: ``You 
can see the genetic impact of what humans have done quite clearly. 
In many cases, you can infer it. Here it is documented. That's why 
it's so compelling.'' Ronald Westemeier, the lead author of the Science 
article, has studied the prairie chicken, Tympanuchus cupido pinnatus, 
for 35 years and recently retired as a wildlife ecologist with the 
Illinois Natural History Survey. The greatest blow to the survival 
of the Illinois prairie chicken, he said, was the introduction in 
1837 of the steel plow, the first that could slice through the deep, 
dense root systems of prairie plants. By the turn of the century, 
the Illinois prairie had vanished into farms, and the heart of the 
prairie chickens' range had disappeared. The 2-pound wild bird, which 
was a staple of the local diet in the 1800s and was brought to Chicago 
markets by the hundreds of thousands, survived in scattered patches, 
especially in the south central part of Illinois, where farmers used 
to grow red top grass, a favorite for nesting, as a cash crop. In 
1931, the subspecies known as the heath hen (Tympanuchus cupido cupido) 
became extinct in the eastern United States. Two years later, Illinois 
banned the hunting of the prairie chicken. In 1962, a sanctuary, now 
called the Prairie Ridge State Natural Area, was established in Jasper 
County, about four miles southwest of Newton, Ill. A second grassland 
sanctuary was established 40 miles away, in Marion County, by the 
Nature Conservancy in 1967. But privately owned grasslands in the 
area kept disappearing, along with their prairie chickens. By the 
1980s, the birds were found only on the two wildlife preserves, cut 
off by hundreds of miles from populations in other states. ``In the 
1970s, we thought we knew everything we needed to know about preserving 
a flock of wild birds,'' Westemeier said. But by 1973, that changed. 
Their numbers kept falling, he said, adding, ``We found more and more 
nests with unhatched eggs.'' By 1990, the hatching rate, which had 
averaged between 91 and 100 percent, had dropped to an extreme low, 
38 percent in Jasper County. By the mid 1990s, Westemeier said: ``The 
count of males dropped as low as six on each sanctuary. We had every 
reason to believe we were going to lose them completely.'' In Illinois, 
this was unthinkable. Here, as in other Midwestern states where it 
makes its home, the prairie chicken has a loyal following. ``They're 
fun,'' said Dr. Dan Svedarsky, a wildlife biologist and member of 
the Minnesota Prairie Chicken Society. In Rothsay, the ``Prairie Chicken 
Capital'' of Minnesota, residents have even built a huge, illuminated 
chicken wire and concrete statue near Interstate 94 to honor the bird. 
Newcomers to the area, Svedarsky said, cannot believe the real prairie 
chicken ``puts on such an unusual show.'' Scott Simpson, who manages 
the Jasper County preserve for the Illinois Department of Natural 
Resources, agrees. ``Once you've seen them and heard them,'' he said, 
``it's nothing you forget.'' In a mating ritual that takes place every 
spring, the male prairie chicken goes to communal mating grounds, 
called leks, where each male stakes out territory and tries to woo 
as many hens as possible. There he inflates bright orange air sacs, 
part of his esophagus, into two orange-sized balloons on each side 
of his head. As air is drawn into these sacs, it creates a three-syllable 
``boom-boom-boom'' _ similar to the sound of air being blown across 
the mouth of a bottle _ that can be heard for miles. While memorable 
for biologists, the downside of this mating system, said Jeffrey Brawn, 
an ecologist and co-author of the Illinois study, is that the dominant 
male contributes disproportionately to the future gene pool, and ``if 
there are inbreeding problems, they will be exaggerated by this system.'' 
The researchers here wanted to know whether significant genetic differences 
existed between the Illinois prairie chickens, which were dying out, 
and the birds in other states, which seemed to be thriving. Dr. Ken 
Paige, a co-author and a geneticist at the University of Illinois, 
was concerned about the possibility of losing ``some of the things 
that were unique about the Illinois birds'' when plans to introduce 
prairie chickens from other states were carried out. Juan Bouzat, 
then a doctoral student at the university, worked with Paige to compare 
DNA from frozen tissue samples of birds that died in Illinois between 
1974 and 1993 with DNA from blood samples of birds captured in Kansas, 
Nebraska and Minnesota between 1992 and 1994. The comparison suggested 
that all the birds were related but that in recent years the Illinois 
birds had become less genetically diverse. To investigate that possibility, 
Bouzat turned to stuffed birds he found at the Illinois Natural History 
Survey here. Ten had been collected in the 1930s and five in the 1960s. 
Most came from the same population in Jasper County. Bouzat was able 
to extract DNA from tissue in the roots of the birds' feathers. He 
found little genetic difference between the Illinois birds of the 
1930s and present-day prairie chickens in other states. But he found 
that the present-day prairie chickens in Illinois had lost one-third 
of the genetic diversity of the birds that lived in the same sanctuary 
before the genetic contraction, or bottleneck, took place. Westemeier 
believes the gene pool diminished to the point of near certain extinction 
in the early 1970s. To keep the state's prairie chicken population 
from dying out, Simpson and other wildlife managers from the state's 
Division of Natural Heritage had begun transplanting birds from Minnesota, 
Kansas and Nebraska to Illinois. Between 1992 and 1996, they brought 
in 518 prairie chickens. All were tracked with leg bands and some 
with radio-telemetry tags. The new and old populations interbred, 
and hatching rates went back up to 94 percent this year. No major 
changes in the local environment occurred during that time, so the 
scientists attribute the success to factors intrinsic to the breeding 
birds. It was, they reported in Science, ``a unique example of the 
general scenario predicted by `extinction vortex' models. These models 
predict that demographic and genetic effects reinforce each other 
in small populations to increase the probability of local extinction. 
We believe that the near-complete loss of suitable grasslands and 
satellite populations in the region drove the greater prairie chicken 
toward this scenario.'' Robert Lacy, a population geneticist in the 
department of conservation biology at the Brookfield Zoo in Chicago, 
said the study has two important lessons: ``One is that there are 
cases, like the prairie chicken, we can do something about still. 
In other cases, we're down to the last population.'' He pointed to 
the black-footed ferret, isolated for up to 50 years and rediscovered 
in Wyoming in the early 1980s. The last ones were captured in the 
hope of breeding them in captivity and releasing them into the wild. 
Although the low numbers have been taken care of, he said, ``the ones 
being released have lesser genetic diversity'' and, without a genetically 
healthy population for comparison, there is ``no way of knowing whether 
the effort to re-establish them will be compromised.'' ``Studies like 
the prairie chicken caution us not to drop down to a single, isolated 
population,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>