<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981228.0427 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As recently as a few weeks ago, it seemed as if America's corporate 
giants need not worry too much about the Internet. After all, if upstart 
companies that specialize in online commerce were ever to realize 
investors' much-hyped expectations for future profits, Fortune 500 
members could always just buy them. Not anymore. The recent explosion 
in share prices of companies linked to the online world has been so 
spectacular that the market value of some Internet companies is rapidly 
eclipsing that of more established competitors, even when the online 
companies still lag badly in terms of profits and revenues. On Monday, 
the Internet lodged another such milestone, this time shaking some 
core assumptions in the finance industry. The market value of San 
Francisco-based discount broker Charles Schwab reached $25.5 billion, 
putting it ahead by a nose of the industry standard-bearer and Wall 
Street heavyweight, Merrill Lynch &AMP; Co., which investors now say 
is worth $25.4 billion. Market value can change dramatically day to 
day, and investors still value one big investment bank, Morgan Stanley 
Dean Witter, above Schwab. But Schwab's helicopterlike ascent is unprecedented, 
analysts said, both in its speed and perhaps in its challenge to the 
way Wall Street treats the online craze. Consider that just two weeks 
ago, the market was awash with unconfirmed rumors that Merrill might 
consider buying Schwab to give it a presence online, a possibility 
that now seems far-fetched given the huge increase in Schwab's stock 
price. ``Merrill has to be concerned about this,'' said Richard Strauss, 
securities industry analyst for Goldman Sachs. ``There is significant 
value in Merrill for many reasons. But the Internet is clearly something 
that they have to make a top priority.'' Schwab has been swept up 
in the Internet stock frenzy. America Online, perhaps the best-known 
Internet entertainment and commerce company, recently surpassed Disney 
in market value. Amazon.com has a market value well above the combined 
value of two leading rivals, Barnes &AMP; Noble and Borders. Investors 
value Ebay, the new Internet auction company, at more than five times 
Sotheby's. Schwab, unlike Merrill and other rivals, has transformed 
itself from a traditional retail broker, albeit one that specialized 
in discounted fees, into a company that does most of its business 
online. Merrill, meanwhile, has delayed plans to offer a limited online 
trading service to some customers until early next year. Morgan Stanley 
and Donaldson, Lufkin &AMP; Jenrette, Wall Street houses that like 
Merrill have a more diverse array of businesses than Schwab, have 
substantial online operations. But only a small part of their revenue 
is Internet-related. Schwab, moreover, dodged a bullet from new rivals 
like E-Trade and Ameritrade, services that focus exclusively on cut-rate, 
online stock trading. Even as online trading has soared as a percentage 
of total stock trading, Schwab has maintained its market share of 
30 percent of online trading, analysts said. The company has watched 
the revenue it derives from each trade slide as investors switched 
to less expensive trading through its Web site. As recently as late 
last year, Schwab earned $63 on every trade it handled, and now that 
average has fallen to $53. But a sharp increase in the quantity of 
trades has more than made up for that loss, and profits are rising 
at a rapid clip. ``Schwab did a great job to turning the Internet 
to its advantage when it could easily have become a victim,'' said 
Bill Burnham, online commerce analyst at Credit Suisse First Boston. 
``Now, any fears that they will be superseded by the Internet have 
subsided. They are the leader.'' Many analysts warn that the lopsided 
valuations placed on companies with the suffix ``.com'' has the classic 
symptoms of a financial bubble and will likely prove fleeting. Some 
say the same about Schwab's sudden rise, and indeed its valuation 
by some traditional measures seems extraordinary. Schwab trades at 
65 times its projected profits next year, a ratio more familiar to 
the speculative Internet world than the brokerage community. Merrill 
trades at 16 times its forward earnings. That's despite the fact that 
Merrill manages $1.4 trillion in client assets, three times what Schwab 
manages. Merrill's revenues in the last year totaled $17.5 billion, 
seven times Schwab's. ``It just does not make that much sense for 
Schwab. These lofty multiples get applied to Internet companies that 
are not mature and are thought to have an enormous growth path ahead 
of them,'' said Guy Moscowski, a brokerage stock analyst at Salomon 
Smith Barney. ``I don't see how you apply that kind of thinking to 
Schwab. It has been around for 25 years and has a more mature business.'' 
Likewise, officials at Merrill say they are not about to overhaul 
their strategy because of daily changes in stock prices. ``We have 
a long term strategy that is global, that has been very successful 
in growing clients' assets, revenues and market share,'' said Jim 
Wiggins, a Merrill spokesman. ``We are sticking to it.'' Even if Merrill 
chose to do so, it might have a hard time mimicking Schwab's heavy 
Internet focus. Schwab has always sought to provide brokerage services 
at a low cost. That makes the company more vulnerable to competition 
from purely Internet companies than from full-service brokers like 
Merrill, which compete in providing advice and financial planning 
services to customers. Moreover, Merrill has a network of 14,000 brokers 
who would likely resist any move by Merrill management to shift a 
large proportion of the firm's business online. ``Just from a structural 
position, it's incredibly difficult for Merrill to rush into the Internet 
business,'' Burnham said. ``They would have a huge political issue.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>