<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981228.0419 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
People who worked for Jenny Crowe-Innes 10 years ago knew that there 
were times when they could find her lying in pain on the floor with 
a migraine headache. ``Usually I would just lay there on my office 
floor until someone came in to either take me home or to the emergency 
room,'' recalled Ms. Crowe-Innes, who owns an executive search company 
near San Francisco. The incapacitating attacks eased five years ago, 
after a neurologist suggested that Ms. Crowe-Innes try a new class 
of migraine drugs known as triptans. They work faster and are more 
effective than existing migraine medications. Ms. Crowe-Innes takes 
Imitrex, the leading triptan, which works so well and so fast _ usually 
within 20 minutes _ that she does not mind paying some $73 for a two-dose 
shot. Imitrex is made by Glaxo Wellcome. ``Once you've experienced 
that pain, you'd pay almost anything for something to relieve it,'' 
she said. After going for decades with few available migraine drugs, 
the 25 million Americans who suffer these monster headaches now have 
a wide choice of new remedies. Three additional triptans have been 
introduced within the last year _ Glaxo Wellcome's Amerge, Maxalt 
from Merck &AMP; Co., and Zomig from Zeneca Pharmaceuticals _ with 
Pfizer set to release yet another in 1999. The new drugs are staking 
out a potentially huge market, one that Cowen &AMP; Co. estimates 
will grow to $3.5 billion from $1.6 billion in the next three years. 
Such growth would not be all that surprising: Slightly less than half 
of all migraine sufferers in the United States have seen a doctor 
in the last year and pain relievers are very popular drugs. Indeed, 
doctors say that few benign conditions are as debilitating as a migraine, 
further raising drug makers' hopes. At the same time, some pharmaceutical 
companies are spending freely on consumer advertising for the new 
drugs, a strategy that has previously created much larger markets 
in a matter of weeks. Yet sales of migraine drugs have so far not 
lived up to expectations. Triptan sales are expected to rise only 
15 percent to 20 percent next year, after soaring 72 percent in 1996 
and 27 percent through September, according to IMS Health, an industry 
consultant. Sales growth has been stalled by a glut of free triptan 
samples that have temporarily replaced new prescriptions and by a 
similarity in effectiveness among the new drugs. ``The pharmaceutical 
companies were completely misguided when it came to migraine drugs,'' 
said Dr. Neil Raskin, a professor of neurology at the University of 
California at San Francisco. ``They thought they could expand the 
market, but that hasn't happened.'' More important, many consumers 
_ and even some doctors, drug makers say _ do not fully understand 
what a migraine is. It is an excruciatingly painful headache that 
often leaves its victims almost completely debilitated. Along with 
a headache, migraine sufferers often feel nauseated and weak, and 
frequently experience an acute sensitivity to light. While migraines 
usually begin gradually, they are sometimes set off by food _ notably 
red wine, cheese or chocolate _ and frequently accompany a change 
in the body's hormones, causing women to experience them three times 
as frequently as men. Most migraine sufferers have typically mistaken 
the pain as a sinus headache and have used over-the-counter medications 
to ease the other symptoms. Rarely does that work, leaving some people 
to suffer for days before the pain finally passes. ``One of our biggest 
goals is to educate patients on how to delineate a migraine headache 
from a common headache,'' said Stephen O'Quinn, senior clinical program 
director for migraines at Glaxo Wellcome. ``Patients have to be able 
to recognize that they have a migraine and need prescription medication. 
They have to understand that migraine headaches are a disease.'' To 
educate patients and doctors, Merck, Zeneca and Glaxo Wellcome have 
begun marketing blitzes. Turn on any television channel, and chances 
are that there will be a commercial for Imitrex or Zomig or an ad 
for no specific brand that illustrates a migraine's symptoms. Even 
with a nearly 83 percent share of the migraine drug market in the 
United States, Glaxo Wellcome has spent $28.6 million _ 58 percent 
of the industry's total expenditures for consumer migraine ads _ to 
expand the brand's sales, according to Competitive Media Reporting. 
To make its Zomig brand a contender, Zeneca has spent $20.4 million 
through August to promote the brand, roughly 39 percent of the drug's 
sales through that period. The ads have paid dividends: Zomig has 
picked up 6.6 percent of market share _ largely at Glaxo Wellcome's 
expense _ since its introduction last January. Merck, meanwhile, has 
yet to spend a nickel on consumer ads to promote Maxalt, and has no 
plans to start, according to company executives. Instead, the company 
has flooded doctors' offices with brochures and tapes, hoping to educate 
physicians about migraines and the benefits of Maxalt's dissolvable 
tablet. Merck's strategy may deliver the most results, analysts said, 
given that until most people understand what a migraine is, the majority 
of cases will remain untreated. Advertising has indeed prodded some 
migraine sufferers to see their doctors, but some patients have been 
notoriously stubborn. Doctors say that many of these people had parents 
who suffered from migraines and insist on following their example 
by locking themselves in a dark room until the headache stops. ``One 
reason why more people don't seek medical help is because migraines 
are episodic,'' said Dr. Richard Lipton, a neurologist at the Albert 
Einstein College of Medicine in New York. ``When the pain subsides, 
many sufferers believe that's the last migraine headache that they 
will ever have. They don't seek treatment until they need it.'' Patients 
who do arrive at their doctor's offices may encounter another obstacle 
to treatment. Unable to recognize a migraine headache's textbook symptoms, 
some doctors often order a barrage of invasive tests and scans to 
rule out such medical horrors as cancer or brain tumors, drug companies 
say. Patients often abandon the treatment before a correct diagnosis 
can be made. ``Some physicians will want to make sure that the cause 
of the headache is not organic,'' said Gerardo Torres, associate medical 
director for Zeneca Pharmaceuticals. ``But doctors who are not well 
trained may do unnecessary tests. The management of migraines is not 
taught in most residencies.'' To expand the migraine market, the makers 
of triptan need to revamp their marketing strategies, some industry 
analysts argue. Consider the ads for Zomig and Imitrex. Campaigns 
for both drugs portray a woman grimacing with her hand to her head 
_ Madison Avenue's universal symbol for headache _ only to be replaced 
by an image of the same women, vibrant and vital, after she has taken 
one of their migraine pills. While the ads may convince some people, 
they are just as likely to confuse as help. Analysts contend that 
the entire slant to these campaigns should be scrapped, beginning 
with the word ``migraine,'' a clinical term that some people will 
never fully understand. ``Migraine should be repositioned as superheadache,'' 
said David Saks, a managing director at Gruntal &AMP; Co. ``There's 
no question the condition is undertreated, but people need to be told 
to take these medications when the headache begins, to stress possible 
prevention. People have traditionally been more than willing to pay 
money to relieve pain.'' Competition in this market has begun to grow 
nasty. Most neurologists say there is little difference in efficacy 
between the triptans, but that has not stopped the drug makers from 
pointing some out. Ask any Glaxo Wellcome sales representative about 
Imitrex or Amerge and expect to get an earful. Not only does Imitrex, 
in its injection form, relieve some migraines within 10 minutes _ 
the fastest of any triptans _ Amerge remains in the bloodstream for 
more than six hours to prevent additional attacks. The other triptans 
remain in the bloodstream for only two to four hours. A potential 
drawback with the Imitrex injection is that it costs $73 wholesale 
for a two-dose shot. The Glaxo Wellcome sales representative will 
not volunteer that information, but the Merck representative probably 
will. Maxalt costs $11.25 wholesale a tablet, the lowest of its competitors. 
Side effects are also a potential problem, and include lack of energy, 
nausea, dizziness or tightness in the chest or throat. Realizing that 
the efficacy among the triptans is relatively close, drug makers have 
provided several methods of taking the medication. Usually, how a 
drug can be taken is merely an added convenience to consumers, but 
with migraines it has fast become a volatile marketing point. One 
big advantage Merck has pushed is Maxalt-MLT, a wafer that dissolves 
in a patient's mouth without water. Glaxo Wellcome offers Imitrex 
as a shot, nasal spray and tablet. Zeneca will soon offer Zomig in 
a wafer and nasal spray. Even though triptan sales have slowed, the 
companies are confident that the market will pick up, and Glaxo Wellcome 
and Zeneca are both exploring the use of celebrities to promote their 
migraine drugs in commercials. Most migraine sufferers who have tried 
the triptans have quickly become loyal to their particular brand, 
doctors say. Given Glaxo Wellcome's stranglehold on the migraine market, 
it is unlikely that any company will be able to upend its dominant 
share. But doctors do see a need for several triptans on the market. 
``Some migraine sufferers couldn't take any of the other medications,'' 
Raskin, the neurology professor, said. ``With the triptans, they usually 
find one that will work for them. The trouble is that all the drug 
makers decided to stay in a narrow channel. As long as they keep putting 
out these look-alikes, we'll never have drugs that are 100 percent 
or even 90 percent successful.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>