<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981228.0063 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
U.S. troops in the Persian Gulf are vaccinated against deadly germs. 
So are FBI agents who are probing a growing number of biological incidents. 
So are some White House officials. Protections against living weapons 
are new to the military and security of the United States, and they 
raise troubling questions. Is this prudence or paranoia? Should everyone 
be vaccinated? How real is the threat? Aren't deadly germs nearly 
impossible for attackers to use without hurting themselves? Isn't 
this threat just another bogeyman, like so many before? Germ weapons, 
though around for centuries, have played no significant role in modern 
warfare and terrorism. Skeptics point to this history and say that 
biological strikes of any consequence are unlikely. But officials 
in Washington from President Clinton on down are taking the issue 
very seriously, with thousands of people and billions of dollars in 
motion to address the germ threat. ``Eventually, this is going to 
hurt us,'' said Robert Blitzer, who recently left the FBI after directing 
its section on domestic terrorism. ``There's no question in my mind.'' 
Moreover, a yearlong inquiry by The New York Times revealed trends 
that suggest the era of germ tranquility may indeed be ending: _ Uprooted 
weapon scientists from Iraq, Russia and South Africa are hunting for 
new jobs and spreading germ secrets. _ Radical states with reputations 
for supporting terror, such as Iran and Libya, are seeking germ weapons. 
_ Terrorists, including Osama bin Laden, are increasingly interested 
in pestilential germs. Some boast openly of being able to kill foes 
with deadly plagues. Today, officials in Washington stress that they 
know of no imminent danger, even while acknowledging the limitations 
of intelligence. Most agree that the threat, while low, is growing. 
The defenses that Washington is quietly erecting, officials say, are 
akin to the insurance that homeowners take out against floods and 
earthquakes. The odds may be small, this argument goes, but precautions 
are warranted since conditions are changing and damage could be great. 
R. James Woolsey, director of Central Intelligence from 1993 to 1995, 
is among the former officials who are worried. Germ terrorism, he 
said in an interview, is ``the single most dangerous threat to our 
national security in the foreseeable future.'' Germ weapons can be 
hard to make and use, contrary to myth and claim. It took the United 
States decades to master the art before renouncing such arms in 1969. 
In the early 1990s, Aum Shinrikyo, a Japanese cult, launched at least 
nine germ attacks in Tokyo that were meant to kill millions. But the 
strikes produced no known injuries or deaths. Dangerous to the attacker 
as well as the attacked if successful, germ weapons are considered 
most practical when used far from the aggressor's homeland; intervening 
land and sea establish what amounts to a quarantine. The main appeal 
of such weapons is that they are incredibly cheap compared to chemical 
and atomic arms. Yet pound for pound, germ weapons rival nuclear ones 
for maiming and killing, and some biological agents are considered 
superior in that regard; in theory they can annihilate many millions 
of people. Clearly, they surpass their nuclear kin as an instrument 
of fright and disruption: Once sown, infections can spread unpredictably, 
since they are alive. Experts especially worry about smallpox, which 
is highly contagious and seen as particularly dangerous since few 
people are now immunized against its ravages. ``To say the threat 
is low is not to minimize its potential,'' said Neil Gallagher, assistant 
director for national security at the FBI. Today, the secrets of germ 
warfare are increasingly up for grabs as weapon scientists from countries 
that made biological arsenals hunt for new jobs. The nomads are from 
Iraq (starting in 1991 after Persian Gulf war), Russia (starting in 
1992 after the Soviet collapse) and South Africa (starting in 1994 
as apartheid fell apart). Russia alone has many thousands of former 
germ warriors increasingly cold, poor and hungry. Legitimate science 
also heightens the risk. The global war against infectious disease 
has produced more than 1,500 germ banks that tend to trade freely 
in deadly microbes. Future strides could make matters even worse. 
Experts agree that research into the genetic foundations of life, 
an approach that promises to cure many diseases, might, in evil hands, 
one day produce weapons that work against only certain races or ethnic 
groups. ``It's difficult but not impossible,'' said Dr. Joshua Lederberg, 
a Nobel laureate in biology who advises Washington on germ warfare. 
More unsettling, he added, is that traditional killers seem to be 
a growing danger right now; he called them ``a monster in the back 
yard.'' Today, at least 17 nations are suspected of having or trying 
to acquire germ weapons. Perhaps they want to deter foes. The wild 
card is that some (Cuba, Iran, Iraq, Libya, North Korea, Syria) are 
also considered architects of terrorism. Libya worked hard to join 
the germ club. In 1994, it sought to hire scientists fleeing South 
Africa's crumbling program, including its head, Dr. Wouter Basson. 
That move, officials say, was foiled by diplomatic pressure from Washington 
and London. However, Libya may have succeeded in hiring (or perhaps 
hiding and employing for Baghdad) Dr. Amir Medidi, a top scientist 
of Iraq's germ effort, U.N. inspectors revealed. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>