<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981228.0297 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Every winter, after flying south from the eastern United States, millions 
of monarch butterflies festoon fir trees in the mountains of Mexico, 
creating one of the world's most dazzling and famous biological spectacles. 
But in spite of intense interest in these beloved insects, the details 
of their travels, like those of so many creatures that do not submit 
to tagging or to voyeuristic techniques like radio-transmitters, have 
largely remained a mystery. Now three new studies, including one released 
Dec. 22 on monarchs, herald the arrival of a powerful new technique 
that can identify, sometimes to within a few miles, where migrating 
animals _ from butterflies to mastodons to humans _have been. The 
new technique takes advantage of different forms, known as isotopes, 
of chemical elements. Biologists have begun discovering that these 
isotopes, present in different amounts in different regions, can leave 
a distinctive chemical signature written in the feather of a bird 
or the wing of a butterfly. By pinpointing crucial places where animals 
spend their lives, for example the major breeding grounds of monarch 
butterflies, the studies are not only illuminating the paths of these 
travelers, but are showing where conservationists should be focusing 
their efforts. In the case of monarchs, much of their breeding ground 
now appears to be on some of the most heavily farmed regions, heavily 
sprayed with pesticides, in the United States. ``This has been a massive 
breakthrough,'' said Dr. Keith Hobson, a research scientist at the 
Canadian Wildlife Service in Saskatoon, who carried out the monarch 
work along with Dr. Len Wassenaar, a research scientist with Environment 
Canada, also in Saskatoon. ``These are questions we could get at no 
other way.'' Dr. Page Chamberlain, a geochemist at Dartmouth College 
and another of the leaders in this newly developing field, said that 
when he first heard that researchers were using isotopes to trace 
elephant movements, ``We thought, `Hey, we can do that. We can do 
it with fish too.' Now within a couple of years we've gone from fish 
to birds to insects. It has a lot of promise.'' It turns out, to biologists' 
delight, that the world is peppered and painted with many different 
kinds of isotopes whose levels in a region vary depending on factors 
like temperature, rainfall, bedrock and soils. Hydrogen, for example, 
which comes in its standard form as well as the heavier form deuterium, 
shows a distinctive pattern of distribution. Depending on whether 
hydrogen in any particular molecule of water is heavy or light, the 
water will be heavy or light. When clouds move inland from over the 
ocean, heavy water rains out first and lighter water further inland, 
creating a stable gradient that can be mapped. Those differences get 
translated into plants that take up the water and then into insects 
that eat the plants, birds that eat the insects and so on, leaving 
an indelible mark on even the flightiest creatures. Researchers can 
refine their ability to pinpoint locations by using multiple isotopes 
with different specificities. Strontium, for example, an element that 
has been used to trace salmon movements, can vary greatly between 
streams just a few miles apart. To track monarchs, researchers used 
carbon and hydrogen, first developing a detailed isotope map. Working 
with Dr. Chip Taylor, an ecologist at the University of Kansas and 
the director of Monarch Watch, a nonprofit research and education 
group, Wassenaar and Hobson enlisted the help of 90 amateur butterfly 
enthusiasts, many of them schoolchildren. These volunteers around 
the country raised monarch caterpillars on milkweed plants, the insect's 
food plant, from their area. The carbon and hydrogen in the wings 
of the resulting butterflies revealed the variation in isotope ratios 
from the Rocky Mountains to the Atlantic _ the breeding range of the 
monarchs that migrate to Mexico. Researchers were then able to study 
the wings of monarchs that had died naturally in 13 wintering sites 
in Mexico. They showed for the first time that these butterflies dangling 
together like crowded Christmas tree ornaments came from all parts 
of the breeding range, flying in and mingling after having grown up 
as caterpillars in places as distant as Massachusetts, Illinois and 
Maryland. The work put to rest a theory that different roosts were 
populated by butterflies from distinct geographic regions. The new 
findings are a big step forward as earlier attempts to track the monarchs 
had been limited to tagging. ``The odds of recovery with little guys, 
like monarchs, are pathetically low,'' Wassenaar said, about one recaptured 
monarch for every several thousand tagged. The most surprising discovery, 
however, was that, while the monarchs' breeding range is quite large, 
half of all the butterflies collected from Mexico had come there from 
a fairly restricted and highly agricultural area including Kansas, 
Nebraska, Iowa, Missouri, Wisconsin, Illinois, Michigan, Indiana and 
Ohio _ soybean and corn country. The bad news, said Dr. Lincoln Brower, 
a monarch researcher at Sweet Briar College, is that ``pesticides 
are killing milkweed plants on a grand scale in this very region, 
what they've shown is the most important breeding region for monarchs.'' 
More worrisome still, Taylor said, is the use of transgenic plants, 
which have been genetically altered so that they can withstand pesticide 
sprays that competing weeds, like milkweeds, cannot. Other transgenic 
plants, like those that produce toxins in their tissues, are of great 
concern to biologists who note that it remains entirely unknown what 
effect these novel plants might have on non-target insects in these 
regions, including monarchs. ``There is a revolution coming along 
in agriculture,'' Taylor said, ``that has great potential to eliminate 
a lot of milkweeds.'' The reach of the new isotope studies is becoming 
so broad that even the dead are not immune from these investigations. 
Dr. T. Douglas Price, archeologist at the University of Wisconsin, 
and an international team of colleagues are tracking the movements 
of ancient humans using strontium deposits in teeth and bones. ``The 
beauty of this is that in people, your tooth enamel forms at birth 
and doesn't change and your bone represents where you lived the last 
10 years of your life,'' he said. ``If the ratios are different, we 
know that the person moved.'' Using such simple principles, Price 
said his team had just completed a study of the peoples of the Mexican 
city of Teotihuacan, testing the idea that different parts of the 
city were ethnic neighborhoods of people from different regions of 
Mexico. ``We've looked at their bones and they're definitely outsiders,'' 
Price said. ``The potential of this technique is really remarkable.'' 
In addition, others are tracking declining songbirds and salmon, and 
two paleontologists, Kathryn Hoppe at Princeton University and Dr. 
Paul Kock at the University of California at Santa Cruz, are reconstructing 
the movements of fossil mastodons and mammoths. Meanwhile, there remain 
many untapped isotopes and as many new questions to be asked. ``I 
think we can look at just about any animal, you name it,'' Hobson 
said. ``Forensic applications are also quite possible. If someone 
wanted to know if marijuana was grown in the southern United States 
or Canada, that would just be a piece of cake.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>