<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981228.0367 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Sheltered from view by bushes on the side of the highway that runs 
north from Mexico City to Toluca, Lt. Col. Hildegardo Bacilio Gomez 
got out of an old Chevrolet Cavalier looking more like a banker than 
a man on the run. Short and chubby, the officer wore pressed navy 
blue pants, a tie and shiny, patent leather shoes. His round face 
was cleanshaven; his hair neatly trimmed. And even though he said 
he felt his life was at risk, he talked mostly in triumphant tones 
about how he and his fledgling dissident military movement had sparked 
a national debate that could lead to public scrutiny of the long-secretive 
Mexican armed forces. ``This is a transcendental movement,'' he said. 
``It is like a snowball that cannot be stopped once it starts to roll 
down a hill.'' Little more than a week after leading a highly unusual 
demonstration by more than 50 uniformed soldiers to protest what they 
contend are human rights abuses within the military justice system, 
Bacilio Gomez, an army surgeon and father of six, has abandoned his 
home. He is spending the holidays in hiding, but not in silence. Immediately 
after the march, a rare display of internal dissent within the armed 
forces, officials of the high military command denounced Bacilio Gomez, 
43, as a traitor and a self-serving criminal, who faces numerous charges 
of disobedience and insubordination. The military's chief prosecutor 
ordered the officer to appear for questioning about his movement, 
the Patriotic Command to Raise the People's Consciousness. And later, 
a warrant was issued for Bacilio Gomez's arrest on charges of desertion. 
The surgeon said he is convinced that he would be tortured or even 
killed if he turned himself in, so he fled his home and has attempted 
to make his case in the press. With the help of relatives and friends, 
he faxes communiques almost every day to news agencies in Mexico City. 
He meets secretly with reporters, often picking them up on isolated 
corners, without any bodyguards or escorts. ``I am going to continue 
to fight,'' he said, in an interview along the Toluca highway over 
the weekend. ``I am going to continue convincing people that if there 
is no justice for a military officer, for a surgeon, for an educated 
man, for a father who lives an honest life, then there will be no 
justice for anyone.'' Bacilio Gomez, who has served in the armed forces 
23 years, and was sent to medical school by the armed forces, acknowledged 
that he has been charged with a dozen military crimes, but he contends 
that the charges against him are false. His problems began, he said, 
on Sept. 1, 1996, when he left his army post at the Central Military 
Hospital in Mexico City to treat an emergency patient in the private 
clinic he has operated for the last 10 years, which he is not prohibited 
from doing as a military doctor. His superior officers charged him 
with insubordination, jailed him for three days and cut his military 
pay to $150 from about $1,500 a month. Each time the surgeon tried 
to protest the charges against him, he said, new charges were added. 
``They take away your salary, your uniform, your job and your dignity,'' 
Bacilio Gomez said. ``Imagine what that does to your mental state.'' 
In two letters, he said, he sought the help of the Mexican secretary 
of defense, Gen. Enrique Cervantes. In the most recent letter, dated 
Sept. 28, Gomez wrote that more than 80 percent of the soldiers in 
military prisons are innocent or were sentenced in unfair trials, 
and he urged the general to create a special commission to review 
his case and the cases of others. ``Many of us are soldiers who lived 
a normal life and behaved in a civil and acceptable way,'' he wrote, 
``but because of some misunderstanding, or a poorly applied rule, 
or vengeance, we have been transformed, emotionally destroyed.'' The 
letter ended with these words: ``Justice cannot wait.'' Cervantes 
did not respond, Bacilio Gomez said. The surgeon began meeting with 
other soldiers who were accused of crimes and were facing military 
trials to plan a demonstration. ``What else could we do?'' he said. 
``They had us on our knees. We had to march or we were going to die 
from frustration.'' On the afternoon of Dec. 18, Bacilio Gomez and 
about 50 other soldiers and officers, most of them in dress uniform, 
marched down the Reforma, one of the city's most prestigious boulevards. 
They carried Mexican flags, a banner with the image of the Virgin 
of Guadalupe, the patron Saint of Mexico, and placards criticizing 
the army high command. At the end of the march, Bacilio Gomez met 
with officials from the leftist Party of the Democratic Revolution 
to present a list of demands, including a call to abolish military 
courts. The party has expressed support for what the movement is fighting 
for. The dissident officers demand that armed forces personnel be 
judged in civilian courts, just like any other citizen. Officials 
in the ministry of defense did not respond to requests for an interview 
about the dissident group. In statements to the news media last week, 
the military's top prosecutor, Rafael Macedo de la Concha, lashed 
out at the protesters, saying that he would launch an investigation 
into each person who marched. And in news releases, the prosecutor 
said that Bacilio Gomez's conduct could be considered ``new and grave 
crimes.'' ``This office feels the need to remind those military officers 
that we must put before our own personal interests the sovereignty 
of the nation, loyalty to institutions and the honor of the army,'' 
Macedo wrote, ``values that Lt. Col. Bacilio Gomez ignores.'' Critics 
of the dissident movement also say that Basilio Gomez's actions appear 
self-serving. At the start of his protest, the surgeon asked the government 
to let him retire from the military and to guarantee him safe passage 
to Venezuela. Roderic Camp, a scholar at Claremont McKenna College 
in California who has written a book on the Mexican military, said 
that although the movement is small and its leaders have dubious motives, 
the group's protest has resonated because it is the first organized 
display of internal dissent within the armed forces. In the past five 
decades, Camp said, individual officers who spoke out against abuses 
were often stripped of their rank and thrown in jail. Five years ago, 
a brigadier general, Jose Francisco Gallardo, was jailed on charges 
that he misappropriated military supplies, including horse feed. The 
charges arose a few weeks after the general wrote an article calling 
for the appointment of an ombudsman to serve as an advocate on behalf 
of soldiers on issues like promotions, salaries and pension funds 
and to support officers accused of military crimes. Last April, the 
general, 50, received two 14-year prison sentences, over the protests 
of national and international human rights groups. Camp also noted 
that there is almost no civilian scrutiny of the Mexican armed forces. 
The secretary of defense and the secretary of the navy are both active-duty 
officers, appointed by the president, but only once in recent history 
has a military secretary been removed from office before the end of 
the six-year term, Camp said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>