<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981228.0069 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Three months ago, Wang Youcai was feeling optimistic about the prospects 
of the China Democratic Party, a fledgling group he had helped to 
found and hoped to register as China's first opposition party. ``I 
think the likelihood I'll be re-arrested is very small,'' he said 
in an interview. But last week, after swift trials, Wang, 32, and 
two other organizers, Xu Wenli and Qin Yong, were sentenced to more 
than a decade each in prison for ``subverting state power.'' And in 
a speech, President Jiang Zemin proclaimed that challenges to Communist 
rule would be ``annihilated in the early stages.'' The surprising 
thing is that all this came at the end of a year when China's rigid 
political system had seemed to be relaxing its grip. So the verdicts 
sent ebullient hopes that China was poised for change crashing to 
the ground _ and not just for the dissidents but for the many Western 
leaders who have flocked to Beijing in the past year, applauding China 
for progress on human rights and legal reform. How had their optimism 
been so far off base? Where their calculations overly simplistic, 
or terribly wrong? In fact, many signs in 1998 suggested that China's 
leaders were ready for a dose of political reform: Jiang discussed 
Tibet and the Tiananmen massacre with President Clinton during an 
hour of live television. China said it would sign the International 
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. Chinese officials played host 
to Mary Robinson, the United Nations High Commissioner on Human Rights. 
But in their optimism, many people overestimated the significance 
of such events, overlooking the obvious: That China remains a one-party 
state, with the rule of the Communist Party written into its constitution. 
``These were all important steps, but I think they were misinterpreted 
by dissidents and by many in the outside world,'' said Andrew Nathan, 
a professor of political science at Columbia University in New York. 
``They decided that initiations for change could come from outside 
rather than inside the Communist Party. But that was never true.'' 
Still, the Clinton visit in June seemed remarkably open, and dissidents 
like Wang thought that the time was ripe to propose an alternative 
party. A few months later, initial attempts to register the party 
in two provinces were not immediately squashed. So the members felt 
further emboldened. In fact the China Democratic Party never even 
came close to registering _ no closer than hearing from a few local 
officials that if its members could show things like an official meeting 
place and a list of members, they were free to turn in an application. 
But for activists who had previously landed in jail for their democratic 
leanings, it seemed like progress, even though no one knew for sure 
just why China's leaders had turned cordial. Was it all a show for 
the West, and particularly for Ms. Robinson, whose visit was just 
weeks away? Or was there genuine debate about political reform among 
the top leadership? The optimists chose to act on the chance that 
the opening was real. ``Especially around August and September there 
seemed to be a thaw,'' said Chen Zhonghe, a Democratic Party member 
in Wuhan. ``And some had the belief that Jiang Zemin might offer a 
different approach. That turned out to be an illusion.'' Foreign governments 
and visiting dignitaries tuned in to the liberalizing signals as well, 
and they too found their hopes raised. Journalists proclaimed a Beijing 
spring. Lawyers from England, Germany and the United States came to 
assist China's much publicized quest for ``rule of law.'' But many 
of these Westerners have little experience in China. And they have 
not spent much time with the older generation of men who run China. 
Following their own democratic interests, they have focused instead 
on the younger, more progressive, often Western-trained officials 
and academics. Clinton met with homeowners. Hillary Rodham Clinton 
visited a groundbreaking women's legal aid center. It was easy to 
leave with optimistic impressions. Now the trials are reminders that, 
although China is undoubtedly moving toward a bit more openness, the 
direction is not necessarily toward Western democracy. Western lawyers 
who recently took part in freewheeling law forums here said they were 
shocked that the dissidents were not even accorded lawyers or open 
trials, as are guaranteed by Chinese law. ``We hear a lot about China 
moving towards `rule of law,' which we tend to conflate with democracy 
or a multi-party system,'' said Sharon Hom, a law professor and expert 
on China at the City University of New York. ``We assume they go hand 
in hand, but that's not true in China. Rule of law in China is to 
promote economic development and modernization. When push comes to 
shove, it does not include political development.'' Many China scholars 
say they hope, at best, for incremental change. ``I think there's 
enough ferment that will cause boundaries on political discourse to 
be slowly expanded outward,'' said Stanley Lubman, a consulting professor 
at Stanford University Law School. ``The Chinese leadership, however, 
has never indicated how much loss of control it will tolerate.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>