<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981228.0346 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Medical preparations for trips to exotic places must include a visit 
to a doctor or travel clinic for inoculations and advice. But even 
trips to more conventional places like a spa in California or your 
cousin's cabin in Colorado should involve gathering items for first 
aid or other health problems that might arise. For many, this counsel 
is redundant. Some of my best friends are hypochondriacs, and I do 
travel with them. I scoff when they climb aboard with Merck Manuals 
bulging in their pockets, and a first-aid kit that's the size of a 
carpenter's toolbox. If anything goes wrong, that kit is the first 
thing we rip open: for sealed sterile pads to wipe wounds, small bandages 
for blisters, something for diarrhea, elastic bandages, instant cold 
packs and a variety of other items not always easily found, particularly 
in the back country. If you are the one forced to carry it, the medical 
kit should contain the essentials and little more. Liquids weigh a 
lot, so one-shot containers of antiseptics are just fine. Be sure 
you have enough rinse for contact lenses. Factory-sealed containers 
raise fewer questions at customs frontiers than repacked pills or 
ointments. If a group is going to be together the whole time, a collective 
kit is a luggage economy. But be sure you have your own extra pair 
of eyeglasses. The most important parts of the medical kit for anyone 
with a chronic condition, and that means many people over 60, are 
hospital records and extra copies of all prescriptions, written not 
for trademark names but for generic names, and thus useful in pharmacies 
everywhere. Dr. Martin Wolfe counsels the State Department on its 
employees' travel needs as well as directing a travel clinic in Washington. 
He says the first priority is gathering information to guide a doctor 
who may have to treat you for the first time: X-rays or electrocardiograms, 
for example. Part of this information-gathering is an examination 
of health insurance policies and medical evacuation coverage, he says. 
A record should be made of all essential numbers, with telephone and 
fax for your primary-care doctor or organization. All this should 
be in carry-on bags. The new edition of ``Health Hints for the Tropics,'' 
edited by Wolfe and published by the American Society of Tropical 
Medicine and Hygiene, contains a practical list for a medical kit. 
Although intended for tropical travel, the list can be amended for 
all sorts of trips. The list is particularly helpful in providing 
generic names for products as well as trade names: for example, dimenhydrinate 
(Dramamine). Over-the-counter items may be hard to find under U.S. 
trade names. Among the nonprescription items listed in the booklet 
are Ace bandages, tincture of benzoin, dental floss and traveler's 
dental kit, extra glasses or contact lenses, hearing-aid batteries, 
thermometer, pocketknife, itch or sunburn medicine, Burow's solution 
(for skin inflammation), sunscreen, insect repellent, a mosquito net 
with the repellent permethrin, a water purification device, oral rehydration 
salts for use in diarrhea, foot powder, analgesics, antiseptics, laxatives, 
anti-diarrheals, motion-sickness medicine, throat lozenges, antihistamines, 
antacids, infant feeding materials, birth-control devices, multivitamins 
and a Sawyer extractor pump for snake and insect bites. The tropical-medicine 
group's list does not include two items I consider useful. One is 
an instant cold pack. These light 5-by-4{-inch plastic packs of ammonium 
nitrate and water become ice-cold when pounded or massaged. Activated, 
they are so cold they are not supposed to be applied longer than 20 
minutes because of the danger of frostbite. Once activated, the packs 
cannot be used again safely. They can be bought in pharmacies or from 
sports specialty shops. As Disposable Cold Packs, they are available 
from Chinook Medical Gear, P.O. Box 1736, Edwards, CO 81632, (800) 
766-1365, which sells three for $3.95 or 10 for $11.95, plus postage. 
This company has a catalog of kits and individual items. On the Web, 
the address is www.chinookmed.com. My other choice qualifies as first 
aid the same way that parents of young children define ``emergency'' 
when they pull up the car in areas marked ``emergency parking only.'' 
This item is called Brief Relief. It is a zip-shut plastic pouch, 
with interior funnel, that contains a material that congeals urine 
to an odorless gel. For obvious reasons, they are favored by winter 
tent-campers. These are sold in the latest Magellan's catalog in a 
four-pack for $9.85, plus shipping. Magellan's, 110 West Sola St., 
Santa Barbara, CA 93101; (800) 962-4943. In addition to the $5 ``Health 
Hints'' booklet, which has 54 pages packed with information, the Society 
of Tropical Medicine has just issued the 1998 edition of its directory 
of specialists in tropical medicine, parasites and travelers' health. 
People preparing for travel who want a reference to a specialist pre- 
or post-travel can find one here; the names of practitioners and clinics 
are cross-referenced by state and town. This book is free to those 
who send a 9-by-12 envelope with $1.70 postage (for U.S. addresses). 
For the booklet and the directory, send a check for $6.70 and the 
unstamped envelope to: American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 
60 Revere Drive, Suite 500, Northbrook, IL 60062; www.astmh.org on 
the Web. Hard-to-Find Books Right now two reliable, inexpensive publications 
for travelers are scarce or out of print, so the tropical-medicine 
booklets may be the best game in town. The federal Centers for Disease 
Control's ``Health Information for International Travel,'' in its 
most recent edition, 1996-97, is in modest supply at the government 
Printing Office. The new edition is due sometime in May, in a new 
format. The old one costs $20 from the Superintendent of Documents, 
Washington, D.C. 20402, where it is publication 017-023-00197-3. It 
can also be found at www.cdc.gov. The nonprofit International Society 
of Travel Medicine's Clinic Directory is now out of print, and the 
organization is seeking sponsorship for a new edition. Shell Oil Co., 
as part of an auto-safety campaign, has urged that all cars contain 
a first-aid kit with the following: bandages, adhesive tape, scissors, 
blankets, latex gloves, a mouth guard (for artificial respiration), 
flashlights, flares and reflectors, plus change for a pay telephone. 
Shell has also published a series of booklets: ``Crash Course, Simple 
Tips That Could Help Save Lives,'' ``Driving Dangers'' and ``Kids 
in the Car.'' The simple tips are worth keeping in the car. Among 
other things, they give a quick explanation of artificial respiration 
steps for those who have not taken an EMS course. These booklets are 
available free at Shell stations, by phone at (800) 376-0200, or on 
the Web at www.countonshell.com. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>