<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981228.0463 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
William R. Perl, who as a young lawyer in Vienna organized a waterborne 
rescue operation that carried thousands of Jews from Nazi-occupied 
Europe to Palestine, died Dec. 24 at his home in Beltsville, Md. He 
was 92. Years after his operation, which he called the Action, Perl 
estimated it had carried 40,000 Jews aboard cattle boats, rundown 
freighters and sailboats on 62 clandestine voyages to Palestine from 
Romania, Greece, Yugoslavia and elsewhere in southern Europe. The 
sealift employed subterfuges, including forged documents, to defy 
the British, who governed Palestine under a League of Nations mandate 
and sought to block large-scale Jewish immigration in hopes of maintaining 
influence in the Arab world. Born in Prague, the son of a textile 
merchant, Perl received a law degree from the University of Vienna 
and during the 1930s was active in the militant Zionist movement led 
by Vladimir Jabotinsky. He began his rescue operation in 1937. A year 
later, after Hitler had taken over Austria, he was summoned by Adolf 
Eichmann, then a lieutenant in the SS, who stuck a pistol in his back, 
demanding to know the whereabouts of a fugitive Jew. Perl did not 
give Eichmann any information but instead interested him in a plan 
to remove Jews from Vienna through sailings to Palestine. When Eichmann 
ultimately rejected the proposal, Perl went to the German Finance 
Ministry in Berlin and, suggesting that he had the backing of Nazi 
authorities, received permission to exchange German marks for British 
pounds that would be used to bribe Greek seamen involved in clandestine 
sailings. Perl told Ralph Blumenthal of The New York Times in 1990 
that the most painful part of his work had been selecting the healthiest 
evacuees for the scarce shipboard space. He said he was still haunted 
by the image of a sick Hungarian woman and her family whom he had 
barred from a transport. ``I convicted them to death,'' he said. Perl 
was arrested in Greece in 1940 _ at the behest of the British, he 
believed _ and put on a train for Berlin. But he cut his wrists as 
the train approached Yugoslavia, was taken off as he had intended 
and was eventually sent back to the Greek authorities. He later escaped 
to Portugal and then Mozambique, where in 1941 he obtained a visa 
for the United States. After that, his operation carried out few missions; 
it ceased entirely in August 1944. Perl enlisted as a private in the 
U.S. Army soon after Pearl Harbor. He became a lieutenant colonel 
in military intelligence, serving in Europe, then joined the Army 
staff at the war crimes tribunal after the German surrender. He was 
the chief interrogator of German SS men who had been involved in the 
massacre of 72 American prisoners of war at Malmedy, Belgium. After 
the war, he received a doctorate in clinical psychology from Columbia 
University and then served with the Army in Munich, counseling soldiers. 
On retiring from the military in 1958, he became a psychologist for 
the District of Columbia's welfare department, taught at George Washington 
University and maintained a private practice in psychology. Perl ultimately 
became an official of the militant Jewish Defense League. In November 
1976, a Federal jury in Baltimore convicted him of conspiring to shoot 
out the windows in the apartments of two Soviet Embassy officials 
in Hyattsville, Md, in protest of the treatment of Soviet Jews. The 
conspiracy conviction was overturned on appeal, although Perl was 
sentenced to three years' probation for a related firearms conviction. 
Perl recounted his rescue efforts in ``The Four-Front War: From the 
Holocaust to the Promised Land'' (Crown, 1979), in which he denounced 
not only the Germans but also the British government, for blocking 
entry of Jews to Palestine, and what he called the ``Jewish establishment,'' 
for failing to take vigorous action to save European Jewry. His second 
book, ``The Holocaust Conspiracy: An International Policy of Genocide,'' 
was published in 1990 by Shapolsky Publishers. Perl's wife, Lore, 
who secretly converted from Roman Catholicism to Judaism shortly before 
their marriage in April 1938, was imprisoned in a concentration camp 
from 1942 to 1944 for trying to hide a Jewish neighbor. Perl was reunited 
with her in Vienna at the war's end. She survives him, as do two sons, 
Solomon, of Olney, Md., and Raphael, of Silver Spring, Md., and four 
grandchildren. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>