<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981228.0409 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Beneath the Smith Engineering Building at the University of North 
Carolina campus here, a dozen gear geeks (and proud of it) are redefining 
the term ``student-athlete.'' Their bodies are sculpted along the 
lines of chess-club members rather than the ripped physiques of football 
players. They are more adept at handling screwdrivers than basketballs. 
But they are pioneers in a new college sport that is just as important 
as football and basketball in this part of the country: auto racing. 
Their racing team, the 49ers of the University of North Carolina at 
Charlotte, is one of six collegiate teams in the country, all in the 
Southeast, and intent on expanding the definition of sport. The 49ers, 
along with Duke, Virginia, South Carolina, North Carolina State and 
North Carolina A&AMP;T, have formed the Intercollegiate Auto Racing 
Association (ICAR), and are revving their motors for a second year. 
They are student-athletes in the real sense of the word: Their racing 
grew out of their education. All are full-time engineering students. 
All were attracted to UNC-Charlotte by a special concentration in 
motor sports offered as part of the school's Bachelor of Science in 
Mechanical Engineering program. They came to western North Carolina 
because it is widely considered the birthplace of the sport. From 
its beginnings in the hollows of North Carolina as a cat-and-mouse 
game between bootleggers in hot rod Chevys and revenue officers intent 
on confiscating their cargo, stock-car racing is now the United States' 
fastest-growing sport. On the NASCAR circuit, attendance has doubled 
to more than 6 million people a year in the 1990's, and television 
ratings are second only to the National Football League. And North 
Carolina-Charlotte sits at the sport's epicenter _ nearly three dozen 
of the teams on NASCAR's top Winston Cup circuit are within a 30-mile 
radius. ``It's like Nashville is if you're a musician,'' said Jon 
McIntire, a freshman from Ottawa, Kan. ``If you want to get into big-time 
racing, you come down here.'' By the standards of the National Collegiate 
Athletic Association, automobile racing shares the same standing as 
archery and rodeo _ which is to say none. It is not one of the association's 
22 sanctioned sports, nor is it subject to NCAA rules and regulations. 
It is separate from the athletic department. ``It is pretty obscure 
as a collegiate sport,'' said NCAA spokesman Wally Renfro of the racing 
league. ``But recognition starts at the institutional level. If you're 
going to have a sport, you need enough schools to compete against. 
So if enough of our members decided this was a viable thing, there's 
a possibility it would be recognized. Right now, it's more of a fringe 
sport than an emerging one.'' The 49ers' practice field is an oil-stained 
garage. Their equipment? It ranges from a $10 screwdriver to a $20,000 
data-acquisition system, a computer that diagnoses everything from 
winning aerodynamics to a driver's command of a steering wheel. Still, 
these athletes have professional dreams _ of being stock-car drivers, 
or engineers or crew chiefs in charge of making automobiles race faster 
around asphalt ovals. ``You got to take what's in your head, get up 
underneath the car and put it to work on the set up,'' said Josh Watkins, 
a sophomore who is the crew chief _ like being a captain _ in a down-home 
summation of college racing. ``Then, hopefully, get it the around 
the track faster than the other guys.'' Whether even the best stock-car 
drivers _ such as the indisputable king, Richard Petty, or the current 
sensation, Jeff Gordon _ are athletes in the truest sense of the word 
is an ongoing debate among sports aficionados. The student racers 
don't care to participate in that debate. They can laughingly refer 
to themselves as ``gear geeks'' or ``motorheads.'' But like other 
intercollegiate athletes, they have brought dedication and devotion 
to their sport. Most have grown up around race tracks, driving on 
the Go Kart circuit or working in garages on cars that race on dirt. 
They all still dream of rolling onto Victory Lane, but will settle 
for getting there alongside the race car rather than behind the wheel. 
``God puts some of us on earth to drive them; the rest of us to work 
on them,'' said David Kapp, a 1996 graduate of the program, who has 
parlayed his college experience into a job as an engineer at Hendrick 
Motorsports, which has 250 employees including the reigning Winston 
Cup champion, Gordon. They race against other colleges on tracks ranging 
from one-fifth to three-eighths of a mile at places like nearby Concorde 
Motor Speedway or Orange County Speedway in Roxboro, N.C. (By contrast, 
the superspeedway in Charlotte is 1.5 miles.) They drive what are 
called Legends cars _ five-eighths-scale models of 1932 to 1934 Fords 
and Chevys that are equipped with 1200-cubic-centimeter motorcycle 
engines and run atop hard, wide tires that prevent them from rolling 
over. The speeds range from 50 to 80 mph, sometimes increasing to 
100 mph on a long straightaway. ``You can't win a race just because 
you have a good set of hands on the wheel,'' said Dr. Bob Johnson, 
chairman of North Carolina-Charlotte's Department of Mechanical Engineering 
Sciences, who runs the auto racing team. ``You have to know about 
setting up a car. It is all about dynamics. This has everything to 
do with experiential education.'' It's also a very expensive education. 
The cars _ each team has one _ cost $13,000, maintaining and rebuilding 
can cost up to $20,000 a year.The schools carry insurance coverage 
for the students, but it's up to the race teams to transform nasty 
crashes on Turn Two into a practicum on making their cars go faster. 
Local contracting companies, auto-parts stores, friends and family 
are solicited for donations to augment the school's funding. There 
are plans to go after national sponsors, but for now the college league 
resembles the sport's nascent days when teams relied on borrowed tools, 
elbow grease and backyard know-how to get them around the track. So 
far, crowds at the Saturday morning races have ranged from several 
hundred to several thousand. There is a qualifying lap, three heats 
to determine the starting order and, finally, the main event _ three 
heats of anywhere from 15 to 20 laps of side-by-side racing. The student 
racers know what the crowds come for. ``They want to see us wreck 
and tear up the car,'' said Watkins, the crew chief who is also one 
of the 49ers' three drivers. ``We do tear them up, too. Sometimes, 
the greatest driving skill isn't exactly on display.'' In fact, the 
49ers' car is currently under complete reconstruction after a smash-up 
last month during the fall exhibition season with Duke. Team members, 
of course, insist that the accident was the Blue Devils' fault. But 
now they have their work cut out for them if they are to defend the 
inaugural Intercollegiate Auto Racing Association championship, beginning 
in February. The circuit will expand to six races and the title race 
will be run at Charlotte Motor Speedway. Call it the Rose Bowl of 
stock-car racing. But the real checkered flag for the students is 
keeping their racing dreams alive. The engineering department here 
has created an advisory board of professionals from Hendrick Motorsports, 
Petty Enterprises and the other big-time racing teams. There are internships 
and part-time jobs available. ``The point is to get your foot in the 
door, whether it's sweeping floors or busting tires,'' says Watkins, 
who works part time for one of the NASCAR teams. And sometimes, those 
racing dreams are spoken of with an older voice and in a startling 
accent. Johnson neither twangs nor drawls when he talks about stock-car 
racing. He is a New Yorker who looks out the window of his office 
here and can see a banked, quarter-mile oval sitting majestically 
where an old running track now lies. He points out that Hollywood 
has discovered racing, as has Madison Avenue. Earlier this month, 
the Smithsonian Institution recognized the sport's cultural contribution 
to the nation by sponsoring a symposium in Washington as part of NASCAR's 
50th anniversary. With an accent closer to New York egg cream than 
Southern iced tea, Johnson asked a question certain to prompt future 
discussion throughout academia. ``Why not good hard racing on college 
campuses?'' he asked. Why not? 
</TEXT>
</DOC>