<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981228.0359 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As delicate negotiations over a new international policy on Iraq go 
on behind the scenes here, President Saddam Hussein is complicating 
his situation in the Security Council with a stream of bellicose statements 
directed both at his enemies and at friends like Russia, France and 
his Arab neighbors. In addition, Iraqis are sending mixed signals 
about their remaining ties with the United Nations, which administers 
a huge relief program in the country. Iraq has already said it will 
never allow arms inspectors back, but it has generally cooperated 
with aid workers. In recent days, however, Iraqi officials have refused 
to allow U.N. relief experts to survey damage done to civilian sites 
by U.S. and British air attacks on Iraq almost two weeks ago. Some 
U.N. officials say they believe that this is because damage to civilian 
buildings was very light, countering Iraqi claims of more damage and 
casualties. Since the attacks, Iraqi officials have couched their 
verbal assaults in racial and anti-Jewish terms, saying ``Anglo Saxons'' 
dominate the arms inspection system and that President Clinton and 
Prime Minister Tony Blair of England are under the influence of ``Zionist 
cliques.'' The Iraqis threatened to shoot down U.S. and British aircraft, 
and Monday they tried to hit U.S. planes with surface-to-air missiles. 
Saddam has also started denouncing the French, who have gone out of 
their way to help Iraq here. The attacks began after both President 
Jacques Chirac and Prime Minister Lionel Jospin said the Iraqi leadership 
bore responsibility for the bombing by refusing to cooperate with 
arms inspections. French officials, who are willing to move swiftly 
to lift an oil embargo and other sanctions against Iraq, have also 
infuriated Saddam by proposing that oil income be monitored by the 
United Nations indefinitely so it cannot be spent on prohibited weapons. 
Saddam wants a no-strings-attached escape from the sanctions imposed 
after the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait in 1990. Iraqi ire is also being 
directed at Arab nations. A tone of frustration mixed with desperation 
has surfaced in speeches by Saddam and his ministers, who attack Arab 
leaders for backing away from Iraq when they should, in Iraq's view, 
be lining up to break the sanctions. Arab support has been slipping 
away from Saddam. On Monday, the Iraqis received two more blows. First, 
a meeting of Arab League foreign ministers scheduled for Wednesday 
at the request of Yemen, one of Iraq's strongest allies in the Arab 
world, was postponed until Jan. 24 at the request of several Persian 
Gulf nations, including Kuwait and Saudi Arabia. The ministers were 
to plan a meeting of Arab leaders to discuss Iraq. In a second blow, 
Egypt appeared to put an end to Iraqi hopes for a high-level meeting, 
at which Saddam's government intended to press its demand that the 
Arab League defy international sanctions. Arab League diplomats say 
they have tried to exert a moderating influence in the region and 
do not want to be drawn into support of Saddam in his defiance of 
the United Nations. ``It is not realistic to think that some fraternal 
Arab countries are going to take part in a summit attended by high-ranking 
members of the Iraqi leadership,'' an Egyptian government spokesman 
said Monday. In Cairo, President Hosni Mubarak took direct aim at 
Iraqi leaders in an interview with the government newspaper Al Gomhuriya. 
``We opposed the air attack,'' Mubarak said, ``because in the final 
reckoning, it is the people of Iraq who pay the price. We sympathize 
with the Iraqi people because we know that our brothers and sons in 
this fraternal country can do nothing about it and the regime in power 
is the root of all problems.'' On Sunday and Monday, Iraqi officials 
appeared to threaten an end to the ``oil for food'' program under 
which they are allowed to sell up to $5.2 billion in oil every six 
months to buy goods like medicine, food and essential equipment. On 
Monday, Trade Minister Mohammed Mehdi Saleh backed away from comments 
on the subject he made to AP television on Sunday, saying he was talking 
about Iraq's future plans once sanctions were lifted, when there would 
be no need for the program. But another ministry repeated the threat 
to end the program sooner, Bloomberg News reported from Baghdad. Saddam 
has never liked the ``oil for food'' program, which he rejected for 
more than five years after it was proposed by the Security Council. 
But it was allowed to continue uninterrupted by the Iraqis during 
the recent bombing raids. John Mills, spokesman here for U.N. relief 
programs in Iraq, said Monday that the Iraqis exported 17.6 million 
barrels of oil from Dec. 19 to 25, the largest amount in any weekly 
period. The exports were worth $145 million; the oil sold for $8.23 
a barrel, a record low price. When the program began in 1986 the price 
was about $18 a barrel. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>