<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981228.0406 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In 1994, when Bosnia was nearly crushed by the attacking Serbs, President 
Clinton decided to make no objection if Croatia violated a U.N. embargo 
by letting arms go through to the Bosnians. Our ambassador to Croatia, 
Peter Galbraith, was told to say _ if President Franjo Tudjman asked 
whether we objected _ that he had ``no instructions'' on the point. 
Tudjman asked, got the answer and let the arms through. They made 
a crucial difference in saving Sarajevo and Bosnia. Two years later 
The Los Angeles Times told the story, emphasizing that some of the 
arms had come from Iran. Sen. Bob Dole, the prospective Republican 
candidate for president, demanded an investigation. Speaker Newt Gingrich 
appointed a special subcommittee with a $1 million budget. He named 
as chairman Rep. Henry Hyde. There was in fact no mystery to investigate, 
and no failure. Galbraith and others involved testified freely about 
what they had done _ without regrets, because the policy had been 
a great success. Bosnia survived. So did the new Muslim-Croat Federation 
brought into being by the United States. The military balance shifted 
against the Serbs, making possible the Dayton Accords. They paved 
the way for the expulsion of Iranian agents from Bosnia. But Henry 
Hyde was determined to find something that could be called wrongdoing. 
So the committee pursued, among other things, a report that Galbraith 
had dated an American journalist while he and she were in Croatia. 
Both were single, so the most prurient bluenose could not have objected. 
But committee investigators deposed Galbraith's secretary and a member 
of his staff to get details of the relationship _ until a lawyer objected. 
Galbraith was also questioned about how he had been told what to say 
to Tudjman. A White House assistant had telephoned, he said, passing 
on word from Anthony Lake, the president's national security adviser, 
to say that he had ``no instructions.'' The assistant added that Lake 
had said it with a smile and a raised eyebrow, Galbraith testified, 
saying that he had made a note of that. The committee then questioned 
Lake and his assistant, and they said they could not remember the 
smile and raised eyebrow. Hyde and his committee, implying that Galbraith 
had made that up, referred his testimony to the Justice Department 
for criminal investigation. Why mention that two-year-old investigation 
now? Because it shows how petty, nasty and partisan Henry Hyde was 
in a situation where no wrong had been done. His purpose was to find 
something _ anything _ to discredit the Clinton Administration in 
an election year. If individuals were hurt, their reputations damaged 
for no reason, so be it. Casual McCarthyism. When the House Judiciary 
Committee started its impeachment inquiry, the Washington press corps 
trotted out its usual adjectives for chairman Hyde: grandfatherly, 
nonpartisan. In reality, Hyde performed exactly as he had in 1996: 
as a relentless partisan. When Salon, an Internet magazine, broke 
the news that Hyde had had a five-year affair with a married woman 
starting when he was 41, Republican leaders reacted with outrage, 
demanding an FBI investigation of how the truth had been told. They 
can dish it out, but they think they should be immune to such attacks 
themselves. The press made little of Hyde's hypocrisy in that episode. 
Nor has it done much with the discovery that Rep. Bob Barr, a leading 
advocate of impeachment, and Trent Lott, the Senate majority leader, 
spoke to a virulent racist group: something more deplorable than anything 
President Clinton has done. But the public understands. I think that 
is one large reason why an overwhelming majority continues to support 
Clinton. Most Americans did not like the vengeful partisan tone of 
the impeachment process. They did not like Kenneth Starr's bullying 
of Monica Lewinsky and her mother, or his prying into the most private 
side of their lives, or his publishing of gratuitous sexual detail. 
They understood that breaking down the wall between private and public 
life is the hallmark of tyranny. In all of this the American sense 
of fair play was offended. And as Joe McCarthy learned, you offend 
that at your peril. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>