<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981228.0442 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
John A. Gotti, the man accused of being the powerful acting boss of 
the Gambino crime family, heeded the advice of his imprisoned father 
and rejected a plea bargain Monday that would have sent him to prison 
for up to eight years, close associates of Gotti said. Negotiations 
collapsed after months of intensive bargaining with federal prosecutors, 
defense lawyers said. ``There is no deal,'' Gerald Shargel, a lawyer 
for Gotti, said Monday. ``Negotiations are finished.'' Relatives and 
friends of Gotti, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said his 
decision was heavily influenced by his father, John J. Gotti, who 
is serving a life prison term without the possibility of parole after 
being convicted in 1991 on charges of being the Gambino family boss. 
Gotti's associates said the son's lawyers recently met with the elder 
Gotti at the federal penitentiary in Springfield, Mo., and that the 
former Gambino boss advised his son to turn down the offer. Shargel 
said he notified government lawyers Monday afternoon that the younger 
Gotti would not accept what prosecutors said was a final proposal 
for a reduced sentence in return for a guilty plea to reduced charges: 
six and a half to eight years in prison and a $1 million fine. And 
while it is still possible that the government could make another 
offer, Shargel said it seemed unlikely. ``As far as I am concerned, 
and apparently as far as the government is concerned, the negotiations 
are over and this case will be tried,'' he said. By standing trial 
in a broad racketeering case, Gotti, 34, will face a possible prison 
sentence of 20 years and confiscation of about $10 million of his 
assets if he is convicted. Prosecutors contend that the assets, including 
two luxury homes on Long Island, real estate in Queens and $358,000 
in cash that was seized from a safe, were obtained with profits from 
criminal enterprises. Gotti's rejection of the deal also means that 
seven co-defendants, including three men whom prosecutors identified 
as high-ranking capos, or heads of Gambino family units known as crews, 
will go on trial. Lawyers and law enforcement officials said those 
defendants had been prepared to plead guilty to lesser charges, but 
those deals fell apart when Gotti rejected the offer made to him. 
Prosecutors had insisted that all eight defendants accept what was 
termed a global agreement under which they would all plead guilty 
to racketeering allegations. In fact, the officials said, such a deal 
was almost completed over the weekend. One defendant, John D'Amico, 
64, who investigators say is a Gambino capo, was scheduled to plead 
guilty Monday in U.S. District Court in White Plains, N.Y., but the 
hearing was canceled when Gotti turned down the deal offered to him. 
Marvin Smilon, a spokesman for Mary Jo White, the U.S. attorney for 
the Southern District of New York, whose office is prosecuting Gotti, 
declined to comment Monday on the breakdown in bargaining. Law enforcement 
officials said Ms. White's office had refused to consider individual 
pleas from Gotti's co-defendants because doing so would have undercut 
the evidence against Gotti, the lead defendant. Associates of Gotti 
said his trial lawyers, Shargel and Bruce Cutler, recently reviewed 
the government's final plea terms with the elder Gotti, who is recovering 
from throat cancer surgery in a prison hospital. According to the 
associates, Gotti, 58, told the lawyers to inform his son that he 
opposed the deal and believed his son would be acquitted. Cutler and 
Shargel declined to comment on their discussions with the elder Gotti. 
``All I can say,'' Cutler said, ``is that the son wants to fight the 
case and clear his name, and the father believes he will win.'' Another 
defense lawyer, James LaRossa, said plea deals for the other seven 
defendants had collapsed. ``There will be a trial,'' said LaRossa, 
who is representing Gregory DePalma, 66. Prosecutors have identified 
DePalma as an acting Gambino capo. The younger Gotti was indicted 
in January on charges that he had led an organized-crime enterprise 
that had engaged in extortion, illegal gambling, loan sharking and 
labor racketeering. Most of the original 23 defendants in the case 
have pleaded guilty to reduced charges. People close to the defense 
team said most of the remaining eight defendants had agreed to deals 
after reviewing the evidence implicating them, including 7,000 electronically 
intercepted conversations. The evidence against Gotti, prosecutors 
said, includes testimony by one Mafia defector and taped conversations 
in which his co-defendants talked about his role in extorting more 
than $1 million from Scores, a strip club in Manhattan, and of turning 
over to him $50,000 in protection payments from a construction company. 
Federal and state experts on organized crime said the proposed deal 
would have been a significant victory in a long campaign by the FBI 
and prosecutors to undermine the Gambino family, which until the early 
1990s was the nation's most influential Mafia group. And imprisoning 
the younger Gotti, the experts said, would have sent a far-reaching 
message: All Mafia leaders are vulnerable. It would also have weakened 
the influence of the Gottis in the Gambino family, law enforcement 
officials said. Investigators contend that the son has been safeguarding 
his father's financial interests and trying to insure that a share 
of the crime group's profits is funneled to the Gottis. He is under 
house arrest in Oyster Bay on Long Island and free on $10 million 
bail. Although the younger Gotti had the title of acting boss bestowed 
on him by his father and was a ranking leader in the family, investigators 
said, he looked out mainly for his own and his father's financial 
interests. And, until recently, the investigators said, a three-man 
committee was responsible for most of the family's day-to-day activities 
and its links to the New York metropolitan region's four other mob 
families. The convictions of the elder Gotti and other high-ranking 
Gambino leaders in the late 1980s and early 1990s led to the Gambino 
family's being supplanted by the Genovese crime group as the nation's 
largest and most potent Mafia faction. Both groups use the New York 
area as their base of operations. Investigators say the Gambino family 
is far from finished, with an estimated 150 inducted or sworn members 
and extensive profits from illegal gambling, loan sharking and labor 
racketeering. If he had accepted a plea deal, Gotti would have spared 
the government a long, complex trial and the nagging possibility of 
an acquittal because of several questionable prosecution witnesses. 
Lawyers who have studied the evidence said the prosecution's pivotal 
witnesses would confront fierce cross-examination and would have to 
admit that they had agreed to testify against Gotti only after making 
deals to avoid harsh sentences for violent crimes and multimillion-dollar 
frauds. The trial is scheduled to begin in February in White Plains. 
But Shargel said Monday that he would ask for a delay because of his 
involvement in another trial that is under way. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>