<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981228.0452 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Remember the date: Dec. 28, 1998. There has never been another like 
it in the history of the National Football League because in a six-hour 
period Monday, five head coaches lost their jobs. In what is being 
called Bloody Monday by team executives and coaches around the league, 
the dismissals were carried out for a variety of reasons, ranging 
from not living up to high expectations to failing to keep a tight 
rein on players. The coaches dismissed were Dom Capers of the Carolina 
Panthers, Ray Rhodes of the Philadelphia Eagles, Dennis Erickson of 
the Seattle Seahawks, Dave Wannstedt of the Chicago Bears and Ted 
Marchibroda of the Baltimore Ravens. With the earlier resignations 
of June Jones from the San Diego Chargers to coach at the University 
of Hawaii and the opening created with the expansion Cleveland Browns, 
there are seven coaching vacancies. And that does not include other 
possible firings, perhaps Washington Redskins Coach Norv Turner among 
them. Bruce Coslet's job with the Cincinnati Bengals supposedly had 
been in jeopardy, but General Manager Mike Brown asked him to return 
Monday despite a 3-13 record. It is unlikely the Green Bay Packers 
Coach Mike Holmgren will return next season. He may opt to leave for 
a more lucrative _ and powerful _ combination of general manager and 
coach. Holmgren could end up with the San Francisco 49ers, and if 
that happens, Coach Steve Mariucci could be coaching in Cleveland 
next season. People around the NFL were stunned by the number of dismissals 
in such a short burst of time, the day after the regular season ended 
except for the Jacksonville Jaguars-Pittsburgh Steelers game Monday 
night. ``This was unbelievable,'' said Ernie Accorsi, the New York 
Giants' general manager. ``I've never seen anything like it. No one 
has.'' Why so many coaches? There is a theory that the quick success 
of men like Bill Parcells with the New York Jets and Dan Reeves with 
the Atlanta Falcons _ both having turned sorry franchises into division 
winners in only two years _ has lowered the patience level of owners. 
An owner thinks: If Parcells can take a 1-15 team to 12-4 in the football 
equivalent of the blink of an eye, why can't my coach? ``It's a bittersweet 
moment,'' said the Ravens' owner, Art Modell. ``I'm saddened by what 
I had to do today, but I look forward to winning again. I didn't come 
from Cleveland to Baltimore to lose.'' The success of Parcells, Reeves 
and the Denver Bronocs' Mike Shanahan _ all with total control of 
their respective organizations _ means that there will probably be 
an increase in such dual positions. The NFL is about copying trends, 
and that is the biggest one going now. But there were particular factors 
in each of the firings. The Panthers' Capers was coach of the year 
in 1996, when he led them to a 13-5 record and National Football Conference 
West title. But 7-9 and 4-12 seasons followed. He was seen as a disciplinarian 
when he first got the job, but there were several major problems that 
marked his tenure. Quarterback Kerry Collins was cut. This month running 
back Fred Lane was benched for one game after grabbing his crotch 
while celebrating a touchdown. Linebacker Kevin Greene was suspended 
for a game after attacking an assistant coach, Kevin Steele, on the 
sideline. The problems in Seattle and Chicago were poor drafting and 
not making the most of talent. The Seahawks' Erickson went 8-8, 7-9, 
8-8 and 8-8, despite the team having acquired high-priced free agents 
like running back Ricky Watters, linebacker Darrin Smith, guard Brian 
Habib, center Kevin Glover and punter Jeff Feagles. Those players 
cost the owner, Paul Allen, some $15 million in signing bonuses. The 
Bears' Wannstedt made several questionable personnel moves, including 
signing quarterback Rick Mirer, and before this season, the coach 
was stripped of much of his power. The Ravens' Marchibroda had a strong 
bond with some of his players, but much more was expected than six 
victories. The Eagles' Rhodes, coach of the year in 1995, worked with 
four different general managers in four years. ``If you really want 
to be truthful with yourself, I think I have to say that I made some 
mistakes early on,'' said the Eagles' owner, Jeffrey Lurie. ``I think 
I should have been a lot more determined to make sure we had a very 
strong player personnel department as the top priority, day one, and 
insisted on changes when I bought the team.'' The Jets and Giants 
have strong contenders for head coaching positions. The Jets' defensive 
coordinator, Bill Belichick, and the Giants' defensive coordinator, 
John Fox, will probably be considered by many teams. The Browns interviewed 
the Minnesota Vikings' offensive coordinator, Brian Billick, Monday, 
and the expansion team is expected to speak to the Bronocs' offensive 
coordinator, Gary Kubiak, on Tuesday. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>