<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981228.0391 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
From her fifth-floor apartment in a freshly converted flour mill, 
Dana Crawford surveyed the abandoned railroad yards at the core of 
downtown Denver and envisioned lofts and more lofts. As carpenters 
built 350 apartments and bulldozers opened utility trenches for 3,500 
more, Ms. Crawford, a developer, waved to a cluster of vacant red-brick 
warehouses near the freight tracks and predicted, ``All these warehouse 
buildings will be turned into lofts.'' Within a one-mile radius of 
Union Station, Denver's beaux arts historic core, the city is halfway 
through a decade-long downtown investment of $1 billion in three sport 
stadiums, an aquarium and urban shopping complexes. Following retail 
and entertainment, downtown is now embarking on an additional $1 billion 
in residential construction. A total of 1,334 apartments are now being 
built or converted downtown, more than the total of the last four 
years. Denver's move toward downtown living is part of a national 
trend, according to a new study of 24 large American cities by the 
Brookings Institution and the Fannie Mae Foundation research groups. 
In a reversal of a trend that started after World War II, in which 
inner cities lost population, each city forecast growth in the number 
of people living downtown. By 2010, the study reported, downtown populations 
are expected to quadruple in Houston, to 9,500 people, to more than 
triple in Cleveland, to 21,000, and to nearly triple in Denver, to 
9,250. Growth is also expected in bigger cities, with Chicago's downtown 
population forecast to increase by a third, to 152,000. But the migration 
downtown is especially striking in Denver, a sprawling city of houses 
and low-rise buildings. ``Denver fits the pattern of a Western automobile 
city, so for a Sun Belt city, what is happening here is very inspiring,'' 
said Brad Segal, an urban consultant who is on the board of the International 
Downtown Association, an organization of city planners specializing 
in downtowns. Noting that delegations from cities as diverse as Albuquerque, 
N.M., and Baltimore have recently toured downtown Denver to get ideas, 
Segal added, ``Most of the cities I work in want to be like Denver.'' 
Planners caution that the move downtown, here and elsewhere, is a 
minitrend in the face of continuing suburban expansion. Indeed, while 
the city of Denver's population grew by 2 percent, or 12,000 people, 
since 1980, to about 500,000 people, its suburbs grew by a third in 
the same time, adding 505,000 people. But looking ahead, Segal and 
other urbanists believe that demographics and accumulated wealth are 
pointing to radical transformations in American downtowns in the coming 
decades. Virtually all the people moving into downtown Denver do not 
have children living at home. They are singles, childless couples 
or older people, the ``empty nesters'' whose children have left home 
for college and careers. By 2010, 72 percent of American households 
will not have children at home, said Dao Nguyen, a research analyst 
who helped prepare the Brookings study. He added, ``That could be 
a boon for cities.'' In Colorado, the fastest-growing population segment 
in coming years is forecast to be households of people 54 years old 
and over. ``The baby boomers' watermelon is going through the demographic 
snake,'' Segal said, ``but there is also this watermelon of wealth.'' 
In addition to the continuing transfer of wealth from the World War 
II generation to the baby boomers, a new change in tax is expected 
to help ``empty nesters'' cash out of the suburbs. Last year, a change 
in federal tax laws raised to $500,000 from $125,000 the portion of 
earnings from the sale of a primary residence that is free of a capital 
gains tax. ``An older couple can put half the money in a downtown 
apartment, and save the rest for travel or a second residence,'' said 
Larry Grace, regional vice president of Trillium Corp., a major downtown 
developer here. Banking on this phenomenon, developers for Trillium 
plan to break ground next year for 700 apartments, the first of as 
many as 4,000 that are to be built over the next decade on 50 acres 
behind Union Station. The apartment demand is there. A recent survey 
of a sample of the 110,000 people who work in downtown Denver found 
that 60 percent of those surveyed were interested in living downtown. 
Waiting lists immediately form when renovation projects are announced 
under a city program to provide downtown apartments at rents affordable 
for working-class and middle-class people. On the free market, prices 
have soared. In one decade, what was once known as Lower Downtown 
has been transformed from skid row to a neighborhood called LoDo that 
is Denver's second-most-expensive housing market, after Cherry Creek. 
``I wanted to get $3,000-a-month rent,'' Mike McPhee said of renting 
his 1,900-square-foot LoDo apartment earlier this year when he moved 
to a smaller place. ``The real estate agent brought in five different 
guys, none of whom had any trouble with that kind of rent.'' McPhee's 
price was $19 a square foot a year. In 1987, John Hickenlooper, a 
downtown pioneer, rented commercial space in an adjacent building 
for $1 a square foot a year. Sales prices for finished LoDo lofts 
have jumped from $82 a square foot in 1990, when Mrs. Crawford did 
the first loft renovation here, to $300 a square foot on some of the 
higher-priced lofts. In a sign of the neighborhood's cachet, the new 
residents include Leo Kiely, president of Coors Brewing Co., and David 
Bailey, president of Norwest Bank of Colorado. Frederick Mayer, who 
made his fortune in oil and gas in the early 1980s, just completed 
building a multimillion-dollar town house in the neighborhood. ``When 
someone can live anywhere they want, and they choose to live in Lower 
Downtown, it's a statement about how the city is changing,'' said 
Jim Olson, a Seattle architect and the designer of Mayers town house. 
LoDo's runaway appeal comes from a constellation of factors: declining 
urban crime, rising congestion of suburbs, a powerful regional economy 
and a host of entertainment venues within walking distance, including 
dozens of new restaurants, a 9,300-seat theater complex, a new baseball 
stadium for the Colorado Rockies, a new football stadium for the Denver 
Broncos and a basketball and hockey stadium for the Nuggets and the 
Avalanche. Crime, long a barrier to moves by older people into city 
centers, has dropped in Denver, as in much of the nation. Here it 
declined 25 percent in the last five years. ``This is one of the safest 
police districts in Denver,'' said Peggy Houser, who was out on a 
recent evening with her husband, John, a retired businessman, to watch 
the lighting of Union Station for Christmas. ``It is a real neighborhood. 
We see a lot of people on the street we know.'' As highway commuting 
distances lengthen, some Denverites dream of the walkable city. ``We 
just got rid of one car,'' said Larry Kravetz, the owner of a small 
securities firm, who now walks from his new loft to his office, five 
blocks away. ``We feel like we are on vacation the whole time.'' Kravetz 
who moved his family to LoDo this summer from a southern Denver suburb, 
sounded a note increasingly heard here, describing the suburbs as 
``sterile.'' Six blocks from his loft, Joyce Meskis, owner of the 
Tattered Cover bookstore, agreed. ``A city's soul activities,'' she 
said, ``the art center, the theaters, the museums, the main library 
_ all of that usually centers around the urban core.'' For example, 
a LoDo resident could choose one recent week from among the following 
cultural activities, all within walking distance: book signings by 
three authors at the Tattered Cover, a performance of the musical 
``Rent'' by a touring cast at the Denver Center for the Performing 
Arts, a performance of ``The Nutcracker'' by the Colorado Ballet and 
``600 Years of British Painting,'' a new exhibit at the Denver Art 
Museum. Last month, Pavilions, a $107 million urban shopping and entertainment 
complex, opened on the 16th Street pedestrian mall downtown. Covering 
two blocks, it offers 40 shops, 15 movie screens and dining at the 
Hard Rock Cafe and Wolfgang Puck. Redolent with history, this neighborhood 
of three- and four-story red-brick buildings was built on the site 
of Denver's first gold rush settlement, 140 years ago. LoDo's transformation 
has been helped by Colorado's economic boom. Through August, the state 
ranked third in the nation, after Nevada and Arizona, in the number 
of residential housing permits issued in proportion to population. 
Fueled in part by high-technology expansion, the office vacancy rate 
in downtown Denver has plummeted to 7.5 percent today from 30 percent 
a decade ago. While metropolitan Denver's unemployment rate has dropped 
to 2.8 percent, not all boats have been raised. With gentrification, 
the adult homeless population in LoDo has largely shifted a few blocks 
to the north, where the police generally do not bother people drinking 
on stoops. ``Young people increasingly know that they are not welcome 
downtown if they are not carrying a Gap shopping bag,'' said David 
DeForest-Stalls, director of the Spot, a center for street youths 
and runaways. ``If they want to keep from being frisked every 10 to 
15 minutes, they need to stay out of downtown.'' Noting that he was 
offering an alcohol and drug-free center for young people, DeForest-Stalls 
criticized the heavy concentration of bars in LoDo, adding, ``It's 
ironic to see Denver's pride in creating an alcohol mecca.'' But Tom 
Noel, a Colorado historian, sees downtown Denver returning to its 
historic roots, as a noisy, sometimes raucous, people-filled urban 
village. ``On the eve of Prohibition, Larimer Street had 60 saloons,'' 
said Noel, a professor who has studied Denver's entertainment habits, 
past and present. Noting that tourists now come from Wyoming and Kansas 
to visit LoDo, he added, ``It's going back to the old idea of Denver 
as the drinking capital for the hinterland.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>