<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981228.0254 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Life and death lie nowhere so close together as in the human cell's 
counting device for limiting how often it can divide. The device is 
a sort of tally stick that gets shorter at each division. When it 
runs out, the cell dies. The telomere, as biologists call the device, 
is overruled in only two kinds of cell and as a result both are immortal, 
in the sense that they can go on dividing indefinitely with no sign 
of growing old. One is the cells of the germline, the egg cells and 
sperm-generating cells, that remain ever youthful from one generation 
of people to another. The other is tumor cells. Biologists announced 
last January that they had learned the death-defying secret known 
to germline and tumor cells, that of how to override the telomere-shortening 
system. The discovery stirred a euphoric ferment of proposals for 
immortalizing the various body tissues that are especially prone to 
give out in old age and disease. But a little knowledge is a dangerous 
thing. Would the revitalized tissues gain the endurance of germline 
cells or the lethal exuberance of tumor cells? The two teams of biologists 
that announced their telomere-override method in January now report 
in the journal Nature Genetics that their cells are still growing 
and dividing with no sign of cancerous tendencies. One team, led by 
Choy-Pik Chiu of Geron Corp., which owns rights to the telomere-override 
component, says its laboratory cultures of immortalized cells have 
doubled more than 200 times, with their anti-cancer genes still in 
good order. This confirms the idea that the cells will ``provide therapeutic 
opportunities for age-related diseases,'' the Geron scientists assert. 
Usually cells divide only 50 times or so, depending on their type, 
before telomere shortening drives them into senescence. The other 
team, headed by Woodring Wright and Jerry Shay at the University of 
Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas, said their altered cells 
had gone through 280 doublings, also without showing any of the wayward 
behavior typical of cancer cells. Both groups enabled their cells 
to defeat the telomere-shortening system by activating an enzyme called 
telomerase, which builds telomeres back up to their normal length. 
In normal cells an essential component of the enzyme, the template 
on which it rebuilds the telomeres, is absent because the gene that 
makes it is switched off. To immortalize their cells, the two groups 
inserted into them a switched-on form of the human telomerase template 
gene. Does the new result mean that cells with activated telomerase 
can be transplanted into patients' bodies without creating an extra 
risk of cancer? The two experiments mean nothing of the kind, in the 
view of Robert Weinberg, a leading cancer biologist at the Whitehead 
Institute in Boston. ``They are both kind of nonresults,'' he said. 
``Both groups report that putting telomerase into normal cells does 
not per se create a cancer cell, which is a straw-man issue because 
no one expected it would. The real problem is whether the telomerase-bearing 
cells are more predisposed to undergo changes that make them into 
malignant cells.'' For a normal cell to become a cancer cell, it must 
defeat the various safety circuits that protect against runaway growth. 
Incipient cancer cells are thought to accumulate mutations in the 
genes that underlie these circuits. Probably four or five separate 
genes must be knocked out before a normal cell becomes a fully developed 
tumor cell. One of the cell's safety circuits is the telomere-shortening 
system. Indeed it may be the cell's last-ditch defense against tumors. 
An incipient cancer cell that has knocked out all the other genes 
restraining its growth can divide only so many times before the telomeres 
drive it into senescence. Perhaps the final hurdle for a successful 
tumor cell is to activate its telomerase gene. All that the new experiments 
show, in Weinberg's view, is that the general regulatory circuits 
of the cell are unaffected by the presence of active telomerase. But 
a cell with activated telomerase has certainly taken one of the five 
steps down the road to cancer, in Weinberg's view. ``The question 
is whether you are one big step or one small step nearer, and one 
can't know that from their experiments,'' he said. Dr. Calvin Harley, 
Geron's chief scientific officer, said it was unfair to say that no 
one had thought telomerase activation would cause cells to become 
cancerous. Overproduction of telomerase might well have deranged the 
cells' regulatory mechanisms, an important concern that had now been 
laid to rest, he said. But the company's plan is not to give patients 
cells with permanently activated telomerase, if it can avoid doing 
do. Rather, the hope is to develop drugs that will switch on telomerase 
temporarily, just long enough for it to rebuild the telomeres back 
to their youthful length. ``The responsible approach in the therapeutic 
development of telomerase is not to constitutively activate the enzyme 
but to control its regulation,'' Harley said. Asked if Geron had yet 
developed drugs to switch the telomerase gene on and off, Harley said, 
``We have some data,'' but he added that the company's research is 
focused on understanding cells with permanently activated telomerase. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>