<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981228.2000.0676 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Germany's Defense Minister's has a wish list for 1999 and he's told 
a national newspaper what's right near the top. Rudolph Sharping says 
he hopes Bosnian Serb wartime leaders Radavan Caritidge and Joaquim 
Vladich will be captured and brought before an international tribunal 
next year. That, of course, is easier said than done, as we learn 
in this report, from "The World's" Jackie Roland in Belgrade Italian 
troops from the NATO-led peacekeeping force escort set out from Sarajevo 
for a patrol around Parlay, the wartime capitol of the Bosnian Serbs. 
Parlay was also the home of notorious war crime suspect, Aradavan 
Katadich. Although, it's unclear how much time he spends there these 
days. In the past year, Espor has carried out high-profile operations 
in Parlay and other national strongholds It's also been increasingly 
active in detaining people accused of war crimes. Most of those picked 
up, so far, have been small fish, but one of Espor's commanders, Lieutenant 
General Jack Deverall denies there's a policy of going for easy targets. 
We've gone for those that have made themselves, in a sense, available. 
But they've provided a worthwhile target for us to actually detain. 
There's been no policy that we're going to go for certain levels or 
certain stages, standards of war criminals at all. One of Espor's 
success stories was the arrest of Aridislav Kurstych, announced this 
month by an Espor spokeswoman. The detention of General Kurstych was 
carried out by Espor soldiers. Entirely within mandate. General Kurstych 
led the Bosnian Serb forces that captured the so-called safe-haven 
of Sreprenitza in 1995. The War Crimes Tribunal in the Hague issued 
a secret indictment against Kurstych. So his arrest on charges of 
genocide took many by surprise. Chuck Sudaytich, the author of a new 
book on Srepenitza says this was probably the most significant arrest 
to date. With the arrest of General Kurstych earlier this month, the 
War Crimes Tribunal took a great leap forward in -- in terms of selecting 
and arresting a suspect who has the potential to give them evidence 
that can lead right back to the progenitor of the war and that's President 
Slobodan Milosevic of Yugoslavia. President Milosevic does not currently 
appear on the wanted list. There's about 50 others, mostly Bosnian 
Serbs, do and are still at large. Some continue to hold positions 
of influence in their local community. Chuck Sudaytich says these 
people must be captured. You can't have refugee returns without the 
war criminals removed from society. You can't have even true economic 
reform, without the war criminals' return from society. Let's say 
you have -- let's say you have a -- a plan for economic recovery in 
a small town in Eastern Bosnia. If you wanted to inject capital into 
one of these little places, it's a foregone conclusion that when it's 
-- when the deal is done, when the money is in the bank, they're going 
to come knocking on the door. They're poverty stricken, they're desperate 
and they have weapons. The arrest of Radovan Kurstych has been predicted 
several times in the past year. But he's still at large. This has 
led to speculation that the international community thinks arresting 
Kurstych might be more trouble than it's worth. Lieutenant General 
Deverall admits Espor commanders have to weigh the risks when planning 
an arrest operation. If a number of innocent civilians were injured 
or killed, this could actually have a political fallout, not within 
Bosnian itself, but in the wider international community. People may 
say, is it worth the detention of that man if civilians are to be 
killed. Apologists for a policy of inaction have always said, ah, 
what about the potential consequences. Political analyst Christopher 
Bennett. In reality, there have been no repercussions. The bottom 
line is that NATO is the most powerful military alliance ever on this 
planet. And it is about time that it behaved as such and it dealt 
with what is, in fact, little better than a series of peasant armies 
across Bosnia and Herzegovina. Radavan Kurstych no longer has the 
political influence he once enjoyed. But as an architect of the ethnic 
cleansing that took place during the Bosnian war, he remains an important 
symbol. If he continues to allude authorities, he will be a symbol 
of justice delayed. But if he is arrested, Radovan Kurstych could 
become a symbol of Western determination to prosecute crimes against 
humanity wherever they are committed. For "The World," this is Jackie 
Roland in Belgrade. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>