<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981228.2000.2014 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Tragedy has struck, but not stopped Australia's Sydney to Hobart yacht 
race. Over the past two days, gale force winds and high seas battered 
dozens of the boats, killing at least two sailors and leaving three 
others missing or presumed drowned. Today the race continues with 
slightly fewer than half the 115 yachts that started it still sailing. 
David Gray is a spokesman for the Australian Maritime Safety Authority, 
which is helping to coordinate the country's largest-ever maritime 
rescue operation. David, rescue attempts are underway now for the 
second day. Can you tell us what the latest in the situation is? Yes. 
The situation at the moment is the yacht that we are concerned about 
here late last night was Winston Churchill and we found one life raft 
with four men. And the second life raft we found about last night, 
Australian time. There are only two people on board and three had 
been washed overboard. We've now got a search going for those men. 
They've got life jackets and -- we've got about 4,000 square nautical 
mile search going for them right now, about 50 miles off shore. And 
we have another situation where another yacht, -- challenger, with 
five people on board. Two of them were seriously injured yesterday. 
We were having a Navy -- liaison with them early this morning and 
I haven't found that -- we're -- fairly concerned with them because 
they're distressed beacon has stopped and we're not picking up on 
a satellite anymore. And there are five people on board there. Another 
race, yacht Veto, a race -- they've heard nothing since early yesterday 
afternoon and she's 50 miles offshore and then we've got a big search 
going there. At the moment, we're using about 34, 35 aircraft. The 
only thing -- different today is that weather conditions have -- down 
to one to two meters -- seas in the north of the search area and about 
two to three meters in the south. But basically, that's the picture. 
And of course, we've now suspended the search for the missing English 
yachtsmen Glenn Charles who was washed out overboard from -- to. This 
is the yachtsman who was actually at the Atlanta Olympics and he's 
been missing for -- for quite a few hours now. Is that why the search 
is suspended? Well, yes. It's two days. It'll be two days in a few 
hours here. You say that the weather has improved from what it was 
earlier. I imagine that some of the rescue crews had a pretty touch 
time in some of those fierce winds and... Well, yes. Well, they had 
to suspend some of the -- from some of the yachts because of the way 
that -- they were up to 60 knots, 70 knots, in some cases. Some of 
the helicopters said up towards 80, dusting and, I mean, it's impossible 
situation. And we're talking waves that were as high as a two- story 
building in some cases. Yeah. There were seven, eight, meter -- going 
through at the same time, yeah, in some cases. They've calmed down 
a bit yesterday, later in the day, `round about six meters. But it's 
a vast improvement today. And we've got visibility for the air crews 
now of about 10 kilometers, which is a big, big improvement, although 
the sun --. Well, was this totally expected, this kind of weather? 
Does this race have a history of poor weather? No, no, no. -- is traditionally 
known for some very rough weather but, I mean, this was -- this was 
just a number of yachts that were about midfield that got hit by a 
sea storm on the second day. And it was the middle of the afternoon. 
It hit them really hard. At this point, it's surprising to hear that 
some yachts are still sailing and organizers don't plan on calling 
off the race? A lot of them got through, got pass this. And you know, 
there's more than half the field have pulled out now. But a lot of 
those yachts have got through past this storm before and so -- condition, 
you know? And it's really just up to the individual boaters to decide 
if they're... They decided to call and they -- and depending on the 
condition of his boat, he's got broken rigging or gear. He makes the 
decision. It's up to him to protect the lives of his crewmen and it's 
his call. David Gray, a spokesman for the Australian Maritime Safety 
Authority. Thank you very much. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>