<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981228.2000.2911 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is "The World." I'm Lisa Mullens. Time now to answer today's 
geography quiz. We are looking for a country in Southeastern Europe 
where, nine years ago Nikolai Tchacheski was overthrown, tried and 
executed and which, today, is suffering from a nationwide case of 
indigestion. The two, we assume, had nothing to do with each other. 
Adam Brown is an Associated Press reporter who's in our mystery country. 
Adam, first tell us where you are? I'm in Bucharest, Romania. Bucharest, 
Romania, which is the answer to our geography quiz today. And what 
is with this nationwide case of indigestion today? Why are Romanians 
stuffing themselves? Well, it seems to me it stems partially from 
an old rural superstition that eating well on holidays would give 
a good bumper crop for the next year. This was part of the reason, 
but also people here make an average of $120 per month and can't afford 
to indulge throughout most of the year, so luxury during the Christmas 
holidays means eating. And so, what kind of delicacies are they bingeing 
on? Well, the main problem doctors are mostly concerned with, cabbage 
rolls made with pickled cabbage and stuffed with spicy pork meat, 
washed down with prune alcohol. And this is causing a lot of congestion 
in -- in hospital emergency rooms in Bucharest. Patients holding their 
stomach and -- and many of them too embarrassed to say exactly how 
much they ate. So why is it so hard, though, for them to kind of push 
away the plate? Is this, you know, something that's just not done 
there around the holiday season? No. It's something that -- that is 
not done. I mean they want to have a good time and this means enjoying 
yourself during the holidays. Gosh, I guess so. I mean, is it kind 
of considered a badge of honor to wind up in the emergency room in 
some strange way? No. It is not quite a badge of honor there. They're 
kind of embarrassed about not being able to handle kilos of spicy 
pork meat. Kilos. My gosh. I -- I'm not sure exactly who could do 
that. So -- so once they get to the hospital, then, what's the -- 
what's the prognosis? Is there kind of a Romanian version of Pepto 
Bismal? Basically, there is. They generally send them home and tell 
them not to eat so much, unless it's severe cases, combined with alcohol 
poisoning. Is there an unusually high case of this happening this 
year? No, not particularly. This is a traditional Christmas -- Christmas 
season happening. It's been going on for several years. So do -- do 
emergency rooms generally up the staff around holiday time, knowing 
these things might go on? They do. And then they're prepared for more 
of this until New Year's. That's right. New Year's Day on the way. 
Now how about you, Adam Bown? What did you eat this holiday weekend? 
I -- I spent with my girlfriend's family and they're all vegetarians. 
So no emergency room for you. ...one of the few vegetarian families 
in Romania. That's right. Well, it sounds like for many Romanians, 
maybe the best New Year's resolution is fasting, at least for a short 
time anyway. Could be. Adam Brown, thank you very much and Happy New 
Year to you. OK. Thank you very much. Adam Brown is an Associated 
Press correspondent in Bucharest, Romania. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>