<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981228.2000.3096 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
One of Hoven Droven's web sites says the name of this group means, 
whatever. The band informs us that the name translates to Helter Skelter. 
"The World's" Marco Worman says ether would be an appropriate moniker 
for this Swedish sextet. This is Swedish folk music. Sure, there's 
a marshall amps-worth of heavy metal. But for Swedish band Hoven Droven, 
that's the point, because that's the background of the six guys in 
the group, says fiddler Shell Erik Ericsson. I listened to it. My 
father played -- fiddler. But I also listen to - to AC-DC and Bruce 
Springstein and whatever and rock. And the rest of the guys who listen 
to everything, actually. The -- is a big "Kiss" fan. We are -- open 
for music. So we make music. We take the best of everything. This 
pounding track, "Cop Polska," The Meat Dance, pushes Hoven Droven's 
craziness to the limit. Like most Hoven Droven tunes, say Shell Erik 
Ericssson, "Cop Polska" is set to Sweden's national folk dance. We 
have something called "Polska. That is -- it's not a waltz, but it's 
with three beats. Is it like the polka? No, not the polka. The polka 
is two beats. Doom- ba, doom-ba, doom-pa. Polska is more dum, dum-dum, 
dum- dum. Instead of one, two, three, one, two, three. And that is 
the most popular -- written in Sweden. We have it in all the children's 
songs and, of course, in the dance. In addition to blending rock influences 
with its Swedish folks roots, Hoven Droven invariably slips in notes 
from the blues scale, familiar to North American ears. That's -- that's 
the blue note. It's like the blues. Same thing as blues. It's the 
Swedish blues. With its blues feeling and polska beat, Hoven Droven 
is essentially a dance band and one that Swedes of all ages pour out 
to see, says its fiddler Shell Erik Ericsson. We play for one concert 
in -- Sweden and it was for children -- children concert. In the middle 
it was an old man, you know, I think was 89 years old, then he's stamping 
feet and he liked it. So, there you go. Everyone likes it. There is 
a lot of energy in the music and that was not a problem for us to 
make a rock and roll act of it because it is the same energy in folk 
music as it is in rock 'n roll. Is there a possibility that, you know, 
in 100 year's time people will look back on Hoven Droven and say, 
that's the real folk music of Sweden? Yeah. You know, the folk music 
is not -- not something you want in a museum. It's a living thing. 
So of course, we are folk music in Sweden for 1900s. For "The World," 
I'm Marco Worman. Music from Swedish folk metal band Hoven Groven 
brings this edition of our program to a close. If you like, check 
us out on line at www.theworld.org. In Boston, I'm Lisa Mullens. Thanks 
for tuning in and join us again tomorrow for another spin of "The 
World." 
</TEXT>
</DOC>