<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981228.2000.0373 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is "The World." I'm Lisa Mullens. The United States has struck 
Iraq again for the first time since the end of Operation Desert Fox 
nine days ago. American fighter planes today retaliated against Iraqi 
missiles fired in Northern Iraq's no- fly zone. A Pentagon spokesman 
said U.S. planes fired back, scoring at least two direct hits on the 
Iraqi air defense site. President Clinton defended the action and 
the U.S. mission. The no-fly zones have been and will remain an important 
part of our containment policy. Because we effectively control the 
skies over much of Iraq, Saddam has been unable to use air power to 
repress his own people or to lash out again at his neighbors. Our 
pilots have the authority to protect themselves, if they're threatened 
or attacked. They took appropriate action today in responding to Iraq's 
actions. President Clinton said the U.S. air crews returned safely 
to their base in Turkey, but this afternoon Iraq said its air defenses 
had probably shot down a Western plane and that the search is underway 
to locate the wreckage of the aircraft and its pilot. The Pentagon 
has denied the Iraqi claim. Amahtsia Baram, a visiting professor of 
Middle East history at Georgetown University in Washington says today's 
action by Iraq is nothing new. Well, the Iraqis in the past used to 
do it, as well, off and on. Occasionally, they claimed that they did 
not paint, quote, unquote, the American jet fighters with their radar-locking 
system. Meaning, locking in. Yes, locking in. And in some cases, even 
the -- even launch missiles and -- and denied it. The system is simple. 
From the international viewpoint, they don't look good when they do 
that. But domestically, Saddam needs it very badly because he lost 
a lot of face during the American attack. Afterall, Iraq just rolled 
over and played dead. And this affects people's sense of honor, if 
you wish, and self respect. And so, he needs to show them that he 
is still defiant. He's still fighting. He's still showing resistance. 
And so, he needs that. Before we talk more about the significance 
of that, perhaps you can remind us exactly what these no-fly zones 
are. They were set up, we know, in 1991 after the Gulf War and they 
cover an enormous amount of territory, almost all of Iraq. The first 
no-fly zone was established in 1991 to protect the Kurds. The second 
-- one in the South was established later and then extended. The reason 
for establishing it in the south was to protect the Shiites against 
Saddam's punitive actions especially, if you could use his jet fighters 
or his helicopter gun ships. So it was made mainly to protect the 
Shiites in the South, Kurds in the North and Kuwait against another 
Iraqi attack. So Iraqi aircraft and even Iraqi helicopters are banned 
from these no-fly zones. But the United States and other countries 
can and do fly over routinely, usually, as you said, without incident, 
although Iraq is apparently locked on by radar to U.S. aircraft in 
the past, but has not necessarily fired. Or how often have -- have 
U.S. aircraft been fired at? A few times. I remember, five or six 
times, they were fired at. But many more times that they were -- that 
their radar were locked on --. But that's a big danger. So the fact 
that it is happening, then that its point, does it -- does it represent 
the start of a new military strategy on the part of Saddam Hussein 
or the start of a new political strategy? I think political, not military. 
Militarily, the Iraqis are inferior and they know that. Saddam needs 
to show to his people that he's still defiant. So he's telling the 
international community - - haven't done it, but he's telling his 
soldiers domestically we have done it. And he'll continue to do it. 
And does that extend to other Arab countries? There was popular condemnation 
of the United States and British attacks on Iraq. Is that playing 
a role and prompting Saddam Hussein to take a more aggressive approach 
in this no-fly zone? Yes. He would like to have more Arab support 
and he hopes that some kind of provocation will get Arab support for 
him. I think if he has high hopes for that, he's wrong. He will get 
very, very limited support for that. Why is that? Because these -- 
the no-fly zones are regarded already as a fate accompli. It's there. 
And if you try to challenge it, it's like trying to -- to chain --. 
And so, people are not going down to the street to demonstrate because 
of an incident between American Air Force and one or two ground-to-air 
missiles in Iraq. What -- what other information can you provide on 
this? It would seem like the most important thing for Saddam Hussein 
to do is to get sanctions lifted. And one would wonder how his latest 
actions would help in that. What do you make of it? Saddam has two 
very important things. But one is crucial and the other one is just 
important. The crucial thing, from his viewpoint, is to keep his WMD's, 
weapons of mass destruction. He needs it for a variety of reasons. 
But he simply is not going to give it up. This is his first priority. 
His second priority, though still a very high priority, is to lift 
the embargo. He doesn't know how to get there, on both counts. Amatsia 
Baram is a visiting professor of Middle East History at Georgetown 
University. Thank you very much for coming in. You are most welcome. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>