<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981228.2000.2583 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Thousands of people aren't feeling so great in Hong Kong, either. 
Not because of what they're eating or drinking, but because of what 
they're breathing. "The World's" Michael SWAYTO explains in this report. 
It's the Hong Kong hack. It's not pretty. And I can tell you from 
personal experience, it sticks around a lot longer than your average 
common cold. When I came down with it for the first time, doctors 
couldn't seem to give me anything to make it go away. My friends and 
colleagues weren't surprised, though. They'd all been through the 
same thing. I see a lot of people coming in with recurring chronic 
chest infections, which are not healing quickly. Four to six weeks 
cough is quite common. Dr. Brian Walker has a practice in the center 
of town. People are quite used to having a bit of a cough. You can 
see people spitting the streets everyday. But in a more mundane life, 
oh, for example, myself, my sense of smell has been reduced and I've 
got a permanently blocked nose. What's the cause of these illnesses? 
Most observers agree, they're directly linked to Hong Kong's deteriorating 
air quality. And the city's bad air is caused almost entirely by this 
: cars and buses that run on diesel, which includes just about all 
the vehicles in town, with the exception of those that still use leaded 
gasoline, something which was phased out of the United States in the 
mid 1970s. People here are getting fed up with the pollution, though, 
they're sick of coughing and they're tired of the smog which often 
obscures the city's skyline. Some of the most vocal advocates for 
cleaner air have been students at King George V Secondary School. 
Basically, it affects all of us, not just some people, like, everyone 
living in Hong Kong and I think we could do quite a lot if we raised 
awareness and, like, let people know if - - how its affecting everyone. 
And I guess, we got to take action now, before it's too late. We have 
to actually live and grow up in this air. These teenage students recently 
participated in their first-ever protest march. Donning surgical masks, 
they walked through the center of town where they handed a petition 
with 30,000 signatures to Hong Kong's chief executive. The government 
here is gradually phasing out diesel fuel. But the student's teacher, 
David Enser accuses it of dragging its feet. He directs my attention 
out the school window to one of Hong Kong's most famous hills, Lion 
Rock, located just a mile or so away. I've been in Hong Kong seven 
years. And when I first came here at this time of the year, which 
is the best time of the year in Hong Kong for visibility, you could 
see Lion Rock very clearly. Today is a case in point, you can't see 
Lion Rock at all. It's completely shrouded. And this is not uncommon 
there. Enser notes that if Hong Kong follows through on its current 
plans, people here will have to breathe dirty air for at least another 
six years, because diesel won't be phased out until the year 2005. 
I appreciate their sense of frustration. We share it. Ken Salkeld 
is one of the government's point men on environmental matters. We 
have been putting in very rigorous package of ledgers that -- cities 
have been doing over the last 10 years. There you've seen significant 
improvements. We've only seen very gradual improvement. That's a consequence 
of the density of population here and the massive increase in the 
vehicle -- over the last 10 years. That same density of population, 
though, has helped Hong Kong develop one of the best public transportation 
networks in the world. Most people here don't even own a car. The 
vast majority of vehicles on the road are taxis, buses and minibuses. 
But while there are emission standards here, a fine costs less than 
$60. This is one of several issues related to air pollution that was 
recently debated by Hong Kong's lawmakers. Why should the public be 
subsidizing poisonous pollution? Christine Lowe is the head of the 
Pro- Environment Citizens Party. She faced an uphill battle in Hong 
Kong's legislative counsel to pass an anti-pollution amendment. Why 
should we put our own public health at undue risk? Lowe's amendment 
failed. But the legislature did vote overwhelmingly for a broad measure 
prodding Hong Kong's government to conduct more studies about air 
pollution, something which might help improve the air quality in the 
long term, but won't do much to help Hong Kongers breath easier now. 
For "The World," I'm Michael Swayto in Hong Kong. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>