<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981228.2000.1180 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is "The World." I'm Lisa Mullens. We're already pretty certain 
what one of next year's top economic stories will be, the introduction 
of the euro, Europe's new common currency. In today's entry from "Tony 
Kahn's Journal," Tony raises some questions about how Europeans will 
take care of business in 1999. At the stroke of noon, December 31st, 
11 European countries will fix the value of their currencies to the 
euro. Twelve hours later at midnight, those currencies will die and 
the euro will be born. Well, not exactly. For three more years, the 
euro will actually be used for electronic transactions only -- till 
2002. The only money Europeans will be folding in their wallets, flipping 
in their fingers or jingling in their pockets will be the officially 
extinct francs, liras, pesetas and Deutsche marks of old. Europe will 
enter a financial twilight of the living dead. Using the new virtual 
euros in cyberspace and zombie money on the ground. I have no idea 
what impact this strange set of circumstances is going to have on 
government. But the effects on average human beings are likely to 
be very strange. First of all, never underestimate the shock of kissing 
your currency good-bye. I was in Mexico at an ice cream shop the night 
the government issued the first new one-peso coins to replace the 
old, fluffy devalued 1,000 peso bills. Customers got their change 
and drifted away in shock, staring at the tiny coins as if someone 
had just spat in their palms. For that moment, they weren't even sure 
what it meant to be Mexican. Senior, one old lady explained to me, 
it sounds crazy, but that new money makes me feel 1,000- times poorer. 
Now, Mexicans are optimists. Add French pride, Swiss anxiety, Iberian 
intensity or Bavarian braggadocio to the mix and you've got a real 
trauma. All right, you argue. But at least with everything set to 
the same standard, people will accept your national currency anywhere 
without worrying about the latest exchange rate, oui? No. Ask yourself, 
if you have an American quarter and a Canadian quarter in your pocket, 
equal, for all practical purposes, in value which do you try to get 
rid of, first? Hmm? And why? Because that American quarter feels more 
like you, except your Deutsche marks exchanged changed from my francs? 
Over my dead body, politics misseur. So much for people trying to 
do their best, what about the crooks? Consider the case of a hypothetical 
French candy bar, sort of like an Almond Joy. Let's call it the Almond 
De Jois Devive, made in France and sold for a nice round franc, the 
new price of the De Jois Devive suddenly becomes .149411706347428 
euros. Now is anyone going to pay a ridiculous price like that? No. 
So, to raise the price to a nice round euro, you increase the size 
of De Jois Devive. And while you're at it, how great is the temptation 
to make it maybe just a little smaller than it should be, eh, mon 
ami? A penny for your thoughts or, should I say, a euro for your emotions? 
Notice, by the way, that I haven't even mentioned the potential rage 
of tens of thousands of money changes and little bunkers all over 
Europe who know they have only three years left to their careers or 
the fact that people are being asked to say good-bye to their beloved 
dying currency for three, long years. Do you know any relationship 
that ended happily when it took three years to call it quits? So what 
are we left with? A lofty plan for a united Europe, offering whole 
new opportunities for political tension and emotional distress. And 
does anyone really understand that it's coming next week? In a recent 
British poll, only 30 percent of the respondents knew the euro was 
a currency and not an East- European car. And last week, an American 
foreign trade official admitted he didn't realize international exchanges 
wouldn't be listing prices in European currencies anymore. Bob Dylan 
may have been right, after all. The times, they are a changing. But 
is this the best time to start making new change? 
</TEXT>
</DOC>