<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981228.0500.0719 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Russia has inaugurated a new generation of nuclear ballistic missiles 
despite its current economic crisis. Perhaps that's why Defense Minister 
Igor Surgayev called it a major achievement during a time of severe 
shortages in defense spending. Russia's dire economic problems has 
led to what many see as an alarming rise in extremism. This has prompted 
Russian President Boris Yeltsin to pledge to mount a campaign against 
extremism and controversy against anti-Semitic and xenophobic statements 
by leading communist politicians. VOA Moscow Correspondent Peter Heimline 
reports, Russia's Jewish minority is nervously watching developments. 
In the center of Moscow, the final touches are being made on a new 
theater devoted to Jewish culture. The Laheiam Theater is the first 
of its kind to open in the Russian capitol, since the collapse of 
communism. The post-Soviet era has seen large scale migration of Russian 
Jews, but there are also signs of a revival of Jewish culture. The 
Laheiam Theater's opening comes at a time of anxiety about the anti-Semitic 
tendency beginning to show on the fringes of Russian Society. In recent 
weeks two communist members of Parliament have made speeches expressing 
concern about the excessive influence wielded by Jews in Russia's 
government. Victor Illeukin, influential communist chairman of Parliament's 
defense committee said, at a video-taped hearing this month, Jews 
surrounding President Yeltsin were to blame for what he calls, "the 
genocide of the Russian people." The remarks spark outrage in the 
media, and calls for the communist party to be outlawed. The communist 
leadership, in turn, demanded that reporters for Russia's three main 
television networks be banned from covering parliamentary proceedings. 
Rabbi Barra Lazarre Chairman of the Rabbinical alliance in the countries 
of the former Soviet Union says such statements have added to the 
worry about rising levels of Russian nationalism. we're - Rabbi Lazarre 
says flare ups of anti-Semitism are common at times of financial crisis. 
The shocking part of it is that today such things have been said without 
any problem saying it, and they find a reason to say it. Number one, 
they find a reason because of economic crisis, who to blame for when 
something goes wrong. And the worst part is that these people, they 
know that nothing is going to happen to them. Lawmaker Victor Illeukin 
says his remarks in Parliament are not a condemnation of Jews, but 
simply a criticism of the lack of ethnic and regional balance in the 
Yeltsin Administration. Communists commonly use the term genocide 
to describe President Yeltsin's harsh economic policies, which they 
say have caused a social breakdown that has led to a sharp decline 
in population since 1991. In an interview with VOA, Mr. Illeukin argues 
the combined fall in life expectancy and birth rates during this decade 
could have been avoided with a better balance of interests. These 
consequences that were and are at the moment in the Russian Federation 
could have been avoided. They would have been different, less painful 
consequences if the government reformed on the principle of participation 
by the majority of representatives of native nations, and not according 
to the principle of the main nation being the Jewish people. Mr. Illeukin 
describes as unfounded the accusations of anti-Semitism against him. 
He says his comments in Parliament were simply an attempt to stand 
up for the rights of the Russian majority. If Russia as the biggest 
nation announced they must take care of themselves, protect themselves 
from destruction, from genocide, from the Yeltsin genocide, then suddenly 
everybody takes this as damage to other nations, especially to the 
Jewish nation. Such remarks, however, worry members of Russia's tiny 
Jewish minority. Rabbi Barro Lazarre says comments by senior communist 
leaders, whether they realize it or not, serve to legitimize more 
open anti-Semitism and xenophobia in the general public. If anybody 
would feel harassment, and problems it is us. Because our Synagogue 
was bombed twice in the last two years. And we felt what it means, 
when there is an anti-Semite who wants to hurt the Jews. But Rabbi 
Lazarre believes even in these times of economic hardship, there are 
a few signs of deepening anti-Semitism in the general population. 
Igor Cosyuroff,, Artistic Director of the Lacheiam Theater sees a 
trend towards greater religious openness. He says, while we are alive 
we have hope, we have faith that the majority of Russians are decent 
people, not anti-Semites. Mr. Cosyuroff, sitting in his office above 
the theater says, despite everything that is happening, common sense 
must prevail. Peter Heimline VOA News, Moscow. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>