<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981228.0500.0551 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Disaster has struck Australia's annual Sidney to Hobart Yacht race. 
Savage seas and wind gusts up to 150 kilometers an hour tore through 
the fleet, leaving at least two sailors dead and ten others missing. 
A massive rescue operation is underway in the seas off Melbourne. 
News Now's Les Carpenter spoke with Reporter Robin Polk about the 
tragedy. There is just the one vessel that we are searching for, it's 
called the Winston Churchill. The search is continuing off the southeast 
coast of Australia. There are nine people on board who were last reported 
abandoning their vessel and getting on to a life raft. You say they 
have sited the life raft? There have been reports just in the last 
few minutes that a life raft may have been sited. But we are sending 
a helicopter out to that area in the hope that it can confirm that. 
What about some of the other yachts? Have many made it to shore, or 
are many still heading for the finish line? Some are due just to get 
across the line and finish the race, but the majority of the yachts 
in the race have run for cover, and they have fled to ports all the 
way down the southeast coast of Australia; either in New South Whales 
or Victoria, choosing not to go out into the treacherous and notorious 
straight which separates the mainland from Tasmania. Have most been 
accounted for, all of the yachts, the 115 yachts been accounted for, 
except for the one? Yes they have all been accounted for except the 
one. There is another that is in some distress. It's called the Solar 
Globe Challenger, it's 90 nautical miles off Green Cape, off the southeast. 
It went out further than anybody else, but a frigate from the Royal 
Australian Navy called the Newcastle is on its way out there. And 
it will be going along side fairly shortly. Three men have already 
been lifted off that - or winched off that vessel. But there are five 
on board still with a number of varying injuries. So, right now we're 
looking at how many victims, how many people have died in this accident? 
There are two who are confirmed dead. They were from a vessel called 
the Business Post Maid. Regrettably the skipper suffered a heart attack 
during the dreadful conditions over night. A crewman became trapped 
in his safety harness and drowned. About seven of that crew were winched 
to safety. So, it's two dead, one that we are looking for - the English 
sailor from a vessel called The Sword of Orion - and the nine people 
on board the Winston Churchill. That is Reporter Robin Polk speaking 
with News Now from Australia. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>