<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981228.1600.0358 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It was another difficult year of alternating progress and setbacks 
in Israeli/Palestinian peace process. In December US President Bill 
Clinton made an unprecedented visit to both Israel and the Palestinian 
controlled Gaza areas. And the Israeli Parliament rebelled against 
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu. VOA's David Gullest reports from 
Jerusalem. It was a sight that no one would have predicted just a 
few years ago, an American president in Palestinian controlled Gaza 
addressing Yasir Arafat at a gathering of hundreds of Palestinian 
leaders. With Mr. Clinton looking on the audience at the unprecedented 
December 14th meeting, rose to reaffirm the nullification of language 
of the Palestinian charter, calling for Israel's destruction. Mr. 
Arafat, heard through an interpreter, said the act should end once 
and for all Israeli doubts about the Palestinian's desire for peaceful 
coexistence. I hope that this will close this chapter further, for 
we have cut out our commitments and obligations. And we are determined 
to continue our quest for peace, peace of the brave, and coexistence 
on the basis of respecting justice and international legitimacy. Mr. 
President I would like to re-trace what I have said to you at the 
White House, that we will proceed on the peace process without violence, 
without confrontation, the peace of the brave, the peace of the righteous 
and justice, the peace that would provide our people with freedom 
and dignity on their free land, so peace can benefit all peoples in 
the region. The Clinton visit, the first ever by a US president to 
both Israel and the Palestinian areas had been intended as a celebration 
of the Wye River agreement concluded October 24th. In an extraordinary 
nine days summit at a conference center near Washington, Mr. Clinton 
and his advisors finally got Mr. Arafat and Israeli Prime Minister 
Benjamin Netanyahu to agree to clear the way to negotiations on the 
final status issues of the Oslo Peace Process. A definitive revocation 
of the anti-Israeli provisions of the Palestinian Charter was a key 
condition of the Wye deal, and in his Gaza address Mr. Clinton said 
he hoped the gesture long demanded by Israel would change the climate 
of the entire peace process. I thank you for your rejection, fully, 
finally and forever, of the passages in the Palestinian Charter calling 
for the destruction of Israel. For they were the ideological underpinnings 
of a struggle renounced at Oslo. By revoking them once and for all, 
you have sent - I say again - a powerful message not to the government 
but to the people of Israel. You will touch people on the street there. 
You will reach their hearts there. Israel handed over another 13 percent 
of the West Bank and released 250 Palestinian prisoners in the first 
phase of the Wye agreement, but despite US diplomacy the process bogged 
down thereafter. Palestinians accused Israel of violating the deal 
by releasing mainly common criminals rather than political and security 
detainees. And there were days of violent protests by Palestinians 
in the West Bank. The Netanyahu government accused the Palestinians 
of inciting the unrest and froze implementation after the Clinton 
visit unless the Palestinians met a list of conditions. Foremost among 
them, for Mr. Netanyahu, was an end to talk of a unilateral declaration 
of Palestinian Statehood. We said again and again that regardless 
of what happens in the negotiations, on May 4th of 1999, they will 
unilaterally declare a state, divide Jerusalem, and make its eastern 
half the Palestinian capitol. This is a gross violation of the Oslo 
and Wye accords which commit the parties to negotiate a mutually agreed 
final settlement. Mr. Arafat and the Palestinian Authority must officially 
and unequivocally renounce this attempt. I think no one can seriously 
expect Israel to hand over another inch of territory unless and until 
such an unambiguous correction is made. Critics of Mr. Netanyahu and 
the Israeli Parliament charge that his hard line stance towards the 
Palestinians was primarily an effort to placate wavering members of 
his right-of-center coalition. And anti-Netanyahu sentiment that had 
been brewing across the political spectrum on his handling of the 
economy as well as the peace process, finally culminated in a December 
21st Knesset vote for new elections. Opposition Labor party leader, 
Ahud Barrack in a climactic speech to the Parliament, accused Mr. 
Netanyahu of abandoning the peace process and dividing Israel. He 
is heard through an interpreter. The Netanyahu government has no vision 
for a better future for the state of Israel. All it has is its survival 
plan. This is a government whose survival plan is single. It's a systematic 
capitulation to the extremists in order to survive. This is a government 
which can not and does not wish to work for the sake of the whole 
of the Israeli people. Israeli analysts give Mr. Netanyahu little 
chance of making a political comeback in the elections expected in 
late April. Several members of his own Likud party are mounting challenges 
to his leadership. And the widely respected former Army Chief of Staff 
General Amnon Lipkin Shahoff retired from the military with the apparent 
aim of leading a new centrist party in the elections. The peace process 
is likely to remain on hold until the Israeli leadership question 
is resolved. David Gulles, VOA News, Jerusalem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>