<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981228.0500.2314 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Turning to Europe, heavy fighting in Serbia's Kosovo province has 
brought the death toll to at least 10 killed since Thursday. William 
Walker, chief of the Verification Mission of the Organization for 
Security and Cooperation in Europe says, he's gained commitments from 
both sides in the fighting for a temporary truce, in order to evacuate 
the wounded. Mr. Walker also said, he hoped the fighting could be 
contained short of a return to full-scale war. Balkan's expert Nicholas 
Panno of Western Illinois University told News Now that the situation 
is analogous to what occurred earlier this year. It appears that it 
is going to be difficult to maintain the cease fire that was negotiated 
with unarmed OSCE observers on the ground. It is likely that effective 
truce will require armed observers from OSCE or some other international 
organization. There unfortunately does not seem to have been a strong 
desire, especially on the part of the Yugoslavs to maintain the cease 
fire. Although it was unfortunate that we've had a number of incidents, 
the response of the Yugoslavs as was the case in the fighting during 
the spring and summer has been much greater than is called for by 
the situation. It is deplorable that the Yugoslav federal government 
has felt the need to send troops, tanks and heavily armed police units 
into Kosovo. This is, I think, a violation of the terms of the cease 
fire. And it was also, I think, unfortunate that the Yugoslavs have 
placed the blame on the Albanians for the - especially the Kosovo 
Liberation Army - for the unfortunate episode in Pisch. There has 
not been proof that the Kosovo Liberation Army is responsible for 
this incident. And given this series of events, it is clear that the 
situation is a very dangerous one. And that it is going to take some 
very strong concerted efforts on the part of OSCE or NATO to insure 
that we do not have a repetition of the wide-scale fighting that occurred 
during the spring and summer of 1998. And do you anticipate that may 
include a resumption of a threat of airstrikes against Belgrade as 
was issued last October? I think that NATO is going to have to issue 
a threat of airstrikes and also other counter measures to insure that 
the fighting doesn't spread. I think also that it is necessary that 
the intensive diplomatic activity that has been underway continue. 
I also think that it is necessary for the Albanians of Kosovo to develop 
a unified negotiating team. And I think that it is essential that 
the Albanians indicate, as they have in the past, that they are willing 
to participate in meaningful negotiations to try and effect a settlement. 
That is Balkans expert Nicholas Panno. He says he believes the Serbs 
have reacted with an over abundance of force against separatists. 
He says Belgrade has developed a serious situation unwarranted by 
the facts. The Chairman of the OSCE has issued a statement saying 
that, if the bloodshed and violence in Kosovo escalate, the organization 
will have to reconsider the forms of its activity. Serbian police 
used artillery and other heavy weapons to attack ethnic Albanian rebels 
for much of Sunday. In apparent retaliation for the death of a Serbian 
farmer, earlier. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>