<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981228.0500.0357 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Cambodia's Prime Minister is against a trial for two top Khmer Rouge 
leaders who have surrendered to the government. Han Sen, Monday, endorsed 
amnesty for the two, Khu San Pan and Noon Chia, despite insistence 
from the US government and human rights organizations that they should 
face trial for their involvement in Cambodia's four year reign of 
terror in which an estimated 2 million people died. We discussed the 
late breaking developments in this story with reporter Hugh Watkin 
in Phnom Penh. He says Hun Sen's resistance to a trial now, is a reversal 
of his previous position endorsing the need to bring justice and resolution 
to Cambodia's bloody history. For reasons which are yet unclear, he 
has just told reporters outside the Council of Ministers that these 
people will not be tried because he fears, to go through the process 
would run the risk of returning Cambodia to a state of civil war. 
Now, I've been speaking to a number of people just around town, just 
ordinary Cambodians in the last two days, because it was looking like 
this might eventuate over the last 48 hours. Their reaction is mixed. 
First they are very pleased, unanimously very pleased that this three 
decades of civil war here in Cambodia seems to have finally ended. 
But when asked how they feel about the prospect that these people 
will not go to trial, they are also unanimous in their anger. There 
is not one person in Cambodia, over the age of 30 years which was 
not effected in a very dramatic way by the Khmer Rouge government 
between 1975 and 1979, because nearly a fifth of the population was 
killed. So, everybody has suffered very painfully from the Khmer Rouge. 
And the fact that these people are now apparently escaping justice 
has angered the average Cambodian. In view of everything you have 
said, it is such a curious move on his part, given that he has made 
prior statements about this before - absolutely no explanation for 
what appears to be a reversal on his part. No, it's really bazarre 
and really very hard to get any sort of take on it whatsoever. There's 
no question that these two gentlemen, Khu San Pan and Noon Chia bear 
command responsibility for the appalling things that happened here. 
They have tried in the past to blame everything on Pol Pot, now everything's 
being blamed on the military commander Tei Moch but these guys very 
clearly were two of perhaps a dozen people who administered Cambodia 
during the Khmer Rouge time. And there is evidence, documentary, as 
well as witness testimonies, which show very clearly that these people 
do have a case to answer for in terms of their command responsibility 
of an enormous genocide, which occurred in this country. Reporter 
Hugh Watkin spoke to News Now from Phnom Penh. The two Khmer Rouge 
leaders are set to meet with Hun Sen on Tuesday. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>