<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981228.0500.2700 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Sociology students at a college in Richmond, Virginia don't need to 
go to the campus book store to buy a textbook for their course. It 
hasn't been printed. The book is only available on-line. Dan Noble 
has details. Each semester, Lynn Nelson a Sociology Professor at Virginia 
Commonwealth University teaches more than 300 students. They meet 
regularly in the classroom where he gives lectures. But Professor 
Nelson can be heard outside the lecture hall as well. His on-line 
Sociology textbook, entitled "Sociology and Global Perspective" contains 
text, pictures and even his voice. The electronic book which is found 
at the website www.sociologyonline.com even begins with a verbal introduction. 
Hi, I'm Lynn Nelson. I'm pleased to welcome you to Sociology On-line. 
This web will be a central meeting place for all of us throughout 
the course. Professor Nelson goes on to describe how his sociology 
students will use the web and the electronic textbook. We'll be posting 
messages here, results of research that you have carried out. Your 
classmates will respond, and you will reply to them. The different 
sections of this web create what I like to call an open structure 
for learning. For example when studying population trends, Professor 
Nelson has his site linked to other sources. With a click of a mouse, 
students are transported electronically to the US Census Bureau's 
web page where they see various graphs. At the same time, Professor 
Nelson's voice is heard as he interprets what the students are seeing. 
It was really an evolutionary thing, because as I started this project, 
it wasn't intended to be a textbook at all. It was intended to be 
supplementary material for a large class that I teach, Introductory 
course. But as I got more and more into it, I began to see advantages 
to having a textbook itself on the web. The sociologist professor 
says that most of the students read the textbook from the screen and 
print out paper copies so that they can read when they are away from 
their computers. Yes, I encourage everyone to print it out, because 
it is useful to have hard copy, I think, for underlining and things 
like that. But, one thing that they can do on the screen, which they 
cannot do with hard copy is cut and paste. And some of them do that, 
making their own notes by just cutting and pasting from the screen. 
According to Professor Nelson, Sociology is the kind of field where 
changes are so dramatic some times, from one year to the next, that 
books become obsolete very quickly. It's easy, he says, to edit his 
on-line sociology text book. And he adds, the website is also proving 
to be a useful place for students to meet and discuss sociology outside 
of class. People post things on the web, and someone maybe two days 
later responds to it. And we also have real time interaction with 
the message boards. In one case, a few days ago, a student told me 
she was up in Maine visiting her sister when we had a discussion at 
one day. And she was a full participant. So there are lots of things 
that add flexibility here. And for the convenience of the students, 
Professor Nelson has placed on-line, some full-length lectures lasting 
50 minutes. Students can listen to a lecture essentially at their 
convenience because when those lectures are on the web, they don't 
have to be there at a certain time during the week. And not only can 
they listen at their convenience, but one of the things they can do 
- which is not possible when they are in a classroom - is they can 
pause. They can replay different parts if they want to take more notes. 
They can even turn it off if they want to do that. Hopefully that 
doesn't happen too often. Lynn Nelson of Virginia Commonwealth University 
says that the use of computers has changed the way his sociology students 
learn. He says that they interact with each other every week, and 
they can do it on their own time. The level of their activity, he 
concludes, is inconceivable in a normal class. High technologies helping 
sociology students to socialize. I'm Dan Noble. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>