<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981228.0500.1357 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the 1800s an estimated 100,000 fierce Grizzly bears roamed North 
America. By 1900 they had been virtually wiped out by hunters. In 
1975 Grizzly bears were listed as a threatened species, and protected 
by the federal government. As a result, today, the bears are making 
a comeback. Increasing numbers are being re-introduced into the wilderness 
of Wyoming, Montana, and Idaho. But this is not welcome news for some 
ranchers who say that the bears kill their livestock, and others who 
simply fear the fierce Grizzly. In response to these concerns, a singer 
and a filmmaker have begun staging performances in hopes of changing 
the bears image. As Jill Hoyt reports from Boise, Idaho it is a difficult 
task. Singer, songwriter Beth McIntosh was inspired to write this 
song, "Grizzlies Walking Upright" when she read a native American 
legend. And it was the story of a volcano goddess marrying a Grizzly 
Bear, and their children become the soul of mankind. So, to me you 
have these essential archetypal forces combining to create what is 
a wild and soulful human being. Strumming her guitar before flood 
lights, Beth McIntosh might be the volcano Goddess, and a peacock 
who follows as the second act could be the Grizzly bear. Barrel chested 
with a dark thick beard, Peacock at times looks, even acts like a 
Grizzly. From the edge of the stage he claws at the air, while narrating 
his silent film. As he shows stark close-ups of bison, elk or Trumpeter 
swans, Peacock tells of the interrelatedness among wild animals. Then, 
the huge screen shows a silvertipped Grizzly bear loping toward the 
camera lens. Spent the whole day filming her. And then the wind shifted. 
She walked right up on me, and she is so close I could reach out and 
almost touch her. But she didn't touch me. The Grizzly didn't touch 
the filmmaker in part because he turned away from the bear, didn't 
make eye contact, and spoke softly. Peacock learned such survival 
behavior during the 15 years he spent filming grizzlies in Glacier 
and Yellowstone National Parks. I shot footage of Grizzly bears because 
they were in trouble, and I wanted to advertise their plight, and 
because a friend of mine named Ed Guage gave me a Bollix camera. Every 
April, with four feet of snow still on the ground, Peacock shouldered 
the heavy 16 mm camera and tripod, packed tent and food, and snowshoed 
into the mountains. Peacock is not a university trained wildlife Biologist. 
Filming Grizzly bears was Peacock's way of finding the soul he felt 
he'd lost while serving as a medic in the Vietnam War. I had the sense 
of an artistic vision, and I certainly wanted to capture a variety 
of wildlife cinematography. But in the back of my head was just this 
notion that, you needed to go and make this record. Peacock's written 
record, "The Grizzly Years, in search of the American Wilderness" 
is now out in paperback. It's a personal narrative that combines science, 
nature writing and the artist's search for commonalties between Grizzlies 
and humans. Because of the unpredictable nature of Grizzly bears, 
Rocky Barker author of a book about dangerous species called saving 
all of the parts, says Peacock's approach, using art to change people's 
perception about bears may be the only rational approach. Bears evoke 
in humans many emotions, but the one that unfortunately captures most 
people is simple fear. The time we've been on this continent, we've 
lived with Grizzlies every day of every century except this last one. 
It's no big deal, we've always been right with the bear. I mean were 
neighbors, we eat the same things, we use the same habitat - humans, 
grizzlies. And this last century, fear of bears is a brand new thing. 
What Doug Peacock and Beth McIntosh hope to do with their music, film 
and writing is to transform this fear of the Grizzly bear into knowledge 
and eventually into respect. I'm Jill Hoyt in Boise, Idaho. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>