<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981228.1600.1355 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Every year hopeful young musicians move to Austin, Texas to launch 
careers. They want to be with other musicians in a place that has 
dozens of live music venues. And some feel they are more likely to 
be noticed in Austin because of its reputation as a seedbed for new 
music. Carolyn Weaver talked with one young singer/songwriter Carla 
Manzour who made that little trip more than a year ago. Carla Manzour 
grew up near Washington DC of South American parents. But here father's 
father was from Lebanon and Manzour's ornamented singing style and 
plaintiff strings evoke Middle Eastern music. Manzour studied piano 
and taught herself to play the guitar, but she didn't realize until 
her third year at St. John's College that she wanted to pursue music 
as a career. She began playing at clubs open to beginners. I was very 
impatient to start, and so I did start. I played open mics and small 
gigs like in Annapolis and Baltimore. I wanted to see what I was really 
made out of. I wasn't totally confident about my talent. And I wanted 
to go somewhere where I could really test it, see, compare myself 
to really great musicians. Carla Manzour planned to move to Austin 
after graduating from college in 1995, but there were a couple of 
delays. At first she thought she would need to keep her music on the 
side while she worked as a teacher. I was kind of deluded. I thought 
that I could have a real career and then just kind of pursue music 
as a hobby. And I found that I was putting music on the back burner 
you know, way too often. I just one day said, I can't do this. Music 
is what I want to do. So, I moved back home for a couple of months. 
I then moved to Florida for a couple of months. It was supposed to 
be a detail on the way to Austin. And that turned into six months, 
and I was there with someone at the time. And I just said, I'm going 
to go on to Austin, you can meet me here, when you're ready. And so 
that's what I did. I came out, I drove by myself, just my guitar, 
my futon and my clothes. I did an open mic the second night I was 
here. And just as soon as I got here, it felt right. In the year and 
a half she's been in Austin, Manzour has formed her own ensemble with 
mandolin player Billy Bright, basist Brend Davies, percussionist Andrew 
Gerfers, and Thomas Vanderbrook on violin. Manzour plays classical 
guitar. They've recorded their first CD in Bright's living room, and 
Manzour now performs either solo or with the group almost every night 
of the week, after her part-time day job. Right now, this is my third 
night of three in a row, and my voice is actually suffering a little 
bit. I could barely finish out my three-hour long set last night. 
But, it's worth it to me. It's hard work, but it is what I want to 
do. Carla Manzour and her group live and perform in Austin, Texas. 
Ordering information for her CD is available through E-mail at Kmanzur@jump.net 
I'm Carolyn Weaver. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>