<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981228.1600.0757 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Northern Ireland's leading Protestant and Catholic politicians were 
awarded the 1998 Nobel Peace Prize for their efforts to end 30-years 
of sectarian violence. But the Good Friday agreement they signed last 
April faltered for most of the year over the issue of disarming nationalist 
paramilitaries. Correspondent Maurie Cassman takes a look at what 
has been achieved and what still needs to be done. When the Good Friday 
agreement was signed last April, US mediator George Mitchell outlined 
the achievements of the marathon negotiations, including the right 
of self-determination. The agreement creates new institutions, the 
Northern Ireland Assembly to restore to the people the fundamental 
democratic right to govern themselves, and a North-South Council to 
encourage cooperation and joint-action for mutual benefit. The agreement 
deals fairly with such sensitive issues as prisoners, policing, and 
de-commissioning. It was a moment of euphoria, a moment when Irish 
republicans and unionists sat together and hammered out a political 
framework for their mutual future. Catholic leader John Hume summoned 
up that optimism again later in the year, when he accepted the Nobel 
Peace Prize, that he and Protestant leader David Trimble had won for 
their peace efforts. Two major political traditions share our island, 
the Island of Ireland. We are destined by history to live side by 
side. After the hardship and pain of many years, a true, and enduring 
symbol of peace. But Mr. Hume and Mr. Trimble both acknowledge, in 
accepting their Nobel gold medals, that their peace is not yet complete. 
The violence did not stop after the April agreement. Several incidents 
cast a shadow over the peace process, none as much as the car bombing 
last August in the Northern Ireland town of Omagh. The terrorist attack 
claimed 29 victims and fueled fears that the peace process itself 
would die. Politicians on both sides of the political and religious 
divide called for calm, but progress stalled over the issue of disarming 
republican paramilitaries. Northern Ireland's Protestant First Minister 
David Trimble insisted that decommissioning had to start before Sinn 
Fein, the political wing of the Irish Republican Army could join the 
new cabinet. Sinn Fein argued that there are no pre-conditions in 
the Good Friday agreement. The deadline for setting up the new assembly 
slipped as he dispute simmered. A frustrated British Prime Minister 
Tony Blair called for flexibility and compromise during a historic 
speech to the Irish Parliament in November. I am not asking anyone 
to surrender. I am asking everyone to declare the victory of peace. 
In Belfast or Dublin, people say the same thing, "Make the agreement 
work." By the end of the year, however, implementation of the fragile 
agreement was still faltering. Protestant First Minister Trimble used 
his Nobel Prize acceptance speech in December to demand that Irish 
nationalists start disarming immediately. All I ask for is that they 
say that the so-called war is over, and that it be proved by such 
a beginning. That is not too much to ask for. The Irish Republican 
Army reacted to the tough speech by naming a hard-liner to its top 
post. The IRA's political wing Sinn Fein has refused to budge from 
its position that decommissioning is not a pre-condition for political 
participation. And the British and Irish prime ministers are still 
seeking a solution that allows both sides to save face but still makes 
the necessary confidence building gestures to move the peace process 
forward. Laurie Cassman, VOA News, London. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>