<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981228.1600.2354 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Community activist, Shariffa Alcateed is president of the Muslim Educational 
Council. She spoke with VOA's Judith Latham about the portrayal of 
Muslims in the American media. They feel that their portrayal is unfair, 
that the media usually looks for the negative in Muslims, and then 
plays it up as large as possible. And the most damaging thing, is 
the media very often makes the act of an individual person, who happens 
to be Muslim, seem as if it's representative of the thinking and feeling 
and actions of all Muslims. While if that same action is done by a 
Christian or a Jewish person, it is just the act of one person. Now 
in the case of terrorist attacks, and their reporting in the mass 
media in the United States, why does this touch such a sensitive nerve 
with Muslims. I can't speak for all Muslims in the world, but I do 
know that it does touch a sensitive cord among Muslims in the United 
States, particularly because we always hope that when something happens, 
that that will not reverberate on us individually. In the case of 
the Oklahoma City Bombing, I remember that some of the first reports 
presumed that it was the work of so-called Arab terrorists. Yes, that's 
true and people at the top of our government were saying that, and 
that pained us greatly, especially those of us who spend millions 
of hours doing positive work in this country. So, it seemed as if, 
no matter what we do, no matter how good a person we are, no matter 
how much we become part of this civil society, it is not enough, and 
it doesn't count. People were afraid that they would literally be 
attacked. And in fact, that is what happened. Many Muslims, many Arabs 
were in fact attacked by people just because they thought they were 
connected with the bombing in Oklahoma City. Now what effect does 
this have on school children? Well, very often, other children start 
taunting them. They start calling them names, like "scarfhead", and 
"camel jockeys", and sometimes they get into fights. Because the other 
school children think that they are being more American, and they 
are exhibiting their loyalty to America by beating up on a Muslim 
or Arab child. You had mentioned that a high official in the government 
was one of the first people to say publicly that the Oklahoma City 
Bombing might be associated with Muslim terrorists or Arab terrorists. 
That was not President Clinton. No, it was not President Clinton, 
it was the one general, from the Department of Defense. The entire 
Muslim community is grateful to the President for having made public 
statements to support respect for Muslims, and for Arab American citizens 
in this country who have proven that we are law-abiding citizens. 
Another thing that we appreciate from President Clinton and from others 
in the government, is that when they make speeches, they are inclusive 
of Muslims. They say, Jews, Christians, and Muslims. Or they say, 
church, synagogue, mosque. That's so important to us. It makes us 
feel as if indeed, we are a part of America. But are there particular 
issues of Americans of Arab background? Well, of course, because of 
the continuing conflict in the Middle East, people demonize Arabs 
more than any other group of Muslims because they think an Arab is 
a Muslim, and a Muslim is an Arab. And they don't know that half the 
Arabs in this country are Christian Arabs. In the case of films like 
"The Siege", many non-Muslims would say that the portrayal of the 
Muslims in that film is a positive one. And so they are at a loss 
to understand all the furor. What is it that there are not understanding. 
I have not read a single review written by a Muslim, or an Arab who 
thought that that was a positive and wonderful portrayal of Muslims. 
And one of the reasons is that it incipiently draws conclusions for 
the audience about the basic nature of Muslims and Arabs, to say that 
they are basically evil. And that they are violent. Even though the 
producer himself, has defended the film saying that there is a sensitive 
portrayal of the protagonist in the film. I believe he lies. He is 
completely insincere, and had the intent from the beginning to smear 
Muslims and create a very, very vicious image in the mind of the average 
American. American Muslims, I think, are beginning to develop stronger 
relationships with people who are in the media, so that they can proactively, 
ahead of time, provide them with more accurate information, with more 
accurate information. And that coupled with the fact that Islam is 
almost the second largest religion in this country, that makes people 
step back and think twice when they didn't use to listen before. Shariffa 
Alcateed is the founder of the North American Council for Muslim Women. 
She's also president of the Muslim Education Council. American Muslims 
and the Media was written and researched by Judith Latham. For Dateline, 
I'm Susan Clark. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>