<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981228.0500.1825 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Arab Parliamentary Union has strongly condemned the US and British 
airstrikes against Iraq. The Union which consists of legislators from 
19 Arab countries held a one-day emergency meeting in Amman Jordan, 
Sunday, to consider a United Arab response to the attacks. A statement 
issued after the meeting described the airstrikes as unjust US and 
British aggression and called on the UN Security Council to ensure 
that such attacks will not be repeated. It also demanded financial 
compensation for the Iraqi people and called on Arab governments to 
work on lifting sanctions imposed on Iraq after the Gulf War. VOA's 
Victor Beatty spoke with Edward Platte, Professor of Political Science 
at Indiana University in Pennsylvania. Professor Platte was asked 
if the statement from the Arab Parliamentary union undermines what 
the United States tried to accomplice with the airstrikes against 
Iraq. It is in one respect, because I thought we had gotten very good 
support from the Arabic countries in this most recent effort. They 
had been very quietly supportive, they hadn't gone out of their way 
to praise what we were doing. But they hadn't been vocal in their 
protests either. Is this a setback for US policy? Well, we certainly 
would like to have public support from the Arabic countries, but it's 
a situation in which the policy we're pursuing doesn't seem to have 
any real outcome or meaning any more. The goals we might achieve by 
it are very limited, and I think everyone has just simply reached 
the point where they think there might be better alternatives to pursue. 
And those alternatives would be sir? A non-military containment of 
Iraq inside its own borders. In other words I think the concerns with 
the repeated airstrikes which don't really seem to accomplice anything 
significant apart from being punitive. There's a new element also 
in this, at least one that has not been quite emphasized in the past, 
and that is the overthrow of Saddam Hussein. Do you think Arab states 
in the region will support that? We've been working toward that end 
for about the last eight years now, with very little success, obviously. 
There simply is no foundation to build upon to remove Saddam from 
power. Internally he is in full control and tends to squash things 
before they get started. And the external groups are all badly fragmented. 
So, it's a real problem. I think that we are hoping for some kind 
of magic bullet solution for a lone army officer with a loaded pistol 
can get close enough to him to remove him from office. Is that likely? 
It can't be discounted totally. Certainly every time he gets hint 
of the slightest discontent within his own military, he cleans house, 
and the people who might be discontented are taken care of first. 
But, just given all it takes is one person at the right place at the 
right time with the right weapon. And you can't discount it totally. 
Edward Platte is a professor of Political Science at Indiana University 
in the state of Pennsylvania. He spoke with VOA's Victor Beatty. The 
Arab Parliamentary Union meeting Sunday in Amman followed a warming 
from Iraq that it will fire on planes that violate its airspace, that 
would include the western enforced No Fly Zones. US and British officials 
say they will continue to enforce the No Fly Zones and warn that their 
pilots will take action if they are threatened. Iraq says it does 
not recognize the No Fly Zones because they are imposed by the United 
States and Britain. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>