<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981228.1600.2155 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Muslims in the United States are protesting what they see as negative 
media stereotypes, stereotypes showing Muslims as Arab terrorists, 
or religious extremists. American Muslims and the Media is the subject 
of today's Dateline. Here's Susan Clark sitting in for Pamela Taylor. 
American films have show characters who were assumed to be Muslim 
doing a lot of damage. The latest movie about terrorism, called "The 
Siege" shows an enormous amount of damage to New York City. And the 
film, "The Siege" is under siege from the American Muslim community. 
It's members say they are fed up with what seems to be an endless 
series of films that make Arabs the villains, and equate Islam with 
terrorism. The producer of "The Siege" say, the producers have got 
it all wrong. VOA's Ed Warner reports on the controversy. One explosion 
after another rips apart New York City until the US Army is finally 
called out to end the violence. That is the plot of a new film, "The 
Siege" which has outraged the Muslim community in the United States 
because the bombers are all Arabs. That is real life, notes Lawrence 
Wright, one of the authors of the screenplay. He notes Arabs blew 
up the World Trade Center and two American embassies in Africa. He 
wrote, in the Washington Post, that it would be hard to deny the United 
States is engaged in a world-wide struggle against Arab terrorism. 
So, Mr. Wright located that struggle in New York. But, he insists 
Arabs and Muslims in general are favorably portrayed in the film. 
There is ample talk about patriotic Arab Americans and Islam as a 
religion of peace. Edward Zweick, producer of "The Siege" says some 
viewers are over sensitive. I would not support any kind of wanton 
vilification or demonization of any group. I wouldn't support just 
the creation of any enemy so as to have a convenient antagonist for 
a film, that's exploitative. But I don't believe that's all what we 
did. In fact I think we've done quite the opposite. We've done something 
that is rather sympathetic and compassionate. But a review in the 
New York Times comments that while the script is even-handed, the 
images of scheming "Arab villains speak louder than words. That is 
what concerns Ibraham Hooper (ph, National Communications Director 
of the Council on Arab Islamic Relations. In his opinion, the film 
repeatedly links normal Islamic religious practices with a call to 
prayer, the washing before prayer, to violence. Arab Americans become 
the victims at the film's end when they are rounded up by a zealous 
US general. It is too late, says Mr. Hooper, to save their reputation. 
You've seen death and destruction by Muslims, hundreds and hundreds 
of innocent New Yorkers are killed in terrorist bombings. So, by the 
time these scenes of detention come, you're thinking, "Yeah, well, 
detain these people, you really need to do it." Jack Sheehan, author 
of "Arab and Muslim Stereotyping in American Popular Culture says, 
since 1970 more than 300 Hollywood films have been made with Arabs 
as the villains. VOA's Ed Warner reporting from Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>