<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981228.0500.2994 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
And the US economy seems to be ending 1998 on a robust note, with 
statistics this week on housing and consumer confidence likely to 
suggest that the boom will carry over into 1999. In the United States, 
the economy is in its sixth year of expansion. It is continuing to 
grow briskly, and Barry Wood also reports, it looks favorable into 
the new year. The United States continues to grow faster than any 
other major industrial economy. In 1998, US growth exceeded 3 percent, 
considerably higher than what was achieved in Western Europe. While 
growth is robust, inflation is subdued, and the unemployment rate 
has declined to less than 4.5 percent. By contrast, unemployment in 
Europe is more than twice as high. This was a year of sudden shifts, 
most notably a stockmarket correction of nearly 20 percent that occurred 
from June until September. By year's end, the stockmarket had recovered 
its lost ground, and was near record highs. Analysts attribute the 
recovery to prompt decisive action by the Central Bank which reduced 
interest rates three times from September to November. Jerry Jesunovsky, 
the head of the National Association of Manufacturers says the US 
economy will expand by another 2.5 percent in 1999. Mr. Jesunovsky 
says the expansion is driven by rising incomes and productivity, and 
not by the stockmarket. The decline that occurred in the market was 
sufficiently short-lived so that under any hypothesis you wouldn't 
assume it would have a big impact on consumption. And you'd have to 
see a significant and prolonged decline in the stockmarket before 
you would see, I think, an impact on consumer spending. Mr. Jesunovsky 
says most of his 14,000 member companies have embraced new technologies 
and restructured their operations so that they can compete even against 
lower priced imported goods. But there are worrying signs, an unprecedented 
wave of mergers in both manufacturing and services has led to substantial 
losses of high paying jobs. The average American consumer is heavily 
indebted. And for the first time in decades, consumers are spending 
more than they earn. These developments lead some economists to conclude 
that a growth slowdown is inevitable. Mickey Riordan is an economist 
at the World Bank. In the United States, slowing of growth from the 
rapid pace of 1998 is likely to be driven, in part, by the crisis 
in Asia and elsewhere as exports continue on a declining trend that 
they started this year. But also, as consumers retrench, given their 
current over extension and some slowing of investment spending as 
well. Recent Federal Reserve measures are likely to achieve a soft 
rather than a hard landing next year. But for years the US economy 
has grown faster than most forecasters predicted. Analysts point to 
the dominance of US companies in the rapidly expanding information 
technology sectors, with US firms far ahead in computers and telecommunications. 
Thus even with 40 percent of the world in recession, with commodity 
prices at 20 year lows, and with US exports declining: the US economic 
outlook remains bright. Barry Wood, VOA News, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>