<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981228.0500.2062 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The United Nations has called for a 48-hour cease fire between the 
Angolan government and UNITA rebels to allow a safe search for a UN 
plane that crashed Saturday with 14 people on board. The transport 
plane went down in flames shortly after taking off from Central Angola. 
It is not known if any of the ten passengers or four crew members 
survived the crash in an area thought to be under UNITA control. The 
UN World Food Program suspended flights in Angola pending further 
information. It has been a difficult year for Angola, just as the 
international community thought peace was just around the corner. 
From Johannesburg, VOA's Alex Bolita has this look at the hopes and 
failures for an Angolan peace. The Angolan government's frustration 
with the UNITA rebel movement reached a peak this past year, as the 
country marked the fourth anniversary of the signing of the Lusaka 
Protocol. That was the UN sponsored peace deal that was to have brought 
about the rebel group's complete demilitarization and its integration 
into Angola's political mainstream as a legitimate opposition party. 
But UNITA, distrustful of the government's intentions never demilitarized, 
retaining a hidden army estimated in size at 30,000 men. It also continued 
to purchase weapons, paying for them with diamonds mined from territory 
it controlled. The international community tried to impose tough sanctions 
on UNITA in a bid to force its compliance with the terms of the 1994 
peace deal. But these had little impact. Eventually the government 
of President Jusea Guadalu Dusantos decided enough was enough. jusea 
guaalu dusantos, angolan president First, the President announced 
the government was breaking off further contacts with UNITA leader 
Jonas Savimbi. Instead it recognized a UNITA splinter group made up 
of dissidents who had broken with the rebel chief. But the move had 
little impact on Mr. Savimbi who dismissed the break away group as 
insignificant. In November, having decided force was the only thing 
the rebel leader would understand, the government sent troops on an 
offensive to seize UNITA's twin central highland strongholds of Andullo 
and Bilundu. The aim was to capture or kill UNITA's leaders and thus 
force the collapse of the rebel movement. The assault failed, in part 
because UNITA counterattacked using heavy weapons that caught the 
government by surprise. By mid-December UNITA was threatening the 
government's grip on several key towns including Kuito and Huambo. 
The government lashed out at the UN Peacekeeping Mission in the country, 
blaming it for failing to enforce the peace agreement and allowing 
UNITA to rearm. Angola National Radio reported at year's end the government 
was seriously considering asking the United Nations Mission to leave. 
Authorities in Luanda were also understood to be seeking military 
support from neighboring countries for an all out fight with UNITA. 
Analysts were not all together surprised by Angola's descent into 
renewed civil war. Richard Cornwell of South Africa's Independent 
Institute for Security Study says the conflicting ambitions of President 
Dusantos and UNITA leader Savimbi have long spelled trouble for the 
country. In fact sometimes one comes to actually doubt the sanity 
of the people involved. Rational choice doesn't appear to be in it. 
President Dusantos obviously has his own interests in retaining power. 
He's settled the tiger, he can't get off. There are all kinds of rumors 
about the amounts of money that are being made at the Presidential 
Palace by skimming the oil revenues. For his part, Jonas Savimbi has 
made it quite clear that he's not interested in material gain, he's 
interested in being president of Angola. So, there you've got the 
standoff. It's between the unpalatable and the unacceptable. As the 
violence in Angola mounted during 1998, he prospects for a new humanitarian 
disaster also grew. By year's end relief workers were reporting hundreds 
of thousands of Angolans had been forced from their homes by the latest 
fighting, and were in need of assistance. Alex Bolita, VOA News, Southern 
Africa Bureau. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>