<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981030.1830.1169 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We're going to take "A closer look" tonight at the man behind the 
money. This is the final weekend of the campaign season. Candidates 
are sweating over the latest polls, planning last-second strategies. 
And in this age when money and politics are so closely intertwined, 
you can bet they're counting their cash. Money is so important now, 
you simply have to have enough to compete. Which is why one senator, 
who you don't see on the talk shows every Sunday, may be the most 
critical figure in this election. Here's ABC's John Cochran. You've 
heard about the Clinton factor in this election. But you may not have 
heard about the McConnell factor. How are you? Senator Mitch McConnell 
is solely responsible for handing out $86 million from the republican 
senatorial committee's war chest. This is a position in which one 
can wield tremendous power. You can settle some scores, you can help 
some people you like and you can punish some people you don't like. 
I can smell a close election. McConnell has been generous with some, 
like Jim Bunning, who is in a close contest in Kentucky. Good luck, 
sir. Thank you. This happens to be McConnell's state. So it is a point 
of honor for him to elect a fellow republican here. McConnell has 
not been so generous to congresswoman Linda Smith, who is running 
in Washington. So glad to meet you. Smith believes her problem is 
that she worked tirelessly for campaign finance reform, which was 
opposed by, that's right, Mitch mcConnell, We're going to kill a Bill 
that richly deserves to be killed. Who actually led the fight against 
it. It didn't help that Smith also fought against tobacco subsidies 
-- they grow tobacco in McConnell's Kentucky. McConnell gave her campaign 
less than 5% of what the law permits him to give her. I don't have 
any animosity toward congresswoman Smith. I'm going to help candidates 
that I think have a chance to win. Smith says she might actually be 
leading in her race if McConnell had helped her. What he did by not 
contributing the money that should have come three weeks ago is I 
had to stay off of TV for three weeks. McConnell has targeted close 
races where he thinks republicans deserve the big bucks to defeat 
democrats, like Wisconsin's Russ Feingold, another proponent of campaign 
finance reform, and South Carolina's Fritz hollings who, well, let's 
just say, republicans don't like him. It's personal. How did McConnell 
get so much power? Because his fellow republicans gave it to him. 
Democrats do the same thing, except they gave the power to two senators 
-- bob Torricelli and Bob Kerrey. They have critics, too. But McConnell 
has more money to disperse, so he has more critics. I think it's a 
matter of Mitch McConnell having to make some very tough decisions, 
and a lot of people not liking those decisions. In the end, McConnell 
will be judged on how well his party fares election night. D when 
the results come trickling in, remember, one of the big players in 
this election is a senator who is not even running. John Cochran, 
ABC News, Washington. You might wonder how much money is out there 
right now? The republican national committee, along with their Senate 
and house committees, have taken in about $278 million. The democrats 
aren't quite so rich, but they've still raised $185 million. What 
do they spend it on? Political commercials, mostly, the best way to 
reach the voters. A recent survey found that political advertisements 
during evening news broadcasts actually outnumber news stories about 
politics by a margin of four to one. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>