<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981030.0219 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
International monitors are urging ethnic Albanian rebels to allow 
traffic to flow freely in Kosovo to improve prospects for a negotiated 
settlement now that police and army units have largely withdrawn and 
fighting has stopped. The Albanian language newspaper Koha Ditore 
reported Friday that members of the Kosovo Diplomatic Observer Mission 
met Wednesday with Kosovo Liberation Army commanders to urge them 
not to impede traffic and to abide by a cease-fire. KLA rebels have 
been seen milling about positions and highway checkpoints evacuated 
by government forces under pressure from NATO. According to the newspaper, 
the monitors told the rebels that Serb police will be allowed to patrol 
highways once a week under the Oct. 12 agreement between President 
Slobodan Milosevic and U.S. envoy Richard Holbrooke. It appeared the 
monitors were trying to reassure the rebels that the limited presence 
of Serb police does not necessarily mean the government is violating 
the peace agreement or that they represent a major threat to ethnic 
Albanian civilians. International envoys are hoping that if they can 
keep the lid on the tense province, most of the thousands of refugees 
will return to homes they fled after Milosevic launched his crackdown 
on ethnic Albanian separatists Feb. 28. So far, however, only a few 
ethnic Albanians have returned home. Those interviewed in makeshift 
encampments say police or soldiers are still in the area, or their 
houses were unlivable because of war damage. ``The return is not as 
easy as was expected,'' said Jacques Franquin of the U.N. refugee 
agency in Geneva. Western powers led by the United States threatened 
NATO airstrikes to pressure Milosevic to agree to reduce his forces 
in Kosovo to the levels they were at before he launched a February 
crackdown in Kosovo, a province of Serbia, the dominant republic in 
Yugoslavia. Hundreds have been killed in the fighting. The threat 
of airstrikes remains, though NATO this week lifted its deadline for 
Milosevic to fully comply. The deal also calls on the Serbs to facilitate 
the return of some 300,000 refugees, half of them abroad and the other 
half scattered over the troubled province. But many refugees remain 
deeply suspicious that not enough Serbian forces have pulled out. 
Tough talk on Thursday by Serb government officials in Belgrade did 
nothing to alleviate their concerns. Vojislaw Seselj, Serbia's deputy 
premier, vowed to continue the government's fight against ethnic Albanian 
rebels in Kosovo despite the withdrawals. He insisted that the substantial 
police pullout of government forces from Kosovo, as demanded by NATO, 
did not mean Serbia would give up its struggle against ``terrorism.'' 
``All armed terrorists will be disarmed and brought to justice,'' 
said Seselj, according to the Fonet news agency. ``The withdrawal 
of police from Kosovo does not mean the end of (our) fight against 
terrorism.'' Also Thursday, Ivica Dacic, a spokesman for Milosevic's 
ruling Socialists, said Serbia and Yugoslavia would ``defend themselves 
as they have done so far.'' International observers report large numbers 
of Serb police and Yugoslav soldiers have returned to barracks or 
left Kosovo, and a convoy of 15 tanks rumbled into the Pristina barracks 
on Thursday from positions 15 kilometers (9 miles) west of the capital. 
But police and soldiers still maintain a visible presence in some 
areas. Police were checking vehicles Thursday on the main road between 
Pristina and the western city of Pec. Three tanks and two mortar launchers 
were positioned outside Junik, near the mountain border with Albania. 
Refugees said the continued police presence shows the failure of the 
agreement. ``I don't have anything to eat and my family is sleeping 
on the floor but I can't go back because there are police just 200 
meters (yards) from my house,'' complained Cen Gashi, 58, a farmer 
and father of 11 children living in the room of an acquaintance about 
5 kilometers (2 miles) from his village, Perceva. Since the withdrawal, 
land mines and booby traps set by Serb forces have been tripped and 
reports of sporadic violence continue. The Serb Media Center reported 
Thursday that two pro-Serb Albanians had been killed by the guerrillas 
in separate incidents. There was no way to independently verify the 
report. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>