<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981030.0253 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
International monitors urged ethnic Albanian rebels to allow traffic 
to flow freely in Kosovo to improve prospects for a negotiated settlement 
now that police and army units have largely withdrawn and fighting 
has stopped in the troubled province. The Albanian language newspaper 
Koha Ditore reported Friday that members of the Kosovo Diplomatic 
Observer Mission met Wednesday with Kosovo Liberation Army commanders 
to urge them not to impede traffic and to abide by a cease-fire. KLA 
rebels have been seen milling about positions and highway checkpoints 
evacuated by Serb government forces under pressure from NATO. According 
to the newspaper, the monitors told the rebels that Serb police will 
be allowed to patrol highways once a week under the Oct. 12 agreement 
between President Slobodan Milosevic and U.S. envoy Richard Holbrooke. 
The monitors apparently have been trying to reassure the rebels that 
the limited presence of Serb police does not necessarily mean the 
government is violating the agreement or that they represent a major 
threat to ethnic Albanian civilians. International envoys hope if 
they can keep the lid on the tense province, most of the thousands 
of refugees will return to homes they fled after Milosevic launched 
his crackdown on ethnic Albanian separatists Feb. 28. So far, however, 
only a few ethnic Albanians have returned home. Those interviewed 
in makeshift encampments complain that police or soldiers were still 
in the area, or their houses were too damaged. ``The return is not 
as easy as was expected,'' said Jacques Franquin of the U.N. refugee 
agency in Geneva. Western powers led by the United States threatened 
NATO airstrikes to pressure Milosevic to agree to reduce his forces 
to the levels they were at before he launched the crackdown in Kosovo, 
a province of Serbia, the dominant of the two republics in Yugoslavia. 
Hundreds have been killed in fighting. The threat of airstrikes remains, 
though NATO this week lifted its deadline for Milosevic to fully comply. 
The deal also calls on the Serbs to facilitate the return of some 
300,000 refugees, half of them abroad and the other half scattered 
over Kosovo. But many refugees remain deeply suspicious that not enough 
Serbian forces have pulled out. In Belgrade on Thursday, Vojislaw 
Seselj, Serbia's deputy premier, vowed to continue the government's 
fight against ethnic Albanian rebels despite the withdrawals. He insisted 
that the substantial police pullout of government forces, as demanded 
by NATO, did not mean Serbia would give up its struggle against ``terrorism.'' 
``All armed terrorists will be disarmed and brought to justice,'' 
said Seselj, according to the Fonet news agency. ``The withdrawal 
of police from Kosovo does not mean the end of (our) fight against 
terrorism.'' Also Thursday, Ivica Dacic, a spokesman for Milosevic's 
ruling Socialists, said Serbia and Yugoslavia would ``defend themselves 
as they have done so far.'' International observers report large numbers 
of Serb police and Yugoslav soldiers have returned to barracks or 
left Kosovo. A convoy of 15 tanks rumbled into barracks in the provincial 
capital Pristina on Thursday from positions 15 kilometers (9 miles) 
west of the capital. But police and soldiers still maintain a visible 
presence in some areas. Police were checking vehicles Thursday on 
the main road between Pristina and the western city of Pec. Three 
tanks and two mortar launchers were positioned outside Junik, near 
the mountain border with Albania. ``I don't have anything to eat and 
my family is sleeping on the floor, but I can't go back because there 
are police just 200 meters (yards) from my house,'' said Cen Gashi, 
58, a farmer and father of 11 children living in the room of an acquaintance 
about 5 kilometers (2 miles) from his village, Perceva. Since the 
withdrawal, land mines and booby traps set by Serb forces have been 
tripped and reports of sporadic violence continue. The Serb Media 
Center reported Thursday that two pro-Serb Albanians had been killed 
by the guerrillas in separate incidents. There was no way to independently 
verify the report. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>