<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981030.0800 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
By mid-December, Ukraine will fulfill all the conditions set by the 
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development for a loan to complete 
two new nuclear reactors, officials said Friday. The country's nuclear 
authorities are to give the EBRD a report on the new reactors' potential 
environmental and social impact, the last of the bank's requirements, 
said Hennadiy Sazonov, project director for the state nuclear energy 
company Energoatom. Ukraine wants to complete the reactors at the 
Khmelnytsky and Rivne nuclear power plants to compensate for the planned 
closure of the Chernobyl power plant, which it has pledged to shut 
down by 2000. However, top government officials have repeatedly said 
that Ukraine would close Chernobyl, the site of the world's worst 
nuclear accident in 1986, only after the two new reactors start operating. 
Ukraine and the governments of the world's seven major industrialized 
nations have asked the EBRD to consider providing funds for the completion 
of the reactors, estimated at dlrs 1.2 billion. The EBRD, however, 
put forward four requirements. Sazonov spoke during a public debate 
of the project, one in a series of discussions Ukraine is required 
to hold while preparing the environmental and social impact report 
for the EBRD. The report and the results of its distribution among 
the citizens are to be sent to the EBRD by Dec. 18, Sazonov said. 
He said Ukraine has fully implemented two conditions: ensuring that 
the project meets the required domestic and international safety standards 
and is the least costly compared to other alternatives. Energoatom 
intends to send the EBRD a report next month on Ukraine's implementation 
of the third condition, which is to guarantee that the the new reactors 
would make enough profit to return the loan, Sazonov added. The reactors 
at Rivne and Khmelnytsky are currently more than 80 percent completed, 
but their construction was halted after Ukraine's 1991 independence 
due to the lack of funds and a later parliamentary moratorium on the 
construction of new nuclear facilities. The government's decision 
to complete the two reactors has prompted protests from environmental 
groups in Ukraine and adjacent countries, but appeared to have little 
influence on its determination to finish the project. Ukraine's five 
nuclear plants have 14 operational reactors, which account for nearly 
half of the country's electricity production. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>