<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981030.1085 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The former commander of a notorious army intelligence unit organized 
the assassination of Colombia's main opposition leader three years 
ago, probably on orders from a senior official, judicial sources said 
Friday. Former Col. Bernardo Ruiz Silva, for whom an arrest warrant 
was issued in mid-October, is accused of planning the Nov. 2, 1995, 
murder of Alvaro Gomez Hurtado, the officials said. Ruiz was still 
at large Friday and believed to be in Colombia, said the sources, 
who spoke on condition of anonymity for security reasons. Prosecutors 
had hoped to keep the arrest warrant secret until they captured Ruiz, 
but news of the charges was leaked by Colombian media. Ruiz is wanted 
on charges of aggravated homicide, intent to murder and conspiracy, 
a spokesman for the chief prosecutor's office said. Gomez, a three-time 
presidential candidate and head of the Conservative Party, was shot 
to death in broad daylight as he got into his car after teaching a 
class at a Bogota university. The assassination occurred during a 
period of great political turmoil, when Gomez was demanding that then-President 
Ernesto Samper resign because of evidence he was elected in 1994 with 
$6 million in contributions from drug cartels. Four former soldiers, 
all of whom had worked under Col. Ruiz, have been arrested for allegedly 
carrying out the assassination. Some have implicated Ruiz, who at 
the time of the killing commanded the 20th Intelligence Brigade, the 
sources said. In all, six people have been arrested in the case. The 
officials said prosecutors believe Ruiz was acting on the orders of 
higher-ranking officials, perhaps even someone within the Samper administration. 
The television news program CM&AMP; reported Thursday night that two 
generals and several leading politicians have also been implicated 
in the assassination. It did not name them, however, and no further 
arrest warrants have been issued. Some Colombian media have theorized 
that the assassination was ordered because Gomez was involved in a 
plot to overthrow Samper. Without naming names, Samper repeatedly 
asserted that conservative politicians were trying to organize a coup 
against him. Former U.S. Ambassador Myles Frechette has said he was 
approached in August 1995 by Samper opponents who sought Washington's 
support for a coup. Frechette said he refused to help the conspirators, 
whom he has not named. Ruiz was relieved of his command in late 1997 
and the 20th Intelligence Brigade was dissolved in May. The State 
Department, Colombian prosecutors and international human rights groups 
had repeatedly accused the brigade of sponsoring death squad killings. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>