<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981030.1058 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In a swift move to rescue the imperiled land-for-peace agreement with 
Israel, Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat worked Friday to silence 
his Islamic militant rivals. The charismatic Hamas founder, Sheik 
Ahmed Yassin, was held under house arrest, his phone line cut, and 
burly security men with AK-47 assault rifles were posted outside his 
home in a Gaza City slum. Only his wife and children were allowed 
to come and go. More than 100 Hamas activists were arrested within 
a 24-hour period. Senior figures in the group, which is bent on sabotaging 
the U.S.-brokered peace deal, were seized and had phones disconnected. 
Israel said the crackdown on Hamas, coming a day after a suicide attack 
aimed at Israeli school children, was a positive sign, but that Arafat 
needed to do more to earn the 13 percent of the West Bank he was promised 
in the peace accord. ``They must struggle firmly against ... the terror 
groups,'' said Israel's hawkish foreign minister, Ariel Sharon. ``If 
the commitments are fulfilled, Israel will carry out its part.'' Prime 
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu demanded that the Palestinian Authority 
arrest Mohammed Deif, a leader of Hamas' military wing, Izzedine al 
Qassam. Deif has masterminded several terror attacks and has been 
in hiding in Gaza for three years. Netanyahu said there was ``increasing 
suspicion'' that Deif was involved in Thursday's bombing. If he is 
not caught, Netanyahu said, more attacks that could derail the peace 
process are inevitable. Despite the tough words, however, a senior 
U.S. official said he expected the timetable of the peace agreement 
to be kept. The official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said 
the Palestinian Authority was expected to present a security work 
plan to U.S. officials over the weekend. This, in turn, could pave 
the way for Israeli Cabinet approval on Sunday of the Wye River accord. 
In the meantime, Arafat is under tremendous pressure to prove to Israel 
that his campaign against Hamas is different from past sweeps in which 
hundreds were rounded up but then released. At the same time, Arafat 
cannot risk provoking a bloody backlash that could lead the Palestinians 
to the brink of civil war. In the Sara neighborhood of Hamas founder 
Yassin, a slum of unpaved alleys and crumbling homes, many feel Arafat 
has gone too far already. ``They surrounded his (Yassin's) home with 
armed officers as if he was a criminal under arrest,'' said Omar Abul 
Subar, 42, wearing a long robe, baggy pants and slippers as he emerged 
from the local mosque. In the long run, Arafat only will have broad 
public support for a move against Hamas if the Israelis deliver their 
part of the agreement _ releasing prisoners, opening the Gaza airport, 
opening a land route between the West Bank and Gaza _ so the Palestinians 
feel they have something to gain. Palestinian commentator Ghassan 
Khatib cautioned that mass arrests were no guarantee that violence 
against Israel will stop. ``Even if they manage to catch the right 
people, Hamas can always recruit new ones and organize attacks,'' 
Khatib said. Still, Arafat's adviser, Nabil Abourdeneh, made it clear 
that the Palestinian leader was in no mood for compromise with Hamas. 
``We will not allow any faction to stand in the way of liberating 
Palestinian lands,'' Abourdeneh said. Arafat has rounded up Hamas 
activists in the past, but this marked the first time he arrested 
and silenced the entire leadership within a day. In a sign that the 
campaign was not confined to Gaza, Arafat's men on Friday prevented 
a planned Hamas march in the West Bank town of Nablus. It was also 
a first that Arafat took on Yassin, a quadriplegic since his teens 
who is widely respected even by many outside Hamas for building and 
funding clinics and schools. The roundup began Thursday afternoon, 
just hours after a Palestinian motorist rammed his rigged car into 
an Israeli army jeep escorting school children from a nearby Jewish 
settlement. A soldier was killed, but the 40 children escaped unharmed. 
By Thursday evening, security guards were posted outside Yassin's 
home and he was informed he was under house arrest. In an interview 
Yassin granted to Qattar-based Al-Jazeera TV just before the guards 
arrived, he said he wanted to avoid fighting among the Palestinians 
at all costs, but that attacks on Israelis were a legitimate way of 
fighting occupation. Several hours later, at 1:30 a.m. Friday, Palestinian 
agents ransacked Yassin's home, arrested three bodyguards and seized 
weapons, videotapes and files, according to a handwritten fax sent 
to news agencies. The authenticity of the fax, which bore Yassin's 
signature, could not be confirmed. Despite the unprecedented pressure 
on Hamas, the group's initial response to the crackdown was somewhat 
mild. It accused Arafat of trying to ``wipe out'' his political opposition, 
but did not threaten retaliation against the Palestinian Authority. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>