<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981030.0246 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A Spanish judge who wants former Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet 
brought to Spain to stand trial for genocide and other crimes awaited 
a National Court decision Friday on whether Spain has jurisdiction 
over atrocities committed by the military juntas of Chile and Argentina. 
An 11-judge panel of the court convened behind closed doors at 9.30 
a.m. (0830 gmt), with a decision expected by early afternoon. For 
over two years, Judge Baltasar Garzon and a colleague have been probing 
human rights crimes in Argentina and Chile in the 1970s and 1980s. 
Garzon filed the arrest warrant that resulted in Pinochet's detention 
in London since Oct. 16. The case before the court panel Friday resulted 
from a protest filed in May by state prosecutors who objected to Garzon's 
investigations on the grounds that Spain had no jurisdiction over 
such crimes. Although the National Court's decision Friday does not 
deal specifically with Pinochet's detention or his extradition, Garzon 
is expected to decide on the future of his case depending on the ruling. 
If the judges rule against Garzon, he would be in the awkward position 
of seeking extradition of Pinochet on charges related to crimes the 
court says he had no business investigating in the first place. In 
such a case, Garzon mostly likely would be forced to drop his drive 
to extradite Pinochet as well as the parallel probes that led to his 
arrest. Garzon is not expected to appeal if he loses. Pinochet, who 
seized power in 1973 and ruled for 17 years, has been widely accused 
of running a ruthless regime. During his rule, 4,299 political opponents 
died or disappeared, according to a Chilean government report. Garzon 
says that under Spanish law he can go after Pinochet, 82, on the grounds 
that he committed genocide by trying to wipe out his political opponents. 
In the arrest warrant, Garzon also accuses Pinochet of terrorism and 
torture. The case was shaken Wednesday by Britain's High Court ruling 
that Pinochet has diplomatic immunity. That decision is under appeal 
and Garzon is expected to keep trying to extradite Pinochet as long 
as he is detained and the Spanish National Court backs the case. The 
11-judge panel began deliberating after hearing attorneys argue for 
and against the case for some four hours Thursday evening. National 
Court prosecutor Pedro Rubira insisted that jurisdiction for human 
rights crimes committed in Argentina and Chile lies within those countries, 
not Spain. He added that Pinochet cannot be charged with genocide 
because political opponents that died under his regime were not persecuted 
because of their race or religion. But Carlos Slepoy, a lawyer for 
families of junta victims in Argentina, said: ``Pinochet is guilty 
of genocide because he tried to eliminate an entire group of people.'' 
Another lawyer, Juan Garces, representing families of junta victims 
in Chile, drew applause from about 100 spectators in the court chamber 
by stating, ``Let justice be done. Let's help humanity.'' The Spanish 
probes of Chile and Argentina intersect because Pinochet is accused 
of taking part in Operation Condor, in which several military juntas 
in South America teamed up in the 1970s and 1980s to crush what they 
perceived as a communist threat. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>