<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981030.0514 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A Spanish judge is expected push ahead for the extradition of former 
Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet after the National Court ruled Friday 
that Spain had jurisdiction over crimes committed during the military 
dictatorships in Chile and Argentina. The ruling gave a green light 
to Judge Baltasar Garzon to continue with his investigations into 
the alleged crimes of genocide, terrorism and torture committed by 
Pinochet during his military dictatorship between 1973-90. Garzon 
issued an international arrest order on this basis which led to the 
detention of Pinochet in London on Oct. 16. But his probe against 
the 82-year-old former Chilean leader was snarled earlier this week 
when Britain's High Court ruled that, as a former head of state, Pinochet 
had immunity from prosecution. He has been kept under arrest pending 
an appeal expected to be heard next week. Sources close to Garzon 
said that if he got the backing from his National Court he would continue 
to seek the extradition as long as Pinochet remained detained. ``It's 
an immense homage to the disappeared (people) of Chile and Argentina, 
'' said Carlos Slepoy, a lawyer representing families of Argentine 
victims. ``From a legal point of view its a landmark decision.'' The 
11-judge panel reached the decision shortly after 2 p.m. (1300gmt) 
after nearly five hours of deliberation. ``The panel has voted unanimously 
to reject the appeals and authorizes Spain to hear the facts of what 
happened,'' Carlos Cezon, one of the judges, announced. The decision 
was greeted with whoops of joy from lawyers backing the investigation 
and relatives of the victims who had gathered in the court in downtown 
Madrid. For over two years, Judge Baltasar Garzon and a colleague 
have been probing human rights crimes in Argentina and Chile in the 
1970s and 1980s. Garzon filed the arrest warrant that resulted in 
Pinochet's detention in London since Oct. 16. The panel of judges 
studying a protest filed in May by state prosecutors who objected 
to Garzon's investigations on the grounds that Spain had no jurisdiction 
over such crimes. Although the National Court's decision Friday does 
not deal specifically with Pinochet's detention or his extradition, 
Garzon was expected to decide on the future of his case depending 
on the ruling. Pinochet seized power in 1973 and ruled for 17 years, 
during which 4,299 political opponents died or disappeared, according 
to a Chilean government report. Garzon says that under Spanish law 
he can go after Pinochet, 82, on the grounds that he committed genocide 
by trying to wipe out his political opponents. In the arrest warrant, 
Garzon also accuses Pinochet of genocide, terrorism and torture. Wednesday 
Britain's High Court ruling of immunity for Pinochet shook Garzon's 
case. An appeal of the decision is expected next week and a five-judge 
House of Lords panel may rule later in the week. Garzon is expected 
to keep trying to extradite Pinochet as long as he is detained and 
the Spanish National Court backs the case. The Spanish panel heard 
arguments for and against the case Thursday evening. National Court 
prosecutor Pedro Rubira insisted that jurisdiction for human rights 
crimes committed in Argentina and Chile lies within those countries, 
not Spain. He argued that Pinochet cannot be charged with genocide 
because political opponents that died under his regime were not persecuted 
because of their race or religion. But Slepoy said Pinochet was ``guilty 
of genocide because he tried to eliminate an entire group of people.'' 
The Spanish probes of Chile and Argentina intersect because Pinochet 
is accused of taking part in Operation Condor, in which several military 
juntas in South America teamed up in the 1970s and 1980s to crush 
what they perceived as a communist threat. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>