<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981030.0500 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Intensifying their crackdown on Islamic militants, Palestinian police 
on Friday cut the telephone lines of Hamas founder Ahmed Yassin and 
the group's leading activists. They also prevented a Hamas march in 
the West Bank. A fax sent to news agencies claimed that Palestinian 
agents ransacked Yassin's home early Friday, arrested three bodyguards 
and seized weapons, videotapes and files. The authenticity of the 
handwritten fax could not immediately be confirmed. More than 100 
Hamas activists have been arrested in the Gaza Strip since Thursday's 
suicide attack on an Israeli transport of school children in the Gaza 
Strip, security officials said. The unprecedented decision to silence 
Yassin came after Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat met with his security 
chiefs to chart the next stage of the campaign against Hamas that 
Israel says is a precondition for a timely West Bank troop withdrawal. 
Arafat adviser Nabil Abourdeneh said the Palestinian Authority had 
made it its top priority to ensure that the Israeli pullback from 
13 percent of the West Bank begins on time. ``We will not allow any 
faction to stand in the way of liberating Palestinian lands,'' Abourdeneh 
told The Associated Press. Israeli Foreign Minister Ariel Sharon said 
Friday that Israel would not go ahead with the 12-week pullback unless 
the Palestinians wage an all-out war against the Islamic militants. 
``They must struggle firmly against the infrastructure of the terror 
groups,'' Sharon said. ``It the commitments are fulfilled, Israel 
will carry out its part.'' On Friday morning, armed Palestinian policemen 
and plainclothes agents blocked the sandy streets leading to Yassin's 
home in a Gaza City slum and ordered journalists to leave the area. 
Cars were searched and passers-by questioned. On Thursday evening, 
Arafat had placed Yassin after house arrest on Thursday evening. It 
was a sharp about face. In the year since Yassin's release from an 
Israeli jail, Arafat had tried hard to avoid open conflict with Yassin 
who is revered in the impoverished Gaza Strip for having built a wide 
network of clinics and schools. Many in Yassin's Sabra neighborhood 
felt Arafat had gone too far. ``By insulting him, they have insulted 
every honest Muslim here,'' said Nayed Al Amer, 34, as he returned 
home from noon prayers. He and others said fear kept them from protesting 
openly. The wife of Hamas spokesman Mahmoud Zahar said she hasn't 
heard from her husband since he was picked up by plainclothes agents 
on Thursday afternoon. Phones were cut later that night, said Mrs. 
Zahar, who would not give her first name. In a sign that the crackdown 
is spreading to the West Bank, Hamas activists in the town of Nablus 
said Palestinian security forces prevented them from holding a march 
Friday to protest the arrests of the group's leaders. Arafat has moved 
against Hamas in the past, sometimes arresting hundreds of activists 
in retaliation for suicide attacks against Israel. However, the current 
crackdown marked the first time Arafat had the entire Hamas leadership 
arrested and silenced. The arrests came in response to the suicide 
attack at a busy Gaza junction in which an Islamic militant rammed 
an explosives-laden car into an Israeli army jeep escorting a red-and-white 
bus carrying Israeli school children. The 40 students on board were 
saved but the car bomb killed an Israeli soldier in the jeep, a 19-year-old 
immigrant from Ukraine. The attack came only six days after the signing 
of the agreement in Washington. It was a destabilizing new factor 
in what is already a highly delicate prelude to implementing the accord. 
That process is to start next week. Blocking the pact is the avowed 
goal of Hamas, which bitterly opposes any peace with Israel. Hamas 
has carried out attacks that have killed scores of Israelis. Earlier 
this week, Netanyahu indefinitely postponed a Cabinet session that 
was to ratify the peace agreement. Officials in his office said the 
regular weekly Cabinet session would be held Sunday, as planned, but 
that the peace agreement would only be discussed if the Palestinians 
had submitted a detailed security plan to the Americans by then. Palestinian 
negotiator Hassan Asfour said the plan would be presented to the Americans 
on Monday, as initially planned. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>