<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981030.0130.0046 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
"CNN Headline News," I'm Loretta Lepore. After 36 years away, John 
Glenn says he's enjoying the view from space. The 77-year-old became 
the world's oldest space traveler Thursday when he and six crewmates 
lifted off aboard the shuttle "discovery." Three hours and 20 minutes 
into the launch, Glenn made his first call back to mission control. 
Hello, Houston. This is ps-2, let me get sprung out of the mid-deck. 
And that is absolutely Gorgeous. And Roger that, glad you're enjoying 
the show. Enjoying the show is right. This is beautiful. The best 
part is, to a trite old statement, zero-G, and I feel fine. Roger 
that, we had a bunch of your friends asking about you today and how 
you're feeling and I'm sure they're glad to hear that. First report 
is great. I don't know what happens down the line, but Hawaii is great. 
I just can't even describe it. John Zarrella has more on Thursday's 
historic launch. After waiting 36 years, John Glenn's dream to return 
to space has come true. Five, four, three, two, one -- booster ignition, 
and liftoff of "Discovery," with a crew of six astronaut heros and 
one American legend. In 1962, Glenn left earth in a capsule built 
for one. Thursday, he left earth in a space plane with six other astronauts. 
No event in U.S. space history since the launch of "Apollo 11" to 
the Moon has captured so much attention. Glenn's wife and family watched 
liftoff from a private viewing area. The president and Mrs. Clinton 
were here, too. a chorus of cheers went up from the hundreds of thousands 
of people who packed every single "you can see it from here" spot 
on the space coast. I didn't think it was gonna affect me like it 
did, but it was really, really -- it was just something you have to 
see. I don't think you can watch -- I don't think TV does it justice. 
It was really emotional. It gave me goose bumps. The scheduled 2:00 
P.M. launch was delayed 19 minutes by minor issues -- one with the 
spacecraft, the second when unauthorized planes had to be cleared 
from the airspace. For NASA, the near-perfect countdown brought "well 
dones" for the shuttle team from the first president since Nixon to 
be on hand for a space launch. We had confidence in you and pride 
in America and a conviction that our space program is good for the 
United States and good for the world. While the countdown was near-perfect, 
on liftoff, a panel that covers the landing drag chute fell off just 
as the vehicle's engines fired up. We are evaluating at this time. 
We do not expect this to impact your mission. If it was a drag chute 
door, this is not a hazardous condition, and we expect the mission 
to proceed as scheduled. Glenn and the crew began their day with the 
traditional early-morning breakfast photo opportunity. A couple hours 
later, with spacesuits on, they waved as they left for the launch 
pad and their appointment with history. "Mercury" astronaut Scott 
Carpenter added another chapter to the history books with a variation 
on his immortalized words uttered first on February 20th, 1962 -- 
Good luck. Have a safe flight. And to say once again, godspeed, John 
Glenn. John Zarrella, CNN, at the Kennedy space center in Florida. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>