<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981030.2130.1511 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The spookiest night of the year is less than 24 hours away. Holly 
Firfer has some hints on how you can keep your little ghosts and goblins 
safe. The candy, the costumes, the fun. Doorbells will be Ringing 
-- Trick or treat. -- as kids prepare to hit the streets and have 
a howling good time. But for some parents, halloween can be a scary 
prospect, filled with anxiety over dark streets, cumbersome costumes 
and too much candy. But don't be fooled, you can have a ghost of a 
chance of a smooth halloween if you just follow some of the experts' 
advice, starting with candy. I think the attitude should be moderation 
is fine. Teach them that once in a while, a treat or candies, cakes, 
cookies, those are okay to have once in a while on special occasions. 
And it helps kids to learn to eat responsibly. Nutritionists say one 
night of overdoing it in the candy department is okay. But if the 
thought of your children eating all those sweets turns you sour, one 
Atlanta dentist has a great idea -- just call on the great pumpkin. 
What you do is come home and you bring the candy and put it out on 
the floor, and you and your mom and dad pick out the best two or three 
pieces for yourself. And then you put the rest of the candy back in 
the bag. And you leave the bag out on the countertop that night. And 
when you go to sleep, just like Santa, the great pumpkin comes and 
he takes the bag of candy and he leaves you a toy. And one more candy 
tip -- stay away from lollipops and hard candies. The longer sugar 
sits on the teeth, the more bacteria builds up and can cause cavities. 
Seeing kids run through the neighborhood in costumes can be quite 
a treat, but picking out the right costume can be the tricky part. 
Have their faces painted instead of using masks, and floppy hats that 
would prevent their seeing properly. Some other halloween tricks -- 
make sure children know their phone number in case they get lost or 
scared. Establish a route before the kids head out, and set a return 
time. Also, make sure children don't enter apartment buildings or 
other enclosed areas without an adult. And advise them to go only 
to the homes that are lit well. There are more deaths and injuries 
on the night of halloween than any other night of the year. And so, 
it certainly helps to take these precautions. Be sure kids' costumes, 
including their shoes, fit well, so they don't trip. Give them flashlights 
in case they're out after dark. And be sure they always use the sidewalks. 
And most importantly, all the experts agree, don't worry too much. 
It's a night for fun and fantasy. Happy halloween. Holly Firfer, CNN, 
Atlanta. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>