<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981030.0130.1492 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Astronaut John Glenn's age may have been the subject of some jokes 
lately. But as Jeanne Moos reports, the nation is rooting for one 
of its favorite icons. You may think of this as a case of deja vu. 
But for John Glenn, it's deja flew. Booster ignition and liftoff of 
"discovery." Roger, the clock is operating. We're under way. Instead 
of playing shuffleboard, he's on board the shuttle. Imagine getting 
dumped in the drink -- at an age when most folks would opt for the 
Whirlpool. John Glenn's idea of bingo -- g-59. -- is G-forces. Not 
even gravity keeps this guy down. He's my peer and I admire him. Who's 
John Glenn? Are you serious? yes. I'm sorry. John Glenn? no? Isn't 
he like a politician or something? Just tell us who he is. a day before 
the launch, John Glenn was, to them, a discovery. I don't know the 
dude you're Talkin' about. Oh, that old guy! Yeah, I think that's 
so cool. And here you thought John Glenn was old-fashioned just because 
he took an Andy Williams tape along on the flight. Moon river Don't 
give Glenn any ideas about flying to the Moon next. Cartoonists have 
had a field day with Glenn's age. A spacewalk with a Walker in "the 
New York post." Glenn is a backseat driver in "the Arkansas democrat 
gazette." And then there's the checklist -- booster Rockets, rocket 
fuel, depends, geritol, polygrip. Actually polydent and ensure were 
advertisers during the network launch coverage. -- And drink to your 
health. Drink to his health. I hope he's in good shape, because I 
wouldn't want him catching a heart attack up there. And then there 
was all that talk about Glenn taking along metamucil. As an associated 
press writer put it, "because he may need help making all systems 
go." All systems are go. Glenn himself has joked about having to choose 
between mixing his tang, that favorite drink of astronauts past, with 
either metamucil or geritol. Metageritang, we call this concoction. 
ugh. In Times Square, people watched the liftoff. And it seemed to 
give some a lift. There were actually tears of happiness. And even 
teenagers who barely knew John Glenn from John Lennon wished him the 
best. For Glenn -- Glenn, just for you. Good luck, man, 'cause you 
-- you're -- Unbelievable! He's like the cool guy, he's like the Mack 
daddy pimp dude. Mack daddy dude is considered a compliment, because 
a dude like that gets all the girls. So godspeed, Mack daddy dude. 
Jeanne Moos, CNN, New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>