<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981030.0130.0601 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Thursday in the Gaza strip, an Israeli escort Jeep blocked a suicide 
bomber from ramming a car filled with explosives into a school bus. 
The bomb killed one Israeli soldier, but none of the students on the 
bus were injured. The terrorist group Hamas claimed responsibility 
for the attack, prompting a quick response from Palestinian authority 
President Yasser Arafat. He ordered the house arrest of the group's 
spiritual leader, sheik Ahmed yassin. Jim Clancy has more on what 
that may or may not accomplish. Palestinian police surrounded the 
home of sheik Ahmed Yassin in gaza, searching vehicles and questioning 
people approaching the Hamas founder's residence. But whether the 
unexpected house arrest of the blind, crippled sheik Yassin will bottle 
up Hamas terrorism is an entirely different matter. A little more 
than one year ago, sheik Ahmed Yassin returned to Gaza from an Israeli 
prison by way of Jordan, all by helicopter. The tumultuous, heroes' 
welcome was seen by Israelis and Palestinians alike, as evidence of 
his charismatic leadership of Hamas, a leadership that was, and is, 
firmly opposed to further compromise with Israel. Sheik Yassin had 
been sentenced to life in prison by Israel in 1989 for his role as 
founder of Hamas. His release came at the demand of Jordan's king 
Hussein, and in apparent exchange for a mossad agent captured in Amman 
after the bungled assassination attempt of a Hamas official there 
last year. Since his release, sheik Yassin has been afforded special 
treatment by the palestinian authority though he has spoken out often 
against the Oslo accords and vowed to continue resistance to Israeli 
occupation. The move against sheik Yassin and the detention of some 
Hamas officials is being seen by many as tough action by the Palestinians. 
This to prove they will keep their part of the wye river memorandum 
reached last week in the U.S., house arrest is seen by some as a modified 
action against the Hamas founder a move limited in actual effect, 
and perhaps easily lifted. But risks remain. First, even house arrest 
leaves the Palestinian authority and its president yasser Arafat open 
to criticism that they are now carrying out what Israel itself could 
no longer do. Second, and perhaps more important, Israeli and Palestinian 
experts often agree that sheik Yassin may well be more dangerous as 
a prisoner than he is when he is free. Jim Clancy, "Headline News." 
</TEXT>
</DOC>