<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981030.1830.1305 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
And in "living longer, living better" tonight -- a nutrient some are 
calling "the vitamin of the next century" -- folic acid. Boosters 
predict it will help prevent everything from heart disease to alzheimer's. 
Here's NBC's Jim Avila. It's the food nutritionists have recommended 
for years, and mothers before that. But here is the new science even 
they didn't know. New research shows it's the folic acid in leafy 
green vegetables, beans and broccoli that makes them healthy. And 
experts say it's not a passing vitamin fad. There is emerging evidence 
that folic acid may actually prevent fatal diseases that strike humans 
as they get older. Whatever your mother or grandmother said about 
eating spinach, she's right. Dr. Jacob selhub believes in his work. 
Studying folic acid for 30 years at Boston's tufts University. He 
lives it, starting each day with a half pound spinach omelette. I 
call folic acid "the vitamin of the next century." In fact, the national 
institutes of health has commissioned studies, million dollars worth, 
because folic acid promises so much. Have you taken your vitamins 
on a daily basis? Across the country, 56 clinics monitor stroke patients 
now taking folic acid to improve blood flow. It's working. In Boston, 
62-year-old Patricia Curtin takes folic acid, part of a study testing 
the theory it can prevent repeat heart attacks. She's had three. Her 
first at age 49. I had gotten my coffee and newspaper and suddenly 
fell down on the street. Already, folic acid is recommended for women 
of child-bearing years to prevent birth defects. But now there is 
new hope, huge studies on the suspected connections between folic 
acid and prevention of heart disease, stroke and colon cancer. And 
new data suggests folic acid could prevent Alzheimer's. More than 
a million Americans die from those diseases every year, each, connected 
to cell growth. Folic acid is vital to healthy cells. Without it, 
cells breakdown. If you don't have folic acid, everything stops. Dr. 
Joan manson researches heart disease. I thivg that folic acid does 
have a staying power which is not true of many of the nutrients that 
have been touted in the past. The FDA says 35% of Americans don't 
get enough folic acid in their food. The best sources -- spinach, 
broccoli, beans, lentils, oranges. It's also in pill forms, but experts 
say it's better to absorb in food. And it's safe to take before the 
studies are complete. Don't wait for the messiah, take it now. Folic 
acid, a well-known nutrient, medical researchers now believe has even 
more potential to help humans "live longer and better." Jim Avila, 
NBC news, Boston. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>