<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981030.1830.0946 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
NBC news "in depth" tonight -- the final, frantic weekend of campaign 
'98. All across the country, candidates are making the final push 
for votes. Among the most important contests are, of course, the 36 
governors' races. Right now, republicans hold 24, democrats 11, and 
one, Maine, has an independent governor. And by next week, the country 
could have brothers as governors of two powerful states, brothers 
with more than a passing familiarity of what it takes to become president. 
Two sons of president bush -- governor George W. bush, an overwhelming 
favorite to win re-election in Texas, and his younger brother, Jeb, 
a clear favorite to make a comeback after a narrow defeat in Florida 
four years ago. Four years later, Jeb bush is running as a kinder, 
gentler republican. Love you. He's spending more time talking about 
education and economic opportunity, and less time about school prayer 
and abortion. This baby is made for politics. In 1994, bush, a successful 
south Florida real estate investor, ran as an ideological conservative. 
When asked, then, what he would do for blacks, he answered, "probably 
nothing." He lost, just barely, and that campaign was a real strain 
on his family life. Bush says he was forced to re-evaluate his private 
and public life. He converted to Roman catholicism, the faith of his 
Mexican-born wife. He helped start a charter school in one of Miami's 
poorest neighborhoods. Got your E-mail. Bush is determined to win 
a big chunk of the state's traditional democratic base, the African-American 
and Latino population. He jumped out to a sizeable early lead, but 
lately, his democratic opponent, lieutenant governor buddy MacKay, 
has been closing the gap, especially among women voters. MacKay is 
pro-choice, bush anti-abortion. They're also divided on education. 
They both favor innovative approaches, such as this trade school in 
palm beach county, for kids who have trouble in traditional classrooms. 
Did you do this yourself? But bush wants to go further, using public 
money for private school vouchers. The idea that you will allow some 
students out of public schools with public dollars is an idea thaw 
will destroy the schools. When you leave behind the kids that will 
be left behind, don't you have a Class of under students? We have 
that now. That's what we need to fight against. Every ten days or 
so, Jeb bush talks to his older brother, George w. bush, running for 
re-election as governor of Texas. I think he's a lot more confident, 
and he's learned what it is to be a Leader. What are the biggest differences 
between you and George W.? Probably just more style than anything. 
You are more stylish than he is? Of course, I was the smartest. What 
advice do you get from your mother on the campaign trail? Don't brag, 
don't get cocky. Whenever I start, I see this looming figure of my 
mom behind the crowd, and it puts me in check real quick. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>