<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981030.0354 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The World of Coca-Cola, which on the cultural scale falls somewhere 
between legitimate museum and Disney-style extravaganza, is one of 
M. Douglas Ivester's hangouts. Once a month or so, he likes to pop 
in, gaze at the exhibits of Coke ephemera and eavesdrop on the tourists 
crowded around. The other day he spied a jukebox, punched up a bouncy 
1930s tune, the ``Coca-Cola March,'' and lingered for a moment to 
listen. ``Doesn't it just make you want to get a flag and march,'' 
he asked, ``and then go attack the world?'' For Coca-Cola Co., attacking 
the world _ with or without musical accompaniment _ has become a lot 
harder lately. Just one year into his tenure as chairman and chief 
executive, Ivester finds himself leading Coke through extraordinarily 
bleak times. Sales have shriveled in miserable synchrony with the 
collapse of the Russian ruble, the continued economic morass in Japan, 
worries about an impending monetary crisis in Brazil and an assortment 
of other ills _ even bad weather in Germany. Gloom would have every 
reason to prevail in the corporate world of Coca-Cola, a company that 
gathers 75 percent of its profits outside the United States and is 
the archetype of the U.S. multinational corporations that rode the 
'90s promise of an ever-expanding global economy directly into investors' 
hearts. But if others confronting today's economic woes seem befuddled 
_ think of the International Monetary Fund, this or that central banker, 
the hobbled gurus of the hedge fund business _ Ivester and his fellow 
Coke executives exhibit an almost surreal confidence. It is perhaps 
a byproduct of so many years spent selling a high-fructose, caramel-colored 
beverage that, by most measures, people can live without. Ask Ivester 
about the inhospitable global atmosphere, and you might soon wonder 
why you even brought it up. Crisis? What crisis? By his definition, 
it's business as usual. ``This is a changed environment for people 
of a certain age,'' he said, referring to the generation of business 
people who have only known the 1990s expansion. ``But for the Coca-Cola 
Company, it's nothing new. We've worked in these environments for 
years. We go to a country to stay. We don't go to a country for the 
good times.'' After all, said Ivester, who is 51 and joined Coke 19 
years ago, Coke is adept at wringing profits out of its most remote 
operations _ patches of jungle or desert, remote islands and other 
spots he calls ``upcountry.'' With a touch of scorn, he added: ``Eighty-five 
percent of the places we do business in are tough, and they've always 
been tough. A lot of companies rushed in and got some of the cream 
that was rising to the top.'' It's brave talk. But can Coca-Cola weather 
so many simultaneous flare-ups when it is so dependent on overseas 
earnings? Is its bet on global growth so big as to be too risky? Does 
the situation spell extended weakness for company earnings? Coke itself 
is making no predictions beyond the fourth quarter of this year, when 
it has said earnings will be down compared with the comparable period 
in 1997. And this comes on the heels of a third quarter in which earnings 
were down 12.2 percent. Investors are offering a tentative vote of 
confidence. With the encouragement of analysts who were impressed 
by Ivester's calm demeanor in delivering his earnings warning at a 
meeting in late September, they have bid the stock up from a low of 
$53.6875. It closed Friday at $67.5625, still 24 percent off its mid-July 
high of $88.9375. But the market is not always a shrewd judge when 
it is infatuated with a stock; sometimes, a rally can lead into a 
bear trap. Given Ivester's talking down of expectations for the rest 
of the year, investors are paying a price-to-earnings multiple of 
46 for the company. The risks for companies like Coke are ``becoming 
clearer,'' said Leah Modigliani, an equity strategist for Morgan Stanley 
Dean Witter, ``but they were really there before as well.'' Coca-Cola 
and other global consumer marketers like Procter &AMP; Gamble and 
Gillette may be great companies, she said, but sometimes, ``great 
companies shouldn't really be confused with great stocks.'' In Coke's 
favor are its management, deep with people who have broad international 
business experience, and its deep pockets, which allow it to invest 
heavily at any time. Working against it are the global uncertainty 
that continues to preoccupy investors and the question of whether 
the company will need to spend abnormal amounts to generate the growth 
that impresses. ``It's been a long time since they've had to manage 
through this much turmoil on such a broad-based scale,'' said Doug 
Lane, a beverage analyst for Merrill Lynch. Ivester has the added 
burden of replacing a legend: the genteel, Cuban-born Roberto Goizueta, 
who died of complications from lung cancer in October 1997. Goizueta 
was revered by almost everyone who holds even a splinter of Coke stock 
for his relentless focus on shareholder value. During his 16-year 
tenure as chief executive, the company's book value mushroomed from 
$4.3 billion to $147 billion, attracting such august investors as 
Warren E. Buffett and anointing new millionaires all over Atlanta 
and the red-clay country beyond. Still, the leadership transition 
was all but seamless, largely because Ivester, as company president 
and Goizueta confidant, had been integrally involved in top-level 
decisions for a long time. Among other things, he was the architect 
of the spinoff and consolidation of Coca-Cola's bottlers that did 
wonders for the parent company's balance sheet, moving off debt and 
stoking profits. A man whose posture and stride bring to mind those 
polar bears featured in so many Coke commercials, Ivester seems to 
have blossomed in his new role, exuding a certain charm where he was 
once the numbers man hovering in the background. But he now stands 
alone at the top _ he has purposely avoided naming a No. 2 _ and Coke's 
numbers are certainly off. Sales volume worldwide rose by only 3 percent 
in the three months ending Sept. 30, compared with 11 percent in the 
period a year earlier. And he acknowledged being surprised at the 
speed with which the global situation unraveled. ``I don't think you 
anticipate these sorts of things,'' he said. Historically, analysts 
say, Coke has used its considerable capital to ride out financial 
traumas _ the devaluing of the Mexican peso in 1994, for example _ 
while smaller competitors retreated or even failed. But now, with 
so many problems on so many fronts, the company has kicked into higher 
gear. There are meetings each week about Germany, Coke's third-biggest 
market, where concerns include currency value and bottling efficiency 
as well as the weather, and every six weeks about Japan, second only 
to the United States in generating profits. In Indonesia, where sales 
have fallen by double digits as the economy has tumbled into depression, 
Coke is trying a returnable glass 6-ounce bottle _ a low-cost size 
_ in hopes of spurring a rebound. A car sweepstakes in Germany and 
coupons on 2-liter bottles in Russia are other strategies in a global 
effort to improve volume. With so many consumers chastened, though, 
Coke faces an uphill fight. In Brazil, cheaper second-tier brands 
known as ``Tubainas'' are cutting into Coke's market share. ``Coke 
is much better, but too expensive,'' said Terezinha Barros Neves, 
a housekeeper from Rio de Janeiro. One analyst, Laura Meizler of Salomon 
Smith Barney, points to ``actual declines in core Coca-Cola products'' 
in Brazil, adding: ``You will see an even bigger decline in the fourth 
quarter.'' In Venezuela, Coke's anchor bottler, Panamco, has lost 
market share over the last year to Pepsico, which recently started 
an aggressive discounting program, Ms. Meizler added. Coke is reeling 
in costs wherever it can, from postponing training programs to reducing 
work by outside contractors. Its bottlers in Japan are being pushed 
into collaboration: instead of producing every Coca-Cola product, 
each will specialize in a few products and sell them across a wider 
region. Analysts say the plan has met with considerable resistance. 
``When times are good, you don't think about these things,'' said 
Douglas N. Daft, Coke's group president for Asia and the Middle East. 
``Boy, have I practiced everything I've ever learned.'' Day to day, 
Ivester counsels Coke executives around the globe, whom he and others 
describe as depressed. Don't cancel the Christmas party, he told one 
manager; it would send the wrong message. Don't take problems like 
the Russian economic situation personally; instead, he advises his 
deputies, look for opportunity in the rubble. ``Almost immediately, 
I started saying, `Let's capitalize on this,' '' Ivester said. His 
fundamental tactic is to encourage his troops to share a mindset that 
posits the company working its way through the current mess and, ultimately, 
coming out ahead. It is a philosophy that seems rooted in his childhood 
on the fringes of Gainesville, Ga. He was an only child, and his parents, 
both factory workers, gave him ``as much opportunity as they could,'' 
he said. They also gave him their undivided attention, he added, pressuring 
him to succeed in school. ``My father's point of view was, if they 
gave A-pluses and you didn't have all A-pluses, you weren't all the 
way there,'' said Ivester, who remains close to his parents _ and 
motivated to win. ``Mindset to me is setting a destination,'' Ivester 
said. ``It's not a matter of if we're going to get there. It's a matter 
of when. I've been that way my entire life.'' He works seven days 
a week, often long into the night. His travel schedule is exhausting, 
too. He has visited 19 countries since the beginning of the year, 
making seven stops during one 11-day trip in September. Even outings 
to the supermarket are research missions: Ivester will often stand 
at the end of the checkout lane to see what beverages people are buying. 
Overseas, he has been known to peer into trash baskets to see how 
people are spending their snack money. ``He is not in the ivory tower,'' 
says Andrew Conway, a beverage analyst for Morgan Stanley. ``He is 
out in the field.'' (Sometimes, in fact, he can be seen driving himself 
to the field in his bright red Porsche.) All of Ivester's deputies 
have learned, sometimes the hard way, that voice mail is the boss' 
favorite form of communication. ``If there's any relevant data on 
something, I leave him a message on it,'' said Daft, ``four times 
a day, minimum, when I'm in Atlanta and five or six times a day when 
I'm traveling.'' Daft once thought he could travel without so much 
contact with Ivester. The first time he didn't check in for several 
days, Ivester called to say, ``I was really worried about you.'' Mostly, 
though, Ivester's current worry is about how to expand the business. 
At a billion servings of Coke-owned drinks a day, it simply is not 
big enough for him. He likes to point out that people around the world 
are consuming 47 billion other drinks that aren't Coke _ every day. 
It's that mindset business again. Charles Frenette, who became Coke's 
director of marketing in May, said: ``There is a fundamental belief 
in this company that we have unlimited potential as far as anyone 
can see or imagine. It's simply our job to figure out how to remove 
the barriers to that growth.'' Jack Stahl, the Coke group president 
who oversees business in the United States and Canada, added, ``I've 
never heard Doug say `I'm satisfied.''' Recently, Stahl got a bottler 
to increase his sales growth projections to 12 percent a year, from 
3 percent. He said that when he proudly reported that to Ivester, 
the response was, ``Twelve percent? That's really just a mindset, 
isn't it?'' It was clear that 24 percent would have been better. Competitors 
have a special place in the Coke mindset. Inside Coke headquarters, 
no one refers by name to Pepsi-Cola; instead, it's ``P-cola'' or ``P-company.'' 
And when asked about the competition, Coke executives routinely refer 
to the power of their own brands, not the threat from someone else's. 
But there is much evidence that they do care. Last June, at the Atlanta 
hotel where Coke was conducting a meeting for money managers and analysts, 
one attendee was amused by the spectacle of the room-service staff 
scrambling to remove bags of Frito-Lay snacks _ made by Pepsico, Pepsi's 
parent _ from the mini-bars. Coke, like any other major soft-drink 
company, would rather have its own products in every nook and cranny 
_ to the exclusion of others, when possible. The practice of obtaining 
exclusive distribution rights, is at the center of a federal lawsuit 
Pepsico filed earlier this year against Coca-Cola, contending that 
Coke used its considerable leverage to force food-service distributors 
to drop Pepsi fountain products. Coke officials say the lawsuit is 
groundless. ``Doug's mission is to place that stuff in every conceivable 
market and to convince people that they should drink it,'' said Tom 
Pirko, a New York-based consultant who works with Coke and other soft-drink 
companies. ``There's a belief system there that they are doing the 
right thing.'' Global Depression could certainly challenge the mindset. 
And the economics of Coca-Cola's business could be roiled by a proposed 
rule change by the Financial Accounting Standards Board that, if enacted, 
might force the company to reabsorb billions of dollars in debt that 
is now on the books of major bottlers around the world. But Coca-Cola's 
board offers a vote of confidence in the people it has put in charge. 
``Coke and other businesses are being affected by the rolling movement 
of the Asian flu,'' said Donald McHenry, a former U.S. ambassador 
to the United Nations and a Coke director since 1981. ``All companies 
are going to have to react and adapt their plans, and Coke is no different.'' 
Coke, he added, is ``in very good hands.'' Indeed, a close encounter 
with Coke's inner circle leaves the impression that the chief executive 
thinks the outside world simply needs to follow his example. ``I drink 
water occasionally,'' Ivester said when asked what else was on his 
personal beverage list. Then he said softly, almost under his breath, 
``Why would you drink anything other than a Coke product?'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>