<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981030.0220 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
NEW YORK _ ``Hey, want to get some cake?'' William Gelman whispered 
to a blonde who caught his eye at an evening of Bible readings the 
other day. Just then, another young woman, a brunette passing in a 
haze of perfume, wriggled past Gelman to take a seat. ``Excuse me,'' 
she said. Gelman, an entrepreneur in his 30s, dressed unassumingly 
in khakis and a dark sweater, looked the brunette up and down; swirled 
his finger, making note of her long brown curls, and then turned back 
to the blonde. ``Or we can just go outside now and talk,'' he offered. 
The blonde declined and walked on through the standing-room-only crowd 
at Congregation Kehilath Jeshurun on East 85th Street. But Gelman 
didn't seem to mind. There were plenty of other fish in the sea. That 
night, like every Tuesday evening, hundreds of single men and women 
in their 20s and 30s had gathered for an hour and 15 minutes of Bible 
readings and discussions, and then for another hour and a half of 
a ravenous singles scene. Around 9 p.m., the meet-and-greet spills 
from an auditorium, where participants have shared cake, soda and 
business cards, onto the street and into the bars of the Upper East 
Side. Some simply skip the religious talk and show up for the socializing. 
The cake is cut from one of several cakes presented each week to couples 
who have met and then gotten engaged at the gatherings by Rebbetzin 
Esther Jungreis, the evening's organizer. She is the widow of a rabbi 
and the founder of Hineni, a Jewish outreach group that promotes the 
faith among young Jews, often more secular than observant but overwhelmingly 
single. A latter-day Dolly Levi, she lives to ``make a match,'' she 
said. Dara Wechsler, a 22-year-old teacher from Little Neck who attends 
the Hineni evenings regularly, put it more directly. ``It's a meat 
market,'' she said. ``Where else do we learn about how to be a moral, 
ethical person while meeting cute guys?'' Across the city, religious 
leaders, both Christians and Jews, say they have noticed the most 
unlikely phenomenon: Bible-oriented social groups have become popular 
singles scenes, in a late-century reinvention of the traditional church 
social. Groups of 20- and 30-somethings are meeting for discussions 
of ethical issues and Bible stories, often mid-week rather than on 
Saturdays or Sundays, with the intent, sometimes more covert than 
expressed, of finding a mate. In recent months one group has held 
parties at Rebar, a trendy Chelsea disco, and at Doubles, a private 
club in the basement of the Sherry-Netherland Hotel. Religious leaders 
from nearly a dozen churches and synagogues in Manhattan said that 
groups for young singles have grown significantly in the past two 
years, while attendance at retirees and parents' groups is flat. Focus, 
a group at the Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church for people in their 
20s and 30s, mostly single, has doubled to 125 members in the last 
year, said the Rev. Dr. Greg Cootsona, an associate minister. Focus 
holds a Super Bowl party, winter ski trips, Broadway nights and a 
Christmas cider sing. Hineni, which had 500 members two years ago, 
now has about 2,000, and it has included a number of offspring of 
prominent Jewish families, like Steven Perelman (whose father, Ronald 
Perelman, is the chief of the Revlon empire), Charles de Gunzburg 
(whose mother was a Bronfman) and Alison Cayne Schneider (whose father, 
James Cayne, is the chief executive of Bear, Stearns). ``The new church 
social is kind of hot right now,'' said Wade Clark Roof, a professor 
of religion and society at the University of California at Santa Barbara, 
who is studying the religious life of Generation X. Even Jay Leno 
has noticed the trend. During his ``Tonight'' show monologue last 
Monday, he cited churches as the new singles bars and joked: ``What 
kind of pickup lines are guys going to start using in church? `Hey, 
let me guess _ your name's Grace because you're really amazing'?'' 
The church social has come a long way from its origins as a source 
of comfort to weary prairie settlers, as portrayed in Laura Ingalls 
Wilder's ``Little House'' series, where the dusty and lonely of heart, 
circa 1881, would meet at ``the church sociable.'' And the convention 
has grown from the gatherings held after Sunday services at New England 
churches, where single folk were relegated to a picnic table of their 
own heaped with potato salad and casseroles. Marcia Fingal, a model 
who was attending an inspirational lecture at Marble Collegiate Church 
on Fifth Avenue the other evening, heard her own sort of pick-up line. 
``Are you joining the Connection?'' asked Brian Robinson, 32, who 
works in advertising. He was referring to the church's group for single 
people between 20 and 35, the Marble Connection. It sponsors hikes, 
dances, and Thursday-night chicken dinners. ``I'm not sure,'' replied 
Ms. Fingal, a newcomer to New York. She said that whenever she moves 
to a new city, ``I join a gym and find a church.'' She was checking 
out Marble Collegiate, the church where the Rev. Dr. Norman Vincent 
Peale preached and where, more recently, Donald Trump met Marla Maples. 
``We're not a ministry of nerds full of Lisa Loopners and Todd,'' 
said the Rev. Kimberleigh Jordan, head of young-adult ministries at 
the church. She was referring to the socially hopeless characters 
on ``Saturday Night Live'' played by Gilda Radner and Bill Murray. 
``Not that they're not welcome,'' she quickly added, ``but our folks 
are really cool.'' She stressed that the Marble Connection not be 
called a singles group, to distance it from overtones of a meat market. 
``We've taken the word singles out of most of our literature,'' she 
said. ``People do end up dating, but there's no pressure.'' Robinson, 
who has dated several women he met through the Marble Connection, 
said: ``You get rid of all the status stuff here. If you're making 
$200 grand, that's nice, but it wouldn't be the first thing you'd 
talk about.'' Katherine Callan, a freelance writer and editor in her 
30s, recalled that during one of her first visits to the Connection, 
people played word games designed to reveal personal traits. ``I couldn't 
believe I was doing this,'' she said. ``I was talking about personal 
things with people I didn't even know. It became some sort of an icebreaker.'' 
Ms. Fingal, the model, said that she was looking to a church for spiritual 
grounding and a quiet space to think, rather than to find a boyfriend. 
But her friend Jannette Clemenceau, who had accompanied her to the 
lecture, was more specific about her interest in the Connection. ``I 
want to meet a man,'' she said, adding that bars and clubs held no 
interest for her. ``I want my partners to have the same spiritual 
values as me. When you're here, you're open. You're more able to connect 
to someone who is also trying to connect to a higher power.'' Such 
sentiments are widely echoed. ``I don't want to meet a man walking 
around with a cell phone in a bar,'' said Avigail David, a 25-year-old 
student who was attending a Hineni evening. Her theory was that any 
man who'd show up for lectures on ethics and the Biblical perspective 
on the fear of commitment made a good prospect. Clergymen, sociologists 
and other researchers say that much of the appeal of the new church 
social _ defined broadly as any gathering outside conventional rites 
of worship, often by small groups meeting on week days _ is generational, 
appealing to the many people in their 20s and 30s who grew up without 
formal religion. Traditionally, people have found their way back to 
organized religion after marrying and starting families, often so 
that their children can get a spiritual education. But members of 
Generation X, who grew up in the 1970s and '80s with no religious 
affiliation, are venturing back before marriage and parenthood. Their 
port of entry is often a social group, rather than a worship service. 
``There are a lot of people who are not returning to church, but they 
are looking for a first encounter _ there's a sense where they grew 
up completely disconnected,'' said the Rev. Dr. James Wind, the president 
of the Alban Institute in Bethesda, Md, a nondenominational research 
organization specializing in religion. The Rev. Brenda Husson, the 
rector at St. James' Episcopal Church on Madison Avenue, said: ``The 
numbers are amazing. We are getting lots and lots of newcomers in 
their 20s and 30s.'' She attributed the influx to a seeking of spirituality 
and a longing for community. Her parish's group for single people 
in their 20s and 30s, the St. Jamesians, engages in Bible discussions 
but also holds parties, dinners and trips. For newcomers with few 
previous religious ties, the mixing of denominations, a feature of 
many social groups, is not an obstacle. Many Protestants attended 
a black-tie charity dance at Doubles last spring sponsored by the 
junior wing of the Inner-City Scholarship Fund, which raises money 
for Roman Catholic schools in New York. At Marble Collegiate, which 
is affiliated with the Reformed Church in America, Christians of many 
denominations participate in the Marble Connection. An exception, 
however, is Judaism, which has long emphasized marrying within the 
faith _ and in some quarters, concern is being expressed since many 
Reformed and Conservative Jews have married non-Jews. At Hineni, the 
whole point to the Tuesday night social is to foster marriages between 
Jews. Rabbi Joshua Lookstein, an assistant rabbi at Congregation Kehilath 
Jeshurun, which lets Hineni use its synagogue but has no affiliation 
with the group, said the encouragement of Jewish marriages is ``a 
survival attitude.'' ``It's not so much a Biblical commandment as 
it is a sociological necessity,'' he said. ``If both parents are not 
Jewish, the likelihood that that child will grow up with any kind 
of significant Jewish identity is slim at best.'' At the cocktail 
party following one Hineni evening, Lori Mark, a 34-year-old wine 
distributor, felt the same way. ``Jews should marry Jews,'' she said 
to Doug Miller. But Miller, 35, a money manager, disagreed. ``Hey, 
you got to get love where you can,'' he said with a shrug. Why was 
he attending a Jewish singles party more crowded than a hot downtown 
club? ``To find a woman, to be honest,'' he said. ``You know, I never 
have any luck in bars.'' A few nights later, young members of the 
Inner-City Scholarship Fund gathered at Rebar. The pulsing music was 
so loud that the sea of 25-year-olds in navy suits could hardly hear 
one another and resorted to scribbling notes. Graeme Williamson, 26, 
a bond analyst for Lehman Brothers, said he joined the group after 
a friend told him it would be a good way to meet women. A member of 
the party-planning committee, he had come up with the idea of holding 
a party at Rebar, on the assumption that newcomers would attend. In 
fact, a throng of nearly 200 turned up, paying $35 each. William Goodloe, 
director of the group, which was founded by Cardinal Terence Cooke 
in 1971, doubted that most were Catholic. Williamson caught sight 
of an attractive woman he didn't know just as she was leaving, and 
he approached her. At a fund-raiser like this, ``I felt it's easier 
to talk to people,'' he said later. ``I felt I can be myself. We exchanged 
business cards.'' He declined to name the woman, for fear of jinxing 
the brand-new relationship. ``We've actually gone out on one date,'' 
he said. ``We're still talking.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>