<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981030.0380 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
On his second day in orbit, 77-year-old John Glenn was feeling fine, 
eating well and working hard Friday, and so were all the astronauts 
aboard the space shuttle Discovery. They got busy early, deploying 
a small communications satellite, processing metal alloys and semiconductor 
materials, and studying the effects of space weightlessness on the 
human body and how it relates to aging. For old times' sake, the people 
of Perth, on the western coast of Australia, had their lights on in 
full glow and Glenn saw them as the shuttle passed to the north, just 
as he had done so memorably on his first space flight, on Feb. 20, 
1962. In a televised report from Discovery, Glenn smiled and declared, 
``It's been a great ride so far.'' He said the launching on Thursday 
``was quite different from the ride I got long, long ago.'' And he 
said he was enjoying the freedom to float weightlessly in the shuttle, 
which is far more spacious than the tiny cockpit he occupied on his 
first flight. Glenn said he had suffered no motion sickness and was 
eating heartily, and he joked that in weightlessness a speck of food 
stuck on his glasses. ``To be able to float freely up here, I just 
wish everyone could experience this,'' Glenn said. Mission officials 
said the shuttle was also performing well. They said the missing cover 
of a parachute compartment, which fell off during the launching here, 
was not expected to curtail the flight or pose a hazard during the 
vehicle's descent and landing. Engineers are still investigating the 
cause and possible implications of the malfunction. At a news conference 
at the Johnson Space Center in Houston, Jeff Bantle, the mission operations 
manager, said the absence of the insulation-covered aluminum panel 
should not expose any vital shuttle systems to dangerously low temperatures 
in orbit or to high ones during re-entry into the atmosphere for landing. 
The plan now, he said, was not to attempt to deploy the stowed parachute 
on landing to assist in braking the shuttle's speed on the runway. 
Bantle said this plan would not add any ``significant risk'' or require 
that Discovery change its landing site from the Kennedy Space Center 
to Edwards Air Force Base in California, where the breadth of the 
flat desert gives pilots a wide margin for error. For the first half 
of the shuttle program, the vehicles landed safely without using such 
so-called drag chutes at touchdown. Technicians here recovered pieces 
of the panel scattered around the launching pad from which Discovery 
took off on Thursday for its planned nine-day mission. The astronauts 
were instructed to use a camera on the end of the shuttle's robotic 
arm to investigate the tail section where the parachute door had been. 
It is not yet clear whether the parachute is still tucked inside the 
opening, though engineers think it remained in place and is not likely 
to deploy prematurely. Aside from the missing door, Bantle said, ``The 
orbiter is in very good shape.'' David Williams, a physician and the 
director of life sciences at the Johnson Space Center, reported that 
Glenn ``is really enjoying being back in space, and he's doing really 
well.'' Glenn is retiring from the U.S. Senate in January and is making 
his return to space 36 years after he became the first American to 
orbit Earth. He is the oldest person to travel in space. ``You could 
hear the excitement in his voice,'' Williams said. ``I think he's 
doing a fantastic job.'' The whole crew, the doctor said, appeared 
to be well and extremely busy and productive during their first 24 
hours in orbit. Using a terrestrial expression, he said, ``From a 
medical perspective, this crew hit the ground running.'' The crew 
is commanded by Lt. Col. Curtis Brown of the Air Force. The other 
astronauts are Lt. Col. Steven Lindsey of the Air Force, Dr. Stephen 
Robinson, Dr. Scott Parazynski, Pedro Duque and Chiaki Mukai. Duque 
is from Spain, and Mukai is from Japan. When Discovery flew north 
of Australia Friday morning, the glowing lights of Perth were clearly 
visible, as Glenn had been told to expect. Looking out a shuttle window, 
he radioed to Mission Control: ``I've got a real good view of Perth, 
two big centers of light. I think Perth's grown a little since I saw 
it from this angle last time.'' In the afternoon, Brown, Lindsey and 
Robinson were at the controls when one of the shuttle's payloads was 
released out of the cargo bay. This was the Petite Amateur Naval Satellite, 
or Pansat, a small communications satellite designed by students at 
the Naval Postgraduate School in Monterey, Calif. Although its main 
purpose is to train military officers in designing, building and operating 
satellites, Pansat will function for at least a year in the amateur 
radio frequency range as a kind of space bulletin board for ham radio 
operators. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>