<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981030.0217 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Bloomington airport had the feel of a dinky Greyhound bus station 
in 1978 when Robert K. Merton arrived to deliver a lecture at Indiana 
University. So Tom Gieryn, who had studied the sociology of science 
with Merton, could wait outside when his guest stepped off the plane. 
As they stood catching up by the chain link fence, they could hear 
the puddle jumper Merton had flown in on groan to life. ``He said, 
`My bag is still on the plane,' '' Gieryn remembers. Don't worry, 
Gieryn assured him; after all, how could he have noticed for certain 
that the baggage handlers hadn't carried off his suitcase? But Merton 
was insistent. A few moments later, the plane began rolling forward. 
In an instant, the rangy Merton bounded past the gate, across the 
tarmac and onto the runway. ``He walks out in front of this plane 
that is beginning to move,'' Gieryn said. ``I was scared that he was 
going to die.'' Confronted by the formidable Robert Merton, however, 
there wasn't much choice. The plane stopped. ``He insisted they open 
it up,'' Gieryn continued, ``and sure enough, the bag was in there.'' 
The story of Robert Merton's wayward suitcase has a lot in common 
with the story of his career as one of the most influential sociologists, 
if not one of the most influential theorists, in America: The supreme 
self-confidence, the exacting attention to detail, the knack for being 
right. Even if most people haven't heard of Robert Merton, they have 
probably heard of his ideas. He coined the phrase ``self-fulfilling 
prophecy'' and developed the idea of ``role models.'' He invented 
the focus group interview, which has turned into the bedside tool 
of every political consultant and advertising executive. He formed 
a theory of ``deviant behavior,'' explaining why people broke the 
rules when they couldn't achieve success playing by them. If those 
ideas have seeped into daily conversation, dozens of other, less familiar 
ones have helped lay the foundations of modern sociology and are still 
invoked in today's heated battles over the nature of scientific truth. 
Indeed, before Robert Merton, there was no sociology of science. Scientists 
were considered a breed apart, singular geniuses who didn't conform 
to normal rules. But Merton treated the scientific profession like 
any other social entity, pulling it apart like a house made of Legos 
to figure out how knowledge is produced and how scientists behave. 
In 1942, he laid out the ``ethos of science'' and single-handedly 
founded a new field, an achievement that contributed to his becoming 
the first sociologist to win a National Medal of Science in 1994. 
These days, Merton works mostly out of his Riverside Drive apartment. 
His narrow, overstuffed office is barely three paces from wall to 
desk. Rows of black and white photographs _ of Freud, of his first 
publisher, Alfred Knopf, of his former neighbor the artist Jacques 
Lipschitz _ solemnly gaze out over greetings from some of his nine 
grandchildren and his Mac computer. At 88, Merton's face has grown 
thinner and his jawline juts out sharply against his slender neck; 
his hands have an ever-so-slight tremor. But he is still a lanky six 
feet with a patrician bearing and a passion for conversation. Over 
the past six decades, he has delved into everything from the workings 
of a biracial public housing project to the availability of baby-sitters 
in a New Jersey town of shipbuilders to Kate Smith's skill at selling 
war bonds. All the time he was on the lookout for the repeating threads, 
the patterns that could illuminate how society operates. ``The objects 
are trivial,'' he explains, sitting erect at his desk in a pressed 
checked shirt, argyle socks and polished black shoes. But they offer 
what he calls ``strategic research sites,'' like using fruit flies 
to figure out the mysteries of heredity. The example of a successfully 
integrated community was used in Kenneth Clark's Supreme Court brief 
for the Brown vs. Board of Education case; the surfeit of babysitters 
illustrated how trust develops in a close-knit neighborhood; the war 
bond drive showed how telling people you're close to a goal encourages 
them to give more. But that's not all. Merton taught sociologists 
to think about the world in a different way _ not to focus on piddling 
minutiae or to ponder some grand theory-of-everything, but to aim 
for the ``middle range.'' No one really cares, for example, when a 
particular Harry met a particular Sally; and it is impossible to devise 
a theory about when every Harry met every Sally; but one might be 
able to figure out under what conditions some Harrys met some Sallys, 
and then draw conclusions about their socio-economic status or marriage 
and birth rates. What distinguishes Merton, then, is a remarkable 
ability not only to identify a problem, puzzle out the research method 
and make sense of the significant details, but also to articulate 
it all with literary grace. As Eugene Garfield, an information scientist, 
has written: ``So much of what he says is so beautifully obvious _ 
so transparently true _ that one can't imagine why no one else has 
bothered to point it out.'' Jonathan Cole, a former student who is 
now the provost and dean of faculties at Columbia University, said, 
``If there were a Nobel Prize in sociology, there would be no question 
that he would have gotten it.'' Instead, his son, Robert C., won the 
Nobel Prize in economics last year. (More recently, the younger Merton 
_ who was introduced to the stock market along with baseball by his 
father _ has been in the press again as a founder of the notorious 
Long-Term Capital Management hedge fund, which nearly collapsed with 
multi-billion dollar losses.) The ``father of the economist'' (as 
he frequently signs himself) is also the father of two daughters, 
Vanessa, an associate dean at Pace University Law School, and Stephanie, 
an automobile safety activist. They grew up with as many as 25 cats 
in the Westchester town, Hastings-on-Hudson, that was populated by 
wire-and-cable company employees and a handful of Nobel laureates. 
``File cabinets and file cabinets filled with 3-by-5 and 4-by-6 cards, 
neatly typed,'' Robert C. says of his childhood home, ``endless files 
of them.'' Aside from research, they have enabled the obsessively 
fastidious Merton to produce obscure articles with the easy flourish 
of a nightclub conjurer. And like a magician who graciously presents 
a patron with a spontaneously produced bouquet of flowers, he sends 
colleagues copies of this or that story, stamped with a kelly green 
finger pointing out where to read. Merton's vast collection of books 
now fills six libraries, including the ones in the Upper West Side 
and Easthampton homes that he shares with his second wife, the sociologist 
Harriet Zuckerman, a former graduate student of his whom he has been 
with since the late 1960s. Robert C. is particularly close with his 
father. They have talked at least once a day for more than 30 years. 
Still, he admits: ``It wasn't always easy to have someone of his talent 
and caliber around; to be surrounded by Pulitzer Prize winners and 
laureates. It's nice, but it's a high bar.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>