<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981030.0415 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The stylized map of Manhattan's skyscrapers on the wall behind Andrew 
D. Stone's desk at Credit Suisse First Boston is peppered with tiny 
yellow dots, each representing a real estate deal in which he had 
a hand. There are more than 140 in all, from 17 Battery Place and 
40 Wall Street in lower Manhattan to the St. Moritz Hotel on Central 
Park South and the Vinegar Factory on the Upper East Side. In just 
under three years, Stone, a confessed deal junkie and the head of 
CS First Boston's principal transaction group, poured more than $5 
billion into commercial real estate loans and equity investments in 
New York, a total of $24 billion nationally. So aggressive was his 
approach that last February, CS First Boston backed five of the seven 
bidders for 48 Wall Street, a landmark building in the heart of the 
financial district. ``Relationships aren't our strength,'' Stone acknowledged 
last spring. ``We love the market. If three guys are bidding, we'll 
back all three. We don't like to pick the partner we like best.'' 
But the market Stone loved a few months ago is not the market of today. 
The real estate boom that he _ and the investment banks of Nomura 
Securities and Lehman Brothers, among others _ had fueled came to 
a screeching halt when global turmoil roiled markets in late summer. 
The effects were sudden and drastic. Real estate deals collapsed. 
Initial public offerings were called off. The ``flight to safety'' 
that drove down stocks as investors sought comfort in Treasury bonds 
also decimated the market in the mortgage-backed securities that Wall 
Street sold to finance its real estate lending. And the sound of knees 
knocking could be heard at industry conferences from Houston to Boston, 
as investors flashed back to the early 1990s, when inflated property 
values collapsed and overbuilt downtowns teemed with dark and half-empty 
buildings. ``We haven't hit our heads on the windshield, but it makes 
people think about how the world was five or six years ago,'' said 
Mark Teitelbaum, senior managing director of investment sales at Julien 
J. Studley Inc., a New York real estate company. How did real estate 
_ the most local of businesses _ become exposed to the hazards of 
globalization? By coming to rely on Wall Street, the nerve center 
of the global economy, for financial backing. Commercial banks and 
savings-and-loan institutions had stumbled _ and in some cases collapsed 
_ under the weight of billions in sour real estate loans in the recession 
of 1990-91, and they had all but stopped lending to developers and 
landlords. Bankers like Stone and Ethan Penner of Nomura Securities 
became the new kingmakers in real estate, stepping in as the traditional 
banks bowed out. Their innovation was to turn commercial mortgages 
into securities. Instead of just letting the loans clutter up their 
own balance sheets, investment banks pooled the loans; cut the pools 
up into classes rated triple-A on down, just like municipal bonds 
or commercial paper, and sold the loans _ under the name ``commercial 
mortgage-backed securities'' _ to institutions, including pension 
funds, hedge funds and mutual funds. In essence, they shared the wealth 
_ and risk. And the dollar value of commercial loans made by investment 
banks blossomed, from $17 billion in 1993 to $50 billion in the first 
eight months of 1998, before the effects of a stumbling market were 
felt, according to Commercial Mortgage Alert, a newsletter. That river 
of cash invigorated downtown hubs, suburban office and industrial 
parks and apartment complexes, as owners renovated old buildings and 
added value to their assets. But it also allowed speculative buyers 
and developers to outbid each other for properties, driving prices 
ever skyward. Now though, with financial investors demanding steeper 
returns on mortgage-backed securities or refusing altogether to buy 
the loans warehoused on the investment bankers' balance sheets, Wall 
Street has abruptly tightened the capital spigot to a mere trickle. 
And as a result, the real estate deals that aren't coming unwound 
are shriveling; properties are commanding as much as 25 percent less 
than sellers expected in June. ``Don't worry, the market'll come back,'' 
Steven Roth, the chairman of Vornado Realty Trust _ whose stock has 
fallen to $33.6875 from a high of $49.1719 in January _ told a crowd 
of real estate professionals at a recent conference. ``You'll just 
be as old as I am when it does.'' Warnings like that were almost unthinkable 
three months ago, and, to students of real estate fundamentals, hard 
to understand even now. Demand for office space is rising in most 
cities, particularly New York, where there has been limited building 
the last seven years. Asking rents in Manhattan jumped more than 28 
percent the last two years, according to Cushman &AMP; Wakefield, 
a real estate brokerage firm. For all the immediate pain _ not least 
the $1.16 billion pretax loss recorded by Nomura last month, mostly 
because of losses in its mortgage-backed business _ that schism is 
the sign of hope in this wacky real estate market. The current troubles 
are rooted in the way Wall Street financed growth, not in supply and 
demand for space. That suggests that the next downturn in real estate 
may be less devastating than the last because the excesses of the 
market are being weeded out. Already, bankers are limiting loans to 
70 percent of a property's value, compared with 95 percent three months 
ago. In short, with investment banks beholden to fixed-income investors 
who won't tolerate losses in their own portfolios, market discipline 
is having its salutary effect. ``Gone are the days when the investment 
banks are going to buy wildly speculative deals where the cash flow 
is not in place,'' said Peter Hauspurg, chairman of Eastern Consolidated 
Properties. Steven C. Witkoff was one of the first real estate meteors 
to streak across the New York skyline after the commercial real estate 
recession ended in the mid-1990s. Starting with a small 40-year-old 
office tower in 1995, he quickly acquired a stable of 30 buildings 
in five cities; up to 95 percent of the financing was provided by 
Credit Suisse First Boston or Lehman Brothers. For three years, Witkoff, 
a former real estate lawyer, was one profitable jump ahead of the 
rapidly escalating market. ``Witkoff had the vision to get in there 
when nobody else did,'' said Stephen B. Siegel, president of the New 
York-based real estate company Insignia/ESG and an adviser to Witkoff. 
``He bought his first building before anyone saw any appeal in the 
downtown market.'' But Witkoff's current maneuvering is indicative 
of just how the financial markets have shaken the real estate operators 
who benefited so handsomely from Wall Street's free flow of financing. 
In recent weeks, Witkoff, 41, has struggled to hold his biggest trophy: 
the Woolworth Building, the handsome Gothic tower near City Hall in 
Manhattan. He beat out rival bidders in July with what many experts 
thought was a rich offer: $157 million, or $160 a square foot. Three 
years earlier, Witkoff and other buyers could have acquired downtown 
office buildings for a cheap $17 a square foot. But in the summer 
of 1998, buyers had already snapped up the bargains, and many deals 
were being based on a projected spike in rents, not existing cash 
flow. Then world markets tumbled, and Lehman backed away in September 
from financing the Witkoff deal. Fearing he would lose the building, 
but reluctant to pay what now seemed like an exorbitant price, Witkoff 
pressed the Venator Corp., as the Woolworth Corp. had been renamed, 
to renegotiate. Venator, anxious to close the deal by the end of the 
year and fearing that any other buyer would pay even less, agreed. 
They signed a new deal that is scheduled to close in early December 
for $137 million, a 14 percent discount from the original price. Witkoff, 
who put down a $15 million deposit, is confident that he will secure 
the financing. Witkoff, like other leveraged speculators and developers, 
has pulled out of other deals and canceled development plans this 
fall as his financing disappeared. One junked deal was his planned 
acquisition of 11 buildings from the TIAA-CREF pension fund. ``The 
underlying economics of real estate didn't change,'' said Philip DiGennaro, 
a managing director of TIAA-CREF who negotiated with him. ``It's the 
capital markets that changed, and Witkoff was concerned about going 
forward without having his financing locked up.'' Other operators 
have fared far worse. Crescent Real Estate Equities, a Fort Worth 
company controlled by the financier Richard E. Rainwater and one of 
the largest commercial landlords in the country, called off its $465 
million purchase of office buildings in Illinois and California and 
canceled a $1.5 billion agreement to buy a casino company. The developer 
Harry Macklowe lost a deal _ and possibly his $6 million deposit _ 
to buy the 22-story building at 460 Park Avenue in New York after 
he failed to round up new financing when Lehman Brothers pulled the 
plug, according to brokers and bankers. ``Financing is being pulled 
left and right,'' said Michael T. Cohen, president of GVA Williams 
Real Estate, a prominent landlord and real estate broker in New York. 
``It's cut the legs out from under the highfliers.'' With the securities 
markets wilting, Witkoff and Macklowe are among a group of real estate 
investors who have had to abandon plans to take their companies public. 
Many had gone on shopping sprees in New York and elsewhere, seeming 
to pay almost any price to expand their portfolios on the expectation 
that they could pay down their loans and pay off their partners with 
the proceeds of a stock offering. If the economy slows and rents fail 
to rise as much as these highly leveraged investors expected, some 
of them will come under pressure, either when their loans from the 
investment banks come due in three or four years or even sooner. Jules 
Demchick, president of the J.D. Carisle Development Corp. in New York, 
said he had been contacted by a number of investment bankers asking 
whether he would be interested in taking over development deals on 
which the banks might have to foreclose. Witkoff, who pulls in enormous 
management fees on his properties, said he could easily weather the 
storm. Although the leverage on his properties _ the amount he owes 
in loans against them _ ranges from 75 percent to 92 percent of their 
value, he says he has cut operating costs and leased vacant space 
at increasingly higher rents. ``I've bought solid, cheap bricks in 
good locations,'' Witkoff said. Real estate brokers and developers 
say that the retreat by Wall Street lenders has taken the froth out 
of the market. Besides falling prices, the number of prospective buyers 
will probably drop, too, as lenders insist on higher levels of equity. 
But, they add, real estate markets in most of the United States remains 
healthy, if only because vacancy rates are low and _ in most places 
_ there are few new office towers on the way. ``Wall Street has gotten 
religion,'' said Mitchell S. Steir, executive vice president of Julien 
J. Studley. ``Instead of chasing every deal in their path, they've 
decided to shut off the spigot for the time being. Now deals will 
have to stand on merit, rather than on some dream-like fantasy about 
rents.'' If anyone was the poster boy for Wall Street's aggressive 
fueling of the real estate boom in the 1990s, it was Ethan Penner, 
the self-proclaimed rock-and-roll banker who started Nomura Securities' 
commercial lending unit in 1993 and resigned in September in a shake-up 
of Nomura's American operations. If a developer wanted a quick loan, 
Penner delivered. At its zenith, his unit was making $1 billion in 
commercial loans a month, for a total of $32 billion before it was 
spun off in June as a subsidiary _ the Capital Company of America. 
But his popularity with borrowers sometimes came at the expense of 
investors. Last March, Penner upset some investors in Nomura's mortgage-backed 
securities by not disclosing that one of the bank's offerings included 
loans with a novel structure that could result in lower financing 
costs for borrowers. The device, however, could also carry tax implications 
for investors. Competitors of Nomura contacted the rating agencies 
once they figured out what Nomura was up to. Lehman Brothers was particularly 
vocal, and an incensed Penner says he called Richard S. Fuld Jr., 
the bank's chief executive, to bawl him out. ``This is a disgrace 
to your firm,'' Penner says he told Fuld. A Lehman spokesman would 
not comment on the matter. Institutional investors not told about 
the loans were angry when they found out. As a result, the ratings 
agencies demanded that Nomura and Morgan Stanley Dean Witter, which 
was distributing the securities, amend the prospectus to fully disclose 
the terms. ``If they had just disclosed it, there wouldn't have been 
a ruckus,'' said Gale Scott, a managing director in the real estate 
finance group at Standard &AMP; Poor's, one of the ratings agencies. 
Wall Street's real estate financiers were caught off guard by August's 
front-page news, as Russia stopped payment on its bonds and both Asian 
and Latin American markets shuddered. Focused on real estate fundamentals, 
they had not counted on the bond market troubles' widening the spread 
between their products and Treasury securities as investors gravitated 
to less risky investments. By Aug. 28, bankers were already anxious 
as the spread on triple-A commercial mortgage-backed securities grew 
to 110 basis points (or 1.1 percentage points) over 10-year Treasury 
securities, up from 80 basis points at the beginning of June. By Sept. 
25, they were panicking as the spread reached 145 basis points. Banks 
faced trouble on several fronts. Their loan portfolios, which respond 
to market activity in ways similar to any sort of fixed-income investment, 
fell sharply in value as investors sought safer havens. And there 
were fewer buyers for their mortgage-backed securities. Criimi Mae 
Inc., a real estate investment trust that sought bankruptcy protection 
on Oct. 5, was said to have backed out of a preliminary agreement 
to buy $137 million of subordinated notes in a $1.3 billion deal offered 
by the Capital Company of America in September. Deborah Boyer, a portfolio 
manager at T. Rowe Price, the mutual fund family in Baltimore, said 
her company, a buyer of mortgage-backed securities last spring for 
some private accounts, is not investing in the market now, either. 
``Eventually, real estate is going to go into a downturn,'' she said. 
``We fear what is going to happen _ fear of a collapse.'' There were 
other complications. If banks did go forward with securities offerings, 
the rates they would be compelled to pay investors would likely be 
higher than the interest they were collecting on the loans in their 
portfolios _ a money-losing equation. And investors would want to 
buy only the highest-rated portions of the deals coming to market, 
forcing banks to keep the riskiest loans in their portfolios. ``Any 
bank today that is holding loans originated earlier this year is probably 
finding those loans under water,'' said John Levy, chairman of John 
B. Levy, a real estate investment bank in Richmond. Much of Wall Street 
simply stopped making new loans. In August, Credit Suisse First Boston 
told clients that it was backing away from more than $750 million 
in real estate deals and shutting its financing operations until the 
market improved. Lehman Brothers said it would become more ``selective.'' 
It didn't take long for the weakest links to emerge. In mid-September, 
Capital America disclosed that it had received $113 million in margin 
calls on its credit lines with Morgan Stanley. In Tokyo, officials 
of Nomura Securities began pouring money into the floundering American 
real estate operations. By Oct. 22, when Nomura announced that it 
was taking a pretax loss of $1.16 billion for the six months ended 
Sept. 30, the company had sunk $1.73 billion into bailing out its 
units in the United States _ fully half the size of the rescue mounted 
for Wall Street's most notorious recent basket case, the Long-Term 
Capital Management hedge fund. Most of Nomura's losses in the United 
States came from marking down the value of its huge inventory of real 
estate-related loans. Currently, the company has about $10 billion 
in commercial loans on its books. In the heyday of the mortgage-backed 
securities market, Penner estimates that his unit made $1 billion 
for Nomura. But in the wake of recent losses, many of the bank's top 
American executives have resigned _ including Penner, who left with 
a $30 million severance package. Are there more time bombs like Nomura's 
waiting to go off among Wall Street's real estate lending operations? 
Most banks like to clear loans off their books by year's end. But 
December is approaching, and the bond market has shown only modest 
improvement in recent weeks. Any bank selling mortgage-backed securities 
into this market, traders say, will be hard-pressed to make a profit. 
A week ago, Lehman Brothers completed the biggest sale ever of mortgage-backed 
securities _ a $3.8 billion offering with interests in 172 properties, 
including Manhattan's famed General Motors building on Fifth Avenue. 
But because the deal was structured to be paid off quicker than typical 
offerings of this sort and had a floating interest rate, analysts 
said it did not reflect the health of the market over all. Yet the 
market's genius is at work. With Wall Street's lending spigot turned 
low, new sources of capital for the real estate industry are emerging. 
The developer Richard Kalikow recently closed on his $245 million 
acquisition of the Helmsley Building, at Park Avenue and 45th Street 
in Manhattan, with backing from the Bass family of Texas. Now that 
cash is king and prices are falling, real estate investment funds 
like those operated by Apollo Real Estate Advisors, Blackacre Capital 
Group and Westbrook Partners _ even Credit Suisse First Boston's Praedium 
Fund _ are panting to buy what they think will be ``excellent opportunities'' 
when the dust finally settles, according to real estate executives. 
Some investment bankers may change their pinstripes, too. Rumors abound 
that Stone, guru of CS First Boston's mortgage-backed lending operation, 
will be tossed out, that the investment bank is losing millions and 
that he is stuck with $2 billion in high-risk mortgages no one will 
dare buy. Yet there is talk, too, that Stone is about to start a fund 
_ with financial support from CS First Boston _ that would invest 
in just the sort of low-grade commercial mortgage-backed securities 
the bank is having so much trouble selling. Stone denies most of it, 
though he acknowledges that his day of reckoning is near. He said 
his unit at CS First Boston made ``a huge amount of money'' in the 
first half of the year, albeit less since then. None of his loans 
are in default, he added. And if he can reduce the $9.3 billion in 
American mortgages on the bank's balance sheet _ by, among other things, 
selling $4 billion in securities in two large offerings later this 
month _ he will be in good shape, he said. ``I could be sitting pretty, 
or licking my wounds,'' Stone said. ``I'm feeling very upbeat now. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>