<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981030.0428 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Even in Greenwich Village, no one knew quite what to make of it. It 
was a chilly Halloween night in 1974 and through the narrow streets 
came a procession that looked something like a cross between a Happening 
and a medieval mystery play. There was a man in a seven-foot-tall 
lobster suit, borrowed from a Sam Shepard play. There was a two-headed 
pig monster and a giant lizard. The 200 marchers paused to wage a 
mock battle between good and evil on the steps of the Washington Square 
Methodist Church, and then wandered across to the park, where they 
waved sparklers and, basically, wondered what else to do. ``There 
were not many people around besides us _ maybe bums,'' said Ralph 
Lee, the mask and puppet designer who started the Village Halloween 
Parade. ``And here we were, all holding sparklers, kind of looking 
at each other.'' When the parade rolls through the Village on Saturday 
night, a quarter of a century later, its opening announcement, ``Let 
the Celebration Begin!'' will be heard live on the radio in Japan, 
and the parade will be televised live in the city. The signature puppets, 
once made by Lee in his Village apartment with help from a theater 
company, will come from an upstate workshop, where they have been 
made with help from such corporate sponsors as Dunkin' Donuts, Snapple 
and Miller Brewing Co. The parade is estimated to bring neighborhood 
merchants more than $40 million. And consuming Avenue of the Americas 
from Spring to 22nd Streets will be more than 20,000 marchers, who 
are expected to be surrounded by 2 million spectators _ a crowd roughly 
the population of greater Miami and about four times the size of the 
New Year's Eve celebration in Times Square. As things in New York 
tend to do, what started out small and homegrown has become an annual 
superlative: the biggest, the best, the most famous. But as with other 
big things in the city, the parade has also begun to acquire powerful 
enemies. Many gay and lesbian participants who once figured prominently 
in the celebration now complain that it has not only lost its neighborhood 
spirit, but also its uniquely gay New York character. This is, perhaps 
more than anything else, a belated reflection of changes in the gay 
population in the Village and the city as a whole _ as Chelsea and 
other neighborhoods become new centers of gay life, and notions of 
a seamless ``gay community'' give way to a wider diversity of pursuits 
and opinions. But many gay leaders say the parade has begun to reflect 
something more troubling: a rise in anti-gay sentiment in the city 
and across the country. They say that for at least the last five years, 
it has attracted a sizable group of people who come simply to drink 
and, often, to taunt, threaten and hurt gay participants. ``I think 
there is just this sense that the parade once felt like a place where 
we could have fun with everybody,'' said Deven J.C. DeMarco, a gay 
24-year-old sous-chef helping to organize a demonstration at the parade 
to condemn anti-gay violence. ``Now, the parade kind of feels like 
it's part of the problem,'' DeMarco said. This year, the parade occurs 
against a backdrop that focuses those feelings more than at any other 
time: an 81 percent rise in reported anti-gay bias crimes citywide 
and the killing of Matthew Shepard, a gay college student in Wyoming, 
which has prompted angry protests around the country. But the parade's 
organizers complain that the event has been unfairly targeted by a 
small but vocal group of gay men and lesbians. Jeanne Fleming, an 
artist and event planner who has organized the parade since 1985, 
says she thinks this may be because the group is seeking issues to 
reignite gay advocacy in the city. Or maybe, she says, it is simply 
for political gain: Christine Quinn, the executive director of the 
Gay and Lesbian Anti-Violence Project and a parade opponent, is seeking 
the City Council seat of Thomas Duane, who is gay and who is going 
to run for the state Senate. The parade's organizers say that Duane, 
who supports Ms. Quinn, called for the parade to be canceled this 
year in part to make it an issue to distinguish Ms. Quinn. Duane denies 
any political motives and says that from his perspective, the parade 
has become ``a sea of homophobia.'' His concerns, the organizers say, 
are not only unfair but unfounded. They point out that there have 
been no anti-gay bias incidents reported during the last four years. 
They say they had no trouble gathering 17,000 signatures from Village 
residents, many of them gay, on a petition to support the parade. 
There is an additional layer of animosity from Village residents, 
both gay and not, who say the parade's main supporters these days 
are the bars and clubs that profit from it. They say it has simply 
outgrown the neighborhood and abandoned its modest roots. But this 
is often a matter of perception. At a press conference this week in 
which the parade organizers announced the issuance of a police permit, 
an elderly woman on the sidewalk spoke wistfully of the event's beginnings: 
``This was something that was started for children in the Village,'' 
she said. In fact, says Lee, the founder, it really was not, and Village 
residents tend to over-romanticize the parade's beginnings. While 
many children were involved in the first parades, it was composed 
mostly of friends and friends of friends, and he got the idea after 
he staged a similar event for students at Bennington College in Vermont, 
where he was teaching. ``I thought of it as a milelong theatrical 
event,'' he said. While he produced it on a shoestring, he added that 
it was also not exactly a spontaneous, ``Fame''-like outpouring of 
people onto the streets. From the very first year, Lee obtained parade 
permits from police. And during the first parade, there was a single 
police scooter at the head of the parade and one at the end. But the 
parade caught on quickly. The next year it doubled in size, Lee said, 
and spectators began to line the streets. After first resisting, he 
soon accepted help from corporate sponsors as expenses escalated. 
(The parade organization is a nonprofit group, and sponsorship remains 
relatively small: the budget this year is $43,000, less than half 
of which comes from big companies, Ms. Fleming said. The rest is from 
grants, from the city and from Village merchants and individuals.) 
By 1985, when the parade had grown so large that the route was shifted 
off the side streets of the Village onto Avenue of the Americas, Lee 
said he no longer had the time or energy to organize it. ``What I 
really always wanted,'' he said, ``was for people to come and watch 
it and then go home to their own communities and have their own celebrations; 
but I knew that was never going to happen.'' Lee added that though 
there were gay participants during the first years, drag queens and 
overtly gay elements were not noticeable until several years later. 
Ms. Fleming said she estimated that by the mid-1980s, gay participation 
had grown to about 30 percent and was very visible. Men in drag and 
men and women wearing next to nothing shared the streets with Christian 
fundamentalists, Hare Krishna adherents, AIDS activists and people 
dressed as witches, goblins, shoes, nuns, urinals and tubes of lipstick. 
But by 1991 she remembered surveying the crowd and thinking, ``My 
God, I'm running a straight event.'' Even as large as the parade has 
grown, police say it remains one of the tamer celebrations in the 
city for its size. Mike Singer, a community affairs officer for the 
6th Precinct, said that criminal activity had not risen consistently 
over the years. ``Crime is really very low the night of the parade,'' 
he said. ``Quality-of-life complaints are high.'' But some residents 
said that the low number of summonses reflects the fact that there 
are not enough police officers to catch wrongdoers and that the process 
of reporting crimes, especially anti-gay bias crimes, is difficult. 
(Police will not say how many officers patrol the parade, but they 
say the number will be larger this year.) Matt Foreman, a past director 
of the Anti-Violence Project, said he remembered bottles being thrown 
at him and others when they marched in the parade in 1990 and 1991 
with Queer Nation, a street protest group. ``But you're going to the 
precinct on Halloween night to spend several hours there reporting 
an incident where you're not seriously injured?'' he asked. ``Come 
on.'' Ms. Fleming _ who loves Halloween so much that she once got 
married on Halloween night _ said she has become accustomed to opposition 
over the last few years. And it has not ruffled her because the tradition 
of the parade itself has been one of dissent and radically opposed 
viewpoints. ``This is an event where literally every group is marching 
to a different drummer, and part of the fascination is to figure out 
how to keep it all together,'' she said early this week. But by Thursday 
night, after long days of trying to calm nerves and rally support 
and figure out whether protesters would disrupt the parade, she added 
wearily: ``Right now, if I had a choice, I would say it's become too 
political and it's not for me anymore. I'm an artist.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>