<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981030.0436 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Jim Wiltberger, an accountant and political activist, remembered what 
it was like to be a gay man traveling outside the French Quarter into 
the more conservative and unwelcoming parishes of Louisiana. Gay men 
identified themselves with code words, he said. They signaled one 
another by twisting their pinkie rings. They had colored handkerchiefs 
sticking out of their pockets to advertise their sexual orientation, 
with different colors connoting particular proclivities. ``But then 
there got to be something like 54 different colors and nobody could 
remember what the code was and, besides, at a bar you couldn't see 
the color in the dark,'' Wiltberger said from the witness stand Wednesday 
in Civil District Court in New Orleans, a wobbly air-conditioner fan 
clanging in the background. Even as religious conservatives and some 
Republican politicians have intensified their criticism of homosexuality 
and are urging states to strengthen or more strictly enforce their 
anti-sodomy laws, gay and lesbian activists have continued a decade-old 
strategy of attacking the 19 remaining state anti-sodomy statutes, 
one state at a time. The current battle is in Louisiana. In a case 
that opened on Monday and was expected to run at least a week, John 
Rawls, a gay New Orleans lawyer, is arguing that the state's anti-sodomy 
law is incompatible with the Louisiana constitution. The trial began 
with a veterinarian describing how some 460 species of mammals have 
been known to exhibit some form of homosexual behavior. It continued 
with a discussion of how ``crime against nature'' statues date to 
12th-century ecclesiastical laws. And it included the testimony of 
several homosexuals about how the law had been used to discriminate 
against them in Louisiana. The Louisiana law against ``unnatural carnal 
copulation'' makes it a felony punishable by up to five years in prison 
and applies to both homosexual and heterosexual couples. Rawls said 
he would prove that the law was invalid because it was religious in 
nature, that it discriminated against people whose rights were protected 
by the state constitution and that there was no rational scientific 
basis for it. ``Of course that's what he's going to do, that's what 
he ought to do, that's the smart thing to do,'' said Charles Braud, 
a lawyer in the state attorney general's office assigned to defend 
the statute. ``But this statute has been on the books in Louisiana 
for 150 years and it's the attorney general's job to defend the constitution 
and the state's laws. I believe all we have to do is show that the 
legislators had a rational reason for enacting the law.'' Braud said 
the state would wait until Rawls finished his arguments before deciding 
whether to call any of its witnesses, including mental health experts 
and the leaders of groups that believe homosexuality is a chosen lifestyle 
that, with counseling, can be unchosen. ``It's my hope that we will 
determine he has not proved his case and not have to present any witnesses 
at all,'' Braud said. The Lambda Legal Defense and Education Fund 
has led some of the efforts to overturn anti-sodomy laws and is assisting 
in this case. ``Back in the early 1960s, every state in the union 
had some form of anti-sodomy statute,'' said Suzanne Goldberg, a lawyer 
with the organization. ``Now there are 19 states that still have them, 
14 that outlaw sodomy and oral sex between all couples and five that 
outlaw it only for same-sex couples.'' The issue, gay activists say, 
is not so much the arrest of people for engaging in such sex acts 
but the other ways in which the laws are used to discriminate against 
or clamp down on homosexuals. ``Sodomy laws are used to brand gays 
and lesbians as criminals, and they are also used as the basis for 
all sorts of other discrimination,'' Ms. Goldberg said. ``There have 
been instances, in Texas, Florida and Georgia, where they were used 
to deny jobs to gay applicants, and in North Carolina and Virginia 
such laws were used as a basis for denying custody in divorce cases. 
It's also often used as a means of keeping gays out of the political 
process.'' Even more important, she said, was the social climate that 
such laws create in a community, perhaps encouraging those disposed 
to violence against homosexuals. Many states repealed their anti-sodomy 
laws in the late '60s and early '70s. In 1986, though, the Supreme 
Court, in a 5-4 vote, ruled in a case involving a gay Georgia man 
arrested while engaging in oral sex in his own home that there was 
no privacy protection under federal law that invalidated the Georgia 
statute. As a result, gay groups have moved into the state courts 
and legislatures in the last decade, because state constitutions sometimes 
guarantee more specific and widespread rights than does the Bill of 
Rights. Since that Supreme Court decision, Nevada and the District 
of Columbia have voted to repeal their anti-sodomy laws, and state 
courts have overturned them in Kentucky, Montana and Tennessee. But 
not all efforts to have the laws repealed have succeeded. In Texas, 
an appeals court declined to rule on the constitutionality of that 
state's law. In Missouri, a state court upheld the state's anti-sodomy 
law, arguing in part that Missouri had a public health interest in 
outlawing anal and oral sex, since such acts could spread the AIDS 
virus. Gay activists say they are already looking beyond the Louisiana 
case, to battles in Arkansas and Maryland. ``The issue in every state 
is always the same, whether that state's courts are willing to tear 
up their state constitution or throw out their sodomy laws,'' Rawls 
said. ``This is a continuing, galling insult to all lesbian, gay, 
bisexual and transgender persons.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>