<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981030.0381 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A federal judge has ruled that 24 news accounts about the investigation 
of President Clinton appear on their face to show that prosecutors 
in Kenneth Starr's office repeatedly and knowingly violated federal 
rules by leaking grand jury testimony or other secret information, 
according to documents released Friday. In the ruling, made in September 
by U.S. District Court Judge Norma Holloway Johnson but unsealed only 
Friday, the judge also said that an investigator selected by her to 
look into the matter had the power to seize and examine the prosecutors' 
telephone records and logs along with their appointment calendars, 
memorandums and other documents to determine whether they disclosed 
information to the press. Judge Johnson kept secret the name of the 
investigator, known as a special master, although she did not explain 
why. She said that if the special master found instances of improper 
leaks she could hold members of the independent counsel's office in 
contempt or order other sanctions. Such an action would undermine 
the standing of the independent counsel, but it is unlikely that even 
if sanctions were imposed they would affect the results of the Starr 
investigation. In her ruling, Judge Johnson also adopted a sweeping 
definition of the kind of information that prosecutors may not disclose 
in a grand jury investigation. She said prosecutors are prohibited 
not only from talking publicly about actual grand jury testimony but 
also about more generalized matters, like the ``strategy and direction 
of the investigation,'' the fact that a witness has been subpoenaed 
to testify or even ``what is likely to occur'' before a grand jury. 
Such a broad definition appears at odds with Starr's view as expressed 
in an interview in the magazine Brill's Content in June. In that interview, 
Starr acknowledged that he and his deputy had spoken with reporters 
about the investigation ``on background.'' But he insisted that these 
disclosures were not illegal because they did not involve direct testimony 
before a grand jury. He said his comments were permissible because 
they were made to protect his office from attacks that undermined 
public confidence in his work. The news reports that Judge Johnson 
has ruled contain evidence of violations of grand jury secrecy are 
from the television networks ABC, CBS, NBC, CNN and Fox, as well as 
from Newsweek, Brill's Content, The New York Times, The Washington 
Post, The New York Daily News and The Boston Globe. Judge Johnson 
said that because the news accounts constituted ``prima facie'' evidence 
of wrongdoing, the burden was now on Starr and his fellow prosecutors 
to show they were not the source of the articles and broadcast accounts. 
In her 23-page opinion, Judge Johnson summarized the two dozen broadcast 
and newspaper reports about the investigation of Clinton's relationship 
with Monica Lewinsky and noted that many included attributions like 
``prosecutors,'' ``sources with knowledge of the investigation,'' 
``the prosecution acknowledged,'' ``law enforcement sources'' and 
``Starr's deputies.'' She described the articles and broadcasts as 
``serious and repetitive'' evidence that Starr and his prosecutors 
may have committed violations. Some of the reports contained less 
direct references to prosecutors as the sources of information. The 
forceful ruling was quickly welcomed by the White House, which has 
been pressing the notion that Starr and his deputies are committed 
to ousting Clinton from office to the point of abusing their power. 
Gregory Craig, special counsel to Clinton, described Judge Johnson's 
ruling Friday as confirming ``what we have said all along.'' Craig, 
who is managing the White House response to both the Starr investigation 
and the efforts in Congress to impeach the president, said: ``We believe 
that the Office of Independent Counsel has been waging a campaign 
of leaks against the president in an improper effort to influence 
public opinion and congressional opinion and it has done so in direct 
violation of federal laws safeguarding the confidentiality of grand 
jury proceedings.'' Elizabeth Ray, a spokeswoman for Starr, declined 
to comment except to say that the prosecutors' office was cooperating 
fully with the special master named by Judge Johnson. Judge Johnson 
had initially ruled that Clinton's lawyers were allowed to conduct 
an investigation of possible leaks from the office of Starr, but an 
appeals court overturned that order, saying it would be improper for 
White House lawyers to be questioning the prosecutors who were investigating 
the President. In the order released Friday, Judge Johnson is saying 
in essence that if the White House is not permitted to conduct an 
investigation into leaks, she will have her own investigator do it. 
The investigator or special master has apparently been at work for 
more than a month, according to the Judge Johnson's ruling. Several 
bureau chiefs of the news organizations whose accounts were included 
in the ruling said they would have no comment because the issue involved 
confidential sources. At the same time, the news executives who were 
interviewed said that neither they nor their reporters had not been 
contacted by the special master. If that were to occur, they said, 
they would refuse to identify their sources, relying on the protections 
of the First Amendment. All of which makes it more likely that the 
special master is focusing on the people who work in the office of 
the independent counsel, perhaps including Starr himself. Unlike the 
journalists, the prosecutors would have no grounds to refuse to answer 
questions from the judge's personal representative. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>