<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981030.0440 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Anthony J. Celebrezze, a storied Cleveland mayor who transformed the 
city's skyline in the 1950s and went on to spend three productive 
years as secretary of health, education and welfare in the 1960s and 
three low-key decades as a federal appellate judge, died Oct. 30 at 
a hospice in Cleveland. He was 88 and a founder of a far-flung Ohio 
political dynasty. His family said the cause was cancer. For all the 
pride he took in the accomplishments of his nine activist years as 
mayor of Cleveland, Celebrezze later admitted that his most sweeping 
achievements came during his brief service in the Kennedy and Johnson 
Cabinets. He was appointed by President John F. Kennedy in July 1962 
as the first Italian-American to serve in a presidential Cabinet. 
He remained in the Cabinet until August 1965, when he submitted his 
resignation to President Lyndon B. Johnson. In that time, Celebrezze 
helped shepherd more than a dozen major New Frontier and Great Society 
bills through Congress, including the Medicare Act, the Civil Rights 
Act of 1964, the Water Pollution Control Act, the Clean Air Act and 
the law creating the Head Start program. For all that, Celebrezze's 
heart remained in Cleveland. During his 30 years as a member of the 
6th Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals, based in Cincinnati, Celebrezze, 
who had senior status at his retirement in 1995, maintained an office 
in the federal courthouse in Cleveland, a city where he was regarded 
with something akin to awe. That was hardly surprising, since throughout 
his career Celebrezze maintained a reputation as both an urban visionary 
and a hard-nosed, hard-working and honest politician whose very life 
seemed to epitomize a cherished American myth of triumph over poverty. 
The man who began his political career in Cleveland as the self-proclaimed 
``boy from the slums'' was not even born in the United States. The 
son of an Italian immigrant who never made more than 26 cents an hour 
as a railroad track walker, Celebrezze, the middle child of 13, was 
born on Sept. 4. 1910, in Anzi, Italy. His hometown was a rocky mountain 
village in the province of Lucania, on the instep of the Italian boot, 
where his family had repaired to sit out the depression of 1908. As 
Celebrezze later recalled, growing up in a Cleveland slum across the 
street from a house of prostitution and an opium den instilled in 
him the idea that things could be made better, as they were years 
later when the neighborhood was cleared to make way for a college 
as part of a vast urban development program developed during his years 
as mayor. From the age of 6 he joined his older brothers and sisters 
as a shoeshine boy and newspaper hawker on a busy downtown street 
corner considered such a choice location that they had to fight off 
others seeking to displace their family monopoly. Long after the children 
had grown, Clevelanders knew the intersection as Celebrezze Corner. 
After working his way through local colleges in Cleveland as a boxer, 
railroad laborer and freight truck driver, Celebrezze obtained a law 
degree from Ohio Northern University in Ada in 1936. He worked a while 
for the Ohio Bureau of Unemployment Compensation, then entered private 
practice, which he maintained, with time out for service in the Navy 
in World War II, until he began his political career with election 
to the Ohio state Senate in 1950. Widely regarded as the most effective 
Democratic member of the Republican-controlled legislature, Celebrezze 
mastered an amazing range of specialties and handily won re-election 
in 1962, although his impatience, blunt style and outspoken ways alienated 
some Democratic powers in Cleveland. Then an older brother, Frank, 
who had become a Municipal Court judge, organized a ``Draft Tony for 
Mayor'' campaign. Campaigning against the Democratic machine as a 
maverick who could not be bought, Celebrezze was swept into office 
in 1953. Though initially dismissed as a lightweight by many, he helped 
transform the city and was repeatedly re-elected by increasing margins. 
A tight man with a public dollar, he won a national reputation for 
his accomplishments and was elected president of the American Municipal 
Association (now the National League of Cities) in 1958 and president 
of the U.S. Conference of Mayors in 1962. However, he lost a bid for 
governor in 1958. He also campaigned hard for Kennedy in 1960, but 
turned down an offer of a judgeship after Kennedy's election, saying 
he had more to do in Cleveland. In 1962, however, while serving an 
unprecedented fifth term as mayor, he accepted appointment as secretary 
of health, education and welfare. Celebrezze was given major credit 
for a range of important legislation, most notably in creating Medicare. 
But living in Washington on a $25,000 salary proved such a personal 
hardship that after running up $30,000 in debts, he asked Johnson 
to name him to the bench in Ohio. The president swiftly obliged, naming 
him to the 6th circuit, which covers Ohio, Michigan, Kentucky and 
Tennessee. As a grand old man of Ohio politics, Celebrezze, whose 
son, Anthony Jr., served as state attorney general and whose grandson, 
Anthony III, is now running for Franklin County court clerk in Columbus, 
was a highly sought-after speaker in Ohio and elsewhere. True to form, 
the man who began his political career proclaiming he could not be 
bought refused to accept fees for his speaking engagements. In addition 
to his son and grandson, Celebrezze is survived by his wife, Ann; 
two daughters, Jean Anne Porto of Washington and Susan Marie Sullivan 
of Boston; a daughter, Mildred Ragucci, and two brothers, Salvatore 
and John, all of the Cleveland area, and nine other grandchildren. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>