<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981030.0370 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Despite months of financial turmoil and heightened anxiety about contagion 
from the rest of the world, the U.S. economy is holding up far better 
than most experts expected. U.S. economic output grew at a surprisingly 
solid 3.3 percent pace this summer, the Commerce Department reported 
Friday, as automakers scrambled to rebuild inventories after the General 
Motors strike and consumers spent money as fast as they earned it. 
Although significantly slower than the dizzying pace at the beginning 
of the year, the increase in the nation's gross domestic product for 
the July-September quarter was nearly twice the 1.8 percent annual 
rate of the spring, when the Asian crisis first hit U.S. industry. 
And it was a lot faster than the 2 percent gain Wall Street forecasters 
had predicted. On the eve of a midterm election, evidence that the 
economy is performing better than anticipated was welcome news for 
Democrats. And President Clinton was quick to take credit for the 
low interest rates and a balanced budget that have contributed to 
the healthy economy. ``In the face of worldwide economic turmoil,'' 
Clinton said at the White House on Friday morning, ``our economy remains 
the strongest in a generation.'' Along with the robust growth in the 
economy, now expected to deliver more than $8.5 trillion in goods 
and services this year, the inflation rate hit its lowest point since 
1963. The most comprehensive measure of inflation, the so-called GDP 
deflator, rose at a mere 0.8 percent annual rate. Forecasters expressed 
surprise at the economy's continued vitality. ``Reports of the expansion's 
demise are greatly exaggerated,'' said Stuart Hoffman, chief economist 
of PNC Bank in Pittsburgh. Investors in the stock market, who have 
been worrying about the prospects for corporate profits, celebrated 
the brighter economic picture by sending the Dow Jones industrial 
average up 97 points to close above 8,592. ``The question has been: 
Is the U.S. economy strong enough to drive through the problems of 
the world?'' Jeffrey Davis, chief investment strategist at State Street 
Global Advisors, told Bloomberg News. ``The evidence suggests it is.'' 
Bond investors, however, were disappointed, selling off some of their 
bond holdings and pushing interest rates higher. Together with the 
rebound in the stock market and fresh signs that wage inflation is 
heating up, the latest evidence that the seven-and-a-half-year-old 
expansion remains on track makes it somewhat less likely that the 
Federal Reserve will cut interest rates again right away. ``The GDP 
report has lowered the odds of an immediate easing,'' said Richard 
Rippe, chief economist at Prudential Securities. Although Friday's 
report eased fears that a recession lay around the corner, most economists 
still expect growth to slow in the coming year. The 50 forecasters 
in the Blue Chip Economic Indicators survey expect the economy to 
advance by just 2.1 percent in 1999. One source of the current strength 
may well turn into a source of restraint in coming months. The buildup 
of business inventories at a $57 billion annual rate, which mostly 
occurred in the auto industry, added nearly a percentage point to 
economic growth in the summer. That pace of accumulation is not expected 
to be sustained in coming quarters. At the same time, all categories 
of domestic spending, including consumer outlays, were somewhat weaker 
in the summer than in the first half of the year. Trade was the biggest 
drag on growth, though not as much as earlier in the year. In the 
summer, the widening trade deficit shaved three fourths of a percent 
from GDP, compared with a sharp two percentage points in the spring. 
Exports fell at a 2.9 percent annual rate while imports rose at a 
3.4 percent annual rate. The trade gap is likely to widen further 
as growth in Latin America slows. But the global picture is not completely 
bleak, William Dudley, chief economist at Goldman, Sachs, points out. 
Most Asian countries are now running large trade surpluses, which 
means that they are no longer under extreme pressure to slash imports 
from the United States. Business investment in new plants and equipment, 
which powered growth during most of this expansion, is suddenly idling. 
Over all, investment fell 1 percent in the summer after soaring at 
a 26 percent annual rate in the first half. Equipment spending edged 
up at a mere 1 percent rate while factory and office construction 
contracted at a 6.5 percent annual rate. The prospects for further 
growth in business investment are mixed. On the one hand, industry 
is not utilizing its existing capacity as much as before, suggesting 
the need for new facilities is waning. On the other, cash flow is 
holding up well, despite weaker profits, giving business the wherewithal 
to spend more. And orders for everything from computers to heavy machinery 
were surprisingly strong in October. ``Companies still want to be 
more efficient, get ready for year 2000 and substitute technology 
for workers,'' said Rippe, who thinks spending will stay sluggish 
but will not dry up. In the main, America's consumer households are 
still the economy's stalwarts. The growth of home building slowed 
in the summer, only partly because of a spate of tropical storms. 
The National Association of Realtors reported Friday that new home 
sales continued to slip after Labor Day. In some areas, real estate 
agents report that stock market jitters are affecting the high end 
of the market. Yet housing has rarely been more affordable for the 
average family. Incomes are rising smartly, house prices have not 
moved up much and mortgage rates are near a 30-year low. That suggests 
that housing will continue to be a plus for the economy. Consumption 
also slowed from the spring, but remained at a very robust 3.9 percent 
annual rate. The rate is all the more remarkable in light of the fact 
that the GM strike prevented consumers from buying all the cars they 
evidently wanted. Vehicle production and sales, which fell sharply 
in the spring, continued to shrink in the summer, but both appear 
to be on the rebound this fall. There are several reasons for thinking 
that consumers will become a bit more cautious. For one thing, Americans 
spent virtually all of their income this summer, and the official 
savings rate dropped to virtually zero. That's not likely to continue. 
For another, consumer confidence readings have come down since the 
summer. The University of Michigan's index, which was hovering at 
around 105 as recently as August, fell to 97.1 in October despite 
the fact that the Federal Reserve twice lowered interest rates. ``Confidence 
is still very positive, but the direction of change is unambiguous,'' 
said Richard Curtin, director of the Center of Consumer Surveys at 
Michigan. ``It indicates that spending growth will weaken.'' There 
are several important factors, however, that should keep the slowdown 
from turning into outright retrenchment. The stock market is rebounding, 
and the Dow delivered its best performance for the month of October 
since 1982. Wages are rising at a very solid clip. And the job market, 
though a bit looser than several months ago, is still quite tight. 
Help-wanted advertising is strong and first-time claims for unemployment 
insurance, which were drifting up a few weeks ago, are back down close 
to 10-year lows. All in all, said Dudley at Goldman, Sachs, ``the 
most likely scenario is that we'll slow down more but avoid recession.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>