<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981030.0377 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It could have been a scene from ``The Milagro Beanfield War,'' the 
Robert Redford movie about Hispanic farmers fighting for water rights 
here in northern New Mexico. Under the balcony of an adobe meeting 
hall, Roberto Mondragon, the lion-maned actor who played a farmer 
in the 1988 film, addressed Hispanic ranchers and farmers at a political 
rally here. But in a detour from the script, the ``Vivas!'' were for 
Rep. Bill Redmond, a Republican. After winning a special election 
in May 1997 to represent New Mexico's 3rd District in Congress, Redmond 
is seeking re-election. ``People have become more practical _ they 
are much less married to a party,'' Mondragon, a former Democratic 
lieutenant governor, said as he gave Redmond a hearty hug to welcome 
him to a rally sponsored by a group called Democrats for Redmond. 
Across town, politics followed the conventional script as Redford 
led a tumultuous pep rally today for the Democratic congressional 
candidate, Tom Udall, New Mexico's attorney general and heir to a 
sterling political name in the West. Struggling to keep from drowning 
in a Republican sea, Democrats in the Rocky Mountains are finding 
Republicans poaching on their traditional electorates. As the Rockies 
now rival the South as the nation's most Republican region, Republicans 
now control 19 of the 22 congressional seats in the seven-state time 
zone. It comprises Arizona, Colorado, Idaho, New Mexico, Montana, 
Utah and Wyoming. In Colorado's 2nd District, normally safe for Democrats, 
Mark Udall, first cousin of Tom, is facing a stiff challenge from 
Bob Greenlee, a moderate former mayor of Boulder. Polls indicate that 
both congressional races are too close to call. Republican poaching 
is most striking here in Rio Arriba County, where Republicans account 
for only 10 percent of registered voters. Democrats account for all 
the county commissioners, and, in Espanola, all the city council members. 
``We have been doing a lot to cut into his base among Hispanic Democrats,'' 
Kevin McDermott, spokesman for Redmond, said in noting a poll in Thursday's 
edition of The New Mexican in Santa Fe that showed that 20 percent 
of registered Democrats in the district supported Redmond. ``The land-grant 
issue has given us a lot of credibility among traditionally Democratic 
Hispanics.'' Last month, the House of Representatives approved a bill 
sponsored by Redmond to study local families' claims that the land 
of their ancestors was lost to the U.S. Forest Service. Making political 
hay from history, Redmond arranged for two pages of the Treaty of 
Guadalupe Hidalgo to go on display in Santa Fe last week. ``The biggest 
defrauding of land in the United States took place when they did not 
respect the treaty,'' the congressman said here, referring the peace 
settlement in which Mexico ceded much of what is now the American 
Southwest. In a district comprising a mix of sovereign Indian tribes, 
Hispanic voters, and non-Hispanic whites, the Democrats are trying 
to make peace with a new political tribe, the Greens. In the 1997 
election, Carol Miller, the Green candidate, won a surprising 17 percent 
of the votes. President Clinton, seeing the Greens as spoilers for 
New Mexico Democrats, recently urged environmentalist Democrats to 
``look at the consequences'' of voting Green. To cut down the Green 
vote, Udall, the state attorney general, enlisted dissident Greens 
to form Greens for Udall. Ms. Miller said Thursday : ``That group 
is totally funded by Udall. Their real problem is Democrats for Redmond.'' 
Partly because Udall is seen as strong on the environment, and partly 
because liberals do not want to see the re-election of Redmond, a 
conservative, support for Ms. Miller has fallen in polls here to single 
digits. In a complex political chess game, Republicans are promoting 
the Green candidate as a liberal alternative to Udall. ``They are 
building her up, and trashing me,'' Udall complained. Thursday's New 
Mexican newspaper quotes John Dendahl, chairman of the New Mexico 
Republican Party, as saying, ``Carol Miller is our best friend.'' 
Shortly after last year's special election, Mike Burita, a Redmond 
strategist, wrote in an article in Campaigns and Election magazine, 
``By legitimizing Miller as a liberal alternative, we helped her peel 
away crucial Democratic voters.'' Ms. Miller retorts that the 1997 
race was won by turnout. Redmond won the seat with 43,472 votes. That 
tally amounted to 23 percent fewer votes than he received six months 
earlier against Rep. Bill Richardson, who resigned in February 1997 
to become chief U.S. delegate to the United Nations and is now Energy 
Secretary. In the special election, half of registered Republicans 
voted while one-quarter of registered Democrats voted. Looking to 
Tuesday's voting, Udall concluded, ``It's a close race that will come 
down to turnout.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>