<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981030.0405 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Following are excerpts from an order by U.S. District Court Judge 
Norma Hollaway Johnson of dated Sept. 25, in which established her 
reasons for ordering that member of the independent counsel's office 
must show cause why they should not be held in contempt of court for 
disclosures in 24 news reports. The order was made public by the court 
Friday. On June 19, 1998, the court ordered the Office of the Independent 
Counsel (O.I.C.) and individual members therein to show cause why 
they should not be held in contempt for violations of Federal Rule 
of Criminal Procedure 6(e)(2). The Court also set forth procedures 
to be followed at a show cause hearing that would include the participation 
of counsel for President Clinton, the White House, Monica Lewinsky, 
Bruce Lindsey and Sidney Blumenthal (collectively ``mavants''). In 
a second order, entered on June 26, 1998, the court clarified its 
June 19 order and outlined further procedures related to the show 
cause hearing including permitting the movants to undertake limited 
discovery of press contacts with the O.I.C. The O.I.C. appealed the 
court's procedural rulings permitting movants to take discovery and 
to participate in the show cause hearing. In its emergency appeal, 
the O.I.C. did not contest the court's finding that prima facie violations 
of Rule 6(e) had been established by at least six news reports. Rather, 
the O.I.C. strenuously objected to the procedures that the court had 
adopted in order to conduct the show cause hearing; the O.I.C. argued 
that any show cause hearing and related discovery must be conducted 
ex parte and in camera. The Court of Appeals vacated the procedural 
aspects of the court's June 19 and June 26 orders and remanded for 
further proceedings consistent with its opinion. Presently before 
the court is the O.I.C.'s ex parte memorandum requesting that the 
court outline further procedures for the O.I.C. and its members to 
show cause why they should not be held in contempt. Rule 6(e) provides, 
in relevant part, that ``an attorney for the Government, or any (such 
Government personnel . . . as are deemed necessary by an attorney 
for the Government to assist an attorney for the Government in the 
performance of such attorney's duty to enforce Federal criminal law) 
shall not disclose matters occurring before the grand jury, except 
as otherwise provided in these rules. . . . A knowing violation of 
Rule 6 may be punished as a contempt of court.'' It is clear that 
the secrecy requirements of Rule 6 (e) apply to the O.I.C.. Our courts 
have consistently recognized the importance of secrecy to the proper 
functioning of our grand jury system, specifically noting ``several 
distinct interests served by safeguarding the confidentiality of grand 
jury proceedings.'' The Supreme Court outlined the ``several distinct 
interests protected by Rule 6(e) as follows: First, if preindictment 
proceedings were made public, many prospective witnesses would be 
hesitant to come forward voluntarily, knowing that those against whom 
they testify would be aware of that testimony. Moreover, witnesses 
who appeared before the grand jury would be less likely to testify 
fully and frankly, as they would be open to retribution as well as 
to inducements. There also would be the risk that those about to be 
indicted would flee, or would try to influence individual grand jurors 
to vote against indictment. Finally, by preserving the secrecy of 
the proceedings, we assure that persons who are accused but exonerated 
by the grand jury will not be held up to public ridicule. Therefore, 
enforcing Rule 6(e) is of the utmost importance to the integrity of 
our grand jury process. For this reason, the Court of Appeals has 
held that a district court ``must conduct a `show cause' hearing'' 
if a motion for order to show cause establishes a prima facie violation 
of Rule 6(e). To establish a prima facie case, movants must show that 
media reports disclosed information about matters occurring before 
the grand jury'' and indicated that the sources of the information 
included attorneys and agents of (O.I.C.).'' Once a prima facie case 
is established, ``the burden of rebutting the prima facie case will 
lie with the independent counsel, who must now come forward with evidence, 
in whatever form the district court requires (including affidavits, 
depositions, production of documents, or live testimony) to rebut 
the inferences drawn from the news articles that established the prima 
facie case of a Rule 6(e) leak to the press by personnel in or `close 
to' the (independent counsel's) office.'' If the court finds that 
a member of the O.I.C. violated Rule 6(e)(2), it may order appropriate 
relief such as contempt sanctions and equitable relief. In order to 
establish a prima facie case, movants must first demonstrate that 
the media reports disclosed ``matters occurring before the grand jury.'' 
The D.C. Circuit has held that the scope of grand jury secrecy is 
necessarily broad in order to properly effectuate the several distinct 
objectives of Rule 6(e). ``It compasses not only the direct revelation 
of grand jury transcripts but also the disclosure of information which 
would reveal `the identities of witnesses or jurors; the substance 
of testimony, the strategy or direction of the investigation, the 
deliberations or questions of the jurors and the like. In light of 
the ``broad reach of grand jury secrecy,'' the Court of Appeals has 
held that Rule 6(e) covers ``naming or identifying grand jury witnesses; 
quoting or summarizing grand jury testimony; evaluating testimony; 
discussing the scope, focus and direction of the grand jury investigations 
and identifying documents considered by the grand jury and conclusions 
reached as a result of the grand jury investigations.'' In addition, 
``the fact that (a witness) was subpoenaed to testify, the fact that 
he invoked (a) privilege in response to questions, (and) the nature 
of the questions asked'' of him are ``according to our precedent `matters 
occurring before the grand jury.' '' Furthermore, statements by prosecutors 
which disclose when an indictment will be presented to the grand jury, 
who will be charged in the indictment and what crimes will be charged 
also violate the secrecy requirement of Rule 6(e). ``The touchstone 
is whether disclosure would tend to reveal some secret aspect of the 
grand jury's investigation.'' .... In addition to establishing that 
media reports disclosed ``matters occurring before the grand jury'' 
movants must also show that such reports ``indicated that the source 
of the information included attorneys and agents of the (O.I.C.). 
When deciding whether movants have met their burden, the court must 
treat all statements in the news reports as true with respect to what 
was disclosed and by whom. Thus, if a news report explicitly identifies 
the source of information protected by Rule 6(e)(2), the court must 
accept this attribution as correct for purposes of the prima facie 
case. While an article expressly identifying the O.I.C. as the source 
of the Rule 6(e) information clearly supports a prima facie case, 
``(t)he article submitted need only be susceptible of an interpretation 
that the information reported was furnished by an attorney or agent 
of the (O.I.C.); in fact, ``(i)t is not necessary for (an) article 
to expressly implicate the (O.I.C.) as the source of the disclosures 
if the nature of the information disclosed furnishes the connection.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>