<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981030.0204 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Several years ago, flowering kale enjoyed a period of vogue among 
my gardening neighbors. It was as common a sight in the fall as chrysanthemums, 
lined up in front of the foundation shrubs or clustered around the 
mailbox post. The plants have eye-catching red, white or pink centers, 
surrounded by a ruff of blue-green outer leaves. They look a little 
like the stiff, frilly petticoats once worn by little girls under 
their party skirts. I never cared that much for them, until I discovered 
their great advantage over chrysanthemums, asters, monk's hood and 
other decorative autumn plants. They are delicious. When frost has 
wiped out the tender vegetables and hard freezes threaten the tougher 
ones, it's a treat to munch anything fresh from the garden. Even my 
cats understand that. We vie with each other for the right to the 
last sprigs of parsley. Flowering kale is not safe in my yard. Many 
of my neighbors consider the gardening season to coincide with the 
swimming pool season. It opens on Memorial Day weekend and closes 
roughly three months later on Labor Day weekend. Whatever's left to 
be harvested at that point becomes the locally popular concoction 
called End-of-the-Garden Salad, a mixture of tomatoes, cauliflower, 
corn, peppers, carrots, beans and more, packed into jars and sealed 
in a pressure canner for winter eating. I'm of a different persuasion. 
As long as the soil is warm and the days are of reasonable length, 
plants will grow well into November. Moreover, autumn often brings 
the best gardening weather _ clear, sunny days and crisp mornings. 
Unfortunately, that fine season wears into winter, and even a diehard's 
desire to work in the garden wanes when the north wind is whipping 
sleet into one's eyes. The last crops have to be good soldiers, capable 
of taking care of themselves. I've no desire to trudge into the garden 
each night with tarps and blankets to swaddle the vegetables. Collards 
and kale (the regular kind) are real troupers, as are brussels sprouts 
and cabbages. They don't need shelter. Why have bags of vegetables 
in the freezer when there are living ones that will handle being frozen 
and thawed repeatedly, getting sweeter with each cold blast? Chinese 
cabbage looks fragile compared with the thicker-leaved red and green 
cabbages, but it's a deception. After a night in the 20s, the fat, 
drumlike heads will be frozen so solid that the outer leaves can be 
snapped like crisp potato chips. But if the temperature rises above 
freezing, the plants will look dewy and fresh, as if they had just 
been bathed by a spring shower. Bok choy and tatsoi are variants of 
Chinese cabbage, with the same stalwart attitude toward the weather. 
Tatsoi (the name translates loosely as ``black cabbage lying flat'') 
forms a ground-hugging rosette of dark green leaves. It looks like 
spinach, but has a mild mustard flavor, and is beautiful enough to 
grow around the mailbox post with the flowering kale. Leeks are nonchalant 
about winter, although a little mulch around the base of the plants 
might be needed to keep the soil from freezing. I've chipped leeks 
out of frozen ground and left them in the cellar until the collar 
of soil halfway up the shank thawed enough to be removed, but it's 
a messy business. The same goes for parsnips, carrots, rutabagas, 
turnips and other root crops. They'll keep beautifully in the ground, 
even after their foliage is gone, but knowing they're down there, 
safe and savory, isn't much help if you can't pry them out without 
a pickax. One year I neglected to mulch the parsnips early enough, 
and the foliage was completely gone by the time I hauled a cartload 
of straw to the spot. I mulched the wrong bed, to my great frustration 
when the urge for parsnips hit. Roots can also be dug when the ground 
is still soft, and stored indoors over winter. (That's why everyone 
used to have a root cellar, after all.) My limited storage facilities 
are already crammed with comestibles that can't be left outdoors, 
like winter squash, sweet potatoes and apples, so the roots must fend 
for themselves. With some protection, like a cold frame or some plastic 
sheeting, it's possible to keep more delicate vegetables going into 
early winter. Lettuce, arugula, mizuna, beets, chard and mustard greens 
will take cold temperatures if they are sheltered from dry winds that 
dry out their thin leaves. I might use a scrap of polyester row cover 
to protect ready-to-harvest salad greens if the weather takes a nasty 
turn, but true extended-season gardening requires more dedication 
than I am likely to muster in November. Cold frames have to be opened 
for ventilation on sunny days, covered with insulation on really cold 
nights and watered even if the garden hose is frozen. The rugged cold-weather 
plants in my garden, standing proudly over the mowed-down remains 
of the peppers, tomatoes and squash, are more to my liking. In my 
south-central Pennsylvania climate, even kale will succumb to the 
weather typical of January and February, but it starts sprouting new 
growth in March. Flowering kale, I'm told, will do that as well, but 
I can't attest to it. By March, the few I've ever grown have long 
since been eaten. THIS WEEK: AHEAD OF THE WINTER GARDEN By PATRICIA 
JONAS c.1998 N.Y. Times News Service Tie long rose canes securely 
to fences and arbors to prevent snapping or splitting in winter winds. 
Cut out diseased or damaged wood, but don't do major rose pruning 
now. If you've had black spot, mildew or other rose diseases, scrupulously 
remove fallen leaves. Start planting tulips and continue planting 
other spring bulbs. Wait until frost has blackened foliage before 
digging and storing tender tubers like dahlias, but cut down foliage 
of herbaceous perennials like peonies that will not add interest to 
the winter garden. Continue to remove spent annuals. Clean any pots 
that held diseased plants with a solution of one part bleach to nine 
parts water. Leave vines like moonflower (Ipomoea alba) for its hard 
fig-shaped seed pods and love-in-a-puff (Cardiospermum halicacabum) 
for papery brown seed capsules that cling all winter to their stems 
like little balloons. Be careful not to throw invasive species of 
weeds or any that have gone to seed on a compost pile. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>