<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981030.0303 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When this election year began in California, the big political questions 
were whether the Republican nominee for governor, state Attorney General 
Dan Lungren, a staunch foe of abortion, was too conservative to appeal 
to swing voters in this diverse and giant state, and whether Sen. 
Barbara Boxer was too liberal to do the same. Now, as the election 
season winds down here, Lungren trails his Democratic opponent, Lt. 
Gov. Gray Davis, by double-digits in the polls. And Boxer finally 
appears to have opened a solid lead over her Republican challenger, 
state Treasurer Matt Fong _ but only by outspending him 2 to 1 in 
television advertisements that paint him as extremist. In sum, moderation 
is the watchword in the Golden State this year, and Davis, a 23-year 
veteran of state government widely mocked as the dullest politician 
in his party, appears on the verge of a major victory that will put 
him in charge not only of the world's seventh largest economy but 
also of the political redistricting of the nation's largest state 
_ and thus, a big chunk of Congress _ two years from now. That blandness 
has become the dominant political virtue in a state that not so very 
long ago produced the polar partisan opposites of Ronald Reagan and 
Jerry Brown _ and at a time when partisan divisions are deeper than 
ever in many aspects of national political debate _ says much about 
current feeling in a place long viewed as an incubator of American 
trends. ``It's like bookends,'' said Bill Carrick, a South Carolinian 
who has been a Democratic political consultant in Washington and, 
for nearly a decade, here in Los Angeles. ``On the one hand, you have 
a national Republican Party increasingly dominated by Southern politicians, 
with a unique, Southern-fried Republicanism exemplified by Trent Lott, 
Newt Gingrich, Dick Armey and Tom DeLay.'' Carrick added, ``California 
has a big pile of Republican moderates who are pro-choice, very sensitive 
to environmental protection, worried about the coast and offshore 
oil drilling, afraid of random violence and therefore more supportive 
of gun controls _ basically 25 percent of the party with a political 
philosophy that is more like the philosophy of independents than it 
is like other Republicans.'' For months, Davis, a decorated Army veteran 
of the Vietnam War who supports the death penalty, has relentlessly 
exploited those tensions in the Republican Party in a state where 
party registration is about evenly divided but where Republicans have 
controlled the governorship for 16 years. Davis has succeeded to such 
a degree that in the most recent Los Angeles Times Poll on the election 
last week, he led Lungren 53 percent to 42 percent among people it 
considered likely to vote, and drew nearly 5 in 10 of the voters who 
described themselves as moderate Republicans. By contrast, more than 
5 in 10 moderate Republicans had an unfavorable impression of Lungren. 
In a particular bit of bad news for Lungren, a higher percentage of 
voters viewed Lungren negatively than they did Brown, for whom Davis 
worked as chief of staff in Sacramento and whom Lungren has tried 
to turn into a hot-button liberal by association in this race. Instead, 
Davis has made Lungren's old voting record as a conservative congressman 
_ against creating the Department of Education, against reparations 
for Japanese-Americans interned in World War II _ stick against him. 
On the other hand, Boxer, an outspoken liberal from Marin County north 
of San Francisco, was locked for months in a tight race with Fong, 
a soft-spoken, fresh-faced political newcomer, because voters perceived 
her as out of step with California's prevailing political order. In 
her six years in the Senate she has not managed to expand her base 
of support, and only broke 50 percent in her job approval ratings 
for the first time last week. Only in recent weeks, with a series 
of television commercials attacking Fong's opposition to new gun control 
laws and accusing him of opposing tougher environmental standards, 
did Boxer gain the upper hand in the campaign give-and-take. A statewide 
Field Poll made public Thursday showed her leading Fong 51 percent 
to 42 percent among people it regarded as likely to vote. Boxer's 
biggest break came when The San Francisco Examiner disclosed this 
week that in June, Fong gave $50,000 in campaign funds left over from 
a past race for state treasurer to the Traditional Values Coalition, 
an Orange County-based group that opposes abortion, birth control 
and gay rights and favors school prayer and tougher obscenity laws. 
That disclosure so angered Fong's gay supporters that he promptly 
signed a letter agreeing to support most of their legislative priorities, 
including a series of bills outlawing discrimination against homosexuals 
in employment and housing and working to increase funds for AIDS research. 
And that, in turn, angered Fong's conservative religious supporters. 
``Fong has damaged himself terribly,'' said Sherry Bebitch Jeffe, 
a political analyst at the Claremont Graduate School. ``Barbara Boxer 
is a very polarizing politician, but the reality of it is, she is 
closer to the views of those moderates on issues that Democrats have 
skillfully made wedge issues, particularly gun control and abortion 
rights. What she has managed to do is push those buttons that concern 
moderate and independent voters.'' On Wednesday, Boxer basked in the 
glow of the most popular politician in the state, Sen. Dianne Feinstein, 
who in her six years in office has managed to build broad appeal with 
her sponsorship of controls on assault weapons and a tough anti-crime 
stance. At a joint appearance in Santa Monica, which has recently 
seen an unusual wave of gang-related shootings, Boxer and Feinstein 
complained that Fong opposes new gun control measures, including a 
ban on junk guns and a requirement for child safety locks. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>