<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981030.0401 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Former Gov. Cecil Andrus says that if Rep. Helen Chenoweth were to 
come across a brush fire, her instinct would be to douse it with a 
pail of gasoline. Time and again, Mrs. Chenoweth, a stalwart on the 
right flank of the Republican revolution, has taken stands and made 
statements that created an explosion. For instance, after the bombing 
of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City in 1995, 
she asserted at a committee hearing, ``The most peaceful and responsible 
thing this body could do is listen to the complaints of people who 
have resorted to violent action.'' Mrs. Chenoweth advocates an elk-hunting 
season in Yellowstone National Park, and she sponsored legislation 
that would require federal agents to get permission from local sheriffs 
before carrying firearms into the sheriffs' jurisdictions. Now Mrs. 
Chenoweth, 60, is one of the few Republican incumbents who are in 
serious danger of being defeated in Tuesday's election. Her Democratic 
opponent, Dan Williams, a 36-year-old lawyer from Boise who lost to 
her by only 6,500 votes in 1996, is presenting himself as someone 
who represents the same conservative values as Mrs. Chenoweth but 
is willing to compromise to accomplish goals. In their third and final 
debate, taped on Thursday in a television studio in Spokane, Wash., 
for broadcast in northern Idaho on Sunday night, Williams told his 
opponent: ``We don't always get 100 percent of what we want in this 
life. The trouble with your approach is that we never get one inch 
closer to a resolution of our problems.'' Mrs. Chenoweth, a skilled 
debater, had a ready response. ``My goodness, Mr. Williams, but that's 
trial-lawyer stuff,'' she declared. Then she added: ``We don't need 
having someone sit down and compromise with the federal government. 
That's gone on too long. Real people with real property need an advocate. 
Individuals and small businesses need an advocate to stand up and 
make the federal government accountable.'' The two candidates do have 
some policy disagreements. Mrs. Chenoweth believes that most abortions 
should be illegal and that the government should not pay for abortions 
for poor women, even in cases of rape or incest. Williams favors abortion 
rights. Mrs. Chenoweth would turn over some federal land to the states. 
Williams believes that such action would result in a give-away to 
developers. But basically, the election boils down to a referendum 
on Mrs. Chenoweth and her style. Marc Johnson, who was chief of staff 
to Andrus, a Democrat, says Idahoans have such strong views about 
Mrs. Chenoweth, favorable and unfavorable, that she would win 48 percent 
to 52 percent of the vote whether she were running against Abraham 
Lincoln or Godzilla. Mrs. Chenoweth said in an interview that she 
agreed with that appraisal. Incidentally, even though she has been 
divorced from Nick Chenoweth since 1973, she wants to be called ``Mrs.'' 
and not ``Ms.,'' she said, ``because I am a mother and a grandmother,'' 
and she calls herself a ``congressman'' because she thinks ``congresswoman'' 
is a silly word. If she is re-elected, she said, she will retire at 
the end of the term because she pledged when she first ran in 1994 
that she would limit herself to three terms. She has come to believe 
that the idea of term limits is a mistake, she said, but added: ``I 
gave my word. It was part of the bargain between the voters and me.'' 
The race for the other congressional seat in Idaho is also close. 
The incumbent Republican, Michael D. Crapo, has resigned to run for 
the Senate. Democrats recruited Richard Stallings, who held the seat 
for eight years until 1993, to return to politics and try to regain 
it. His Republican opponent, Mike Simpson, is speaker of the state 
House of Representatives. This raises the prospect that in Idaho, 
one of the most conservative and Republican states in the country, 
Democrats could pick up two congressional seats now held by Republicans. 
Political insiders here agree that both races are too close to predict 
the outcome with confidence, but say that if they had to bet they 
would put their money on the Republicans. The reason, said John Freemuth, 
a political science professor at Boise State University, is that Republicans 
in Idaho are much better organized to get their supporters to the 
polls. The Chenoweth-Williams race took an unusual twist last month 
when Mrs. Chenoweth ran a television advertisement in which she asserted: 
``Bill Clinton's behavior has severely rocked this nation and damaged 
the office of the president. I believe that personal conduct and integrity 
does matter.'' After the commercial was broadcast, The Idaho Statesman 
reported that in the 1980s, Mrs. Chenoweth had a six-year affair with 
a married man who was her business partner. Mrs. Chenoweth acknowledged 
the affair, calling it a mistake but emphasizing that at the time, 
she was single and not in public office. Williams has taken the high 
road. ``My sense,'' he says when asked, ``is that the people out here 
care a lot more about real issues than they do about anyone's personal 
life, whether it's Helen Chenoweth's or Bill Clinton's.'' Since the 
disclosure of her affair, Mrs. Chenoweth has not run the Clinton advertisement. 
When the matter came up at the debate on Thursday, Mrs. Chenoweth's 
response sounded as if it could have come out of the mouth of the 
president: ``With regard to my mistake, I'm not proud of it, but I 
am proud of my record in Congress. The Idaho people are far more interested 
in what I have done in Congress and what I will be doing in the future.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>