<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981030.0236 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
What is it about New York Jews and Chinese food? During a recent rainy 
afternoon in a basement classroom at New York University, graduate 
students were discussing why Jewish immigrants from Eastern Europe 
were originally drawn to such an alien cuisine and how Chinese restaurants 
became integral to the experience of Jewish assimilation. The class, 
called ``Culture and Foods,'' is part of the Department of Nutrition 
and Food Studies at New York University's School of Education, which 
for the last two years has been training students in nutrition, food 
studies and food management. It was once thought that you are what 
you eat; now it also seems true that you study what you eat. While 
NYU remains one of the few schools with a formal food studies program, 
courses are increasingly being offered at colleges across the country. 
Meanwhile, scholarly journals and books are increasingly dealing with 
food issues, like Calaloo, an African-American literary journal, and 
the journal Southern Folklore and Food and Culture: A Reader. Perhaps 
it is because food is one of the great universals and one that people 
can relate to as a source of pleasure. Perhaps it is because food 
studies taps into larger scholarly trends. The development of women's 
studies has taken areas that were once relegated to the realm of mundane 
domesticity _ like food _ and examined them for clues to the larger 
culture. ``There has been a trend in scholarship and academia in general 
to pay more attention to the contemporary and the everyday,'' said 
Lucy Long, an assistant professor in the department of popular culture 
at Bowling Green State University in Ohio. ``Food is an everyday kind 
of item that everyone can relate to, but you can extract from this 
very, very theoretical ideas.'' Ms. Long, who has a background in 
folklore, said she studies ``how food is being used to express personal 
identity, how it is being used to affirm the place of an individual 
or a group within society, how food is used in rituals to help individuals 
find meaning in everyday activities.'' Among the topics she has explored, 
for example, are how Friday night pizza parties have become occasions 
for parent-child bonding; how the very unwieldiness of the Thanksgiving 
turkey demands extended family socializing; and whether Americans' 
acceptance of Mexican food translates into a more general acceptance 
of Mexicans. Ms. Long also cited the work of another scholar, George 
H. Lewis of the University of Pacific in California, who has examined 
the image of Maine lobster, how it changed from a poor man's food 
to a national delicacy and thereby alienated the local people. At 
the University of Maryland, Baltimore County, Warren Belasco, a professor 
of American studies, also examines the folklore of food and questions 
of agriculture, business and the environment. In a senior seminar 
on the American food chain, for example, Belasco's students trace 
a single food product from farm to factory to supermarket to kitchen. 
Belasco said this kind of analysis encourages students to think about 
the consequences of their food choices: ``When I eat this hamburger, 
what chain of events am I taking part in here?'' he said. ``We talk 
about the ethics of meat and agricultural products; who picks our 
food, raises it, grows it, transports it, what goes into it; the relationship 
to big business.'' Belasco is vice president of the Association for 
the Study of Food and Society, a group of sociologists, historians 
and nutritionists who meet annually in conjunction with a group of 
rural sociologists, agronomists and philosophers. Next week, the New 
School in Manhattan, together with its journal, ``Social Research,'' 
plans to have a three-day conference to examine the connections between 
food and culture, featuring 25 scholars, scientists and policy makers. 
Everything from the impact of environmental changes on food production 
to the food and drink of ancient Egypt will be discussed. Although 
NYU's department has been around since 1926, when it taught home economics, 
it has shifted its focus over the years. Nutrition, food and hotel 
management were emphasized in the early '90s; in 1996, the school 
began emphasizing the roles food plays in culture, health and commerce. 
``I was hearing an enormous interest in learning more about the role 
of food in society and the role of food in culture,'' said Marion 
Nestle, a professor and chairwoman of the department. The course Culture 
and Foods, for example, explores how crayfish became an ethnic emblem 
of the Cajuns; how the Molokans, a Russian Orthodox group in Los Angeles, 
buy food only from stores that are owned by other Molokans; how culture 
is transmitted throughout community cookbooks; how the Hare Krishnas 
limit what foods they eat and how much, yet use food as a way to proselytize, 
having an elaborate weekly ``love feast'' for the public. In class 
the other day, students seemed most interested in the discussion of 
Jews and Chinese food. They had read ``New York Jews and Chinese Food: 
The Social Construction of an Ethnic Pattern'' by Gaye Tuchman and 
Harry Levine, an essay included in the book ``The Taste of American 
Place: A Reader on Regional and Ethnic Foods,'' published this year 
by Rowman &AMP; Littlefield. In the essay, the authors argue that 
Jewish New Yorkers were attracted to Chinese food because they viewed 
it as cosmopolitan, a way to move beyond their greenhorn status. What's 
more, the overcooked vegetables and chicken soup typical of Chinese 
fare were more familiar and less threatening than other types of food: 
safe treyf (Yiddish for nonkosher food). By the second generation, 
the authors said, Jews had come to identify Chinese food as ``a New 
York Jewish custom, an aspect of group identity.'' ``There is a passionate 
interest in food and health, taste, travel,'' Ms. Nestle said. ``It 
used to be more about how to make this or that, but the quality of 
the writing about food has dramatically improved. It is much more 
connected to what's happening in the world.'' Besides, she noted, 
``Everybody eats.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>