<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981030.0313 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As everyone surely knows by now, the global financial crisis has frightened 
lenders, making them very reluctant to buy Corporate America's IOUs. 
Unless a company is among the elite _ an IBM or a General Electric 
or an AT&AMP;T _ borrowing money has become an ordeal. Such tightfistedness 
on the part of lenders can dry up economic activity. Companies borrow, 
for example, to buy new machinery and computers, and then pay off 
the debt from revenue the new equipment produces. Or they stockpile 
raw materials and finished merchandise, and repay the debt as the 
goods are sold. Shrink such activity long enough and a recession could 
ensue. So it comes as pleasant news that banks are not pulling back 
in their lending to large corporations as other lenders are _ in fact, 
they are lending more, partly offsetting the pullback by the others. 
These other ``lenders'' are the mutual funds, the pension funds, the 
insurance companies, the Wall Street investment houses and the wealthy 
individuals who usually buy corporate IOUs, in the form of long-term 
bonds and short-term commercial paper issued by the nation's large 
companies. Lately, scared by the world financial turmoil, these investors 
have been sticking to risk-free Treasury securities instead. The nation's 
banks are not as skittish. According to new Federal Reserve statistics, 
bank loans to business, adjusted for seasonal variations in lending, 
rose by $11.3 billion in September, compared with a rise of $7.6 billion 
in August, the month the credit crisis started. Then, in October, 
bank loans to all business rose by $25 billion in the first three 
weeks, to a total of $940 billion. Much of this $940 billion is going 
to smaller companies, which come to banks for most of their financing. 
But large companies account for the recent surge in loans _ companies 
like Seagram, Bridgestone/Firestone and Jefferson Smurfit, a paper 
manufacturer. The surge in bank lending has not been enough to offset 
entirely the decline in the sale of corporate IOUs. New offerings 
of commercial paper have fallen by nearly $20 billion in recent weeks; 
on top of that, the sale of high-yield corporate bonds, sometimes 
called junk bonds, has almost disappeared. These sales normally raise 
$20 billion a month for companies that lack top-of-the-line credit 
ratings. Still, the rise in bank lending ``is somewhat alleviating 
what would otherwise be a severe credit crunch, and the question is, 
How long will it keep doing that?'' said Alan Blinder, a Princeton 
University economist. The great hope is that the global financial 
crisis will lift early next year. Or by then, the people who used 
to invest in corporate IOUs, which pay higher interest rates than 
the Treasuries they are investing in now, will cease to be so nervous 
and start buying again. Until the crisis lifts, companies can somehow 
get by, everyone hopes, either by postponing projects or by borrowing 
from banks _ if not all the money they want, then at least some of 
it. But there is a concern that, even in these final weeks of 1998, 
the rise in bank lending may be less than meets the eye, and less 
a support of the national economy than the Federal Reserve's statistics 
might indicate. Rather than signaling a flow of new loans, much of 
the lending appears to be borrowers' drawing on existing lines of 
credit established months ago. What's more, while bank loans for general 
business activity are rising much faster than in the first half of 
the year, real estate lending is weak. Bank real estate loans are 
rising much more slowly now than in the first half of the year. Home 
mortgages are flowing fast enough, but loans for the purchase or construction 
of office buildings, plants and other commercial structures are not. 
Banks like to sell to others the real estate loans they originate, 
and thus limit the amount of risk they bear in the event of defaults. 
That is easy for home mortgages, because federal agencies are big 
purchasers of these loans. But commercial real estate loans must be 
sold into a market of private investors, and investors are not buying 
these commercial bank loans. ``Applications for commercial mortgages 
are way up, but the banks are not increasing what they have on the 
books, not yet,'' said Dennis Yeskey, regional managing director of 
real estate services for Deloitte &AMP; Touche. A similar ceiling 
is likely to limit the growth of bank lending for standard business 
activity, despite the recent surge in such lending, because banks 
do not like to carry huge loans on their books. So they syndicate 
corporate loans, parceling out portions of a big loan to other banks. 
And loan syndication is not rising. Jefferson Smurfit, for example, 
sought recently to borrow $4 billion in new bank loans, but had to 
settle for just $550 million. ``The banks are not going to take that 
kind of risk,'' said James Davis, president of Loan Pricing Corp., 
which monitors bank lending. And that is why the banks, for all the 
current surge in corporate lending, are not likely to sustain the 
U.S. economy through a financial crisis that lasts past January. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>