<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981030.0302 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Paying corporate employees with stock options is promoted as a way 
to align the interests of executives and other workers with those 
of shareholders. But while investors are encouraged to stick with 
a stock for the long term and to hold on tight if prices slide, many 
companies have developed a hair-trigger response to market dips when 
it comes to options pricing. In October alone, more than 100 companies 
revealed options repricings, either in announcements or in filings 
with the Securities and Exchange Commission, a review of these documents 
found, and analysts expect many more companies to join the parade. 
By moving quickly when the market was down temporarily, some of these 
companies gave employees a boost to their wealth when the market leaped 
back to life _ one that would be shared only by investors who bought 
new shares during the market dip. Some companies that have announced 
repricings are tiny, like Interactive Flight Technologies of Phoenix, 
which makes in-flight entertainment systems for airlines. It went 
public in 1997 at $8 a share and gave employees options at that price. 
But when its stock plummeted this fall, Interactive repriced all its 
options down to 87{ cents. The stock now trades at 62{ cents. A few 
better-known companies have also repriced options, including Ziff-Davis 
and CMP Media, the magazine publishers; Reebok, the shoemaker, and 
Republic Industries, H. Wayne Huizenga's network of car dealerships. 
Ziff-Davis repriced options for all employees; the other three excluded 
senior management. An option is the right to buy shares in the future 
at a preset price. If the stock rises in value, the holder can profit 
from the difference between the preset _ or ``strike'' _ price and 
the market price when the option is exercised. Options have become 
an increasingly important part of corporate compensation, sometimes 
creating hundreds of millions of dollars in wealth for executives. 
Many companies have begun extending options plans to lower-ranking 
managers and rank-and-file workers, as well. Of course, if a stock's 
market price falls below the strike price, the options are ``underwater'' 
and cannot be exercised except at a loss. That is supposed to be the 
chance the holder takes. But in this year's market turmoil, many companies 
have rewritten options terms to spare their holders from getting wet. 
Robert G. Monks, a principal in Lens Inc., an investment firm that 
has long pressed to reign in executive pay, predicted that by next 
May, when the majority of companies will have filed proxy statements, 
``repricing options will be virtually universal.'' That view is extreme, 
said David L. Yermack, an associate professor of finance at New York 
University's Stern School of Business. His research, published earlier 
this year, found that smaller companies repriced about 2 percent of 
executive options annually from 1992 to 1995. He expects 10 percent 
to 20 percent of companies to reprice options by next May. ``There 
are enough firms that know how much institutional investors object 
to repricing options and would not do it under any circumstances,'' 
Yermack said. ``A clear third of the Fortune 500 would see it as morally 
reprehensible.'' As for the filings in October, Yermack said that 
``you would think people would wait more than a month or two after 
the price drops before doing this.'' The issue was addressed last 
Monday by John Bogle, the senior chairman and founder of the Vanguard 
Group of mutual funds, during a speech at a conference sponsored by 
the Investor Responsibility Research Center. Bogle urged colleagues 
to ``take a firm stand'' against repricings that are ``grossly unfair'' 
to shareholders. Monks said options repricings, especially when extended 
to senior executives, showed that ``the market in executive compensation 
has been contrived and is not an honest market.'' He denounced what 
he called ``the fraud of options that are a one-way street _ I win 
when I win and I still win when my shareholders lose.'' Robert Salwen 
of the Executive Compensation Corp., a consulting firm in New York, 
said two recent calls from clients suggested that companies were of 
two very different minds these days. ``My first call was from a company 
suffering underwater options that wanted advice on repricing,'' Salwen 
said, ``and the next call was a company that wants to grant out-of-the-money 
underwater options as an incentive to executives to bring up the stock 
price. I've never experienced that juxtaposition before.'' A review 
of the filings with the SEC also found two significant trends in options 
repricing. One is to award options that vest, or become eligible to 
be exercised, in monthly rather than annual increments. That gives 
employees at least some of their options much sooner. The other trend 
has showed up at companies like Royal Gold, a Denver concern with 
royalty interests in Nevada gold-mining operations. Royal Gold repriced 
all its outstanding options, but reduced their number by 21 percent. 
Employees were left with the same potential economic value they had 
before, based on an option-valuation technique known as the Black-Scholes 
method, said Stanley Dempsey, the company's chief executive. (Some 
54 percent of the affected options belong to him.) For options holders, 
there is an upside and downside to such a repricing: If the stock 
price rises to a level between the old and new strike prices, the 
holder will now profit. But if the stock price soars above the original 
strike price, the profit potential is limited by the reduced number 
of options. Psychologically, however, many workers feel that they 
are better off with such a repricing: They stand to gain even if the 
company's prospects are not as rosy as they once might have seemed. 
Salwen said he expected many companies to adopt this approach, which 
is more palatable to institutional investors than a straight repricing. 
But in highly competitive job markets, he said, ``it will not be enough 
to calm the waters and keep people from walking'' to a rival offering 
a bigger options package. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>