<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981030.0260 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With bank credit tightening and the market for initial public offerings 
bone-dry for all but the biggest deals, cash-starved small and midsize 
companies are hunting for alternative sources of money. Galloping 
into the breach are firms called factors, which buy companies' accounts 
receivable or lend against them. Factors see an opportunity to break 
out of the niche markets they have traditionally served _ mainly garment 
and textile makers _ and venture into industries like health care, 
construction and technology. And in a growing number of instances, 
factors are gaining customers and working in business partnerships 
with an unlikely ally: banks, their main competitors. ``We're going 
to see that more and more,'' said Leonard Machlis, executive director 
of the Commercial Finance Association, an industry trade group for 
factors and other asset-backed lenders. ``When things start to tighten 
up, as banks lose money in emerging markets and hedge funds, some 
businessmen will not be able to get refinanced'' by banks and will 
turn to factors, Machlis said. Some association members, he added, 
have already seen an increase in such business. Floor Concepts, a 
commercial flooring company in Saddle Brook, N.J., offers a case in 
point. When Len Gleeson and Fred Renshaw, partners in the company, 
needed money to keep their business running, they knew better than 
to turn to a bank. A year ago, a local branch of First Union Bank 
turned them down for a loan, Gleeson said, because the company did 
not have the collateral the bank required, such as ownership of its 
headquarters building. And with the climate change in the financial 
markets since then, the odds of getting a yes this time were probably 
even worse. But without a cash infusion, Floor Concepts could not 
afford to increase staff and buy supplies for jobs already under way 
or about to start. So the company sold the right to collect $220,000 
it was owed by customers to Quantum Corporate Funding, a factor based 
in New York. Quantum advanced Floor Concepts about 60 cents on the 
dollar up front, and took over responsibility for collecting from 
the customers. Quantum gets its money back as the customers pay what 
they owe, and keeps a further 3 percent, called a discount, for its 
profit; after that, Floor Concepts gets the balance. ``We had plenty 
of business, but what we really lacked was cash to fund our business,'' 
Gleeson said. Although it cost Floor Concepts considerably more to 
get cash from Quantum than it might have paid in interest on a short-term 
bank loan, Quantum was prepared to advance funds without insisting 
on collateral that banks usually demand. With its coffers refilled, 
Floor Concepts was able to bid on and win more new contracts, and 
the profits from the new work should more than offset the cost of 
factor financing, Gleeson said. Banks base lending decisions on the 
borrower's creditworthiness. But to a factor, the creditworthiness 
of the borrower's customers is what counts. In Floor Concepts' case, 
Quantum sized up the likelihood that clients like Barnes &AMP; Noble 
or Hackensack University Hospital would pay their bills. The cost 
of funds for the client _ akin to the interest rate charged on a bank 
loan _ is the discount, which can vary from 2 to 4 percent on current 
invoices due within 30 days, to 15 percent or more if payments are 
overdue or are not payable for several months, or there is much doubt 
about the customers' ability to pay. Discounts are also affected by 
whether a client promises the factor a minimum amount of future business 
or just wants one deal, and by how much effort the factor expects 
to expend to collect what is owed. A 3 percent discount on 30-day 
receivables is equivalent to an annual interest rate of about 42.5 
percent, assuming invoices are paid on time. In its current form, 
factoring has been around since the 1960s, but it has been growing 
rapidly lately. According to a survey of its members by the Commercial 
Finance Association, factors had $205 billion in outstanding advances 
at the end of 1997, a 21 percent increase from 1996. Though garment 
industry-related business still accounts for 80 percent of all factoring 
in the country, factoring is spreading to new industries, Machlis 
said, partly because of new cooperation between banks and factors. 
Instead of just saying no to applicants who cannot meet their lending 
requirements, some banks now steer customers toward factors. Craig 
Sheinker, Quantum's president, says that every week he receives marketing 
calls and visits from bank officials who are looking to line up factors 
for client referrals. Quantum's bank, Sterling National, a unit of 
Sterling Bancorp, also sends clients Quantum's way, said Michael Gallina, 
a senior vice president for corporate lending at Sterling. ``If a 
company doesn't have the ability to generate a profit, we probably 
wouldn't do business with them'' right now, Gallina said, but the 
company may grow into a profitable future customer. ``If I'm not able 
to help them directly, I can refer them to somebody who can help them. 
And who knows the benefits of that down the road?'' Factors can also 
be useful to banks by monitoring the creditworthiness of receivables 
for bank clients, or by helping the bank keep track of collateral. 
``It gives banks some comfort in lending to companies that are having 
some difficulty in troubled times,'' said Richard Romer, executive 
vice president of CIT Group Commercial Services, a factor based in 
Livingston, N.J. Four of the country's largest factors are owned at 
least in part by banks. Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank has a stake in CIT; Fuji 
Bank is an owner of Heller Financial of Chicago, and Nationsbanc and 
the Bank of New York each have big in-house factoring operations. 
Banks have gotten into factoring because they like its high profit 
margins compared with traditional lending, said Stewart Long, president 
of Nationsbanc Commercial, the bank's factoring arm. Bank factors 
tend to offer easier terms than independents but stick to the least 
risky customers. A chance to cut financing costs led Philip Knight-Sheen, 
president of Medrec Inc. of San Antonio, which places physical, occupational 
and speech therapists in temporary positions at hospitals and nursing 
homes, to switch from an independent factor earlier this year to the 
factoring arm of Security National Bank in San Antonio. Knight-Sheen's 
company, which has about $3.5 million in annual sales, had been a 
client of Advantage Funding, an Atlanta-based factor, since 1995, 
when his efforts to line up bank financing proved futile. But as the 
company grew and its finances strengthened, ``the interest rates became 
prohibitive,'' Knight-Sheen said. The arrangement with Advantage required 
Medrec to finance a large portion of each month's invoices whether 
or not it needed cash that month, and the financing costs were eating 
up 35 percent of his company's revenue. Now that he is using the bank, 
he factors invoices only occasionally, at a lower total cost. Another 
disadvantage of using the independent factor was that the involvement 
of Advantage led some customers to think Medrec was in financial trouble. 
But initially, the pros outweighed the cons. ``The reason we went 
with them is we didn't have the money to pay our therapists, and the 
government was taking longer and longer'' to reimburse, Knight-Sheen 
said. ``Advantage saved our life. For small companies that need to 
get going, it's a godsend.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>