<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981030.0285 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This spot marks an end point of the Great Man-Made River, a $25 billion 
project that some have suggested may be either a financial folly or 
a military undertaking. But one thing is clear: the enterprise, believed 
to be the largest civil- engineering project under construction, has 
begun to succeed in its declared mission _ delivering vast quantities 
of fresh water hundreds of miles across a barren desert to residents 
of Libya's parched coast. In Tripoli, the capital, whose residents 
until two years ago had to make do with unreliable supplies of brackish 
water from sources invaded by the sea, that has been cause for considerable 
celebration. ``What used to be salty is now as sweet as can be,'' 
exulted Daoud Tayeesh, 53, a shopkeeper. It is not that there have 
not been any problems. Ever since the water began to flow in September 
1996, Tripoli's old water mains have burst, one after another, unable 
to withstand the pressure of water that tumbles into the capital's 
colonial-era water system from a storage tank here in Sidi Saye, which 
is about 400 feet above sea level. On countless occasions, local residents 
say, the flooding has transformed parts of the capital into lakes, 
with geysers spewing water into the air from corroded Italian-made 
iron pipes. And though the Tripoli branch of the project is supposed 
to carry 660 million gallons of water a day, the amount flowing now 
is still a relative trickle. Libyan engineers say the current volume 
is just 106 million gallons, only two-thirds of what Tripoli needs 
every day for nonagricultural purposes alone. The vast project is 
also running behind schedule, slowed by financial constraints that 
foreign experts say have forced the Libyan government to postpone 
some essential projects. Still, Libyan engineers said in interviews 
here that 87 percent of the work on the Tripoli section of the project 
had now been finished, and they expressed confidence that all of the 
work would be completed in early 2000. In a country without a single 
free-flowing river of its own, water flowing at full stream through 
the pipe, more than 12 feet in diameter, would be enough to irrigate 
vast new agricultural projects. It is intended to fulfill the dream 
first sketched in 1974 by Col. Moammar Gadhafi, the Libyan leader, 
who said his plan was not only to provide Libyans with a sure supply 
of water, but also to make the desert bloom. The line that ends in 
Sidi Saye, about 15 miles northeast of Tripoli, begins about 600 miles 
to the south, at a station deep in the Sahara that serves as a collection 
point for water drawn from more than 100 underground aquifers, some 
more than 1,500 feet beneath the sands. The line that reaches Tripoli 
is part of the second phase of the two-part Man-Made River Project. 
The first, which begins deep in another part of the desert hundreds 
of miles to the east, ends near the coastal town of Benghazi. It began 
to carry water in 1994. But even that section still requires additional 
construction and drilling, and it is providing only 1/8 of the 530 
million gallons of water a day that is its maximum capacity. In the 
Tripoli section, among the work that remains unfinished is a section 
of the pipeline that is supposed to end at Tarhuna, about 40 miles 
southeast of Tripoli, where U.S. officials have said Libya has been 
building what would be the world's largest underground chemical weapons 
plant in a hollowed-out mountain. As recently as 1996, U.S. officials 
warned that the weapons plant might be completed as early as this 
year, but they have since suggested that work on that project appears 
to have stopped. Libyan officials have insisted that the work at Tarhuna 
is an irrigation project to be fueled by the Man-Made River. The planned 
link between the underground pipeline and whatever might be under 
construction at Tarhuna is among the reasons that some former workers 
and others have said they suspect that the Man-Made River might have 
a military purpose. They have suggested that the sturdy pipes, buried 
about 15 feet beneath the ground, could be used to store chemical 
weapons or even to move military equipment. But Libyan engineers and 
several high-ranking Western diplomats called that theory nonsense. 
The Libyans allowed an American visitor to inspect sections of the 
pipeline, in which no evidence could be found that it was being used 
for anything other than its stated purpose. ``This project is just 
to carry water,'' declared Adel Bakir, the manager of the Tripoli 
section of the enterprise. Many critics of the vast project have suggested 
that it may be a monumental waste of money, suggesting that it would 
have been far cheaper for Libya to build coastal desalting plants 
or even import water from a country like Turkey to meet its needs. 
A senior Western diplomat here said he understood that the underground 
reservoirs in the desert could run dry in 50 years. But Bakir spoke 
for his government in saying that even ``very very conservative estimates'' 
by Libyan and foreign experts held that the supply would last at least 
four centuries. He said the project was ``the most feasible and most 
cost-effective alternative available to us.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>