<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981030.0281 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Everybody knew it would be good; the question was how good? Rarely 
does an opera company assemble the ingredients that went into the 
Metropolitan Opera's new production of ``Le Nozze di Figaro.'' Mozart's 
opera seen afresh opened Thursday night and what a cast: Bryn Terfel 
as Figaro, Renee Fleming as the Countess, Cecilia Bartoli as Susanna, 
Susanne Mentzer as Cherubino and Dwayne Croft as the Count. There 
to hold all the talent together was Jonathan Miller, the director; 
and making music in the pit was the estimable Met orchestra conducted 
by James Levine. Miller's sense of detail, Terfel's utter naturalness 
and the swift buoyant virtuosity of the orchestra playing accounted 
for the evening's unequivocal successes. Elsewhere, the big vocal 
talents onstage remade Mozart's roles in their own image and asked 
a lot of questions along the way. First question: what is Susanna's 
nature? Ms. Bartoli's dark voice is certainly up to the part, and 
goodness knows she works hard enough at it. Ms. Bartoli, the opera 
performer, is slowly revealing herself to New York audiences, and 
the picture is of a physical comedian pure and simple. Given the opportunity, 
she will invest that property in every role. In a situation where 
there is no room to clown _ for example, ``Deh! vieni'' in Act IV 
_ the singing can be deeply touching. Elsewhere Ms. Bartoli creates 
a buzz-saw trail of mugging, eye rolling, spastic comedic gestures 
and near-pratfalls. Her energy is engaging, but until Act IV we have 
no idea that Susanna is anything more than a purveyor of farce. Ms. 
Bartoli seems to be giving us the same character every time out, like 
the Hollywood stars of old who played themselves whether the movie 
was ``Hamlet'' or ``Billy the Kid.'' Miller has staged the ensemble 
numbers with wondrous depth and exactitude, but he seems to have let 
players like Ms. Bartoli go their own way. Maybe on purpose. Perhaps 
audiences have brooded too long and seriously over the upstairs-downstairs 
sociology of Susanna's life. Maybe broad comedy plays well against 
the travails of Ms. Fleming's Countess. I for one missed Susanna's 
emotional frailty and ambiguous loyalties in the early acts. This 
begs the second question: who is the Countess? Ms. Fleming would make 
her a purveyor of vocal luxury. ``Porgi amor'' was a flood of beautiful 
sound; the climactic tones of ``Dove sono'' made the body tingle. 
For those of us who imagine the role in terms of austere yet injured 
dignity, Ms. Fleming's soft, vulnerability _ frail and fragile _ made 
an interesting contrast: a wounded dove in place of a moral presence. 
Some will argue that it is the duty of the Countess, melancholy as 
she is, to impose, to occupy a rather larger spiritual space than 
Ms. Fleming's lovely presence can. Another question: Why was Ms. Mentzer's 
absolutely seamless singing attached to such frantic behavior? The 
voice conveyed so much of Cherubino. Was all that racing about, arm 
waving and bug-eyed reaction to every opposite reaction a necessary 
adjunct to things already conveyed in musical terms? Which brings 
us to Terfel for whom there is no question at all. So confident was 
he in himself and the easy power of his voice that nothing was exaggerated. 
No phrase was pushed, no movement oversold. It is hard to imagine 
a more satisfying performer for the role. Croft, whose beautiful baritone 
can sometimes drift into blandness, was as lively here as I can remember 
him. I also liked Anthony Laciura's sly and delicate Don Curzio. Making 
an excellent first impression was Danielle de Niese as Barbarina. 
The production is as simple and reticent as Miller's direction. Peter 
Davison's peeling paint and tilted interiors imply declining grandeur 
and impending upset. Levine's up-tempos prodded everything in their 
path. One cannot say enough about the septet ending Act II and the 
final ensemble of Act IV: episodes in which theater and music merged 
as they rarely do, and where each player was made exquisitely aware 
of every other. Mozart operas move on the wheels of their ensembles, 
and Miller _ with no coups de theatre and many acts of self-effacing 
care _ made them turn. It was an intriguing evening: with much that 
was pure Mozart, much that was pure singing and periodic meetings 
of the two. PRODUCTION NOTES: `LE NOZZE DI FIGARO' Opera in four acts 
by Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, libretto by Lorenzo da Ponte, after the 
play by Beaumarchais; conductor, James Levine; production by Jonathan 
Miller; sets by Peter Davison; costumes by James Acheson; lighting 
by Mark McCullough; choreography by Terry John Bates. At the Metropolitan 
Opera. With: Renee Fleming (Countess), Cecilia Bartoli (Susanna), 
Susanne Mentzer (Cherubino), Dwayne Croft (Count), Bryn Terfel (Figaro), 
Wendy White (Marcellina), Heinz Zednik (Don Basilio), Paul Plishka 
(Dr. Bartolo), Danielle de Niese (Barbarina), Anthony Laciura (Don 
Curzio) and Thomas Hammons (Antonio). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>