<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981030.0371 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The world's leading industrial nations on Friday endorsed President 
Clinton's proposal to help protect vulnerable but essentially healthy 
nations from the kind of currency and stock market upheavals that 
have battered nations from Asia to Latin America in the last year. 
The proposal establishes a new line of credit that would make billions 
of dollars available to some countries to ward off attacks on their 
currencies or markets that are set off by economic troubles elsewhere 
in the world. The plan, announced by the Group of 7 industrial nations 
Friday morning, offers a new strategy for the International Monetary 
Fund, which has usually offered money only after a country is in deep 
economic trouble. Under the new plan, the fund could act more quickly 
to help countries before their economies grow far sicker. ``With substantial 
new resources at the IMF,'' Clinton said Friday morning at the White 
House before leaving for campaign appearances in New York, ``this 
line of credit gives us a powerful new tool that can be used when 
it will do the most good at the lowest cost before the trouble starts.'' 
The plan does not require any new money from countries contributing 
to the Fund, although the announcement specifically noted that individual 
countries could contribute additional money. The idea was developed 
by Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin and his aides, who want to send 
a message to speculators that they may be taking big risks if they 
sell a nation's currency or other assets, believing that they will 
decline in value. Frequently, those sales force a devaluation of the 
currency. In theory, speculators could lose money if the IMF credit 
line helps a country stabilize by buying back its own currency or 
boosting its reserves. The Group of 7 also announced several other 
longer-term steps to reform the IMF, ones that were demanded by Congress 
in return for $18 billion in additional funding approved this month. 
They included new requirements that the IMF charge relatively high 
interest rates for many of its loans, so that countries are encouraged 
to pay back the fund as soon as private lenders are willing to offer 
them money in the country _ a strategy that worked in Mexico in 1995. 
Markets rose at the news on Friday, perhaps less for the specifics 
than for the evidence that the leading industrial nations, who appeared 
to be drifting without a firm policy a month ago, were finally taking 
action. But while the statement by the finance ministers and central 
bankers of the Group of 7 nations committed the group to ``limit the 
swings of boom and bust that destroy hope and diminish wealth,'' many 
of the specific, longer-term actions were left extraordinarily vague. 
For example, the statement supported ``an orderly and progressive 
approach'' to continued opening of financial markets around the world 
_ a subject of fierce debate in smaller economies in Asia and Latin 
America, where many believe that pressure from Washington to allow 
investors to move billions of dollars freely across borders has contributed 
to the enormous volatility in markets, and the panic that dried up 
credit around the world after Russia's economic implosion in August. 
``This kind of wording could mean almost anything, including the ordaining 
of some kind of controls,'' said John Lipsky, chief economist at Chase 
Manhattan Bank. On Friday, Rubin refused to reveal what portion of 
the IMF's funds would be devoted to this new ``precautionary fund.'' 
His aides said that the former currency trader knew the importance 
of keeping secret the size of the world's economic arsenal. ``If people 
want to bet against the house, we would rather keep them guessing,'' 
one White House official said Friday. Congress recently approved an 
additional $18 billion in new money to the fund, part of a $90 billion 
infusion from its member nations. The first test of the new approach 
may come as early as next week, in Brazil, where the final touches 
are being put on a package of $30 billion to $40 billion in aid provided 
partly by the IMF. Brazilian officials, fresh from the announcement 
of an austerity plan intended to convince global investors that Brazil 
is finally mustering the will to end wild overspending, are flying 
to Washington this weekend to close the deal. The United States is 
expected to contribute $3 billion to $5 billion to that program. American 
officials continued on Friday to be coy about their contribution to 
the Brazil package, in part because it is likely to raise hackles 
in Congress, which objected strenuously to a $20 billion commitment 
to Mexico in 1995. One administration official left little doubt that 
Brazil will be the test case of the new strategy. ``Some of the ideas 
involved with contingency financing could possibly find application 
in Brazil, although that will of course depend on how the situation 
in Brazil progresses,'' Deputy Treasury Secretary Lawrence Summers 
said at a a news briefing in the White House. ``It's a new way of 
doing business, and that alone may be useful,'' the official said. 
Nonetheless, there are three major risks associated with the new precautionary 
fund strategy. The first is that the fund, desperate to stop the economic 
contagion that spread from Asia to Russia to Latin America, could 
end up supporting a country that fails to carry through on its promised 
reforms. In fact, the presence of the protective shield created by 
the line of credit could reduce pressure on a government to clean 
up its financial act. ``My concern would be are we throwing good money 
after bad?'' asked Sung Won Sohn, the chief economist of Norwest Corp. 
``Will they waste resources put in by the G-7 and the IMF?'' The first 
test, Sung noted, may come in Brazil, whose unpredictable Congress 
already shows some signs of resisting many of the budget cuts and 
increased taxes that the government is proposing to stabilize the 
economy and quality for IMF aid. On Friday, Summers addressed that 
criticism, saying: ``That's obviously a crucial issue.'' He added 
that any effort by the country to draw on the line of credit would 
``require the approval of the IMF board, on the basis of review by 
the IMF staff of the appropriateness of policy that was being pursued.'' 
The second concern is that once the IMF extends the line of credit 
to a country, it would be virtually impossible to withdraw it _ even 
if the country's fiscal discipline fell apart, as it did in Russia. 
By terminating the line of credit, the IMF would essentially be announcing 
to the markets that it was now open season on a country's currency 
_ and trigger a panic. In short, the fund would be handcuffing itself 
to the country it is helping. The third concern is that the IMF, in 
trying to speed along approved of its ``precautionary'' loan, may 
impose conditions a country that are considerably less strict than 
the conditions on an ordinary loan from the Fund. ``Fewer conditions 
and more money is not the direction the IMF should be going,'' Jeffrey 
Sachs, the Harvard economist and a longtime critic of the fund, said 
earlier this week. The changes announced Friday took weeks to negotiate, 
and American officials said the talks were led by Gordon Brown, Britain's 
chancellor of the Exchequer. The United Kingdom is the temporary president 
of the G-7 nations, and Prime Minister Tony Blair has repeatedly said 
in recent weeks that bringing some order to the world economy would 
be one of his top priorities. In a statement Friday, Brown noted that 
several of the long-term initiatives include a commitment to develop 
international standards on fiscal policies, corporate governance and 
accounting, so that countries and companies can be judged by investors 
around the world. In many nations, accounting standards have been 
written to allow nations to hide their problems and protect influential 
businesses, many with close ties to politicians. Off-shore islands 
that make their money by providing a haven for big investors and their 
funds use secrecy as a national asset _ one they are not easily going 
to give up. ``These problems will take considerable time to work out,'' 
Rubin said Friday. ``I've said that many, many times.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>