<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981030.0412 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Shortly after Dr. Avadis Tevanian joined Apple Computer Inc. as a 
senior executive last year, he recalls, a software developer warned 
him that if Apple did not stop selling its highly successful QuickTime 
multimedia software product, ``Microsoft would take any necessary 
action to drive Apple out of businesss.'' Eighteen months later, ``I 
appreciate the prophetic import of his words,'' Tevanian stated in 
written testimony as a government witness in the antitrust trial against 
Microsoft Corp. Tevanian, a close lieutenant of Apple's co-founder 
and acting chief executive, Steve Jobs, was vice president of engineering 
at Jobs' Next software until Apple acquired Next in 1997. Now an Apple 
senior vice president, he is scheduled to take the stand in U.S. District 
Court on Monday morning to face cross-examination by Microsoft lawyers, 
who will try to impeach his direct written testimony. In the direct 
testimony, made public Friday evening, Tevanian accuses Microsoft 
of threatening and bullying Apple to drop support for Netscape Communications 
Corp.'s browser for navigating the World Wide Web and instead to favor 
Microsoft's Internet Explorer browser. If Apple refused, he said, 
Microsoft executives, in several discussions with Apple, threatened 
to stop developing and supporting crucial Microsoft business software 
for Apple's Macintosh operating system. Tevanian testified that Microsoft 
had also repeatedly pressured Apple to drop out of the multimedia 
software market, in which Apple's QuickTime program for playing audio, 
video and animated graphics files is a de facto industry standard. 
When Apple refused, he said, Microsoft rigged the Windows operating 
system so that, in many circumstances, QuickTime would not work on 
Windows computers. Apple's Macintosh line of personal computers and 
its operating system, Mac OS, stand as the only real competition to 
Microsoft, though Apple now has less than 5 percent of the market. 
Almost every other personal computer in the world runs Microsoft's 
Windows operating system. Responding to Tevanian's testimony, Microsoft 
released a statement Friday asserting: ``Microsoft and Apple continue 
to be great partners after more than 17 years of both competing and 
cooperating in the software industry. Microsoft today reiterates its 
strong support for the Macintosh and our Macintosh customers.'' In 
many ways, Tevanian's testimony echoes that of the man who preceded 
him on the witness stand, David Colburn, a senior vice president at 
America Online. In his testimony, Colburn described how Microsoft 
had used its Windows monopoly to thwart a planned deal in which America 
Online was to distribute Netscape's Navigator as its default browser, 
that is, the browser distributed with America Online's software. By 
offering America Online an icon on the Windows desktop, the most valuable 
real estate in cyberspace, Microsoft was able to persuade the online 
service to abandon Netscape and to make Internet Explorer its default 
browser. Similarly, Tevanian said that while Apple offered both the 
Microsoft and Netscape browsers, it had originally chosen Netscape 
as its default browser. But Tevanian testified that when Microsoft 
chairman Bill Gates learned of that choice, ``he became very upset,'' 
and that over the following months Microsoft used a variety of threats 
and entreaties to persuade Apple to make Internet Explorer the default 
browser. Finally, in mid-May 1997, Tevanian testified, Microsoft told 
Apple that it would pull the plug on application programs for the 
Macintosh operating system if Apple refused to adopt Microsoft's browser 
and declined to settle several other disputes ``on terms acceptable 
to Microsoft.'' Among the programs Microsoft threatened to quit supporting 
were its Macintosh versions of Word and Excel, industry-dominating 
word processing and spread sheet programs. Both are also part of Microsoft 
Office, which has more than 90 percent of the market for business 
applications suites. As a result of that domination, Tevanian said, 
Apple ``desperately needed to maintain support for Microsoft Office 
for Macintosh.'' At the time of the threat, which Tevanian called 
``extremely disturbing,'' Microsoft, he said, ``had made a substantial 
investment getting Office 98 for Macintosh ready for market,'' yet 
was ``willing to risk an outright loss of that entire investment to 
force Apple to terms.'' Apple gave in and made Internet Explorer the 
default browser and agreed not to promote Netscape's browser. As Tevanian 
describes it, Microsoft sweetened the deal by making a $150 million 
investment in Apple and agreeing to settle some patent disputes. By 
the time the deal was announced in August 1997, Apple had lost $1.7 
billion over the previous seven quarters. In its statement Friday, 
Microsoft said: ``The allegation that Microsoft threatened to withhold 
Macintosh Office 98 in order to force Apple to make Internet Explorer 
its default browser is another example of how the government deliberately 
twists facts to support its distorted allegations.'' Tevanian testified 
that Microsoft also used threats to persuade Apple not to market QuickTime 
for Windows computers. At one point, he testified, Microsoft offered 
to let Apple continue writing software tools for creating multimedia 
files _ a tiny market consisting mostly of professional developers 
_ if Apple would cede the far larger market for software that plays 
such files on all computers. The business tactics he describes echo 
the central testimony last week of James Barksdale, the chairman of 
Netscape, who said that Microsoft offered to let Netscape sell browsers 
to the far smaller pool of non-Windows computers if the company would 
cede the Windows browser market to Microsoft. Tevanian quotes one 
senior Microsoft executive at a meeting as saying: ``We're going to 
compete fiercely on multimedia playback, and we won't let anybody 
play back in Windows.'' Soon after that, he said, Apple's multimedia 
program stopped working well on Windows computers. Microsoft's statement 
says: ``While Dr. Tevanian alleges that Microsoft has somehow intentionally 
disabled his company's product, the facts show that Apple's engineers 
did not properly author the QuickTime set-up program for Windows. 
``Despite Dr. Tevanian's accusations, the only known interoperability 
issues affecting QuickTime were caused by Apple, not Microsoft.'' 
The statement echoes Microsoft's response when the chief executive 
of RealNetworks, Rob Glaser, told the Senate Judiciary Committee last 
summer that Microsoft had engineered the Windows Media Player to ``break'' 
his company's industry-leading multimedia software for the World Wide 
Web. Starting Monday morning, John Warden, Microsoft's lead lawyer 
in the antitrust suit, will begin a cross-examination of Tevanian 
that is likely to last for several days. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>