<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981030.0326 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Until they declared ``Netwar'' against the Mexican government, Ricardo 
Dominguez and Stefan Wray earned their activist credentials the old-fashioned 
way, attending rallies in support of the Zapatista rebels, handing 
out pamphlets, shouting political slogans. Now, the two New Yorkers 
organize ``virtual sit-ins'' and recruit computer programmers to attack 
the World Wide Web sites of any person or company they deem responsible 
for oppression. Their new rallying cry: ``The revolution will be digitized.'' 
Wray, 37, and Dominguez, 39, are co-founders of the Electronic Disturbance 
Theater. It is one of several groups around the world that are beginning 
to experiment with computer hacking, so far largely nuisance attacks 
and the equivalent of electronic graffiti, as a means to a political 
end. ``We see this as a form of electronic civil disobedience,'' Wray 
told a group of about 75 people who had gathered in New York's East 
Village for an ``anti-Columbus Day'' event in October. ``We are transferring 
the social-movement tactics of trespass and blockade to the Internet.'' 
The notion is a departure for both radical activists and hackers, 
whose distinct, subversive subcultures have rarely intersected until 
recently. In some ways, the two psychologies are polar opposites. 
Hackers, while reliably anti-authoritarian, tend to limit their critique 
of the military-industrial complex to its imperfect computer security 
apparatus. Enamored of their image as the cowboys of the electronic 
frontier, most at least pay lip service to the hacker mantra, ``information 
wants to be free.'' But whatever capacity they might have to disrupt 
the social order has so far been largely restricted to pointless vandalism 
and pinching the occasional credit card number. Political activists, 
on the other hand, preoccupied as they are with the power structure, 
have typically paid little heed to the information infrastructure 
on which it rests. Motivated by the desire for social change, they 
generally see building communities of support and cooperation as essential. 
But the rapid growth of the Internet has transformed what was once 
a hacker playground into, among other things, a far-reaching political 
platform. What's more, the tricks invented by hackers have become 
easier for activists to learn and adopt because they are now widely 
published on how-to Web sites. As a result, radical groups are discovering 
what hackers have always known: Traditional social institutions are 
more vulnerable in cyberspace than they are in the physical world. 
Likewise, some members of the famously sophomoric hacker underground 
are finding motivation in causes other than ego gratification. In 
recent months, groups as diverse as the Animal Liberation Front, a 
militant animal-rights group; Radio4All, which supports pirate broadcasting, 
and international teams of teen-agers with cyber pseudonyms like Milworm 
and causes like anti-imperialism have increasingly begun pumping political 
protest through the Internet's security holes. On Oct., 27, a day 
after China's human rights agency announced its new Web site, the 
official view of that nation's human rights record was replaced with 
an electronic trespasser's manifesto: ``China's people have no rights 
at all, never mind human rights. How can the United States trade millions 
and millions of dollars with them and give them most-favored trade 
status when they know what is happening?'' Earlier in October, computer 
intruders scrawled ``Save Kashmir'' over the opening screen of a Web 
site that the Indian government set up last summer to provide information 
about the region, whose ownership is disputed by Pakistan and several 
separatist groups. The hacked site included photographs of Kashmiris 
allegedly killed by Indian forces, overlaid with the words ``massacre'' 
and ``extra-judicial execution.'' In June, after the Indian government 
conducted nuclear tests, college students in Britain and the Netherlands 
claimed credit for placing the image of a mushroom cloud on the Web 
site of India's major nuclear weapons research center. In September, 
Portuguese hackers modified the sites of 40 Indonesian servers to 
display the slogan ``Free East Timor'' in large black letters, and 
they added hypertext links to Web sites describing Indonesian human 
rights abuses in the former Portuguese colony. No slouches in packaging 
and self-promotion, the burgeoning computer underground has adopted 
a catchy term for the trend: they call it ``hacktivism.'' ``Hacktivism 
is a way to be heard by millions,'' a group of three Mexican hackers 
known as X-Ploit wrote in an e-mail message to a reporter. ``We want 
to speak out about what we and many, many people disagree with in 
this treasonous and corrupt government. If we protest both on line 
and off line, we'll have better chances to see a change.'' The tactic 
is not limited to one end of the political spectrum. A group of Serbian 
computer hackers this month claimed responsibility for crashing a 
Web site promoting the ethnic Albanian cause in the Serbian province 
of Kosovo. The Serbian newspaper Blic quoted one of the hackers as 
saying, ``We shall continue to remove ethnic Albanian lies from the 
Internet.'' Wednesday, the group, called Black Hand, after a clandestine 
Serbian military organization at the turn of the century, attacked 
the site of the Croatian state-owned newspaper Vjesnik. Croatian hackers 
counterattacked the next day, inserting messages like ``Read Vjesnick 
and not Serbian books'' on the Web site of the Serbian National Library, 
Vjesnik reported Friday. Guerrilla attacks on Web sites may seem more 
of a headline-grabbing ploy than true information warfare. But security 
experts said the recent spate of digital vandalism underscores the 
risk to companies and governments that increasingly rely on the Internet 
for commerce and communication. ``What this demonstrates is the capacity 
of groups with political causes to hack into systems,'' said Michael 
Vatis, chief of the National Information Protection Center, a new 
federal agency formed to protect the nation's crucial infrastructure. 
``I wouldn't characterize vandalizing Web sites as cyber-terrorism, 
but the only responsible assumption we can make is there's more going 
on that we don't know about.'' Established by Attorney General Janet 
Reno this year, the center is in part a response to the perception 
that ``political forces which could not take on the United States 
in conventional military terms stand a better chance on an electronic 
battlefield,'' said Vatis. The potency of the sling-shot approach 
is not lost on would-be hacktivists, either. ``If you have 10 people 
at a protest, they don't do much of anything,'' said a Toronto-based 
computer jockey who calls himself Oxblood Ruffian. ``If you have 10 
people on line, they could cripple a network.'' Oxblood is a member 
of Cult of the Dead Cow, a hacker group that recently reserved the 
Web address www.hacktivism.org as an Internet distribution hub for 
tools to assist others in subversive digital activism. He said the 
group was planning to attack the Internet operations of U.S. companies 
doing business with China. But the effectiveness of such actions is 
unclear, prompting a debate over how best to implement the hacktivist 
brand of political protest. Under U.S. law, terrorism is defined as 
an act of violence for the purpose of intimidating or coercing a government 
or a civilian population. And breaking into a computer system and 
altering data are felonies. For that reason, the members of the Electronic 
Disturbance Theater emphasize that the software they use to attack 
Web sites disrupts Internet traffic but does not destroy data. In 
the tradition of civil disobedience protests, they encourage mass 
participation and use their real names. The group was forged in an 
online discussion among several American supporters of the Zapatistas, 
the first armed revolutionaries known to have solicited public sympathy 
for their struggle by publishing their communiques over the Internet. 
On Nov. 22, the group says, it plans to attack the Web site of the 
School for the Americas, a U.S. Army training center for foreign military 
personnel, some of whom have been accused of human rights abuses. 
Recent targets have included the sites of Mexican President Ernesto 
Zedillo and of the U.S. Defense Department. When online activists 
heed the call to ``commence flooding!'' they visit the group's Web 
site and click on an icon that launches a program called FloodNet. 
The software points their Web browser to the target of the attack, 
where it requests the same page over and over again at a rate of about 
10 times per minute. This tactic is a variation of what is known in 
Internet security-speak as a ``denial of service attack.'' An unusually 
large volume of requests will overwhelm the computer that is serving 
up the target's Web pages. This can cause legitimate visitors to see 
error messages instead of the pages they are seeking, and it can even 
crash the server computer. ``This isn't cyber-terrorism,'' insisted 
Carmin Karasic, a Quincy, Mass., software engineer who designed the 
FloodNet program. ``It's more like conceptual art.'' The U.S. Defense 
Department does not agree. Alerted to a planned FloodNet attack on 
its public site on Mexican Independence Day, the agency responded 
by diverting the requests to a nonexistent Internet address, a spokesman 
said. ``If it wasn't illegal it was certainly immoral _ there are 
other constructive methods of electronic protest,'' the spokesman 
said. The victims of such attacks are not the only ones to criticize 
the digital desperados. In their quest for support from a public already 
suspicious of hackers and anxious about online safety, some political 
activists deride such methods as counterproductive. And hackers faithful 
to the ethic of electronic exploration for its own sake deride Web 
site intrusions as the work of ``script kiddies,'' an epithet for 
people who break into systems by using schemes developed by others 
rather than by searching out new security holes of their own. Script 
kiddies have been responsible for a recent surge in attacks throughout 
the Internet _ of which politically motivated hacks are a small fraction. 
But in e-mail and telephone interviews, several hackers promoting 
a political agenda _ all of whom refused to give their real names 
_ insisted that their motives were pure. ``We have hundreds of servers 
we could hack, and we don't,'' said Secretos, a Portuguese hacker 
in his early 20's whose group, the Kaotik Team, has taken up the cause 
of East Timor independence. ``By contrary, we even help them to fix 
their bugs. The main objective of our hacking pages is to transmit 
the message. It is not, `We are groovy, we have power.''' John Vranesevitch, 
editor of Antionline, an Internet publication that tracks hacker activities, 
said the apparent political awakening among hackers reflects a generation's 
coming of age. ``We're starting to see right now the first generation 
of people who have grown up on the Internet,'' said Vranesevitch, 
who at 19 counts himself among that group. ``These hackers are entering 
the ages where people are most politically active. This is their outlet.'' 
And some are trying to make that outlet more accessible. A 26-year-old 
University of Toronto dropout calling himself Perl Bailey, after a 
computer language popular among Web developers, said he had earned 
a living as a software developer and had dabbled in not entirely legal 
computer exploration for several years. Now, he is writing a tool 
to arm computer novices with basic hacktivist techniques. ``After 
you reach a certain point, it feels like you are dressed up with nowhere 
to go,'' he said. ``I want to make people doing questionable business 
dealings with countries that have no respect for human rights worry 
that someone who doesn't have a grade school education can sit down 
and go click-click and create havoc. To me that to me is very powerful.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>