<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981030.0018 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There is something a little worrying in the idea that operatic music 
by Mozart has been lying around in various European libraries without 
anyone taking the trouble to study it properly, let alone perform 
it. Yet this is the conclusion that must be drawn if ``The Philosopher's 
Stone,'' which is to have its first modern performance Friday night 
in Boston, with another on Sunday, really does contain numbers by 
Wolfgang Amadeus alongside music by other composers. Musicologists 
disagree about the attribution. Now audiences can decide. Mozart probably 
had a fair idea of his position among the composers of his time, but 
he was certainly not averse to collaborating. During his years in 
Vienna he wrote arias or ensembles for at least five operas at the 
court theater, in addition to the scores he wrote entirely himself. 
Generally, it seems, he was responding to the wishes of particular 
singers. Louise Villeneuve, for example, had three new Mozart arias 
to sing in two productions in the fall of 1789 that were among her 
first in the imperial city. The next year she created the role of 
Dorabella in ``Cosi Fan Tutte.'' Around this time Mozart was also 
involved with the company run by Emanuel Schikaneder at the Theater 
auf der Wieden, outside the city center. This was the company for 
which Mozart wrote not only ``The Magic Flute'' but also an aria with 
a virtuoso part for solo double bass. Both contributions were made 
in 1791, the year he died, but could he also have written for earlier 
Schikaneder shows? Could he, in particular, have contributed to ``The 
Philosopher's Stone,'' staged in September 1790 with music by a number 
of Schikaneder house composers? The answer is a clear yes from David 
Buch, the American musicologist who was the first to take a scholarly 
look at the piece, and whose edition is being used in the Boston performances 
at the New England Conservatory's Jordan Hall. Speaking recently from 
his home in Iowa City, he remarked that ``all the evidence suggests'' 
that Mozart wrote at least three numbers for ``The Philosopher's Stone.'' 
One of these has been known, and disputed, for a long time. It is 
a duet in F between Lubano and Lubanara, the Papageno and Papagena 
of this opera. As Buch points out, one of the fascinations of ``The 
Philosopher's Stone,'' leaving aside all question of Mozart's creative 
participation, is that it offers a context for ``The Magic Flute'' 
and may even change the way that work is viewed. Both operas have 
prince and peasant heroes who are eventually united with suitable 
consorts after surmounting magical trials. Both works also show fairy-tale 
worlds subject to the whims of rival powers of light and darkness, 
though the beneficent spirit is a tenor role in ``The Philosopher's 
Stone,'' while the bass Franz Xaver Gerl, who was to be Sarastro in 
``The Magic Flute,'' was the evil magician Eutifronte in the earlier 
piece. There are even musical connections, places where Mozart in 
``The Magic Flute'' quotes from ``The Philosopher's Stone.'' The case 
for Mozart's authorship is strongest for the F major duet, of which 
there is a copy largely in his hand. That fact alone is almost sufficient. 
If one might want to say the duet is too simple to have been composed 
by Mozart (in it Lubano discovers that his beloved is under a spell 
and can only meow like a cat), then it is certainly too simple for 
him to have taken the trouble to copy out _ an act that would have 
indicated he wanted to study it. Probably Mozart was working up a 
piece that had been drafted by another composer, because the vocal 
lines and some of the string parts were already in place when he picked 
up his pen, and Mozartified the number, as he Mozartified works by 
Handel. The quality of the orchestration, especially of the wind parts, 
seems to justify Buch's conclusion that ``the spirit of Mozart is 
very much present'' here. Not all earlier Mozart scholars were of 
the same opinion, but then they had not seen what Buch has seen: a 
score of the opera dating from close to the time of the first performance 
and placing Mozart's name against not only the F major duet but two 
other short numbers in the second-act finale. Buch examined this score 
in the City and University Library of Hamburg in the summer of 1996, 
not long after it had been returned from St. Petersburg, Russia, with 
other World War II booty. His subsequent announcement that ``The Philosopher's 
Stone'' might contain unknown Mozart got a lot of attention. The other 
newly attributed segments are duets as well, the first also for Lubano 
and the still-meowing Lubanara, the second for Nadir, the Prince, 
and a soprano Genie who leads him on his way. Both are pretty elementary, 
though, again, that is not a reason to discount them as Mozart's; 
otherwise audiences might have to lose quite a lot of Papageno's music 
in ``The Magic Flute.'' The Hamburg score is also persuasive evidence 
that these pieces are genuine Mozart precisely because its attributions 
to him are so modest: seven minutes or so of music in a score playing 
for two hours. Publishers and impresarios of the time would have wanted 
to exaggerate Mozart's contribution, and indeed a ``Philosopher's 
Stone'' songbook from the era shamelessly ascribes the entire score 
to him. If the Hamburg copyists were content to claim so little, perhaps 
they should be believed. In any event, the importance of ``The Philosopher's 
Stone'' must lie in its qualities as an entity, not in its maybe-Mozart 
fragments. After all, the presence of two or three Mozart arias has 
not kept other multiple-composer operas like ``The Indiscreet Inquirer'' 
or ``The Good-Hearted Grouch'' in the repertory, and in those cases 
Mozart's contributions are unmistakably his and glorious. The numbers 
he might have produced for ``The Philosopher's Stone'' are certainly 
not of the same quality. But the piece as a whole may reveal a lot 
about the theatrical environment in which ``The Magic Flute'' came 
to be, and so help us all appreciate that fully and magnificently 
Mozartian work the more. If nothing else, ``The Philosopher's Stone'' 
may suggest, disturbingly, that it is not so easy to distinguish mostly 
Mozart (the F major duet) from possibly Mozart or even from what is 
straightforwardly not Mozart. Martin Pearlman, who is to conduct these 
performances by Boston Baroque, points out that the opera shows Mozart 
working within a community of composers, exchanging ideas, perhaps 
helping out with a few measures here or there, not as a solitary author 
but as part of a team. If the piece now has a continuing life, that 
will not be for Mozart's part in it but because it is, in Pearlman's 
words, ``a lot of fun.'' Kochel, Take Note Boston Baroque is to perform 
`The Philosopher's Stone'' Friday night at 8 and on Sunday at 3 p.m. 
at the New England Conservatory's Jordan Hall, 30 Gainesborough Street, 
Boston. Martin Pearlman will conduct the 1790 opera, which some scholars 
attribute to Mozart and colleagues. The performance will last about 
three hours, including intermission. Soloists include Kurt Streit 
and Paul Austin Kelly, tenors; Jane Giering-De Haan, Judith Lovat 
and Sharon Baker, sopranos; Kevin Deas and Chris Pedro Trakas, baritones, 
and Alan Ewing, bass. David Buch, the musicologist who was the first 
to take a scholarly look at the work, will give a preconcert talk 
at 6:45 Friday night and at 1:45 p.m. Sunday. Tickets: $21 to $45. 
Information: (617) 484-9200. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>