<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981030.0444 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Facing vital ballot initiatives and continuing to fight for increased 
acceptability across the country, the gambling industry and its supporters 
this year have contributed about $85 million to influence next week's 
election. From the more than $71 million being wagered on a California 
ballot measure that could legalize the state's tribal casinos, to 
the thousands more being spent in an effort to oust South Carolina's 
antigambling governor, contributions from casino interests are increasingly 
affecting the nation's politics. As gambling revenues have grown around 
the country, the industry's money has spread far beyond the boundaries 
of Nevada, the nation's gambling capital, and its contributions have 
increased to members of both parties. According to an analysis conducted 
for The New York Times by the Campaign Study Group, a research company 
in Springfield, Va., contributions from casino companies to candidates 
for national office and to political parties totaled $4.9 million 
from Jan. 1 to the second week in October, with a slightly larger 
share going to Republicans. Of that amount, the largest party recipient 
was the National Republican Senatorial Committee, which received $925,000, 
and the largest amount given to an individual candidate went to John 
Ensign, the Republican candidate for the Senate from Nevada. By comparison, 
federal contributions to candidates and parties from the gambling 
industry are slightly more than half of the amount that the tobacco 
industry has poured into the system, according to the analysis done 
for The New York Times. ``Both political parties are obviously heavily 
dependent on contributions from the gambling industry, which is having 
a major influence on Washington,'' said James Dobson, a member of 
the National Gambling Impact Study Commission, a congressional commission 
studying the social and economic impact of gambling. ``I'm especially 
concerned about the influence of that money on the GOP,'' added Dobson, 
who is also president of the nonprofit organization Focus on Family 
and opposes gambling. ``The gambling industry has bought and paid 
for the politicians,'' he said. In state races, gambling industry 
dollars are also having a huge impact. In Missouri, voters will decide 
whether 11 of the state's 15 casinos may continue operating slot machines 
although they do not sit on the Mississippi or Missouri Rivers as 
state law stipulates. If the amendment fails, casino companies say 
they will have to close. The casino industry is expected to spend 
about $8 million blanketing the state with advertisements, while opponents 
of gambling are fighting with less than $200,000. Still, polls show 
the outcome could be close, as Missouri residents, who legalized gambling 
in 1992, still appear to be unsure about whether they want to keep 
casinos around. ``It's too close to call,'' said Joe Coccimiglio, 
an industry analyst at Prudential Securities. ``If we don't get a 
good voter turnout, it could be difficult.'' In Maryland, the Republican 
gubernatorial candidate, Ellen Sauerbrey, received a recent boost 
to her campaign when Hilton Hotel Corp., the owner of casinos around 
the country, contributed $250,000 to aid the Republican National Committee's 
attacks on her Democratic opponent, Parris Glendening, according to 
a report in The Washington Post. Glendening, the incumbent in the 
race, has opposed installing slot machines at the state's horse tracks. 
Hilton owns a horse track in Maryland. California's Proposition 5, 
which would legalize and likely lead to expansion of the state's Indian 
gambling business, is being vehemently opposed by Nevada casinos, 
which receive an estimated 30 percent of their business from California 
residents. But the spending in the campaign has been large on both 
sides, with tribal interests matching the deep pockets of Nevada's 
casino companies. Recent polls show the proposition is likely to pass, 
but a lengthy court challenge could follow. Gov. David Beasley, R-S.C., 
has found that his opposition to establishing a state lottery and 
his attacks on the state's mushrooming $2.5 billion-a-year video poker 
industry have caused the gambling industry's dollars to pour in for 
his Democratic opponent, former state Rep. James Hodges. The largest 
video poker operator in the state, Fred Collins, has spent millions 
on newspaper, radio and television advertisements urging voters to 
``Ban Beasley.'' And to make matters worse for the governor, The Republican 
Governors Association, whose members receive significant support from 
gambling interests, recently retreated on a plan to spend $500,000 
for advertising on Beasley's behalf. Arizona voters are expected to 
approve a ballot measure that would extend the operation of the state 
lottery through July 2003. Without the passage of Proposition 304, 
the lottery would end in July, but despite some opposition from religious 
groups, the measure is expected to win easily and, consequently, campaign 
spending has been minimal. According to the analysis by the Campaign 
Study Group, the largest individual contributor to federal candidates 
and parties was Mirage Resorts, which gave $327,000 of a total of 
$442,000 to Republicans. Mirage, a Las Vegas casino company, has projects 
planned for Mississippi and New Jersey. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>