<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981030.0309 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A 61-year-old woman smiles reassuringly into the camera and tells 
viewers that Kenneth (Buddy) MacKay, the Democrat running for Florida 
governor, is an all-around great guy. ``I should know,'' says the 
woman, Anne MacKay, in a commercial that has been on television for 
eight weeks. ``We've been married 39 years.'' Mrs. MacKay is among 
the new stars of this year's campaign ads: political wives offering 
testimonials that their husbands can be counted on. Candidates' spouses 
have appeared in campaign advertisements before, but they usually 
sat silently alongside their neatly dressed children in family portraits. 
This year, for the first time, the wives of a number of candidates, 
Democratic candidates in particular, are out in front, with greater 
prominence and a new purpose. Many have speaking roles, and almost 
all talk about their husbands' values. None of the wives featured 
in this season's commercials come out and say it: ``Hey, no Clinton 
problem here.'' But in the year of Monica Lewinsky, the subtext is 
clear, according to some of those who make and study these advertisements. 
Roy Barnes, a Democrat running for governor of Georgia, has made a 
number of advertisements prominently featuring his wife of 28 years, 
Mary Barnes. And Raymond Strother, the Washington political consultant 
who made the commercials, said they are a tactful but necessary way 
for Democrats like Barnes to inoculate themselves from any hint of 
sexual scandal. ``Character is a big question this year, and the family 
values issue is a tricky one for Democrats because of what's been 
going on with the head of the Democratic Party,'' Strother said. ``So 
we're all trying to portray them as having a long-term commitment. 
People are thinking more about the personal lives of the candidates 
this year, and it would be foolish to deny that's a part of it.'' 
``You have wives on the air as a subtle way to say, `I'm not Bill 
Clinton,''' said Kathleen Hall Jamieson, dean of the Annenberg School 
of Communication at the University of Pennsylvania. ``And what's new 
is the number of wives _ many more this year _ in so many prominent 
races, and so many talking, and saying, `We've been married 12 years'; 
`We've been married 24 years,' `We've been married 39 years.''' (The 
husbands of female candidates occasionally appear in commercials, 
too, but only to smile in the style long ago perfected by feminine 
helpmates.) Even before Republicans began broadcasting commercials 
that refer to the sex scandal directly, Strother said, ``most of us 
were buying insurance policies against that kind of thing by showing 
the spouses.'' In Barnes' case, Strother said, the advertisements 
have dual purposes, contrasting Barnes' personal life both to the 
president's and to that of Barnes' Republican opponent, Guy Millner, 
who has been married three times. This year's preoccupation with the 
sex lives of public officials was recently parodied in a series of 
mock campaign advertisements on ``Saturday Night Live,'' in which 
a candidate admitted that his chief qualification for office was that 
a fire had left him unable to cheat on his wife. ``I get phantom pains 
when I even think about sex,'' he said proudly. Some of the real campaign 
advertisements are only slightly less obvious. And almost always, 
they try to tie the candidate's personal life to his public performance. 
A handful of Republicans have done commercials highlighting their 
happy homes. An advertisement for Mike Simpson, speaker of the Idaho 
House who is running for Congress, shows his wife pouring lemonade 
at a family picnic. The voiceover says, ``Mike married his high school 
sweetheart, Kathy, 28 years ago.'' The commercial continues, ``Later, 
Dr. Mike followed in his father's footsteps and joined the family 
dental practice. Kathy's mom is part of the family now, passing Idaho 
values from generation to generation.'' But most of the advertisements 
are for Democrats like Evan Bayh, senatorial candidate from Indiana, 
whose wife, Susan Bayh, narrates a commercial in which she and her 
husband are shown playing with their twin sons, who will be 3 in November. 
Mrs. Bayh says, ``Evan and I are working hard to instill in our boys 
the right type of values, the same set of Hoosier values Evan fought 
for as governor.'' In closing, she says, ``Evan will bring Hoosier 
values to Washington.'' Mrs. Bayh said her appearance in the advertisement 
had nothing to do with Clinton's problems. ``We had planned this way 
back in July,'' she said, the month before Clinton admitted the affair, 
though half a year after most Americans had, according to polls, already 
concluded it took place. Robert Squier, the Washington consultant 
who made the advertisement in which Mrs. Bayh appeared, allowed that 
``with 20/20 hindsight, I'm glad we ran that spot, and I'm sure a 
lot of other people are, too, with Republicans once again trying to 
turn things to Clinton.'' Mrs. Bayh said that such commercials work 
only if the image that the wife is pitching happens to be accurate. 
``You can't create a new image,'' she said. ``It can only solidify 
a person's feelings if you're saying something people already believe 
to be true.'' Consultants who have made similar commercials said they 
feel they have to be careful, and right, when they tacitly advertise 
a man's fidelity, because a wife's testimonial could easily backfire, 
potentially even smoking out stories about long-past affairs. Then 
again, many Americans responded to news of the president's affair 
with a former White House intern by saying that if Hillary Rodham 
Clinton was sticking by her husband, they would, too. So voters might 
feel comforted by a wife's support even if her publicly sworn faith 
in her husband turned out to be undeserved. In either case, the appearance 
of a devoted wife is not always a help, and has already proved a serious 
miscalculation for at least one Democratic congressional candidate. 
John Rose was heavily favored to win the Democratic primary for the 
open seat in Kentucky's 6th Congressional District until he began 
broadcasting an advertisement narrated by his much younger and very 
pregnant blond wife, who was shown sitting on a couch rubbing her 
swollen belly while he looked on, grinning. The advertisement is widely 
considered the most likely reason he lost in the Democratic primary 
to Ernesto Scorsone, a slightly more liberal candidate who is given 
less chance of winning the election in the conservative-leaning district. 
Mrs. MacKay, whose commercial in the Florida governor's race has generated 
more positive calls from supporters than any of MacKay's other advertisements, 
said she was not trying to make any point larger than that she thinks 
her husband would be a better governor than his opponent, Republican 
Jeb Bush. (And Mrs. MacKay's commercial is at least as subtle as a 
recent Bush advertisement that shows a burglar at work, apparently 
thrilled with news that MacKay supports a tax on burglar alarms. While 
making off with a television, he pauses to say, ``Way to go, Buddy.'') 
Mrs. MacKay said she hopes the trend of wives in the forefront endures 
beyond this year's focus on wives as protectors of their husbands' 
honor. ``Because women's roles have changed, a woman is seen more 
as a partner'' whose word about her husband counts for something, 
Mrs. MacKay said. And women other than political wives do seem to 
figure more prominently in this year's campaign advertisements, Dr. 
Jamieson said: A few moms have cropped up, too. One is Doris Chabot, 
who appears in a commercial for her son, Republican Rep. Steve Chabot 
of Ohio. ``He understands the importance of keeping promises,'' Mrs. 
Chabot says in the commercial, referring to her son's pledge to protect 
Social Security. ``After all, Jerry and I raised him right.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>