<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981030.0279 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In their flesh-toned attire, the eight dancers in American Ballet 
Theater's latest premiere, ``Without Words,'' are like clay figurines 
molded and remolded into countless configurations by their sculptor-choreographer, 
Nacho Duato. Duato, a 41-year-old Spaniard, is a hot ticket on the 
European dance scene and ``Without Words'' advertises his gift for 
the startling image. Everything about this inventive work, which had 
its premiere on Thursday night at City Center, looked experimental 
_ right down to the curtain calls. When did you last see a choreographer 
come onstage and distribute bouquets to his own dancers? The score 
that Duato uses consists of six Schubert songs, but it is heard as 
instrumental music without words, as the title says. Like the songs, 
the dancing has been stripped bare of overt Romantic aura. Love and 
death are themes in the ballet derived from the music, but Duato has 
given us his contemporary take on a 19th-century obsession. The spare 
setting uses large dreamlike photographs of the dancers by Nancy Ellison 
to introduce each section. It speaks of a not-so-brave new world, 
yet even within the 20th-century blackness of an existential stage 
space, Duato presents a universal life cycle with all its naturalness, 
free of alienation as well as of frills. To say he has swept away 
all period atmosphere is not accurate. His own choreography is indebted 
here to the style developed in the late 1970s by Jiri Kylian, director 
of the Netherlands Dance Theater, where Duato was once a leading dancer. 
In ``Remanso,'' the exciting male trio he created last year for Ballet 
Theater, he used more original movement, seemingly inspired by the 
bravura of the great dancers at his disposition. ``Without Words,'' 
more sophisticated, finds him in the familiar vein seen in 1994 with 
his own troupe, National Dance Company of Spain, at City Center (131 
W. 55th St.). The idiom is not classical and the women are not on 
toe. Yet ballet training and classical placement is essential for 
the swift partnering and concealed virtuosity. As a title, ``Without 
Words,'' refers to feelings that can be conveyed in more than one 
way and in the music, the vocal line was transcribed by Mischa Maisky 
for cello in a recording where his pianist was Daria Hovora. On this 
occasion, the cellist in the pit was Scott Ballantyne and the pianist, 
Barbara Bilach. There is no question that from the first song, ``Der 
Mueller und der Bach,'' the cello, surrogate for the words, is meant 
to dominate. The no-cartilege physicality of the choreography comes 
into play with the first trio. Sandra Brown is outstanding in various 
convolutions with her two partners, Angel Corella and Maxim Belotserkovsky. 
Slides of Ms. Ellison's images from the choreography are often striking 
as they amplify the emotions expressed by the bodies below. Duato 
is no slouch at opening up new dimensions of a dancer's performance, 
and if there is any proof that Paloma Herrera is a 20th-century dancer, 
it is in her twisting and stretched duet, beautifully danced, with 
Corella. The movement phrases are packed with surprises, including 
cartwheels and pendulum swings. Sara Mau then enters to hold her hand 
over Keith Roberts' eyes for a turbulent sequence that incorporates 
Vladimir Malakhov, powerful as ever, and Julie Kent. The full cast, 
now a lonely crowd, assembles onstage. The women's typical silhouette, 
doll-like with flexed feet, is expanded in the gymnastic contours 
of the final and imaginative duet, danced excellently by Ms. Kent 
and Malakhov (the everyman who curls up at the close). Brad Fields' 
lighting, following Duato's concept, enhanced the production. On the 
same program, Anton Dolin's ``Variations for Four,'' to music by Margaret 
Keogh, switched dancers around from a previous performance. Even this 
new cast still has to reach the top level of the Harkness Ballet production 
of the 1960s, when the choreography was somewhat different. Jose Manuel 
Carreno was now first in line, and Ethan Stiefel looked at ease in 
the second solo, with his previous jumping variation coherently rendered 
by Corella. Belotserkovsky had the adagio solo. In the main duet from 
Antony Tudor's ``Leaves Are Fading,'' Amanda McKerrow and John Gardner, 
two true Tudor dancers, movingly expressed the rapture of young love. 
Tudor's satirical ``Gala Performance'' had Giuseppe Picone, new as 
a very romantic hero, effectively playing off against Christine Dunham's 
tragic Italian ballerina. As her two rivals, Anna Liceica (Russian) 
and Ashley Tuttle (French) had the right catfight spunk. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>