<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981030.0348 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In a landmark ruling, an 11-member panel of senior Spanish judges 
decided unanimously Friday that Spain has the legal right to bring 
criminal charges against Chile's former dictator, Gen. Augusto Pinochet, 
and to seek his extradition from Britain. The judges' decision, which 
is based on a large body of international humanitarian law, runs directly 
counter to a ruling by the High Court in London. That court said on 
Wednesday that Britain had no authority to arrest the 82-year-old 
general since, it said, he had immunity for actions committed while 
he was head of state. Nonetheless it ordered that he remain in detention 
pending an appeal to the House of Lords. Pinochet was arrested two 
weeks ago at the request of a Spanish magistrate while he was on a 
visit to Britain. The decision Friday, a sweeping finding that Spain 
had jurisdiction over crimes committed by the Chilean and Argentine 
dictatorships two decades ago, is without precedent, according to 
experts in international law. They said that under international conventions 
Spain or any signatory had the right and obligation to prosecute crimes 
against humanity. The experts pointed out that several countries have 
previously prosecuted crimes, for example Nazi war crimes, which had 
been committed outside their territory, but that the countries invariably 
tried individuals who were on their soil. But the Spanish ruling affirms 
Spain's jurisdiction over a multitude of crimes against humanity committed 
over a long period by people not in Spanish custody. Until now, such 
ambitious goals have been pursued only by international tribunals. 
The Spanish decision thus opens the way for Madrid's request for Pinochet's 
extradition to face trial here on charges of genocide, terrorism and 
torture. Friday's ruling may bolster the appeal pending in Britain 
against granting the general immunity and releasing him, by reinforcing 
Spain's legal case. The decision by Spain's National Court, which 
is the country's second- highest tribunal, ends a long struggle between 
Spain's conservative government and two independent Spanish magistrates. 
For the past two years, the magistrates, responding to the relatives 
of victims, have been investigating the torturing and killing by the 
Chilean and Argentine dictatorships. But the government argued that 
they had no authority to do so and said the investigations were complicating 
Spain's diplomatic and commercial relations with Chile and Argentina. 
The National Court in Madrid met to settle the issue of jurisdiction. 
Following seven hours of public hearings Thursday and four hours of 
closed-door deliberations Friday, the 11-judge panel announced its 
decision in a tense and crowded courthouse Friday afternoon. As one 
of the judges read out that by unanimous decision ``the jurisdiction 
of Spain has been confirmed,'' there was an outburst of applause and 
sobs of relief from lawyers and relatives of victims of the South 
American dictatorships. Some shouted loudly, ``Viva, Viva la Justicia!'' 
``This is a breath of fresh air, a breath of justice, for all us,'' 
said Patricia Isaza, a 38-year-old architect from Chile. Ms. Isaza 
said she was kidnapped at the age of 16 by Chilean security and held 
and tortured for 26 months in a camp known as JIR. ``Even if Pinochet 
goes back to Chile, things will not be the same for us.'' Outside 
the courthouse, Sergio Requena, a 52-year-old Chilean engineer who 
was tortured and imprisoned for one year in 1975, said ``the door 
of justice has opened just a crack.'' He added: ``I hope that this 
is the beginning of the end of impunity.'' After the ruling was announced, 
some lawyers and human rights workers rushed to an upper floor of 
the court building to thank Baltasar Garzon, the investigating magistrate 
who set in motion the investigations into the crimes of the Chilean 
and Argentine right-wing regimes. It was Garzon, long seen here as 
a quixotic figure, who filed the request that led to Pinochet's arrest 
in London Oct. 16. European legal experts said the ruling is a strong 
signal of encouragement to prosecutors in France, Italy, Sweden and 
Switzerland where in recent days relatives of victims of the Chilean 
dictatorship have filed suits against Pinochet and several courts 
have sought his arrest. The experts said that, even if Britain eventually 
allows the former dictator to return home, the Spanish legal system 
will now be able to pursue him as well as other senior Chilean and 
Argentine military officers through arrest warrants if they travel 
and by blocking bank accounts allegedly held in their name in European 
cities. Spain could not try any of the suspects in absentia, but France, 
for instance, could. France did try Capt. Alfredo Astiz of the Argentine 
navy, in absentia, and sentenced him to life in prison for killing 
two French nuns. Garzon had already signed a number of arrest warrants 
and asked Switzerland for bank accounts to be blocked. But if the 
National Court had said Friday that Spain had no jurisdiction, Garzon 
would probably have been forced to annul these steps. Court officials 
here said that as long as Pinochet remains in Britain, Garzon will 
continue to seek his extradition, for which the formal request will 
be filed in the coming days. Two British government lawyers have been 
working with Garzon's team over the past week as it prepares the extradition 
request for London. The reason for their assistance, court officials 
said, is to insure that the request matches British technical requirements 
and is not delayed by bureaucratic complications. The Spanish government, 
though it has been opposed to the investigations, has said in recent 
days that it would comply with whatever the judiciary decided. Spanish 
lawyers said Friday that, contrary to earlier reports, the government 
need not and cannot approve or disapprove the extradition request, 
although it could slow down the necessary paperwork if it so desired. 
``The government must now send on the request because it cannot block 
it,'' said Diego Lopez Garrido, professor of constitutional law at 
the University of Castilla-La Mancha at Albacete. The National Court 
in Madrid Friday did not outline the arguments behind its ruling claiming 
jurisdiction for Spain. Carlos Cazon, the judge who made Friday's 
announcement, said the court would provide written arguments next 
week. But court officials said the ruling was based on Spanish law 
and on the large body of international humanitarian law adopted in 
recent decades, including the Geneva Conventions and the U.N. conventions 
against torture and against genocide. Countries that are parties to 
these conventions _ such as Britain and Spain _ have the right and 
the obligation to pursue crimes against humanity. There is no limit 
on place or time in pursuing such crimes. Garzon has argued that such 
grave crimes were committed against civilians in Chile and Argentina. 
The Argentine military killed or ``disappeared'' more than 10,000 
of its political opponents between 1976 and 1983. In Chile, according 
to a Chilean government report, more than 4,400 people were killed 
during Pinochet's rule between 1973 and 1990 and many thousands were 
imprisoned and tortured. Less than a dozen cases were brought to trial 
in Chile. Experts in international law welcomed the Spanish decision. 
``We are seeing a groundswell of support for international humanitarian 
law,'' said Graham Blewitt, a senior prosecutor at the tribunal in 
the Hague that deals with war crimes in the former Yugoslavia. ``Frankly, 
this support is very encouraging.'' Carlos Slepoy, an Argentine lawyer 
who was in Madrid representing the Argentine Association for Human 
Rights, also celebrated the Spanish ruling. ``At last we have heard 
that the great violators of human rights can be caught and tried anywhere,'' 
he told reporters, fighting back tears. ``For years, we read this 
in international laws, but the principle was rarely applied. We waited 
22 years to try to achieve justice. We had to come to Spain to find 
the beginning of it. Argentina and Chile have been in hiding. The 
assassins are still walking in the streets.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>