<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981030.0352 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Moore's Law _ which holds that the speed of computing doubles every 
18 months _ is a concept that is hopelessly alien to the practice 
of law. The government's antitrust lawsuit against the Microsoft Corp. 
wound up its second week in federal district court in Washington on 
Friday, and the case, which was originally expected to be argued in 
a month's time, now looks as though it might drag on until close to 
Christmas. Based on the stock market's response, it does not seem 
as though investors think the government has much of a case. Since 
the trial began, Microsoft's shares have actually risen slightly, 
closing at $105.875 Friday. Still, the case remains a wild card for 
Microsoft's prospects. George L. Priest, the John M. Olin Professor 
of Law and Economics at Yale Law School, talked about the trial and 
what it means for business. Q. You have no interest in the case beyond 
that of a well-informed bystander. What is your take on what has transpired 
thus far? A. I don't think the Justice Department has shown much of 
anything yet in the Microsoft case. They have emphasized meetings 
and memos that are ambiguous at best. But nothing I have read rules 
out the possibility that the Internet Explorer and its integration 
into Microsoft Windows is a superior product for consumers than an 
unbundled browser, such as Netscape's Navigator. And that has to be 
the ultimate standard: What is the impact on consumers? How are consumers 
worse off? Q. It seems the Justice Department is bringing an antitrust 
case in an industry whose lifeblood is speed. Even if the government 
wins its case, isn't there a risk that competitive conditions in the 
business will be far different once a remedy is proposed than they 
were when the case was brought? A. The case will be obsolete by the 
time it is settled unless the judge rules for the government and slaps 
some kind of injunction on Microsoft. That would be unfortunate for 
consumers, the economy and the world. One of the problems is that 
most of our antitrust law has been developed in the context of manufacturing, 
where if a firm has a very large market share we know it will take 
a long time to erode, because of the costs of getting into the market. 
But this is not U.S. Steel, whose monopoly took 30 years to erode. 
This is an industry where market share can be overturned in a very 
short period. Q. What sort of remedy do you think might be imposed 
if the government wins? A. If the judge puts a limitation on the Microsoft 
browser, and tells them to unbundle it, that is not so important. 
It is not a clear gain for consumers, but it will not dramatically 
affect the industry. As it is, anyone with the mildest level of computer 
sophistication can download Netscape's Navigator within a matter of 
minutes. It can't be an important restraint of trade to exclude Navigator 
when you can get it off the Internet that quickly. Q. What if the 
court ordered a breakup of Microsoft? A. I don't think Microsoft can 
be broken up. This is not a company with different plants. What are 
you going to do, put partitions in the halls of Microsoft's headquarters 
in Redmond, Wash.? The notion of breaking up Microsoft is lunacy. 
Q. Still, might a victory over Microsoft embolden the government to 
take on other high-technology companies? A. I don't think the industry 
will be thrown into a tizzy if Microsoft loses, if only because Justice 
does not have the prosecutorial resources to bring massive numbers 
of suits. This is not like the 1960s and 1970s, when the Warren Court 
began issuing decisions that effectively agreed with everything Justice 
brought before them. That type of authority did have a substantial 
impact on all industrial development in the United States, and it 
was only in the 1980s and 1990s that that sort of thrust has been 
reversed. I don't think that is going to happen here. Q. The Microsoft 
case is capturing the headlines, but the government recently brought 
an antitrust suit against Mastercard and Visa. Is this the start of 
a new period of activism by Justice in antitrust? A. I don't know 
why Justice has gotten more active. It is unfortunate that it seems 
more activist on the behalf of individual firms that at the moment 
are not doing as well as their competitors in the marketplace, be 
they American Express in the Mastercard/Visa case or Netscape Communications 
in the Microsoft action. I am a strong supporter of antitrust law, 
as a general matter. But given the increased level of competition 
in the world, we are going to need fewer antitrust cases. Monopolization 
will become less relevant because of the possibilities of entry into 
a given market. We have fewer trade restrictions now, and that allows 
foreign companies to enter and compete if there is even a threat of 
dominance. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>