<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981030.2000.2027 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As Serbian police and army units withdraw from Kosovo and some ethnic 
Albanian refugees trickle cautiously back to their homes, NATO is 
keeping up the pressure on Slobodon Milosevic. Under a U.S.-brokered 
agreement, the Serbian leader promised to reduce his forces in Kosovo 
to the levels they were at last February. That was before he launched 
a crackdown on Albanian separatists in the province. Today, NATO ordered 
the start of an airborne surveillance mission to monitor the troop 
pull out. The planes will support 2000 international observers who 
are moving into to Kosovo to verify Serbia's compliance with the agreement. 
Heading those monitors is veterans U.S. diplomat William Walker who 
speaks with us now from Bethesda, Maryland. Mr. Walker, how would 
you characterize the situation as it is today in Kosovo? I think I 
would pretty well just say ditto to what you said in your introduction. 
I think we're seeing some progress towards compliance. I think a pull 
out has begun, a fairly significant one. I think there are still places 
where they're out of compliance in terms of some units are over strength. 
Some units have not gone back and we're just going to have to keep 
the pressure on as you described. And so how do you characterize full 
compliance and is there a deadline that you would set for that? Not 
a deadline. What we are saying about in terms of compliance is that 
for all too long, the government of President Milosevic has been engaging 
his troops, his police, in acts of real repression in Kosovo. We want 
the forces that have come in lately in the last six to eight months 
to start really withdrawing to get out of the picture and certainly 
to cease the repression. As long as he is moving in a dramatic fashion 
towards that objective, I think all we will do will be continuing 
to monitor to make sure he is complying. You can't look at every unit 
and say there are 10 today; it better be down to five tomorrow or 
we'll do something very dramatic to you. The deadlines have to be 
a little more flexible than I think your question implies. Ambassador 
Walker, can you talk a little bit about the efforts to restore some 
semblance of normalcy back to Kosovo, specifically in terms of trying 
to get the Kosovars, the ethnic Albanians who are still camped out 
in the countryside, back to their homes. What kind of homes do they 
have to return to at this point and is it really safe for them to 
come back? I think as we get the word out, that some of these forces 
of repression are moving back into containment or out of the region. 
As soon as we get the word out that there are going to be, you said 
up to 2,000. It could be more than 2000 international verifiers in 
there. I think we will be able to bridge that problem of distrust, 
of fear and these people will start moving back to their homes. Obviously, 
coming back to your home after it's been destroyed or damaged or your 
crops have been ruined, there's going to be a lot of hardship in Kosovo 
over the next, this coming winter. The humanitarian organizations, 
the NGOs are in there and it's going to take some time for one, the 
word to get out and two for all the verifiers to get in there. But 
I think we already have a presence on the ground that is giving the 
sort of assurances to the people up in the hills that were fearful 
that they can now start to return. In conditions of real safety, not 
where they're going to be as worried as they were before. Mr. Walker, 
thank you very much for speaking with us. Not at all, my pleasure. 
William Walker is the head of mission for the OSCE and the Kosovo 
verification mission. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>