<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981030.2000.1258 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is the World. I'm Lisa Mullins. And if it's Friday, this must 
be the day that we ask foreign correspondents in Washington, DC just 
how they're covering the top American news of the week. Today's guests 
are Arkady Orloff of RIA Russian news agency and Radio France's Phillippe 
Reltein. This week, instead of looking around the nation's capital 
for stories, they have been gazing skyward at a space craft carrying 
history's oldest space traveler, code named TS2. Hello Houston. This 
is TS2 and let me get strung out of the for a little while. We're 
just going by Hawaii and that is absolutely gorgeous. And roger that. 
Glad you're enjoying the show. Well, I'm enjoying the show is right. 
This is beautiful. And it was a beautiful launch at Cape Canaveral, 
Florida yesterday that sent John Glenn and his six crewmates into 
space aboard Discovery. Let's start off first, gentlemen with your 
headlines. How did you capture this historic launch at Cape Canaveral 
for your readers? First, Arkady. Almost immediately after the launch, 
we flashed a news bulletin saying in Russian could be translated as 
a legendary Glenn is back in space again. And Philippe? I would say 
Glenn, a go go. Which needs no translation. It's crazy of Glenn, our 
good old days and that's the feeling and I think that was the way 
to say it. Arkady Orloff, As a Russian, I wonder from your perspective, 
how you're portraying this for your readers in Russia, specifically 
because when John Glenn went into space the first time it was so much 
a part of the competition in the space race between Russia and the 
United States. And does that at all tinge how Russians view John Glenn? 
Very much so and I would say that it's still a complication in a way 
because most of the older cosmonauts, whom we talked to in Moscow 
all said that they envied John Glenn and they would like to be in 
his shoes today and this is still a continuation of that complication, 
but on a different level. And most of the Russian, it means that this 
is an important event. This is again a legend comes true. This is 
some kind of back to the future, returning back to their younger days 
for millions of people. So. And Phillippe Reltein, I wonder what your 
editors, when you talk to them back in France are telling you to focus 
on as you cover this story and what approach are they interested in 
your taking? The sociological approach, how the Americans react to 
that and one little sentence for Bill Clinton yesterday, when he said 
if you feel patriotic today seeing John Glenn, keep it until Tuesday 
when you go voting and that's something that I see also. And that's 
something I say also. There is a certain amount of flag waving and 
a certain amount of patriotism we're getting here and I wonder if 
your mandate is to try and stay away from some of that and be a little 
bit more dispassionate for your own audiences? No, because if that 
exists, you have to transmit it as you see it. And that was the case 
yesterday. Not everywhere you had people who said this is a marketing 
operation and we have to remember that it costs a lot and that we 
have this problem each time we put a man or a woman on the shuttle, 
we don't know if those people are coming back and there is a big, 
big thing coming now with $60 billion at stake. It is a space station 
in orbit and with the Russians, with Canadians, Japanese, the Europeans. 
All that will cost a lot of money and imagine if the program is not 
popular. What would happen in case of recession or something like 
that. So we have, we need this kind of pictures, John Glenn or another 
guy and next year, you will remember that's the 30th birthday of man 
on the moon. So there is an operation here to keep all the program 
popular and probably to back that program with money and who is paying 
it? Taxpayers are paying. In our approach we are trying to do less 
circus, less hoopla and more essence and more science for example. 
For instance, today's morning story run by our agency was about that 
John Glenn experienced the weightlessness for the first time, in spite 
of the fact that he was the first to orbit. He was strapped to his 
seat 36 years ago and he managed only to fly, just float freely in 
the shuttle only yesterday. And finally, don't forget that they also 
have the first Spaniard on this mission and the first time that the 
Japanese astronaut makes your second flight, I mean the first lady 
to fly second time into space. All those elements have to be included 
to show the flight from different perspectives and we also need to 
project the idea that space is needed. We need the resources for that. 
There is still some romance left in this area of human endeavor. So 
they have to concentrate on that and do it a bit more persuaded and 
probably just covering only the crowds, the celebrities, the president's 
speeches and flags. Well, we appreciate your speaking to us about 
your coverage. Arkady Orloff, correspondent and Washington bureau 
chief for RIA Russian news agency and also Philippe Reltein, correspondent 
for Radio France. Nice to talk to you again and hope you have a nice 
weekend. Thank you. Thank you very much. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>