<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981030.2000.2997 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is the World. I'm Lisa Mullins. When Sydney, Australia hosts 
the summer Olympics in the year 2000, it will also be hosting the 
first ever green games. Four years ago the International Olympic Committee 
added the environment to the two other pillars of the Olympics, sports 
and culture. The World's Margaret Sturnstein reports from Sydney's 
future Olympic village, the symbol of the green Olympic games. Construction 
is on track at the athlete's village in Hermbush Bay, centerpiece 
of the Sydney Olympics. In September of the year 2000, more than 15,000 
athletes and team officials will stay here within walking distance 
of the Olympic stadium. The village is on a rise overlooking a pond 
and roadway with views of sports venues and nearby parklands. The 
development wouldn't look out of place in most suburban communities. 
It's a medium-density mix of low-rise houses and apartments. The difference 
though is that each of these units will be solar-powered and built 
on principles of ecologically sustainable development or ESD. Maria 
Atkinson is environment manager for Movack Lend Lease, the project's 
commercial developer. They all have the solar power panels. In addition 
to that, they all have the solar hot water service which is gas boosted. 
Then there's the water conservation. We're using a dual-pipe system, 
so one pipe feeds drinking water and the other is the recycled water. 
In most past Olympics, athletes have been housed in high-rise blocks 
that have ended up as residential white elephants for the host city. 
Sydney's organizers plan to avoid that by incorporating the village 
into an entirely new suburb. After the 2000 games, athletes housing 
will be converted into part of a development called Newington. By 
2005 it will include some 2000 dwellings and be home to about 5400 
people. The Olympics first solar village will then become the world's 
largest solar-powered suburb. The solar village has demonstrated that 
big business can be green and sensible and guess what, also profitable 
and commercial. Kathy Zoy is executive director of the government 
funded Sustainable Energy Development Authority. SEDA is one of the 
environmental partners in Newington. Zoy says the project has demanded 
a change of mindset for everyone involved, builders and developers 
in particular. It took a lot of pushing at the outset but once we 
got them to agree that it was in their commercial self interest, just 
the flood gates opened. After the games, this great Australian parklands 
suburb will continue to be developed according to market demand. While 
athletes' housing is still under construction, the first stage of 
the Newington development is now on sale. Buyers can move in by the 
end of this year and live onsite for the Olympics. That prospect, 
plus the environmental aspect is attracting these house hunters. I 
think the environmental affect is very important. It's why that we've 
got to move. and not in a year's time. The units are priced between 
$250,000 and $540,000. That's in step with the high-cost Sydney market. 
Developers report that more than half of the available properties 
have sold in the first week, mostly to people from nearby suburbs. 
We know it's going to produce a nice estate. But what's it going to 
do to the wider metropolis? What's it going to do to the surrounding 
suburbs? Geographer Kevin Dunn worries that Newington will become 
a bubble community, separate from suburbs that surround it. The area 
is about 30 minutes from downtown Sydney. It's primarily industrial 
with a mostly migrant, low-income population. But the danger then 
is that you turn these nice developments into forms of gated suburbs, 
isolated little pockets of niceness within an area of lower socio-economic 
and various types of structural problems. There's been a lot of effort 
to make sure that this suburb actually gives something to the community 
that it's being developed within. For the developers, Maria Atkinson 
counters criticism that Newington will turn inward. She agrees the 
estate is self-contained and self-dependent. But she says it will 
actually provide new services for residents in neighboring communities. 
Newington will have community facilities such as a primary school, 
a shopping center. It will have a community facility, a child minding 
center. All of this is new to this area. As construction continues 
on the next stage of Newington, everyone involved agrees the development 
as an environmental showcase would not be happening without the Olympics. 
That is the ultimate incentive. For the first time in Olympic history, 
this project is galvanizing environmentalists, officials and developers, 
all working together toward the year 2000. Then, the athletes solar 
suburb will put Sydney's green games on the global stage. For the 
World, this is Margaret Sturnstein in Sydney. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>