<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981030.2000.0374 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is the World. I'm Lisa Mullins. Yassar Arafat is acting like 
he means business. Intensifying his crackdown on Islamic militants 
today, the Palestinian leader had his police cut the telephone lines 
of Ahmed Yosein, the detained founder of Hamas. Security officials 
also said today that they have arrested more than 100 Hamas activists. 
All this comes one day after a suicide attack aimed at a bus load 
of Israeli school children killed one soldier and the attacker. Arafat 
today met with his top security advisors to chart the next stage of 
the campaign against Hamas, the group that's carried out attacks that 
have killed scores of Israelis. Arafat advisor who was at the meeting, 
says that the Palestinian authority will cut Yaseim's ties to the 
outside world. The only thing that has been decided today that the 
government will try to control connections and statements to the press, 
because it's coming at a time when we cannot afford to do that and 
when the entire Palestinian people are looking for food for the implementation 
of the agreement that we had at the Wye Plantation and that would 
benefit the Palestinian people tremendously and move them from the 
situation they are facing now that is desperate and then very difficult 
to situation. What are some of the early signs of reaction from some 
of his followers. Even if he is not under house arrest he is under 
certain restrictions. Well, I don't think that there will be any problems. 
His constituency and our people in general understand that we are 
under different circumstances and very complicated situation that 
has to do with the higher interests of the Palestinian people that 
we have to restore our land. We have to have a passage to unite our 
country and our people. We have to have our prisoners released and 
we have to have a better tomorrow than the day we are facing today. 
Although not everyone is under that same understanding. I mean Sheik 
Yaseem is a very potent symbol of opposition to a peace process that 
some complained has done very little to improve the lives of Palestinians. 
Is there a danger by taking any kind of action that Mr. Arafat might 
lose support which would then go to Hamas? No, we are not worried 
about that, the situation. I, with due respect, I think that you are 
inflating the circumstances here. Let me say this. Mr. and any of 
the other people who are arrested or detained or even, you know, under 
some kind of control. We're not in that situation because they voice 
opposition to the peace agreement or the agreement that we have signed 
with Israeli government, including the Wye Plantation agreement. This 
is not a crime in Palestine. I myself am not happy with that agreement. 
There are a lot of people who are not even Hamas followers who are 
not happy with the situation with the agreement. This is not the reason. 
There is no crime in Palestine if somebody doesn't like any political 
agreement or any political move on the side of Palestinian authority. 
The only thing that would make the authority intervene is any threat 
or act like what happened yesterday that would endanger the safety 
and the tranquillity of the Palestinian society. This is the criteria 
and it's not that he opposes you know, some reservation to the agreement 
that has been signed. It is not that anybody voices his dismay with 
the agreement, has nothing to do with this. This is a country that 
has a margin of democracy that people at the council, at the council, 
all on television, or in the press, voice very freely their fears 
and their reservations vis a vis the agreement that has been signed. 
The criteria is endangering Palestinian society and endangering the 
commitment of the Palestinian authority both international and regional. 
a close advisor to Palestinian leader Yassar Arafat, speaking with 
us from his office in Gaza. With the view from the United States, 
here is the World's Anthony North. As soon as the Wye Plantation accord 
was signed last Friday, many feared it would provoke a violent response 
from opponents on both sides. Yesterday those fears proved correct 
when a man drove a car packed with explosives at a bus carrying Jewish 
school children in Gaza. The first apparent suicide attack in six 
months. Israel's Prime Minister Benyamin Netanyahu called Yassar Arafat 
immediately afterward. And I said to him, that unless he acts immediately 
to carry out rigorously the Wye Plantation commitments that the Palestinian 
authority took with respect to security and fighting terrorism, this 
process will not go anywhere. And he promised me to do so and I hope 
he will. Within hours, Arafat was already going further than ever 
before in cracking down on the Palestinian militant group Hamas, which 
is suspected of being behind yesterday's attack. But former Palestinian 
Cabinet minister Hannan Ashrowi says Palestinians are paying a heavy 
price for those actions. The Palestinian authority is willing to go 
to any lengths to demonstrate its commitment to the agreement, even 
though it might mean actually violating the civil rights and political 
rights and human rights and if it means also entering into a domestic 
confrontation. Judith Kipper of the Center for Strategic and International 
Studies in Washington, echoes that view. But she says Yassar Arafat's 
main concern is stopping violent opposition to the Wye peace deal. 
There is of course the possibility that he will be accused of being 
more authoritarian, but I think the question is, is the crackdown 
on those who do political violence or is the crackdown on people who 
politically disagree with him. And I think there is a difference. 
Despite the warning sounded by Prime Minister Netanyahu, other Israeli 
officials have given a cautious welcome to the actions against Hamas, 
such as Cheval, the country's ambassador to Washington. The initial 
response is what we had hoped for, but I think this underlines our 
concerns about security and we'll have to see how the Palestinian 
authority will follow up now. The Clinton administration goes further. 
A State Department official told this program that Arafat is taking 
real risk by his actions and he said the administration expects to 
see a detailed Palestinian security plan over the weekend. Earlier 
this week, the Israeli prime minister put up a Cabinet discussion 
of the Wye deal, complaining that that Palestinian plan was late. 
But Judith Kipper says Netanyahu remains fully committed to the accord. 
So far there's every indication that he's on the road to implementation. 
With the events of this week, I think were political maneuvering because 
very serious parts of his own constituency are against the accomplishments 
of the Wye River negotiation. And those Israeli opponents were quick 
to draw the worst conclusions from yesterday's bomb attack. But the 
State Department official points out, it could have been much, much 
worse. Quoting an Israel paper, he said, it's very lucky that Jeep 
got in the way of the bomber. If we'd had 20 dead school children, 
we'd be in a very different position today. For the World, this is 
Andrew North. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>