<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981030.2000.2610 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
If you're like most Americans, you probably think malaria is no longer 
a major health threat but the fact is, the parasitic disease, which 
is transmitted by mosquitoes continues to kill more than a million 
people every year. Today the World Health Organization is helping 
to launch an ambitious roll back malaria campaign. WHO Director General 
Drew Harlan Broodland acknowledges that one obstacle to the effort 
is widespread ignorance about the prevalence of malaria. This is of 
course a global disease. It's a threat to all of us. And with today's 
amount of travel, anyone can really get into contact with this disease. 
Can you explain then, how a disease that was almost eradicated in 
the 1950s, how that could have turned around so much in the past 30 
years? How we could now be reaching epidemic proportions once again? 
Climate changes, environmental changes have added to the amount of 
places where the mosquito breeds. Even the global climate change has 
maybe added to the number of countries which have a climate where 
the malaria mosquito breeds and where the spread of the disease is 
coming up. So what we have seen is many more cases per year and the 
awareness of not only the human suffering, the child aspect, but also 
the economic consequences and that's a major concern. What do you 
think is the single greatest tool that could help in the fight against 
malaria? It's a broad alliance of partners from the World Bank, UNICEF, 
WHO, the private sector, the pharmaceutical companies, the research 
community because we need to develop vaccine which is today not available. 
It will take seven to 15 years to get that result but there are many 
research efforts going on and if they get sufficient support and funding, 
they will probably lead to a result. The other one is we need development 
of new drugs because the mosquito and the malaria develops a resistance 
to the existing drugs. So we need again a research effort to bring 
new drugs to the market. Do you expect malaria to become a major problem 
in the United States? Well, I think the fear of the spread of malaria 
will be also here. You have climate conditions in certain states where 
you can get this kind of disease, breeding and continuing. So there's 
no sanctuary on the planet. As WHO marks its 50th year, I wonder how 
the organization is going about trying to eradicate diseases like 
tuberculosis and malaria differently now. How the fight is different 
now than it was say, 50 years ago or 30 years ago. We have experienced 
success stories like the smallpox eradication. At the same time gradually 
we see that there are new and reemerging diseases. HIV/AIDS is one 
example. It was unheard of, completely unknown 20 years ago. And it 
is now a major threat to public health and it illustrates the changing 
picture where we can never feel complacent that we have solved the 
problem of infectious diseases. Because they do reoccur. We get new 
strains and we have to be on guard. We have to be surveying, continuously 
trying to control because the microbial world will hit back. Speaking 
to us in Washington, DC Drew Harlan Broodland is the director general 
of the World Health Organization. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>