<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981030.2000.2387 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Until a couple of years ago, Halloween would come and go largely unnoticed 
outside America's borders. But ghosts, ghouls, jack o' lanterns and 
spider webs are increasingly popping up elsewhere and not everybody's 
happy about it. Yesterday a leading French politician called the Halloween 
celebrations in his country part of a cultural globalization which 
he said, from our point of view, is a menace. Closer to home, Mexicans 
are starting to get into the creepy swing of Halloween things, but 
as the World's Frank Contraras reports from Mexico City, most Mexicans 
are preparing for this weekend's more traditional holiday, the Day 
of the Dead. Mexico City's giant La Merced market is full of traditional 
Day of the Dead items this time of year. Mexicans are preparing to 
celebrate the consecutive All Saints and Day of the Dead holidays 
this Sunday and Monday. So for the past week, people like Isabel Amarotez 
have been shopping here for candied skulls and candles which are placed 
on special altars honoring the dearly departed. Along with the skulls 
and bone shaped bread, each vendor also has plenty of witches' hats 
and jack o' lanterns on display. Amarotez says she's not tempted. 
ISABEL AMAROTEZ For me the Day of the Dead is more important than 
Halloween, no question. So I'm here to buy items for a Day of the 
Dead altar, like candy skulls and sweet bread. I'm not buying the 
Halloween stuff. Celebrating the Day of the Dead is a tradition that 
dates back century, predating even the arrival of the Spanish conquistadors 
in 1519. The Aztecs observed similar holidays which were then blended 
with Catholic ones. Many Mexicans have a strong sense of pride in 
this tradition. For them, Halloween is another example of the U.S. 
cultural invasion of Mexico. Here in Mexico, it's supposed to be the 
Day of the Dead, not Halloween. But Halloween also has its advocates 
here. Businessman Marco Bordeo is one of them. He goes to Chicago 
every year to buy discount Halloween merchandise and then sells it 
here at La Merced and around Mexico. He says there's plenty of demand. 
MARCO BORDEO I sell a lot of Halloween items, starting in June or 
July. A lot of shops that sell party items buy these things from me, 
because they want to make sure they have enough for Halloween. Bordeo 
admits Halloween is more of a commercial tradition. He knows there's 
a growing market for it in Mexico, because each year more and more 
people are dressing their children up in costumes and even taking 
them trick or treating. But that doesn't mean tradition is being left 
behind. Some Mexicans, like 24-year-old Janita Silva link Halloween 
to their own Day of the Dead commemorations. Tomorrow night, Silva 
says she'll get dressed up in a cat woman suit and go to a Halloween 
party with friends. JANITA SILVA In our Halloween parties, we dance 
in our costumes. But at the same time in my home, we put up a Day 
of the Dead altar. That's more like a family tradition. So we celebrate 
both. Silva will also go to the cemetery Sunday night and clean off 
her grandmother's grave. She says her family will stand around the 
tombstone and remember the beautiful things the old woman would say 
while she was alive. Silva says her celebration of both the Day of 
the Dead and Halloween reflects her country's ability for blending 
elements from different cultures into something uniquely Mexican. 
For the World, I'm Frank Contraras in Mexico City. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>