<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981030.2000.0804 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Iraqi's turned on their short wave radios today and heard a new station. 
This is Radio Free Iraq, whose programs are modeled on the cold war 
era broadcasts of Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty, those services 
aimed at the communist world. Radio Free Iraq's target is more specific 
- Iraq's leader Saddam Hussein. The World's Jeb Sharp has our story. 
The Clinton administration's Iraq policy has been under fire all year 
as totally inadequate. But members of Congress seem to agree on the 
merits of Radio Free Iraq. It's boosters say the new service will 
be modest, but effective, carrying on the cold war tradition of broadcasting 
into a closed society. Former ambassador to Baghdad, David Newton 
is heading up the effort. We'll be trying to do what Radio Free Europe 
did for so many years and successfully and that is to bring accurate 
and true information to people who are deprived of that kind of information, 
the kind of radio Iraqi's would have in their own country if they 
lived in a free society. Come on, stand up against evil. The infidels 
and their supporters and their allies. This is the usual Iraqi media 
diet, the relentless propaganda machine of Saddam Hussein. And the 
great battle has been initiated, the mother of all battles. Radio 
Free Iraq wants to counter Saddam's message with its own variety of 
news and commentary, using the good old American philosophy that the 
free flow of information leads to a more democratic society. No one 
believes that an hour a day is enough to topple Saddam Hussein on 
its own, but Ken Pollack of the National Defense University believes 
it sends a crucial message of resistance to the Iraqi people I think 
what Radio Free Iraq is designed to do is to keep the pressure on 
Saddam and to keep a sense in Iraqi population that there is a benefit, 
a reason to oppose Saddam and that perhaps if the opportunity presents 
itself, they ought to take advantage of it. Whether it's a popular 
revolt that topples Saddam or a coup by Army officers or an assassin 
is unclear. Who knows? The man may wind up dying in his bed. But Masawi 
of the opposition group, the Iraqi National Congress, is much more 
pessimistic. He had hoped for a radio service that would take on the 
regime directly. You have to remember one thing. The people in Iraq 
are extremely cynical about how the outside world view their situation. 
They blame Saddam Hussein for the tragedy they're living through on 
a daily basis. But they still look back at 1991 and see that American 
troops, allied forces, stood by while Saddam Hussein crushed their 
uprising. We need to renew the will within the Iraqi people to rise 
up again. We need to put the confidence they need that the world will 
stand by them this time and they will not be let down like they were 
let down back in 1991. Radio Free Iraq will not do that. But State 
Department officials say Radio Free Iraq has a very specific mandate, 
to broadcast independent objective material and to be neither a mouthpiece 
for the opposition nor a mouthpiece for the Clinton administration. 
Middle east analyst Anthony Cortisman argues it's an impossible distinction. 
The problem with calling this Radio Free Iraq is it's clearly U.S. 
sponsored. As a result, any Iraqi nationalist can be convinced that 
anyone who speaks on it is to some extent a traitor or someone who 
has given up supporting his national cause. It simply does not make 
sense to openly label movements and communication systems as U.S. 
sponsored. Cortisman argues it won't help an already fragmented opposition 
to gain support inside Iraq if it's seen as allied with the United 
States. Even worse, says Cortisman is that now Congress has authorized 
$97 million for opposition efforts to overthrow Saddam Hussein, Radio 
Free Iraq will be linked in Iraqi eyes to that military effort. But 
Gene Sosan, the author of a forthcoming memoir about his long career 
with Radio Liberty, broadcasting to the former Soviet Union, says 
the impact of Radio Free Iraq should not be underestimated. But we 
didn't know when we were shooting these arrows into the air that we 
were getting any results. But over the years, we kept getting feedback 
and gradually we began to get a rather good sample of our listening 
audience which included not only common people, but perhaps more important, 
the elite audience of intellectuals, scientists and people of the 
arts and people even in the party. It's Sosan's belief that if this 
new venture reaches a similar cross section of people in Iraq, change 
will come in time. But despite such optimism, Radio Free Iraq has 
plenty of skeptics. Very few of them feel strongly enough about it 
to quibble over the $5 start up costs. Much more disturbing they say, 
is how slight a tool it seems in the absence of a more convincing 
strategy for bringing down Saddam Hussein. For the World, I'm Jeb 
Sharp. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>