<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981030.1600.0359 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The fighting has stopped in Kosovo and ethnic Albanians are slowly 
starting to return to their homes or what's left of them. Many are 
still fearful that Serb police are too close for comfort. But Serb 
villagers don't feel safe either. VOA's Laurie Kassman visited some 
villagers on the road to Malasevo and has this report. They come on 
foot, by horse-drawn cart, or tractor, by twos and threes to see if 
it's safe to come home, and for many, if there is a home to come back 
to. Abne Castro Dee has come to the village of Cataluca to help his 
friend fix up a room in what is left of his house. For the past several 
months, Abne gave refuge to his friend and his friend's extended family 
of 24. Across the field, two women wash the few clothes they have 
found in a house they had to abandon when the fighting erupted in 
earnest about a few months ago. There's nothing left inside. It's 
burned, part of it. It's burned and there are graffiti inside saying 
"Serbia" and stuff like that. And they've taken so many things. Basically, 
it's a mess. The women and children are not ready to return just yet. 
They are still afraid. As they are talking, a Serb police truck passes 
on the road above the village. They're instantly nervous and take 
their children to hide behind some trees. She said she gets upset, 
frustrated when she sees them passing like that, because even children 
are the ones that get really scared when they see police officers 
running by or passing by. The Serb police fade from view and within 
minutes, a young bearded man saunters down the hillside. He calls 
himself, Druga. He says he will respect the cease fire but he won't 
lay down his weapon. He wears the khaki uniform of the rebel ethnic 
Albanian Kosovo Liberation Army. A brand new walkie talkie is strapped 
to his waist. "Only the independence of Kosovo," he says, "will bring 
a true peace." Farther up the road, three Serb militias sit inside 
an ambulance parked in front of an abandoned gas station that used 
to be a Serb military outpost. They nervously finger their guns as 
a car pulls up to ask directions. Three kilometers beyond is the abandoned 
town of Marashevo, once considered a stronghold of the KLA rebels. 
A pile of rubble is all that remains of a group of small shops in 
the center. What buildings do stand are mere skeletons, burned out 
shells of what they once were. There is no life here except for a 
few stray dogs lounging in the afternoon sun. Then a carload of men 
arrive to inspect the damage. Fourteen-year-old Mohammed and his young 
brother walk in from a nearby field. "We're looking for our cows," 
Mohammed says. When his family fled during the fighting three months 
ago, he says they had to leave everything behind, including the three 
cows. Now Mohammed wants to find them and bring them home. Laurie 
Kassman, VOA News on the road to Marashevo. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>