<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981030.1600.0674 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The economic community of West African states opened its 21st annual 
summit Friday in Nigeria. The 16 member countries are working on an 
eventual monetary union in the year 2000. Despite a number of steps 
in that direction, this year's summit is not a celebration of a job 
almost completed. VOA's John Pitman in Abuja reports the summit is 
focused on finding ways to resolve a security crisis as well as ways 
to prevent the spread of insecurity in the future. With the year 2000 
deadline for the creation of a regional monetary union just over a 
year away, the leaders of the economic community of West African states, 
ECOWAS, say insecurity is the greatest threat to economic growth, 
cooperation, and development in the sub region. It was a theme echoed 
by South African president, Nelson Mandella, who addressed the summit's 
opening ceremony in his capacity as the chairman of the Southern Africa 
development community, SADEC. The greatest weapon that. Mr. Mandella 
cited the ongoing civil strife in Congo Kinshasa as an example of 
a conflict which has already drawn in its neighbors and which could 
spread further unless dealt with quickly and carefully. Picking up 
Mr. Mandella's warning, Nigerian leader, General Abdul Salami Abubacar 
who holds the rotating chairmanship of ECOWAS urged the group's members 
to implement a conflict resolution mechanism which was proposed last 
year. The proposed mechanism would provide a unified diplomatic response 
to crises. It would also include a regional peacekeeping force which 
would be modeled on the ECOWAS force now serving in Liberia and Sierra 
Leone. In addition to security issues, the 16 ECOWAS members will 
use this summit to discuss economic and trade questions. While all 
16 members have committed themselves to forming a monetary union similar 
to the European monetary union in the year 2000, most of the members 
have fallen behind in their efforts to meet a number of criteria for 
membership, such as holding inflation to a single digit. Paul Ogwuma 
is the chairman of the ECOWAS Committee of Governors. Those to whom 
that our country in that regard. After the opening ceremony on Sunday, 
the leaders watch a bonfire of drugs confiscated in a regional anti-drug 
smuggling program. Friday evening, the members met privately to discuss 
the details of the proposed security mechanism, work on the timetable 
for monetary union, and select a new chairman. Nigeria will hand over 
the gavel to the new chairman in a ceremony Sunday morning. John Pitman, 
VOA News, Abuja. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>