<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981030.1600.2155 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Financial analysts are calling upon the United States, the European 
Union, and Japan to help all the rest of the world out of recession. 
In today's final report of a five-part series on the Asian crisis, 
Dateline looks at the challenge the crisis has created for the three 
global economic super powers. Here's Linda Cashden. Factories are 
silent in parts of Asia, Latin America, and Russia. Construction projects 
are at a halt. The first step toward recovery, economists reason, 
must be to restart economic activity so that jobs can be created and 
with them, income. To stimulate production, however, we must first 
stimulate demand, orders for factory products, buildings, bridges, 
and so on. Economist Lawrence Shimeran of Washington's Economic Strategy 
Institute says demand must originate in the world's two healthiest 
economies. The United States and Western European are the only sources 
of demand anywhere in the world economy. If either or both of us start 
seeing slippage, we will be not only in global recession, it will 
make it virtually impossible for Asia to recover, and this kind of 
thing can spiral downward. The consequences are so huge that in our 
judgment, the priority everywhere in the world has to be promoting 
economic growth. The most effective way to spur demand, Mr. Shimeran 
says, is to lower interest rates. That encourages people to borrow 
money which increases the amount of money in circulation and stimulates 
spending. The United States has lowered interest rates twice in the 
last month and has pressured Germany to do the same. However, Morgan 
Stanley international economist Joseph Quinlan says in order to prepare 
for the launch of its single currency, the Euro, in January, the European 
Union must bring all interest rates down to the present German rate. 
That could be difficult for countries like Spain and Ireland. For 
that reason, Mr. Quinlan says, Germany is reluctant to lower its interest 
rates even further in order to provide a global stimulus. That is 
legitimate in the sense that we're just, you know, days away from 
seeing the introduction of single currency. Some people would argue 
though that this is looking inward and not outward and realizing that 
very drastic times require drastic measures. The last thing the world 
needs is for the Euro introduction to be brought forward in a disorderly 
manner, but at the same time, the liquidity conditions around the 
world require a lower interest rate. Mr. Quinlan says debt forgiveness 
looms as another possible means of lessening the current global financial 
crisis, more specifically, restructuring the billions of dollars of 
Asian debt that exists. In essence, Mr. Quinlan says that would mean 
asking the banks that lent the money in the first place to accept 
repayment at a fraction of what they are owed. U.S. and European reactions 
to that possibility differed too, Mr. Quinlan says, because European 
banks are owed about five times what U.S. banks stand to collect. 
And then says Counsel on Foreign Relations Economist Bruce Stokes, 
"There is the issue of trade." Who will help increase Asia's desperately 
needed export earnings by buying the region's products? Thusfar, Mr. 
Stokes says the United States has done most of the buying. Traditionally, 
the Europeans have no real philosophical inhibitions against imposing 
quotas, against imposing various restraints on imports. They do not 
have an import lobby as we do to combat those kinds of protectionist 
measures so there's no countervailing domestic political force to 
offset the impulse towards protectionism, and there is the real threat 
of trade diversion when they do that. In other words, they will not 
accept the products we begin to see a flood into our market of those 
kinds of products. That is why at the moment, Mr. Stokes say the United 
States is running a current account deficit and European a surplus. 
U.S. trade representative Charlene Barshevsky agrees that the European 
Union is simply not doing its share. Using steel as an example, the 
E.U. imports are half of what the U.S. does in steel from Russia. 
The E.U. imports one-tenth the volume of steel from Japan as the United 
States does. We are encouraging the E.U., as I said, to liberalize 
restrictions that it may have in place whether steel or autos or other 
areas so that it can act more fully as an engine of growth. If the 
European Union does not liberate its trade restrictions, Ms. Barshevsky 
says the trade disparity could lead to new trans-Atlantic tensions. 
In fact, VOA correspondent Ron Pennstein reports, at the moment, the 
European Union's preoccupations are eurocentric, not global. Europe 
has already won the battles of establishing a single market and agreeing 
on a common currency, the Euro. The new currency makes its debut in 
January alongside the national currencies in 11 of the European Union's 
15 countries. The new German government has pledged to reverse budget 
cuts taken by the outgoing government of Helmut Kohl. The new center 
left German governor is already arguing with the European Central 
Bank based in Frankfurt. Many of the leaders that met here in Austria 
say their biggest job is fighting unemployment, and to do that, they 
have to create growth. In its economic forecast, the European Union 
says economic growth in the 15-member states will be 2.4 percent next 
year instead of the previous three percent. The European Commission 
says Europe will not be able to increase imports from Russia and Japan 
until economic growth improves. The European government says there 
is a need to inflate themselves from the global economic crisis. VOA 
correspondent Ron Pennstein reporting from Austria. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>