<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981030.1600.0857 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The World Bank joined several U.N. agencies Friday in launching a 
campaign to fight one of the world's most deadly and costly diseases: 
malaria. Economic aspects of fighting malaria are considered a central 
element of the campaign, as the disease is most prevalent in poor 
countries, particularly in Sub-Saharan Africa. VOA's Max Rustin reports. 
The latest campaign against malaria stands out from past campaigns 
malaria stands out from past campaigns for one important reason: the 
inclusion of the World Bank as one of its primary supporters. World 
Bank president, James Wolfenson. What is crucial is for us to mobilize 
the funds to approach the issue from economics as well as social and 
humanitarian issues to try and make the case to financiers that this 
is an area which is central to the development activity most particularly 
in Africa. The campaign was launched by World Health Organization 
director, Groe Harlem Bruntland, who wasted no time in drawing attention 
to the economic impact of malaria. Not only does malaria kill about 
one million people each year, she says, in Sub-Saharan Africa, it 
also slashes economic output. One has calculated that there can be 
a 12 percent reduction in income solely due to the affect on malaria 
on the economic output. To help counter this reduction, U.N. and World 
Bank officials are asking for stronger support from local governments 
and international donors. United Nations Children's Fund director, 
Carol Bellamy, says there are some signs of progress in the participation 
of local governments, particularly in Uganda and Tanzania. The government 
of Uganda and Tanzania recently drastically reduced taxes on mosquito 
nets and on insecticides, so that's a way in which government can 
actually make a commitment and that has an impact, and that will be 
easier to get the bed nets into the country, and that will have a 
greater impact on reducing malaria. U.N. and World Bank officials 
say another area they hope the campaign will improve is the relationship 
between international pharmaceutical companies and the fight against 
malaria. They say only one major pharmaceutical firm is now making 
a serious attempt to develop new anti-malaria drugs down from several 
a few years ago. They say most companies now look at the problem as 
one concerning only poor countries, an image campaign organizers hope 
to change by stressing the economic benefits of developing appropriate 
drugs. Mr. Wolfenson says he is convinced general international funding 
for health programs that distribute appropriate drugs should not be 
a problem. He says the most difficult aspect may be in getting the 
governments of developing countries to focus on the issue so that 
resources are applied effectively, an area in which the World Bank 
has extensive experience. Max Rustin, VOA News, United Nations. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>