<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981030.1600.1333 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Well, Halloween is almost here, and it's a live and well in this country. 
In fact, the costumes and candy, cards, pumpkins, and novelty toys 
began right after America's Labor Day in early September. But modern 
Halloween has its roots deep in ancient pagan tradition. VOA's Adam 
Phillips has more. American Halloween has had its commercial side 
for years, but few of those in today's over 40 crowd ever thought 
this holiday would come to rival Christmas in popularity, as measured 
by sales figures. Susan Smith represents the National Confectioners 
Association, whose members she predicts will sell $1.7 billion worth 
of candy this year. That figure includes over nine million kilograms 
of orange, yellow, and white candy corn alone. Halloween is the largest 
selling candy holiday and has been for a long time. But Halloween 
has ballooned as a holiday as far as trick or treating, as far as 
people having displays out, as far as parties. It's really turned 
into a holiday where Americans go all out. Especially with costumes 
and masks. To many children and a growing number of adults, Halloween 
means permission to get a little wild, says Verna Gates, a folklorist 
with the University of Alabama. People parading in costumes, we've 
done this for centuries. I think there is something basic and essential 
to our human nature that at least one day a year, we want to throw 
off our normal identity and try something a little different. Ms. 
Gates says that Halloween, or Old Hallow's Eve, is rooted in a three-day 
Christian festival that includes All Saints Day and All Souls Day, 
a time to remember and pray for the dead. These celebrations are themselves 
based in pagan religious practices, mostly of agrarian peoples. And 
at that time, all things could happen. In fact, this three-day period 
between October 31st and November 2nd where the walls kind of blur 
with the past, present, and the future kind of mingle together. Men 
can dress as women, women can dress as men, and spirits come into 
our world, and we can go into their world. It is the Irish who are 
credited with bringing Halloween to America. In their ancient lore, 
the time of transition between the riotous growth of summer and the 
deathlike stillness of winter was mirrored by a thinning of the boundaries 
between the living and the dead. Irish legend said that when the dead 
came to call, the living had to be ready. Verna Gates explains this 
direct precursor to the trick or treat ritual of today. No one wanted 
to appear stingy to their ancestors. You didn't. That was a bad thing 
to do. You wanted to appear gracious. And should there be spirits 
or elves or even ghosts coming to visit you, you didn't want to offend 
them. You wanted to make sure that you had plenty of food and hospitality 
for them so they could go happily back to their spirit world and bother 
you no more. Some people, especially witches, actually like to get 
bothered that way. And what would Halloween be without witches. Well, 
don't look just for the black cloak type with the pointy nose, broom 
stick, and boiling cauldron. According to Phyllis Kuwat, Manhattan 
law, modern-day witch, and author of "Book of Shadows," a witch is 
on a positive spiritual path. People need to know what that means. 
And I say if somebody is paying attention, nature is the teacher. 
For modern-day witches, Halloween, which they call by the Celtic name, 
Sauwen, is the holiest day of the year because of it's heightened 
possibilities for communion with the unseen energies of the earth. 
Miss Kuwat says that awareness could be relevant to everyone at the 
bittersweet time of year when Halloween comes. Halloween is a very 
magical time of year. Even if we're living in cities and we can't 
help but see the darkness all around us. They roll the clocks back 
this weekend and it got dark very early. And you're enveloped in that 
kind of chill winter. So it's a time of repose and rest and like primal 
kinds of sleep. And in sleep come dreams. And it's from dreams that 
new life comes. And there's this mystery and the reconciliation of 
opposites of impossible things, you know, that life emerges from darkness. 
And at the heart of the mystery is the power of love, the green of 
spring. Something to think about along with all that candy corn. I'm 
Adam Phillips. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>