<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981108.1830.0594 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The death toll is now estimad at 10,000, making Mitch the deadliest 
atlantic hurricane in more than two centuries. The worst storm in 
the memory of many Americans is hurricane Andrew which devastated 
south Florida in 1992. It killed 58 people. In fact,he combined death 
toll from all the major storms and floo to hit the U.S. over the last 
decade is less than 1,200, a tenth of the toll in hondus and Nicaragua. 
In our Hemisphere, there have been few disasters that compare. Managua, 
1972, 11,000 lled by an earthquake. Mexico cit 1985, twin earthquakes 
kill more than 8,000. But even these catastrophes may dwarfed by the 
still-rising ath toll from hurricane Mitch. As the search for bodies 
continues in Honduras and Nicaragua, the survivo the face a bleak 
future. Here's ABC's Ron Claiborne All day long, they cross the river 
in leaky wooden barges, goi home. Here we met Julia Rodriguez, on 
her way to see if her mother had rvived the storm. Rodriguez, who 
lives in the capital, Tegucigalpa, hadn't heard from R mother since 
last week when hurricane Mitch ravaged Honduras. The road to E house 
where she was born is long, winding and pocked witlandslides. But 
she MA it. Her town was T ABC's world news tonig destroyed. But Julia's 
mother was okay. "As soons I saw my mother," she says, "I felt like 
my life had been returned to me." This was one small, Y story in a 
country that has suffered so much death and destruction and is only 
now struggling to its feet. Reign aid is finally beginning to reach 
some of the towns that have been without od or water, virtually cut 
off from the rest of the world. All of the roads out of tegucigalpa 
are severed, like this one in El chimbo, forcing hondurans to improvise 
-- to move atever aid they can to the areas outside the capital. Meanwhile, 
the sad search for more victi goes on. Buried in the side of a iff, 
where several shanties slid into the river, they find body, that of 
a boy maybe years old. One knows who he is. Directly across the river 
from where the body was found, sherwin Ramos wanders among thwreckage 
that used to be his home. When the nghborhood on T other side collapsed 
into the river, it triggered a Tidal wave that wash away his house. 
"It was horrible," he says. "It took everything. It washed away everything 
we had here." Ramos lives in a Shelter now. He has no idea whe or 
how he will find ather home. He's just one of an estimated 1 million 
hondurans, one out of every S people, who have noome. Ron Claiborne, 
ABC, tegucigalpa, Honduras. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>