<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981108.0755 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Nationwide elections Sunday were for governors and members of congress, 
but Venezuelans also were deciding the political fortunes of a failed 
coup leader running for president on an anti-corruption, anti-establishment 
platform. Supported by millions of peasants and shantytown dwellers, 
a new movement led by Hugo Chavez, who took up arms against the government 
six years ago, appeared poised for a strong showing in Sunday's congressional 
vote. Chavez is also the front-runner to win the Dec. 6 presidential 
election. With Venezuelan politics taking on overtones of class warfare, 
officials feared an outbreak of violence. They dispatched about 100,000 
soldiers and police to ensure peaceful voting, expelled the local 
election board in the country's second-most populous state, and prohibited 
the sale of liquor and the carrying of weapons. President Rafael Caldera, 
whose army chief recently implied the armed forces would seek to block 
Chavez's rise to power, cast his ballot and declared the vote ``an 
expression of the will of the people.'' In a country where fraud allegations 
often surround elections, Caldera promised the results would be ``respected 
completely and in a transparent, clean and honest way.'' About 11 
million of Venezuela's 23 million residents are eligible to vote, 
and by midday Sunday, turnout looked strong. The voting was plagued 
by long lines and confusion over complicated ballots, however. Voting 
machines that were being used for the first time in Venezuela malfunctioned 
in many balloting stations. At 4 p.m. local time (2000 GMT), when 
voting stations were supposed to close, election authorities announced 
on nationwide TV that the deadline would be extended for at least 
two hours because many people were still waiting to vote. ``The turnout 
apparently has been massive,'' Rafael Parra Perez, head of the national 
election council, told reporters. He said about 10 percent of the 
voting machines malfunctioned. In a front-page plea to its readers, 
the Caracas newspaper El Universal tried to calm tensions. ``We call 
for serenity, balance and strict respect for the electoral results, 
as an expression of a sacred social pact,'' it said. Despite the surging 
popularity of Chavez's Patriotic Pole coalition, Venezuela's two oldest 
parties _ the center-left Democratic Action Party and the conservative 
Copei Party _ could benefit from well-greased political machines bringing 
out the vote Sunday for 23 governors, 48 senators, 189 members of 
congress and 391 state assembly members. Patriotic Pole stands a good 
chance of winning the largest share of Venezuela's congress, which 
is currently dominated by Copei and Democratic Action. ``I am optimistic 
because the people are alert, with their eyes wide open,'' said Chavez 
as he voted Sunday amid shouts of ``Hugo! Hugo!'' The one presidential 
candidate who seems to be able to channel anti-Chavez sentiment is 
Henrique Salas, a Yale-educated businessman seen as pro-business and 
pro-markets. But Salas doesn't seem to have the passionate popular 
support enjoyed by Chavez, and he does not have much political machinery 
to bring out the vote for his center-right Project Venezuela Party 
on Sunday. President Caldera's party, Convergence, which broke away 
from Copei five years ago, is not expected to be a major player in 
these elections. The traditional parties are expected to do better 
in the gubernatorial races, where many of the candidates are incumbents 
who have spent years handing out political favors. Some of the candidates 
running on Chavez's ticket are former army officers who participated 
in his 1992 coup attempt against then-President Carlos Andres Perez. 
Perez himself is running for senate while under house arrest in his 
home state of Tachira pending charges of illegal enrichment. If he 
wins as expected, he will receive parliamentary immunity and be freed. 
Many people blame Copei and Democratic Action for the country's declining 
living standards and for squandering Venezuela's vast oil wealth. 
``Chavez is the antithesis of the democratic decay this country has 
had,'' said Ivan Hernandez, a 52-year-old high school teacher who 
said he is voting for Patriotic Pole. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>