<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981108.0131 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A trial delayed 23 years by Bangladesh's bitter and often bloody politics 
culminated Sunday with a judge convicting and ordering death for 15 
former military commanders in the 1975 assassination of the country's 
first prime minister. Four others, including a former junior minister 
for information, were acquitted in the killing of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, 
father of current Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina. After taking office 
in 1996, Hasina used her power to bring her father's killers to trial, 
saying ensuring justice would help entrench democracy in this volatile 
country. Thousands of followers of Sheikh Mujib, as he is popularly 
known in Bangladesh, danced in the streets outside the courtroom to 
celebrate the verdict by Dhaka District Judge Kazi Golam Rasul. Shouts 
of ``justice has prevailed!'' rang out. Rasul ordered the sentences 
carried out in public by firing squad. Those convicted have the right 
to appeal. Rahman, who led the country's independence war against 
Pakistan in 1971, was gunned down by rebellious soldiers at his Dhaka 
residence on Aug. 15 in 1975. Most of his family was also killed that 
day; two daughters survived because they were out of the country on 
holiday. Months earlier, Rahman had instituted one-party rule and 
gave himself more powers. His critics had accused him of authoritarian 
rule and corruption, but his daughter says he was trying to ensure 
order and would have restored democracy if he had been given time. 
Rahman's killers granted themselves amnesties, and in the ensuing 
political turmoil no one ever moved to bring them to trial until Hasina 
came to power. In its 27 years of history Bangladesh has witnessed 
the assassination of two heads of government _ the first was Rahman; 
three military coups; and 19 failed coup attempts. Sunday's verdict 
ended the country's first trial of coup leaders in a civil court. 
Military tribunals were set up to try the leaders of other coups. 
After 149 days of hearings, the verdict was handed down to retired 
army officers Syed Farooq Rahman, Sultan Shahriyar Rashid Khan, Mohiuddin 
Ahmed, Khandaker Abdur Rashid, Aziz Pasha, Shariful Haq Dalim, Bazlul 
Huda, Noor Chowdhury, Mohiuddin Ahmed, Rashed Chowdhury, Ahmed Shariful 
Hasan, Kishmat Hashem, Abdul Majed, Nazmul Ansar and Moslemuddin Ahmed. 
The judge found Taheruddin Thakur, Abdul Wahab Joardar, Marfat Ali 
Shah and Hashem Mridha not guilty. Only five of the accused _ Syed 
Farooq Rahman, Khan, Ahmed, Wahab and former junior Information Minister 
Thakur _ were in court to hear the verdicts. The government is trying 
to track down the others, all believed to have fled Bangladesh. Fearing 
the verdict would spark violence, authorities had deployed more than 
10,000 security forces in Dhaka, the capital city of 9 million. Political 
violence, which is common in Bangladesh, escalated on the eve of the 
verdict on Saturday when clashes between opposition activists and 
supporters of Hasina killed one person in Dhaka. The government accused 
the opposition of trying to derail the trial. Opposition leader Khaleda 
Zia denied the charge, accused Hasina's government of incompetence 
and corruption, and called for a nationwide general strike Monday 
and Tuesday. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>