<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981108.0351 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A trial delayed 23 years by Bangladesh's bitter and bloody politics 
culminated on Sunday with a judge convicting and ordering death for 
15 former military commanders in the 1975 assassination of the country's 
first prime minister. Four others, including a former junior minister 
for information, were acquitted in the killing of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, 
father of current Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina, because there wasn't 
enough evidence against them. After taking office in 1996, Hasina 
used her power to bring her father's killers to trial, saying ensuring 
justice would help entrench democracy in this volatile country. Thousands 
of followers of Sheikh Mujib, as he is popularly known in Bangladesh, 
danced in the streets outside the courtroom to celebrate the verdict 
by Dhaka District Judge Kazi Golam Rasul. Shouts of ``justice has 
prevailed!'' rang out. Hasina visited her former home where her father 
was executed shortly after the verdict was announced. ``Bangladesh 
will be free of a curse the day the killers will be executed,'' Hasina 
told reporters as she broke into tears. Rasul ordered the sentences 
carried out in public by firing squad, a departure from the normal 
practice of death by hanging. He said this would be a lesson to the 
army which had failed in its duty to protect the leader of the nation. 
The convicted men said they would appeal the sentence in a higher 
court. Rahman, who led the country's independence war against Pakistan 
in 1971, was gunned down by rebellious soldiers at his Dhaka residence 
on Aug. 15 in 1975. Most of his family was also killed that day; two 
daughters survived because they were out of the country on holiday. 
Months earlier, Rahman had instituted one-party rule and gave himself 
more powers. His critics had accused him of authoritarian rule and 
corruption, but his daughter says he was trying to ensure order and 
would have restored democracy if he had been given time. Rahman's 
killers granted themselves amnesties, and in the ensuing political 
turmoil no one ever moved to bring them to trial until Hasina came 
to power. In its 27 years of history Bangladesh has witnessed the 
assassination of two heads of government _ the first was Rahman; three 
military coups; and 19 failed coup attempts. Sunday's verdict ended 
the country's first trial of coup leaders in a civil court. Military 
tribunals were set up to try the leaders of other coups. After 149 
days of hearings, the verdict was handed down to retired army officers 
Syed Farooq Rahman, Sultan Shahriyar Rashid Khan, Mohiuddin Ahmed, 
Khandaker Abdur Rashid, Aziz Pasha, Shariful Haq Dalim, Bazlul Huda, 
Noor Chowdhury, Mohiuddin Ahmed, Rashed Chowdhury, Ahmed Shariful 
Hasan, Kishmat Hashem, Abdul Majed, Nazmul Ansar and Moslemuddin Ahmed. 
The judge found Taheruddin Thakur, Abdul Wahab Joardar, Marfat Ali 
Shah and Hashem Mridha not guilty. Only five of the accused _ Syed 
Farooq Rahman, Khan, Ahmed, Wahab and former junior Information Minister 
Thakur _ were in court to hear the 90-minute verdict. The government 
is trying to track down the others, all believed to have fled Bangladesh. 
One of the convicted men, retired Major Bazlul Huda, was extradited 
to Bangladesh on Sunday from Bangkok, Thailand, where he was arrested 
on shoplifting charges, police said. He was flown in on a special 
flight to Dhaka. Fearing the verdict would spark violence, authorities 
had deployed more than 10,000 security forces in Dhaka, the capital 
city of 9 million. One person was killed on the eve of the verdict 
on Saturday in clashes between opposition activists and supporters 
of Hasina On Sunday, a group of people in the southern city of Chittagong 
went on a rampage after hearing the verdict, attacking homes and damaging 
25 shops and 30 vehicles. But on the whole, Bangladesh appeared to 
take the verdict with calm. Hussein Mohammad Ershad, former president 
and the leader of the third largest party in the country, welcomed 
the verdict saying the trial had been held in accordance with the 
law and people should accept it. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>