<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981108.0785 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Police cruised streets in the western resort city of Mazatlan on Sunday, 
on watch for trouble as voters in four Mexican states cast ballots 
in elections seen as an important test of political parties' strength 
ahead of the 2000 presidential vote. The governor's race in Sinaloa, 
home to Mazatlan, was the most closely watched. Pre-election polls 
showed support split nearly evenly between the candidates of the ruling 
Institutional Revolutionary Party, known as the PRI, and the conservative 
National Action Party. The PRI _ which has held the presidency and 
most statehouses for 69 years, and which has won five of seven gubernatorial 
elections so far this year _ was likely to hold onto a key governorship 
in central Puebla state. The left-center Democratic Revolution Party, 
or PRD, appeared to have a chance of gaining its second governorship 
in the small central state of Tlaxcala. Elections for state legislators 
and mayors in Michoacan were seen as a test of support for Mexico 
City Mayor Cuauhtemoc Cardenas, an expected PRD presidential contender 
whose support is based in that western state. Voting appeared to be 
proceeding without problems in the four states, although attempted 
voter-buying was reported in Sinaloa. Witnesses said PRI and National 
Action activists were out in some neighborhoods offering money to 
those who would vote for their candidates. Nacional Action leaders 
in Puebla accused pro-PRI taxi drivers of offering transportation 
to supporters of the ruling party. There were no immediate responses 
from the parties. After the 1997 midterm elections, when the PRI lost 
control of the lower house of Congress and of Mexico City, the party's 
future had been in question. Its move toward selecting candidates 
through open primaries is believed to have helped the PRI recover 
strength by allowing it to offer strong nominees, observers say. ``There 
were doubts early in the year about the PRI's ability to win elections. 
Now it is adapting to a more competitive elections system in Mexico,'' 
said Armand Peschard, an analyst with the Center for Strategic and 
International Studies in Washington. A gubernatorial victory in Sinaloa 
would be a great show of strength for the PRI or for its rival, National 
Action, he said. Sinaloa state is plagued by drug-trafficking and 
high unemployment that has forced many residents to move _ some to 
the United States _ in search of jobs. The PRI hopes internal reforms 
like the primary used to choose candidate Juan S. Millan, a former 
labor leader, will keep Sinaloa's 1.44 million voters loyal to the 
party. Prior to this year, the PRI chose such candidates in back-room 
deals at state assemblies. Millan has built his campaign on stronger 
anti-drug efforts. Many of the leaders of Mexico's largest drug cartels 
were born or lived in Sinaloa, including deceased drug lord Amado 
Carrillo Fuentes and the Arellano Felix brothers, now reputedly the 
country's top traffickers. National Action candidate Emilio Goicochea 
has focused on discontent with the Pacific Coast state's continuing 
problems of low economic growth, crime and drugs. Everyone agrees 
the state's image needs a boost. ``To guarantee jobs, investment, 
and education, we must change the state's image as soon as possible. 
There's no other way. We can't allow for the name of Sinaloa to be 
immediately associated with drug trafficking,'' Millan said recently. 
The political fortunes of three men widely seen as potential presidential 
candidates in 2000 could be affected by the results of the state races. 
Old guard Gov. Manuel Bartlett could see his presidential prospects 
boosted by a PRI victory in Puebla, whose governorship he will be 
leaving after the elections. Interior Minister Francisco Labastida, 
also of PRI, could be helped by a ruling-party victory in his home 
state of Sinaloa. Cardenas would get a boost from PRD victories in 
Tlaxcala or Michoacan, a state he once governed. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>