<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981108.1830.0898 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In "focus" this evening -- fighting the war on crime by going after 
the gunmakers. NBC's Pete Williams reports on the city that is leading 
the way. The city of New Orleans, where crime is down dramatically 
in the past few years, now hopes that by going to court, it can cut 
crime even more. New Orleans has become the first city to sue America's 
leading makers of handguns, claiming that gun crime and accidental 
shootings cost the city millions of dollars a year in police and medical 
services. We seek to recover damages, damages that the city and its 
taxpayers have suffered from the gun industry's sale of guns that 
are not safe. New Orleans claims that firearms companies know guns 
can fall into the wrong hands, stolen by criminals or picked up at 
home by children. In its lawsuit, the city says manufacturers fail 
to build in safety features, knowing full well their products could 
include such things as briefcase-style locks, already available, that 
allow a gun to be fired only after the user dials in the combination. 
Or systems now being developed that would keep the firing mechanism 
locked until the owner, wearing a radio transmitter, picks up the 
gun. But the firearms industry fears that the city's real agenda is 
gun control. They're trying to use the courts to achieve what the 
population, the voters, have not wanted to do, which is to regulate 
legitimate use of firearms. Legal experts say one big question is 
whether the safety measures New Orleans calls for would interfere 
with legitimate gun users. To what extent does this, for example, 
diminish the utility of the handgun? If you install this kind of technology, 
does it make it more difficult to use the gun in self-defense? The 
city will have a tough time in court, because gun lawsuits rarely 
get very far. Courts nearly always rule that there's no basis for 
suing the makers of legal weapons that work as they're meant to. Simply 
put, guns are products designed to kill. But in a northern California 
courtroom, one gun lawsuit has survived and is about to go to the 
jury. A gunmaker is on trial for the death of a high school freshman, 
accidentally shot by a 14-year-old friend who didn't know the gun 
was loaded. The victim's parents say the beretta pistol, similar to 
this one, has a Dangerous design feature. When the clip is removed, 
a round can remain in the chamber. In the lawsuit, the parents argue 
that children who get their hands on the gun will mistakenly believe 
that removing the clip takes out all the ammunition. But the company 
insists the gun had an indicator that showed when the chamber was 
loaded, and that the 14-year-old knew how to check to see if the gun 
was loaded, but forgot to do it. Even so, lawyers for the victim's 
family say manufacturers are well aware they could make their guns 
safer. We know that gun owners will be irresponsible with guns. That 
does not relieve the industry of the responsibility to, itself, design 
products to protect against these horrible shootings. Gun manufacturers 
say they're developing technologies for making personalized weapons, 
guns that can be fired only by the owner. But the industry hopes the 
government won't require them, because they won't be easy to make. 
It's going to be years before it's available. So, although we want 
to work on it, we also want to be responsible enough to report to 
people that it's gonna be many years before we can make this a Reliable 
option. But the legal pressure won't let up. Officials in Chicago 
and in dade county, Florida, say they'll soon file their own lawsuits 
against gunmakers. And more big cities plan do to the same. Pete Williams, 
NBC news, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>