<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981108.1830.1270 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The tobacco wars continue this week for the first time since the Liggett 
company broke with the rest of the tobacco industry and began making 
private information public. Two of Liggett's former associates are 
about to testify in court. Exclusive details now, from NBC's Bob Kur. 
In the 1970s and early '80s, attorney Lawrence Meyer was a lawyer 
in private practice retained by the Liggett tobacco company. J. Bowen 
Ross was in charge of Liggett's patents, technology and trade secrets. 
Both were involved in a $15 million effort by Liggett to develop a 
safer cigarette. There were no secrets. NBC news has learned that 
at this trial in Washington state, meyer and Ross are prepared to 
testify that Liggett was pressured by other tobacco companies to kill 
the safe cigarette project. A point made in this pretrial video deposition 
by former Liggett attorney meyer. Brown and Williamson was threatening 
Liggett's very existence if they marketed or tried to market the cigarette. 
He went on to say there also was pressure from Philip Morris. Among 
other things, a threat to cut Liggett out of beneficial industry-wide 
legal strategy sessions. Philip Morris and brown & Williamson have 
denied threatening Liggett. But the industry was concerned that if 
anybody marketed a so-called "safer cigarette," it would imply that 
all other cigarettes were unsafe. And that could prompt a barrage 
of lawsuits and invite more federal regulation of the industry. Liggett, 
with a shrinking share of the cigarette market, believed any product 
it could sell as "safer" would be a goldmine. It was great for Liggett 
if it worked, but it was catastrophic for the industry because it 
wasn't business as usual. Liggett scientists believed they'd found 
a way to treat tobacco, so that when smoke was tested on mice it produced 
virtually no tumors. But tests were cut short. The project was killed 
before the possible benefits of a so-called "safer cigarette" could 
be determined. In his deposition, Liggett's former patent attorney 
said he warned his bosses the decision could come back to haunt them 
once critics found out about it. They could view it as a conspiracy 
either within the company or with others, that you had a useful product 
and did not come forth with it because you were afraid that it would 
hurt your existing franchise or that it would be harmful in a cancer 
litigation. This week, the two Liggett witnesses are testifying in 
a state trial, but their lawyer also has met with federal prosecutors 
to discuss how the two might play a role in the ongoing justice department 
investigation of big tobacco. Bob Kur, NBC news, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>