<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981108.0067 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Like all of contemporary music, American opera has many currents and 
tributaries, and any blanket assertions about it will quickly draw 
shouts of contradiction. But an important school of thought about 
this repertory, rooted to some extent in a Germanic and Russian conception 
of opera, holds that American opera will resonate most strongly if 
it is linked to American literature. This philosophy was eventually 
supplanted by one in which recent news events attained primacy as 
operatic subject matter, but between the 1940s and the '70s, several 
works were based on American novels, plays and short stories. One 
of them, Carlisle Floyd's setting of the John Steinbeck novel ``Of 
Mice and Men,'' returned to the New York City Opera repertory on Saturday 
evening after a 15-year absence in a persuasive new production by 
Rhoda Levine. Ms. Levine's production, which occupies spare naturalistic 
sets by John Conklin, was first staged at the Glimmerglass Opera in 
1997. Steinbeck's story of itinerant farm workers has ample operatic 
potential. Its main characters, the feebleminded Lennie and his companion 
and protector, George, fantasize about buying a small farm of their 
own, thereby breaking the cycle of wandering the countryside, taking 
low-paying harvesting jobs and getting chased out when Lennie lands 
them in trouble. They nearly achieve this dream when Candy, another 
worker, offers to put his substantial savings at their disposal if 
he can join them. There is ample foreshadowing to warn us that this 
plan will go awry, as well as a near tragedy when Lennie ends up in 
a brawl with Curley, the boss. Lennie's passion for petting soft things, 
but doing it so hard that he destroys them (coupled with a tendency 
to panic under pressure), leads him to inadvertently kill Curley's 
wife. Floyd, who wrote his own libretto, kept close to the Steinbeck 
story, one of his major departures being a slight expansion of the 
character of Curley's wife, who is given no further name. In the novel, 
we get a sense of her discontentedness; in the opera, her dreams of 
better things parallel George's and Lennie's, and Floyd has her express 
them in a coloratura line. His music otherwise is in the vernacular 
of midcentury tonality: It is chromatic, often declamatory, occasionally 
lyrical _ George, Lennie and Curley's wife are all given plenty to 
work with, and it has the picturesque qualities of verismo opera. 
It also has an undercurrent of mildly folksy, Coplandesque melodies 
that have become the standard musical depiction of a Western accent, 
but it avoids veering too close to Copland's own ``Of Mice and Men'' 
film score. The City Opera has assembled an admirable cast. Anthony 
Dean Griffey gives us two views of Lennie: As an actor, he astutely 
conveys the nuances of Lennie's childlike personality; as a singer 
with an attractive, focused tenor, he conveys the full measure of 
Lennie's vulnerability. As George, Dean Ely is vocally and dramatically 
well matched to Griffey, and the rich timbre of his bass-baritone 
enlivened his solo turns and ensembles. Nancy Allen Lundy handled 
Curley's wife's music with agility and a nicely understated sweetness 
that made her more sympathetic than Steinbeck's character. And Joel 
Sorenson made the most of the few lines afforded the bellicose Curley. 
There were also fine contributions from Julian Patrick, as Candy, 
and Victor Benedetti, as Slim, the levelheaded leader of the workers. 
The singers' English diction was fine all around, but the company 
used supertitles nevertheless, a prudent move in so big a house. As 
it happened, the orchestra, which played reasonably well under Stewart 
Robertson's baton, often overpowered the singers. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>