<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981108.0221 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The focus of Jonathan Miller's attention in his new book, ``On Reflection'' 
(Yale University Press), is light. That is, luster and gleam and splendor, 
shimmers and surfaces and deformations, windows and mirrors and water: 
light as it comes to us off the surface of objects and is captured 
in pigment and image. The glint in the eyes of Durer's ``Self-Portrait'' 
is not just a reflection but a revelation of an inner world; the glassy 
flare that blurs an image on the wall in Velasquez's ``Las Meninas'' 
tells us it is a mirror, reflecting figures standing where we stand, 
looking. The book is actually a catalog of an exhibition that opened 
earlier this fall at the National Gallery of London, but it came to 
mind recently while watching Miller's new production of ``Le Nozze 
di Figaro'' at the Metropolitan Opera. It wasn't that the production 
itself was full of mirrors or played extravagantly with image and 
light and distortion. Miller was even self-effacing here, letting 
the staging reflect Mozart and his librettist, Da Ponte, without too 
many distracting glints of his own persona. If he was holding up a 
glass to the opera, he was trying to make sure it had as few curves 
and swirls as possible. Miller's restraint was so startling because 
he has a reputation for experimenting with operas' settings and styles 
_ setting ``Rigoletto'' in Little Italy of the 1950s or ``Tosca'' 
in Fascist Italy or ``The Magic Flute'' in a World War I-era hotel. 
One of his most powerful productions at the Metropolitan, Debussy's 
``Pelleas et Melisande,'' replaced the opera's mythic kingdom and 
forest with a decaying 20th-century mansion on which Atget photographs 
were projected. It turned the composer's symbolist fantasy into a 
melancholic evocation of ruin. For a while, in fact, a joke was making 
the rounds about Miller, who has an M.D. degree. He finds himself 
in a hospital, conducting an extremely delicate medical procedure. 
``It's not working,'' he calls out. ``Quick! Move it to the 18th century.'' 
Whereupon the operating theater and its participants are decked out 
in appropriate classical style. There can also be an enfant terrible 
aspect to Miller's brilliance. In an interview in The Guardian in 
September, for example, the director reiterated his attack on the 
Met's stagings for being ``35 years out of date.'' He referred to 
Covent Garden as a ``wife kennel, a place where businessmen dump their 
wives in order to keep them quiet.'' Opera stars, he has said, can 
be ``horrible Jurassic Park dinosaurs.'' And there are indeed a few 
relics of provocation in this ``Figaro'': isn't it a cliche by now 
to indicate the end of the idea of nobility by showing the Count's 
mansion needing a coat of paint or being rakishly tilted in the finale? 
But these relics are minimal, (as are infrequent signs of characters 
not reacting to what they are hearing). So how do we account for the 
kind of elegant restraint Miller brought to this opera? He is almost 
always acute at imagining character and choreographing intricate ensembles. 
But this time there was something else going on, marked by its absence, 
not its presence. It was as if Miller was aiming more at reflection 
than at interpretation. Which is what brings us back to Miller's recent 
foray into curatorship. In his almost cartographic survey of reflection 
in the visual arts, he examines how paint suggests reflective surfaces, 
why the eyes of a portrait seem to follow us around a room, why mirrors 
are said to reverse right and left but not up and down. How mirrors 
have been associated with vanity as well as with revelation. But the 
recurring implication is that through acts of reflection and portraying 
reflection, we come to know ourselves and the world. Reflection provides 
a form of knowledge, which is why the word has also come to describe 
the very activity of thought. We reflect on something only by stepping 
outside it, by starting to see it from another perspective, one that 
is not fully our own. Unreflective experience is immediate; and it 
provides sensation. Reflective experience is mediated, rational, partly 
analytical. It distances us from an object. It shows us its setting 
and makes us aware of its contours. It unveils what had been taken 
for granted. It also shows that there are multiple perspectives, many 
ways of seeing and knowing. And isn't this what we see in ``Figaro''? 
Much is often made of the political content of this opera, the ways 
in which the old order is undercut by the new, nobility undermined 
by notions of equality. But this is also an opera that is about knowledge 
and bafflement. Its characters hear and see and think they learn: 
Cherubino overhears the Count pressuring Susanna; the Count overhears 
Basilio spreading rumors about the Countess; Susanna overhears the 
Count blaming the Countess; the Count overhears Susanna proclaiming 
victory; Figaro believes he has caught Susanna with the Count; the 
Count believes he has caught Figaro with the Countess. The greatest 
sequence in the opera, the finale of the second act, is saturated 
with delusion and revelation. Who is in the Countess' closet? Who 
has jumped from the window? What are the contents of the dropped paper? 
Who arranged for a nocturnal rendezvous? There are almost as many 
answers as there are characters. This is all latent in Beaumarchais' 
play, but Mozart's music, with its phantasmagoric series of dances, 
manages to stand outside the goings-on, commenting upon them with 
a haunting mixture of sympathy and superior knowledge. The second 
act finale marks each revelation with a change in key, rhythm and 
tempo, so one feels each shock; but the sequence is also delicate, 
playful, pulsing, hinting that all is not yet known. Until the opera's 
conclusion, no character is granted complete knowledge. Each character 
suffers because of misjudgments, believing something true based solely 
on the evidence of eyes or ears. Eyes and ears, though, are the instruments 
of illusion. It is mind and character that matter. This is an opera 
that almost defines the nature of the Enlightenment. It is about the 
illusion of appearance and the difficulties of knowledge. And it is 
about how knowledge grows out of imagining the world from another 
position, through another perspective. The truth is not in the details, 
but in the summation of details. It lies outside individual experience. 
It is the product of reflection. So perhaps, for Miller, who celebrates 
light and reflection in all their incarnations, that was enough: simply 
to step outside the frame and point to what Mozart had already made 
poignantly transparent. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>