<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981108.0185 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Sooner or later, Seton Hall will find a defense it can score against. 
What defense that is, though, remains to be seen, as the Pirates were 
done in by both man-to-man and zone sets in this weekend's National 
Association of Basketball Coaches Classic. Valparaiso, a power in 
the Mid-Continent Conference, used a 2-3 zone to stymie Seton Hall 
and leave the RCA Dome with a 64-54 victory Sunday night. Saturday, 
host Indiana whipped the Pirates, 83-69, with a stifling man-to-man. 
If you're thinking the Pirates lost to the gutsy Bryce Drew-led group 
that threw a monkey wrench into last year's National Collegiate Athletic 
Association tournament, forget about it. Drew was drafted by the Houston 
Rockets and three other starters graduated. Nonetheless, after dropping 
South Carolina, 67-61, on Saturday, Valparaiso left here with a 2-0 
record. Seton Hall (0-2) might have lost more than a game it should 
have won. With 5 minutes 27 seconds remaining, shooting guard Rimas 
Kaukenas left with a left knee injury after Valparaiso's 6-foot-11-inch 
center Zoran Viskovic fell on his leg. Kaukenas, a 6-4 junior from 
Lithuania, had been Seton Hall's main offensive weapon, scoring 17 
points. Though they never got going on offense, the Pirates were in 
position to win with four minutes to play after freshman Ty Shine 
stripped Valparaiso's Jared Nuness of the ball and took it in for 
a layup to pull Seton Hall to within one, 51-50. The Pirates fell 
behind by 53-50 on a basket by Ivan Vujic, but moments later, with 
a chance to tie or get as close as a point, Shine missed two 3-pointers. 
Less than 10 seconds later, Nuness drilled a 3-pointer from the top 
of the key to put Valparaiso up by 56-50 and all but end the Pirates' 
hopes with 2:14 left. The Crusaders' balance _ five players scored 
from 8 to 13 points _ contrasted Seton Hall's one-man show. Only Duane 
Jordan joined Kaukenas in double figures, with 10 points. For the 
second straight game, the all-Big East point guard Shaheen Holloway 
scored only 6 points, 10 fewer than his career average. Milo Stovall 
led Valparaiso with 13 points. Early on, Seton Hall had a chance to 
set the tone and put away the Crusaders. Applying the type of oppressive 
man-to-man pressure that Indiana forced on them Saturday, the Pirates 
took away everything Valparaiso attempted to do on offense. Smothering 
the ball-handlers and cutting off passing lanes, they made life miserable 
for the slow-footed Crusaders. During a seven-minute stretch early 
in the half, Valparaiso turned the ball over on six of seven possessions. 
Pirates players twice stripped Crusaders of the ball, and four times, 
Valparaiso players simply gave it away by dribbling off their feet, 
traveling or throwing the ball away. But for the most part, Seton 
Hall failed to capitalize, building just a 12-8 lead while the Crusaders 
struggled to get into their offense. Saunders and Kaukenas hit a few 
3-pointers, and the Pirates scored a couple of fast-break baskets, 
but other than that, their offense was as dead as their defense was 
alive. A day after nationally ranked Indiana shut them down, the Pirates 
were rendered ineffective by Valparaiso's 2-3 zone. With the 6-10 
freshman Charles Manga and the 6-6 senior Jordan failing to establish 
a presence inside, Seton Hall was forced to launch bombs from the 
perimeter. A poor outside-shooting team, the Pirates made only 8 of 
26 first-half shots (30.8 percent). The longer Seton Hall went without 
taking control of the Crusaders' miscues, the more confident Valparaiso 
grew. Suddenly, midway through the first half, the Crusaders' fear 
vanished. They began setting stronger picks and showing more patience 
and eventually surged ahead. Using a 13-5 run, Valparaiso turned a 
14-11 deficit at the 10:20 mark into a 24-19 lead a minute before 
the break. With most of their jumpers clanging off the back of the 
rim, the Pirates went into the locker room trailing, 26-22. The deficit 
would have been worse were it not for Kaukenas, who proved to be the 
only Pirate with an outside touch in making 4 of 7 shots (including 
2 of 3 3-pointers) for 12 points. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>