<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981108.0110 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After a year dominated by scandal in the White House and an inquiry 
into the impeachment of the president, Democrats made unexpected congressional 
gains on Election Day, picking up five seats in the House and not 
losing any ground in the Senate. Surveys of voters leaving polling 
places throughout the country showed that some groups that had shifted 
toward the Republicans in 1994 are moving back toward the Democrats, 
including voters in the East, Catholics and those who live in big 
cities. The table, based on the voter surveys, shows how 115 demographic 
groups voted for House candidates this year and in the past nine elections. 
The surveys used to draw this portrait are based on large numbers 
of respondents, making it possible to examine the preferences of some 
groups whose proportion of the voting population makes them too small 
to look at in typical surveys. Gender and Age Men continue to be more 
likely than women to vote for Republicans. Before 1994, the percentage 
of men who voted Republican was three to six percentage points higher 
than the percentage of women who voted Republican. In 1994, the difference 
soared to 11 points, in 1996 it was nine points and in the latest 
election there is a 7-point gap between the number of men and women 
who voted for the Republican candidate. The differences between men 
and women are particularly evident among voters with college degrees 
and voters under 30. In the last three elections, a majority of voters 
60 and older has given its votes to Republican candidates, perhaps 
signaling the departure of the New Deal generation. This trend toward 
supporting Republican candidates among older voters is seen among 
both men and women. Sixty percent of older white people voted for 
the Republican candidate in their district, but older black voters 
continued to support Democrats overwhelmingly. Party Loyalty Since 
1994, the Republicans have been doing a better job of holding onto 
most self-identified Republican voters, getting at least 90 percent 
of their votes. Democrats have also been doing well at retaining their 
party's adherents. For the last three elections, increasing numbers 
of independents, who make up a little more than one-fourth of all 
voters, have been voting for Republican candidates. This year, the 
votes of independent women are divided equally between the Republicans 
and the Democrats. Independent men are more inclined than independent 
women to vote Republican, but not to the degree that they were in 
1994. A majority of the white voters who consider themselves independent 
supported the Republican candidate in their district. And although 
a large majority of black independents supported the Democratic candidate, 
one-fifth favored the Republican candidate. Overall, only 11 percent 
of blacks voted Republican. Financial Concerns Candidates from the 
party of the incumbent president tend to be favored by voters who 
believe their economic situation has improved. In 1980, 1994 and 1996, 
the Democratic candidates were backed by a majority of voters who 
said their financial situation had improved. And voters appear to 
turn against the incumbent party when they believe their situation 
has worsened. Most of the voters who described their family as being 
either less well off or the same voted for Republican candidates, 
as they did in 1994 and 1996. Social Alliances There are still some 
signs of the social alliances that have existed since the Great Depression. 
For example, less affluent voters, those with annual income under 
$30,000, gave the majority of their votes to the Democrats. Black, 
Hispanic and Jewish voters remained strongly Democratic. Voters who 
lived in a household with a union member continued to support the 
Democratic candidate, as did urban voters. By contrast, voters whose 
income exceeded $30,000 and white Protestants voted for Republican 
candidates. Republican candidates were favored by suburbanites, as 
well as by those who live in small towns and rural areas. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>