<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981108.0055 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Did a history teacher from Michigan and an obscure Canadian programmer 
discover a twist to computing's Year 2000 problem that the experts 
had missed? That question has ignited a simmering technical debate 
in which some experts _ including Year 2000 specialists at Compaq 
Computer's Year 2000 Expertise Center in Albany, N.Y. _ see a real, 
if imperfectly understood, flaw that could cause many computers to 
malfunction after seeming to sail smoothly into the year 2000. Many 
experts, however, see it as a case of unfounded scare mongering. The 
controversy turns on the intricacies of how computers keep time. It 
underscores how the approach of 2000 is stirring doubts among computer 
users and corporate America about who the true experts are and how 
much they can be trusted. The Year 2000 problem stems from a seemingly 
simple glitch: Computers have long used just two digits to refer to 
the year, such as 98 for 1998, and often have trouble recognizing 
that 00 is 2000 rather than 1900. But, as this dispute shows, that 
simple problem spawns questions that can defy quick, clear-cut answers. 
The purported timekeeping flaw was first reported in August 1997 by 
Jace Crouch, a 46-year-old professor who teaches courses on Western 
civilization at Oakland University in Michigan. It was subsequently 
described at length on the Internet (www.intranet.ca/mike.echlin/bestif) 
by Michael Echlin, a 35-year-old programmer at Atomic Energy Canada 
Ltd. Not only is the timing of the flaw's onset unpredictable, they 
say, but so are the results, which include malfunctions that can wipe 
out data, prevent computers from starting up, and lead software programs 
to make faulty calculations. The problem is said to affect primarily 
older computers, but some more recent IBM clones are also said to 
be susceptible. One report of the flaw involved an Apple Computer 
Macintosh, and the flaw may lie hidden in a wide range of electronic 
machinery. But is the flaw real? Or is it, as some critics say, a 
reckless claim by the two men, who have set up a small company that 
markets software to identify and neutralize the problem? ``They are 
selling a fix for something they can't even explain,'' said Thomas 
Becker, chief executive of Rightime Co., a Miami-based software company 
that specializes in products that regulate timekeeping on personal 
computers. ``They are trying to capitalize on fear.'' For more than 
a year, the conflict over what has been variously called the Crouch-Echlin 
Effect, time dilation, or simply, T.D., has been waged largely on 
a handful of Internet sites favored by computer buffs. Even critics 
like Becker say that Crouch and Echlin have undoubtedly encountered 
something strange that urgently needs further research and explaining. 
It all began with Crouch's decision more than a year ago to set his 
office computer forward to Dec. 31, 1999, to test how it would handle 
the transition to the year 2000. The rollover happened without a hitch, 
even though the machine ran on a clone of Intel's aged 286 microprocessor 
chip _ a relic from the mid-1980s. Since Crouch was using the computer 
for word processing in which the date it logged made no difference, 
he decided not to change the date back. But to his consternation, 
during the next two weeks the computer's clock jumped ahead to December 
2000. Other odd malfunctions cropped up. Crouch's report of these 
anomalies on the Year 2000 forum at the comp.software newsgroup on 
the Internet intrigued Echlin. He set up experiments on several computers, 
then posted results suggesting Crouch's problems were not isolated. 
But it certainly was baffling. While some testers reported computers 
jumping ahead for minutes or months, others said they experienced 
leaps backward, while on some machines the clock appeared to simply 
slow down. Some afflicted computers were unable to locate the pathway 
to outside phone lines or even their own hard disk, making it impossible 
to fire up programs. ``The jury is still out on exactly what is happening,'' 
said Douglas de Lacey, who oversees computer systems at Cambridge 
University's School of Arts and Humanities in Britain and has reported 
encountering the Crouch-Echlin Effect on two aging Toshiba laptops. 
Pressure for a verdict is building, though, especially since a recent, 
widely distributed e-mail announcement from Compaq's Year 2000 office 
in Albany that said the company would be reselling the software fix 
created by Crouch and Echlin. Becker said that he was being peppered 
by anxious calls from major clients like General Motors and Exxon 
asking what they should do. If the Crouch-Echlin Effect is real, computer 
users may have to spend billions of dollars testing and possibly replacing 
equipment that seemed ready for the next century. Theories of what 
is causing the Crouch-Echlin Effect have come and gone. Most Crouch-Echlin 
believers now suspect that the problem stems from a glitch in the 
process through which computers can _ each time they are turned on 
_ update the time from a battery-powered chip called the real time 
clock, or RTC. The real time clock keeps track of time even during 
periods when the computer's external power is switched off. The clock 
is used as the source of the time and date by a computer's operating 
system and is also directly accessed by some software programs, unless 
the computer is part of a network in which a central server keeps 
time for a coordinated group of devices. So far, the Crouch-Echlin 
Effect has only been observed in computers with ``nonbuffered'' real 
time clocks, a design not used in today's name-brand computers but 
common in older devices. Nonbuffered real time clocks cannot be read 
for an instant as their own second counter clicks over to the next 
second. Because computer designers know of this limitation, all computers 
are programmed to avoid checking nonbuffered real time clocks during 
that update. Here's how: A chip known as the Basic Input-Output System, 
or BIOS, looks to the real time clock for the time and date when the 
computer user hits the ``on'' switch. In the case of a nonbuffered 
real time clock, the BIOS chip will see the electronic equivalent 
of a red flag for 244 microseconds before the update is to occur. 
Seeing this flag, the BIOS waits briefly. If the flag is not there, 
the BIOS figures it has enough time to complete its reading and proceeds 
to do so. All this works fine until the computer reaches the year 
2000, according to Echlin. After that, he says, computers with nonbuffered 
real time clocks may trip up if an unlucky user turns them on at the 
wrong instant in the update cycle. The problem, Echlin said, is that 
at least some BIOS chips actually calculate by relating what they 
read to elapsed time since a Jan. 1, 1980, start date _ a sort of 
universally presumed dawn of time in the PC industry. After 2000, 
that takes two steps: Time from 1980 until the end of 1999 is added 
to time since the beginning of 2000, he said. The extra fraction of 
a second it takes to complete the Year 2000 translation could push 
the time check beyond the 244 millisecond safety window if the computer 
happens to be switched on just before the flag goes up, Echlin said. 
The result is a garbled time check with unpredictable results, he 
said. ``They make a very solid argument,'' said Jeff Floyd, a real 
time clock specialist for Motorola Inc., the giant semiconductor company 
that manufactured the real time clock chip on Crouch's computer. But 
critics like Becker contend that Echlin is being needlessly alarmist. 
They complain that Echlin and Crouch have declined to provide equipment 
on which they have seen their effect to critics who have asked to 
test it. Becker said his doubts grew last year after he set up his 
own test. He harnessed two computers with nonbuffered real time clocks 
to a third device that turned them on and off 25,000 times over a 
three week period. There was no sign of the Crouch-Echlin Effect, 
he said. Testing just two machines is hardly definitive, Becker conceded. 
But he said it was pointless to devote more time and resources without 
the cooperation of Crouch and Echlin. ``I don't deny there is something 
going on, but we tried to work with them and couldn't get their cooperation,'' 
said James Lott, manager of timekeeping devices at Dallas Semiconductor, 
a maker of real time clocks and other chips. ``We have full lab facilities 
and would guarantee confidentiality. The cloak of secrecy turns all 
of us off.'' Some of the critics suspect the supposed Crouch-Echlin 
Effect is a variation on common timekeeping problems that are caused 
by faults in a computer's power supply. Other critics challenge the 
BIOS explanation. David Ross, an engineer with Phoenix Technologies, 
a leading BIOS manufacturer, said that the process by which a BIOS 
chip checks the time and date occurred too rapidly to create the situation 
Echlin had described. A more likely explanation, in his view, is not 
that the affected BIOS chips are taking too long to identify the year 
2000 date, but that they are simply confused by encountering ``00.'' 
Echlin insists that power supplies are not the problem because the 
computers performed flawlessly on dates earlier than 2000. He also 
bridles at charges that he and Crouch withheld crucial evidence. Early 
this year, they sent the motherboard from Crouch's computer to Mark 
Slotnick, a sympathetic technician at what was then Digital Equipment's 
Year 2000 Expertise Center, to verify their results. Digital was acquired 
by Compaq last June. In April, Barry Pardee, manager of the center, 
told Echlin that Digital had confirmed the Crouch-Echlin findings 
in its own tests. Shortly after Digital's merger with Compaq, Pardee 
agreed to resell the software fix developed by Yeovil Systems and 
Development Research Inc., a venture set up by Echlin, his sister-in-law, 
and Crouch. Pardee said at the time that the testing had not turned 
up any problems in Digital or Compaq computers but that the software 
would be sold as a service to customers whose offices had a mix of 
brands. Compaq-Digital also sent along an initial royalty payment 
that Echlin described as ``about $1,000 for each of us.'' Crouch and 
Echlin met soon afterward for the first and only time, in Sault St. 
Marie, Ontario, half-way between their homes, where Echlin hand-delivered 
Crouch's check. ``We're not planning to get rich,'' Echlin said, adding 
that Yeovil gets just $1 for each copy of the software sold. ``We 
were going to give this away but corporate America doesn't trust anything 
that's free.'' Word of Digital's endorsement spread in October via 
an e-mail from Pardee that Digital salesmen distributed to customers. 
It included pricing for the software fix. Digital offered the software 
at prices from $32 a unit for 50 computers down to $3 each for orders 
of 25,000 or more. Crouch-Echlin critics were dumbfounded by Pardee's 
endorsement. Becker alerted Karl Fielder, chief executive of Greenwich 
Mean Time Ltd., a Year 2000 consulting company, who contacted Compaq 
officials at the company's headquarters in Houston. Some engineers 
within Digital also expressed doubts, a Compaq spokesman said. The 
flurry of activity may soon bring the issue of whether Crouch-Echlin 
is real to a head. Compaq officials plan to test the device that produced 
the results Pardee found convincing and to ship it to Becker, a spokesman 
said. Pardee and Slotnick did not respond to requests for comments. 
Company officials said they were skeptical and would not ship the 
Crouch-Echlin software fix unless further testing changes their minds. 
One customer has purchased it, the company said, and will receive 
a refund if the testing does not confirm the flaw. But Echlin is not 
backing down. ``Jace and I have been hoping ever since we found this 
that someone would come along and prove us wrong,'' he said. ``No 
one who has followed our test procedures has.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>