<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981108.0144 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In six short days, Ohio State's Joe Germaine went from much-hyped 
Heisman Trophy candidate to a quarterback only entrusted by his coach 
with handing the ball off during a critical fourth-quarter drive. 
In less than four hours Saturday, the Buckeyes lost all their national 
title hopes when Michigan State pulled the upset of the season. Now 
everything is a mess _ especially for those awaiting Monday's Bowl 
Championships Series rankings, which promises to match the best two 
teams in the nation in a true national title game to be played at 
the Fiesta Bowl. For the first time in seven years, the USA Today/ESPN 
coaches' poll has a tie for No. 1, between Kansas State and Tennessee. 
The Associated Press news media poll was more decisive, giving Tennessee 
the top spot over Kansas State. And The New York Times computer ranking, 
one of three nonhuman measuring services employed by the BCS, chose 
Florida State with one loss as its No. 1, with Tennessee No. 2 and 
Kansas State No. 3. Throw the votes and calculations into the BCS 
blender and, for another week, college football is shaken but not 
yet meaningfully stirred. How will the rankings from the BCS formula 
spew out this week? Here's a try: 1. Tennessee, 2. Kansas State, 3. 
UCLA, 4. Florida, 5. Florida State. A couple of bedrocks of college 
football thinking remain steadfast. First, the teams that want to 
play for a national title must win big games in November. Second, 
an early-season loss does not necessarily kill championship chances. 
Third, the Florida teams, at least in recent history, have a lot to 
say about who actually is the best team in the country. And finally, 
Ohio State Coach John Cooper once more will have to sweat the Michigan 
game. The Buckeyes blew a 24-9 lead against Michigan State, but had 
the ball late in the fourth quarter when Cooper took it from Germaine, 
who had come into the game off four consecutive passing performances 
of 300-plus yards. Ohio State ran and ran and ran until it ran out 
of room. On fourth-and-1 at the Michigan State 26-yard line with 3 
minutes 33 seconds left _ and Ohio State trailing by 28-24 _ linebacker 
T.J. Turner held up Joe Montgomery at the line. By the time Ohio State 
got the ball back, Germaine had less than 2 minutes left and no timeouts. 
Still, he passed the Buckeyes down to the 15. On fourth down, he lofted 
a spiral to the left corner of the end zone for flanker Dee Miller 
_ only to have it picked off by cornerback Renaldo Hill. Afterward, 
Cooper conceded the Buckeyes were out of the national championship 
race and acknowledged he had a more daunting task ahead. ``We still 
have a chance to win this league,'' he said of the Big Ten Conference 
race. ``We need to regroup and do something we haven't done in a while, 
and that's beat Michigan,'' said Cooper, well aware of Ohio State's 
1-8-1 record against Michigan over the last 10 years. Now for the 
first time in a long time, the big November games will take place 
in locales like Knoxville, Tenn., and Manhattan, Kan., between teams 
not usually in the title race this time of year. On Saturday, Tennessee 
(8-0) takes on Arkansas, a team that finally cracked top 10 in all 
the rankings after being kept out despite being one of only four unbeaten 
teams in the nation. Simultaneously, Kansas State will face Nebraska 
in a game where the roles are dramatically reversed. In recent years, 
the Cornhuskers hogged the spotlight and the Kansas State game a meant 
one more pesky challenge for them to repel. Now, Kansas State is expected 
to beat a team with two losses, though the Wildcats have not topped 
Nebraska in 29 years. Kansas State beat Baylor by 49-6 on Saturday, 
but the Wildcat locker room rang with dissatisfied voices. Twice the 
No. 1 scoring offense in the nation failed to get points from inside 
the Baylor 10. ``It's a wake-up call for us, because we can't get 
stopped,'' running back Eric Hickson said. ``We got stopped today, 
and that's something we've got to improve on. We've got to cut down 
on our mistakes.'' The Baylor locker room was not happy either. In 
the age of computer-heavy rankings, Kansas State Coach Bill Snyder 
elected to score a touchdown on the final play. He later called it 
``a bad choice,'' but it reportedly upset his quarterback, Michael 
Bishop. There are a couple of one-loss teams out there that have been 
accused of similar sins in the past: Florida and Florida State. They 
remain in the title mix because they had the good sense to lose early 
in the year _ the Gators to Tennessee and the Seminoles to North Carolina 
State. Only one team is going to emerge unblemished from the Tennessee-Arkansas 
game. They will most likely face each other again in the Southeastern 
Conference championship game. If Kansas State gets past Nebraska, 
it has a tough Missouri team the following week and probably Texas 
A&AMP;M in the Big 12 championship game. The polls' No. 3 team, U.C.L.A. 
(8-0), continues to tempt the fates _ the Bruins needed a 61-yard 
touchdown pass from Cade McNown with 21 seconds left to beat lowly 
Oregon State (4-6) on Saturday. UCLA has three tough games left against 
Washington, Southern California and Miami. So the Florida-Florida 
State game on Nov. 21 might ultimately become a qualifier game for 
the Fiesta Bowl. Both have steadily risen in the polls _ right or 
wrong, losses in September are easily forgiven by voters. They are 
computer darlings because of the strength of their schedules. Florida 
State's opponents are 51-27 and Florida's 42-29, both better numbers 
than any of the remaining unbeatens. The odds are long that Kansas 
State, Tennessee and UCLA will all remain unbeaten. It's dicey to 
bet that two of them go undefeated. The best bet on the board is that 
one of the three plays the winner of the Florida State-Florida game 
_ presuming the victor retains only its one loss _ for the national 
title in the Fiesta Bowl at Tempe, Ariz., on Jan. 4. In an ironic 
footnote that fits under ``the-more-we-know-the-more-we-don't know'' 
heading, in 1991 the coaches' poll could not decide between Miami 
and Washington as its final No. 1 team. When both won bowl games, 
the coaches crowned Washington and the writers' Miami. The only difference 
now is that a split championship will be mostly computer-generated. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>