<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981108.0148 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial on Monday, Nov. 9: To hear 
the politicians' postmortems, you might conclude it was Social Security, 
not impeachment, the economy or anything else, on which the midterm 
elections were fought. In fact, exit polls showed that Social Security 
was on the minds of many voters, and that the issue worked better 
for the Democrats. But there was little in the way of informed debate 
on the issue from either side. Why? First, the potential for demagogy 
is high, with both parties quite happy to accuse opponents of endangering 
benefits. Second, any serious discussion might have made clear that 
the government's current budget surplus is a mirage. Last year's budget 
surplus _ about which both the president and the Republicans crowed 
incessantly _ was due to a big surplus in Social Security. The rest 
of the budget showed a deficit of almost $30 billion. Most of the 
Social Security surplus, which supposedly goes into the Social Security 
Trust Fund, was spent on other programs. Away from the campaign trail, 
there has been a flood of suggestions for ``fixing'' Social Security. 
In fact, the potential shortfall after the baby boom retires is not 
nearly as great as the one that may confront Medicare, the other entitlement 
program for the elderly. Modest tax increases, slight increases in 
retirement age or a decision to raise benefits by less than the rate 
of inflation could go a long way toward solving the Social Security 
problem. Nonetheless, there are calls to ``privatize'' the system 
and put Social Security money in stocks, which in the past have generally 
shown better returns than bonds over long periods of time. Some of 
the arguments ignore the fact that Social Security was never a real 
pension plan. It is a system that taxes working Americans to finance 
payments to people who are retired or disabled. Any plan to convert 
Social Security to a pension plan, in which a worker's own taxes are 
put aside to pay for his or her retirement, must take into account 
the need to finance payments for those now retired or nearing retirement 
age. The lure of stock investing is based largely on the idea that 
by assuming relatively high returns one can avoid tough choices. But 
remember that there have been prolonged periods when stocks were poor 
investments. Those periods often began when _ as is currently the 
case _ stocks were trading at extraordinarily high valuations. Privatization 
advocates would have individuals own stocks through accounts like 
the 401(k) plans offered by many companies. Such plans are very attractive 
to Wall Street, but the fees Wall Street would collect would come 
out of profits available to pay beneficiaries. Will the government 
_ that is, the taxpayers _ be willing to guarantee that Social Security 
recipients would not suffer if stocks fell too far? If so, that would 
create an incentive for those managing the funds to use risky strategies. 
If not, the idea of a safety net begins to fade. Some propose that 
the government itself buy the stocks. That could cut down on administrative 
costs, but would make the federal government a major owner of American 
industry within only a few years. How would it decide what companies 
to buy, and how would political interference in corporate governance 
be avoided? It was good to learn after the votes were counted that 
both parties thought Social Security was so important. Now we will 
see if they can avoid the temptation of seeking short-term political 
gains rather than constructive long-term solutions. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>