<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981108.0025 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Herodotus, in his great history of the Persian Wars, says that the 
bravest combatant of them all was the Spartan Dienekes who, when told 
that the Persian arrows blocked out the sun, jauntily replied: ``Good. 
Then we'll have our battle in the shade.'' That anecdote serves as 
an epigram for Steven Pressfield, whose new novel, ``Gates of Fire,'' 
is a gripping and swashbuckling re-imagining of the battle of Thermopylae, 
perhaps the most famous military engagement of antiquity. Not surprisingly, 
one of Pressfield's main characters is the very Dienekes who, naturally, 
utters the words that Herodotus attributed to him. Dienekes' display 
of defiant humor is one small example of the way in which Pressfield 
has woven history into a novel that, in addition to plenty of sweep 
and sting, has a feel of authenticity about it from beginning to end. 
These pages are written as a kind of heroic saga, drenched in the 
gore of battle and the dust of Spartan discipline. Pressfield sprinkles 
his text with the vocabulary of the Greeks _ with helots (slaves) 
and hoplites (foot soldiers), the 8-foot spears and the short daggers 
of the Spartans, the medications used to treat wounds and the especially 
pungent vocabulary of a martial society. But along with a stirring 
history lesson, Pressfield has created a stirring story. His Spartan 
heroes are Homeric in dimension, but they are fully formed figures, 
struggling with the terror of battle, pondering the meanings of freedom 
and obedience as well as the sacrifice of oneself for the state. Most 
of ``Gates of Fire'' is narrated by Xeones, battle squire to one of 
the 300 Spartan warriors who fought at Thermopylae, all of whom, in 
historical fact, died there in an audacious holding action aimed at 
slowing the advance of the invading Persian army under Xerxes, the 
King. The badly wounded Xeones has survived the battle despite the 
Egyptian hoplite spear that penetrated his rib cage, and he has been 
taken prisoner by the Persians. Xerxes himself, though victorious 
at Thermopylae, has lost 20,000 of his own soldiers to the far smaller 
Greek force, and he wants to know the secret of the Spartans' courage 
and skill in battle. He orders his physicians to save Xeones' life 
and, that done, listens carefully as the defeated squire tells his 
life story. And an exciting, romantic, star-crossed story it is. After 
losing his mother and father in an attack on his home by enemy soldiers, 
Xeones and his female cousin Diomache become hunters in the mountains, 
led there by a former slave, Bruxieus, who watches over them. When 
Bruxieus dies, the cousins _ Xeones is 12, Diomache 15 _ have no choice 
but to go their separate ways, she to Athens and he to Sparta. There 
he becomes a kind of sparring partner and companion to a youth undergoing 
the brutal 13-year course of military training required of all high-born 
male members of Spartan society. Though a foreigner excluded from 
full Spartan citizenship, Xeones is loyal to his adopted city, eager 
to acquire training to avenge the death of his parents and to take 
care of Diomache, who is his beloved. The youth he is attached to 
is Alexandros, whose sponsor is Dienekes. Alexandros is a too-delicate 
young man who entertains philosophical objections to the Spartan cult 
of warfare and suffers accordingly. Together the two boys grow up 
in the extreme world devised by the upper ranks of Spartan society, 
the Peers, in response to the war-torn state of Greece. When Xerxes, 
defeated earlier at Marathon, invades Greece for a second time, with 
2 million men under his command, the two are among the elite chosen 
to sacrifice themselves for the cause at Thermopylae. As a historical 
novelist, Pressfield, whose previous novel is ``The Legend of Bagger 
Vance,'' is not at the level of the very best ones, say, the Robert 
Graves of ``I, Claudius'' and ``Claudius the God.'' But he is close. 
His ``Gates of Fire'' is full of an earthy, profane vitality and a 
narrative power that make it difficult to put down. The battle scenes 
are expertly drawn, full of the horror of ancient warfare. He manages 
also to describe Spartan society in all its brutality and yet to humanize 
it at the same time, largely by rendering its characters in rounded, 
complex fashion. The obscenity-laden speeches that he puts into the 
mouths of the Spartan heroes as they await battle are worth the price 
of the volume. ``How does one conquer fear of death, that most primordial 
of terrors, which resides in our very blood, as in all life, beasts 
as well as men?'' Dionekes asks on the eve of the great battle. ``We 
cobble our courage together on the spot, of rags and remnants. The 
main we summon out of that which is base. Fear of disgracing the city, 
the king, the heroes of our lines. Fear of proving ourselves unworthy 
of our wives and children, our brothers, our comrades in arms.'' But, 
Dionekes continues, this is not real courage. ``Nor is beastlike fury 
or panic-spawned self-preservation. These are katalepsis, possession. 
A rat owns as much of them as a man.'' One answer to the question 
of true courage given is that the highest valor ``lies in that which 
is female,'' and Pressfield gives a resonant and complicated role 
to the women of this story. The wife of Dionekes, Arete, is an especially 
compelling figure, a woman whose courage is all the greater because 
it stems not from fear of embarrassment but from deep compassion. 
The war with Persia provides the occasion for ``Gates of Fire,'' but 
the conflicts within Sparta, caused by divided loyalties and private 
animosities, are the true stuff of this novel's drama, and these conflicts 
are mediated by Pressfield's women. By the time he brings his story 
to a finish, we have learned a great deal of history, and we have 
sensed as well the protean grandeur of antiquity. It's not unlikely 
that Herodotus, who made Pressfield's story possible, would have enjoyed 
this book. PUBLICATION NOTES: `GATES OF FIRE' By Steven Pressfield. 
386 Pages. Doubleday. $23.95. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>