<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981108.0139 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the 1920 presidential campaign, the Democratic ticket was James 
Cox and young Franklin Roosevelt. The Latinesque call to vox populi, 
the voice of the people, was in this doggerel: Cox and Roosevelt/ 
Roosevelt and Cox;/ You tell 'em, populi,/ you got the vox. That Cox 
didn't make it. Neither did the new one: Rep. Chris Cox of Southern 
California, who for one brief shining moment was the dark horse candidate 
to succeed Newt Gingrich as speaker of the House. Gingrich is a figure 
I vainly urged to step down ever since his cockamamie book deal. He 
belatedly got the voters' message and did the right thing; liberals 
and Big Labor will miss their favorite punching bag the way hard-line 
hawks miss Brezhnev. That was revealed in the Democratic leader Dick 
Gephardt's embittered late hit about ``the damage that was wrought 
on this institution'' by the man whose job he wanted. It was left 
to the Atone Ranger in the White House to graciously bid farewell 
to a ``worthy adversary.'' Almost certain to be the new voice of House 
Republican people is Bob Livingston, who had the moxie and foresight 
to first challenge the speaker. The current Appropriations baron is 
not the stiff he seems to be on television. At a recent charity roast 
(I was the roastee), he whipped out a harmonica and stunned the crowd 
with an updated rendition of ``Oh Susannah.'' If a solid, dependable 
insider were the new face the GOP leadership needed, Livingston would 
be a natural. What he will need to prove, however, is that he is not 
merely ``not Newt.'' In the apportioning of power, he will also have 
to be sensitive to geographical balance: the notion of a man from 
Louisiana joining Mississippi's Trent Lott in the congressional leadership 
places too much faith in the Land of Lotteries, Casinos, Riverboat 
Gambling and High Moral Dudgeon. But as this is written (during the 
``fluff dry'' part of the news cycle), that Congressional Delta Force 
is wrapping up the speakership. House chairmen successfully leaned 
on members to ``re-up'' _ to freshen old commitments to the Livingston 
they know _ rather than turn to a comer before his time has come. 
That exhibited characteristic supercaution. Take a quick look at the 
challenger who so quickly folded: Cox was a White House counsel in 
the Reagan years from California, the biggest state, now a wholly 
owned subsidiary of the Clinton White House and desperate for Republican 
hope. Chosen to head the Select Committee investigating the Asia connection 
to fund-raising and espionage, he impressed even endangered Democrats 
with a low-key, fair-minded approach. His classified report is due 
on Jan. 2; we'll get a cleared version a month later. Cox is the sort 
of personality the GOP requires as one of its spokesmen in the long 
year before the presidential candidate takes over: reasonable, intellectually 
able to marshal arguments on tax reduction. What did he get in return 
for not making a fight for the speakership? His Republican Policy 
Committee will probably get a larger staff. That's not much, but when 
national security becomes an issue, he'll have a stronger voice in 
the upcoming missile defense debate. Livingston, the putative speaker, 
is not someone Democrats will be able to demonize or roll at session's 
end, as they did Gingrich. He is probably better positioned than anyone 
to wheel and deal with Democrats inside the House. Will he be a memorable 
speaker, effective in achieving conservative legislation with the 
Senate, thereby helping presidential candidates in 2000 keep the House 
in Republican hands? Hope for surprises, but don't expect miracles. 
Below the speakership, the election of leaders next week should offer 
Republicans a chance to make a new start. Why isn't Jennifer Dunn 
more ambitious? Why not elect the telegenic and principled J.C. Watts 
and Steve Largent to leadership positions? The infusion of new energy 
near the top will be Speaker-apparent Livingston's first major test. 
This week, Republican voters should tell him, through their representatives 
in Congress, that a reshuffle of old faces is not enough. If you want 
new hands at the helm with constructive, conservative ideas, then 
tell 'em, populi. You got the vox. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>