<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981108.0063 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As its antitrust trial moves into the fourth week, Microsoft Corp. 
finds itself trying to deflect a flood of charges of threats and bribes. 
The litany of shameful misconduct, according to the government, was 
directed not only at Microsoft's rivals but just about everyone in 
the industry _ including personal computer makers, Internet service 
suppliers and others. The Justice Department's story line is that, 
time after time, the digital-age monopolist showed up in the doorway, 
brandishing a club in one hand while offering price discounts and 
marketing support with the other. It is, as an antitrust expert said, 
an ``800-pound gorilla'' case. It is certainly entertaining. But is 
it a strong legal case? No, Microsoft insists, as it asks ``where's 
the body?'' _ where, in other words, is evidence that consumers are 
being hurt by the company's tough business tactics. That is a real 
hurdle for the prosecution, particularly because the personal computer 
industry where Microsoft is so powerful is not flashing the conventional 
warning signal of consumer distress _ rising prices. But that hurdle 
is by no means insurmountable, antitrust experts say. What the government 
must do, they say, is to marshal enough evidence of anticompetitive 
behavior by Microsoft to convince the court that there would be more 
innovation, more competition and probably lower prices if the company 
were forced to change its ways. For example, the next government witness 
is to be Steven McGeady, an Intel vice president, who will testify 
that Microsoft prodded the big chip maker to step back from developing 
Internet and multimedia software and from supporting Netscape Communications. 
The prosecution's case is largely about the future _ the loss of opportunities, 
the government says, in a field at the forefront of a new economy. 
``It does require a court to make an inference, to decide that the 
corporate behavior in question simply has to have negative effects,'' 
said William Kovacic, a visiting professor at George Washington University 
Law School. ``But since the Standard Oil case, courts have been willing 
to make inferential leaps into the future if they are persuaded that 
the bad conduct is serious enough.'' Indeed, the Supreme Court's ruling 
in 1911 to uphold the breakup of Standard Oil was one of the biggest 
judicial leaps into the future. Standard Oil, in its defense, had 
argued cogently that kerosene prices had declined since the 1880s 
and that the company, led by John D. Rockefeller, was an engine of 
industrial innovation, wealth creation and job generation. ``Standard 
Oil's pitch was why tamper with success, just as Microsoft is warning 
today,'' Kovacic said. In Microsoft's view, the government ``simply 
doesn't have the evidence to make its big-is-bad case,'' said Charles 
Rule, a former senior Justice Department official who is now an adviser 
to Microsoft. ``All of these alleged anticompetitive meetings,'' Rule 
said, ``amount to Microsoft basically informing another software company 
that it plans to compete vigorously in some new field and telling 
that company you can consider joining us. Saying you're going to compete 
like heck is not a violation of the nation's antitrust laws.'' The 
Justice Department and 20 states suing Microsoft recognize that they 
must present an array of damaging evidence to overcome the company's 
defense _ that rivals may be hurt by its actions but consumers are 
not. Since the trial began, the government has used piles of e-mail 
it has subpoenaed to make its case. In his opening statement, David 
Boies, the Justice Department's trial lawyer, showed an e-mail message 
from an executive at Hewlett-Packard to a Microsoft executive. The 
message protested restrictions Microsoft had placed on personal computer 
makers, barring them from making changes on the first screen that 
appears on computers when Microsoft's Windows operating system starts 
up. Microsoft had said its contract restrictions were to insure a 
``uniform consumer experience,'' but the government says that the 
curbs were intended to restrain the distribution deals that its rival 
in the Internet browser market, Netscape, could strike with PC makers. 
The Hewlett-Packard executive wrote that his company was ``very disappointed'' 
with Microsoft's restrictive contracts. ``From the consumer perspective,'' 
he said, the restrictions are ``hurting our industry and our customers.'' 
After displaying the e-mail message in court, Boies declared: ``This 
is not a better-product, consumer-driven approach, your honor. This 
is a monopolist, able to ignore the demands and the complaints and 
the protest of their customers.'' The government's early witnesses 
have repeatedly advanced the argument that the future of computer 
software innovation would be brighter if Microsoft were held in check. 
James Barksdale, Netscape's chief executive, testified that he thought 
there would be more innovation and more competitors in the browser 
market if Microsoft had not bundled its browser, the Internet Explorer, 
with its industry-standard Windows operating system and given the 
browser away free _ essentially removing the commercial incentive 
for entrepreneurs to invest in the browser market. And last week, 
Avadis Tevanian Jr., a senior vice president at Apple Computer, described 
a series of threats from Microsoft. The company, he testified, succeeded 
in getting Apple to make Internet Explorer the main browser on Macintosh 
computers, and Microsoft also tried to force Apple to step back from 
the new market for multimedia software. Market muscle and deep pockets 
_ not innovative smarts _ are the forces that make Microsoft a winner 
in new software markets, Tevanian asserted. With its industry witnesses, 
the government is arguing that Microsoft bullied companies into deals 
that reduce competition and do not result in any discernible consumer 
benefit. Thus, the government adds, these deals must hurt consumers, 
even if there is little immediate evidence of harm. ``The government 
is closing in on what is critical _ a loss of consumer choice and 
prices that are higher than would be the case if there were unrestricted 
competition,'' said Stephen Axinn, an antitrust litigator who is a 
partner of Axinn, Veltrop &AMP; Harkrider in New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>