<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981108.0130 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
One day in January, Bill Owens will shuttle cardboard boxes down a 
hall of the state Capitol here, moving from the treasurer's office 
to the governor's. For the first time since 1974, the year President 
Nixon resigned, Colorado is to have a Republican governor. But on 
a larger scale, Owens' election seals the interior West as the most 
Republican region in the country. Republican governors are set to 
rule every state in the 14-state expanse bounded by the Sierra Nevadas 
to the West and Missouri and Arkansas Rivers to the East, a gain of 
three for the GOP. The region that was known in the 1980s for such 
Democratic stalwarts gas Govs. Dick Lamm of Colorado, Cecil Andrus 
of Idaho and Pat Williams of Montana has decisively shifted into the 
Republican camp. ``When I was head of the Western Governors' Association 
in the late 70s, we had only one Republican governor, everyone else 
was a Democrat,'' marveled Philip M. Burgess, president of the Center 
for the New West, a regional think tank here. The new Republican dominance 
can be seen at all levels. In the 13 of the 14 states, Republicans 
control 20 of the 26 chambers. (Nebraska has a single nonpartisan 
chamber.) In the region's congressional delegation, Republicans have 
a 2-to-1 advantage _ 64 Republicans to 33 Democrats. If Texas is excluded, 
the Republican advantage jumps to 3 to 1, or 49 to 16. After the 2000 
census, the interior West is expected to gain seven House seats, while 
the Northeast is expected to lose five. Thinly populated, the interior 
West traditionally has received scant attention from national political 
strategists. The seven states of the Mountain Time Zone _ Arizona, 
Colorado, Idaho, Montana, New Mexico, Utah and Wyoming _ have a combined 
population of 14 million, the same as Florida. But in the 2000 presidential 
election, political attitudes in the Mountain states may carry more 
weight. On Nov. 16, leaders from these states, plus Nevada's, are 
to meet in Salt Lake City to decide on a date for a joint Western 
presidential primary. ``Issues important to the interior West have 
been virtually ignored in past elections,'' said Wyoming Gov. Jim 
Geringer, a coordinator of the effort. ``If several states band together 
to hold a primary, we increase the odds that the voice of the West 
will carry beyond our borders and all the way to Washington, D.C.'' 
In contrast to the interior West, Democrats rule the Pacific West. 
Democrats will be governors and will control state legislatures next 
year in California and Washington state. Oregon will have a Democratic 
governor and a Republican-controlled Legislature. ``It clearly is 
not one West anymore,'' said William T. Pound, executive director 
of the National Conference of State Legislatures, a research group 
based here. ``There is a striking contrast between the Pacific West 
and the mountain West.'' On a simplistic level, conservatives have 
moved from coastal southern California to the interior West, tipping 
ideological and partisan balances. Over the last decade, 1.6 million 
people, largely whites, have migrated from California. Nevada, Arizona, 
Idaho, Utah and Colorado experienced the nation's highest population 
growth rates, with California supplying the largest group of migrants. 
In Colorado, polls indicate that the newcomers have been far more 
likely to register Republican than Democratic, according to Floyd 
Ciruli, the president of a polling company here. ``We got the Southern 
Californians, the people facing the fires, the floods, the riots, 
and all the other reasons to leave,'' he said. ``Republicans out here 
speak of an orderly society, personal responsibility.'' In the last 
decade, voter registration in Colorado has moved from an even balance 
to a 130,000 advantage for the Republicans. ``If you look at the whole 
Rocky Mountain area, to win as a Democrat is an uphill climb,'' conceded 
Colorado Gov. Roy Romer, chairman of the Democratic National Committee. 
Romer did not seek re-election Tuesday. With three interior Western 
states _ Nevada, Utah and Arizona _ experiencing the nation's highest 
rates of job creation, Democrats had hoped that the influx of newcomers 
would foster activist environmental politics. Instead, affluence has 
reinforced existing conservative, small government values. ``The Rocky 
Mountain West is becoming more economically viable, and when people 
are comfortable, they vote Republican and for incumbents,'' said Dottie 
Lamm, wife of the former governor. Last week, as Colorado's Democratic 
candidate for senator, she was defeated by an almost 2-1 margin by 
Sen. Ben Nighthorse Campbell, a Republican. Jim Nicholson, a Colorado 
real estate developer and chairman of the Republican National Committee, 
said Friday: ``The spirit of the Rocky Mountain West, the emphasis 
on freedom and rugged individualism, coincides well with Republican 
values and ideas.'' Among the problems hindering the Democrats is 
that their core constituency groups, such as union members and racial 
minorities, are at low levels in the Rockies. But critics say that 
Democrats have also allowed Republicans to carry the flag on issues 
popular here: term limits, tax cuts, local control and individual 
responsibility. While the Civil War may still define politics in the 
South, public lands still define Western politics. Federal lands account 
for about half of all Western lands. Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt 
alienated many Westerners when he sought to charge ranchers and miners 
more to use federal land. About five years ago, conservatives started 
talking about the Clinton administration's ``War on the West.'' They 
described Babbitt, who comes from an Arizona ranching family, as Washington's 
colonial agent for the West. ``In the interior Rocky Mountain states, 
the federal government is still seen as the nanny,'' said Burgess. 
``Democrats like Al Gore and Bruce Babbitt are always telling us how 
to use our water, how to use our public lands.'' Democrats also have 
lost a generation of political figures who managed to take care of 
their liberal base and to capture the moderate middle. ``The Lamms 
and the Romers gave East Coast folks the wrong impression that this 
was a liberal region,'' said Gary Hart, who was a Democratic senator 
from Colorado in the 1980s and now works as a lawyer in Denver. ``In 
Colorado, the Romers, the Lamms, the Harts _ that generation has passed,'' 
said Dick Wadhams, the campaign manager who engineered Owens' razor 
thin, 7,928-vote victory over the Democratic gubernatorial candidate, 
Lt. Gov. Gail Schoettler. Her defeat ``put the final spade of dirt 
on that generation of Democratic elected officials,'' Wadhams said. 
But others caution that the Western voter is not a partisan voter, 
but an independent. In the 1992 presidential campaign, the West was 
Ross Perot's strongest region. Romer, who at 70 has been in Colorado 
politics for 40 years, predicted confidently, ``This is going to swing 
back. The culture is going to change.'' Predicting that rampant growth 
would create a need for a more interventionist government, he said: 
``In Colorado, it was wide-open spaces and leave us alone. Now, everybody 
is stuck in a traffic jam. They can't get into their parks.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>