<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981108.0198 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In late July, Mayor Rudolph Giuliani began shutting down strip clubs, 
and over the next month, the Dow Jones industrial average plunged 
1,500 points. In September, a court ruling gave some clubs a partial 
reprieve, whereupon the market began to recover. Last Wednesday, a 
strip club won another round in court, and the Dow surged 250 points 
the rest of the week. Mere coincidences? The mayor apparently thinks 
so, since he is continuing his dangerous crusade. But the stripper-Dow 
connection is all too obvious to those versed in the scientific literature 
of endocrinology. The market plummeted in August _ and will plummet 
again if Giuliani prevails _ because of a testosterone drought. This 
phenomenon was demonstrated by Emory University researchers who studied 
the closest scientific approximation of New York's financial district: 
a group of rhesus monkeys competing for status in a confined space. 
When one male defeated another in a contest over a female, the testosterone 
level rose in the winner and fell dramatically in the loser, who would 
subsequently cower in the winner's presence. But there was a quick 
cure if, when the winner was not around, the loser got a glimpse of 
a sexually receptive female monkey. His testosterone level promptly 
rose. It surged even though he had no chance of having sex because 
he was in a cage looking out at an unobtainable female _ the closest 
scientific approximation of a guy looking at a stripper. ``One implication 
of the study,'' explained Dr. Kim Wallen, a psychologist at Emory's 
Yerkes Primate Center, ``is that strip bars are popular because male 
losers can retreat there to raise their testosterone levels.'' This 
finding has vital economic implications because testosterone promotes 
feelings of well-being and helps people concentrate on tasks. Although 
it is popularly blamed for causing dangerous aggression, like the 
``roid rage'' said to afflict athletes on steroids, scientists say 
this is largely a myth. ``Testosterone doesn't make guys go out raping 
and pillaging,'' Dr. Wallen said. ``It generally makes them feel self-confident 
and ready to take on the world.'' It makes them feel like Mark McGwire, 
who did so much for the St. Louis economy while raising his testosterone 
with pills. Think of him losing his concentration and confidence, 
or of those cowering monkeys, and you see the risks of the mayor's 
crackdown. When Wall Street's masters of the universe lose focus and 
turn skittish, they bring down the Dow and the rest of the city's 
economy. When they're cowering, how can realty agents hope to sell 
them two-bedroom apartments for seven figures? Wallen declined to 
speculate on the stripper-Dow connection _ he has his academic reputation 
to consider _ but he noted that this might be a good time for women 
to get ahead on Wall Street. Their levels of testosterone are more 
stable than men's, which is one reason they do not need to go to strip 
clubs after a bad day in the market. Male losers are in a bind, though, 
especially the recently laid-off Wall Streeters who need a boost of 
testosterone to find a new job. Some strip clubs are staying open 
by putting bikinis on their dancers, but customers are unhappy, which 
jibes with the results of another study of primate behavior. In this 
experiment with baboons, researchers found that the male voyeurs were 
highly selective and a bit simple-minded. The baboon voyeurs did not 
respond to just any female. The female baboon had to appear to be 
in heat, which the researchers simulated by attaching a red plastic 
mold to her rear. As with men at a strip club, it took a crude illusion 
of sexual receptivity to jolt their endocrine systems. If clothes 
on a dancer ruin that illusion, where can male losers get a boost 
of testosterone? The only quick alternative suggested by the primate 
research is to win a fight with another man. ``New Yorkers,'' Wallen 
said, ``might want to consider which is socially preferable, a place 
where guys go to look at naked women, or a place where they go to 
beat up other guys?'' It is a perilous choice, as Giuliani's own role 
model demonstrated with tragic consequences. The last time a righteous 
mayor crusaded to close down strip joints, New York endured a long 
testosterone drought known as the Great Depression, and it took a 
world war to get the economy moving again. Fiorello H. La Guardia 
thought those were just coincidences, too. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>