<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981108.0141 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Eleven months ago, the New York Giants danced and celebrated on the 
Texas Stadium field. Champions of the storied National Football Conference 
East, the Giants were brandishing a new-found supremacy, a display 
that hinted at a shift in the balance of power within the division. 
It has turned out to be a very brief reign. On Sunday at Texas Stadium, 
there was no frolic in the Giants. Unceremoniously, the defense of 
their NFC East championship all but ended in a workmanlike 16-6 victory 
by the Dallas Cowboys. Nine games into the 1998 season, the Giants 
have lost six times _ more losses than they had last year. With seven 
games to go, a Giants season that dawned with great expectations has 
dissolved into an audition for next year. Although the Giants played 
one of their more consistent games, when it was over, all that remained 
was the nagging notion that their effort was too little too late. 
``It's discouraging, because I thought we'd use the first half of 
the season to position ourselves and maybe stockpile some wins,'' 
Giants quarterback Danny Kanell said. ``Maybe we got caught up in 
it a little bit and thought things were going to come easy. But they 
didn't. The hole kept getting bigger and bigger.'' And the Giants 
have yet to climb out. They are only two victories ahead of Washington, 
which means the Giants have gone from last place in 1996 to first 
place in 1997 to nearly last place in 1998. With three division losses 
and a formidable remaining schedule, they are eliminated from the 
playoff chase in every way except mathematically. As Giants coach 
Jim Fassel said: ``Realistically, today's game puts us out of it. 
I'm not going to kid you.'' There was hope for a while on Sunday that 
the Giants were mounting a last charge, a final swipe at making something 
of their season. Late in the first half, with a first down at the 
Dallas 1-yard line, the Giants seemed destined to take a lead on the 
Cowboys (6-3). But in a fitting sequence for a failed season, the 
Giants did not score a touchdown and never truly recovered. The key 
play on the goal line was a second-down, 7-yard sack of Kanell, after 
a first-down run did not produce a touchdown. Fassel had called a 
pass intended for tight end Al Pupunu. It was a new play, installed 
to take advantage of an overaggressive Cowboys defense. In Friday's 
practice, the Giants had run the play no fewer than three times, once 
to be sure that a blitz up the middle was properly picked up. On Sunday, 
the blitz came from the back side, or left side, of the formation. 
Pupunu, who lined up on the right side, was supposed to disengage 
from his defender at the line and drift into the right side of the 
end zone. Running back Gary Brown was the only other option, also 
on the right side. And Kanell's attention was focused entirely on 
the right side. From the left, Dallas' Darren Woodson ran toward Kanell 
unabated. Pupunu was bottled up at the line, lost in the goal-line 
maze of bodies. Before Kanell could consider a pass to Brown, Woodson 
decked him. Two plays later, the Giants kicked a 23-yard field goal 
to tie the score, 6-6. Fassel, whose offense has been criticized for 
its conservatism, did not consider a pass on the goal line a significant 
risk. ``They've been very good on the goal line against the run,'' 
he said. ``And if you're going to pass on the goal line, your best 
opportunity is to do it before third down. If you've run it twice 
and been stopped, trying to throw it on third down won't fool them.'' 
As if motivated by the same reasoning, the Cowboys scored the game's 
only touchdown in the fourth quarter on a second-down, 1-yard pass 
from Troy Aikman to tight end Eric Bjornson. ``I thought it was a 
good call,'' Kanell said of the play on which he was sacked. ``It 
just went wrong too fast. It happened too quick. I wasn't supposed 
to even worry about anything from the back side.'' The Giants' failure 
to get into the end zone overshadowed a productive day offensively. 
Their offensive line, often denigrated, played ably, leading the team 
to a season-high 159 yards rushing. Brown ran for 119 yards on only 
15 carries, averaging 7.9 yards. Kanell was much more decisive than 
he had been in last week's loss to Washington, throwing the football 
downfield often and completing 12 of 24 passes for 139 yards. The 
Giants, the worst team in the National Football League in third-down 
efficiency, even converted six of 13 third-down plays into first downs. 
But as Brown said, ``If you don't put the ball in the end zone, it 
doesn't matter how many yards you have.'' Following their retreat 
at the goal line at the conclusion of the first half, the Giants' 
first possession of the second half could have been a rallying point. 
And the Giants did appear to be on their way to something when Kanell 
connected with Chris Calloway for a 23-yard pass into Cowboys territory 
early in the third quarter. But Calloway fumbled after his catch, 
and Dallas recovered. It was the only turnover of the game. Soon the 
Cowboys, who dominated the rest of the game, had a 9-6 lead. Dallas' 
fourth-quarter touchdown sealed the victory. The key play in the Cowboys' 
scoring drive came on a third-and-3 when Aikman, who completed 11 
of 12 passes in the second half, passed to Ernie Mills for 27 yards. 
Mills fell to the Giants 1-yard line after making the catch. On the 
play, Giants free safety Tito Wooten appeared close enough to knock 
the ball away from Mills, or deliver a blow that would have made a 
reception unlikely. Wooten did neither, awkwardly jumping past Mills 
but not colliding with him. Wooten, whose play has significantly regressed 
from last season, when he was one of the Giants' top defensive backs, 
made a similar misplay two months ago when the Cowboys routed the 
Giants at Giants Stadium. ``That is one of those times when we didn't 
make plays to win,'' Fassel said. ``That's the kind of game it was. 
The team tried hard and we did some things better. But that's what 
it was. ``Good effort, poor results.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>