<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981108.0038 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Even by his own standards, Placido Domingo has accomplished an extraordinary 
hat trick in recent weeks. At the same time he was discussing extending 
his contract at the Washington Opera, where he has been artistic director 
since 1996, he was also meeting individually with members of the board, 
and with the entire executive committee, to explain why they should 
not be alarmed at his decision to become the artistic director of 
the Los Angeles Opera while continuing to hold the reins in Washington. 
Domingo's contract in Washington ends in 2002, and the extension under 
discussion would take it to 2004. The Los Angeles post, which was 
announced last week, begins in July 2000. The announcement comes at 
a time when the Los Angeles company is hoping to increase its number 
of productions and performances, and Domingo says he is willing to 
curtail his own performing schedule in order to keep up with his new 
responsibilities. Still, Domingo says he regards his Los Angeles position 
as more of an upgrade than an entirely new job. His connection with 
the company goes back to its founding in 1984. At first, he signed 
on as a member of its board, and when Peter Hemmings became its first 
general director, Domingo took the title of artistic consultant. He 
sang the title role in the company's first production, ``Otello,'' 
in 1986 and became artistic adviser in 1995. At 57, he now succeeds 
Hemmings, who is retiring at 64. Hemmings has already planned the 
2000-01 season, so Domingo's own programming will not be seen until 
2001-02. ``I think of my new position as an upgrading,'' Domingo said 
in a telephone interview between rehearsals in Washington, ``because 
as artistic adviser I was involved in discussions with Peter Hemmings 
about the productions, the casting. It was a collaboration, although 
it was minor compared with what I will have to do now.'' Still, Domingo's 
dual directorship raises questions. The most immediate is: Where in 
his schedule is the room to pencil in further commitments? He continues 
to give more than 60 performances a year in international opera houses, 
and in recent years he has been conducting as well, both in the opera 
pit and on the symphonic podium. Every four years, when the World 
Cup games are played, he joins Luciano Pavarotti and Jose Carreras 
to trawl for megabucks as the Three Tenors. He sponsors Operalia, 
which is billed as the world's largest opera competition, held annually. 
And to keep things exciting, he owns a restaurant, called Domingo, 
in New York City. If the Washington Opera board members have doubts 
about Domingo's ability to run two companies effectively, they have 
not expressed them publicly. Robert Craft, the president of the company, 
said that after he faxed board members to warn them, on Oct. 30, that 
the Los Angeles appointment would be announced the following Monday, 
he received no protests, comments or questions. Domingo and spokesmen 
for both companies have advanced a variety of reasons why the dual 
directorship poses no problems for either side. But weighing heavily 
in the equation is something the companies do not go out of their 
way to point out: Domingo's value as a fund-raising asset more than 
offsets any problems that might be caused by potential scheduling 
conflicts. Opera companies, and arts organizations in general, learned 
long ago that if they are associated with an artist who is a household 
name, corporate and private donations flow more freely. Beverly Sills 
discovered this when she was director of the New York City Opera, 
and she has continued to put her celebrity to use in raising money 
as chairwoman of Lincoln Center. Domingo, as one of the best-known 
opera singers of his generation, has proved to be a similar lure. 
But those in the opera world who expected Domingo to be little more 
than a money magnet have been surprised at his hands-on approach to 
the Washington job. No mere figurehead, he has taken charge of the 
company's programming, offering both standard repertory and unusual 
works. His success has been mixed: rarities like ``Il Guarany,'' by 
the 19th-century Brazilian composer Antonio Carlos Gomes, and the 
company's current production of Verdi's ``Simon Boccanegra'' have 
been skewered by critics; others, including a revival of an American 
classic, Douglas Moore's ``Ballad of Baby Doe,'' have fared better. 
Craft, noting that Domingo has also been involved in administrative 
aspects of the Washington company, said the level of energy he has 
brought to his work helped persuade the board that his taking on another 
directorship would not be a problem. ``I really don't think there 
were doubts expressed in the executive committee after hearing him 
explain how he could do both these jobs,'' Craft said. Part of Domingo's 
presentation, both Craft and Domingo said, was a demonstration that 
the production schedules of the two companies did not overlap, allowing 
Domingo to focus on each during crucial times. ``We can organize the 
dates so that if something is happening in one company, it is not 
also happening in the other,'' Domingo said. ``In other words, as 
an artistic director, I begin to think three years ahead about a production: 
about casting, conductors, designers, directors.'' ``And then, if 
you have the right people with you, they can start to get in touch. 
That's not work I have to do. I have the ideas. Then, when the production 
begins, I am involved in the beginning moments, I attend the first 
rehearsals; I look in as the rehearsals develop and I attend the final 
rehearsals and the opening. I don't have to be in the city the whole 
time.'' Hemmings, the outgoing general director of the Los Angeles 
Opera, noted that Domingo was succeeding him only partly, coming in 
as artistic director, not general director. ``So there will be someone 
else to take on that part of the job,'' he said. ``And the search 
for that person has not yet begun.'' But that raises further questions. 
Can a directorship be maintained if so much is delegated? And what 
will happen if crises occur when Domingo is on the other side of the 
country? A division of responsibilities of this sort, however, is 
hardly without precedent. Artistic and administrative duties are handled 
by separate staffs, under separate directors, at both the Metropolitan 
Opera and the New York City Opera; and James Levine, the artistic 
director of the Met, spends time away from his company. The model 
that Domingo presented to his board in Washington, moreover, included 
some tempting blandishments, including the possibility of sharing 
productions, and therefore costs, with the Los Angeles Opera. The 
two companies have borrowed each other's productions on occasion; 
now that arrangement would be formalized. ``There could be some synergies 
and economic possibilities,'' said Christine Hunter, the chairwoman 
of the Washington Opera's executive committee. ``It would be an ace 
in hand to assemble a wonderful cast for a production and have it 
performed both places. Even if the production begins in Los Angeles 
and comes to Washington, we have a true ensemble when it arrives.'' 
Domingo did not think that was quite what he had proposed. ``It's 
a nice dream,'' he said, ``but I don't see it working exactly that 
way. It's difficult to get singers to commit that much time, for rehearsals 
and a production in one city, and then moving to another city.'' ``I 
was thinking that our shared productions would not coincide in the 
same season. But there are exceptions. In 2003, for example, I hope 
to celebrate the anniversary of Berlioz with a big production of `Benvenuto 
Cellini.' That could be in both theaters. But it would be an exception.'' 
Craft expressed complete confidence in Domingo's energy, noting that 
one week recently, he sang at the Met on a Saturday night, stayed 
up until 5 a.m. studying the score of Saint-Saens' ``Samson et Dalila,'' 
which he was about to conduct, then attended a Sunday noon brunch 
in Maryland on his way to ``Simon Boccanegra'' rehearsals in Washington. 
That night, he flew to the West Coast, and was back to conduct ``Aida'' 
at the Met on Tuesday. Domingo, however, has started to rethink his 
ability to take on an imprudent number of commitments, and he said 
that when he began in Los Angeles, the shape of his performing schedule 
would change. ``I will cut my touring,'' he said, ``so I can spend 
more time around Washington and Los Angeles. When I am working at 
the Washington Opera and singing at the Met, I can commute. When I 
am in Los Angeles, that will give me a chance to perform more with 
the San Francisco Opera, which is a company I love very much. But 
to do this, I will have to give up some of my European engagements.'' 
At the moment, the Washington and Los Angeles companies are of comparable 
size: Washington, with a budget of $25 million, presents 70 performances 
of eight productions a year; Los Angeles has a $19 million budget 
and presents 54 performances of eight productions. Both, however, 
have cautious expansion plans. After the renovation of the Kennedy 
Center Opera House, the company may add slowly to its production schedule, 
assuming it can raise the money to do so. The Los Angeles Opera, which 
shares the Dorothy Chandler Pavilion with the Los Angeles Philharmonic, 
will be in a position to expand when the philharmonic moves to Walt 
Disney Hall, possibly in 2002. Within the next two years, Hemmings 
said, the company expects to add another production, and by the 2003-04 
season, it envisions giving 80 to 90 performances of 9 or 10 productions. 
This expansion is tied to the ability to raise money and expand the 
audience. Besides his skill at attracting donations, Domingo has another 
edge in Los Angeles: The company hopes that having a Spanish-speaking 
director _ and one with a passion for zarzuela, a form of popular 
Spanish opera _ will help it reach into the growing Hispanic community. 
There is a sense, too, that time is on Domingo's side. Neither company 
is likely to expand much before 2000, and his responsibilities in 
Los Angeles do not begin in full until 2001. By the time that growth 
at either company begins to exert any real pressure on him, Domingo 
will be in his early 60s, and may be reconsidering his singing schedule 
yet again. If worst came to worst, he could decide between companies. 
Hemmings, who is returning to his native England, where he will consult 
and oversee the construction of an opera house, discounts assertions 
that holding two positions will be unduly taxing for Domingo, and 
in any case, he has no fears for the company he built in Los Angeles 
over the last dozen years. ``He is an incredibly busy and active man,'' 
Hemmings said. ``He has considerable roots here. Because I'm not a 
performer, I've always been resident in the place I'm working, and 
have therefore had time for a lot of the administrative details. But 
those will now devolve upon an executive director. So a lot of the 
structure is in place, and I think he'll succeed.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>