<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981108.0135 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As the Clinton administration once again considers using force against 
Iraq, the Pentagon has drafted separate plans for a sharp, swift strike 
that could begin at any time, and a larger, more punishing assault 
that would require sending more forces to the region, officials say. 
President Clinton met for two hours Sunday with his senior national 
security aides at the presidential retreat at Camp David, Md., to 
discuss strategies for responding to the new defiance by Iraq's president, 
Saddam Hussein, of the U.N. weapon inspections. Officials emphasized 
that Clinton had not yet decided to use force in the latest confrontation 
with Saddam and that the plans could change. But with no 11th-hour 
diplomatic initiative in sight and with frustration over Iraq growing 
not only within the administration but among allies in Europe and 
the Persian Gulf, the possibility of a strike has loomed larger than 
at any point since the showdown last winter with Saddam. Either of 
the two plans now under consideration could cause significant damage 
to Saddam's bases of power, including Iraq's military and special 
police and factories or other sites suspected of producing chemical 
and biological weapons, the officials said, speaking on the condition 
of anonymity. They declined to discuss the planning in greater detail. 
The swift strike has the advantage of speed and surprise. The United 
States could launch the strikes with the forces already in the Persian 
Gulf, including warplanes aboard the carrier Dwight D. Eisenhower 
and seven other Navy vessels that can fire Tomahawk cruise missiles. 
The larger strike could do more damage, the officials said, but would 
require Clinton to activate air and naval forces based in the United 
States. Those forces, already on call in case of a crisis in the region, 
could arrive in the Gulf region within 96 hours. ``The trade-off is 
speed vs. power,'' said one official familiar with the planning. During 
the meeting Sunday with his national security aides, which took place 
at the presidential retreat in Camp David, Md., Clinton asked for 
a review of all the diplomatic and military options on the table, 
and told his advisers to report back to him ``over the next several 
days,'' said David Leavy, the spokesman for the National Security 
Council. ``He had some important questions he wanted to get some more 
information on,'' Leavy said. Clinton made no decisions at the meeting, 
Leavy said. In attendance were Secretary of State Madeleine Albright; 
Secretary of Defense William Cohen; the chairman of the Joint Chiefs 
of Staff, Gen. Henry Shelton; the national security adviser, Sandy 
Berger; and the director of central intelligence, George Tenet. Sunday's 
meeting came on the heels of diplomatic missions by Clinton's aides. 
On Friday Cohen completed a whirlwind tour of nine Arab states, where 
he gauged anti-Iraqi sentiments. He won no public backing for military 
action, but officials said he received private pledges of support 
from allies whose territory or air space might be needed for strikes. 
Berger met with his French and British counterparts outside Paris 
on Saturday. ``The patience among all the allies is frayed, badly 
frayed,'' an official said Sunday. The United States has not set a 
deadline for Iraq to reverse its decision to end all cooperation with 
UNSCOM, the U.N. commission overseeing the dismantling of Iraq's weapons 
programs. Administration officials also said they had not decided 
whether to issue an ultimatum before acting. One official said the 
administration did not foresee a new diplomatic appeal to Iraq, like 
the one the U.N. secretary-general, Kofi Annan, made in February to 
avert a U.S.-led strike. While the administration had refused to discuss 
any timetable for action, there are external factors that could affect 
decisions in the days ahead. A significant one is the president's 
schedule. He plans to leave the United States on Friday for a nine-day 
trip to Asia. An overriding question facing the administration is 
what to do after a strike. While the Pentagon's planners believe even 
the smaller option could heavily damage targets dear to Saddam, a 
strike could well mean the end of the seven-year effort by U.N. inspectors 
to ferret out Iraq's ballistic missile and chemical and biological 
weapons programs. Pentagon officials have also warned that even a 
larger strike is not likely to topple Saddam, nor is it any guarantee 
of eliminating Iraqi weapons of terror. In Baghdad, the Iraqi government 
showed no signs of backing down. Iraq's deputy prime minister, Tariq 
Aziz, said Iraq would not resume cooperation with the weapons inspectors 
until the Security Council agreed to review the sanctions imposed 
in 1991 after the Persian Gulf war. The trade minister, Mohammed Mehdi 
Saleh, said Iraq had nothing to fear from attacks, since the sanctions 
were already causing suffering. ``They will not kill in a military 
strike more than they are killing with sanctions every day,'' The 
Associated Press quoted him saying. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>