<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981108.0104 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Pete Sampras has visited but not really seen Switzerland, Austria, 
Germany and now France. His autumn tour of European arenas continues, 
and this week he will spend more time indoors in Stockholm. ``I'm 
losing my tan,'' Sampras, the southern Californian turned Floridian, 
said. He is chasing computer points more than trophies, and after 
five weeks of sustained effort and intermittent physical treatment 
on his often-fragile body, he has helped his cause considerably, but 
not necessarily his aura of supremacy. Sampras might be the finest 
tennis player of all time: a sleek, composed cocktail of baseline 
fluidity and serving acuity, but for all his motivation to cling to 
his No. 1 ranking and all his natural aptitude for indoor tennis, 
he has managed to win only one of the five tournaments he has played 
on this side of the Atlantic since losing in the U.S. Open semifinal. 
He withdrew in mid-tournament in Lyons with a bad back, lost to Wayne 
Ferreira in three sets in Basel and to Richard Krajicek in three sets 
in Stuttgart. On Sunday, he again lost, this time in three sets to 
Greg Rusedski in the final of the Paris Indoor, but this match was 
no cliffhanger. Unlike the others, it was a three-of-five-set match, 
and Rusedski served it out, 6-4, 7-6 (7-4), 6-3, and then immediately 
and understandably began serving up superlatives. ``I definitely think 
it's the best match of my career,'' he said. ``To beat Pete Sampras, 
the No. 1 player in the world, is an unbelievable feeling considering 
my record.'' Until Sunday, Rusedski was 0-6 against Sampras, but that 
lopsided score line does not reflect that Rusedski has often given 
him trouble. Looking at a left-handed serve that is as powerful and 
difficult to read as Rusedski's does not take long, and Sunday, he 
delivered what may be the fastest second serve ever recorded: a nearly 
135 mile-an-hour effort in the second set that was far quicker than 
any first serves of Sampras. Of course, the service gun is really 
nothing more than a marketing tool: an elicitor of gasps from the 
stands. One does not beat Sampras in straight sets with only a serve 
on an indoor court as medium-paced as the one at the Palais Omnisports 
de Bercy. Rusedski's game has evolved considerably since he decided 
to leave Canada in 1995 and play for Great Britain, where his mother 
was born. ``He's definitely tough when he's on,'' Sampras said, ``and 
he was definitely on today.'' Rusedski's tennis remains ungainly at 
times _ a bit premeditated. His wickedly effective inside-out forehand 
is a slash, not a sweep. His on-court movements are often abrupt, 
but his footwork has improved considerably along with his once vulnerable 
backhand and returns. That progress has not been as evident lately 
because he injured his ankle in June, forcing him to retire from his 
first-round match at Wimbledon and hindering him the rest of the summer. 
``He didn't put it totally behind him until Vienna last month,'' said 
his coach, Sven Groenveld, who took over after Rusedski and Tony Pickard 
split on acrimonious terms after Wimbledon. Groenveld, a well-traveled 
33-year-old Dutchman, has more experience coaching women than men, 
although he did help Michael Stich reach the 1996 French Open final. 
He has been disappointed by the self-centered attitudes of some of 
his pupils in the past, but he and the relentlessly cheerful Rusedski 
have struck up a friendship. ``I've been going through a divorce, 
and Greg has been very supportive of me through it,'' he said. ``It's 
something I will never forget.'' The 11th-ranked Rusedski will never 
forget beating Sampras, but it might not have happened if Sampras 
had not played poorly when serving for the second set at 5-3. He double-faulted 
twice in that game and missed a routine backhand volley, and that 
was essentially all the reassurance Rusedski needed to win the final 
Super 9 event of the season. ``I know he really wanted this match, 
as well,'' Rusedski said of Sampras. ``And that makes it even more 
special.'' Rusedski has a fine chance of qualifying for the ATP Tour 
Championships in Hanover later this month. If Yevgeny Kafelnikov loses 
before the final this week in Moscow, Rusedski is in. Body willing, 
Sampras will be there, too, attempting to hold off Marcelo Rios and 
finish No. 1 for the sixth consecutive year. His chances are good, 
although they would have been better if he had won today. It is a 
bit of a false debate in that Rios has yet to win a Grand Slam event. 
But the Chilean has won three Super 9 titles this year _ Indian Wells, 
Calif.; Key Biscayne, Fla., and Rome. Sampras has won Wimbledon, but 
only three other minor tour events. If Sampras does fulfill his mission, 
he will break his tie with Jimmy Connors, a better showman but not 
a better player who finished No. 1 from 1974 to 1978. ``I'm sure he's 
probably not rooting for me, knowing him,'' Sampras said. ``The reason 
I'm doing this is I feel like it's one of the records that in tennis 
won't be touched.'' At a moment when beating Sampras is beginning 
to look increasingly within reach for eager ATP members like Rusedski, 
that is a timely approach. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>