<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981108.0029 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Joe Camel, the advertising icon that became a powerful symbol to critics 
of the tobacco industry's efforts to lure minors to smoking, will 
go on trial on Monday, more than a year after he was retired by R.J. 
Reynolds Tobacco Co. The Federal Trade Commission brought the case 
contending that Reynolds, a unit of RJR Nabisco, committed an unfair 
trade practice by using the Joe Camel character to attract children 
and adolescents to cigarettes. Government lawyers assert that once 
Reynolds introduced the campaign, Joe Camel became as recognizable 
to children as Mickey Mouse, promoting a lethally addictive product 
for a segment of the cigarette market that was central to the company's 
future. The case is the culmination of an eight-year struggle between 
the FTC and Reynolds over the Joe Camel campaign. It is also the first 
time the commission has characterized a tobacco advertising program 
as unfair because of its effect on young consumers. Since the company 
voluntarily decided to pull the campaign last year just weeks after 
the commission filed its complaint, the case has turned into the regulatory 
equivalent of a probate contest, with the two sides fighting over 
Joe Camel's corpus. The government seeks a permanent ban blocking 
Reynolds from ever using Joe or his brethren characters, which include 
Buster, Max and Floyd, in cigarette ads. Government lawyers have also 
asked the administrative law judge hearing the case to order Reynolds 
to pay for a consumer education program that would discourage adolescents 
and teen-agers from buying cigarettes. In its defense, Reynolds has 
tried to transform Joe Camel from a cool and goofy promotional character 
to a protector of the First Amendment. The company says that Joe Camel 
has had no significant impact on smoking by people younger than 18 
and argues that the commission's complaint poses fundamental constitutional 
issues that are certain to affect how other industries can go about 
marketing their products. ``The witnesses and other evidence the FTC 
will put on will not show that Joe Camel caused anyone _ let alone 
underage persons _ to start smoking, smoke more or not quit when they 
otherwise would have,'' said Guy Blynn, vice president and deputy 
general counsel of Reynolds. ``This attack on cigarette advertising 
will fail both because it does not meet the Federal Trade Commission's 
own standard for establishing unfairness, and because it tramples 
on the constitutionally protected right of a lawful industry to advertise 
a lawful product.'' Lawyers at the commission respond that the First 
Amendment does not protect unfair trade practices, particularly in 
a case like this in which the product at issue causes so many deaths 
and illnesses. In a trial brief filed two weeks ago, the FTC said 
that the Camel campaign ``had immediate and dramatic effects on youth 
smoking behavior.'' ``Within one year, Camel's brand share of smokers 
below the legal smoking age almost tripled and within five years quadrupled,'' 
the brief said. ``More disturbing, the incidence of youngsters age 
12-17 smoking their first cigarette began to increase, as did the 
incidence of daily smoking by this age group.'' According to a federal 
survey, the brief concluded, the incidence of new smoking increased 
by nearly a third, and the incidence of daily smoking rose by 50 percent, 
during the years of the Joe Camel campaign. But the company contends 
that the Joe Camel campaign was aimed primarily at the 18-to-24-year-old 
age group. The case will feature a stream of testimony and company 
documents about its advertising campaign, revealing the marketing 
strategy of Reynolds at a time when it was beginning to see a serious 
erosion in sales. In addition to company executives who worked on 
the campaign, the two sides are expected to call experts in health, 
marketing and economics. The Joe Camel character was created in 1974 
by a British artist, Nicholas Price, for a Camel advertising campaign 
in France that subsequently appeared in other countries throughout 
the 1970s. The character arrived in the United States in 1988 in materials 
created by Trone Advertising in Greensboro, N.C., for the 75th anniversary 
of the Camel brand. The figure almost immediately attracted the attention 
of officials studying the problem of smoking among the young. After 
studies found that Camels were 10 times as popular among teen-agers 
as adults and that illegal sales of cigarettes to minors had reached 
$500 million, the surgeon general, Antonia Novello, called on Reynolds 
to withdraw the Joe Camel campaign. Five years ago, the FTC staff 
recommended banning Joe Camel ads because of their appeal to children. 
But in 1994 the commission rejected the recommendation by a vote of 
3-2. President Clinton then attacked Joe Camel, saying the campaign 
told minors that ``smoking is cool.'' In March 1997, the staff of 
the FTC once again recommended action against the campaign and two 
months later, the commission approved the complaint that is to be 
heard on Monday. The case is expected to be completed next month. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>