<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981108.0111 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The English will kill each other to protect animals. The French fight 
to the death to preserve the purity of their language. Italians, however, 
rarely get indignant about anything, except food. Few other nations, 
for example, have so passionate a grass-roots movement to preserve 
endangered species of cheese and protect vegetable rights. ``Plants 
have a soul,'' playwright and Nobel prize winner Dario Fo warned a 
rapt audience last week at a conference on Biodiversity and Genetic 
Species on the Verge of Extinction. ``They have feelings. And some 
are assassins, using poison to destroy.'' Fo is one of the intellectual 
pillars of Slow Food, a food and wine organization created 13 years 
ago by an Italian journalist, Carlo Petrini, as an antidote to fast 
food. Both men were expecting more than 100,000 people to attend Slow 
Food's Salone del Gusto, a five-day food fair, drawing epicures dedicated 
to the languorous enjoyment of slowly prepared regional delicacies. 
Petrini became radicalized when he entered the Piazza di Spagna in 
Rome and smelled mass-produced french fries wafting from the country's 
first McDonald's. Slow Food, which was begun by a group of leftist 
intellectuals disenchanted by politics and disgusted by the fast-food 
trend, has in the last few years become fashionable in Italy and throughout 
Europe. After an initial, mostly botched effort to infiltrate the 
United States eight years ago, it is now catching on via the internet 
with American food and wine connoisseurs. Now with 40,000 members 
in 35 countries, Slow Food's manifesto warns against ``obsessive worrying 
about hygienic matters'' and pledges to preserve such endangered foods 
as Firiki apples from Greece and Sicilian lattume di tonno, sperm 
of male tuna. Il Salone del Gusto, held in a giant convention center 
which was once a Fiat car factory, boasts 300 regional food stands, 
with free samples, 50 gourmet dinners and 325 workshops on everything 
from ``Cooking in the Antipodes'' to ``Hungarian Foie Gras and Tokaij,'' 
(or Tokay, a white wine). It is to ordinary food fairs what Republican 
national conventions are to New Hampshire political coffee klatches. 
Here, however, delegates vote with their forks. ``Feel how the fat 
gallops in your mouth,'' Piero Sardo, a cheese expert and co-founder 
of Slow Food, instructed 110 gourmands who signed up and paid $16 
for last Thursday's workshop, ``Strong Cheeses and Sweet Wines.'' 
He was commenting on a Stilton, served with a Greek port wine. His 
students, seated at conference tables behind six tasting glasses and 
a plate of cheeses labeled by number, swallowed obediently before 
nibbling a French Roquefort, which they were informed, contains ``noble'' 
salt levels. Food is not just good at these workshops, it is dripping 
with history. ``Real iberico,'' a Spanish ham, comes from a breed 
of pig, Cerdo Iberico, which is the direct descendant of the Mediterranean 
boar that man began domesticating in Neolithic times. Uncontaminated 
by any crossbreeding, raised in the Dehesa, an ancient Mediterranean 
forest and fed on la bellota, a kind of acorn, the Cerdo Iberico is 
a kind of ``thoroughbred swine,'' according to Giovanni Pellinghelli 
del Monticello, a consultant to a guild of Iberian ham producers, 
who delivered the lecture. ``We will never know what the Bollinger 
Louis XV drank really tasted like,'' he said sadly, referring to phylloxera, 
a disease that destroyed European vines in the late 19th century. 
``But this pig is an uncontaminated breed, its ham today has exactly 
the same taste it had when it was eaten by Charles V of Spain.'' French, 
British and American history buffs are known for their re-enactments 
of famous battles _ Austerlitz, Waterloo or Gettysburg. Italians prefer 
to dwell on the great meals of history. Actually, so do their American 
acolytes. Patrick Martins, a Slow Food activist based in Bra, a food-obsessed 
town in Piedmont, Italy, wrote his thesis at New York University on 
Medieval Food Sculptures, which, among other things, involved molding 
asparagus into a giant chess-set. Fo and others complain about multinationals, 
which favor mass production and have steadily reduced the world's 
varieties. At the turn of the century, there were 30,000 varieties 
of rice in India. Now, there only 12. But the public also prefers 
convenience, speed and lower prices. ``Our real enemy is the obtuse 
consumer,'' Sardo said. Yet at the Salone, even among the initiated, 
there were some Slow Food recidivists. Lorenzo Molinacci, 42, who 
makes Panforte di Siena, a sophisticated brand of fruitcake, was discovered 
at lunchtime wolfing down a prefabricated prosciutto sandwich at the 
Autogrille, an Italian fast-foot outlet inside the convention hall. 
``What else could I do,'' he said sheepishly. ``I'm very busy and 
I had to go somewhere and eat fast.'' Post-modern food tastings at 
the fair were provided by theater director Silvio Panini, who created 
a ``degustazione teatrale,'' in which the diners, wearing earphones 
and seated at stark steel tables, sample tiny drops of balsamic vinegar 
and minimalist morsels of parmigiano while a performance artist recites 
sensual eating instructions. ``Agriculture is an aesthetic,'' Panini 
explained. In many areas, it is also a dying art. Lard from the region 
surrounding Carrara, which was the basic food for the marble workers 
who supplied Michelangelo, is in danger of extinction, according to 
Slow Food. ``Pigs today are small and too meaty, everyone wants pork-light,'' 
complained Marino Giannarelli, 50, whose family firm, Lardo di Colonnata, 
produces a small amount of extremely thick, succulent lard. The Caciocavallo 
Podolico is a rare, fragrant cheese from the Campania region, which 
relies on finicky free-range white cows, who will only give milk if 
their calves are standing near them, and even then, only a few liters 
a day. ``You have to be a hero to make it,'' Sardo said. ``And also 
a bit crazy.'' A kilo of Caciocavallo Podolico costs $37, three times 
as much as more ordinary varieties of Caciocavallo. To raise consumer 
consciousness, Antonio Madaio, a processor from Eboli, has begun selling 
three-pound balls of his cheese in wooden trophy boxes, with a certificate 
attached. Participants ranged from Jonathan White, an artisanal cheese-maker 
from Peekskill, N.Y. who makes butter for the White House, to some 
of the world's most high-minded chefs. Miguel Sanchez Romera, 45, 
for example, is a neurologist who on weekends cooks Spanish nouvelle 
cuisine at his restaurant, L'Esguard, in a small town outside Barcelona. 
He was one of three chefs selected to prepare a three-course, $178 
gourmet meal for 36 people, which included a dish of egg and caviar 
inspired by Van Gogh's Sunflowers. Romera gave a lecture explaining 
the neurological impulses of appetite. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>