<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981108.0123 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
She was at least as elusive as the other dreams this country has pursued. 
A mermaid was spotted last week under Falomo Bridge, swimming in the 
murky creek spilling into Lagos Lagoon. After word spread, hundreds 
of drivers parked on the bridge, which leads to Victoria Island, this 
city's business center, creating an extraordinary traffic jam, or 
``go-slow'' in the local slang. The curious, the hopeful, the doubtful 
stood there and peered into the waters below. It is with a similar 
mixture of desperate hope, cautious optimism and deep skepticism that 
Nigerians are watching their country's new military rulers who have 
promised a permanent change to a civilian government. The scheduling 
of elections, the release of political prisoners and other reforms 
have earned positive reviews in the West for Gen. Abdulsalami Abubakar, 
who took over as president in June after the unexpected death of Gen. 
Sani Abacha. But in Nigeria, Africa's most populous country and one 
long split by ethnic, religious and regional loyalties, distrust of 
such promises runs deep. Many Nigerians _ journalists and activists, 
opponents of the government and even some of its own officials _ warn 
against being too optimistic. Although many Nigerians say there is 
already a greater feeling of freedom, they are quick to add that political 
reforms have not gone as far as they should. They say Nigeria's problems 
will not be quickly solved. Among them are a military accustomed to 
holding power and a split between the south, which produces the country's 
oil, and the north, which controls it. ``The changes are only cosmetic,'' 
said Olisa Agbakoba, a prominent human rights lawyer in Lagos and 
a member of the Ibo, one of the three major ethnic groups in the country. 
``It's nice that Abubakar doesn't wear dark glasses'' _ a reference 
to Abacha _ ``and that he's supposed to be a nice guy. But nothing 
has changed fundamentally.'' Next month, Nigeria is to start lurching 
toward democracy in a series of elections that are to culminate in 
February with the presidential contest and a transfer of power to 
a civilian government on May 29. The United States has a great stake 
in these events, having raised its investments in the Nigerian oil 
industry and relied increasingly on the country, as West Africa's 
dominant power, to keep peace in the area. For now, before the government's 
promises have been put to the test of elections, even Agbakoba admits, 
reluctantly, that things have improved. Early this year, under the 
old regime, he was arrested at the airport here after returning from 
London, even though he had taken the precautions of returning through 
Ghana and using a second passport. The authorities, he said, suspected 
anyone traveling to Britain or the United States of fraternizing with 
the Nigerian exiles there. After two months in jail _ and, more important, 
after Abacha's death _ Agbakoba became one of the hundreds of political 
prisoners freed by Abubakar. Today he travels freely, holds meetings 
with fellow political organizers and talks on the telephone without 
speaking in code. ``The shadow is no longer there,'' he said. ``You 
feel easy. You sleep easy. Both eyes firmly shut.'' Beyond the release 
of political prisoners, the new openness has touched many levels of 
society. Exiles, most notably Wole Soyinka, the Nobel Prize-winning 
author who lives in Atlanta, accepted Abubakar's invitation to visit. 
On the traffic-clogged, fume-filled streets of Lagos, giant billboards 
now demand human rights. Darting in and out of traffic and rapping 
their knuckles against car windows with pleas of ``Master,'' children 
now hawk political magazines, like Tell, which was banned until a 
few months ago and whose assistant editor was jailed. Akin Akingbulu, 
executive director of the Independent Journalism Center here, said 
``guerrilla journalism'' tactics were no longer necessary. Targeted 
publishers no longer have to move from one printing site to another 
each week to avoid detection, editors do not have to hold meetings 
in restaurants, and reporters are now permitted to attend government 
news conferences. But this new openness, Akingbulu and others say, 
may be temporary. They point out that the government has yet to repeal 
a notorious law, Decree No. 2, that allows the authorities to arrest 
and detain people indefinitely under the catch-all of state security. 
``Abubakar has been in power for five months,'' said Femi Falana, 
a well-known opposition lawyer. ``It doesn't take anything to repeal 
that decree. It just takes a single stroke of his pen. If you say 
you are controlling the military, and you are popular among citizens, 
why are you leaving this problem for the next civilian president?'' 
Mohammed Haruna, chief press secretary to Abubakar, said there was 
a limit to what the president could do in a short time. Undertaking 
all necessary reforms would prolong his tenure and inevitably bring 
accusations of wanting to cling to power, Haruna said. Mohammed Koiranga 
Jada, a member of the Fulani ethnic group who is seeking the governorship 
of the northeastern state of Adamawa, said many changes would have 
to wait until after the scheduled transition in May. ``The problem 
we have in this country is that people are never satisfied and are 
too impatient,'' he said. ``When we get to full-blown open democracy, 
we can take care of everything. After May, we can restructure anything.'' 
Jada belongs to the All People's Party, one of the nine parties that 
succeeded in registering nationally after Abubakar allowed political 
parties to form before the scheduled elections. An independent body 
was created to oversee the elections, but irregularities have already 
been reported. About 16 million voter-registration cards vanished, 
preventing many people from registering, said Haruna and opposition 
leaders. But more important, reforms to ensure the viability of a 
civilian government after May have yet to be undertaken. No constitution 
has been presented to the nation. The military, which has put an end 
to civilian governments in the past, has not been reformed. ``At the 
end of the day, despite Abubakar's good intentions, the monstrous 
military institution is still there,'' said Tunji Braithwaite, a prominent 
Lagos lawyer who formed a party, the Democratic Advance Movement, 
and is seeking the presidency. Even Haruna, the president's press 
secretary, did not rule out the possibility that the military, which 
is led by Northerners of the Hausa and Fulani ethnic groups, could 
take action if it was unhappy with the election results. ``It's possible,'' 
he said. ``You can't discount that.'' It has done so before, annulling 
an election in 1993 presumably won by a southerner, Moshood K.O. Abiola, 
who was this country's most prominent political prisoner until he 
died in detention this year. In fact, Haruna said he suspected that 
reactionary forces _ high-ranking military officials and their civilian 
allies who have much to lose in a democracy _ have at times fed the 
general bad advice. For example, Abubakar recently announced a plan 
formed by Abacha to more than double government workers' minimum monthly 
wage to roughly $56. But the government simply cannot afford such 
an increase, Haruna said. ``No one who wants him to succeed would 
have given him that kind of advice,'' Haruna said. Most politicians 
in Lagos are calling for a decentralized political structure that 
would give greater autonomy to the regions and weaken the grip of 
the few hands in the north that control Nigeria's fate. But barring 
such a reform, the office of the presidency remains all-important 
and the potential cause of ethnic and regional conflict. So far, the 
most prominent figure to have declared his presidential ambitions, 
Gen. Olusegun Obasanjo, is a member of the southwestern Yoruba group 
with close ties to the northern military rulers. While he is widely 
believed to be acceptable to the north, many of his own ethnic group 
dismiss him as being too close to northerners. Jada, the Fulani gubernatorial 
candidate, said he had supported the presumed winner of the country's 
last election, Abiola, a Yoruba who had converted to Islam and had 
succeeded in unifying this fractious country. ``I agree that for the 
stability of Nigeria, we require a power shift to a southerner,'' 
Jada said. ``But the southerner should be nationally popular, like 
Abiola.'' But with the presidential election three months away, no 
figure has appeared yet to Jada in Abuja, or to the hundreds standing 
on Falomo Bridge. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>