<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981108.0100 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In a cramped loft apartment in Macungie, Pa., a grass-roots group 
that includes a mechanic, a retired teacher, a physician and a concrete 
salesman gathers every Tuesday to pray for what they call Christian 
martyrs around the world who are victimized, raped and killed for 
their faith. In Highlands, Colo., volunteers fill a Presbyterian church 
hall to hear a Nigerian refugee testify that Muslims in his village 
back home tied him to a tree, beat him and left him for dead, all 
because he tried to preach the Gospel of Jesus. In Austin, Texas, 
5,000 people march through the streets singing hymns to honor the 
Christians they are told are suffering in countries like China, Saudi 
Arabia and Sudan. Slowly and without much publicity, a new kind of 
solidarity movement is gaining force among Christians across the United 
States. Their focus is what they call ``the persecuted church'' _ 
the fellow Christians throughout the world who they say have been 
targets of abuse solely because of their faith. The concern has grown 
as Christianity has sprouted up in parts of the world long cultivated 
by other faiths, resulting in increasing clashes. The Christian persecution 
movement has gained momentum despite the advice from international 
scholars and some foreign-aid groups that what outsiders often label 
Christian persecution is often a complex brew of racial, economic, 
political, tribal and religious rivalries. Nevertheless, very real 
photographs of tortured pastors and burned churches have had a powerful 
effect. Concern about persecuted Christians first emerged about two 
years ago in the conservative and evangelical churches usually associated 
with the Christian right. But now it is transcending denominational 
and political boundaries. Churches that have long found themselves 
on opposing sides in the debates over abortion or homosexuality are 
finding common cause in Christian persecution. ``All Christians everywhere, 
the body of Christ, are really one body, so if one part is feeling 
pain, we should all be feeling pain,'' said Amy Wierman, who is the 
host of the prayer group in her apartment in Pennsylvania each Tuesday. 
``The Christian woman raped in Egypt, that is my sister. The guy shot 
in Pakistan, that is my brother.'' Now a wide swath of Americans who 
admit they never before paid much attention to foreign affairs or 
human rights is beginning to exert its influence on U.S. foreign policy. 
They are lobbying cities to stop doing business with nations that 
they say persecute Christians. They are writing letters to countries 
_ some of whose names they cannot pronounce _ demanding the release 
of Christian prisoners. They are swelling the coffers of groups that 
aid persecuted Christians. And they are traveling to refugee camps 
in Africa and Asia, taking donated Bibles and gathering testimony 
of suffering to take back to their congregations in Ohio or California. 
Last month, this fledgling movement succeeded in persuading the Senate 
to pass by unanimous vote the International Religious Freedom Act, 
which requires the president to take action against countries that 
the State Department finds are violating the religious rights of their 
citizens. The punishment could range from sending a private diplomatic 
note to invoking economic sanctions. President Clinton signed the 
bill into law on Oct. 27. ``Human rights is now no longer the prerogative 
only of the left,'' said Richard Cizik of the National Association 
of Evangelicals. ``Believe it or not, the religious right is making 
a distinctive contribution to American foreign policy. We are shaping 
policy. And on human rights? Who would have predicted that?'' In a 
movement that is even more spiritual than political, the antidote 
often promoted is prayer. Next Sunday, as many as 100,000 U.S. churches 
_ about a third of the churches in the nation _ are expected to participate 
in the International Day of Prayer for the Persecuted Church, an annual 
event that began two years ago in just 5,000 churches. Organizers 
of the Day of Prayer say the event will be observed by a broad array 
of congregations that rarely find themselves allied, including Methodist, 
Southern Baptist, Roman Catholic, Pentecostal, Orthodox and Salvation 
Army churches. As a result, from both the theological left and right, 
a consensus is emerging. After decades of soul-searching over the 
indifference or even complicity of some Christians in the Holocaust 
and in genocidal wars in Rwanda and Bosnia, Christians are seeing 
themselves as the victims and martyrs of the moment. In church services, 
in literature and in videos put out by the persecuted church movement, 
they are likening Christian persecution to the Holocaust. They quote 
from Anne Frank and Elie Wiesel. And for moral reinforcement, they 
frequently note that it is two Jews, Michael Horowitz, director of 
the conservative Hudson Institute, and A.M. Rosenthal, a columnist 
at The New York Times, who have been raising the loudest protests 
about the persecution of Christians. ``The same thing that happened 
to the Jews _ to the people of the book _ is now happening to Christians,'' 
said John Noska, the concrete salesman whose prayer group in Pennsylvania 
has produced a video on Christian persecution for cable television. 
``Here in America, many of us are living in a comfort zone, and the 
Lord is saying: `Come out of your comfort zone. What about your brothers 
and sisters who are suffering?''' A Change in Focus No Longer Praying 
for Missionaries As a child, Steve Haas always ended his bedtime prayers 
with a plea to the Lord to protect the American missionary families 
he knew who were risking their lives to share the Gospel in Asia, 
Africa and Latin America. Haas, president of Prayer for the Persecuted 
Church, says that his prayers are now for the Asians, Africans and 
Latin Americans whom the missionaries converted to Christianity. Indigenous 
Christians on those continents, and not white missionaries, are now 
the victims of Christian persecution, Haas said. This reflects the 
global shifts in Christianity in the last 30 years. In 1960 more than 
70 percent of all evangelical Christians were Americans, Canadians 
and Europeans, according to Prayer for the Persecuted Church. By 1990 
the picture had flipped, and 70 percent of all evangelical Christians 
were Africans, Asians and Latin Americans. In a mere 30 years, a ``born 
again'' brand of Christianity has spread to countries inhabited primarily 
by Muslims, Hindus, Buddhists and Animists, resulting in some places 
in religious conflict and rivalry. ``When Christians begin to have 
some influence in the life of a nation,'' said Andrew Vanderbijl, 
a Dutch missionary better known as Brother Andrew, ``morally, maybe 
politically, culturally, economically,'' then others in the community 
turn against them. In predominantly Muslim Indonesia, for example, 
Chinese Christians control the economy, he said, ``and when they exert 
influence, they have opposition, and that may turn into persecution.'' 
Where Christians are a minority, they are subject to human rights 
abuses. A State Department report last year listed about 70 countries 
in which there is a wide range of violations against Christians, from 
censoring tracts to detention to torture. Yet many missionaries, aid 
workers, scholars of foreign affairs and State Department officials 
say they fear that the American churches' framing of Christian persecution 
as a global threat is a misguided oversimplification. They point out 
that where there is persecution of Christians, there is also widespread 
persecution of people of many religions and ethnicities (for example, 
Muslims and Tibetan Buddhists in China, Animists and moderate Muslims 
in southern Sudan, Bahais in Iran and Ahmadiya Muslims in Pakistan). 
Also, scholars say, Christians persecute other Christians in places 
where the dominant church senses a threat to its supremacy _ in Russia 
and Greece, for example, and in Central America and South America. 
Trying to solve these problems by focusing only on Christians is ``like 
pulling on one strand of a sweater,'' said David Little, a senior 
scholar at the U.S. Institute of Peace. ``Meanwhile, the whole sweater 
is unraveling.'' ``Where you have smoke, you have fire,'' Little said. 
``Where you have religious persecution, you invariably have violations 
of all other kinds. There are local forces, local interests, so it's 
not subsumable under one kind of conspiracy against Christians. '' 
Some leaders of the Christian persecution movement acknowledge these 
flaws in their approach, but say it is only natural for American Christians 
to care first for their own suffering brethren. Leaders of established 
human rights organizations agree. William Schulz, executive director 
of Amnesty International U.S.A., points out that many people get involved 
in human rights work by fixating first on their counterparts; feminist 
groups focus on women overseas, labor unions on workers. Kenneth Roth, 
executive director of Human Rights Watch, said, ``Whenever we can 
get a large, powerful constituency interested in human rights issues, 
so much the better.'' Christian missionary groups that for years had 
been crying in the wilderness about Christian persecution are now 
seeing their contributions soaring, enabling them to do even more 
evangelizing overseas. At Voice of the Martyrs in Bartlesville, Okla., 
a group founded in 1967, the mailing list, number of staff members 
and income have tripled in the last two years. Christian Freedom International 
in Front Royal, Va., has experienced similar growth. A Martyr's Account 
Tempering Fears of Islam In suburban Cherry Creek Presbyterian Church 
outside Denver, 87 Christians from six local churches turned out on 
a Saturday night earlier this year to hear the testimony of a Nigerian 
Christian lay preacher. The preacher, Sati, who said he feared revealing 
his last name, recounted a personal history of horrors at the hands 
of his Muslim neighbors: blinded at age 6 by Muslims jealous of his 
fathers' flocks; tied to a tree and stoned at age 20 by Muslims who 
accused him of insulting the prophet Mohammed. ``They tried to kill 
me,'' Sati said. ``I was merely debating them, and you don't do that 
if you're trying to reach an Islamic person.'' His audience listened 
in silence. Afterward, 30 people submitted green and white response 
cards volunteering to start Christian persecution task forces in their 
own churches _ just one indication that this movement is being fueled 
primarily by lay people, not pastors. It is events like this in Colorado 
that have led some critics to accuse the Christian persecution movement 
of fanning the flames of confrontation between Christianity and Islam. 
On this particular evening in Colorado, Sati's story of Muslim persecutors 
_ which he has repeated in many churches _ was tempered by a follow-up 
talk by the organizer, Haas. Haas told the audience the problem was 
not with most Muslims but with ``a radical form of Islam now invading 
North Africa and the Middle East.'' But such distinctions probably 
elude most American Christians who are unacquainted with Islam. One 
woman in Haas' audience raised her hand and asked him to please explain 
the difference between Muslim and Islam (one is a person, the other 
a religion). Concern about anti-Muslim undertones in the Christian 
persecution movement is voiced by American Muslim leaders and even 
by some Christian missionaries active in Islamic countries. ``I think 
we are creating an enemy image of the Muslims and making it worse, 
aggravating the problem,'' said Brother Andrew, who began 40 years 
ago by smuggling Bibles into communist nations and now works primarily 
in the Islamic world. ``It is not as bad as it is often portrayed, 
as if Muslims are always persecuting Christians. Culturally and historically 
Muslims and Christians have usually gotten on fairly well together, 
and we are distorting the history when we are saying the Muslims are 
persecuting Christians.'' The Church Revitalization and Martyrdom 
Previous solidarity movements _ like those concerned with South Africa, 
Central America or Soviet Jewry _ have defined success as the end 
of oppression. But people active in the Christian persecution movement 
say their goal is not to stop the persecution. For one thing, they 
say that it is not possible. But they also have a theological reason: 
They say that just as Jesus suffered, modern-day Christians will also 
inevitably suffer for their faith. Martyrdom feeds the faith. ``Other 
faiths have said: Blood is spilled, that's when we grow. That's very 
true in Christendom,'' Haas said. Ultimately, many Americans devoting 
themselves to spreading the word about Christian persecution say they 
hope not only to save the victims but also to save a moribund church 
in the United States. ``It's done me a world of good in my commitment,'' 
said John Wildenthal, a municipal judge in Houston, ``to see the examples 
of these people who have joy and strength in their faith while they 
daily face the threat of personal disaster. It would produce a religious 
revival in the U.S. if the people in the pews were to realize the 
strength and joy that those living in daily danger exhibit. It would 
revitalize the church in America.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>