<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981108.0109 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
On an old stone stairway beside the Potala Palace, the empty fortress 
where the Dalai Lama once presided over Tibet, an elderly woman navigated 
her way down a long procession of steps after coming here to pray. 
``I always come carrying the hope that I will live long enough to 
see the Dalai Lama here again,'' said the woman, Chanchup Lhamo. ``But 
I am getting old, and now I am afraid I may never get the chance.'' 
Tears spilled down her cheeks. ``People tell me that good things will 
come in the future,'' said Mrs. Lhamo, 76, wiping her eyes with the 
sleeve of her sheepskin-lined robe. ``But I wait and wait and never 
see it. It never comes.'' An intensely religious people who revere 
the Dalai Lama as a god and a king, Tibetans nurture a fervent desire 
to see their leader return to the Potala Palace, vacant since the 
day he fled to India in 1959. Many do not hesitate to say they would 
happily sacrifice all of their material possessions to see the Dalai 
Lama in Tibet for a single day. With each passing year, fear grows 
that any return, or visit, by the Dalai Lama is less likely. Beijing 
exercises tight control over Tibet and has little incentive to negotiate 
with the exiled religious leader. Yet international pressure on China 
to relax its grip on Tibet has mounted in recent years, and the Dalai 
Lama himself is proposing a new initiative that he hopes will lead 
to talks with Chinese leaders. Ultimately, he would like to see an 
agreement allowing more self-rule for Tibet under Chinese sovereignty, 
and, of course, to visit his homeland. Courting support for his proposal, 
the Dalai Lama is expected to meet with Vice President Al Gore at 
the White House during his current visit to Washington. During the 
last such visit, President Clinton dropped by, and he may well do 
so again this time. Tibetan exiles have said the Dalai Lama would 
like to meet the president of China, Jiang Zemin at a holy Buddhist 
mountain in northern China. A secluded location, where the Tibetan 
leader can technically travel as a monk, not as a political figure, 
may be more conducive to quiet talks. On the surface, the political 
atmosphere in China seems more open to negotiations on Tibet than 
at any time in a decade. Within the conclave of Beijing's secretive 
politics, Jiang has been steadily gaining clout, giving him potential 
leeway to shift ground on China's most sensitive foreign policy problems, 
Tibet and Taiwan. Hopes among Tibetan exiles lifted when Jiang seemed 
to respond with mild favor to a suggestion made by Clinton during 
his visit to Beijing last June that Jiang someday meet the Dalai Lama, 
who won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1989 for his non-violent work to 
gain greater freedom for Tibet. But China's position on Tibet has 
yet to soften. Chinese officials have reacted negatively to news reports 
about the Dalai Lama's new proposal, voicing irritation that it has 
been discussed publicly rather than sent to Beijing quietly through 
the informal back channels that Chinese leaders prefer. Essentially, 
Beijing's position is that it will not recognize the Dalai Lama as 
a religious leader of Tibetan Buddhists until he declares total allegiance 
to Beijing, affirming that Tibet has always been an inseparable part 
of China. For the last 40 years, China's main concern has been to 
keep a firm political and military grip on Tibet. Even a one-time 
visit here by the Dalai Lama could spark pandemonium among worshippers, 
who uncontrollably mobbed delegations that included siblings of the 
Dalai Lama in the 1980s. Chinese officials have often said that they 
regard the Dalai Lama as an agent of anti-China forces who relies 
on political and financial backing from large foreign powers, namely 
India and the United States. The Dalai Lama's calls for greater autonomy, 
Beijing claims, are a way to gain international support for his longer-term 
goal, and Beijing's greatest fear: making Tibet an independent nation. 
So Beijing insists on verbal declarations of allegiance to the Chinese 
nation by the Dalai Lama, and insists on the same from other prominent 
Buddhist lamas who are considered `living buddhas,' or reincarnations 
of deceased lamas. ``All living buddhas have to be patriotic,'' said 
Ma Chongying, deputy director of the Minority &AMP; Religious Affairs 
Bureau in Tibet. ``If you're not patriotic, there's no such thing 
as being a living buddha. This is an unchangeable principle.'' Equally 
unchangeable, it seems, is the common reverence here for the Dalai 
Lama, despite relentless denigration by the Chinese authorities. A 
visitor to Tibet who mentions the Dalai Lama's name to a local resident 
is routinely greeted with a toothy smile and a big thumbs-up. No open 
worship of the Dalai Lama is permitted. A favorite practice of displaying 
the Dalai Lama's picture is banned except in private homes. Monks 
and other worshippers sometimes ask visitors for a likeness of the 
Dalai Lama, but only out of earshot from the men and women in plainclothes 
who loiter around religious sites in oddly large numbers. In the long 
run, Chinese officials evidently hope that the Dalai Lama issue will 
disappear. Looming behind the current efforts at negotiation is the 
critical question of the Dalai Lama's succession, traditionally decided 
through a highly mystical procedure of locating his reincarnation 
in a young boy somewhere on the Tibetan plateau. Chinese leaders are 
likely to prevent Tibetan religious leaders from choosing a new reincarnation 
of the Dalai Lama, or to control the process so tightly that Beijing 
in fact determines the choice. The current Dalai Lama is 63. ``When 
the Dalai Lama dies, he dies,'' said Ma, the religious affairs official 
in Tibet. ``There will be no replacement.'' Yet at the Potala Palace, 
a 1,000-room mansion that majestically crowns the entire valley surrounding 
Lhasa, Tibet's holy capital, pilgrims come each day to worship the 
Dalai Lama, even if they do not mention his name too loudly while 
doing so. Inside one room of the Dalai Lama's former living quarters, 
a small throne draped with green-and-white silk embroidery and offset 
by a long row of gold-encased cabinets filled with Buddhist statues 
and jewelry is covered by thousands of white scarves brought by devoted 
pilgrims. On a recent morning, an elderly couple dressed in the long 
black and maroon robes of herdsmen from the countryside stepped forward 
to prostrate themselves on the worn stone floor. Their two children 
followed suit on the floor behind, as did a granddaughter in a bright 
yellow parka. A Lhasa policeman, with a mild paunch and dark sunglasses, 
watched silently from the back of the room. After the family moved 
on to the next room, he stepped forward and put a 10-yuan note, the 
equivalent of about a dollar, on a silver chalice. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>