<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981108.0153 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When Rosalind Selzer walks down the double-rutted tractor path each 
morning toward the open fields behind her tiny farmhouse, she sees 
a 28-acre plot that has been profitably planted with soybeans, corn 
and flowers for nearly 50 years. But when officials of the local school 
board wade through the burrs and crab grass here to reach the fields, 
they see something utterly different: the future site of a new elementary 
school that is desperately needed to house this township's rapidly 
growing student population. For nearly two years, Mrs. Selzer and 
the school board have been locked in a nasty squabble over what to 
do with the farm where she has lived for half a century. But that 
squabble took a turn against Mrs. Selzer late last month, when a Monmouth 
County judge upheld the school board's right to seize the farm and 
build a school on it under the doctrine of eminent domain. The case, 
which is likely headed for appellate court, has pitted two opposing 
parties with equally urgent needs. Mrs. Selzer argues that the school 
board has no right to remove her from the land, which has provided 
her only income since 1949. The school board has argued that this 
farming town has turned into a boom town and must have another elementary 
school. The conflict has heated up just as voters across New Jersey 
have approved a statewide plan to set aside $1 billion in property 
taxes over the next 10 years to save nearly 1 million acres of open 
space. Some of the land the state wants to preserve can be found on 
tiny family farms like Mrs. Selzer's. In keeping with the dispute's 
small-town setting, a misunderstanding between old acquaintances lies 
at the heart of it, both Mrs. Selzer and school officials say. The 
fight, they explained, began shortly before Christmas in 1996 when 
Mrs. Selzer bumped into the school board's lawyer, John Dawes, one 
morning in the lobby of the American Hotel in nearby Freehold. With 
a neighborly nod, both sides say, Mrs. Selzer wished the lawyer ``Happy 
holidays'' and asked him how he was. ``He mentioned that the school 
board was looking for land for their new elementary school,'' Mrs. 
Selzer said. ``And I told him I'd rather sell to a school board than 
a real-estate developer.'' Although the two parties agree that the 
conversation took place, they differ on the meaning of Mrs. Selzer's 
words. Mrs. Selzer says her remark was merely idle conversation with 
a man whom she has known for several years. But Dawes considered it 
a good-faith offer and began steps to have the farm appraised. Throughout 
the spring of 1997, as board officials walked the land, Dawes urged 
Mrs. Selzer to retain a lawyer if she was, indeed, interested in selling, 
said Joseph Scozzare, the district superintendent. And as proof of 
that interest, Scozzare said, Mrs. Selzer's lawyer sent a letter to 
the board in October 1997 rejecting the $250,000 offer made by Dawes 
and asking instead for $750,000. ``If she wasn't interested in selling,'' 
Scozzare asked, ``why did she send that letter?'' According to Mrs. 
Selzer, the letter was sent out of fear that the farm would be wrested 
from her despite her wishes, and furthermore, she considered the price 
ridiculously low. It was not a counteroffer, she said, but a desperate 
measure to fend off condemnation. But arguing that negotiations in 
good faith had started but faltered, Judge Lawrence Lawson of Monmouth 
County Superior Court ruled on Oct. 22 this year that a condemnation 
order issued by the township in February could stand. New Jersey's 
eminent-domain law allows judges to force condemnation proceedings 
to continue if good-faith negotiations began but later broke down. 
Scozzare said officials resorted to legal action for only one reason: 
They needed to act quickly to choose a construction site before placing 
a bond-issue for a new school on the ballot for a special election 
that was held in March this year. The ballot question was approved, 
and now the district has nearly $30 million for construction. ``In 
terms of finalizing a property for referendum, there's a point of 
no return,'' Scozzare said. ``No one feels good at how this thing 
turned out, but you cannot let these things drag on and on for months.'' 
The sight of Mrs. Selzer, an elfin, white-haired widow, describing 
how she raised three children alone on the farm after her husband, 
David, died in 1968 from a farming accident could melt the heart of 
even the most soulless big-city real-estate tycoon. She has chosen 
to paint this conflict as a struggle between the modernizing element 
in Manalapan, whose members must deal with the fact that the township 
has in recent years become largely a bedroom community of New York 
City-bound commuters, and the few remaining farmers who have managed 
to eke out a living here. ``It may not look like much, but I really 
want to keep my farm,'' she said in an interview. ``This is still 
a free country, and I have a right to live and work where I want to 
be.'' Although Mrs. Selzer, 73, said she supports building new schools, 
she questioned why officials decided to seize a farm rather than an 
industrial or a commercial site. In turn, Scozzare insisted that the 
Selzer plot was ideal because it is easily accessible by a number 
of local highways and has nearby sewage, gas and water connections. 
Furthermore, he said, the Manalapan-Englishtown Regional School District 
has surged to more than 5,200 students today from about 2,600 in 1986. 
Under Lawson's ruling, a panel of three arbiters has been established 
and has until Dec. 31 to determine the fair market value of Mrs. Selzer's 
farm. In the meantime, Lawson said, the opposing parties still have 
the opportunity to settle the matter out of court. But a settlement 
seems increasingly less likely. Last year, the school won the right 
to bar Mrs. Selzer from planting crops on her land, so that daily 
farming would not interfere with its efforts to inspect and analyze 
the soil. Consequently, Mrs. Selzer lost the income she would normally 
make from the farm for the entire year. While she refused to say how 
much that was, she said that the crop ban has put her in a fighting 
mood. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>