<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981108.0192 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
No more sleeping in stalls for the humans who performed valet duties 
for the 200 horses, certified prima donnas regardless of sex, who 
turned Madison Square Garden into a glorified barn for the duration 
of the 115th National Horse Show. No more dancing and prancing beneath 
the spotlights for the 20 horses from the New York City Police mounted 
unit who were sprung from their day jobs directing traffic and keeping 
order in the Big Apple and allowed to explore their inner artist at 
this event. Amid retirement ceremonies for a much-traveled mare; coronation 
ceremonies for two young riders whose careers have just begun; a dressage 
exhibition by a duo with 21st-century skills, Anky van Grunsven of 
the Netherlands atop the Nureyev of horses, Bonfire, and a $50,000 
grand prix that only extreme daredevils had a prayer of conquering, 
the National concluded its four-day stint at the Garden on Sunday 
night. The $50,000 Budweiser Grand Prix, the splashy jump-fest that 
boasted the highest fences of the week and served as the competition's 
grand finale, attracted 21 international entrants. It was decided 
by a timed three-horse jump-off in which Peter Leone and Crown Royale 
Legato, who soared over eight obstacles in 37.10 seconds, prevailed. 
Second place went to the U.S. Equestrian Team's Eric Hasbrouck on 
Miss Fio, and their effort established the American team, which had 
trailed France heading into this final class, as the National's leading 
international team for the fifth straight year. For the 38-year-old 
Leone, resplendent in a violet jacket that matched the Garden's box 
seats, the victory reprised his blue ribbon performance in this prestigious 
grand prix in 1992. ``It definitely was a worthwhile win,'' said Leone, 
who praised the quality of the course and of the competition he faced. 
The day began with a rooster call for the 72 junior riders who qualified 
for the ASPCA Maclay Championships. They were up at dawn to complete 
the braiding and polishing of their well-groomed mounts, and then 
they funneled into the Garden for the strenuous tests designed by 
a couple of veteran equestrians, Hap Hansen and Michael Matz. Only 
16 of the young riders were selected for the championship round, which 
featured 13 obstacles and a complex combination of step-work that 
included approaches to fences at a trot, canter, counter-canter and 
hand gallop as well as the request to come to a dead halt in the center 
of the ring midway through the jump course. The winner, by acclamation, 
was 18-year-old Erynn Ballard of Hornby, Ontario, who intends to turn 
professional in 1999. ``I just knew everything was going to fall into 
the place,'' Ballard said after her jitter-free performance. The reserve 
champion was Avery Dimmig of Ridgemont, N.C., on Taramount. A fourth-place 
finisher last year in her only prior Maclay appearance, Ballard, whose 
grandfather, Bob, was a captain of the Canadian Equestrian team, is 
the second Canadian to win this prestigious title, the other being 
Laura Tidball in 1980. Something of a pro already, Ballard flew in 
from her riding duties on her home turf at Toronto's Royal Agricultural 
Winter Festival, jumped aboard Bennington, a 10-year-old Dutch-bred 
gelding, and stood in second place over all after the morning elimination 
rounds. Ballard's trainer, Missy Clark, could not recall whether this 
was the fourth or fifth Maclay winner to benefit from her tutelage, 
but she was very clear on her strategy: ``Get the right horse with 
the right kid at the right moment.'' The Good Hands junior championship 
for saddleseat riders went to a 17-year-old American, Tom Pettry of 
Richmond, Ill., riding the 13-year-old Saddlebred High Expectations. 
Pettry, who began riding when he was just 2 years old, was fifth in 
the class last year and said he intends to be studying psychology 
at the University of Arizona by this time next year. The Good Hands 
runner-up was Erin Sembler of Seminole, Fla., on Another Lover. ``Interesting 
name, interesting horse,'' she said. In contrast to the teen-age winners 
of the Maclay and Good Hands, both of whom had more competitions in 
store on their immediate calendars, a 22-year-old pony, Kiss Me Not, 
retired in style with a blanket of flowers and a sentimental sendoff 
that was a small-scale version of the Cigar bash of 1996, the year 
the National returned to the Garden after seven years at the Meadowlands. 
A shyer specimen than Cigar, Kiss Me Not balked when the spotlight 
was trained on her, but bright lights come with the territory here, 
said Jeremy Bouwer, a groom who ministered to the Saddlebred entries, 
including Another Lover, from the DeLovely Farm, Inc. of Rockport, 
Ind. Ensconced at the Garden with eight horses since early Wednesday 
morning, Bouwer, who aspires to be a trainer, spent several stints 
doing night duty in a stall adjacent to his charges and admitted he 
was ready to head home. ``The lights stayed on 24 hours a day,'' said 
Bouwer, who found out firsthand that ``this is the city that never 
sleeps.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>