<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981108.0035 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Page through the most recent issue of More _ a magazine introduced 
last year by Meredith Corp. _ and you'll find the fashion spreads, 
advice columns and lush cosmetics advertisements favored by most glossy 
women's magazines. But look closely. The model swathed in Carmen Marc 
Valco sequins gazes at you from a face softened with age, her eyes 
radiating laugh lines. The advice column offers solace to a reader 
who asks what to wear when meeting her husband's ex-wife for the first 
time. A health article answers this question: Is menopause ``nature's 
big mistake?'' More is a fashion magazine in which the celebration 
of beauty and the concerns of womankind are not limited to youth. 
More's editor, Myrna Blyth, says that it's a matter of editorial policy 
that no model under the age of 40 appear in her pages. ``I wanted 
More to be celebratory, but realistic,'' said Ms. Blyth, 58, who is 
also the editor of Meredith's Ladies' Home Journal, which has a circulation 
of 4.5 million. Realistic? Since when does realism sell magazines? 
Haven't consumer magazines always spun gossamer fantasies in which 
the model is always slender and youthful, the children are freshly 
bathed, the sofas are expertly upholstered and the cocktail party 
is well-attended by famous faces? A dose of reality may help to sell 
some magazines to an aging American population; in the last 18 months, 
several new magazines have put that theory to the test. The only problem 
is that major advertisers are slow to invest in magazines that celebrate 
ordinary conditions like advancing age, ample thighs and anything 
less than apple-cheeked good health. But unlike magazines before them 
that tried to address aging or illness, this crop takes real issues 
and buffs them to a high gloss; the women in More magazine may be 
50 years old, but they are _ after all _ models. The idea for More 
struck Ms. Blyth and Christopher Little, president of Meredith Publishing 
Group, in the early 1990s when they first heard the statistic that 
an American turns 50 every eight seconds. After two test issues and 
two subsequent issues this year, More will declare a monthly rate 
base of 400,000 in January. Then there's Mode, aimed at what the publishers 
call the average-sized American woman: sizes 12, 14, 16 and beyond. 
Published in partnership with Freedom Publications Inc., which owns 
75 newspapers in the United States, including The Orange County (Calif.) 
Register, Mode has a rate base of 500,000 _up from 250,000 with its 
first issue 18 months ago. Mode's beginning was so encouraging that 
the publishers, Nancy Nadler LeWinter and Julie Lewit-Nirenberg, have 
introduced Girl, a magazine for young women that features models who 
are model-thin as well as downright chubby. ``For so long, no one 
wanted to recognize the reality that the average American woman is 
a size 14,'' Ms. LeWinter said. ``What Mode basically did was say, 
`Excuse me, but real women who wear a size 16 can be gorgeous too.''' 
There's the independently published We, a monthly glossy magazine 
for, as the subtitle reads, ``people with disabilities, their families 
and friends.'' Again, the models are stylishly turned out, but they 
pose with their seeing-eye dog companions or in wheelchairs; in the 
current issue, an article frankly details the perils to the immune 
system caused by total paralysis. We's publisher, Charles Riley II, 
said that We's rate base of 90,000 was three times larger than its 
initial circulation one year ago. Mamm, a magazine for women with 
cancer, is owned by Poz Publishing and is produced by the same editorial 
team behind the 5-year-old Poz, a magazine for people who are HIV-positive. 
(Poz became profitable in 1997.) With a circulation of 70,000, Mamm 
will go monthly in April, and the publishers, the brother-sister team 
of Sean Strub and Megan Strub Whiting, have not only started to publish 
Poz en Espanol this year, but plan to start a version of Mamm for 
men next year. While nontraditional fashion magazines like More and 
Mode are markedly different from magazines like Mamm or We, which 
deal with chronic illness, all of the magazines begin with the notion 
that not every consumer craves perfection. More often, say publishers, 
readers seek acceptance for their condition, whether they are simply 
getting older or struggling with a disease. ``There is no fantasy 
about these issues,'' said Christine Miller, executive vice president 
of marketing for the Magazine Publishers of America. ``Aging? No fantasy 
comes to mind. So it would be ludicrous to think of making these subjects 
into fantasies.'' Ms. Miller said the magazine industry had long portrayed 
issues that increasingly affect real people _ like aging, chronic 
illness or weight problems _ as negative. ``Reality is always portrayed 
as negative, and it's not,'' Ms. Miller said. ``So there's a hole 
in the marketplace for people living these things. Their only option 
has been negative, so these magazines fill a huge market need.'' Certainly, 
magazines that address health issues are not new. Diabetes Forecast 
has been around since 1948 and has a guaranteed rate base of 330,000; 
Arthritis Today has a circulation of 625,000, according to the Audit 
Bureau of Circulations. However, those magazines originated as publications 
for medical professionals or association members, while Poz and Mamm 
originated as consumer magazines. More's audience is one of the fastest-growing 
in the United States. And Meredith, its parent which is based in Des 
Moines, Iowa, has the largest consumer database in the United States, 
with information on 73 percent of the home-owning households in the 
country, Little, president of the publishing group, said. ``We saw 
this enormous demographic shift coming,'' he said. ``However, it was 
not only the huge number of people entering this age group, but the 
demographics of the age group. They tend to be more active, healthy 
and involved. They work. It's a generation we've never seen before. 
It's women in their 50s who are acting like women in their 30s.'' 
The real test of whether reality sells is whether corporations will 
pay for advertising. Advertisers shied away from earlier incarnations 
of More _ like Lear's and Mirabella, which both originated as magazines 
for older women. Now Lear's is defunct and Mirabella has been restyled 
by its owners _ Hachette Filipacchi, a unit of Lagardere Groupe _ 
as a general-interest women's magazine. And advertisers continue to 
be wary. Roberta Garfinkle, senior vice president and director of 
print media at the advertising agency McCann-Erickson, pointed out 
that Lear's and Mirabella may have been a little too early to successfully 
surf the demographic wave. She said that ad sales in any magazine 
that tackles less-than-perfect health or beauty issues would come 
when the readers had proved their loyalty. ``I don't think it has 
anything to do with what the advertising community is ready for,'' 
she said. ``It's an issue of, `How ready is the culture of magazine 
readers to accept reality and get away from fantasy?''' All of these 
magazines do, however, have built-in advertisers. While Mode has not 
been able to attract some of the high-end cosmetics lines like Estee 
Lauder, it does have an advertising base of large-size apparel retailers, 
which is the fastest-growing apparel industry in the United States, 
according to the NPD Group, a marketing information concern. Pharmaceutical 
and vitamin companies flock to Poz, Mamm and We. Linda Ciccarelli, 
media director of Sandler Communications, an advertising company that 
specializes in pharmaceutical products, said that she sought out magazines 
like Poz and Mamm that have dozens of pages of direct-to-consumer 
pharmaceutical advertising, if not the cars of General Motors. ``If 
you know there's a group of people out there who are guaranteed to 
be interested in your drug, you can't advertise in a better place,'' 
she said. But Strub and Ms. Whiting of Mamm have failed to convince 
car and cosmetics companies to advertise in their pages. ``Why wouldn't 
you want to buy a lipstick if you have cancer?'' asked Strub. ``We're 
really very angry about it.'' Riley of We is looking forward to seeing 
a profit soon, he said. And he's been surprised by who is interested 
in the magazine. He said he recently sold 4,500 subscriptions to Continental 
Airlines, which plans to distribute the magazine free to passengers. 
``The thinking behind that was that no matter how bad your flight 
is, if you read about these people's struggles, then it puts things 
in perspective,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>