<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981108.0175 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It began with the fanfare of a Sunset Boulevard East, with two aging 
stars from another era in their comeback saga. By game's end Sunday, 
with the Meadowlands crowd chanting, ``Vinny! Vinny!'' it was Vinny 
Testaverde who waved and hugged teammates, bathed in applause, while 
Doug Flutie was on his knees, symbolically closing out a loss. The 
Jets have gone beyond merely being surprising to being taken seriously 
as they captured their fourth straight victory, a decisive, resourceful 
34-12 defeat of the Bills. The victory positioned the Jets, with a 
6-3 record, in a first-place tie with the Miami Dolphins in the American 
Conference East. The Bills, who came in with a five-game winning streak, 
dropped to 5-4. For the first time in 20 years, the Jets are 4-0 in 
their division and have a four-game winning streak for only the second 
time since 1986. They had not beaten the perennial powerhouse Bills 
this decisively since 1985. The Bills had won six straight and 11 
of their last 12 meetings here. Testaverde, who will be 35 years old 
on Friday, remembers being in first place before, ``once, with Cleveland,'' 
in his 12-year career. This victory needed several gritty stands by 
the defense during a first half in which the Jets' offense stumbled, 
losing the ball three times. Yet, all that the Bills got out of it 
was 3 points. The defense held until the offense cranked up. And when 
it did, it was not on the ground. A struggling Curtis Martin was rested 
for two series in the second quarter and had a 54-yard day on 21 carries. 
Testaverde wound up with three touchdown tosses, shrugging off an 
interception on the very first play of the game. He is 6-0 as a Jets 
starter, and his gaudy figures include 15 touchdowns but only three 
interceptions. He was very good Sunday in completing 22 of 31 passes 
for 258 yards. The 36-year-old Flutie had not known defeat in his 
second incarnation in the National Football League, having led Buffalo 
to three straight victories as a starter. This was the first time, 
though, that the Bills failed to score a touchdown with Flutie leading 
them, including parts of two games he came in as a reliever. Their 
scoring Sunday was four field goals from Steve Christie. The Jets 
were curious about this 5-foot-9-inch phenomenon who captured the 
1984 Heisman Trophy, two years before Testaverde won his. At a meeting 
of the Jets' defense on Saturday night, one of the coaches brought 
in a box of Flutie Flakes. Perhaps it helped the defense know just 
what it was dealing with. ``It's been a good five years since I've 
had to deal with this kind of beating,'' said Flutie, who spent the 
previous eight years in the Canadian Football League. He was 12 for 
30 for 154 yards, with 2 interceptions, and he was sacked twice. ``I 
told the team,'' said Coach Bill Parcells, barely allowing a few grins 
in the locker room, ``now you're in first place, and everyone's going 
to be looking for you.'' Testaverde was not even looking for Keyshawn 
Johnson to get the Jets on the scoreboard when they were trailing 
by 3-0 late in the opening quarter. But it was Johnson he found. ``He 
was the fifth guy I was going to, actually,'' Testaverde said. ``Keith 
Byars was headed out, Fred Baxter up the middle, Kyle Brady in the 
flat, and a running back over the middle. I went back over that process 
pretty quickly. And I saw Keyshawn waving his arms.'' Testaverde then 
drilled a 25-yard touchdown pass to Johnson in what was one of the 
wide receiver's finest performances. The numbers _ seven receptions 
for 95 yards _ were not his best, but the receptions he produced were 
worth a highlight film. The defense kept the Jets in contention during 
an awkward first half in which the offense committed three turnovers 
and the special teams produced two stumbling plays to set up Buffalo 
field goals. Yet, the Jets led by 13-9, thanks largely to big plays 
by Johnson and Testaverde. Testaverde connected with seven receivers 
in the first two quarters. But his opening pass, meant for Johnson, 
was deflected and intercepted by a diving Sam Cowart at the Jets' 
38. The defense held, negating the error. The very first punt as a 
Jet by John Kidd _ picked up last week to replace the faltering Brian 
Hansen _ traveled only 34 yards. It allowed the Bills to launch a 
drive ending in Christie's 40-yard field goal for the 3-0 lead. Testaverde 
and Johnson came right back, converting a third-and-10 and then, from 
the Bills' 25, collaborating on the touchdown to put the Jets ahead 
by 7-3. The kickoff was returned 29 yards by the Bills' Kevin Williams, 
setting up another field-goal by Christie, from 37 yards in the second 
quarter. The game could have slipped away from the Jets as Jerald 
Sowell, giving a breather to an ineffective Martin (his opening-half 
statistics were merely 20 yards on nine carries), fumbled the ball 
away twice. His second one was converted to a third Christie field 
goal to propel the Bills to a 9-7 edge. Testaverde, though, led a 
drive that resulted in a 41-yard field goal by John Hall with 27 seconds 
remaining in the half. Not content to run out the clock, the Bills 
tried to get close enough for at least a field goal as they started 
from their 20. But Flutie's second pass was intercepted by Otis Smith, 
his first interception of the year. Testaverde immediately connected 
with Dedric Ward on a 25-yard sideline play, setting up a 43-yard 
field goal by Hall for the 13-9 halftime lead. The Jets quickly went 
to work in the third quarter. Ward, returning punts because Leon Johnson 
was sidelined with a knee injury, produced the season's longest return 
for the Jets. His 20-yarder gave Testaverde the ball only 38 yards 
out. Two plays later, Testaverde and Ward hooked up on a 36-yard scoring 
play on which two defenders were fooled and far behind the receiver. 
The Bills responded with a drive that yielded Christie's fourth field 
goal, a 21-yard boot. On a fourth-quarter drive, the Jets made a gutsy 
call on a fourth-and-6 at the Bills' 35. Testaverde hit Johnson with 
a 6-yard pass and eventually produced a 12-yard touchdown pass to 
Wayne Chrebet for a 27-12 lead. Then Flutie was picked off by Ray 
Mickens at midfield, and this time the Jets insistently used Martin. 
The Jets even took points off the scoreboard after a field goal by 
Hall. The Bills ran into the kicker, giving the Jets a first down 
at the 16. Martin eventually ran in from the 6 to bring the crowd 
to its feet, but not to head for the exits. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>