<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981108.0194 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There is a long tradition of conductors and opera houses catering 
to the whims of prima donnas. The tradition continues at the Metropolitan 
Opera, where Cecilia Bartoli, a singer of sensational popularity and, 
consequently, clout, is performing Susanna in the Met's new production 
of Mozart's ``Nozze di Figaro.'' Although the production, by the British 
director Jonathan Miller, was in rehearsal for more than four weeks, 
Ms. Bartoli showed up late, according to one person with ties to the 
production, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, though an official 
from the Met's press office countered that Ms. Bartoli was at the 
Met and in rehearsal for ``at least a week'' before opening night 
on Oct. 29. It was Ms. Bartoli's strongly expressed desire to perform 
Susanna using two alternate arias, composed by Mozart, in place of 
the familiar arias from the original 1786 Vienna production. Evidently 
she insisted that her contract stipulate that she had the right to 
sing them, at least in some performances. The Met's artistic director, 
James Levine, agreed, apparently annoying Miller, who had staged the 
two arias with the original music and refused at first to stage the 
substitutes, finding them inferior. Met audiences, or at least those 
with access to tickets for more than one performance, have the chance 
to compare the arias. On opening night, when most critics were there 
to review, Ms. Bartoli sang the traditional arias. But for the Tuesday 
and Saturday performances of last week, she sang the substitutes, 
and she will do so once more on Wednesday night. These three performances 
are being videotaped for a later broadcast on public television. There 
is a certain amount of musicological interest, and a large degree 
of novelty, in Ms. Bartoli's decision. But artistically, it is hard 
to see the merits in using the later versions, and easy to understand 
Miller's apparent dismay. The role of Susanna was created by the English 
soprano Nancy Storace. But three years later, in 1789, when the opera 
was revived in Vienna, the Susanna, Adriana Ferrarese del Bene, expressed 
dissatisfaction with her character's arias. She was a poor comic actress, 
but a technically skillful singer with a wide range and effective 
coloratura, and she wanted music that would show off her agility. 
Mozart, though unhappy about the matter, was a pragmatic professional. 
So he complied. In the original score, Susanna's first aria, ``Venite 
inginocchiatevi,'' comes in Act II, when she attempts to dress up 
the page boy Cherubino as a woman, in order to ensnare the Count in 
a scheme to expose him as a philanderer. It's charming, witty music 
that shows Susanna's clever, playful side, a comedic stroke with a 
genial tune. The second aria is the great ``Deh vieni non tardar,'' 
in Act IV. Here, for a moment, the madcap complications of the plot 
stop, and Susanna, who has just married, sings a poignant, reflective, 
lyrically blissful aria about how much she anticipates her first night 
with her beloved. The confused Figaro, who is hiding, thinks she is 
singing about the Count; but Susanna, who knows Figaro is watching 
her and wants to teach him a lesson for his distrust, is really singing 
about her new husband. Both substitutes are frivolous works. But they 
are star turns that stop the show and call attention to Susanna, which 
is seemingly why Ms. Bartoli chose to sing them, and that is certainly 
the effect they had. The aria in place of Act II's ``Venite inginocchiatevi'' 
is a strophic arietta, like a song in verses, ``Un moto di gioia,'' 
a little ditty of a number, and not at all inspired. Susanna is still 
involved with dressing Cherubino up, but the text is filled with generalities 
about the difficulty of the task at hand, and the stress of get-back 
schemes in general. Performing it on Saturday night, Ms. Bartoli soon 
wandered away from the page boy, sung by Susanne Mentzer, more or 
less addressed the audience and left Renee Fleming, who was a sublime 
Countess, with not much to do. The Act IV substitute was the more 
distressing choice, however. The original, ``Deh vieni non tardar,'' 
is utterly moving, a miracle of an aria, while ``Al desio,'' the rondo 
that replaces it, is an unabashed display piece. It begins reflectively, 
with a simple melody, but soon evolves into a frilly, trilly, filigreed 
thing, like Rossini at his most bumptious. The text is embarrassing, 
with Susanna almost panting with sexual anticipation (``My heart can 
no longer resist'' and ``Take pity on my pain''). Ms. Bartoli took 
center stage and unleashed volleys of coloratura brilliance, as Bryn 
Terfel, the wonderful Figaro, just watched, frozen in his hiding place. 
Ms. Bartoli sang the arias with her trademark luscious dark tone, 
perky energy and textual incisiveness. But the sublime moment of musical 
beauty and psychological ambiguity that comes from the original aria 
was gone. And her use of these arias has to be viewed in the context 
of her overall performance, which is, as many critics have stated, 
comically over the top, attention-grabbing and at times hysterical. 
Her Susanna could have stepped right out of Rossini's ``Cenerentola.'' 
In subsequent performances, Ms. Bartoli, according to the Met, will 
resume singing the original arias. But the taped broadcast will have 
the substitutes. The Met has used alternative arias in other Mozart 
operas, most recently ``Cosi Fan Tutte.'' It is hard to imagine Levine 
making a very compelling argument for these particular substitutes, 
other than his desire to accommodate Ms. Bartoli. Mozart knew the 
feeling; of the substitute arias he had composed, he wrote, ``The 
little aria I have made for Ferrarese I believe will please, if she 
is capable of singing in an artless manner, which very much doubt.'' 
This is a somewhat vague phrase, but by ``artless'' I think Mozart 
meant not displaying artifice. But what about accommodating Ms. Fleming, 
Terfel and Ms. Mentzer, who have to adjust while Ms. Bartoli grabs 
center stage? And what about Miller? Joseph Volpe, the general manager, 
knows how to stand up to singers, but he usually defers on artistic 
matters to Levine, who, in this case, like musicians before him, even 
the composer, deferred to his diva. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>