<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981108.0070 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Talk about a play with legs: ``Side Man'' has been using them on a 
veritable walking tour of Manhattan. The production's unusual journey 
began last spring with a brief, acclaimed run in a little off-Broadway 
theater and continued with a successful move for the summer to the 
main stage of the normally revival-driven Roundabout Theater Company. 
Now ``Side Man'' has entered an even unlikelier phase of its nomadic 
life, leaving the relative security of nonprofit theater for a commercial 
Broadway run at the 800-seat John Golden Theater. The significance 
of the drama's rise, and the bravery of its producers, should not 
be understated. Although in recent years new musicals like ``Rent'' 
and ``Bring In da Noise, Bring In da Funk'' have moved popularly and 
profitably from off-Broadway, uprooting a new straight play to Broadway 
is an altogether iffier proposition because the production can't count 
on the musical-devouring tourist trade or on the kind of built-in 
hype that often attends a glittery London transfer. Its survival depends 
on a smaller, specialized audience of serious playgoers, many of whom 
may already have discovered it. The odds, therefore, may be especially 
long on Warren Leight's lovely ``Side Man,'' which reopened Sunday 
night. The show is such an anomaly on Broadway, a tender, deeply personal 
memory play about the turmoil in the family of a jazz musician as 
his career crumbles at the dawn of the age of rock-and-roll, that 
seeing it on a big stage is like peering at Broadway through the giant 
stereopticons of ``Ragtime.'' It's a gentle reminder of bygone days, 
when a new play by Tennessee Williams or William Inge would stir up 
the public and fill seats for months. In its depiction of a young 
man struggling to remain the glue in the troubled marriage of his 
vacant, trumpet-playing father and unbalanced, alcoholic mother, the 
play has an abiding power, although of a muted variety. (Men, I think, 
whose fathers were emotionally unavailable will respond especially 
strongly to the hero's predicament.) But if you go to ``Side Man'' 
expecting tour de force portrayals or actorly pyrotechnics, you're 
liable to feel as if you've walked into the wrong neighborhood. Go 
instead for the more refined pleasures of Leight's offbeat story and 
his true-to-life, as opposed to larger-than-life, characters. The 
production, directed by Michael Mayer, is practically a mirror of 
its Roundabout incarnation, with one important exception: the addition 
to the cast of the movie actor Christian Slater in the central role 
of Clifford, the play's put-upon son and narrator. (Robert Sella, 
the role's originator, left to fill in for Alan Cumming as the M.C. 
in ``Cabaret.'') Slater's performance is courageously economical and 
without showiness; it retains the actor's cinematic sense of containment 
in close-up. This works extremely well in a role that is all about 
the witnessing, absorbing and denying of pain. His composure pays 
off remarkably at the play's subtle climax, when Clifford must thoroughly 
assume the role of parent to his parents and cast his ineffectual 
father, Gene (played by Frank Wood), out of the family's apartment. 
The actor never overplays Clifford's festering anger. It's expressed, 
in fact, only once, when Gene suggests that he has no responsibility 
for the pathetic condition of his wife, Terry (Wendy Makkena), now 
confined to a psychiatric hospital. Disgusted, Slater sends Wood flying 
helplessly into a chair. Suddenly aware of his power, and inclined 
to use it, the son has taken control. Slater pulls this off so unself-consciously 
that you believe in it as an act of frustrated love rather than rage. 
Alternating between the family's apartment and Gene's world of versatile, 
freelance jazz musicians _ the side men of the title _ the play conjures 
an extremely specific slice of New York City between 1953 and 1985. 
It pairs the story of the decline of jazz with the disintegration 
of Clifford's family, and yet some of the moodier interludes erupt 
with astonishing joy, as when, in flashback, Gene woos Terry with 
a bluesy trumpet version of Debussy. No moment is better than the 
one in which Gene, sitting with two of his cronies, played delightfully 
by Michael Mastro and Joseph Lyle Taylor, is swept away listening 
to a cassette of a heartache-filled trumpet solo. Wood's rapture is 
even more wrenching than the music. Mayer holds onto much of what 
made ``Side Man'' so touching, but a few things have also slipped 
in the move around the corner to West 45th Street. It may be that 
the actors are too conscious of the higher stakes on Broadway because 
they are now misguidedly pushing things, trying to convince us that 
this is a punchier, more monumental play than written. Ms. Makkena, 
saddled with the difficult job of ending Act I with the declaration 
of a not-very-potent threat, has become intolerably broad and cartoonish. 
This is only partly her fault. Terry is the play's toughest role, 
consisting largely of volume-raising rants and pitiful tears. How 
many ways can an actor do meltdown? And the gang of jazz men suddenly 
seems to be actively courting audiences (and Tony voters) by telegraphing 
the laugh lines, which, of course, only makes the laughs harder to 
come by. The strength of ``Side Man'' is that it holds its characters 
accountable and, with affection and efficiency, tells us things about 
people in a quirky little cul-de-sac that reminds us of people in 
our own imperfect worlds. This honesty and directness is what makes 
it a vital and refreshing experience, and what, if anything in the 
unpredictable whirlpool of Broadway, will sustain it. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>