<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981108.0026 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
He seemed to be where all the new-media financial wannabes would want 
to be. But last April, Robert Lessin quit his successful career as 
a vice chairman of one of the country's bigger investment banks to 
devote his time and money to the Internet _ and to the many new companies 
he believes it can still spawn. Perhaps the best-known Wall Streeter 
to make such a dramatic change, Lessin, 43, left his lofty perch at 
Salomon Smith Barney Inc. and within days became chairman of Wit Capital 
Corp. (www.witcapital.com), a tiny 2-year-old private investment company 
with offices above the Strand bookstore on Broadway in Manhattan's 
Greenwich Village. With about 65 employees and some $11 million in 
capital _ and a couple of slow elevators to its rather dowdy sixth-floor 
offices _ Wit is seeking to make itself the conduit of choice for 
individuals interested in investing in young, fast-growing companies, 
most of them ventures related to the Internet. And just this week, 
Lessin said, Wit expects to get a further capital infusion of several 
million dollars from a group of outside investors. Wit caught the 
eye of the investment community in 1996 when it became the first company 
to sell stock directly to investors over the Internet, in an initial 
public offering for Spring Street Brewing Co. (www.witbeer.com). Wit 
is the brainchild of Andrew Klein, 37, a former associate at the law 
practice Cravath, Swaine &AMP; Moore, who set up the investment firm 
to finance Spring Street. Now, under Lessin's guidance, Wit aims not 
only to invest in the Internet economy, but to use the Internet to 
help change the economics of investing. ``We want to empower the individual 
in the capital-raising process,'' Lessin said. Traditionally, Lessin 
said, getting in on the ground floor of initial offerings has tended 
to be a privilege available only to insiders, investment bankers and 
big institutional investors. Wit's aim, Lessin said, is to bring individual 
investors into the game by using the Internet to build a community 
of investors. The focus, he said, is not so much on stock trading 
and brokerage services, but on building and maintaining an online 
capital-raising franchise for individual investors. So far, in a succession 
of 31 initial public offerings that was halted by the August downturn 
in the stock market, Wit has raised about $50 million from individuals 
for start-up companies. The offerings in which Wit has participated, 
along with other underwriters, include Micro Strategy, an information 
technology consultant; 24/7 Media, an online advertising sales firm, 
and Cyberian Outpost, an electronic commerce site for technology products 
and services. Meanwhile, some big investors have taken stakes in Wit 
itself, including Mitsubishi Capital Corp., a subsidiary of the Japanese 
financial giant, and the Silicon Valley venture capital firm Draper 
Fisher Jurvetson. And some established names from the financial community 
have taken their place on the Wit board, most notably Joseph Hardiman, 
former chairman and chief executive of the National Association of 
Securities Dealers, and Edward Fleischman, senior counsel at Linklaters 
&AMP; Paines and a former commissioner of the Securities and Exchange 
Commission. Klein, Wit's founder, now plays the role of strategist 
for the company, which has also brought in Ronald Readmond, a former 
executive vice president at Charles Schwab, as its vice chairman and 
president, as Wit seeks to win acceptance among Wall Street's established 
firms. Yet, promising as this all may sound, skeptics note that until 
Wit takes a bigger part in more initial offerings larger than its 
biggest to date _ an undisclosed portion of the $600 million offering 
for Capstar Broadcasting, the radio properties sold off by Hicks, 
Muse, Tate &AMP; Furst _ Wit's promise remains just that. What is 
more, the summer turmoil in the stock and bond markets, most analysts 
agree, has curtailed much stock-issuing activity for months, if not 
years, to come. ``It'll take a long time to happen, longer than they 
think,'' said Tom Taulli, a market analyst in Newport Beach, Calif., 
who works for Silicon Investor, an online financial site in Seattle. 
And whatever Wit's rhetoric about empowering individuals, Taulli cautioned 
that a little power can be a dangerous thing. Taulli, who is writing 
a book on initial public offering investing for individuals, said 
that ``when you open markets, you have to be very careful how you 
educate investors.'' Initial public offerings are particularly risky 
investments, Taulli said: ``Every research study shows IPOs underperform 
the market. Most of them don't do well.'' Lessin, who readily conceded 
that Wit has not yet had time to prove its model, said the recent 
stock market turmoil nevertheless was ``a net positive'' for his firm 
_ because it has allowed Wit to demonstrate that it had placed shares 
into steady hands that would not sell at the first sign of trouble. 
Of the stock placed by Wit, 85 percent remains with the original investors 
two months after being issued, a proportion that compares favorably 
with much of mainstream Wall Street, he said. And, should there be 
any doubt about his commitment to the Internet as an investment opportunity, 
Lessin said he had sunk millions of dollars _ more than $15 million, 
by some estimates _ of his own money into tens of different Internet-linked 
ventures. These bets, placed separately from Wit, include budding, 
still private companies like Culture Finder (www.culturefinder.com), 
an online source of cultural events around the country; Inns and Outs 
(www.innsandouts.com), an online bed and breakfast site, and the Main 
Xchange (www.mainx.com), which Lessin described as ``the leading teen-age-oriented 
online stock exchange site.'' Meanwhile, Lessin devotes about one-quarter 
of his time to Dawntreader, an investment fund that is separate from 
Wit but that shares his services as its chairman. Dawntreader, which 
aims to invest at much earlier stages in start-up ventures than would 
Wit, has so far put money into Watch World (www.watchworld.com), a 
retail business selling timepieces that now is expanding onto the 
Internet and Sports Cappers (www.sportscappers.com), a fee-based online 
business with tips for sports bettors. If Lessin's plate-spinning 
act sounds frenetic, it belies the assumption by some on Wall Street 
that it was the serious stroke he suffered in 1994 that led to his 
decision to forgo the stress of the financial big leagues for the 
whimsical pursuit of Internet start-ups. Lessin, who had returned 
to work at Smith Barney in a wheelchair within weeks of his stroke, 
said his leap into cyberspace was anything but an escape. Instead, 
he described it as a logical move made after analysis of the pending 
societal changes he summarized in a book ``The Middle Chapter: Musings 
of an Investment Banker,'' that his employers at Smith Barney published 
in 1997. In the book he enthused that ``the Internet is replicating 
in five years the superstructure of retailing (distributors, wholesalers, 
boutiques, malls, superstores, catalogs, etc.) that developed over 
centuries.'' After writing that, he said, it would have been hypocritical 
not to follow his own advice by staking his future on the Net. To 
some on Wall Street, Lessin and his new path seem rather outre. ``He's 
very bright, but very strange,'' said one former investment banking 
colleague, speaking on condition that he not be identified by name. 
``Sometimes, he'd turn up to work in chinos and no shoes.'' Lessin 
disputed that account, saying he had always worn shoes to work. And 
while he may on occasion have shed such formal wear as coat and tie, 
he noted, he always wore the mandatory business suit for meetings 
with Fortune 500 companies. That said, he conceded, ``No one has ever 
accused me of being normal.'' Yet, until his sudden move to Wit, Lessin 
in many ways epitomized the Wall Street establishment. A native of 
Lexington, Mass., and a graduate of Harvard, Lessin, the son of a 
college teacher, followed a well-beaten path to Morgan Stanley &AMP; 
Co. after he earned his MBA at Harvard Business School in 1978. A 
sportsman who loves to ski and play tennis, he met his wife, Naida 
Wharton Lessin, through his passion for ballroom dancing. The couple, 
who live in Englewood, N.J., have three children. In 1993, along with 
his mentor Robert Greenhill, and a group of other Morgan Stanley bankers, 
Lessin left for Smith Barney where he and his colleagues tried, with 
only limited success, to power that firm into the top echelon of investment 
banking. Now, after raising billions of dollars for the biggest companies 
in the country, Lessin _ laptop computer and HP620 personal organizer 
in hand _ busies himself with small start-up companies that may be 
long on promise, but often are struggling to make even a few thousand 
dollars in profits. While Wit has suffered significant losses in the 
recent carnage in the securities markets, and particularly in the 
market for initial public offerings, it is now seeking to negotiate 
a capital infusion that would push the capital invested in it to over 
$25 million, Lessin said. The biggest challenge to Wit's business 
model remains the fact that the vast majority of initial offerings 
still are handled by the traditional brokerage firms. And Internet 
investors account for only an infinitesimally small fraction of one 
percent of all investment in new stock offerings. ``It's certainly 
small, very small,'' Lessin said, ``but I intend to make it much larger.'' 
Toward that end, Wit has in recent months affiliated itself with a 
loose collection of companies that calls itself the e-group _ whose 
members also include Waterhouse Securities, Quick &AMP; Reilly's online 
brokerage operation, Datek Online and some 10 other firms that, together, 
account for about 30 percent of the online investing market. The plan 
is to band together to participate as a group in IPO underwritings 
involving bigger, conventional brokerage houses. Wit, in fact, was 
named in August as the e-group's manager in an underwriting group 
led by J.P. Morgan &AMP; Co., which plans to raise capital for EarthWeb 
Inc., a software services company. ``The emergence of the Internet,'' 
Lessin said, ``changes the role that the individual will play in the 
capital-raising process.'' As for the companies that serve those individuals, 
he added, ``the winners are those who create the brand.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>