<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981108.0095 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Jose Antonio Amaya Garcia has lived long enough to survive three hurricanes, 
but the devastation wrought on Central America by the gargantuan maelstrom 
known as Mitch took even him by surprise. ``It's a punishment from 
God,'' Amaya, an elderly carpenter, said late last week as he searched 
under an avalanche for what was left of his house. He is tiny and 
frail in his soiled shirt and pants, the last clothing he owns. ``I 
am 73, and I've never seen a disaster like this.'' As the scope of 
the devastation became clear, many Central Americans like Amaya were 
wondering what had hit them. No other hurricane in modern history 
has wreaked such havoc and death in this region, no stranger to these 
tempests of nature. But unlike past storms that struck hard and moved 
on, this hurricane stalled just off Honduras' north coast for four 
days, dumping several feet of water on Central America even as it 
lost power. Then, for two more days, it crawled across Central America 
from the Atlantic coast of the isthmus to the Pacific coast, before 
turning west, raking Guatemala and El Salvador, and moving into southern 
Mexico. It was the rain, not the storm's winds, that did the most 
damage. The torrential downpours spawned floods and avalanches that 
killed more than 10,000, erased entire villages, devastated crops 
and destroyed much of the infrastructure in Honduras, Guatemala, El 
Salvador and Nicaragua. ``Mitch took a walk through all our territory,'' 
said Martin Baide, a spokesman for the Honduran president's office. 
The freakish behavior of the storm is the major reason it caught governments 
and people off guard. But the high death toll also owes something 
to poverty and politics. Most working-class houses are poorly built, 
and many impoverished people erect their homes, often illegally but 
with a wink from local politicians, on marginal lands close to rivers 
or clinging to unstable mountain slopes that have been stripped of 
trees. What is more, many people did not heed government warnings 
on the radio to abandon riversides and coastal regions for higher 
ground. Many Hondurans remembered Hurricane Fifi in 1974 and Hurricane 
Gilbert in 1988, huge storms that concentrated their fury on the north 
coast of the hilly country but did not move inland. ``All the hurricanes 
that have come by have only touched the bay islands and the north 
coast,'' said Dr. Marcio Galo, a government physician. ``In Tegucigalpa 
we didn't expect such a quantity of water would fall or would cause 
such damage. And we never expected it would affect the south too.'' 
In the second week of October, an unremarkable atmospheric disturbance, 
accompanied by thunderstorms, moved west out of the Sahel in Africa 
and into the Atlantic Ocean. A hundred or so of these tropical waves, 
as meteorologists call them, do the same every summer and fall. For 
a week the tropical wave that would become a hurricane raised few 
alarms as it crossed the ocean, eventually reaching the eastern Caribbean, 
near the Lesser Antilles, on Oct. 19. It was just another band of 
thunderstorms, and nine out of 10 these waves eventually dissolve. 
``We see thunderstorms every day,'' said John Guiney, a hurricane 
specialist at the National Hurricane Center in Miami. ``The key thing 
is persistence.'' But this disturbance did persist, and it grew stronger 
as it moved into the warm waters of the central Caribbean, where sea-surface 
temperatures are well above the 80-degree mark necessary to generate 
a hurricane. Over the next two days, it sucked up moisture and heat 
and its winds began to rise. On Oct. 21 scientists at the Miami center 
determined that the pinwheel-shaped storm had become a tropical depression, 
as baby hurricanes are known, and they dubbed it Mitch, in accordance 
with their alphabetical list. It was 360 miles due south of Kingston, 
Jamaica, moving northward. By the next afternoon, the hurricane's 
winds had risen to about 45 miles an hour, and it was classified a 
tropical storm. But it still offered no clue to U.S. Air Force scientists 
who flew over it in a specially outfitted C-130 cargo plane of what 
it would become. ``There really wasn't much of a center,'' recalled 
Maj. Rich Harter, a meteorologist on the flight. The night of Oct. 
22 and through the next day, everything changed. The storm exploded 
in size and ferocity. By Oct. 24 it was a full-blown hurricane with 
90 mile-an-hour winds, about 200 miles south-southwest of Kingston 
and inching north at seven miles an hour. Though the storm was far 
out at sea, torrential rains hit Costa Rica, causing floods that killed 
seven people. Cuba and Jamaica began preparing for the impact, but 
on Oct. 25 the storm veered westward and ambled menacingly toward 
the Yucatan Peninsula. People in Belize and Mexico braced for the 
worst. Dozens of foreign journalists traveled to the resort city of 
Cancun, Mexico, to cover the storm. By Monday, Oct. 26, the hurricane 
had became a true monster, with winds of 180 miles an hour, moving 
west. Although the eye of the storm was 100 miles north of the Honduran 
coast, heavy rains began falling across Central America. The barometric 
pressure at the center _ a standard measure of intensity _ fell to 
905 millibars, tying it with Camille in 1969 for the fourth-strongest 
Atlantic hurricane on record. To meteorologists, it was beautiful, 
a true marvel of nature. The Air Force reservists who flew into it, 
members of a crew based in Biloxi. Miss., called the Hurricane Hunters, 
saw a perfect bowl-shaped mass of clouds around a clear center, with 
circular tiers like a football arena. ``We were all in awe,'' said 
Guiney, in Miami. ``This was the atmosphere at its worst in terms 
of its impact on man.'' Then, nature's caprice intervened once more, 
in the form of a high-pressure system north of the hurricane. These 
east-west winds deflected the hurricane and steered it west before 
slackening and leaving the storm drifting aimlessly off the Honduran 
coast, often hovering over one spot in the ocean, churning up cold 
water from deeper in the sea. The residents of a Honduran island, 
Guanaja, had to take cover on the afternoon of Monday, Oct. 26. They 
spent a hellish three days as the storm meandered. Vacationers in 
the resort at Posada del Sol described days of listening to a shrieking 
wind outside their cement compound, like a freight train or jet engine. 
Many of the island's 5,000 residents waited out the storm in a protected 
canyon. Luis Pagoada, 48, a land surveyor, weathered the storm with 
12 other people inside a fishing trawler pulled up on a beach behind 
a seawall. Although the group had food and water, he said, they nearly 
lost their composure by the third day of screaming winds and high 
surf pounding the wall. ``We didn't know if the sea was going to bury 
us,'' he said. The hurricane destroyed most houses on the island, 
tore boats from their docks and knocked out all power and telephones. 
Flowers and greenery were blown away, leaving a barren landscape, 
with only tree trunks protruding from denuded hills, Pagoada said. 
Six people were killed. ``It was just luck, luck, simple luck that 
I survived,'' he said. The next day, Thursday, Oct. 29, the hurricane 
hit the hilly north coast of Honduras, near Trujillo. Its winds slackened 
to 60 miles an hour, downgrading it to a garden-variety tropical storm. 
But it produced enormous downpours throughout the region. Harter, 
of the Hurricane Hunters, said flying through the storm at that point 
``was like being in a shaky car wash for about six hours.'' As it 
wandered across Honduras over the next 48 hours, the storm dumped 
as much as two feet of rain a day in some locations, according to 
unofficial estimates. The rivers and creeks lacing Honduras' mountainous 
countryside quickly swelled to several times their normal size, flooding 
entire towns and neighborhoods. In the north, the floods destroyed 
vast banana plantations belonging to American companies and damaged 
coffee crops. Countless families were stranded on rooftops, surrounded 
by water. Countless others drowned as they struggled to find higher 
ground. Communications were knocked out. By Friday afternoon, the 
Choluteca River had put many parts of the capital, Tegucigalpa, under 
water. Factories, hospitals, prisons and several neighborhoods were 
swept away, along with livestock and an unknown number of people. 
People living next to the river abandoned houses and sought shelter 
on higher ground. ``Everything went by in the river,'' said Alejandro 
Isaguire, a 35-year-old farm worker. ``Cattle, cars, tires, buses, 
refrigerators. It was scary. It made me pray to God.'' Late Friday 
and in the early hours of Saturday, the true horrors began. Across 
Honduras, landslides and avalanches buried whole villages and destroyed 
dozens of poor neighborhoods in major cities. Tomas Zelaya Gomez, 
73, was asleep in his bed with his wife when his house was destroyed 
in a landslide that took the lives of at least 13 people, including 
his daughter and granddaughter. ``I didn't hear the noise because 
I was sleeping,'' he said. ``But when I woke, I felt that the walls 
were falling in. I grabbed my wife and we left our room and went into 
the corridor. There was this enormous crash.'' The couple made it 
out of the wreck, only to find most neighbors' houses had slid into 
a river below or collapsed in an avalanche. With the earth still moving 
under his feet and the rain continuing to fall, Zelaya tried desperately 
to pull friends and relatives from the rubble. Fifteen minutes later 
there was another rumbling from the mountainside. The survivors fled 
just before a second landslide took everything left of the homes down 
into the river below. Some riverside communities, like Morolica in 
southern Honduras, were entirely washed away. The floods destroyed 
dozens of shrimp farms and melon plantations in the south. Scores 
of bridges were knocked out, along with power and telephone lines. 
But perhaps no place was harder hit than Casita Volcano, in northwestern 
Nicaragua, near the town of Posoltega and close to the border with 
Honduras. The incessant rains filled the volcano's crater with water, 
creating a lake. On Friday afternoon, the crater's wall gave way, 
burying about 14 villages in mud and killing at least 1,500 people. 
``It is like a desert littered with buried bodies,'' said the mayor 
of Posoltega, Felicita Zeledon. News of the catastrophes was slow 
to emerge. By Saturday morning, Oct. 31, communications systems were 
crippled and all the major roads impassable in Honduras and much of 
Nicaragua. Besides, the storm was not yet finished. Unwinding and 
slowing down, Mitch moved west across Honduras on Saturday, then raked 
through Guatemala and El Salvador on Sunday, finally losing power 
that afternoon as it entered Mexico, near Tapachula. On Monday, as 
skies cleared somewhat, the scale of the disaster became apparent. 
``We have before us a panorama of death, desolation and ruin throughout 
the entire country,'' the Honduran president, Carlos Flores Facusse, 
told his stunned nation in an address that evening. La Ceiba, in the 
north, was flooded and cut off by downed bridges. The second-largest 
city and economic hub, San Pedro Sula, was under a meter of water 
and its airport was badly damaged. The road linking the capital to 
San Pedro Sula and the Caribbean port at Cortes was cut, as was the 
road from the capital to the Pacific Coast. Much of downtown Choluteca, 
the economic engine of the south, had been buried in mud. Government 
officials say Honduras has lost most of its coffee and banana crops, 
worth about $500 million, and about 70 percent of the year's grain 
harvest. ``It's tragic what has happened to us,'' said Marco Polo 
Michiletti, the deputy minister for agriculture. Throughout Central 
America, hundreds of towns found themselves cut off, unable to get 
shipments of food or medicine and without clean water. ``We are completely 
incommunicado,'' said Juan Francisco Alvarez, mayor of Soledad, when 
a Mexican helicopter arrived with a small shipment of food last week. 
His community lost 14 people. ``Eighty percent of our roads are damaged,'' 
he said, wearily ticking off the town's woes. ``All the bridges are 
out. There is no electricity. There are no telephones. We are rationing 
food.'' On Monday afternoon, the U.S Air Force began search-and-rescue 
helicopter operations from Palmerola, about 30 miles northwest of 
the capital, plucking more than 670 people from roofs and trees over 
the next three days. More than 600,000 homeless people were crammed 
into schools, churches and other temporary shelters. On Wednesday, 
more help arrived. Mexico sent helicopters, cargo planes, troops trained 
in rescue missions and 700 tons of food. Japan pledged to repair two 
crucial bridges. The United States followed suit, pledging $70 million 
to help rebuild Honduras. As the week wore on, Tegucigalpa grew tense. 
Prices rose and food disappeared rapidly from grocery shelves. Hundreds 
of cars lined up at gasoline stations, where armed guards kept order. 
The government instituted a nightime curfew and banned the drinking 
of alcohol to combat looting. Desperate people dug through the muddy 
rubble of former stores, looking for canned goods. By Friday the main 
highway linking Tegucigalpa to Port Cortes was reopened after engineers, 
working 24 hours a day, filled in the gaping ravine left when water 
washed away a culvert. Trucks carrying fuel and food began reaching 
the capital. As the waters receded, more and more bodies were discovered. 
Although the bodies of most of the 6,400 people the government estimates 
were killed in Honduras may never be found, the hurricane appears 
to have been the Atlantic's deadliest in two centuries. In Tegucigalpa, 
only 20 bodies have been recovered. Hundreds have been reported missing, 
and are presumed dead. ``A huge number of people are buried,'' the 
city coroner, Dr. Lucy Marrder, said. ``There are entire settlements 
that are buried and they haven't recovered the bodies.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>