<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981108.0122 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With the endorsements of top Republicans in his pocket, Rep. Robert 
Livingston of Louisiana all but declared himself speaker of the House 
Sunday, two days after the abrupt resignation of Speaker Newt Gingrich. 
``I have over a hundred votes or so now, and I need about 112, and 
I'll have them probably within the next two days,'' said Livingston. 
``I will be the next speaker.'' Earlier in the day, Rep. Christopher 
Cox, a conservative from California and the only other announced candidate 
for speaker, said he had gathered about 90 commitments and should 
not be counted out. But by Sunday evening, reports spread through 
the Capitol that Cox would withdraw from the race on Monday in the 
interest of party unity. ``He concluded that Livingston was so far 
ahead that it would be hard to catch up, although Livingston didn't 
have it wrapped up,'' said one Republican close to Cox. He added that 
Livingston had ``intimidated'' a number of members into supporting 
him because even if he lost the race for speaker, he would remain 
as chairman of the Appropriations Committee, an enormously powerful 
position that allocates federal spending. The unofficial news of Cox's 
withdrawal prompted the only other potential candidate on the horizon, 
Rep. Jim Talent of Missouri, to issue a statement Sunday night saying 
that he had decided not to enter the race. ``It's in the bag for Livingston,'' 
said a top Republican aide, who predicted that Cox's formal withdrawal 
would have ``a very soothing effect'' on Republicans. Conservatives 
unhappy with Livingston have been promoting Cox's candidacy, saying 
as late as Sunday that Livingston was not a true fiscal conservative, 
was too hot-headed and was too stuck in the old ways to bring change 
to the House. But a Republican aide said Sunday evening that the conservatives, 
known as CATS, an acronym for Conservative Action Team, are expected 
to drop their opposition. ``The CATS aren't purring but they're on 
board,'' he said. Livingston also had the backing of several committee 
chairmen and that of Rep. Tom DeLay, the House whip, who commands 
the party's vote-getting and vote-counting organization that is used 
to advance the leadership's goals. Still brewing are contests for 
other leadership positions. The majority leader, Dick Armey of Texas, 
is being challenged by Steve Largent of Oklahoma. The conference chairman, 
John Boehner of Ohio, is being challenged by J.C. Watts, Jr., of Oklahoma 
and George Radanovich of California. The whip, DeLay, is believed 
to be secure in his post. But the speakership, which is third in line 
of succession to the presidency after the vice presidency, is the 
most powerful and the most visible. If Cox drops out, Livingston could 
claim credit for out-organizing and out-gunning his opposition that, 
for three hours after he announced his candidacy on Friday, included 
Gingrich himself. The race to replace Gingrich soared into overdrive 
Sunday, lighting up Capitol Hill offices that are usually dimmed and 
dull in the post-election season when Congress is out of session. 
Members scurried back over the weekend from their home districts for 
internal party brawls over leadership posts in the aftermath of the 
Republicans' loss of five House seats in last week's midterms. The 
jousting spilled over onto the television talk shows Sunday. Several 
candidates for three of the party's four hierarchical jobs took their 
case to a national audience, even though the voting, scheduled for 
Nov. 18, will be conducted only among the incoming 223 Republican 
House members. This use of national television for internal party 
positioning seemed in part a response to the overwhelming concern 
of Republicans that they learn how to better communicate their actions 
and goals to voters. They blamed Gingrich for a failure to articulate 
a clear message to voters this fall, although many also said that 
the Republicans had accomplished so little this year that there was 
nothing to communicate. ``What is at stake here is not just the future 
of the House of Representatives but the future of Congress and the 
country,'' Cox said Sunday on the CBS program ``Face the Nation.'' 
Cox had announced his candidacy for speaker on ``Larry King Live'' 
on Friday night. Rep. Jennifer Dunn of Washington said in response 
to a question on the NBC News ``Meet The Press'' that she was considering 
running for majority leader, a higher position than she had previously 
indicated. ``It's possible that I will take a look at that in the 
next couple of days,'' she said. The swamping of the airwaves is also 
an effort to give the party a quick facelift now that Gingrich is 
gone. Democrats repeatedly exploited Gingrich's image, demonizing 
him as the embodiment of what they cast as an extremist Republican 
Party. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>