<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981012.1080 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The herb industry is attempting to counter growing complaints about 
dietary supplements' quality and effectiveness by turning to science: 
A fledgling movement uses pharmaceutical-style testing to ensure consumers 
get what they pay for. It might even turn some popular herbs into 
prescription drugs. ``We're trying to give people some rational basis'' 
for choosing to take a particular herb, said Bernie Landes, chief 
executive of Paracelsian Inc., which hunts the active ingredients 
that make herbs work. ``We want to be the Underwriters Laboratory 
for herbals,'' said Elliot Friedman who heads competitor PharmaPrint 
Inc., which just announced its testing had discovered that five ingredients 
may help St. John's wort ease depression _ not the lone ingredient 
advertised by most herbal brands. Americans are expected to spend 
dlrs 4.3 billion this year on herbal supplements such as saw palmetto, 
gingseng and others that promise to do everything from lifting depression 
and shrinking men's swollen prostates to fighting colds and easing 
stress. So far, there's little scientific proof behind many of the 
claims of better health. And if an herb does help, consumers would 
need a ``standardized'' brand that carries a consistent dose of the 
ingredients that make it work. Just as wine varies from vineyard to 
vineyard and melons from one field are sweet while those from another 
are tasteless, an herb's dozens of mysterious ingredients vary depending 
on rainfall and other growing conditions. St. John's wort, for example, 
recently made headlines when laboratory testing found competing brands 
often don't contain levels of the active ingredient hypericin promised 
on the bottle. No brand advertises all four additional ingredients 
that PharmaPrint claims consumers also need. Testing is ``a step in 
the right direction,'' said Dr. H.B. Matthews of the National Institutes 
of Health, which organized a meeting last month where scientists demanded 
better quality from the booming industry. The two companies are running 
herbs through the same lab tests that prescription medicines must 
pass _ called bioassays _ to uncover just what biologically active 
ingredients they contain. Then the companies contract with herb manufacturers 
to guarantee certain brands carry high levels of the most biologically 
active ingredients. American Home Products next month begins selling 
six PharmaPrint-tested herbs under its popular Centrum supplement 
brand: Echinacea, garlic, ginkgo, ginseng, saw palmetto and St. John's 
wort. Paracelsian promises competing brands early next year. The companies 
also plan to seek Food and Drug Administration approval to sell the 
most effective herbs as prescription drugs, so doctors wary of the 
largely unregulated supplements could choose, for a little higher 
price, a fully tested medicine version. PharmaPrint has begun clinical 
trials of its first drug candidate, saw palmetto, to measure whether 
men taking the herbal pills have their enlarged prostates shrink more 
than men who get a dummy pill. Company testing shows saw palmetto 
is biologically active; the question is whether the effect is big 
enough to help. There already is some scientific data from Europe, 
where Germany sells herbs as drugs, that some herbs have healthful 
effects. That data prompted the NIH to finance a study starting this 
winter comparing St. John's wort to the prescription antidepressant 
Zoloft, to see which better helps moderately depressed Americans. 
Such careful studies are new for the U.S. supplement industry, which 
has run largely on folklore. But ``to assume something the Seminole 
Indians used for maintaining the health of their prostate 500 years 
ago is identical to something in a bottle today _ it really begs the 
whole issue of science,'' said Paracelsian's Landes. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>