<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981012.2130.0239 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Clinton is renewing his call for national hate crime legislation, 
after the death of a gay University of Wyoming student. Matthew shepard 
died this morning five days after he was found pistol whipped and 
tied to a fence post in laramie in near-freezing conditions. The attack 
was denounced by gay rights advocates as a hate crime. Judy Woodruff 
has more on this case that has sparked outrage across the country 
and refueled a national debate. From all along the political spectrum, 
there is outrage over the death of Matthew shepard. From the president 
-- Crimes of hate and crimes of violence cannot be tolerated in our 
country. From Wyoming's republican governor. Hate is anarchy in a 
country that is founded on democracy. I call on Wyoming's people in 
effect all of America to discuss what they might do to cleanse their 
own approach to this. And from leading Christian conservatives, the 
family research counsel headed by likely presidential contender Gary 
bouwer says it's very grieved by the death of this young man. But 
that seems to be where the consensus ends. Gay politics in 1998 is 
as contentious as ever with the Christian right and gay rights groups 
polar opposites. It's a cultural war being waged over the airwaves 
in hard hitting ads such as these put out about a group tide to the 
family research counsel. This is my son Michael at 3. I love my son 
very much. I always have. Even when he told me that he was using drugs 
and involved in homosexuality. My son Michael found out the truth. 
He could walk away from homosexuality. But he found out too late. 
He has AIDS. And it's a ground war with Christian conserve tifz registering 
voters in Alaska and Hawaii to pass constitutional amendments that 
would in effect ban gay marriages. If they succeed, who is next? Protect 
our constitution. Protect yourself. Vote no or November 3. This season's 
political standard barriers for the gay rights movement four openly 
gay democratic house chamers. Tamm mi Baldwin in Wisconsin. Greta 
cammermyer in Washington. And Paul Barbie in Oklahoma. In any one 
wins it would be a first. No candidate has ever entered Congress for 
the first time with their homosexuality out in the open. Gay rights 
advocates don't limit their working relationship only to democrats. 
In New York's closely contested Senate race, the nation's biggest 
gay rights group, the human rights campaign, is seriously considering 
endorsing republican incumbent Al D'Amato. Judy wood rough, CNN, reporting. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>