<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981012.1130.1464 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Most people would agree Steven Spielberg clearly depicted history 
in his latest film, "saving private Ryan." Hillary Bowker reports 
the movie is touching the lives of many people in many different ways. 
I'll see you on the beach! It might just be the next worst thing to 
being there. The graphic portrayal of the D-day landings in Steven 
Spielberg's movie "saving private Ryan" has won praise for the American 
filmmaker. It's hard, even after this long, to watch the opening sequence. 
But the part at the grave, both at the beginning and at the end, were 
also something I had a hard time to deal with -- the man standing 
at the grave looking at the stones. And it was after the movie was 
over and the lights went on, I noticed that most of the people in 
the theater were old men with their wives. That I'd seen it about 
three days after it opened in July last summer, and we all had a hard 
time getting up and getting out of the theater. We were still in shock, 
almost, over the movie. Because of the film, savard was moved to come 
here, to Omaha beach, to visit the Graves of two of his comrades -- 
men killed by the same mortar shell that wounded him. The movie has 
prompted others to visit Omaha beach and visit the Graves of their 
own dead, and also to see where Robert and Preston nyland are buried. 
The story of their younger brother Frederic inspired Spielberg. The 
G.I. was ordered out of combat because two of his brothers had died 
in Normandy, and another was believed dead in Burma. He didn't want 
to go. He told chaplain samson that when he came and found that his 
two brothers had been killed in combat, he said -- he said that "the 
only brothers I have are here and I want to stay here." The Spielberg 
take on this -- the horror and bravery that really was D-day is striking 
a chord with many viewers. Others, especially here in Europe, have 
objected to the impression that the United States fought alone in 
Normandy, when the invasion was an effort involving many allied countries. 
An effort praised in a contemporary newsreel. In banking all on the 
success of operation overlord to end the conflict in Europe, the leaders, 
Eisenhower and Montgomery, relied heavily on the commitment of thousands 
of men and women from many nations. Nations united in a common cause. 
"saving private Ryan" hasn't just brought history back to life, it's 
given it a life of its own. A life that some Europeans fear they've 
been written out of. Hillary Bowker, CNN, London. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>