<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981012.2100.0054 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Tomorrow morning a lot of Americans will walk into a more uncertain 
workplace. At more and more companies people are learning about co-workers 
that won't be back in more and more American households there is concern 
about investments, vacations and how to pay perhaps for the new car 
on order. The Dow went up today finally climing its way back over 
8,000 prompting one analyst to call it bounce from the brink. Make 
no mistake with some economies around the world on a freefall, it 
is a time of high anxiety for the once red hot American economy. That 
brink can return in a day's time. There are many prediction that's 
given the damage already in the long term this may turn out to be 
the slowest and worst wnturn in decades. With the market down 14% 
since July, with 133 stocks having hit new lows just this afternoon. 
We're going to begin with Tyler mathisen, veteran financial journalist 
on cnbc. Tyler, for the first time now around the country we're hearing 
concerns about the coming Christmas season. There is real anxiety 
tonight. There is. Chairman Greenspan testified before Congress that 
since mid July about 1.5 trillion dollars of American's wealth has 
viporized. If you don't think that is going to translate into a slower 
Christmas season, at the malls and in the stores, you got another 
thing coming. People are starting to open up eir mutual fund statements 
and for the first time in eight years since just before the last recession 
occurred, as we went into the war with Saddam Hussein, they're gig 
to say, that hurt. Ey lost 15% of their money in the latest quarter. 
People are actually canselling cars that have been ordered. If you 
ask some dealerships, consumer confidence can feed on itself. It really 
can. What we're beginning to see in the earlest surveys is that in 
August and then again in September the most sensitive part of the 
economy, those households with incomes above $50,000 a year or more, 
whom we will call the affluent,the biggest spenders, are beginning 
to express less confidence in their own financial situations. Back 
in the early summer, 60% were confident about their own financial 
fortunes. Look at August, at September. At number is back down to 
50%. That almost always press as a reduced spending into the next 
quarter or half year or so. We mentioned the numbers from straight. 
Let's show them. The Dow gained about 102 closing above the 8,000 
Mark. NASDAQ had a gain today. Don't try looking for a road map for 
this. Up more than 53 points ending at 1546. What is going on with 
this market? Last week the NASDAQ lost about 7% overall. Today it 
got back about half of that about 3.5%. I think maybe this is a little 
blip. Let's wait and see. We'll know more in a month after so many 
more American corporations reported their profits for the third quarter. 
Not too many people think those profit reports are going to be that 
Rosey. Especially a lot of banks in the Wall Street firms. You mentioned 
at the top of the broadcast, an awful lot of them we can expect to 
see layoffs big time going forward through the fourth quarter. The 
stock market bounced back a little bit. But it is no time to take 
your seatbelts off. Are the firms on Wall Street predicting recession? 
Some are. P. Morgan last week became the first of the big houses to 
predict a mild recession in 1999. Some individual economists employed 
by Wall Street firms, if they're not saying it in so many words are 
darkly hinting that we might go through our first recession since 
that late 1990, early 1991 recession, which was a relatively brief 
one, only two quarters long, and relatively mild. But it hurt all 
the same. Remember, 2/3 of this economy is consumer spending. If consumers 
pull back after they look at those 401-K and mutual fund statements, 
that is going to slow the economy down. Tyler mathisen, still on duty 
tonight. Thank you. Nice to see you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>