<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981012.2100.1203 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
as we mentioned, our other unfolding store bring this evening it appears 
there may be a tentative, underline tentative, deal with Slobodan 
Milosevic to pull his troops out of Kosovo and allow a large force 
of international monitors in to watch the situation. But a entertive 
deal, as you may know, especially in that region does not mean the 
American bombers won't be needed. For more we are joined by NBC news 
chief foreign affairs correspondent Andrea Mitchell who is standing 
by. Perhaps, we hope, you can sort out the conflicting bull continues 
we are getting on the wire services from overseas. Good news, bad 
news, alternating every few minutes. Yes, there's a deal. Yes the 
president says it's out -- full of worth as the per it's written on. 
That's partly the way the president word his statement. They want 
to keep the pressure on. So they came out with tough statements today. 
Basically what happened tonight is that NAto has authorized its generals 
to order air strikes against Serbia forces in Kosovo, the province 
of Kosovo. Here's the big but. They are going to give the president 
milosovic four days to comply with a diplomatic agreement that he 
has conceded to. If he does not at that point the missles would fly. 
In Brussels of the 16 member NATO counsel. The group that has authorize 
air strikes. Commitments are not compliance. Balkan graveyards are 
filled with president milosovic's broken promises. Earlier in New 
York the president talked to U.S. negotiator Richard Holbrooke in 
Brussels. Their decision, even though they had a tentative agreement, 
the United States still wanted NAto to authorize military strikes 
keep the pressure on and make sure the deal does not fall apart. Council 
is meeting to discuss what it does next in a situation of extreme 
seriousness. One might say an emergency. During a week of nonstop 
diplomacy, NBC news has learned holbro an in the province of Kosovo. 
He will withdraw the Serbia army and police from Kosovo, permit relief 
to get to 250,000 refugees, and most important, allow NAto planes 
to monitor his compliance. And 2,000 civilian observers on the ground. 
That civilian force would include some Americans. In prog today, Henry 
Kissinger on the importance of a plomatic solution. We have to understand 
that it is a problem we are trying to solve not an individual quarrel. 
Tonight Holbrooke is tireless, he is heading back to Belgrade to try 
to pin milosovic down. E agreement uld still blow up. Milosovic is 
angry about this threat of force. But keeping that pressure on, Brian, 
is the only way U.S. officials believe to keep him to his word. And 
if it blows up, that's where the carrier battle group comes in. Exactly. 
Andrea Mitchell tonight following this story. Thank you very much. 
My pleasure. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>