<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981012.2100.0629 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We are joined tonight by two men driving their political parties toward 
the November elections, Roy Romer, governor of Colorado, chairman 
of the democratic national committee is with us from Colorado tonight. 
With us from San Francisco is republican counterpart Jim Nicholson, 
chairman of the republican national committee. Governor roamer, defend 
your man from charges that he couldn't have more going on in Washington 
and overseas and there he is tonight in New York raising money. Look, 
he sent that budget up in February. They were supposed to have it 
in April. They're seven months late. The president is always available 
through his staff. Let me tell you, this budget is not yet going to 
be solved until they answer the question of school construction. They 
have not responded to his proposal yet. So, Brian, he's ready to do 
business. He doesn't have to be up there personally. His men are there. 
They just have waited seven months to do something. It's because they 
couldn't get their own act together that they couldn't agree within 
their own party. Raising money, that's a necessary thing. If we had 
had campaign finance reform, we'd have less of that. The republicans 
killed it. Chairman Nick elson? I think Roy Romer said the key word. 
His staff is available. We've been trying to meet with President Clinton 
all year. He is an A-wall president. He's begun gone 152 days this 
year. Either on vacation, traveling abroad or raising money. Tonight 
he's in New York at a glitzy fundraiser, which is the 100th that he's 
graze graced this year. It's for Chuck Schumer who's already said 
that he will not vote against impeaching the president. Clearly -- 
we advertised two months ago when this guy was on vacation at Martha's 
vineyard saying, we want to meet with you. We think you're going to 
try to shut down the government and change the subject. Now we're 
seeing that he's playing politics with the children, the veterans, 
and the seniors of this country and threatening to shut down this 
government. For both of you I have from our friends at the "The Washington 
Post" the latest numbers on the topic of impeachment. Do you approve 
or disapprove of republicans handling of the impeachment issue? Is 
is republicans now. 31% approval. 62% disapproval of how the G.O.P. 
is handling this. And to be fair, the next one says, do you approve 
or sapprove of the democrats? Approve 39%. Disapprove 49. Slightly 
better. Chairman, what is the chance that impeachment for the G.O.P. 
is the political exploding cigar for the republicans? Well, this election 
is not going to be about impeachment, Brian. This election is going 
to be about the things that really matter to American families, like 
the education of their children. We've sent seven bills to President 
Clinton this session of Congress. He's vetoed all seven of them. We've 
been trying to get the president to develop a global economic policy 
a policy on Kosovo to stop the actions in Korea, Kosovo. Senator Moynihan 
himself, democrat senator from New York, as said we have a constitution, 
and we should follow our constitution. That's what was voted on in 
the Judiciary committee. Every member of the U.S. house but five, 
by the way, voted to have an inquiry. After I apologize, governor 
Romer, for make your counterpart here briefly the ambassador of the 
U.N., for the record, he is chairman nicholison. The people are disappointed. 
31% approve. 62% disapprove. Let me tell you why. Congress has given 
us the same kind of me larky you heard. The real reason this budge 
set not being put to bed was the president wants to put 100,000 teachers 
in the schools. He wants to repair 5,000 buildings. If we can get 
together on that I think we can close this wudge budget off. To be 
Frank about it this election is going to be about who's going to deliver 
on education. Who's going to make social security work when you retire, 
who's going to make an H.M.O. Bill of rights work for you. The republicans 
have killed the H.M.O. Bill of rights. That's why people are unmappy 
with them. I'm eager to get to the polls. I think the people are going 
to say we want this president to be back on America's business. I've 
heard something that there is an election coming. Now to our friends 
from "Newsweek," if the congressional election were held today, would 
you vote republican or democratic? Governor Romer, it has been said 
that you have nothing less than impeachment riding on this election. 
What's in it for the voters when democrats can't campaign on the attails 
of a president in ouble? Impeachment is not the issue in this election. 
When people walk into that voting booth, they're going to have three 
questions on their mind. Which of these candidates can best educate 
my child? Which can make health care available for me? And who's going 
keep the economy healthy? On all those grounds the democrats are going 
to win this election. I think that we're on the high ound on issues. 
If you want to have an election on impeachment, we'll win that also. 
Chairman, should impeachment be an issue in this election? Well, you 
know, the things around this impeachment are sues. Integrity, trust, 
morality. This president has only had two cabinet meetings this whole 
year. He had one meeting to draw his cabinet together, not to talk 
about the affairs of state or reign affairs. To lie to them about 
taking vantage of an employee in his office. He's had one more cabinet 
meeting. He called the cabinet together again to tell them that he 
had lied to them about sexually exploiting an employee in the workplace. 
So that's out there. But these polls that you talk about, we're not 
dominated by polls. We don't follow the rule of polls. But I will 
tell you, as you said, the voters in America that are most likely 
to vote, are most likely to vote republican. Every incumbent republican 
member of Congress that I know of by the polls is ahead. But they're 
ahead for the right reasons. I thought you said you don't follow the 
polls? We're not relying on the polts, believe me. We're not taking 
anything for granted. We've got to turn out our voters. We're winning 
because we have cut taxes, balanced the budget, reformed welfare, 
given people health insurance to take with them, and we're committed 
to fixing the school system in America. We are committed to getting 
to a commercial break. That means, gentlemen, we must say good-bye 
for this portion of our interview. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>