<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981012.2100.2476 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
25 years ago now the murder of a young girl was such a strong, emotional 
and compelling story it knocked Watergate off the front pages of New 
York City newspapers for a few days. Since then her mother has waged 
a campaign to seek justice for her child that was murder and protect 
other children as well. NBC news correspondent rehemo Ellis revisits 
a time and story 25 years ago and brings us up to present day. 7-year-old 
Joan D'alessandro just beginning to blossom. My daughter was this 
wonderful, wonderful little bubbly, spunky special person. A top student 
in her second grade class, Joan loved ballet, piano and dolls. She 
was so beautiful. She had reddish-blond hair, blue eyes, beautiful 
features. She loved being a brownie scout. The last time her mother 
saw her alive Joan was headed to deliver girl scout cookies to a neighbor. 
I see her going down, little ponytail so proud taking her little box. 
The neighbor, 26-year-old Joseph McGowen a high school science teacher, 
lured Joan into his house and killed her. In 1974 McGowen was sent 
to prison for murder. Ever since Joan's mother has fought to keep 
him there. I have chosen not to sit back in my grief. At present Joan's 
killer is eligible for parole again. 25 years after the crime family 
and friends still rally to support rosemarie D'alessandro's fight 
to block yet another parole appeal by McGowen. One friend, former 
prosecutor Larry McClure handled the case. It was a tragedy that this 
coupty, the people in this county and beyond this county, backed up. 
And still do. McClure remembers the crime like it was yesterday. He 
asault her sexually, he strangled her. Then at a later point in time 
when there was still some movement, he sufficient cate, strangled 
her a second time. After three days of helping to search for Joan, 
McGowen confessed. And on easter Sunday he led police to the wooded 
area where he dumped her body. He was sentenced to life in prison. 
The maximum sentence at that time. D'alessandro thought life meant 
no possibility of parole. She was wrong. I did not realize how short 
-- what it really, really meant. That it was going to be just 14 years. 
And after that there would be appeals for the rest of his life. So 
I was kind of naive with it. Since McGowen was convicted he's had 
two parole hearings. Each one caused agony for Joan D'alessandro's 
family, afraid a child murder could walk away from here a free man. 
In 1987 and in 1994 D'alessandro pleaded with the parole board to 
remember her little girl. That's when he I really relive it because 
the way the law is right now that is what they make victims go through. 
And in reliving it, it's suffering. It's painful. Both times Pat roll 
board turned McGowen down saying in 1994 that he had "not achieved 
his rehabtive potential." But this past spring the New Jersey state 
appeals court ruled that McGowen, at 51, a man who spent most of his 
adult life in prison, should get a new parole hearing. The court said 
lack of rehabilitation cannot be grounds for refusing parole. That 
the board should only have considered whether McGowen was likely to 
break the law again. The man in charge that have 1994 parole hearing 
says that was a consideration. The direction question, come tell us 
now for the first time today that when she knocked on that doorbell, 
she was dead. And he said, yeah, that's right. 20 years later. 20 
years it took him to get to that point. That's part of the reason 
why we felt he was a risk. Michael jacobson says the court may be 
hung up on semantics. Any board who thinks someone's going it Rio 
fend will not put that person out to me the reason they're not putting 
him out is because they think he's not rehabilitated. Whether they 
use the words or not, it's sort of immaterial. Let the judges know 
that we don't want to see Joseph McGowen on the street ever. D'alessandro 
turned anger over McGowen's possibility of parole into action. She 
campaigned relentlessly to toughen parole laws in New Jersey. I do 
not want another mother to have to go through it. I did want my daughter's 
life and suffering to mean something to make the world better. After 
three years of a grassroots effort, New Jersey's Gheorghe Christie 
Whitman signed Jones law. From now on child's killer sentenced to 
life get life with no possibility of parole. The criminal will die 
in prison. There will be no more appeals. But it's not retroactive. 
It will not affect McGowen, whose new shearing scheduled for this 
month. But D'alessandro's work isn't finished yet. She's working to 
make Jones law a federal law, that will some day protect children 
from every state. How are you? Are you OK today? She can still hear 
her daughter's voice on a tape of Christmas songs made four months 
before she was murdered. Oh, what fun it is to ride The chilling reminder 
of a sparkling little girl, and why one mother fought so hard to protect 
other children. She is the heroine, she is chake to make this world 
better. I and I know she is happy about that. Rehemo Ellis, NBC news, 
Hillsdale New Jersey. Joseph McGowen refused to be interviewed. As 
for rosemarie D'alessandro, she gave her victim's statement to the 
parole board just today. Mick you go general expected to appear before 
the board on Wednesday. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>