<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981012.0408 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Japan's Parliament approved landmark banking legislation on Monday 
that will allow the government to nationalize failing banks, and Japan's 
political parties announced that they had reached a new accord to 
provide several hundred billion dollars in new money to try to revive 
the banking system and set the country on a path toward economic health. 
The new accord, reached between Japan's governing Liberal Democratic 
Party and most of the opposition forces, could lead to the injection 
of huge amounts of public money _ more than $400 billion, or four 
times as much as is now available _ into the nation's banks. The Liberal 
Democrats hope that the political alliance holds long enough for them 
to win passage in the Parliament for the new accord by Friday, when 
the current session ends. The possibility of a way out of the financial 
crisis sent stocks surging on Monday, with shares of the nation's 
banks jumping an average of 8 percent. The Nikkei index of 225 shares 
rose 5.24 percent, to 13,555.01, in a big comeback after last week's 
sudden plunge. U.S. markets also rose on optimism about a solution 
to Japan's financial problems. ``They are like the wheels on both 
sides of a car,'' Prime Minister Keizo Obuchi said at a news conference, 
referring to the two pieces of legislation. ``When both of them pass 
the Parliament, it will mean that we can send out a clear and strong 
message to the world that a global depression will absolutely not 
begin in Japan.'' The law enacted by Parliament on Monday allows the 
government to deal with large, failing banks by nationalizing them, 
liquidating them or transforming them into publicly owned ``bridge 
banks,'' which take over the good loans and good borrowers and try 
to collect on the bad loans. It would establish a public institution 
to buy the good assets to resell them later and to collect the bad 
loans in a process also used by the American Resolution Trust Corp., 
which helped clean up the savings and loan crisis in the 1990s. The 
accord announced on Monday night by the political parties, if enacted 
and carried out, would amount to a bold attempt to revive lending 
by cash-strapped banks and thus bolster an economic recovery. With 
Japan's economy in its deepest recession since World War II, the recent 
wild gyrations in the stock market and the recent sudden and sharp 
surge in the yen against the dollar, politicians have become a bit 
jittery that the financial crisis both here and abroad could worsen 
and that the economy could sink even further. In Washington, Clinton 
administration officials said they were encouraged by the new legislation, 
but were still waiting for the Japanese government to carry out the 
steps and deal forcefully with its economic and financial problems. 
The United States has grown increasingly impatient with Japan for 
failing to clean up its banking system and revive its economy. Other 
analysts were also skeptical, partly because Japan has announced agreements 
in the past, only to have them collapse later. One key criticism has 
been the worry that Japan's major banks will not apply for an injection 
of taxpayers' money, particularly if it means they will be punished 
through controls on management or reductions in shareholder capital. 
The Democratic Party, the main opposition to the new accord, has demanded 
that the government force the banks to take public money. Politicians 
did not disclose details of the new accord, but after the Democratic 
Party protested, the Liberal Democrats decided to bolster the amount 
of the bailout. For many, Japan is at a critical juncture. ``If Japan 
is able to adjust, it can become a locomotive to pull Asia out of 
its troubles,'' said Kenneth Courtis, chief economist at Deutsche 
Bank Group Asia Pacific, at a conference on Monday in Singapore. ``Otherwise, 
it could become a Titanic that pulls the rest of Asia under.'' The 
new accordis intended to provide banks with sorely needed new capital. 
Though no amounts were specified, politicians say the accord could 
provide between $435 billion and $520 billion, or about 10 percent 
of annual economic output. The money would not necessarily be spent 
all in one year. International banks could receive taxpayers' money 
if they agree to absorb another failing institution, if there is a 
severe credit contraction or if more capital is needed for a merger. 
Masaru Hayami, the governor of the Bank of Japan, the nation's central 
bank, warned officials in Washington recently that all the banks were 
short of capital and that the resulting credit squeeze had helped 
stifle economic recovery. With a weak capital base, large international 
Japanese banks have been trimming their lending to meet capital requirements 
set by the Bank for International Settlements. Banks with only domestic 
business must conform to government rules. The international banks 
say they currently meet those standards, but just as troublesome is 
the level of equity capital _ a narrower measure of capital _ that 
could absorb real losses arising from writing off unrecoverable loans. 
The amount of the nation's bad debt could be anywhere from $670 billion 
to $1 trillion. In addition, the tumbling stock market, which is flirting 
with 13-year lows, hurts the level of capital at the banks. Recent 
banking proposals by politicians highlight just how low the levels 
of capital could tumble at the banks if their bad loans were dealt 
with right away. According to the guidelines in one proposal, the 
core amount of equity capital at the banks could fall by nearly one 
half if the top 19 banks disposed of problem loans in line with internal 
findings of the Bank of Japan. The Democratic Party and others have 
demanded that the banks address these problem loans by setting aside 
a portion of profits to absorb losses in the expectation that one-fifth 
of these loans go bad, a proportion based on the findings by the Bank 
of Japan. The difficulty, however, is that most banks contend that 
these loans are currently in fine shape, and they have created virtually 
no cushion of profits for them. The precarious level of capital is 
why many analysts are calling on the politicians to put the money 
in first and then tackle the rebuilding of the sticky principles that 
govern the system. For years, analysts and economists here and abroad 
have been demanding greater financial disclosure, tougher accounting 
standards and more market-oriented rules in the financial system. 
``I am for disclosure,'' said Ryuji Konishi, a former bank executive 
who now teaches economics at Tokyo University. ``But this is not a 
time of peace.'' Chikara Sakaguchi, a member of Parliament and a leader 
in the New Peace Party, has said that his party supports the Liberal 
Democrats' bill. Yoshio Suzuki, a senior member in the Liberal Party, 
which was instrumental in Monday night's agreement, said that the 
Liberal Party would also vote to pass the bill and that the bill was 
assured passage. ``We have finally succeeded in establishing a scheme 
which is essential to overcome the present financial crisis,'' he 
said. Not everyone is happy with the bills, though. Some senior bankers 
say that Japan may be passing up the chance to make the financial 
system and its institutions much more competitive through the kind 
of change that can only emerge from a crisis. In the words of one 
Japanese banker, Japan needs ``hands of the devil and the heart of 
a Buddha,'' so that painful revamping may be done now to bring long 
term benefits. Others say that the Liberal Democrats' version is barely 
different from the plan that is being replaced because of opposition 
from the Democratic Party. Under that plan, Japan's banks received 
public money worth about 1.8 trillion yen, or $15.7 billion, in March, 
but the plan failed to inspire worldwide confidence in the banking 
system. ``I'm very pessimistic,'' said Katsuya Okada, a parliamentary 
member for the Democratic Party, the main opposition whose views are 
being edged out of the second set of legislation. ``The philosophy 
and the method are not so clear yet. It seems as though the government 
is forcing the vote.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>