<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981012.0310 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As he waits for the last votes of his 34-year congressional career, 
Democratic Rep. Lee Hamilton runs one hand through his crew cut and 
thinks out loud, in his right-down-the-middle way, about why the House 
is both meaner and cleaner, more hard-working and less thoughtful, 
than when he arrived here from Columbus, Ind., in 1965. In those days, 
he recalls, members of Congress palled around, played cards and made 
a good-faith effort to be on the golf course by 1 p.m. These days, 
they barely have time to get to know one another, let alone contemplate 
the meaning of legislative life, in the press of 24-hour news cycles 
and three-day work weeks bracketed by rush-rush trips home. Back then, 
you could legally accept fancy gifts and pocket leftover campaign 
funds when you retired. Even if you managed to get into trouble, there 
was no House ethics committee until 1978. Then again, neither was 
there any need to spend nearly all your time raising money. As a small 
town lawyer, Hamilton is nostalgic about the $30,000 he spent on his 
first race in 1964, the year of Lyndon B. Johnson's landslide. In 
his last race in 1996, Hamilton sent $1 million. In his office, the 
congressman's papers are already being packed into boxes and the mail 
is being marked ``return to sender.'' Settling in for a leisurely 
interview, the 67-year-old Indiana Basketball Hall of Famer drapes 
his large frame over a straight-backed wooden chair in a room adorned 
with oil paintings of his dogs, Tawny and Buffy. The Almanac of American 
Politics has called Hamilton one of the most respected members of 
the House. The politically moderate son of a Methodist minister from 
Evansville, Ind., he has been a major force on foreign policy issues 
and led opposition to U.S. aid for the anti-communist Nicaraguan contra 
guerrillas in the 1980s. He was House chairman of the House-Senate 
panel that investigated the Reagan administration's support for the 
contras with the proceeds of illegal arms sales to Iran, and also 
chaired the Foreign Affairs and Intelligence Committees. Both Michael 
Dukakis and President Clinton seriously considered him as a running 
mate. Yet even when invited to linger for a moment over some favorite 
accomplishment, he mentions, not very grandly, that he did not write 
the law that created Medicare but was proud simply to have been among 
those who voted for it. ``I think that legislation has enhanced the 
quality of life for an awful lot of people,'' he said. Despite his 
talk about 1960s sociability on the Hill, Hamilton seems always to 
have put in long hours. A 1966 profile in The Washington Star noted 
that ``Hamilton gets to the office every morning at about 6:30, reads 
all the mail, answers nearly all the roll calls, and has missed going 
back home on weekends only a couple of times since he took office. 
He doesn't drink and he doesn't smoke and he works hard.'' He has 
been enormously popular in the 9th District, the irregular slice of 
mostly rural southeastern Indiana where he was re-elected easily until 
the Republican landslide in 1994. After a narrow win that year, he 
again took 56 percent of the vote in 1996. ``I've been going to a 
lot of retirement dinners back in Indiana,'' he says, ``and the things 
people remember are the simple things, that I've tried to be accessible 
and honest and tried to make government work. When I drive through 
my district and see a sewage system or a library or a school I've 
had something to do with, that gives me a lot of satisfaction.'' And 
most likely, this unwillingness to tout his career and contributions 
would have set him apart at any moment in the history of the big, 
noisy institution he clearly loves. On the other side of the ledger, 
Hamilton says, ``You don't walk away from a 34-year career without 
some regrets, and I leave very disappointed that we haven't done something 
on campaign finance or affordable health care.'' He worries, too, 
about both the widening income gap and the information gap in which 
the computer illiterate are increasingly left behind. He says he entered 
public life at a time of great optimism that government could curb 
poverty and discrimination, and leaves at a moment of extreme skepticism 
that government effectively can, or even should, address such issues. 
Not surprisingly, his most immediate regret is what he sees as the 
necessity for an inquiry into the possible grounds for impeaching 
the president, a man he has admired on policy and excoriated for the 
private conduct that has gotten him into trouble. ``It's a depressing 
way to end a career, on the note of impeachment,'' he says, removing 
his glasses, fiddling with them, putting them back on. ``I'm distressed 
with the ending, but you don't control these things.'' Still, living 
through Watergate and Iran-Contra, Hamilton says, has given him some 
perspective on the current situation: ``We look back now and say the 
system worked in Watergate, but in the middle of it it was messy and 
partisan. And something like that is happening now, in my view. It's 
messy. It's partisan. But it's working pretty well.'' How does he 
answer those in his own party who respond to criticism of Clinton's 
behavior by saying essentially that Reagan did far worse and survived? 
``In Iran-contra you were looking at a president abusing the powers 
of the presidency,'' Hamilton said. ``But though a lot of people on 
the left were disappointed we didn't hang him, the evidence didn't 
point to that. We found out what happened.'' And as a result, ``Mr. 
Reagan was able to recover,'' he said. Hamilton was among the 31 Democrats 
who broke party ranks and voted for an open-ended impeachment inquiry. 
He thought it only right to continue the process, he said, though 
he has not concluded that the president's wrongdoing meets the constitutional 
standard of impeachable offense. He does believe the president will 
finish his term, most likely after being rebuked in some formal way. 
And as Hamilton leaves office, he wants to spend some time thinking 
about how the president might be rehabilitated to assure that the 
office of the presidency is not weakened, particularly on the international 
stage. Hamilton's own future includes two new jobs: director of the 
Woodrow Wilson Center, a government-sponsored institution that promotes 
research as well as exchanges between scholars and policymakers, and 
director of a new center for the study of Congress at Indiana University. 
He and his wife, Nancy, will stay in their home in Alexandria, Va. 
Not only Congress, he says, but political life in general is a different 
game now than it was in February of 1960, when Hamilton remembers 
being unable to turn out a respectable crowd to greet Sen. John F. 
Kennedy in Columbus. ``I called everybody I knew and couldn't get 
40 people to come out to the Old City Hall to see him just a few months 
before he got the nomination,'' for the presidency, he says, laughing. 
``Now you start running for president four years ahead of time and 
the voters are so well informed, you do something and get back to 
the office and the phones are already ringing off the hook.'' Not 
all of this new sophistication is real progress, he says, adding that 
today's elected officials probably pay too much attention to constituents, 
tracking every poll, every hiccup in public opinion. In some ways, 
he feels he is leaving on the same note he came in on: ``We're still 
fighting about Medicare 30 years later.'' But there has been positive 
change, he says, in that the workings of Congress now are much more 
open, and the body more truly representative, with many more women 
and members of minority groups in office. If he has learned anything, 
he says, it is how difficult it is to make representative government 
work. And he claims to have no useful advice for those who will come 
after him. He has for some time now missed the collegiality of his 
early years in Washington, when he remembers a senior Republican correcting 
a glaring parliamentary error he had made on a bill the man opposed 
_ an act of generosity that he says would be unimaginable today. He 
will miss his colleagues, too, he is sure. And if he has not yet had 
the time to fully focused on his feelings about leaving, he still 
departs feeling pretty good about his job: ``I don't leave as a pessimist. 
I'm not gloomy because I have more confidence in the institutions 
of government and the Congress than most of my constituents. The process 
is often untidy, but it works.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>