<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981012.0387 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Chrysler Corp. posted a much-better-than-expected 54.6 percent increase 
in third-quarter net profits Monday as the turmoil in global financial 
markets seemed to be having surprisingly little effect on the Big 
Three auto makers' domestic sales and profits. Chrysler announced 
that it had earned $682 million in the third quarter, or $1.02 a share, 
up from $441 million, or 65 cents a share, a year earlier. According 
to First Call, which tracks earnings estimates, the consensus forecast 
was for Chrysler to earn 87 cents a share. Gary C. Valade, Chrysler's 
chief financial officer, said that with the auto markets strong the 
company had spent less than expected on discounts. Warranty expenses 
and other costs also dropped, he added, and the introduction of the 
redesigned Jeep Grand Cherokee went smoothly. Chrysler benefited little 
from a strike last summer that left General Motors dealers with few 
cars and light trucks to sell, said Thomas T. Stallkamp, Chrysler's 
president. Chrysler was already selling its popular sport utility 
vehicles as fast as it could build them and had little ability to 
increase production, he said. Chrysler executives said Monday that 
the stock market's contraction had not yet hurt auto sales. James 
P. Holden, the company's executive vice president for sales and marketing, 
said at a luncheon last week that he had begun racing the company's 
chairman, Robert J. Eaton, to the fax machine each morning for the 
daily sales report and had found no weakness yet in sales. General 
Motors Corp. is expected to announce strike-depressed earnings on 
Tuesday. Ford Motor Co. is widely expected to post an increase in 
profits on Wednesday. At a lunch with reporters Monday, John G. Middlebrook, 
the general manager of Chevrolet, GM's biggest division, said that 
Chevrolet had found no correlation so far between sharp drops in the 
stock market and the level of auto sales in the following days. ``We 
had an extremely strong close to the month of September right in the 
middle of the turmoil in the market,'' Middlebrook said. Wendy Beale 
Needham, an auto analyst at Donaldson, Lufkin &AMP; Jenrette, the 
New York investment bank, said that while the market turmoil may be 
causing some people on Wall Street to worry about their jobs, overall 
employment is high across the nation and people are spending money 
on cars accordingly. ``I don't see any evidence of a slowdown,'' Mrs. 
Needham said. ``You keep thinking it has to change, but there hasn't 
been any change yet.'' Chrysler's sales outside the United States 
and Canada tumbled 21 percent in the third quarter from a year earlier. 
But that barely hurt the company because only 7 percent of its sales 
are overseas. Chrysler's total sales rose to $15.0 billion in the 
third quarter from $13.2 billion in the comparable period a year earlier. 
Although the average discount per vehicle in the United States rose 
to $1,280 from $1,140 a year earlier, it was down from earlier this 
year. Chrysler is scheduled to merge next month with Daimler-Benz 
AG, which would make Monday's earnings report Chrysler's last as an 
independent company. Some version of Chrysler's profits will still 
be calculated, though, because the company's profit-sharing plans 
require it, Valade said. Stallkamp said that Chrysler had focused 
on further cost reductions and new model introductions, ``even while 
the three-ring circus of the merger is going on around us.'' With 
fierce competition preventing auto makers from raising prices in line 
with inflation, the Big Three have all been cutting costs vigorously. 
Valade said during a conference call with reporters that Chrysler 
had cut pretax costs by $300 million in the third quarter from the 
second quarter, notably through lower warranty expenses and lower 
costs for raw materials and other outside purchases. Chrysler's profits 
in the third quarter of last year were depressed by a $25 million 
after-tax charge for the closing of its Eagle car brand. Excluding 
that charge, profits would have risen during the third quarter of 
this year by 46.4 percent from a year earlier. Ford, which is also 
expecting strong profits, announced Monday that it would develop one 
of the broadest programs ever to link employees' compensation to their 
personal performance and the attainment of various companywide goals, 
as well as the corporation's overall results. Ford already gives bonuses 
linked to performance and profits to its 5,000 top executives. Existing 
profit-sharing plans for an additional 50,000 white-collar employees 
will now vary as well with the attainment of individual and corporate 
targets, such as quality and customer satisfaction, Ford said. Ford's 
blue-collar employees already have a profit-sharing plan, the details 
of which are specified by a contract with the United Automobile Workers 
union. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>