<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981012.0336 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In President Reagan's second term, top officials used the power of 
the White House covertly to sell arms to Iran with the aim of freeing 
hostages, and to pass the proceeds to the Nicaraguan Contras in violation 
of a congressional statute. The conspirators, conscious of their lawlessness, 
tried to conceal their scheme with cold-blooded lies. It was a grave 
assault on our constitutional structure: exactly the kind of state 
wrong for which the Framers of the Constitution designed the impeachment 
clause. No one had the heart to invoke it against Reagan, a man who 
was generally liked and who was by then in a state of decline. The 
Iran-Contra affair puts in perspective the Republican attempt to remove 
President Clinton from office. For his wrongdoing, no matter how the 
advocates of impeachment try to color it, amounts to illicit sex and 
lying about it. James Fallows, writing in The Washington Monthly, 
sums up the distinction from Iran-Contra: ``This time we have a president 
shamelessly deceiving Cabinet members, staff and the public about 
a personal matter. That time we had Cabinet members and the president's 
national security adviser, and probably the president himself, deliberately 
misleading Congress and the public about important matters of state.'' 
There are Americans who are quite unwilling to consider such rational 
_ such constitutional _ distinctions. They hate Bill Clinton and want 
him out of there whatever the reason. Of course there are others, 
not primordial Clinton-haters, who are so disgusted at his behavior 
that they wish he were out of office. They do not see how they can 
respect the man who waved his finger at us and said he did not have 
sex with that woman. But most Americans seem to be drawing a distinction 
between disapproval of what he did and support for the Republican 
effort to drive him from office. People think it is about sex, and 
they don't want that to occupy all the space in our political life. 
The public understands the largely partisan basis of the impeachment 
campaign. The partisan character shows in an interesting way. Impeachment 
advocates, aware that a majority of the public does not think lying 
about sex is a high crime or misdemeanor, are now suggesting that 
something else may turn up to condemn Clinton: the unproved charges 
known as Filegate or Travelgate, for example. Now there is a wonderful 
formula for destroying the constitutional balance of powers: Start 
an impeachment process and hope that something will turn up to justify 
it. That approach would devastate the presidency. Most people understand, 
too, what the impeachment campaign is doing to this country, and the 
world, at a time when our leadership is desperately needed. If it 
goes on, 100 senators will be spending the year 1999 holding a trial 
of the president of the United States while the global financial system 
runs down. Most of the Western world sees what is happening here these 
days as a kind of madness. House Republicans would not have started 
the impeachment process, The Financial Times of London said the other 
day, if they ``had the health of their government and the international 
community at heart.'' In The Times of London, the columnist Simon 
Jenkins wrote: ``Defending the American president against his tormentors 
may stick in my throat. But ... I cannot see what good is served by 
letting disgust get the better of reason, by tearing up fair trial, 
corrupting the Constitution with politics and casting proportion to 
the winds. And for what? A tawdry honey trap.'' Most Americans understand 
one more thing: how dangerous it is for all of us, not just for Bill 
Clinton, to let an unaccountable prosecutor bend the rules in an obsessive 
desire to get one individual. For reasons I do not understand, many 
people in Washington seem to think it does not matter what Kenneth 
Starr did to make Clinton a target of impeachment. That is our old 
friend The end justifies the means. Justice Louis Brandeis wrote in 
1928: ``The greatest dangers to liberty lurk in insidious encroachment 
by men of zeal, well-meaning but without understanding.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>