<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981012.0405 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The United States and its allies early Monday approved an order opening 
the way for NATO to begin a bombing campaign in the Serbian province 
of Kosovo in four days' time. But White House officials said an agreement 
with the Yugoslav president appeared imminent. The ``activation order'' 
passed here Monday at a meeting of NATO was clearly aimed more at 
keeping maximum diplomatic pressure to bear on President Slobodan 
Milosevic, than at preparing for military action. Senior American 
and NATO officials said Monday that America's special envoy to the 
Balkans, Richard Holbrooke, had made significant progress with Milosevic, 
and ``has much of what we're looking for.'' The Yugoslav president 
has agreed to end all police and military operations in Kosovo, withdraw 
forces in a verifiable way and make a unilateral statement pledging 
partial autonomy to the province, American officials said. He also 
appears ready to allow a force of 2,000 monitors, mostly civilian, 
into Kosovo. NATO diplomats, however, said that some differences remained 
over the exact makeup of the international mission that would go into 
Kosovo to verify an agreement. Milosevic's reluctance to promise cooperation 
with international war-crimes investigations was also an outstanding 
issue, they said. President Clinton responded with guarded optimism 
to the latest offer of commitments from Milosevic. ``As I have said 
before, we would prefer to resolve this crisis peacefully,'' he said 
on Monday night. ``If fully implemented _ and that is a critical and 
very big if _ these commitments could achieve the international community's 
objectives.'' ``Balkan graveyards are filled with Milosevic's broken 
promises,'' Clinton said in New York after a fund-raising event. ``We 
will remain ready to take military action if Milosevic fails to make 
good on his commitments this time.'' NATO stipulated that 96 hours 
had to elapse before a first phase of military action could begin. 
Earlier drafts had spoken of 48 hours, and Javier Solana, NATO's secretary-general, 
said the extension reflected the fact that ``after analysis of the 
progress made, we wanted to give a longer chance to negotiation.'' 
The NATO decision was made after Holbrooke unexpectedly interrupted 
his marathon negotiations with Milosevic in Belgrade to come to Brussels 
and brief NATO officials. ``We needed more clout behind the negotiating 
process, and this NATO decision provides it,'' a NATO diplomat said. 
After briefing NATO, Holbrooke returned immediately to Belgrade to 
continue his talks with Milosevic, whose crackdown on ethnic Albanian 
separatists in Kosovo has driven the Clinton administration to the 
conviction that only the credible threat of force could end the violence. 
Whether or not NATO does use force, an important precedent appears 
to have been set by Monday's decision. In effect, NATO implied that 
without an explicit U.N. Security Council resolution authorizing force, 
it has the right, in certain circumstances, to intervene in the internal 
affairs of a European nation. Under the NATO order approved Monday, 
command of more than 400 aircraft and other materiel that might be 
used against Yugoslavia was formally transferred from NATO member 
countries to the alliance's commander in Europe, Gen. Wesley Clark. 
Technically, NATO is now ready to begin a campaign. But any military 
strike _ likely to begin with cruise missile attacks on Yugoslavia's 
air defenses _ would be delayed at least 96 hours. This four-day period 
was favored by several European nations in NATO that remain deeply 
uneasy about the idea of air strikes against Yugoslavia, NATO diplomats 
said. The two outstanding issues _ the make-up of a monitoring force 
and war crimes _ are very sensitive to the the Serbian leader. His 
rise to power a decade ago was based on his clamorous crusade on behalf 
of the Serbs of Kosovo, who are far outnumbered in a province that 
is about 90 percent ethnic Albanian. If a Western military force is 
allowed into Kosovo, the sovereignty of Serbia will appear compromised 
in the very place that many Serbs regard as the heart of the nation's 
being because it was the center of its medieval empire. If war crimes 
investigators are allowed into Serbia, the huge police force that 
forms the core of Milosevic's power and has been central to the repression 
in Kosovo would be enraged. It is unclear whether Milosevic could 
afford to lose so important a buttress of his power. Holbrooke declined 
to address those issues publicly during his brief stay in Brussels. 
But he held talks here with the Polish foreign minister, Branislaw 
Geremek, on the possibility that the Organization for Security and 
Cooperation in Europe might organize the monitors to be deployed in 
Kosovo in the event of an agreement. Poland holds the rotating presidency 
of the 29-nation organization. American officials said Holbrooke is 
discussing a group of about 2,000 international monitors, overwhelmingly 
civilian, largely unprotected and under the auspices of the Organization 
for Security and Cooperation, whose members include Russia. Such an 
arrangement might placate Milosevic. A small number of NATO troops 
would also be engaged, largely in intelligence-gathering and in flight 
duties, and some of them would be on the ground in Kosovo. American 
troops would play a role in that monitoring by NATO, a senior American 
official said, but largely from the air. ``No one anticipates American 
troops on the ground at this point,'' the official said. How an unarmed 
group of civilians could effectively verify Serbian compliance with 
an promise to end its crackdown in an atmosphere charged with violence 
and resentment was not clear. The unexpected visit to NATO headquarters 
by Holbrooke appeared to reflect a growing concern and irritation 
among America's allies that they had not been sufficiently briefed 
on the talks in Belgrade. During the 1995 Dayton negotiations that 
ended the Bosnian war, European governments were infuriated by what 
they saw as Holbrooke's failure to keep them sufficiently informed 
or involved. Diplomats here said similar irritation had begun to emerge 
before Holbrooke's visit. A majority of the Albanians, whose autonomy 
was quashed by Milosevic in the late 1980s, now want independence 
from Serbia and a guerrilla army has been fighting with limited but 
often ruthless means to press this demand. The United States has said 
that it favors restored autonomy for the Albanians but that it does 
not support their independence. American officials said Monday that 
Milosevic was ready to agree to a unilateral statement granting limited 
autonomy to ethnic Albanians in the areas of local government, schools 
and policing and promising a full review of the province's status 
in three years' time. It was not clear how the Albanians would respond 
to such a statement, but it appeared well short of their aims. About 
250,000 ethnic Albanians have been driven from their homes this year. 
Western officials said the ``activation order'' approved Monday might 
remain in place for some time, even if an agreement is reached, because 
it would serve as important backing for Western attempts to monitor 
the pledges made by Milosevic in any accord. The demands on Milosevic 
were spelled out in a U.N. Security Council resolution passed on Sept. 
23, but the resolution did not refer specifically to the use of force 
in the event of Milosevic's failure to comply. This omission, necessary 
because Russia would does not support the use of force against its 
Eastern Orthodox allies in Serbia, has caused concern among some European 
nations as to the legal basis for a NATO attack. But Germany and Italy, 
both between governments, gave formal backing Monday to NATO's move 
toward the use of force. Like other Western governments, however, 
they would prefer a peaceful resolution to a crisis that risks undermining 
painstaking efforts by NATO to establish a cooperative relationship 
with Russia. Russia reiterated its opposition Monday, saying any attack 
on Yugoslavia would be a ``tragic mistake.'' The Russian representatives 
to NATO was called back to Moscow for consultations. As NATO put the 
last political piece in place for a bombing campaign, its military 
preparations continued. At the Aviano NATO air base in Italy, A-10 
Thunderbolt ground-attack aircraft arrived Monday, the latest in a 
buildup of 260 American planes. NATO allies have pledged 170 planes, 
making a total force of 430. Clark has said the first targets would 
be Yugoslavia's air defenses, which would almost certainly be attacked 
by cruise missiles launched from B-52 bombers that have already arrived 
in Britain. Yugoslavia's air-defense system is extensive, a reflection 
of its obsession during the Cold War with possible attack by either 
the Soviet Union or the West. Its arsenal includes 1,850 anti-aircraft 
guns and a variety of Soviet-made surface-to-air missiles, some of 
which were used against allied planes during the Bosnian war. Officials 
here said any military campaign would be calibrated to leave open 
to Milosevic the possibility of compromise at any moment. Initial 
strikes would be limited, but the campaign could extend in phases 
to target strategic roads and bridges, military garrisons, key roads 
and bridges, air bases and military aircraft. It was unclear Monday 
whether each successive phase would have to be approved by NATO's 
national representatives. With a long warning over a possible attack, 
the Yugoslav army has already tried to hide much of its aircraft. 
NATO officials said very few of Yugoslavia's 65 MIG-21s and 15 MIG-29s 
remained at air bases, and the majority have been hidden in bunkers. 
It is unclear whether Yugoslavia would fight back in the event of 
attack. In preparation for a possible attack, Germany and Britain 
Monday closed their embassies in Belgrade. Other nations, including 
the United States, reduced their presence to a skeletal staff. The 
Clinton administration, fearing reprisals, also ordered American officials 
to leave the Serb-controlled part of Bosnia. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>