<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981012.0427 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
John Hickey became suspicious as he reviewed the 16 detailed questions 
faxed by a graduate student. For months, the student, Justin D. Waldrep, 
had been quizzing executives at Hickey's company, NRB Industries, 
a textile manufacturer, for what he said was a business school research 
paper. But the new questions seemed far more detailed than any student 
would need. Increasingly uncomfortable, Hickey decided to find out 
more about Waldrep. With a few telephone calls, Hickey discovered 
he had reason to be concerned, according to a lawsuit filed by his 
company. Waldrep was not working on a research paper. He was not attending 
business school. He was not even a student. In its suit, the company 
reached one conclusion: Waldrep was a corporate spy. NRB Industries 
filed its lawsuit last year and has since settled. It and another 
textile company, Johnston Industries, which filed a lawsuit last week 
in an Alabama state court, say that they were the targets of a corporate 
espionage operation conducted for a top competitor, Milliken &AMP; 
Co. According to the two lawsuits, Waldrep posed as a graduate student 
and another consultant posed as a representative of Swiss investors 
in order to steal confidential information from various manufacturers 
on behalf of Milliken, the largest private textile company in the 
United States. Milliken paid the consultants more than $500,000 for 
detailed information on the customers, suppliers and manufacturing 
operations of nine textile companies, according to NRB's lawsuit. 
Johnston executives say that Milliken used the stolen information 
to lure customers away after first reducing prices on some Milliken 
products. Milliken also introduced a fabric very similar to one manufactured 
by Johnston and then marketed it to Johnston's customers. Johnston 
executives say the small, publicly held company, whose products include 
fabrics for automobile and airplane seats, has lost millions of dollars 
in sales. The accusations against Milliken are emerging as corporate 
espionage increasingly receives attention from lawmakers and executives. 
Some government estimates put the total cost of such spying to American 
business as high as $250 billion a year. The two lawsuits also underscore 
that the biggest security threats faced by companies typically do 
not involve hackers electronically sneaking into corporate computers. 
Rather, the threats are often the people who are invited in. ``The 
area of greatest concern is letting people in the front door and giving 
them the keys to the kingdom,'' said Michael Allison at International 
Business Research in Princeton, N.J. ``Companies forget that people 
can take information home in their heads.'' In the case of NRB and 
Johnston Industries, the knock on their front doors came from Waldrep 
and his boss, Rodney Taylor. In a 24-page sworn statement filed in 
U.S. District Court in New York, Waldrep, who agreed to cooperate 
with NRB after he was sued, detailed how Milliken had repeatedly hired 
the consulting firm, R.A. Taylor &AMP; Associates of Atlanta, to get 
information from its competitors and how he and Taylor then obtained 
that information. In a statement, Milliken said it had hired R.A. 
Taylor ``to obtain, through proper means, information about Milliken's 
markets and some of its competitors.'' ``When claims were made about 
the propriety of the collection techniques being used, Milliken ceased 
doing business with these consultants,'' the statement said. But according 
to Waldrep's statement, Taylor told Milliken executives in late 1994, 
soon after the company hired him, that he would pretend to be an investment 
banker seeking investment opportunities on behalf a Geneva bank. And 
in the spring of 1996, at a meeting at Milliken's headquarters, Taylor 
told other Milliken executives that the consultants would use a ``two-pronged'' 
approach in trying to get information from another textile company, 
Fab Industries, according to Waldrep's statement. Taylor had explained 
to the Milliken executives, Waldrep said, that he would try to get 
information from Fab executives by playing the role of an investment 
banker, while separately Waldrep would approach the company with claims 
of being a student. Taylor said Monday that he had not yet seen the 
Johnston Industries lawsuit. ``So it would not be appropriate for 
me to comment,'' he said. Waldrep did not return several messages 
left on his answering machine last week and Monday. NRB said it had 
``amicably resolved'' its lawsuit against Milliken, Waldrep, R.A. 
Taylor and Rodney Taylor earlier this year. The terms were not disclosed. 
In their statement, Milliken executives said they had been in discussions 
with lawyers for Johnston Industries about its claims and that they 
were ``very surprised'' to learn about the new lawsuit, which they 
plan to defend vigorously. A company spokesman said Monday that he 
could not comment further, because of the pending lawsuit. Milliken, 
based in Spartanburg, S.C., is owned by Roger Milliken, a wealthy 
industrialist and frequent contributor to Republican and conservative 
causes. According to NRB's lawsuit, Milliken hired the consultants 
to obtain information on at least nine of its competitors, and told 
the two men not to tell anyone whom they were working for. Milliken 
and the consultants had code names like Project Ginkgo and Project 
Coconut for their attempts at gaining information for each company. 
Jere Beasley, a lawyer representing Johnston Industries, said the 
company would not have discovered that its trade secrets had been 
stolen if NRB had not learned of a Project Meteor from Waldrep. Under 
that project, Waldrep asked a number of Johnston executives for information 
while posing as a student from Georgia State University. At the same 
time, Taylor had requested information, saying that he was representing 
a group of Swiss investors. Executives at another textile company 
that Milliken had hired the consultants to get information on, Interface 
Inc. in Atlanta, said Monday that they had also learned that it too 
had been a target of the consultants from NRB's lawsuit. Ray Willoch, 
the company's general counsel, said Interface was investigating the 
allegations. For the NRB project, according to Waldrep's sworn statement, 
Taylor sent Waldrep to New York in the fall of 1996 to learn more 
about Columbia University so that he could act more convincingly as 
a graduate student when he visited NRB's headquarters in the Empire 
State Building. For a few days, Waldrep toured the campus, sat in 
classes and obtained a temporary library card from Columbia's library. 
When Waldrep first met Hickey, the NRB executive, he told him that 
he was involved in a transfer program that allowed Georgia State students 
to attend classes at Columbia. Waldrep said he was preparing a research 
paper for a corporate finance class and that he wanted to do the paper 
on NRB's recent merger. Hickey gave Waldrep some of the information 
he requested after he agreed to sign a confidentiality agreement. 
Waldrep promised that only his professor would see the information. 
When Hickey's secretary later requested proof that Waldrep was a student, 
the consultant produced a Georgia State University identification 
card that he had been issued as an undergraduate and one of Columbia's 
temporary library cards. Two months later, Waldrep faxed Hickey a 
list of questions that he said his professor had requested. The questions, 
which had instead been requested by Milliken executives, included 
one asking about NRB's ``new customer pursuits'' and one on how NRB 
fostered their relationships with key suppliers, according to Waldrep's 
statement. In a cover sheet faxed to Hickey with the 16 questions, 
Waldrep asked the executive to meet with him again. ``I know you are 
busy, so I promise not to take up much of your time,'' he wrote. ``My 
professor suggested that I bring a tape recorder with me so I don't 
have to waste time writing.'' Experts say that corporate espionage 
is more common than the public knows because many cases are settled 
privately by companies seeking to avoid publicity and because most 
companies do not realize that information has been stolen. In 1996, 
Congress made stealing trade secrets a federal crime. So far, federal 
prosecutors have pursued few such cases. ``Intellectual property is 
the only corporate asset that can be misappropriated, copied and intercepted 
although nothing may appear to be missing,'' said Richard J. Heffernan, 
a management consultant in Branford, Conn., who focuses on protecting 
against economic espionage. Heffernan helped prepare a study for Congress 
that estimated that American companies may be losing $250 billion 
annually because of information that gets into the hands of competitors. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>