<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981012.0261 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A pill that calms you down without making you dull, sleepy or addicted? 
It may seem too good to be true, but the prospect of inner peace with 
no strings attached is tempting more and more Americans to try kava, 
an herbal product derived from the roots of a pepper plant grown in 
Fiji, Vanuatu and other Pacific islands. To many people who suffer 
from anxiety and insomnia, kava might seem an ideal ``natural'' alternative 
to Valium and the other potentially addicting drugs prescribed to 
soothe ragged nerves. Kava is said to have been used for thousands 
of years in the Pacific to help people relax and socialize. Unlike 
alcohol, which can make people boisterous or belligerent, kava users 
report that the herb calms them without dulling the mind or causing 
hangovers. There have been no scientific studies of kava in human 
beings in the United States. Yet Americans spent $15 million on kava 
in 1996, and twice that much in 1997, according to the Nutrition Business 
Journal, which projects sales of almost $50 million this year. Ed 
Smith, president of Herb Pharm, in Williams, Ore., one of about 40 
American companies that sell kava, said, ``Kava was virtually unknown 
three years ago, and now our sales are going through the roof.'' The 
wholesale price, $14 to $20 for a kilogram of dried root (2.2 pounds), 
nearly doubled in the last few years, Smith said. Kava has become 
the subject of several popular books, and numerous Web sites sell 
it. Scientific trials of kava have been conducted overseas, especially 
in Germany, and have found it helpful in alleviating anxiety and easing 
symptoms of menopause, like hot flashes, sleep disturbances and emotional 
problems. The active ingredients are chemicals called kavalactones, 
which have a mildly depressing effect on the nervous system. The German 
researchers found no side effects or withdrawal symptoms when people 
stopped taking kava. But important questions about kava have yet to 
be answered. It is not known whether the products sold in the United 
States have the same properties as the ones tested in Germany or the 
traditional kava-based drinks prepared fresh in the Pacific. Researchers 
also do not know whether kava can be used safely for a long time or 
whether it can be combined with other drugs or natural products. Because 
it depresses the nervous system, some doctors warn patients not to 
take it with alcohol or drugs like Valium that have the same effect. 
Kava is not totally benign. Road signs on some Pacific islands warn 
people not to drink kava and drive. In addition, there have been rare 
instances of kava abuse among Pacific islanders, resulting in problems 
with the skin and liver. All apparently clear up when the person gives 
up kava. The original kava is a far cry from the hermetically sealed 
bottles now stocked in American health food stores. An 18th-century 
traveler to Polynesia wrote that kava was prepared in a ``most disgustful 
manner.'' The freshly dug roots were cut up and chewed (preferably 
by virgins), spat into a communal bowl and mixed with coconut milk 
or water. The resulting fluid was then strained and passed around. 
People had such a good time drinking kava that Christian missionaries 
tried to ban it. On some islands, kava was pounded rather than chewed. 
Traditionally, only men drank it. Westerners who have tried kava say 
it is bitter and tastes like dirt. It also numbs the mouth. In his 
book, ``Kava: Medicine Hunting in Paradise'' (Park Street Press, 1996), 
Chris Kilham wrote that he was glad he had worn shoes to a kava bar 
on Vanuatu, because the patrons did so much spitting to get the taste 
of kava out of their mouths that there wasn't a dry spot on the floor. 
Needless to say, the kava sold in the United States is not prepared 
in the traditional manner. The roots are dried and ground by machines 
into a powder that can be sold as is, for blending into drinks; put 
into pills or capsules, or made into an alcohol-based extract. Dr. 
Michael J. Balick, curator of the Institute of Economic Botany at 
the New York Botanical Garden, said the demand for kava was leading 
growers in Micronesia to begin cultivating upland forests that should 
be preserved as watersheds. The Nature Conservancy, Balick said, is 
trying to encourage the growers to use low-lying tracts that are not 
so critical to the region. Kava is sold not as a drug but as a dietary 
supplement and, as a result, is largely exempt from the control of 
the Food and Drug Administration. Supplements, unlike drugs, do not 
have to be proved safe and effective and are not tested or inspected 
by any regulatory agency. The FDA does not usually investigate a supplement 
unless people report problems. The agency has no evidence of health 
problems caused by kava, a spokeswoman said. Under FDA rules, manufacturers 
may not claim that their supplements can treat or prevent disease. 
They can, however, make so-called structure-function claims, saying, 
for instance, that a product promotes strong bones or supports the 
immune system. For kava, Smith of Herb Pharm said: ``We can make somewhat 
nebulous claims. We can say it enhances well-being, but we can't say 
it relieves anxiety.'' Yet people are buying it in the hope that it 
will ease anxiety, he said. ``I would love to put on the label that 
it could be used for relieving anxiety,'' Smith said. ``I know it 
does.'' An Internet site devoted to inquiries about kava listed 660 
messages in early October. The writers ranged from people seeking 
help with anxiety to those looking for a new way to get high. Some 
described the results as pleasant, but others called kava useless. 
One wrote: ``Got nothing from the first few small hits, then I downed 
the remaining two-thirds of the bottle and got a very mild, slightly 
relaxing effect for a couple hours.'' Dr. Roberta Lee, an internist 
in Tucson, Ariz., who became familiar with kava while practicing medicine 
in the Pacific, was not surprised by that story. There is no way of 
knowing how much active ingredient was in the product, Dr. Lee said, 
or how high the person's anxiety level might have been. Still, Dr. 
Lee recommends kava to some of her patients. She said that its effects 
were subtle, and that she urged her patients to use brands from large 
European manufacturers, which she declined to name. Because kava is 
considered a drug in Europe, she said, it is more carefully regulated 
than in the United States. ``I worry about patients having access 
to these herbal medications without a prescription or any regulation 
or even general advice,'' she said. ``People in health-food stores 
are giving advice, and they're not pharmacists or medical people.'' 
Dr. Lee would like to see the European studies of kava repeated in 
the United States. ``I want to know what works on a sort of moderate 
anxiety level,'' she said. ``My hunch is that it probably wouldn't 
be appropriate for someone with very major anxiety.'' Ultimately, 
she said, if kava does prove useful, it will be ``just one tool'' 
in treating anxiety, along with diet, exercise, counseling and other 
forms of therapy. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>