<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981012.0247 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There may be more appropriate venues to first learn the art of rock 
climbing than an enormous granite escarpment known as Suicide Rocks. 
The formation is the size of several football fields, albeit vertical 
ones, and emerges out of the San Jacinto Mountains of Southern California 
at an altitude of 7,500 feet. This means climbers must deal with the 
thin air as well as the rocks, which are sufficiently intimidating 
on their own. My anxiety was mitigated slightly by the splendor of 
the setting on a perfect late summer day. I had gone climbing with 
three fellow novices and our guide, John Gleeson, assistant manager 
of a climbing gym called Rockreation in Los Angeles. Our first climb 
was up a route called ``the plague.'' Gleeson insisted it was easy, 
and it was, if you had 10 years' climbing experience, as he did. At 
first, it was pleasantly and surprisingly simple: a 65-degree incline 
with numerous cracks, knobs and ledges to support hands and feet. 
This incline, however, was interrupted by an overhang, where the rock 
folded back over itself, leaving a horizontal v-shaped opening to 
negotiate. It could be done, as Gleeson demonstrated, by bracing your 
back against the rock face and your feet against the overhang and 
shimmying up the rock. This required a faith in friction to hold you 
in place. I tried the move twice, lacked sufficient faith, and failed 
twice. At such moments, two kinds of thoughts pass through your mind. 
There are the irrational ones: in this case, that my breathing sounded 
precisely like that of the underwater respiration of scuba divers 
in Jacques Cousteau documentaries. Then there are the rational ones, 
which are inevitably and repetitively some variation of ``what am 
I doing here, and how do I get out?'' Outdoor rock climbing is about 
two things: The first is fighting gravity, which is as much about 
technique _ a combination of strength, practice and experience _ as 
the surprisingly cerebral activity of figuring out just how you're 
going to make it up the slab of rock above you. Experienced climbers 
often claim that it is the meditative aspect of climbing that is the 
primary reason they do it. Once on the rock, you are absorbed with 
the puzzle of making the correct moves that will get you to the top. 
Getting to the top is all about proving you're good enough, which 
is the second thing. To a novice, rock climbing entails a challenge 
that is as close to overwhelming as you may find in sport. It is also 
one of the few activities you will do that can seem insanely dangerous 
and yet be completely safe and absolutely exhilarating. Indoor rock-climbing 
is what A.J. Liebling, the legendary New Yorker writer, might have 
called a milksop substitute for the outdoor variety. Experienced climbers 
use climbing gyms to expand their repertory of moves, as well as stay 
in shape in the off-season. It is challenge enough for the rest of 
us. The gyms look like junior college productions of The Hall of the 
Mountain King, with climbing walls, arches and boulders, all studded 
with colorful projections of varying degrees of usefulness for supporting 
your weight. These surfaces will be labeled to indicate the difficulty 
of a particular route up the wall if you limit yourself to one color. 
The scale will go from around 5.5 or so, which is easier than climbing 
up a ladder, to 5.14, which I now believe is a featureless, horizontal 
surface that has to be negotiated from beneath. All you'll need in 
the gyms is your usual work-out attire. The gyms will supply rock 
climbing shoes and a harness, which is worn around the waist and thighs, 
like a macho diaper. The shoes are a cross between ballet shoes and 
the rubber slippers that surfers wear. They are worn without socks 
and are excruciatingly tight _ ideally, several sizes too small _ 
to facilitate clinging to footholds on infinitesimal ledges. When 
they fit correctly, the pain will become intense. Indoors or out, 
rock climbing is not a sport for anyone who believes in regular pedicures 
_ or, for that fact, manicures. Gyms will offer a novice class, which 
is what I took before going to Suicide. The class is a good prerequisite 
for entrance into the sport, although it's likely to start with a 
request that you sign an indemnity agreement promising that you (or 
your next of kin) won't sue the gym in the event of accident. It will 
then cover the basics from putting on your harness to the art of belaying 
(pronounced buh-LAY-ing) the remarkably simple and fail-safe method 
for catching a climber who overextends. Belaying requires a partner, 
which makes rock climbing by necessity a communal sport. The workout 
itself will build strength in your forearms and hands, specifically, 
and your legs if you're climbing correctly. It also gives you a new 
sense of body position and balance, because you will learn to contort 
your body into a range of previously unimaginable pretzel-like shapes 
to get up the wall or rock. But the training is very specific and 
shouldn't substitute entirely for other aspects of a regular fitness 
program. ``It can supplement your training program to add variety 
and novelty to it, give it a competitive edge and give you motivation 
to get in and train,'' says Dr. Alan Mikesky, head of the Human Performance 
and Bio-mechanics Laboratory at Indiana University-Purdue University 
in Indianapolis. If you do choose to climb rocks instead of gym walls, 
consider a month or so in a gym working on your moves and your balance. 
Once you do, or even if you don't, plenty of organizations _ including 
the gyms _ offer climbing trips for novices on up. My trip to Suicide 
cost me $90 for the day and I had to get there and back on my own. 
Before going, there are a few things you should know. For instance, 
while you'll likely experience your share of fear, you won't _ or 
at least I didn't _ fear either death or injury. You quickly develop 
confidence that belaying will keep you safe. When I slipped, which 
I did many times, I fell only a few inches before I was caught. What 
I did fear was embarrassment and failure. When I finally made it up 
the plague, I felt a sense of overwhelming relief. I had not failed 
myself. That was the point. There are also things you may learn about 
your character while rock climbing that may (or may not) be of extraordinary 
use to you in later life. For instance, you may learn that it is possible 
to continue climbing upward just because your guide tells you to go 
up, not because you believe it can be done. You may learn that despite 
some pain and total exhaustion, you can look forward to climbing the 
next week because it will be a kick to be good at this sport _ and 
to routinely view the world from such spectacular vantage points. 
And, the only way to do that is to keep climbing. And, perhaps most 
profound, you may learn, as I did, that if you are fond of the skin 
on your knees, you should not start your outdoor climbing career wearing 
shorts. To find rock climbing excursions in your area, call the American 
Alpine Club at 303-384-0110 or the American Mountain Guides Association 
at 303-271-0984. Finding a nearby climbing gym can be done on the 
Internet with a gym search service (http://www.orca.org/subgroup/CGA/cgagymsearch.html), 
by the Outdoor Recreation Coalition of America, which includes the 
Climbing Gym Association. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>