<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981012.0381 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Turbulence in the bond markets continues to wreak havoc among some 
of the most sophisticated investors. Ellington Capital Management, 
an Old Greenwich, Conn., investment firm created by a star mortgage 
bond trader, has unloaded hundreds of millions of dollars in mortgage-related 
securities in the last two days. In response to margin calls from 
its lenders, the firm appears to have been forced to liquidate much 
of the holdings in its hedge funds, while developing a plan with some 
of its lenders that would allow it to remain in business. Ellington 
manages about $1 billion in capital, although it invests more by borrowing 
additional funds. Like other hedge funds, which are aimed at wealthy 
individuals and large investors like pension funds, Ellington is highly 
secretive about its investment strategy and has tended to disclose 
little about how it achieves its results. Founded in late 1994 by 
Michael Vranos, a former senior managing director at Kidder Peabody 
&AMP; Co., the firm specializes in investing in mortgage-related securities. 
Vranos' skill at trading mortgage bonds earned him fame and a staggering 
pay package of about $15 million in 1993, before higher interest rates 
the following year helped cause sizable losses at the firm. Kidder 
was later sold to Paine Webber. Ellington, which declined to comment 
specifically on the events of the last few days, confirmed that it 
had been selling many of its holdings. A spokesman said the firm was 
``involved in a concentrated effort to respond to liquidity constraints 
in the mortgage-backed securities markets.'' Ellington ``conducted 
an orderly sale of certain of its holdings that will produce proceeds 
far in excess of dealer-financing claims on those securities, when 
cleared,'' the spokesman said. Vranos, who did not comment on the 
recent events, did say that the firm's partners were ``doing everything 
we can to protect our investors.'' Like other high-profile managers, 
including John Meriwether of Long-Term Capital, the hedge fund that 
was the recent subject of a multibillion-dollar bailout, Vranos has 
proved no match for a rough ride in the bond markets. By borrowing 
money in the hope of enhancing returns, many of these managers have 
instead amplified their losses at a time when skittish investors have 
retreated to treasuries. That has caused the value of a variety of 
bonds, whether in emerging markets or tied to mortgages, to slide 
sharply. Ellington's sale appears to have been conducted under pressure 
from lenders; margin calls were made last Friday after the price of 
the firm's holdings dropped earlier in the week. In order to meet 
those calls, and prevent future ones, the firm began selling some 
of its holdings and held three auctions. The list of securities offered 
for sale was extensive and seemed to be widely distributed, according 
to Steven R. Point, a bond manager at Glenmede Trust Co. in Philadelphia. 
``There was everything, including the kitchen sink, in it,'' he said. 
Lenders, like banks and brokerages, which normally might lend a hand 
in scooping up some of these investments, seemed anxious to find other 
buyers, he noted. ``Dealers are nervous about the extension of financing 
to these institutions,'' Point said. Ellington's crisis appears to 
have developed suddenly. One of the firm's funds, Ellington Mortgage 
Partners, which accounts for roughly a third of its capital, had been 
reporting a gain of about 8 percent through September, according to 
Hedge Fund Research, a Chicago consulting firm. It had returns of 
about 22 percent last year and 48 percent in 1996. The mortgage bond 
area has been among those hardest hit as interest rates have plunged. 
The possibility that Long Term Capital, which has also been forced 
to sell many of its holdings, could unload an additional several billion 
dollars' worth of securities is further depressing the market, according 
to George P. Van, the chairman of Van Hedge Fund Advisors International 
in Nashville, Tenn. Like Meriwether at Long-Term Capital, Vranos had 
been through difficult times in the bond market before. But during 
previous tough times both men worked for huge brokerage firms, which 
had substantial resources at their disposal, perhaps allowing them 
to weather rockiness. ``The firm's capital surrounded them like a 
comforting cocoon,'' Van said. In contrast, there is precious little 
protection in the current market environment, where worried lenders 
and investors alike are forcing managers to sell, forcing prices lower. 
``It is not over,'' Van said. ``We have a domino effect.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>