<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981012.0009 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Zebra mussels do not generate much good news. A decade ago, the mussels, 
thumbnail-size bivalve mollusks, were accidentally carried from Eastern 
Europe to the Great Lakes by shipping traffic. They have since spread 
across North America, clogging the cooling systems of power plants, 
crowding out native species and cloaking docks and rocky areas with 
bristling mats of sharp, striped shells. So when scientists began 
finding the microscopic larvae of the mussels in Lake George, in the 
Adirondacks, three years ago, nearby residents feared they would soon 
face a full-scale invasion. But now biologists say that in Lake George, 
the relentless spread of the mussels appears to have stopped, apparently 
deterred by the lake water. Even though mature zebra mussels can live 
in it, the larvae quickly die, according to laboratory tests completed 
last month at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in Troy. As word of 
the research spread through lakeside communities, there was a collective 
sigh of relief. ``It's great news,'' said Deanne Rehm, town supervisor 
of Bolton, on the west shore of the 32-mile-long lake. ``We have enough 
threats to the quality of the lake without some new nuisance coming 
along.'' Optimism should be tempered, though, said Dr. Sandra Nierzwicki-Bauer, 
the director of Rensselaer's Darrin Fresh Water Institute, where the 
studies were done. It is unlikely that the finding will lead to a 
treatment that can stop the mussels in other waters, she said, and 
there is always the possibility that the mussels will eventually adjust 
to the lake's seemingly hostile conditions and begin proliferating. 
``The zebra mussel has shown it is able to adapt over time,'' Dr. 
Nierzwicki-Bauer said. ``Nature seems to find a way.'' For roughly 
200 years, zebra mussels have been easily finding their way across 
two continents, spreading first across Europe as newly dug canals 
linked their home range in the Caspian and Black seas with surrounding 
waterways. And almost every time they have colonized a new area, they 
have become a nuisance. In the mid-1800s, after arriving in France, 
clusters began blocking water pipes in Paris. After appearing in the 
Great Lakes in 1988, they hitchhiked on barges down the Mississippi 
River and spread to hundreds of lakes, carried as invisible larvae 
in bait buckets or the bilges of speedboats from one fishing spot 
to another. Efforts to clear the mussels from the pipes of power plants 
and other structures have cost tens of millions of dollars, federal 
biologists say. Earlier this month, Connecticut became the 20th state 
to report finding adult mussels, said Amy Benton, a fisheries biologist 
at the U.S. Geological Survey. Workers in East Twin Lake, in Litchfield 
County, Conn., found several zebra mussels while dredging another 
unwanted imported species, a weed called Eurasian milfoil, she said. 
Small numbers of zebra mussel larvae were first detected in Lake George 
in the summer of 1995, Dr. Nierzwicki-Bauer said, but were only present 
in a few samples. Larvae were found again in the summer of 1997, she 
said, but a protracted survey by scuba divers failed to turn up any 
mature zebra mussels. Even so, the discovery of the larvae created 
a stir, with local residents concerned about the potential harm to 
pipes, to the lake's native mollusks and other species, and to underwater 
shipwrecks dating from the American Revolution. The lack of mature 
zebra mussels was ascribed initially to the lake's naturally low concentration 
of calcium, which the mussels need to form their shells. Lake George 
contains calcium at levels that are about half the concentration seen 
in nearby Lake Champlain, Dr. Nierzwicki-Bauer said. To test that 
theory, the Fresh Water Institute placed adult zebra mussels in tanks 
filled with water from Lake George. Despite the low calcium level, 
the adult mussels thrived. But when larval zebra mussels were placed 
in water from Lake George, they all died within a week, Dr. Nierzwicki-Bauer 
said. To test whether calcium or the pH of the water is the factor 
affecting larval mussels, she said, next spring the laboratory will 
try to raise larvae in water from Lake George that has had its calcium 
level and pH adjusted to match conditions in surrounding waters. There 
have been a few similar reports of lakes in which zebra mussel larvae 
were found, but no adult colonies became established, Dr. Nierzwicki-Bauer 
and other biologists said. Some scientists tracking the progress of 
invasive species said they hoped that Lake George could stay free 
of zebra mussels, but said it was too soon to tell whether it would. 
Charles O'Neill, the director of the National Zebra Mussel and Aquatic 
Nuisance Species Clearinghouse at the State University of New York, 
Brockport, cited the example of Conesus Lake, in New York's Finger 
Lakes region. ``Mussel larvae showed up one summer in a plankton sample 
and were not seen again that year,'' he said. ``They were not seen 
the next year, either, or the year after that.'' State officials announced 
that the mussels had failed to take hold. ``The next summer, they 
showed up all the way around the lake,'' he said. And as was recently 
discovered, the zebra mussel is not the sole molluskan threat in the 
United States. A closely related species, the quagga mussel _ named 
for an extinct relative of the zebra _ has also made its way here. 
The two species appear to be dividing and conquering, with the zebra 
mussel preferring hard surfaces and shallow waters, while the quagga 
mussel, also from Eastern Europe, colonizes sandy, deeper areas. ``Between 
the exotic plants, animals and bacteria coming over, I don't think 
a week goes by that we don't hear of another potentially harmful critter,'' 
O'Neill said. ``It never ends.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>