<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981012.0349 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There are few names that evoke as much political resonance in Ohio 
as Taft. From William Taft, the United States' 27th president and 
a chief justice, to his son, Robert Taft, a senator and presidential 
contender, the family name is one that helped define Republican politics 
for more than a century. Now, in a race in which name recognition 
has been as much of an issue as state policy, Bob Taft, Ohio's secretary 
of state and great-grandson of the president, is running for governor 
in a campaign that is considered a classic Ohio contest. For one thing, 
Taft, 56, the scion of a wealthy Cincinnati family, hails from the 
state's southwestern, more conservative, Republican heartland. His 
Democratic opponent, Lee Fisher, 47, a former state attorney general, 
is a product of Ohio's urban northeastern Democratic base, having 
once represented some of Cleveland's low-income neighborhoods as well 
as its affluent suburbs in the state Legislature. Although Taft has 
enjoyed widespread name recognition, it is Fisher who has attracted 
significant attention in recent weeks with a proposal to reduce property 
taxes by 15 percent _ or $1 billion _ over two years. Fisher has taken 
great pains to highlight his plan and win the attention of voters. 
A few days ago, for example, he held a news conference at the home 
of a family in Toledo that displayed supermarket items they would 
buy with the money they would save under the property tax measure. 
``We can fund this property tax relief and still increase per-pupil 
expenditures,'' Fisher said in an interview in Toledo after his news 
conference. ``And we can still have growth of 3 to 4 percent in all 
other areas of the state budget.'' That tax plan has served as the 
basis of a series of blistering television commercials by the candidates 
in which each attacks the other for his record on taxes. Taft's commercials 
dismiss the proposal by Fisher as unattainable and accuse him of having 
a history more closely associated with raising taxes than reducing 
them. ``I don't think his proposal is doable without a tax increase'' 
in some other area, Taft said, on his way to a community dinner at 
a Lebanese Catholic church in Akron. ``It's a reckless proposal, kind 
of a last-minute, Hail Mary type of plan that's not in tune with reality.'' 
Taft has proposed a far less sweeping tax-reduction plan, calling 
for a tax deduction of as much as $2,500, for college tuition costs 
for families with annual incomes of $50,000 or less. On subjects other 
than the tax plan, Taft offers a bread-and-butter Republican platform. 
With Gov. George Voinovich barred from seeking a third consecutive 
term, and now running for the Senate, Taft seeks to be the first Ohio 
Republican to succeed a Republican governor since 1903. Speaking to 
a group of Republican women in Akron recently, Taft talked of both 
the need to improve the state's schools and his commitment to being 
``tough on crime and tougher on violent, juvenile offenders'' while 
looking to develop programs to rehabilitate young people who commit 
crimes. Fisher has tried to portray his Republican opponent as an 
elite official who is out of touch with most voters. ``Mr. Taft does 
not speak to the concerns of everyday Ohio families and understands 
the problems of working families,'' Fisher said. ``He has stood on 
the side of large insurance companies that have arbitrarily cut off 
thousands of seniors from insurance coverage. You've got someone from 
a famous family running against someone who is standing up for ordinary 
families.'' The candidates offer starkly different views on a number 
of issues. Fisher, for example, supports abortion rights, while Taft 
is opposed to abortion except in cases of rape or incest. Taft supports 
the privatization of the prisons in the state, while Fisher does not. 
And Fisher has opposed recent efforts to tighten the state's workers 
compensation laws, initiatives supported by Taft. Another issue in 
the campaign has been the matter of a debate. Fisher is seeking a 
one-on-one appearance with Taft. The Republican candidate, on the 
other hand, has indicated his preference for a debate with the two 
minor-party candidates in addition to Fisher. Ohio is traditionally 
a swing state where elections for governor can go _ and have gone 
_ either way. But in recent years, the Republicans have enjoyed something 
of a heyday, having captured nearly all the statewide offices. Indeed, 
four years ago the Democrat's showing was so weak in the race for 
governor that the party surpassed by only a few percentage points 
the 20 percent threshold required under Ohio law to hold the status 
as a party on the state ballot. Several polls in recent weeks have 
placed Taft ahead slightly. But with most polls indicating that 20 
percent to 25 percent of the voters remain undecided, Fisher and state 
Democratic leaders suggest that the race is winnable. One reason is 
that Fisher has been particularly adept at fund raising, especially 
for a Democratic candidate in Ohio. While Taft still commands the 
fund-raising lead, having taken in more than $8 million, Fisher is 
not far behind, having raised more than $7 million for the campaign 
and matching Taft's television presence. By contrast, the other statewide 
race, for the Senate seat being vacated by retiring John Glenn, Voinovich 
has outraised his Democratic opponent, Mary Boyle, by more than 3 
to 1. While campaigning, Taft urges his core supporters not to become 
complacent. At the same time, Fisher said his campaign's internal 
polling showed the race to be a dead heat. ``My great-grandfather,'' 
Fisher said, ``was an immigrant sheet-metal worker from Russia, and 
I am running against a man whose great-grandfather was president of 
the United States. But the wonderful thing about America is that if 
you speak to the concerns of everyday people, you can even the playing 
field.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>