<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981012.0085 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The world watched tens of thousands of Communists and their allies 
march on the Kremlin last week, demanding the removal of President 
Boris Yeltsin and his lackeys, and a telegenic protest it was. What 
it wasn't was a good gauge of Russian discontent. For that, you had 
to go 5,300 miles and six time zones east, to the Siberian city of 
Yakutsk. Yakutsk has 250,000 people, no money and more hardship than 
Moscow could dream of. And there, at the appointed hour of 10 a.m., 
in the town square across from the requisite statue of Lenin, perhaps 
40 people showed up to unfurl a few red banners and stamp their feet 
against the cold. By 11 the square was empty. The scene in Yakutsk 
was far more common across Russia on Wednesday than was the mob of 
marchers in that television broadcast from Moscow. There is a lesson 
there. Since Russia's feral brand of capitalism started crumbling 
Aug. 17, bringing down the banking system, foreign trade, the ruble 
and most of a government with it, everybody has been waiting for the 
moment when the population cries ``Enough!'' and takes matters into 
its own anarchic hands. Apparently, it ain't going to happen _ not 
anytime soon, anyway. Russia, the cradle and exporter of global revolution, 
turns out to be not much of a consumer. It clings to the here-and-now 
with a vengeance _ maybe out of habit, almost certainly out of fear 
that stirring the pot will only make things worse. Indonesians exploded 
into riots and looting under similar economic circumstances a year 
ago. Russians complain, then conclude their harangues with the national 
motto, ``Shto dyelat?''_ ``What is to be done?'' Whatever, it is beyond 
their control. ``The problem, I think, is in the mentality,'' said 
Andrei Gnatiuk, who heads a political consulting firm involved in 
election campaigns across Russia. ``People have to understand that 
they're the masters of their own fates. Socialism greatly perverted 
us. We became used to being guaranteed a piece of bread.'' Masha Lipman, 
an editor and political analyst in Moscow for the weekly news magazine 
Itogi, agrees. In 75 years of Communist rule, people traded freedom 
for an assured, if sometimes bleak, existence. She says that smothered 
the democratic notion that individuals working together can change 
the social order. It can be argued that history backs them up: The 
Soviet Union collapsed in 1991 mostly of its own weight, not out of 
any collective national action. Yeltsin enjoyed popular support at 
the time, but he was a catalyst of change, not the agent. In neither 
of the succeeding crises _ not the parliament's attempt to seize power 
from Yeltsin amid hyperinflation in 1993 nor the current collapse 
_ have ordinary Russians been much more than interested spectators. 
Some of that, of course, may well be due to the quality of the alternative. 
The Communist Party has never shed its reputation for the sort of 
rigidity and wrongheadedness, let alone cruelty, that contributed 
to the Soviet Union's downfall, and its leaders today are uninspiring. 
Bolsheviks were Yeltsin's major foes in 1993 and again last week. 
Many major newspapers saw the turnout on Wednesday _ less than a third 
of even modest projections _ as a major setback for the Communist 
Party, which had seemed on the upswing with its return to power in 
key parts of Yeltsin's government. But it is not simply the Communists. 
Russians have yet to swarm to any of the strongmen seeking to fill 
the vacuum left by Yeltsin's declining fortunes _ not to Moscow's 
authoritarian mayor, Yuri Luzhkov, or to the former general who iron-handedly 
runs the huge Krasnoyarsk region of central Russia, Alexander Lebed. 
One popular notion is that the country is exhausted _ by the bloodletting 
during the civil war after the 1917 Bolshevik revolution; by the millions 
of deaths in World War II; by Stalin's mass killings; by the wrenching 
changes that followed the end of Communist rule in 1991. In that view, 
the conviction in the early 1990s that democracy and capitalism would 
rescue Russia from a worse fate has more or less been extinguished. 
Still, nothing has replaced it that is attractive enough to spur people 
to plunge along yet another uncharted course. The devil they know 
is better than the one behind the curtain. ``People are angry, yes; 
but people are also tired,'' said Sergei Markov, a well-known political 
analyst here. ``And people are afraid of bad government much less 
than they're afraid of chaos. They're prepared to have any kind of 
bad government more than instability.'' Each of those theories probably 
has some merit. Historians might argue as well that Russia has never 
experienced a truly democratic society, even now; that it was excluded 
from the Renaissance and its critical links to Western political and 
social philosophy; that top-down leadership, rather than bottom up, 
is the rule when it comes to ruling Russia. All of which may be true. 
But amid the general gloom over the Russian psyche, Gnatiuk has another 
explanation, one that he says is actually supported by empirical data. 
Gnatiuk says that Russians are better off than they let on, and that 
they are simply not in the mood to revolt. He cites polling data from 
his own consulting firm. It concludes that most Russians believe their 
lives have improved in recent years, but that they also believe the 
lives of their neighbors have gotten worse. It is the media _ especially 
the Western media, now available throughout Russia _ that have convinced 
them the nation is a lost cause. ``They're always giving some sort 
of bad news that people somewhere are eating dogs because of hunger, 
or eating cows and now eating the feed and so forth,'' Gnatiuk said. 
``Everyone thinks, `The country will go out on the street and on strike 
because everybody's living badly, but why should I go out on the street? 
I have a TV and a refrigerator. I work; my parents have a pension. 
But those who are doing badly will go out.''' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>