<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981012.0347 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Every afternoon, in the small courtyard outside the Machang Street 
Re-employment Center, small groups of laid-off workers anxiously scan 
the day's help-wanted listings. There is a sad sameness about this 
ragtag army of job hopefuls, each one dressed up, ready for an interview 
at any time: They are all women, all over 35 and all unskilled. ``At 
our factory everyone who was laid off was a woman,'' said Sun Jingqi, 
41, a former textile worker. ``Look around you, everyone here is female,'' 
added Ms. Sun, who had put on heels and makeup and a smart red sweater 
outfit for yet another fruitless trip to check the board. ``Now what 
can we do? We're not young enough. We don't have experience.'' As 
China struggles to convert to a market economy, closing and shrinking 
state-owned industries, women over 35 have born the brunt of the pain: 
They are far more likely to be laid off and far less likely to find 
a new job than any other group in China. These women were the worker 
ants who for decades populated factory floors in an array of state 
industries that have now shrunk or mechanized, from textile mills 
to chemical plants. They learned few skills despite years of work, 
and are mostly poorly educated, belonging to a generation that came 
of age during the Cultural Revolution, when most of China's universities 
were shut down. But they suffer, too, from outright discrimination 
and deeply held cultural biases about the limited abilities of women, 
particularly women over 35. Such biases have free play in a country 
where want ads often specify sex _ not to mention height, age and 
body characteristics. ``If you're over 35, it's very hard to find 
work,'' said a sad-looking 43-year-old woman at the re-employment 
center who would give only her last name, Yang. She said she had been 
laid off this year from a food-processing plant and was preparing 
to go out on an interview for a part-time job cleaning windows at 
60 cents an hour. ``What can you do?'' she asked. ``You have young 
and old ones to look after. You're old to learn new skills. You're 
not attractive anymore. Nobody wants us.'' Not surprisingly, Chinese 
surveys have found higher-than-normal rates of depression, family 
violence and divorce in households where women have been laid off. 
``Laid-off working women don't just need jobs, they also need emotional 
help,'' said Tan Lin, a population expert at Nankai University here. 
``They lose their chance to be employed, or re-employed. They sit 
home lonely and feel depressed.'' Last year women accounted for only 
39 percent of China's work force but nearly 61 percent of its laid-off 
workers, according to the Ministry of Labor. What is more, 75 percent 
of laid-off women are still unemployed after one year, surveys show, 
compared with far fewer than 50 percent of their male counterparts. 
The problem is so great that the Chinese have coined a phrase, a kind 
of acronym meaning ``laid-off working women,'' to describe this pitiable 
group. The problem is particularly serious in places like Tianjin, 
a sprawling coastal manufacturing city of 9 million people that is 
a center of the textile industry and so was stung by 320,000 layoffs 
in 1997 alone. Since jobs at state industries have historically come 
with a wide range of social benefits, laid-off workers often lose 
medical care, child care and funeral benefits as well as a job. Local 
governments, and especially the governmental women's federations that 
exist in every Chinese city and town, have done much hand-wringing 
about the laid-off women, organizing courses to teach them new skills 
and operating re-employment bureaus. But their efforts have been only 
mildly successful, and have inevitably stressed a return to unskilled, 
low-wage labor. ``The training programs they offer have reinforced 
stereotypes about women's work and skills,'' said Ching Kwan Lee, 
a sociologist at the City University of Hong Kong: ``beautician, seamstress, 
domestic helper, child care.'' Ten years ago, when the government 
still assigned jobs, the Communist Party made sure that women were 
well represented in companies and factories. But now working women 
can choose and be chosen, and market forces have not been so kind. 
Despite laws promoting equal opportunity for women in China, companies 
openly favor men over women for certain types of work. ``It's harder 
for women to find work,'' said a law school graduate in the midst 
of a job search, who gave only her surname, Wang, for fear of angering 
would-be employers. ``When they are willing to hire a woman, they 
want someone who's beautiful and capable, too.'' She said many companies 
thought jobs were too strenuous for women if they involved travel 
or work in rural towns considered too rough. Companies are even more 
reluctant to hire women over 35 since, in China, they tend to bear 
full responsibility for both child care and elder care, researchers 
say. They add that these women possess few working skills, even compared 
with the men from their former factories, who had tended to hold the 
technical jobs. Government officials say they expect that most laid-off 
workers will find jobs in the service sector _ which is growing as 
industries shrink. But they acknowledge that women over 35 have few 
prospects in a sector currently obsessed with youth and beauty. Consider 
the ad placed by Jinzhiyuan Garment Co. in Beijing Youth Daily: ``Secretary, 
Beijing residents, female, under 30, above 1.65 meters, must have 
regular features.'' Or another by L'Oreal Cosmetics: ``Promotion girl, 
female, under 28 years old, above 1.65 meters tall, white skin, skinny, 
healthy.'' Zhang Yongping, director of the Machang Street Labor Market, 
said: ``We have found it very difficult to get women over 40 re-employed. 
There are not so many jobs and, of course, the catering services, 
department stores and private companies want the younger ones. They 
won't take women in their 40s.'' He said that such women could only 
find re-employment through women's federations or ``neighborhood committees,'' 
small grass-roots government organizations that in the past focused 
mostly on enforcing the one child-per-family policy and reporting 
on suspicious political activity. Such committees have recently branched 
out, offering dry-cleaning services and help finding jobs, among other 
things. Gen Wei, an earnest middle-aged woman with a hard-working 
air, runs the job placement program at the Sanheli Neighborhood Committee, 
which covers 5,000 people in a compound of dreary five-story concrete 
apartment blocks linked by a web of huge gas and water pipes that 
weave through the air. Sitting at her desk in a spare shack decorated 
with a huge poster bearing the names of local Communist Party members, 
she shook her head as she flipped through a thick black binder containing 
100 forms from people looking for work, 70 to 80 percent of them women. 
She said she had found part-time work for 40: delivering newspapers; 
cooking in a company canteen; helping with child care, elder care 
or housework. ``The men are easiest,'' she said. ``They usually have 
a skill, like fixing plumbing. The women are harder, they have no 
skills, especially women over 40.'' Through the committee's help, 
Liu Xiuhong, a quiet 48-year-old in a frilly cream-colored blouse, 
has found work as a part-time nanny for the 18-month-old son of a 
30-year-old lawyer and her husband, a middle-class couple who recently 
bought an apartment in the neighborhood. Ms. Liu said she was among 
100 working women laid off by a small state-owned sewing machine factory 
early last year. Although the factory is supposed to give her a monthly 
unemployment payment as well as medical coverage, it is broke and 
she has received nothing since January, she said. She makes about 
$30 a month as a nanny. The Tianjin Women's Federation has set up 
something called Home Service Co., which offers laid-off factory workers 
jobs as domestics. Since 1997, 80,000 women have come for help to 
the Women's Federation, said Wang Zhiguo, its chairwoman, who estimated 
that 10,000 had been retrained. Xiao Yuhua, 38, a cheerful woman with 
a broad grin, said she had tripled her income, to $130 a month, since 
she started work as a housekeeper for Women's Federation Home Service 
Co.; she was laid off from her job at Tianjin No. 1 Textile Plant 
three years ago. Kang Li, 31, who had coiffed hair, bright red lipstick 
and a cell phone, said the federation had helped her start a successful 
business selling steamed buns, after she was laid off from her job 
at a handicraft company in 1995. But such success will be harder to 
come by now that the number of unemployed women has skyrocketed. Last 
month the U.N. Development Program and the Chinese government announced 
a $1 million, three-year project to help the laid-off working women 
in Tianjin, teaching them technical and business skills as well as 
giving them small new-business loans. Significantly, the program also 
includes gender-sensitivity training for employment officials, who 
are quick to confide that a woman, at 40, is ``too old'' to learn 
to use a computer, or ``too fat'' to be hired. In China, such biases 
run so deep that women often seem to share their culture's low opinion 
of them. ``Being laid off is difficult for men and women, but the 
men recover quickly,'' said Yang Xiyuan, a retired lawyer in Beijing. 
She added: ``I met laid-off women workers from a textile factory who 
were given new jobs in a bank, but they learned too slowly. They were 
all in their 40s, so their reactions were not very quick. They just 
couldn't do it fast enough.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>