<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981012.0035 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It didn't take long for Atlanta's Dan Reeves, the former New York 
Giants coach, to show just how well he still knows his old team. In 
the first quarter, Falcons wide receiver Tony Martin took a slow seven 
steps or so off the line of scrimmage, then bolted in the direction 
of safety Tito Wooten. The reason for Martin's delay was obvious: 
Reeves, who drafted Wooten, knows Wooten's biggest liability is that 
his attention span is about as long as the life of a fruit fly. Predictably, 
Wooten looked off Martin, thinking the receiver was running a short 
route. Then Martin broke into a gallop, running right by Wooten, who 
was caught completely by surprise. Martin had five steps on Wooten 
when the ball was in the air for a 36-yard touchdown. Reeves 34, Giants 
20. Somewhere, Dave Brown is throwing his Reeves voodoo doll against 
a wall. This game was the worst nightmare for Giants coaches and players. 
In addition to losing to Reeves (they would rather have 17 hours of 
gum surgery than lose to him), the Giants found that he was like a 
Wall Street inside trader. He knows the Giants better than they know 
themselves. Quarterback Danny Kanell sometimes isn't careful with 
the ball when sidestepping a pass rusher, so the Falcons were coached 
to swipe at it whenever they got the chance. It paid off. Falcons 
defensive end Antonio Edwards, who played three games with the Giants 
last season, knocked the ball out of Kanell's hands, caught it in 
midair, and scampered into the end zone for a touchdown. For the Giants, 
particularly the Giants' ownership, this is the worst way to lose. 
They are beat by their former coach, who on his way out the door bashed 
the way the team did things. After leaving New York, Reeves always 
felt that if he got the chance to run an organization again, the way 
he did in Denver when the Broncos went to three Super Bowls, he could 
produce a winner. Now, beating his former team, Reeves and his supporters 
will be saying, ``I told you I could coach.'' Losing this game puts 
the Giants at 2-4, and with key division rivals Arizona and Dallas 
both winning, New York is in peril of not getting into the playoffs. 
If at the end of the season the Giants don't make the playoffs because 
of one loss, Sunday night's game may be the one that kept them out. 
Did Reeves drive a stake through the heart of his old team? But before 
fans flood the Giants with telegrams asking why they ever let Reeves 
go, just remember that it was not a true fit. It could never have 
been, because Reeves wants to run a team by himself. He wants total 
control, which he has with Atlanta and could never have had with the 
Giants. What led to the divorce following the 1996 season was a series 
of disagreements between Reeves and the front office. Reeves said 
that he rarely got what he wanted and that the Giants were inflexible. 
The Giants said Reeves got 90 percent of what he wanted and have pointed 
to a number of examples as proof. When Reeves brought to the Giants 
his first-round bust from the Broncos, linebacker Mike Croel, management 
didn't believe in the player's talent but let Reeves have him anyway. 
Reeves also signed quarterback Tommy Maddox, another of his first-round 
underachievers from Denver, against management's better judgment. 
The Giants' multimillion-dollar indoor practice facility is nicknamed 
the ``Dan Dome'' because he wanted it and got it. Reeves' leaving 
was the best thing for all involved because toward the end of his 
tenure, the situation deteriorated. After the 1995 draft, Reeves was 
angry when it was leaked to the news media that he favored running 
back Rashaan Salaam over Tyrone Wheatley. But it was Reeves who told 
reporters that the Giants' draft room was ``the most argumentative 
place I have ever been.'' The Giants say he blamed them for something 
he did. Now, all that matters is that the Giants are in trouble and 
the Falcons look like a playoff team. Chris Chandler picked them apart. 
When Reeves was in New York, his offenses were predictable and unimaginative. 
Now, Atlanta is an offensive powerhouse. The most embarrassing moment 
for the Giants had to be when Steve DeBerg, a former assistant coach 
with the Giants, got into the game. He is 44 and was playing when 
Ronald Reagan was president. The victory will probably energize Reeves 
like no victory has in years. Though he would never admit it, this 
in a way was his Super Bowl. The Giants still run their team the right 
way, using a two-tiered system instead of the one-man czar, but for 
now, Reeves gets the last laugh. And make no question about it _ for 
the next several days he will be the happiest man alive. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>