<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981012.0091 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Nobody likes to say, ``I goofed'' _ particularly when the mistake 
helped cause the meltdown of stock and bond markets around the globe. 
Which is part of the reason the public pronouncements about the near-collapse 
of Long-Term Capital Management and the billion-dollar bailout of 
the hedge fund organized by the Federal Reserve have been couched 
in language as arcane as the military lingo in a Tom Clancy novel. 
(Another reason is that Wall Street loves jargon, which makes its 
business sound mysterious and important and serves as a sort of secret 
handshake.) But for readers whose cereal boxes don't come with Alan 
Greenspan decoder rings, the following vocabulary builder may help 
impress people at parties _ and perhaps prove handy as the hedge-fund 
drama continues to unfold. Let's start with hedge fund, which has 
nothing to do with shrubs, and little to do with the kind of safety 
implied by, say, hedging one's bets. A hedge fund, of which Long-Term 
Capital was a large and prominent example, is a sort of mutual fund 
for the very rich and for professional investors like pension funds 
and college endowments, all of whom are supposed to be able to watch 
out for themselves. That's why hedge funds are not subject to government 
oversight (at least not yet). The main thing hedge funds have in common 
is that the people running them get to take a chunk of any profits 
the fund makes, in addition to an annual management fee; this tends 
to encourage them to take big risks. Practically everyone who has 
left Wall Street in the past decade claims to be running a hedge fund, 
even if they spend most of their time practicing fly-fishing casts 
or watching ``The Jerry Springer Show.'' So hedge funds come in a 
wide variety of sizes, from a couple of million dollars to a billion-plus. 
But they can have an outsized influence on financial markets because 
they can employ leverage, which basically means they make their bets 
with borrowed money. Long-Term Capital borrowed about $20 for every 
dollar investors put in, which is the kind of behavior that ultimately 
sends compulsive bettors to Gamblers Anonymous. On Wall Street, that 
lofty level of betting is sometimes called nosebleed leverage. Wall 
Street makes it easier to ratchet up bets by creating derivatives, 
or contracts whose value is derived from the performance of something 
else. Anything else. The direction of interest rates in Thailand. 
The number of rainy days in August. The difference between the current 
interest rates in Thailand and the number of rainy days in August, 
divided by the number of pages in the Starr report. While some derivatives 
are commonplace and publicly traded _ like the futures that let farmers 
lock in the price of corn long before the crop is harvested _ many 
are private wagers between two parties, like barroom bets about which 
frog will jump the farthest. That's why such positions can be so hard 
to unwind, or squirm out of. Long-Term Capital was supposed to be 
a market neutral hedge fund, which means it wasn't supposed to be 
betting on the overall direction of the stock or bond market. The 
fund's actual strategy was a secret, even to the people who invested 
in the fund or loaned it money. Its activities were also hidden from 
regulators, leading to complaints that nobody knew what the fund was 
up to, also known as lack of transparency. But it seems Long-Term 
Capital employed a kind of computer-driven arbitrage, a word with 
a variety of meanings on Wall Street. In this case, it seems to have 
meant buying stuff for the wrong price. For example, if toothpaste 
in your neighborhood usually sells for about $4 a tube, and you find 
it in another store for $2, you would snap up all you could. But you 
wouldn't necessarily brush your teeth a lot more; you might sell the 
tubes on the street and reap a 100 percent profit. The problem with 
this strategy, as Greenspan of the Federal Reserve pointed out in 
his testimony to Congress earlier this month (though not in these 
words), is that if enough people try to do this toothpaste trading, 
either the store will raise the price or folks on the street will 
stop buying your toothpaste and go to the store instead. Either way, 
the chances of making a killing will evaporate. Money being a lot 
easier to move than toothpaste, these things happen in a flash in 
financial markets. All this helps explain why Long-Term Capital had 
to move into far-flung markets with low liquidity, meaning it's hard 
to buy and sell things without pushing prices up or down sharply. 
Many of the hedge fund's bets were in notoriously illiquid emerging 
markets, which used to be known as Third World countries and are now 
called submerging markets by Wall Street traders who have lost a bundle 
overseas. Russia may not have had much success as an evil empire, 
but as an evil emerging market, it rules. After Moscow defaulted on 
its debt in August, spooked investors moved their money to the safest 
spot they could think of: long bonds, the 30-year securities sold 
by the United States. That flight to quality reversed capital flows, 
so money that had been streaming into risky markets looking for extra 
profit poured instead into places where there was little risk of loss. 
Investors bid up the price of Treasuries while dumping everything 
else, which shorted out all those high-tech computer models Long-Term 
Capital was relying on. As a result, the fund was essentially bought 
by the banks and brokerage firms that had loaned it money based mainly 
on the perceived intellectual wattage of the fund's managers. In the 
wake of the Long-Term Capital fiasco, many investors have moved, in 
Greenspan's words, from irrational exuberance to fear. All of this 
thanks to what economists call an exogenous event. Also known as a 
surprise. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>