<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981012.0321 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Just how focused must a company be? And how much does it have to cut 
before Wall Street is happy? These are the questions that the directors 
of Tenneco will ponder when they meet on Tuesday at the company's 
headquarters in Greenwich, Conn. No one expects them to announce any 
decisions yet. But as the day wears on, they will most likely decide 
how to jettison Tenneco's money-losing corrugated and containerboard 
mills. Then the board will probably set a timetable for splitting 
the remaining businesses _ specialty packaging and automotive parts 
_ into two companies. It will be Tenneco's final attempt to slim down 
to fighting weight. The company, founded in 1940 as Tennessee Gas 
and Transmission Co., a pipeline company, spent its first 50 years 
growing into a conglomerate with businesses as far-flung as shipbuilding, 
energy and agricultural equipment. And it has spent the last five 
years whittling itself down, from six businesses to four and now two. 
Each time, Tenneco figured that Wall Street would embrace it as a 
stronger, better-focused company. Each time, Wall Street declared 
it an out-of-step hodgepodge doing too little, too late. Even in July, 
when Tenneco first publicly floated the idea that it would split, 
its stock rallied just a bit, and then sank. This time, the board 
is expected to call it quits on the whole conglomerate notion, probably 
by spinning the remaining two businesses to shareholders. ``I thought 
investors would see a mini-conglomerate made up of two superb performers, 
and think 2 plus 2 equals 5,'' said Dana Mead, Tenneco's chief executive. 
``They still think 2 plus 2 equals 3. So we are probably looking at 
the holding company's liquidation.'' Tenneco is unlikely to carry 
out, or even publicize, a decision to rip itself in two until the 
stock market improves. But clearly, it is poised to join ITT and Westinghouse 
in the dustbin of conglomerate history. There is no guarantee that 
investors will apply more favorable equations to the separate companies. 
But history should give them cheer. Case Corp., once Tenneco's agricultural 
equipment subsidiary, did a lot better after Tenneco overhauled it 
and sprung it loose in 1994. And while Case's stock has slipped badly 
in the last six months, analysts say investors were reacting to the 
turmoil in the company's Asian markets, not to its management. ``Individual 
companies are always more focused, and thus more formidable competitors,'' 
said George Staphos, an analyst with Salomon Smith Barney. Still, 
automotive parts and packaging are cyclical, slow-growth businesses. 
Moreover, diversified companies generally have higher credit ratings 
than single-business ones, and it remains unclear which of the two 
spinoffs will acquire the lion's share of Tenneco's $3.2 billion in 
debt. ``They might run into problems meeting debt obligations if they 
are split apart,'' warned Brian Eisenbarth, an analyst with the brokerage 
firm Collins &AMP; Co. For now, the businesses seem robust. Both units 
enjoy above average margins in their industries. Tenneco Automotive, 
whose brands include Monroe shock absorbers and Walker mufflers, has 
acquired some 20 other companies since 1994, and earned $407 million 
on $3.2 billion in revenue last year. Tenneco Packaging, which makes 
Baggies and Hefty bags, has also grown rapidly, earning $372 million 
on $4 billion in sales last year. Spinoffs generally do better, both 
in profits and share price, when freed from their parents. Lucent 
Technologies, for example, has been able to capture a higher stock 
valuation after it left AT&AMP;T, and many chemical companies have 
done better without their pharmaceutical parents. ``Analysts have 
difficulty understanding multi-industry companies,'' said Robert Greenhill, 
chairman of Greenhill &AMP; Co., an investment bank, which is advising 
Tenneco. Maybe so _ but that has not depressed multiples at General 
Electric, Allied Signal, Textron, or other modern-day conglomerates. 
Some investors say it is Tenneco itself, not its diversity, that is 
the problem. ``The moment Case spun off from Tenneco, its performance 
started to improve,'' said Warren Spitz, a portfolio manager of the 
Prudential Equity Income Fund, an investor in Case. ``Tenneco just 
never seems to wring profitability out of businesses it keeps.'' The 
prospect of a Tenneco split has not whetted investor appetite for 
Tenneco shares. Since December 1996, when the company became two businesses, 
the stock has fallen 26.5 percent, to $33.4375, while the Standard 
&AMP; Poor's 500-stock index has risen 34.7 percent. Tenneco's price-earnings 
ratio is 14.4, trailing the 23.7 average for the S&AMP;P 500. ``Their 
multiple stinks because Wall Street understands exactly who they are 
and what they are doing, and none of us buys into it,'' said Joel 
Tiss, an analyst with Lehman Brothers Holdings. Such harsh criticism 
is not universal among analysts. Many others say Mead and his troops 
at Tenneco have worked wonders with what had been a badly managed 
company. ``They squeeze the most profits out of their revenue dollars,'` 
Eisenbarth of Collins said. If that is so, then the dissolution of 
Tenneco as a conglomerate shows that once Wall Street loses confidence 
in a company, even a cost-conscious, investor-sensitive management 
cannot always regain it. Tenneco's actions this decade could have 
come out of a how-to manual for appeasing shareholders. Under the 
supervision of an independent board _ Mead is the only inside director 
_ Tenneco has peeled off layers of businesses. Out, too, went many 
of the corporate frills for which Tenneco was known in Houston, its 
former hometown. The 85-foot yacht, two country clubs, a 30-story 
headquarters building _ all are gone. Gone too are 10 of its 13 aircraft. 
Its headquarters staff, once 350 people, is down to 70, and Mead is 
aiming for 45 by the end of the year. Free company cars and other 
such luxuries are gone, replaced by executive compensation programs 
that include mandatory ownership of stock. Mead took his bonus in 
Tenneco options last year, and says that he will not profit on them 
until Tenneco stock reaches $52. With roughly $13 billion in cash 
available, Tenneco has since 1992 paid down $9 billion in debt, bought 
back $1 billion in stock and shored up its remaining businesses with 
nearly $3 billion in acquisitions. Mead has pledged to keep pruning 
and reinvesting. In July he promised to cut an additional $100 million 
out of Tenneco's annual costs. He says he will probably sell the old 
80,000-square-foot Henry Luce mansion in Greenwich, which Tenneco 
made its corporate home in 1996. It is the kind of streamlining that 
Tenneco's board had begged, in vain, for management to carry out in 
the 1980s. In 1988, Tenneco sold its oil business for more than $8 
billion in cash _ and promptly sank most of it into expanding Case, 
just as demand for agricultural equipment was falling. Soon after, 
Tenneco expanded its Newport News Shipbuilding division just as the 
Cold War was ending. And it refused to drop its Albright &AMP; Wilson 
chemical subsidiary, which was plagued with environmental liabilities. 
By the end of 1991, Tenneco was trying to service $11 billion in debt 
with just $13 billion in revenue. The board ousted the chief executive, 
James L. Ketelsen, and recruited Michael H. Walsh from Union Pacific 
to take his place. ``Mike was a charismatic, mesmerizing executive 
who knew how to turn a business upside down,'' said Felix Rohatyn, 
then a partner of Lazard Freres, once Tenneco's investment bankers, 
and now ambassador to France. Walsh hired Mead, then an executive 
of International Paper Co., and charged him with solving the Case 
problem. Mead cut the number of tractors Case made, trimmed overhead 
and reduced production errors. Tenneco continued whipping subsidiaries 
into shape. It got Newport News back into the market for submarines, 
then spun it, and $600 million in Tenneco debt, to shareholders. The 
company negotiated a tax-free merger of its remaining energy business 
with El Paso Energy Corp., receiving $900 million in El Paso stock 
and shifting $3.4 billion in Tenneco debt to El Paso. ``They got one 
hell of a lot more for all these businesses than any of us had expected,'' 
said Michael Blumenthal, a Tenneco director since 1985 who was Treasury 
secretary in the Carter administration. The breakups were torturous. 
Like so many multinational conglomerates, Tenneco had organized itself 
for maximum tax benefits, not operational efficiency. ``We'd form 
companies to hold assets, and we'd have subsidiaries of subsidiaries,'' 
said Robert Blakely, Tenneco's chief financial officer. Case operated 
as a stand-alone company in several foreign countries and had to be 
unified before it could be sold. Many other subsidiaries had interlocking 
assets, so that a subsidiary in Germany owned Tenneco's real estate 
in California. All of those problems landed at Mead's feet in 1993, 
when Walsh developed brain cancer. Mead, who had been Inside to Walsh's 
Outside, became chief executive in February 1994, and chairman three 
months later, when Walsh died. Walsh is still missed by Tenneco old-timers, 
but many say Mead fills his shoes well. ``Mike had the vision, the 
personality, the leadership skills,'' said Peter Flawn, who just retired 
from Tenneco's board. ``But Dana was always better at execution, and 
he has really grown into the CEO's role.'' It may be a short tenure. 
Mead could become chairman of either packaging or automotive when 
they are split apart. Or, he could be non-executive chairman of both. 
But he is 62 years old, and people close to him say he is most likely 
to retire after a split. Assuming the debt burden remains manageable, 
the businesses should be able to fend for themselves. Most automotive-parts 
companies were hurt by the General Motors strike this summer, and 
the packaging industry has been hurt by Asia's economic meltdown. 
But analysts say that Tenneco's units have weathered the problems 
at least as well as their competition. ``We've taken advantage of 
consolidation opportunities all over the globe, and we're probably 
just one big acquisition away from doubling our sales,'' said Thomas 
Evans, president of Tenneco Automotive. Tenneco Packaging has been 
a high flyer since 1995, when it bought Mobil Corp.'s plastics business 
and its Hefty and Baggies brands, for $1.27 billion. Tenneco has since 
added a zipper-lock bag, the Hefty One Zip, and has persuaded many 
delicatessens to use it for take-out sandwiches. Tenneco has also 
expanded its protective packaging and flexible packaging lines. ``We're 
going to double this business by 2001,'' said Paul Stecko, Tenneco's 
chief operating officer. ``We'll do it if we're part of Tenneco or 
of another company. But being a pure play will still be the best thing 
for our stock.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>