<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981012.2000.1257 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is The World, I'm Tony Conn. Next month, an Indian film that 
played the American art house circuit last year comes out on video. 
"Fire", it's worth the look if for no other reason than the insight 
it provides into a long taboo subject in India, lesbianism. The land 
of the Kama Sutra is actually a relatively closed society when it 
comes to sex, especially lesbian sex. From Delhi, The World's Tincu 
Ray on how lesbians are cautiously coming out of the Indian closet. 
Jo is a 35-year-old single women who lives and works in Delhi. Her 
lifestyle is typical of many women in the capitol, except for one 
fact. She is a lesbian. My first affair when I was 15, with this girl. 
Unfortunately she was straight in what mattered. Jo, who had never 
shared her sexuality with outsiders, has friends who are aware that 
she is gay and accepted. But friends are different from relatives 
and work colleagues. It took Jo's sister and brother- in-law years 
to come to terms with her being gay. Such acceptance though is unusual 
in a country where sexual expression is minimal. BACKGROUND, INDIAN 
music When you walk the streets in Indian cities, you won't see any 
open affection between people. It is a society where the billion-dollar 
movie industry still does not show two people kissing on screen. Segregation 
is common. Dating is frowned upon by most families, and arranged marriages 
are still the objective of parents. In such an environment, it is 
doubly difficult if you are different, something Jo knows all too 
well. Actually, I would love to have a place where I could go, be 
with a women without being stared at. I would love to be able to dance 
with a women. It's terrible when you want all these things, and the 
straight people are getting it. And they are not even happy being 
together. And here are two people, we just love each other totally. 
And we can't even openly say it. It is estimated that there are 10 
million lesbians in India today, a figure that is difficult to confirm 
because of the hidden nature of many lesbians lives. This group has 
few systems of support. At the offices of Sunga Nee, the only help 
line for gay and bi-sexual women in the Indian Capitol, Delhi, the 
problems and experiences of the callers are unique and yet universal. 
Kath is one of Sunga Nee's counselors. Basically some of them are 
young women who are confused about their sexuality. Then we also get 
calls from women who are married who are curious about the issue, 
or have had a relationship or are in a relationship. Or maybe they 
have just been having a sexual interaction or an affair with somebody. 
And they read about the ad and think, oh, this is something I should 
talk about. Indian society is changing. It's actually a wonderful 
thing. Dr. Saad Lavora is a clinical psychologist who works with many 
gay women. Women don't get married, not because they are lesbian. 
A lot more women are not getting married right now. But, I think a 
lot of women who are lesbians are able to stay single because they 
are working, they have friends, and they are comfortable with their 
lifestyle. But in what is seen as India's male-dominated society, 
it is commonly accepted that women's sexuality just doesn't exist. 
Consequently there is little suspicion if two women actually share 
a bed. But, Mother Krishwar editor of the feminist magazine, "Manishee" 
feels India society is more open than it is made out to be. Women 
to women relations, same gender relations, including sexual relations 
are far more easy and accepted more benignly in this culture, because 
of the culture of segregation. The men, hugging each other, kissing, 
sleeping in the same bed. Even close friends, two sisters, sisters-in-law, 
it's such a common place. And who cares what happens under the covers. 
What does seem to bother many people is when two women attempt to 
have a serious, i.e. sexual relationship. In fact some psychiatrists 
in India still treat homosexuality as a behavioral problem. According 
to Dr. Lavora some use extreme treatments. The guy -- tended to think 
that they can, the behavior therapists. And change behavior in a method 
that no behavior therapist uses at this point. Nobody uses electric 
shock to try and change people's behavior. It is terribly primitive. 
But that it happens is true. Ultimately it will take a long time for 
attitudes towards gay rights to change in India. With population figures 
indicating a decline in the numbers of women in India, Jo and other 
lesbians are likely to remain on the fringe of Indian life. And although 
they want recognition, most are happy to achieve it, quietly. For 
The World, this is Tincu Ray in Delhi, India. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>