<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981012.2000.0741 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Kosovo standoff is topping the agenda at a Balkan summit in Turkey, 
today. Among those urging Serbia to take the necessary steps to avoid 
airstrikes were the leaders of Turkey and Greece. It was an unusual 
moment of agreement between the two NATO partners. And it came on 
the occasion of something even rarer, a visit to Turkey by a Greek 
prime minister. When Kostas Semetes arrived in Antalya today, it was 
the first time and the first trip by a Greek prime minister to Turkey 
in five years. The World's Allen Dow reports on the Greek/Turkish 
problem that has become a NATO problem, that has become an American 
problem. The age-old enmity between Greece and Turkey has been underlined 
by their dispute over Cyprus. Turkish troops occupy the northern third 
of the island. Greece supports the Greek Cypriots of the south, who 
are planning to deploy a state-of-the-art missile system. Turkey says 
that will upset the balance of power, and could lead to war with Greece. 
The Turkish Cypriot leader Rolph Dentash says no one should under 
estimate Turkey's resolve to prevent the Greek Cypriots from deploying 
those missiles. Turkey never bluffs. Turkey when she says, I'm going 
to defend my rights, defends her rights. Don't press Turkey. Don't 
play with Turkey. With the situation in the Balkans already so fragile, 
the last thing Washington wants is a fight between Greece and Turkey, 
two NATO partners. But, so important is Turkey's strategic position, 
given its proximity to the Middle East, that Washington has spent 
billions of dollars to maintain its friendship with the Turks. The 
problem is some other NATO allies don't have such a cozy relationship 
with Ankara. And that has called friction between Europe and the United 
States. According to Leila Bolton, a specialist on Turkey, writing 
for the Financial Times. It is true that the United States is sharply 
focused on Turkey's strategic role. And they don't seem to share the 
sort of European-style fears of say, a Mexico on the U.S. border. 
On the other hand, the Europeans are in danger of underestimating 
Turkey's strategic importance to them. One thing that really seems 
to annoy the Europeans is the impression of Turkey running off to 
big brother in Washington, to ask for help in pushing down the doors 
of fortress Europe. As the meeting of Southeast European nations began 
today in the Turkish city of Antalya, Turkey's Foreign Minister Ishmael 
Gem was playing up the importance of dialogue with Turkey's closest 
European neighbors, another reminder of Turkey's strategic importance. 
Well the Balkans is a region where cooperation is most needed in Europe. 
Therefore we believe this is a chance for all the participants, is 
the unique multilateral forum where all subjects, Kosovo included, 
can be discussed with the participation of Yugoslavia. So I believe 
that it is important to prove at least that we can get together at 
a very difficult time for all of us. But with Turkey squabbling with 
the Syrians over their alleged support of Kurdish rebels, and with 
the Greeks over Cyprus, Turkey is hardly a pillar of stability inside 
NATO. Washington has repeatedly tried and failed to mediate an end 
to the dispute over Cyprus. And meetings between the Greek and Turkish 
leaders at the southeast European summit aren't expected to bear much 
fruit either, according to Turkey's foreign minister. I don't think 
that anyone has a great expectation. It's a meeting where the two 
parties will have a dialogue, even if it will be a short one. I don't 
think that we are expecting something substantial. The Greek side 
has always rejected our proposals for a discussion, with a preconceived 
agenda. They don't want to have a dialogue, and I don't think we are 
asking for one, actually. With the situation in the former Yugoslavia 
still so unstable, and tensions rising in the Middle East, a strong 
NATO is essential to U.S. interests. And a divided NATO could send 
a weak signal to those who may wish to threaten U.S. interests in 
the future. For the World, I'm Allen Dow. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>