<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981012.2000.2374 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
More than a quarter of Nigeria's oil output was shut down today. And 
oil company executives have no idea when all the pipes will reopen. 
The installations have come under attack by youths of the Ijaw ethnic 
group who are demanding greater political power and services for their 
impoverished communities. The Ijaws are unleashing their anger, not 
only at foreign-owned oil facilities but at rival ethnic tribes whom 
they consider competitors for oil-rich lands. The BBC's Hillary Anderson 
sent us this report from a Nigerian town where an ethnic clash recently 
displaced 50,000 people and left an unknown number dead. In the deserted 
town of Igbakota the market stalls lay empty, the streets bare. Only 
a small group of men huddled together were talking. The subject of 
conversation, what they called, the war. Another group of refugees 
had arrived in town today, they had come by boat from the depths of 
the nearby swamps and their stories were bad. Five minutes up the 
road in an abandoned building the refugees have found shelter. Women 
were lying on the floor wailing, and tearing at their hair in anguish. 
On their way here they had seen corpses in the waterways, more than 
they have a stomach to count. Yemimi Fumichevi was shaking when she 
talked. A lot of my family have died. My father died, my senior brother, 
my sister, they died. How were they killed? They shoots them, by gun. 
Many fled from the ethnic clashes with their young children with nothing 
but one or two possessions. The people here, mostly from a tiny tribe 
called the Elageis have been under attack from their tribal rivals 
the Eigols. In the dispute, over a piece of land thought to be rich 
in oil, 50 villages have been destroyed. Magnus Aroyolenie Refugee 
Coordinator for the Elageis believes the Eigols have dangerous territorial 
ambitions. These people they are grazers, they want to expand their 
territory. And to corner the oil well of the country. So that they 
become an oil-rich country. So we are thinking, that the plan to succeed 
is the motive behind this aggression. Violent tribal land disputes 
are increasingly frequent in Nigeria's oil areas. Hundreds have died 
in recent months. The violence is often accompanied by calls from 
Nigeria's smaller ethnic groups for autonomy, or even independence. 
In a country with over 250 different ethnic groups, it is a disturbing 
trend. Journalist Tyo Ikojuni says people are making these demands 
because they are fed up with living in poverty. And seeing nothing 
of the vast oil wealth that they think should be theirs. some were 
born, they don't know how a car looks like. They cannot even describe 
how a hospital looks like. See why we have this kind of continuous 
conflict. A few months ago under the rule of the late General Sanie 
Abacha the soldiers would have been sent in to sort out this latest 
ethnic war by brute force. And a lid would have been put on frustrations. 
But the new government, which is working to improve Nigeria's image 
is trying to tread more softly. Community leaders like Risomolu Abodi 
are frustrated. Our people are being killed. Our houses are being 
burnt. The people have food. They can't come out, they are locked 
up - When I prepared to leave the refugees of Obukota, a woman was 
howling on the floor begging for help. Her entire family is dead, 
her house has been burnt down and she was wearing borrowed clothes. 
Like so many others, she is the victim of the exploding emotions of 
a populous who have been fed up with injustice. And who only dare 
now to let their emotions out in a fearful bloodletting. That was 
Hillary Anderson's report from Igbaquoda, Nigeria. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>