<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981012.1700.3188 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Gloucester, Massachusetts, has relied upon the sea for its livelihood 
for nearly four centuries. This past summer, the waters began to provide 
residents with a new way to make money. A 60-meter floating casino 
carries passengers from Gloucester to international waters, beyond 
a state law that bans gaming. As Nancy Cohen tells us, some in this 
historic port welcome the casino while others say gambling doesn't 
fit in with the town's seafaring legacy. Every day twice a day, a 
ship called the Vegas Express pulls out of Gloucester Harbor. It sails 
past lobster boats and saners, past whale watchers and wind surfers, 
past the sea gulls and cormorants gathered on Ten Pound Island. After 
about three miles, it enters international waters. Ladies and gentlemen, 
the casino is now open. The casino is now open. That's your set. We're 
rolling. A point six. Here's we go. About 150 people pay $39 a piece 
to eat, drink and gamble aboard the Vegas Express this afternoon. 
School custodian Bob Ferrara and his friends are having a good time 
at the blackjack table. Ferrara says this ship means they won't have 
to travel so far to gamble. We went to New Hampshire yesterday, and 
we got $140 worth of Powerball tickets. We go to Foxwood's. We go 
to Atlantic City. I play glummy on Russell Street in Charlestown. 
Some in Gloucester say their city is not a place for gamblers. Mayor 
Bruce Toby says gambling is at odds with the character of this port, 
which is still active, despite the decline in the fishing industry. 
It's a comprehensive kind of waterfront experience with cargo work 
still to be done and longshoremen still to be employed, a whole array 
of boats besides fishing boats to be fueled and iced and serviced 
and maintained. This is a port that still works. But some who have 
worked on the port feel the casino has a place here. Tony Virga once 
fished out of Gloucester. His father and grandfather were also fishermen. 
Today, Virga is Gloucester's state representative. He says the ship 
should be allowed to operate for a season and then be evaluated. My 
heart has always been in the fishing industry and always will be. 
I know a lot of people who are involved in what is the remains of 
a once-proud fishing industry. This ship is coming into the Gloucester 
harbor. It has not displaced anyone or anything and has given jobs 
to people who were in the fishing industry but no longer have the 
opportunity to work within that fishing industry. At the helm of the 
gambling ship is a former Gloucester fisherman. Chief mate Bob Fulhood 
used to make his living catching lobsters and herring until overfishing 
began to hurt the industry. Years ago, I seen it going downhill, and 
I decided I better have something else to fall back on. That's why 
I decided to go ahead and get my Coast Guard licenses and have something 
fall back on. Now it's like I have fishing to fall back on, you know, 
instead of the other way around. That's the way it works out. Fulhood's 
many years navigating through wind and rough waters helped land him 
this job. Although he's not comfortable wearing the uniform, he's 
grateful for the work. There's a lot of people working on this boat 
from Gloucester and the area. It's pumping a lot of money into the 
local economy. And you know, they've hired a lot of people. The ship's 
owners say they'll spend hundreds of thousands of dollars a month 
hiring local people like Fulhood and buying supplies in Gloucester 
and nearby towns. But casino opponents argue these economic benefits 
are only seasonal. And some state officials say the boat is skirting 
recent legislation that rejected expanded gaming in the state. Lester 
Bullock of the Georgia-based Leisure Resorts and Casinos, which runs 
the boat, says even if some state officials don't like it, the operation 
is legal. I will tell you at this point, federal law supersedes state 
law, and I will just have to wait and see and address any issues that 
they may bring up in the future. Although this state may not be able 
to stop this casino, the North Atlantic will limit its trips. It's 
hard to shoot craps on a rocking table. So when the seasons change 
and the waves start to rise, the floating casino will close up for 
the winter. I'm Nancy Cohen in Gloucester, Massachusetts. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>