<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981012.1700.0874 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Police have charged two men with first-degree murder in the death 
of Matthew Shepard, who was severely beaten and tied to a fence post 
in near-freezing temperatures last week outside Laramie, Wyoming. 
Meanwhile, many Americans are joining gay rights groups in denouncing 
the murder as a hate crime against homosexuals. VOA national affairs 
correspondent Jim Malone has details. Twenty-two year old university 
student Matthew Shepard died early Monday at a hospital in Colorado. 
Mr. Shepard had been badly beaten and left for dead last Wednesday 
on a fence outside Laramie, Wyoming, where he was a student at the 
University of Wyoming. Police have now charged two men with first-degree 
murder in connection with the Shepard killing. Authorities say the 
primary motive was robbery. But homosexual rights groups around the 
country have condemned the killing as a hate crime, and they say Matthew 
Shepard was attacked because he was openly gay. Police have also charged 
the girlfriends of the two murder suspects as accessories to the crime. 
But one of the girlfriends denies the attack was a hate crime and 
says her friends were merely looking to rob the victim. In addition, 
the father of one of the murder suspects says Matthew Shepard embarrassed 
his son by flirting with him at a bar shortly before the attack. Wyoming's 
governor, Jim Geringer, is promising swift justice for those charged 
in the Shepard murder. He's also calling on the people of his state 
to examine their own consciences in the wake of the attack. GOVERNOR 
JIM GERRINGER The message that needs to go out is that no one is above 
the law, that no life or freedom should be taken simply by an act 
of prejudice. If all we feel is outrage, we have not found a remedy. 
If we don't feel ashamed and we don't change, if we don't speak out 
for truth, we will not preserve the values that have been important 
to America. The hospital in Colorado where Matthew Shepard died has 
been deluged with messages of sympathy and outrage. And late Sunday, 
about 1,000 people took part in a candlelight vigil on the Wyoming 
campus where he'd been a student. Tina Labray was a friend of Matthew 
Shepard who takes some solace in the outpouring of grief. People are 
coming together, and people are making changes. That's what Matt wanted 
to see in his lifetime. It's just too bad he's not around to see it. 
If there was more people in the world who are like the way Matt was, 
hate and tolerance would - would not be an issue. President Clinton 
says he's horrified by the attack on Matthew Shepard, and a White 
House spokesman says the president would like to see a national standard 
established for hate crimes. Homosexual rights groups, meanwhile, 
have expressed outrage about the Shepard killing and say it demonstrates 
the need to expand federal and state laws aimed at preventing hate 
crimes and punishing those responsible. Jim Malone, VOA News, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>