<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981012.1700.0382 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In addition to the NATO ambassadors' meeting, Balkan leaders have 
been discussing the Kosovo situation during a two-day summit in the 
southern Turkey resort of Antanya. The result of that conference may 
be an official declaration denouncing Yugoslavia and demanding an 
end to its crackdown on Kosovo's ethnic Albanians. Amberin Zaman has 
the story in Ankara. Speaking at the summit which brings together 
leaders of Albania, Bulgaria, Greece, Macedonia, Romania, Turkey and 
Yugoslavia, Turkish prime minister Mesut Yilmaz rejected Yugoslav 
calls to keep Kosovo off the agenda. He said any problem affecting 
peace and stability in the Balkans has to be discussed. Officials 
attending the meeting said participants were working on a draft declaration 
condemning Yugoslavia's harsh tactics against ethnic Albanians in 
Kosovo. There is strong public sympathy for the Albanian Muslims in 
Turkey, which has a sizable population of ethnic Kosovars, Macedonians 
and Bosnians. Many migrated to Turkey after the former Yugoslavia 
fell under Communist rule, but many also came here when most of the 
Balkans was part of the Ottoman Empire. The Turkish parliament has 
already voted to authorize sending Turkish troops to any multinational 
force in Kosovo. Turkey is a member of NATO and has contributed troops 
to the NATO-led peace force that was set up to enforce and monitor 
peace in Bosnia. Still, Turkey has been less vocal in its support 
for the separatist Kosovo Albanians than it was for the Bosnian Muslims. 
Not least, say analysts, because it is fighting its own battle against 
Kurdish separatist rebels. Few analysts believe the summit in Turkey 
will have much impact on Yugoslavia's policies. Yugoslav prime minister 
Momir Bulatovic, who is at the summit, termed NATO threats of military 
intervention as unacceptable, and he repeated his government's assertion 
that it is committed to solving the Kosovo crisis through peaceful 
means. The Balkan gathering has brought together the prime ministers 
of Turkey and Greece. The two countries are at loggerheads over strife 
for some territorial rights in the Aegean -- differences that Western 
governments fear could trigger a military confrontation between the 
two countries. Monday's meeting between Greek prime minister Costas 
Simitis and Mr. Yilmas is the first in nearly a year. Amberin Zaman 
for VOA News, Ankara. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>