<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981012.1700.1361 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Moby Dick, the great white whale of Herman Melville's 19th century 
novel has undergone a transformation on the New York stage. VOA's 
Martin Bush reports. Aboard the New Bedford whaling ship Pequod, the 
maniacal Captain Ahab is killed by the white whale he is pursuing. 
That essentially is the plot of "Moby Dick," the renowned 1851 novel 
by the American author Herman Melville. Now, in a playhouse alongside 
a channel to the sea in Staten Island's New York, a show loosely based 
on "Moby Dick" has had its world premiere, called "Ahab's Wife or 
The Whale." It is 90 minutes of performance art, blending dance, theater, 
acrobatics, martial arts and music, although none of the music is 
original. Much is borrowed from the films and musicals of the 1930s. 
For example, Fred Astaire singing "Cheek To Cheek," Lena Horne "Stormy 
Weather." The heroine is Captain Ahab's wife whom Melville mentions 
only in passing in "Moby Dick." The author calls her "a sweet resigned 
girl." She is hardly that in "Ahab's Wife or The Whale," audaciously 
going to sea as the skipper of the Pequod. There, there she blows. 
Far away. Stand by stations. below the loft and on both sides. Ahab's 
wife, whom writer Tom Sleigh likens to an ocean-going Amelia Earhart, 
seeks out in the depths of the sea the white whale which killed her 
husband. She meets the whale and they have a conversation about the 
fate of her missing lover. And then she comes back up to the surface 
again. I think that what happens when she comes back up to the surface 
is that she is, in fact, sort of struggling to come to terms or understand 
what it was that her loss has meant to her. Ellen Driscoll, the show's 
scenic designer, and Tom Slay's wife, originated the idea for "Ahab's 
Wife." She points out that a number of the whale's speeches in the 
show are a link to Herman Melville's chapter about the whale's eyesight. 
And he describes eloquently the fact that the whale has an eye on 
either side of his head and that this sort of biological fact, if 
you will, means that the whale sees one thing in one eye and another 
completely different thing in the other eye. And that these two irreconcilable 
visions never converge. And this idea of the two that never become 
one was a very intriguing idea to us visually and in terms of text 
and movement. He is the kind of nonhuman repository, if you will, 
of all wounds, of all knowledge. He's the thing that outlasts humans 
who can kind of speak of human losses and human vagaries and human 
experience in a more cosmic context. He does survive. Robert Langdon 
Lloyd, the British actor playing the whale, wears no elaborate disguise, 
merely a very long black leather double breasted overcoat. What swam 
toward me I could never see. Only its weight, spreading out on either 
side, swum through it without knowing what it was. Already heading 
blind into other waters. The wake rippling away from either eye, each 
focused on a different aftermath. "Ahab's Wife or The Whale" is being 
produced in an appropriate setting. The musical of the restored sailor's 
Snug Harbor. This 10-square block tract of Greek revival residential 
buildings and granary faces the Kilvan Cove, a commercial waterway 
to the Atlantic Ocean. Earlier in the century, when Snug Harbor was 
a home for decrepit or aged sailing men, author Herman Melville, a 
seaman himself during his early years, often listened to the old sailors' 
yarns while visiting the retirement facility administered by his brother. 
Martin Bush, VOA News, New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>