<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981217.1830.0060 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. We begin again tonight with the U.S. campaign against 
Iraq and congressional campaign against the president. Washington 
is consumed by these two issues tonight. Everyone seems to agree that 
it's virtually impossible to keep them separate. The U.S. is now in 
the middle of the most intense attack against Iraq since the bombing 
campaign which led off the gulf war in 1991. And there has been, the 
Pentagon tells us, no opposition. Seen from here in Washington and 
from Baghdad, it is clear that the USA, and to a small extent the 
British, today have been hitting a lot of targets, though it is hard 
to judge whether the effort is having the desired effect. We start 
in Baghdad. ABC's Bill Blakemore is there. A status report if you 
would. Peter, it's quiet here for the moment. But this second night 
of attacks here, at least in central Baghdad, though not as sustained 
has been heavier and louder than last night's. Just after 10:00 P.M. 
here, massive explosions shook the information ministry. A few blocks 
away, we could see fire, smoke, then more explosions. These were apparently 
the impacts of 2,000 pound warheads of air-launched cruise missiles. 
Damage from these attacks is hard to assess from here. After dawn 
this morning, we could see smoke from a few places in the city center. 
But Iraqis let journalists see little of the first night's damage 
up close -- This rice factory in the town of tikrit, a burst water 
main in Baghdad where a missile apparently went astray. Beyond this, 
Iraqi officials said only that sites hit last night include military 
installations, national police headquarters, a number of factories, 
which they say had no military function and a school for mechanics. 
Journalists were taken to a hospital to see a few seriously wounded 
people. 427 sites. This afternoon, foreign minister Mohammed Sahaf 
charged that the attacks were launched on the basis of only 5 trivial 
disruptions out of 427 weapons inspections the U.N. made here recently. 
They put it in their report, this is one of the violations, you have 
delayed us about 45 minutes. So you deserve to be bombarded. Baghdad 
today, was partly normal, schools were closed, many shops were open. 
Just before sunset, we visited one of the markets. "Where are the 
international laws? Where is humanity," complained this man, "why 
are other countries not treated with this harshness? This country 
will never die." Then the air raid sirens sounded for the second night. 
And, Peter, throughout all of this today there has been no sighting 
of saddam Hussein. The Iraqi news agency did say this morning that 
Saddam Hussein has spent several hours touring the damage from the 
first night's attacks. But there have been no pictures of that. So 
he is probably, apparently, playing the same kind of hide and seek 
he played during the gurg war in 1991. The Pentagon did make the point 
they weren't actually trying to track saddam Hussein over the last 
24 hours. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>