<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981217.1830.0731 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We said at the beginning of the broadcast that the attack on Iraq 
and the impeachment debate were now completely intertwined. The house 
today overwhelmingly passed a resolution of support for U.S. forces 
in the gulf. But having done that, members of the house went quickly 
back to the question of impeachment. As we said, the debate begins 
tomorrow. ABC's Linda Douglass reports from Capitol Hill. It seems 
to be a foregone conclusion that the house will impeach the president. 
But democrats and republicans plan to wage a ferocious battle for 
public opinion on the floor of the house. Today they could not agree 
on how long the debate will run because the democrats wanted to put 
it off until after the bombs stop falling. Bob Livingston has not 
yet been sworn in as speaker, but today he began leading the house, 
insisting the impeachment debate cannot wait for the bombs to stop 
falling. Do we just anticipate that the troops in the field will complete 
their business by Ramadan or by a time certain or by Tuesday or by 
Christmas day or by new years day or by two weeks into January? How 
do we assess when that mission is going to be complete? There is no 
way to know when the troops will have completed their mission. Insisting 
their objections were patriotic, not partisan, democrats pleaded with 
republicans to wait. We also have to look at how Saddam Hussein will 
perceive the idea and information that while he is under physical 
attack by the United States and its people, we are having a debate 
in the House of Representatives to remove the commander in chief from 
his office. It would be a grave mistake to go forward with this vote 
while our nation is engaged in military action. I cannot believe that 
we are even having this debate. But republicans insisted the troops 
in the gulf would want them to go forward. Our fighting men are fighting 
for our constitutional privilege to do just exactly what we are doing 
here today. I think it helps the morale of our armed services if we 
continue to do our job. Now, the debate under the rules is supposed 
to last about an hour. That is because the democrats and republicans 
have not agreed on time. The republicans are going to use a lot of 
bewildering parliamentary maneuvers to extend that time. It's still 
not clear how many obstacles the democrats will try to throw into 
their path. The debate on the house floor tomorrow at 9:00 A.M. eastern 
time. We will be covering it live. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>