<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981217.1830.0435 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
However long this campaign against Iraq goes, the recent history of 
this U.S./Iraqi relationship suggests that most people in the country 
believe that Saddam Hussein is certainly a worthwhile target. However, 
here in Washington, there was not the traditional rally around the 
leader support that usually results while American forces are in action 
overseas. And over there at the White House, Mr. Clinton has had to 
deal with that along with everything else. sam? Peter, the president 
was expecting criticism from republicans who suspect he manipulated 
the timing of this military crisis, but he and his aides have been 
taken aback by the vehemence of some of it. And today they set out 
to try to counter it. Before a briefing from his advisers in the oval 
office, the president was asked how he would respond to such criticisms 
from Senate majority leader trent Lott and house majority leader Dick 
Armey. It's not true. That what I did was the right thing for the 
country. I don't think any serious person would believe that any president 
would do such a thing. And I don't believe any reasonably astute person 
in Washington would believe that secretary Cohen and general Shelton 
and the whole rest of the national security team would participate 
in such an action. At the U.N., chief arms inspector Richard Butler, 
bristled at the idea that his Tuesday report citing Iraqi noncooperation, 
which triggered the military action, was part of a "timing" plot. 
That report was based on the experts of UNSCOM. It danced to no one's 
tune. It was not written for anyone's purpose, including, as some 
of you have suggested, for the purposes of the United States, for 
example. no, i -- And when it comes to the time of the impeachment 
vote, the president said it would not undercut his authority of the 
house acts during the bombing. Mr. Clinton called key legislators 
to brief them on his policy, including senator Lott, who today softened 
his criticism somewhat. Some people inferred, because I questioned 
the timing, that it was related only to the vote in the House of Representatives. 
It was much, much more than that. Lott said he still questions the 
policy, but now that the action is under way, every American pulls 
together. On Capitol Hill, the chairman of the joint chiefs, the secretary 
of defense and the CIA director briefed key committees. But surprisingly, 
perhaps, members said the question of whether an impeachment debate 
might effect military operations never came up. Officials are carefully 
not making a public argument that an impeachment debate would affect 
the military operation. They clearly hope others will. Peter, White 
House aides privately concede the president does not have the votes 
to stop impeachment in this house. They would dearly love to find 
some way to be able to run out the clock of this Congress. Thanks 
very much, Sam. We'll come back to the impeachment debate in just 
a moment. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>