<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981217.1830.1021 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Bill Clinton's credibility is a big issue in this town tonight. He's 
been criticized in the last 24 hours for deciding to attack Iraq on 
the eve of the impeachment debate in the House of Representatives. 
Mr. Clinton says that no reasonable person would believe that there 
is a Connection. The truth is, a lot of serious people believe there 
is a connection. Here's ABC's John Cochran. From the start, it was 
clear republicans were not going to give this president the benefit 
of the doubt. What we question is the timing of the president. The 
day before the articles of impeachment are coming to the floor. Is 
there anybody who doesn't question that? We had to act and we had 
to act now. The president ticked off his reasons -- he had warned 
Saddam hussein in November. On Tuesday U.N. inspectors reported Saddam 
had failed to cooperate, beginning the bombings after Ramadan started 
would have outraged Muslims, that military advisers wanted an immediate 
strike to prevent Hussein from dispersing his forces. So why do so 
many republicans not believe him? My sense of his capacity to be less 
than truthful has grown over the years. Long before we ever heard 
of Monica Lewinsky, republicans were angry with Clinton because they 
felt he had lied to them, and because he had beaten them. Remember 
the budget fight that led to a partial shutdown of government? Republicans 
still believe Clinton conned them and set a trap for them. Now they 
say he will never Con them again. The trust level obviously is low 
with a lot of people with the president. And they have particular 
reasons for distrusting Clinton on Iraq. Many republicans feel he 
has never had an effective policy, and Porter goss, chairman of the 
house intelligence committee, who will hold hearings next month, wonders 
why Clinton did not consult with key republicans before the bombing. 
Suddenly, at a decisive moment to be left out in the cold on this 
is a Question I'd like to explore a little further. So, this is your 
nation's capital now, a town of full of bitter mistrust. If you had 
to imagine an atmosphere that would be more poisonous or make it more 
difficult to get things like social security reform done, it's hard 
to imagine one worse than this. And yet, go outside Washington and 
you find that a majority of americans find it inconceivable that the 
president would order air strikes to gain nothing more than a short 
delay in an inevitable impeachment vote. Regardless of domestic politics, 
yes, I think something needed to be done and this is probably the 
only thing we could do. The timing of this, I don't think can be laid 
at the president's door. It really was driven by Saddam Hussein. To 
those Americans who still trust Bill Clinton, republicans have this 
to say -- we know him better than you do. John Cochran, ABC News, 
Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>