<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981217.0605 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Kanako Yonekura converted her giant-killing skills into Asian Games 
gold Thursday, outsmarting China's Gong Zhichao to win Japan's first 
badminton title at the games in 28 years. Yonekura, ranked just 47th 
in the world, had downed Chinese first seed Ye Zhaoying on her way 
to the final and came from behind to beat Gong, the No. 2 seed, 1-11, 
11-5, 11-6 in the match for the singles crown. ``I gave everything 
of myself,'' said the unseeded pony-tailed 22-year-old, who jumped 
up and down after her win and bowed politely to her teammates in the 
stands. China salvaged gold in men's singles, however, when the fourth-seeded 
Dong Jiong downed Indonesia's Hendrawan, seeded third, 17-14, 10-15, 
15-8 for his first title of the year. China's Sun Jun and Malaysia's 
Yong Hock-Kin, the defeated semifinalists, shared bronze. China also 
won women's doubles gold, with Ge Fei and Gu Jun defeating Indonesians 
Elysa Nathanael and Deyana Lomban 12-15, 15-9, 15-11. China's Qin 
Yiyuan and Tang Hetian, and South Korea's La Kyung-min and Chung Jae-hee 
won bronze. In mixed doubles, Kim Dong-moon and La Kyung-min, the 
second-seeded pair, beat unseeded Lee Dong-soo and Yim Kyung-jin 15-6, 
15-8 for gold in an all-South Korean final. China's Zhang Jun and 
Qin Yiyuan and the first seeds, Trikus Haryanto and Minarti Timur 
of Indonesia, got bronze. Men's doubles went to defending champions 
Rexy Ronald-Mainaky and Ricky Achmad-Subagdja, the top-seeded Indonesians, 
who easily beat Pramote Teerawiwatana and Siripong Siripool of Thailand 
15-5, 15-10. Liu Yong and Yu Jinhao of China and South Korea's Lee 
Dong-soo and Yoo Yong-sung won bronze. Yonekura's gold was Japan's 
first in Asian Games badminton since 1970, when the Chinese weren't 
competing, Japanese sports officials said. Yonekura had looked totally 
outclassed in the first game, and the score had reached 10-0 in Gong's 
favor before she was able to mark a point, earning her a congratulatory 
round of applause from the packed crowd. That game convinced Yonekura 
that she needed to force longer rallies to give the quick-footed Gong 
room to make mistakes, she said. The strategy appeared to work: having 
made just seven errors in the first game, Gong made 18 in the second 
and a fatal 19 in the third. Yonekura, in contrast, made just eight 
in that deciding last game. Yonekura also said that Gong, listed 4th 
in new world rankings published Tuesday, appeared to be laboring under 
the strain of being the favorite. ``I was much more relaxed than the 
other girl because she was under pressure to win for China,'' Yonekura 
said. Lee Joo-Hyun of South Korea and Thailand's Sujitta Eakmongkolpaisarn 
took bronze. Yonekura was aided in her victory by killer drop shots 
to the left and right of the court that got more accurate as the hour-long 
match wore on. Gong, on the other hand, looked unable to figure a 
way through Yonekura's defenses. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>