<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981217.1366 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The opposition Polish Peasant's Party agreed Thursday to join forces 
with the Solidarity-led government in its battle with the president 
over a bill that would open communist-era files. The move indicates 
the governing coalition of parties linked to the movement that toppled 
communist rule almost a decade ago could score a major victory over 
President Aleksander Kwasniewski, a former communist, by mustering 
a 60 percent majority in Parliament's lower chamber to override his 
veto. The parliament was expected to take action Friday morning on 
the veto. Only the largest opposition party, the reformed communists, 
said it will support the ex-communist president. The opening of the 
files would mark a major step in a longstanding political dispute 
over how to confront Poland's bitter past. On Dec. 12, Kwasniewski 
vetoed the government-backed bill that would open secret police files 
to victims of communist-era repression, saying it would give too much 
power to the institute managing the files. He also said all Poles, 
not only victims of totalitarian regimes, should be allowed to see 
their records. Passed by parliament on Sept. 22, the bill would create 
an Institute of National Remembrance to collect communist files from 
1944-89, as well as documents of Stalinist and Nazi crimes. Besides 
making files available to victims, the institute would have power 
to launch investigations to establish those responsible for persecution 
or political murders. Trying to muster the majority needed to override 
the veto, Solidarity leaders promised the peasants to amend the law 
in order that opposition parties could have their say in appointing 
the head of the institute. Peasant leaders have insisted that the 
head of the institute be elected by a 60 percent majority in the powerful 
lower chamber, or Sejm. The law requires only a simple majority vote 
to elect the head of the institute. Solidarity's declaration that 
the law will be amended is satisfactory for us, peasant leader Jaroslaw 
Kalinowski said Thursday announcing his party's decision. Shifts in 
allegiances have occurred since the election in 1997, but were only 
expected to affect a few seats at the most. In September 1997, Solidarity 
won 201 seats in the 460-seat Sejm. Its junior government ally, the 
Freedom Union had 60, the peasants won 27. There were also six members 
of Movement for Poland's Reconstruction, and two representatives of 
the German minority. The former communists had 164 votes. (ajs-gb) 
+ 
</TEXT>
</DOC>