<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981217.1371 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
BAGHDAD, Iraq _ U.S. missiles struck the Iraqi capital Thursday night 
in a second round of airstrikes. At least a dozen explosions were 
heard in Baghdad, and a pall of smoke hung over the downtown. The 
attack came as U.S. officials were still assessing damage from the 
strike by hundreds of missiles early Thursday. In Washington, officials 
at the Pentagon, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said cruise 
missiles were fired deep into Iraq in the second attack and Navy strike 
aircraft fired laser-guided bombs along Iraq's borders. At the government's 
press office in downtown Baghdad, witnesses said one missile was seen 
flying over Thursday night. After the first explosion was heard at 
9:57 p.m. (1857gmt), anti-aircraft fire came in response and tracer 
bullets darted into the night sky. The blasts grew increasingly louder 
as they came nearer the downtown. One missile appeared to have hit 
in the vicinity of the government's Military Industrial Corporation, 
from where smoke drifted into the sky. There was no immediate word 
on casualties from the Thursday night attack. The Military Industrial 
Corporation, which is in charge of Iraq's factories, was heavily damaged 
during the 1991 Gulf War but has since been rebuilt. It is near the 
Rashid Hotel, where Iraq houses visiting dignitaries and reporters. 
Earlier in the day, sailors aboard the aircraft carrier USS Enterprise 
in the Gulf loaded thousands of pounds (kilos) of laser-guided weapons 
on warplanes in preparation for the second attack. Despite urging 
by Russia and China for a halt to the attacks, U.S. President Bill 
Clinton had suggested earlier that the strikes would continue. U.S. 
officials have said the attacks would go on for four days. The full 
extent of damage and casualties from the hundreds of missiles fired 
early Thursday was unclear. Foreign reporters in Baghdad are based 
at a press center in the Information Ministry and cannot move around 
the sprawling city of 5 million without official escorts. An Iraqi 
doctor reported five people killed and 30 wounded. Iraqi Foreign Minister 
Mohammed Saeed al-Sahhaf referred to ``heavy casualties'' in civilian 
areas of Baghdad, but declined to give specific figures. In Washington, 
Gen. Henry H. Shelton, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said 
headquarters of Iraq's special forces and military intelligence were 
leveled by sea-launched Tomahawk cruise missiles. Clinton, meeting 
in the Oval Office with top military and foreign policy advisers Thursday 
morning, expressed regret that there would inevitably be ``unintended 
casualties.'' The American president said Wednesday he ordered ``Operation 
Desert Fox'' to prevent Iraq from building the chemical, biological 
and nuclear weapons it was prohibited from having under U.N. resolutions 
after its 1990 invasion of Kuwait. Many in Baghdad went about their 
normal routines during the day. Government workers showed up at their 
offices and children at schools. Some residents lined up at gas stations 
to stock up on fuel. ``Where is this Clinton? I wish I could get my 
hands on him,'' Salam Mohammed, 34, mumbled from a bed in Baghdad's 
al-Yarmouk Hospital bed, his face bandaged and his body trembling. 
Air raid sirens sounded repeatedly in Baghdad on Thursday afternoon 
and evening. One went off as al-Sahhaf was holding a news conference 
accusing the United States and Britain of committing crimes against 
the Iraqi people. Britain had lent its support to the U.S. attack 
Thursday morning, but did not take part. Al-Sahhaf accused both nations 
of lying in claiming that U.N. chief weapons inspector Richard Butler's 
report Tuesday proved Iraq had not cooperated in the search for its 
weapons of mass destruction. ``This aggression against Iraq is a crime 
against international law, the U.N. charter, and we will hold our 
full right to hold them responsible _ the Americans and British _ 
for all the crimes they are committing against our people,'' al-Sahhaf 
told the news conference. The inspectors have the job of certifying 
Iraq has eliminated its weapons of mass destruction, a necessary step 
before the U.N. Security Council will lift damaging trade sanctions 
imposed on Iraq for its invasion of Kuwait. Al-Sahhaf said inspection 
teams had carried out visits to 427 sites since the last standoff 
over weapons inspections in mid-November and there had been only five 
instances where they didn't cooperate. Those instances _ which he 
said involved misunderstandings or occurred during the Muslim Sabbath 
_ did not justify ``a dangerous crime against the people of Iraq,'' 
he said. Saddam visited some of the targeted sites Thursday, including 
the house of his daughter Hala, Baghdad Radio reported. Hala, the 
youngest of his three daughters, was safe, but the house was demolished, 
it said. ``It was targeted and destroyed by the evil enemies in their 
latest aggression,'' the radio said. Saddam taunted the United States 
and Britain in a radio address, saying they are cowards for not fighting 
``face to face'' but ``depending on a long technological arm.'' At 
least one missile fell in an area near Saddam's biggest palace in 
Baghdad, but his whereabouts were not known at the time of the attack. 
There are 24,100 U.S. troops, 22 warships, including eight equipped 
to fire cruise missiles, 210 aircraft and the aircraft carrier USS 
Enterprise in the Gulf off the coast of southern Iraq. The forces 
are bolstered with 15 B-52 heavy bombers. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>