<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981217.0607 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Angola's UNITA rebels said Thursday they would maintain their offensive 
in the province of Bie and will bring up more firepower to try to 
crack the government's hold on the provincial capital of Kuito. ``The 
military pressure on Kuito-Bie will continue,'' the UNITA leadership 
said in a statement faxed to The Associated Press. The rebel forces 
``will improve their organization and increase their firepower'' for 
new attacks on the besieged city, the statement said. Battles have 
focused on Bie, in the central highlands, since fighting restarted 
on Dec. 4, ending a four-year peace pact in the southwestern African 
country. Kuito was reportedly quiet Thursday. Local radio station 
Eclesia reported that the army was strengthening its defensive positions 
and was preparing to receive supplies dropped by parachute. Planes 
cannot land because of anti-aircraft fire from rebels surrounding 
the city. The army said it had captured seven rebel tanks during battles 
for Kuito and had killed white mercenaries and Congolese rebels fighting 
on the rebel side. Neither side has acknowledged the collapse of the 
United Nations-brokered 1994 peace agreement designed to end a two-decade 
civil war that broke out after independence in 1975. The fighting 
was halted by a 1991 peace deal, but the agreement collapsed a year 
later after UNITA _ a Portuguese acronym for the National Union for 
the Total Independence of Angola _ refused to accept its defeat in 
the country's first elections. Brig. Simione Mucume said in an interview 
published Thursday in the state-controlled daily Jornal de Angola 
that there were 200 rebel casualties Wednesday in a 12-hour battle 
outside Kuito, which lies 500 kilometers (300 miles) southeast of 
the capital, Luanda. Unconfirmed reports said UNITA earlier this year 
bought up to 50 Ukrainian tanks via Uganda, a longtime UNITA ally. 
Angola's rebels, along with Uganda, are reportedly aiding the insurgency 
in neighboring Congo, where the Angolan army is fighting on the side 
of President Laurent Kabila. Also, the government of the Republic 
of Congo, north of Angola, has said that UNITA is supporting outlawed 
militia groups in fighting there. The Angolan army has about 400 troops 
in the Republic of Congo to support President Denis Sassou-Nguesso. 
Western diplomats said UNITA was apparently seeking to spur rebel 
military activity in those two countries as a way to prevent the return 
of Angolan army troops stationed there. The Angolan government has 
accused UNITA of employing mercenaries from Ukraine, Serbia, Israel 
and South Africa to help operate the tanks and sophisticated weaponry 
the rebels have bought over the past year with revenue from their 
illegal diamond operations in Angola. The UNITA statement said that 
due to ``an error of coordination,'' rebel forces strayed into a minefield 
Wednesday in Bie. Ten rebel soldiers, including Lt. Col. Joao Chiwisi, 
were killed and 25 were wounded by mines which also destroyed three 
rebel military vehicles and artillery. The statement also claimed 
that between Dec. 5 and Dec. 16, rebel forces shot down five government 
jet fighters and knocked out five tanks and 20 assault vehicles. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>