<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981217.0595 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Riot squads fired warning shots and tear gas when thousands of student 
demonstrators demanding democratic reform tried to storm the Parliament 
on Thursday. Many of the more than 4,000 protesters threw rocks, bottles 
and gasoline bombs at police and troops who beat them back with clubs. 
Some heavily bleeding students were carried to safety by their friends 
through clouds of tear gas. Paramedics applied first aid on the street. 
Students fought back with sticks and some soldiers hurled rocks at 
protesters. Officials at three nearby hospitals said at least 48 students 
were injured. Most were beaten or overcome by gas. The military said 
four security personnel were seriously injured. It was the second 
straight day that students have clashed with security forces in the 
Indonesian capital. And, it was the worst violence seen since Nov. 
13 when 14 people died after troops fired upon students who also tried 
to march on Parliament. One student leader, who spoke on condition 
of anonymity, said the demonstrators would protest again on Friday. 
Hours before Thursday's street battle, President B.J. Habibie warned 
his country might break up if anti-government protests escalated. 
``If the protests are not controlled it can lead to the disintegration 
of the nation,'' Habibie said at a graduation ceremony of new army 
officers. For weeks, students have taken to the streets demanding 
that Habibie force the military out of politics and put his autocratic 
predecessor, ex-President Suharto, on trial for corruption. Habibie 
has promised to open up the tightly controlled political system and 
to hold elections next year. But the students are not satisfied with 
the pace and scope of his reforms. On Wednesday police also fired 
tear gas and swung batons to disperse hundreds of rock-throwing protesters 
at the Defense Ministry, not far from the presidential palace. Religious 
groups have called on the students to end their protest campaign during 
the forthcoming holy Islamic month of Ramadan, which starts on Sunday. 
As night fell Thursday, hundreds of military reinforcements arrived 
at the Parliament and students lit bonfires on a toll road before 
dispersing. Soldiers ordered reporters and news crews to leave the 
scene. Angry students pulled down and set fire to tents set up by 
the troops near the legislature. They also burned a portrait of Suharto. 
The students had converged on the heavily guarded legislature in two 
groups. They marched to the Parliament demanding political reform 
and the release of some activists arrested by police during other 
protests this week. Outnumbered soldiers and police retreated briefly 
after the students tried to run into the parliamentary grounds. The 
protesters were repelled and scattered when officers responded with 
warning shots and tear gas. Also on Thursday, dozens of riot police 
and troops peacefully blocked about 100 students about 100 meters 
(yards) in front of the presidential palace. Habibie, who has promised 
democratic reform after decades of authoritarian rule, said that freedom 
of expression that allows protests is now guaranteed under Indonesian 
law. ``But in carrying out these rights people must also respect other 
people's rights,'' he said. Indonesia, with 202 million people, is 
the world's fourth most populous country. It has more than 300 ethnic 
groups spread over about 17,000 islands. Student protests and deadly 
riots last May also forced Suharto to quit after 32 years in power. 
At that time students occupied the parliament building for several 
days. Anger at Habibie's seven-month old government has been sharpened 
by a continuing economic crisis, which has resulted in soaring inflation, 
mass unemployment and rising poverty. Sporadic rioting and looting 
has hit some parts of the country. There has also been violence among 
the Muslim majority and the Christian minority with dozens of mosques 
and churches set afire or ransacked. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>