<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981217.1367 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Serbian police who said they were hunting for the murderers of six 
Kosovo Serbs attacked a suspected rebel-controlled village Thursday, 
reportedly killing two ethnic Albanian fighters in a day-long battle 
and arresting 34. The clash that began around dawn near Glodjane was 
one of the biggest in months in Kosovo, where a wobbly October truce 
that has held across most of the Serbian province is in increasing 
danger of breaking down altogether. International monitors who got 
near the western Kosovo village, located 10 kilometers (six miles) 
south of the city of Pec, said they heard shelling and heavy fighting. 
``It was war,'' said a European monitor who spoke on condition of 
anonymity. Police also sealed off a northwestern suburb of Pec as 
part of the sweep. An armored personnel carrier and policemen wearing 
flak jackets blocked a bridge leading to Kapesnica, and police snipers 
looked down from surrounding rooftops. ``We are in pursuit of the 
perpetrators of the shooting in the Panda bar,'' a police commander 
said, referring to the bar where the six young Serbs were slaughtered. 
He spoke on condition his name not be used. Monday's brutal shootings, 
carried out by masked gunmen who riddled the Serb bar with automatic 
weapons fire, dangerously fueled tensions in a province still reeling 
from over 1,000 deaths in months of fighting this year between Serb 
forces and separatist rebels. It was the second major clash this week, 
coming three days after Yugoslav army border guards killed 36 guerrillas 
entering from Albania. The KLA issued a statement late Thursday accusing 
Serb secret police of carrying out the barroom shootings as a pretext 
to crack down further on Kosovo Albanians. It also promised to retaliate 
against Serbian forces over the border killings. Police told the Serb-run 
Media Center in Pristina that after officers searching for suspects 
in Glodjane came under fire, police killed two people wearing camouflage 
uniforms bearing the KLA insignia and armed with assault rifles and 
mortars. They said they arrested 34 people from a ``terrorist gang'' 
in Glodjane and Kapesnica and discovered large quantities of arms, 
ammunition and KLA uniforms. The international Kosovo Verification 
Mission sent several teams to the area, and American and other officials 
held talks with Serbian police in an unsuccessful attempt to calm 
the situation. Hours later the clash was reported still going on. 
The KLA, which is fighting to drive Serb police out of Kosovo and 
break the province away from Serbia, denied involvement in Monday's 
attack. But Serbian authorities have blamed the Albanian guerrillas, 
and Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic pledged this week to arrest 
the ``terrorist bandits.'' The state-run Borba daily called Thursday, 
in a sharply worded commentary, for the withdrawal of international 
verifiers and U.S. envoys from Kosovo, saying they are ``direct instigators 
and helpers of the crimes committed by Albanian terrorists.'' Serbs 
held a protest rally concerning the killings for a second straight 
day Thursday, this time in front of the headquarters of the Organization 
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, which runs the verifying force. 
About 300 Serbs whistled derisively and booed, and demanded an immediate 
meeting with mission chief William Walker, an American diplomat, who 
said he would meet with them Friday. Complaining that the international 
verifiers are failing to ease tensions and not responding sufficiently 
to the Pec killings, they chanted, ``Put them in chains!'' The killings 
have cast further gloom over stalled diplomatic efforts to resolve 
the Serb-Albanian standoff in Kosovo, where dozens have died in sporadic 
clashes since the October agreement. Serbian authorities say they 
are willing to grant only limited autonomy for Kosovo, while most 
of the overwhelmingly Albanian-populated province want independence 
from Serbia _ the dominant republic remaining in Yugoslavia. In a 
related development Thursday, Serbia announced a media crackdown in 
Kosovo, warning the province's ethnic Albanian newspapers to cease 
support for ``terrorism'' or face legal charges under the government's 
restrictive new media law. The government information ministry said 
some Albanian-language papers have carried reports which ``directly 
instigate terrorism.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>