<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981217.1006 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With early elections looming, opposition leader Ehud Barak pushed 
social issues over security Thursday as he launched his campaign against 
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu. With U.S. President Bill Clinton's 
campaign strategist James Carville at his side, Barak said he was 
ready for elections expected in April. Netanyahu said Wednesday he 
would call Israelis to the polls early if he could not muster enough 
support for his hard-line peace policies before a no-confidence motion 
in parliament Monday. Netanyahu's coalition has been crumbling since 
he signed the latest Mideast peace accord opposed by most of his Cabinet 
because it calls for Israel to cede from war-captured West Bank land. 
Barak wants the accord implemented to the letter and has rejected 
calls of support from Netanyahu. Barak accused Netanyahu of capitulating 
to his right-wing coalition and freezing further Israeli troop withdrawals 
from the West Bank. ``We are determined to put an end to yielding 
to extremists,'' Barak said. Barak promised that he would divert millions 
of dollars being spent by the Netanyahu government on Jewish settlements 
in the West Bank to domestic concerns such as education, health and 
ending record-high unemployment. He also pledged to cut government 
grants to yeshivas or Jewish seminaries and to draft its students 
into military service like other Israelis. ``Education before settlements, 
job creation before yeshivas,'' Barak said. Grabbing voters on social 
issues and the economy worked for Carville in the 1992 and 1996 Clinton 
campaigns. In tiny Israel however, security has always been the number 
one campaign issue and candidates have ususally left social issues 
on the back burner for smaller parties to champion. Barak, a former 
commander-in-chief of Israel's armed forces also said Netanyahu's 
policies had harmed the strong strategic ties between Israel and the 
United States, its closest ally. Interviewed on Israel radio, Netanyahu 
said the peace process was on hold because of continuous violations 
of the deal by the Palestinians. Netanyahu turned the debate away 
from social issues to security, a topic which helped him win narrow 
election in 1996. He challenged Barak to reveal how he would deal 
with a possible declaration of statehood next year by Palestinian 
leader Yasser Arafat and Palestinian claims over parts of Jerusalem. 
``I expect that all the members of parliament who are concerned for 
the fate of the state, for the fate of Jerusalem, will rally to support 
me,'' Netanyahu said in an interview with Israel radio. In the 1996 
election, Netanyahu used negative campaign messages against then Prime 
Minister Shimon Peres whom he repeatedly called soft on security and 
said was willing to give away parts of Jerusalem to the Palestinians. 
Netanyahu's campaign was aided by Arthur Finkelstein, the U.S. political 
guru who helped elect many republicans to office. Barak recently employed 
Carville, pollster Stanley Greenberg and media specialist Robert Strom, 
who helped elect Clinton, British Prime Minister Tony Blair and German 
Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>