<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981217.1335 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Military Industrial Corporation, which is in charge of Iraq's 
factories, was heavily damaged during the 1991 Gulf War but has since 
been rebuilt. It is near the Rashid Hotel, where Iraq houses visiting 
dignitaries and reporters. Earlier in the day, sailors aboard the 
aircraft carrier USS Enterprise in the Gulf loaded thousands of pounds 
of laser-guided weapons on warplanes in preparation for the second 
attack. Thursday night's attack came after air raid sirens sounded 
repeatedly during the day, but until the night time attack all proved 
to be false alarms. Despite urging by Russia and China for a halt 
to the attacks, U.S. President Bill Clinton had suggested earlier 
that the strikes would continue. U.S. officials have said the attacks 
would go on for four days. The full extent of damage and casualties 
from the hundreds of missiles fired in the early morning hours Thursday 
was unclear. Foreign reporters in Baghdad are based at a press center 
in the Information Ministry and cannot move around the sprawling city 
of 5 million without official escorts. An Iraqi doctor reported five 
people killed and 30 wounded. Iraqi Foreign Minister Mohammed Saeed 
al-Sahhaf referred to ``heavy casualties'' in civilian areas of Baghdad, 
but declined to give specific figures. In Washington, Gen. Henry H. 
Shelton, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said headquarters 
of Iraq's special forces and military intelligence were leveled by 
sea-launched Tomahawk cruise missiles. Clinton, meeting in the Oval 
Office with top military and foreign policy advisers Thursday morning, 
expressed regret that there would inevitably be ``unintended casualties.'' 
The American president said Wednesday he ordered ``Operation Desert 
Fox'' to prevent Iraq from building the chemical, biological and nuclear 
weapons it was prohibited from having under U.N. resolutions after 
its 1990 invasion of Kuwait. In Baghdad Thursday, one sign of an expected 
second attack was residents lining up at gas stations to stock up 
on fuel. But many people went about their normal routines _ government 
workers showed up at their offices and children at schools _ and some 
gave a show of defiance. ``Where is this Clinton? I wish I could get 
my hands on him,'' Salam Mohammed, 34, mumbled from a bed in Baghdad's 
al-Yarmouk Hospital bed, his face bandaged and his body trembling. 
Air raid sirens sounded repeatedly in Baghdad Thursday afternoon and 
evening. One went off as al-Sahhaf was holding a news conference to 
accuse the United States and Britain of committing crimes against 
the Iraqi people. Britain had lent its support to the U.S. attack 
Thursday morning, but did not take part. Al-Sahhaf accused both nations 
of lying in claiming that the report of the U.N. chief weapons inspector 
Richard Butler proved Iraq had not cooperated in the search for its 
weapons of mass destruction. ``This aggression against Iraq is a crime 
against international law, the U.N. charter, and we will hold our 
full right to hold them responsible _ the Americans and British _ 
for all the crimes they are committing against our people,'' al-Sahhaf 
told the news conference. He said inspection teams had carried out 
visits to 427 sites since the last stand-off over weapons inspections 
in mid-November and there had been only five cases of non-cooperation. 
The inspectors have the job of certifying Iraq has eliminated its 
weapons of mass destruction, a necessary step before the U.N. Security 
Council will lift damaging trade sanctions imposed on Iraq for its 
invasion of Kuwait. Al-Sahhaf said the five sites that caused trouble 
did not justify ``a dangerous crime against the people of Iraq.'' 
One proposed visit was to an office of Iraq's ruling Baath Party, 
he said. Two others were a problem because they occurred on Friday, 
the Muslim day of worship when most people are not working, al-Sahhaf 
said. In one case, he said, the inspectors tried to visit a former 
office of a security official that had been changed into a guest house. 
He said inspectors were delayed for 45 minutes in entering the building 
as Iraqi authorities tried to explain the change. ``Do you deserve 
to be bombarded because you have delayed an inspection team 45 minutes?'' 
al-Sahhaf asked. Al-Sahhaf also listed examples of targets struck 
in the American attack, including factories and the headquarters of 
the security police and military intelligence. He said the two headquarters 
have been inspected more than once by U.N. arms experts and many of 
the factories had U.N. cameras as part of permanent monitoring of 
potential weapons sites. The minister said that instead of calling 
their campaign Operation Desert Fox, the allies should have named 
it ``Operation Villains in the Arabian Desert.'' In the Thursday morning's 
attacks, the warships fired more than 200 Tomahawk cruise missiles, 
and Navy EA-6B attack planes struck Iraqi air defense radars, Pentagon 
officials said. Saddam visited some of the targeted sites Thursday, 
including the house of his daughter Hala, Baghdad Radio reported. 
Hala, the youngest of his three daughters, was safe, but the house 
was demolished, it said. ``It was targeted and destroyed by the evil 
enemies in their latest aggression,'' the radio said. Saddam taunted 
the United States and Britain in a radio address, saying they are 
cowards for not fighting ``face to face'' but ``depending on a long 
technological arm.'' At least one missile fell in an area near Saddam's 
biggest palace in Baghdad, but his whereabouts were not known at the 
time of the attack. There are 24,100 U.S. troops, 22 warships, including 
eight equipped to fire cruise missiles, 210 aircraft and the aircraft 
carrier USS Enterprise in the Gulf off the coast of southern Iraq. 
The forces are bolstered with 15 B-52 heavy bombers. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>