<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981217.0606 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The United States fired hundreds of missiles on Iraq Thursday in attacks 
that lasted through the night, and Baghdad shook with explosions and 
anti-aircraft gunfire. Two people were killed and 30 were wounded, 
a doctor said. Russia and China called for an immediate halt to the 
attacks, but U.S. President Bill Clinton suggested the strikes may 
continue. The Iraqi capital was calm during the day in contrast to 
the air raid sirens and antiaircraft fire that punctuated the night. 
Government employees went to their offices, and children headed to 
school. Morning traffic jams clogged some streets in downtown Baghdad, 
although fewer cars were on the streets. Baghdad residents lined up 
at gas stations to stock up on fuel, a sign that more attacks were 
expected. ``We are expecting the worst of Clinton because we have 
discovered that he has no humanitarian principles,'' said Riad Mamdouh 
al-Samarai, 36, as he stood at one station. The strikes were met with 
defiance in Iraqi newspapers. ``Iraqis are pulling together to go 
forward to bury the strikes of aggression and continue their new crusade 
to teach the enemy lessons, which they will never forget,'' al-Qadissiya, 
a government newspaper, said in an editorial. Iraqi President Saddam 
Hussein visited some sites targeted by U.S. missiles Thursday, including 
his daughter's house, Baghdad Radio reported. She was safe, but the 
house was demolished. ``It was targeted and destroyed by the evil 
enemies in their latest aggression,'' the radio said. Air raid sirens 
broke the night's silence minutes before a barrage of anti-aircraft 
fire lit up the Baghdad sky at 12:49 a.m. (2149 GMT Wednesday), unleashing 
thunderous blasts like a fireworks display and shaking windows of 
buildings. At least one missile fell in an area near Saddam's biggest 
palace in Baghdad, but his whereabouts were not known. Witnesses said 
another missile landed in the neighborhood of al-Adil, about two kilometers 
(one mile) from Abu Ghraib where a sprawling military camp and radio 
relay stations are located. Neither of Iraq's television stations 
broadcast Thursday afternoon, and three of four official radio stations 
were silent. It was not clear whether they were destroyed. One stray 
missile hit an Iranian city, Tehran radio reported. Sirens were heard 
twice in Baghdad, and anti-aircraft guns were fired four times during 
the night. As the sounds of the last barrage at 5:18 a.m. (0218 GMT) 
faded, a call for prayer floated over the winter morning from a mosque 
loudspeaker. Clinton said he ordered the strikes on military and security 
targets to retaliate for Iraq's defiance of the U.N. Special Commission, 
which is responsible for eliminating the country's weapons of mass 
destruction. ``Saddam Hussein must not be allowed to threaten his 
neighbors with nuclear weapons, poison gas or biological weapons,'' 
he said. British Prime Minister Tony Blair said he authorized the 
participation of British forces. Saddam taunted the United States 
and Britain in his radio address, saying they are cowards for not 
fighting ``face to face'' but ``depending on a long technological 
arm.'' An Iraqi newspaper, Babil, suggested Clinton launched the attack 
to divert attention from his impeachment hearings. Dr. Hazim el-Nasri, 
head of the al-Yarmouk Hospital in Baghdad, said two people were killed 
and more than 30 were wounded, suffering mostly burns in the face, 
hands and legs. But the full casualty toll was not known, and there 
was no official word. ``Where is this Clinton? I wish I could get 
my hands on him,'' mumbled Salam Mohammed, 34, as he moaned on his 
hospital bed, his face bandaged and his body trembling. Unlike a previous 
U.S. attack on the city in 1993, there was no blackout this time. 
The streets were brightly lit, as were many homes when the attack 
began. The total damage from the attack could not be immediately assessed, 
although residents in an Iranian town reportedly saw thick smoke rising 
from targets across the border in Iraq. Iraqi officials took foreign 
reporters to Karada, an upscale commercial and residential neighborhood, 
where a missile had landed. The blast burst water mains in a street, 
flooding a two-kilometer (one-mile) stretch of a street. Karada is 
across the Tigris River from the Old Presidential Complex, but it 
was not clear if the palace was damaged. Foreign reporters, who are 
based at a press center in downtown Baghdad and can travel around 
the city only with a government escort, were given selective access 
to the damage. In Moscow, Russian President Boris Yeltsin denounced 
the United States and Britain for the attack and demanded an immediate 
end to the campaign, warning it could shatter regional security. At 
a Security Council meeting, the ambassadors of Russia and China, both 
sympathetic to Iraq, urged an end to the attacks. Staunch American 
allies _ Germany, Canada and even Japan _ supported the strikes. U.N. 
Secretary-General Kofi Annan called the events a ``sad day for the 
world,'' saying he did everything in his power to seek peace. But 
he didn't say whether the attacks were justified. In his speech, Clinton 
said the campaign against Iraq will be a ``strong sustained series 
of airstrikes,'' indicating that more punishing strikes are likely 
in the next few days. There are 24,100 U.S. troops, 22 warships, including 
eight equipped to fire cruise missiles, 210 aircraft and the aircraft 
carrier USS Enterprise in the Gulf off the coast of southern Iraq. 
The forces are bolstered with 15 B-52 heavy bombers. In the attacks, 
the warships fired hundreds of Tomahawk cruise missiles, and Navy 
EA-6B attack planes struck against Iraqi air defense radars, Pentagon 
officials said. The United States hopes the attacks will achieve what 
the U.N. Special Commission, or UNSCOM, says it has not been able 
to achieve in seven years of work: destroy Iraq's ability to produce 
weapons of mass destruction, specifically chemical and biological 
arms. ``Instead of the inspectors disarming Saddam, Saddam is disarming 
the inspectors,'' Clinton said. The U.N. Security Council will not 
lift economic sanctions imposed on Iraq for its 1990 invasion of Kuwait 
until the inspectors certify that Iraq is free of chemical and biological 
weapons and long-range missiles and programs to build them. Iraq accuses 
the chief inspector, Richard Butler, of being a U.S. puppet who is 
deliberately prolonging the sanctions. Butler withdrew all his weapons 
inspectors from Baghdad on Wednesday, accusing Iraq of going back 
on its promise last month to cooperate fully with UNSCOM. That promise 
had saved Iraq from an imminent U.S. attack on Nov. 14. Many of the 
U.N. humanitarian staff remained in Iraq, and their spokesman, George 
Somerwill, said they had received no instructions to evacuate. He 
said 133 U.N. staff were still in Baghdad and 233 staff had stayed 
in northern Iraq. ``We are still waiting for instructions from New 
York,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>