<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981217.0989 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The United States fired hundreds of missiles on Iraq Thursday in attacks 
that lasted through the night, and Baghdad shook with explosions and 
anti-aircraft gunfire. Two people were killed and 30 were wounded, 
a doctor said. Air raid sirens sounded again Thursday afternoon. It 
was the first time since attacks ended early Thursday morning. But 
no explosion were heard, and no antiaircraft guns were fired, either. 
Russia and China had called for a halt to the attacks, but U.S. President 
Bill Clinton suggested the strikes would continue. Earlier, a sense 
of normalcy had returned to the streets of the Iraqi capital in sharp 
contrast to the sirens and antiaircraft fire that had punctuated the 
night. Government employees went to their offices, and young children 
headed to school. Morning traffic jams clogged some of the streets 
in downtown Baghdad, although fewer cars were out than usual. Baghdad 
residents, however, lined up at gas stations to stock up on fuel, 
a sign that more attacks were expected. ``We are expecting the worst 
of Clinton because we have discovered that he has no humanitarian 
principles,'' said Riad Mamdouh al-Samarai, 36, as he stood at one 
station. On Thursday evening, Iraqi Foreign Minister Mohammed Saeed 
al-Sahhaf accused the United States and Britain of lying ``shamelessly'' 
in claiming that the report of the U.N. chief weapons inspector proved 
Iraq had not cooperated in the search for its weapons of mass destruction. 
``This aggression against Iraq is a crime against international law, 
the U.N. charter, and we will hold our full right to hold them responsible 
_ the Americans and British _ for all the crimes they are committing 
against our people,'' al-Sahhaf told a news conference. He said inspection 
teams had carried out visits to 427 sites in the past month _ since 
the last stand-off over weapons inspections _ and only five cases 
of non-cooperation arose. Al-Sahhaf characterized the five sites involved 
as minor and said they did not justify ``a dangerous crime against 
the people of Iraq.'' In one case, he said, the inspectors wanted 
to visit a former office of a security official, but it had been changed 
into a guest house. He said that as Iraqi authorities tried to explain 
it was a guest house, the inspectors were delayed from entering for 
45 minutes. ``Do you deserve to be bombarded because you have delayed 
an inspection team 45 minutes?'' al-Sahhaf asked. Al-Sahhaf also listed 
examples of targets struck in the American and British attack, including 
factories and the headquarters of the security police and military 
intelligence. He said the two headquarters have been inspected more 
than once by U.N. arms experts and many of the factories had U.N. 
cameras as part of permanent monitoring of potential weapons sites. 
The overnight missile attack caused ``heavy casualties'' in populated 
areas of Baghdad, al-Sahhaf said. But he declined to give specific 
figures. The minister said that instead of calling their campaign 
Operation Desert Fox, the allies should have named it ``Operation 
Villains in the Arabian Desert.'' The strikes were met with defiance 
in Iraqi newspapers. ``Iraqis are pulling together to go forward to 
bury the strikes of aggression and continue their new crusade to teach 
the enemy lessons, which they will never forget,'' al-Qadissiya, a 
government newspaper, said in an editorial. Iraqi President Saddam 
Hussein visited some of the targeted sites Thursday, including the 
house of his daughter Hala, Baghdad Radio reported. Hala, the youngest 
of his three daughters, was safe, but the house was demolished, it 
said. ``It was targeted and destroyed by the evil enemies in their 
latest aggression,'' the radio said. Air raid sirens had broken the 
night's silence minutes before a barrage of anti-aircraft fire lit 
up the Baghdad sky at 12:49 a.m. (2149 GMT Wednesday), unleashing 
thunderous blasts like a fireworks display and shaking windows of 
buildings. At least one missile fell in an area near Saddam's biggest 
palace in Baghdad, but his whereabouts were not known. Witnesses said 
another missile landed in the neighborhood of al-Adil, about two kilometers 
(one mile) from Abu Ghraib where a sprawling military camp and radio 
relay stations are located. Both of Iraq's television stations were 
not broadcasting Thursday afternoon, and three of four official radio 
stations were off the air. It was not clear whether they were destroyed. 
One stray missile hit an Iranian city, Tehran radio reported. Sirens 
were heard twice in Baghdad, and anti-aircraft guns were fired four 
times during the night. As the sounds of the last barrage at 5:18 
a.m. (0218 GMT) faded, a call for prayer floated over the winter morning 
from a mosque loudspeaker. Clinton said he ordered the strikes on 
military and security targets to retaliate for Iraq's defiance of 
the U.N. Special Commission, which is responsible for eliminating 
the country's weapons of mass destruction. ``Saddam Hussein must not 
be allowed to threaten his neighbors with nuclear weapons, poison 
gas or biological weapons,'' he said. British Prime Minister Tony 
Blair said he authorized the participation of British forces. Saddam 
taunted the United States and Britain in his radio address, saying 
they are cowards for not fighting ``face to face'' but ``depending 
on a long technological arm.'' Dr. Hazim el-Nasri, head of the al-Yarmouk 
Hospital in Baghdad, said two people were killed and more than 30 
were wounded, suffering mostly burns in the face, hands and legs. 
But the full casualty toll was not known, and there was no official 
word. ``Where is this Clinton? I wish I could get my hands on him,'' 
mumbled Salam Mohammed, 34, as he moaned on his hospital bed, his 
face bandaged and his body trembling. The total damage from the attack 
could not be immediately assessed, although residents in an Iranian 
town reportedly saw thick smoke rising from targets across the border 
in Iraq. Iraqi officials took foreign reporters to Karada, an upscale 
commercial and residential neighborhood, where a missile had landed. 
The blast burst water mains in a street, flooding a two-kilometer 
(one-mile) stretch of a street. Karada is across the Tigris River 
from the Old Presidential Complex, but it was not clear if the palace 
was damaged. Foreign reporters, who are based at a press center in 
downtown Baghdad and can travel around the city only with a government 
escort, were given selective access to the damage. In Moscow, Russian 
President Boris Yeltsin denounced the United States and Britain for 
the attack and demanded an immediate end to the campaign, warning 
it could shatter regional security. At a Security Council meeting, 
the ambassadors of Russia and China, both sympathetic to Iraq, urged 
an end to the attacks. Staunch American allies _ Germany, Canada and 
even Japan _ supported the strikes. U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan 
called the events a ``sad day for the world,'' saying he did everything 
in his power to seek peace. But he didn't say whether the attacks 
were justified. In his speech, Clinton said the campaign against Iraq 
will be a ``strong sustained series of airstrikes,'' indicating that 
more punishing strikes are likely in the next few days. There are 
24,100 U.S. troops, 22 warships, including eight equipped to fire 
cruise missiles, 210 aircraft and the aircraft carrier USS Enterprise 
in the Gulf off the coast of southern Iraq. The forces are bolstered 
with 15 B-52 heavy bombers. In the attacks, the warships fired hundreds 
of Tomahawk cruise missiles, and Navy EA-6B attack planes struck against 
Iraqi air defense radars, Pentagon officials said. The United States 
hopes the attacks will achieve what the U.N. Special Commission, or 
UNSCOM, says it has not been able to achieve in seven years of work: 
destroy Iraq's ability to produce weapons of mass destruction, specifically 
chemical and biological arms. The U.N. Security Council will not lift 
economic sanctions imposed on Iraq for its 1990 invasion of Kuwait 
until the inspectors certify that Iraq is free of chemical and biological 
weapons and long-range missiles and programs to build them. The chief 
inspector, Richard Butler, withdrew all his weapons inspectors from 
Baghdad on Wednesday, accusing Iraq of going back on its promise last 
month to cooperate fully with UNSCOM. That promise had saved Iraq 
from an imminent U.S. attack on Nov. 14. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>