<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981217.0265 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Thousands of student demonstrators threw rocks and bottles at troops 
guarding the Parliament on Thursday after Indonesia's president warned 
that his country might break up if anti-government protests escalate. 
``If the protests are not be controlled it can lead to the disintegration 
of the nation,'' said President B.J. Habibie at a graduation ceremony 
of new army officers. Hours after he spoke as many as 3,000 students 
in two groups converged on the heavily guarded legislature. Many carried 
sticks but were stopped from entering by police and troops. The military 
said several soldiers were injured when protesters threw rocks. Some 
tore down tents used by troops and blocked two major roads. Earlier, 
dozens of riot police and troops peacefully blocked about 100 students 
about 100 meters (yards) in front of the presidential palace. On Wednesday 
police fired tear gas and swung batons to disperse hundreds of rock-throwing 
protesters at the Defense Ministry, not far from the palace. Habibie, 
who has promised democratic reform after decades of authoritarian 
rule, said that freedom of expression that allows protests is now 
guaranteed under Indonesian law. ``But in carrying out these rights 
people must also respect other people's rights,'' he said. Indonesia, 
with 202 million people, is the world's fourth most populous country. 
It has more than 300 ethnic groups spread over about 17,000 islands. 
For weeks, students have been holding street protests demanding that 
Habibie force the military out of politics and put his autocratic 
predecessor, ex-President Suharto, on trial for corruption. The protesters 
and security forces have clashed on several occasions. On Nov. 13, 
security forces shot dead nine student protesters when thousands tried 
to march on Parliament. On Thursday about 200 Islamic and pro-Habibie 
supporters rallied near Jakarta's National Monument and called on 
anti-government students to end their protests during Ramadan, the 
Muslim holy month, which starts on Sunday. Student protests and deadly 
riots last May also forced Suharto to quit after 32 years in power. 
Habibie has promised to open up the tightly controlled political system 
and to hold elections next year. But the students are not satisfied 
and stage demonstrations almost daily in Jakarta and other cities. 
Anger at Habibie's seven-month old government has been sharpened by 
a continuing economic crisis, which has resulted in soaring inflation, 
mass unemployment and rising poverty. Sporadic rioting and looting 
have hit some parts of the country. There has also been violence among 
the Muslim majority and the Christian minority with dozens of mosques 
and churches set afire or ransacked. On Wednesday mobs rioted and 
attacked Chinese-owned shops in Samarinda on the island of Borneo. 
To counter the threat of rising violence and lawlessness ahead of 
next year's elections, the government plans to establish a civilian 
militia to help the police and military. Some opposition groups and 
human rights activists fear the group, to consist of as many as 40,000 
unemployed young men, will be used to intimidate government opponents. 
Meanwhile a senior Cabinet minister claimed that Habibie had moved 
too fast to deliver democratic reform. Education Minister Juwono Sudarsono 
said Indonesia had now become a ``frightening society.'' ``People 
are hungry and they take tend to take the law into their own hands,'' 
he told a group of foreign business people on Wednesday. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>