<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981217.0302 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Riot squads fired warning shots and tear gas when thousands of student 
demonstrators demanding democratic reform tried to storm the Parliament 
on Thursday. The protesters threw rocks and bottles at troops who 
pushed beat them back with clubs. Soldiers ordered reporters and news 
crews to leave the scene. It was the second straight day that students 
have clashed with security forces in the Indonesian capital. Hours 
earlier President B.J. Habibie warned his country might break up if 
anti-government protests continued to escalate. ``If the protests 
are not be controlled it can lead to the disintegration of the nation,'' 
Habibie said at a graduation ceremony of new army officers. More than 
3,000 students in two groups converged on the heavily guarded legislature. 
Many of them carried sticks. They marched to the Parliament demanding 
political reform and the release of some activists arrested by police 
this week. Dozens of students and some troops were injured in the 
clash. Outnumbered soldiers retreated briefly after the students tried 
to run into the parliamentary grounds. The protesters scattered when 
the troops responded with warning shots and tear gas. Some heavily 
bleeding students were carried to safety by their friends through 
clouds of tear gas. The students earlier tore down tents used by troops 
and blocked two major roads. Also on Thursday, dozens of riot police 
and troops peacefully blocked about 100 students about 100 meters 
(yards) in front of the presidential palace. On Wednesday police fired 
tear gas and swung batons to disperse hundreds of rock-throwing protesters 
at the Defense Ministry, not far from the palace. On Nov. 13, security 
forces shot dead nine student protesters when thousands tried to march 
on Parliament. Habibie, who has promised democratic reform after decades 
of authoritarian rule, said that freedom of expression that allows 
protests is now guaranteed under Indonesian law. ``But in carrying 
out these rights people must also respect other people's rights,'' 
he said. Indonesia, with 202 million people, is the world's fourth 
most populous country. It has more than 300 ethnic groups spread over 
about 17,000 islands. For weeks, students have been holding street 
protests demanding that Habibie force the military out of politics 
and put his autocratic predecessor, ex-President Suharto, on trial 
for corruption. On Thursday about 200 Islamic and pro-Habibie supporters 
rallied near Jakarta's National Monument and called on anti-government 
students to end their protests during Ramadan, the Muslim holy month, 
which starts on Sunday. Student protests and deadly riots last May 
also forced Suharto to quit after 32 years in power. At that time 
students occupied the parliament building for several days. Habibie 
has promised to open up the tightly controlled political system and 
to hold elections next year. But the students are not satisfied and 
stage demonstrations almost daily in Jakarta and other cities. Anger 
at Habibie's seven-month old government has been sharpened by a continuing 
economic crisis, which has resulted in soaring inflation, mass unemployment 
and rising poverty. Sporadic rioting and looting has hit some parts 
of the country. There has also been violence among the Muslim majority 
and the Christian minority with dozens of mosques and churches set 
afire or ransacked. On Wednesday mobs rioted and attacked Chinese-owned 
shops in Samarinda on the island of Borneo. At the same time hundreds 
of farmers clashed with troops during a protest over the ownership 
of a plantation near Medan on the island of Sumatra. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>