<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981217.0130.0120 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The "desert fox" maneuver diverted much of America's attention away 
from the cross fire on Capitol Hill surrounding impeachment. That's 
left some people skeptical about the timing of the operation. Wolf 
Blitzer reports, President Clinton is trying to allay those concerns. 
President Clinton gave the final order to attack Iraq on the eve of 
an almost certain vote to impeach him. But he told the nation that 
wasn't a factor. Saddam Hussein and the other enemies of peace may 
have thought that the serious debate currently before the House of 
Representatives would distract americans or weaken our resolve to 
face them down. But once more, the United States has proven that although 
we are never eager to use force, when we must act in America's vital 
interests, we will do so. Mr. Clinton said he had to act now before 
the Muslim holy month ramadan begins this weekend to avoid offending 
Muslim allies. The president repeatedly stressed his national security 
advisers, including the military, unanimously recommended quick action 
to catch Iraq off guard before Saddam Hussein could protect his military 
assets. And it came just a day after chief U.N. weapons inspector 
Richard Butler reported Saddam Hussein had broken his latest promise 
to comply with inspections made when Mr. Clinton aborted similar strikes 
in November. This situation presents a clear and present danger to 
the stability of the persian gulf and the safety of people everywhere. 
The international community gave Saddam one last chance to resume 
cooperation with the weapons inspectors. Saddam has failed to seize 
the chance. Three key U.N. security council members -- France, Russia 
and china objected. Mr. Clinton did get military and political support 
from British prime minister Tony Blair. There is no realistic alternative 
to military force. We are taking this military action with real regret 
but also with real determination. We have exhausted all other avenues. 
But critics say the entire mission is not well thought out. The president 
needs to understand, and I thought we had gotten to this point, that 
the problem in Iraq is Saddam Hussein. Bombing buildings does not 
get it. Bringing Saddam Hussein to justice and dismantling his regime 
is what this is about. Mr. Clinton promised a long-term strategy of 
sustained attacks to eliminate the threat from Saddam Hussein's weapons 
of mass destruction. If we turn our backs on his defiance, the credibility 
of U.S. power as a Check against Saddam will be destroyed. U.S. officials 
say a wild card here is that no one knows if saddam Hussein will escalate 
the fight by lashing out against his neighbors. And still another 
wild card -- the impeachment threat and how that might affect this 
latest showdown. That was wolf Blitzer at the White House in Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>