<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981217.0130.1502 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Many celebrities are publicly denouncing impeachment of President 
Clinton. Jill Brooke explains why. At rallies around the U.S., celebrities 
gathered to oppose the impeachment of President Clinton. 70% of American 
people, the high 60s, think Clinton shouldn't be impeached. I do not 
believe that the framers of the constitution would have considered 
this particular situation a high crime and misdemeanor. And celebrities 
are also speaking out on shows like "the view." It's a coup D'etat. 
It's a real coup, only it's without the guns, it's without the military 
in the street. It's a version of what they do in those other countries 
that you read about and say, "oh, that would never happen here." It's 
happening. And they're speaking out at movie events. It's not a high 
crime or a misdemeanor. He was trapped into lying about a little fling 
that he had. I don't think he should be, anybody should be impeached 
over that. It's unfortunate that politicians have gotten so out of 
touch with what people care about. It's no secret why the artistic 
community is so supportive of clinton and the democratic party. Our 
freedom of speech, and our freedom of expression, and the national 
endowment of the arts and things like that that Hollywood needs Washington 
for, and I think that's why we've worked together. Many in Hollywood 
believe that Ken Starr's investigation of the president has been, 
as critics have called it, "sexual McCarthyism." And this is a term 
that hits home in Hollywood, because artists were high-profile targets 
during the McCarthy era. That's why many are worried about the impeachment's 
implications. My father, oddly enough, sees the link, he lived through 
both situations. And he said, "I've never seen this much hate since 
that time." And I just thought that was very perceptive. And it's 
something you don't want to see in the Senate. That sort of hate, 
a nasty feeling, and for the entire country. Years and years of organization 
from religious right fanatics throughout this country. Now it's come 
home to roost. Nobody stopped McCarthy either. At some point, people 
are going to say, "this is enough." This is not to say that everyone 
in Hollywood supports Clinton. I loathe liars. I loathe them. Liars 
-- every single crime that is committed between people, starts with 
lying. The repercussions are so far reaching if he walks. And some 
welcome a compromise. I think he shouldn't be impeached, he should 
be censured. While Hollywood has been viewed as more liberal than 
other pockets of the country, many say it doesn't apply to this issue. 
I'm not so sure that they're that different than the public which, 
I guess, is two-thirds not in favor of impeachment. While the public 
awaits whether Congress votes to impeach the president, many in Hollywood 
have already cast their votes in support of bill Clinton. Jill Brooke, 
"CNN Entertainment News," New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>