<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981217.1130.0256 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Americans have varied reactions to the bombing in Iraq. Jeff flock 
is joining us to tell us what the folks there have to say about the 
latest military action in the gulf. Jeff, what are are you hearing? 
We're trying to get a sense what people think about this confluence 
of events. We're at Lou mitchells where a lot of people come early 
to read the headlines and get their take on the world's events. Many 
events overnight, do you support the president? Do you support the 
attack? I support the president but I don't support the attack. I 
think we bombed Iraq before. Nothing happened. I wouldn't say nothing 
happened but it didn't do what we intended for it to do and here we 
are again doing the same thing. So I'm not sure what it is going to 
accomplish this time. On the other side of the table, perhaps support 
of the attack and not the president. What do you think, sir in. I 
support the attack. I have a little difficulty believing the president 
of the United States on the timing issue. Until watching him last 
night, although I probably wanted to believe him, I jucht have this 
big question of whether or not he tells the complete truth. Do you 
have a problem, sir, with what the president says based on what's 
happening in his personal life? I think the timing is very suspect. 
I believe that the military action was needed. why? Right now, this 
very moment, I don't know. That's the question I have. I know they've 
tried all kinds of diplomatic channels, they've tried the United Nations, 
it hasn't worked. Something needed to be done but I don't know if 
the timing was right. Before we get away, impeachment or removal, 
yes or no? No to impeachment and no to removal. No and no. I think 
we have more important things to do in this country than waste time 
in the impeachment. Lart word? No on impeachment but I would like 
him to think about resigning. There you have it from Chicago, people 
that digested the headlines overnight and they'll continue to watch 
it and so will we. I'm Jeff flock, CNN, reporting live from Chicago. 
Jeff, all the way around table there no on impeachment. Have you been 
hearing this all morning? I'm sorry, I didn't get that Catherine? 
I said a -- I know it is loud there so I'll speak loudly for you. 
Have you been hearing like from these people all morning that no all 
the way around the table on impeachment? People's attitude about impeachment, 
I think most of the people we've talked to have been able to separate 
the two issues out, feels that the American people are intelligent 
enough to separate the two issues and focus on them individually. 
That seems to be the sense here. All right, thank you, Jeff flock 
reporting to us live from Chicago. Thank you, Jeff. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>