<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981217.2100.1279 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Congressman Rothman, I don't have to tell you that starting tomorrow 
morning on drive time, on talk radio across the country, and the talk 
is already starting here in Washington, talk about a mean season, 
Bob Barr speaks to a group in the American south, somebody floats 
out the fact that it was a white sue premsi group, Bob Livingston's 
problems are now public. There are going to be callers from all over 
the country saying this White House will stop at nothing to save the 
president from what is all but inevitable in the house tomorrow. And 
how do you defend that? First of all, no one's proven that it's coming 
from the White House. Let's keep our eye on the ball. We've got servicemen 
and women, 20,000 of them, in the gulf, ready to lay down their lives 
in what most Americans believe, 75%, are justified actions to go against 
Saddam Hussein. They believe in that military effort that the president 
has begun. We ought to keep our eye on the welfare and safety of our 
young people in the Persian gulf, and we also ought to keep our eye 
on the constitution of the United States, which is about to be shredded 
with partisan sheers by those with such a loathing of the president 
of the United States that they would dumb down and reduce the impeachment 
standard that's in the constitution that was only supposed to be used 
to remove a president who was so awful and such a tyrant that it would 
be a threat to the republic. Could I -- Congresswoman fowler, fair 
point. Why can't the republican-controlled house give it a rest long 
enough to let the air strikes stop in the Iraq before taking up the 
articles of impeachment? Himself when asked the question today would 
it undermine his ability to conduct this tomorrow, he said it wouldn't 
have an impact. The secretary of defense made it clear that we are 
moving forward with our constitutional duty to move forward. We are 
doing nothing to undermine his ability to conduct these operations. 
We took the time today, as we should have, to express our unanimous, 
almost, support for our young men and women in harm's way doing the 
good job they always do when called upon by us. And that we should 
do, support fully our troops. But democracy does work, and that the 
message we're sending tomorrow. Saddam Hussein doesn't pull our chain 
and stop our democratic processes in this country. We have a constitutional 
duty to go forward tomorrow. I disagree with Mr. Rothman. If we don't 
proceed with the impeachment proceedings, that is the dumbing down, 
because it's sending a message we have lowered the bar. So, we have 
to move forward and determine before the house if there is sufficient 
cause to send this to the Senate, did this president lie under oath 
to a grand jury, did he obstruct justice and abuse his power. Those 
are the serious and heavy questions we'll be taking up morrow. Congressman 
Steve Rothman, congresswoman llie fowler, thank you for joins us tonight. 
Thank you. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>