<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981217.2100.1090 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Joining us tonight for congressional reaction to what is a breaking 
story about the speaker-elect, democratic congressman Steve Rothman, 
sits on both international relations and Judiciary committees. Representative 
Tillie fowler is vice chair of the republican conference. She is the 
senior women on the international senior committee. Congresswoman 
fowler, you were in the meeting tonight where speaker-elect livingston 
laid out his case. What about his remarks can you relate to us, and 
what about the support from your group? Well, Brian, the speaker-elect 
has the full confidence, the trust, and support of every member of 
the republican conference. That was very evident tonight. We are behind 
him 100% and look forward to him leading the U.S. House of Representatives 
in the 106th Congress. Is there a glass house issue now in the House 
of Representatives? After all, he's going to assist in presiding tomorrow 
over a case, the crux of which, according to many, is sex, that will 
lead to the first approval, it looks like, of articles of impeachment 
since 1868. No, Brian. There is no similarity at all. This issue is 
a personal issue between Bob and Bonnie Livingston. It's a matter 
between them. What we have to address tomorrow is our constitutional 
duty to determine whether the president of the United States willfully 
and intentionally lied, committed perjury to a grand jury, did he 
obstruct justice, and abuse the powers of his office. Those are the 
issues before the House of Representatives. Congressman Rothman? yes. 
Go ahead. There's a lot of material there. What we have to -- sure. 
What we have to really think about are not the unfortunate discle 
sures of speaker-elect Livingston's private life. What we should be 
concerned about is the fact that the republican majority of Congress 
has decided on the second day of military action to make an effort 
to remove the commander-in-chief of those same military forces. Now, 
the impeachment movement is not going away. The republican majority 
will still have the numbers it needs to impeach the president if they 
want to, and those numbers will prevail for weeks and weeks to come. 
The fact that they couldn't delay this impeachment debate and vote 
for another day or two while our soldiers are in the field is disgraceful 
and unacceptable. And the other thing we ought to be focusing on other 
than people's sex lives is the permanent damage that is going to be 
done to the United States constitution by the dumbing down, if you 
will, the reducing of the impeachment standard in the constitution, 
which is treason, bribery, and other high crimes and misdemeanors 
against the state. An impeachment standard not met under any's reasonable 
definition of those words, not by clear and convincing evidence. And 
that is going to be a permanent scar on our constitution and will 
affect future presidents if they have to take policies that the party 
controlling the Congress disagrees with wondering will that party 
spend another $40 million in four years investigating them. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>