<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981217.2100.0531 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Now we want to get the latest from the Pentagon. We'vlearned something 
about this latest volley of cruise missiles. NBC news Pentagon correspondent 
Jim Miklaszewski has been on the job all day. Well, Brian, if today's 
air strikes follow what has become pretty much of a Script over the 
last couple of days, as soon as the sun starts to rise, you can -- 
you can bet that the air strikes probably will be called off at least 
for the night. And one of the reasons, of course, is that U.S. military 
officials under the direction of President Clinton, actually, are 
trying to hold down, minimize the possibility of civilian casualties. 
So, they have decided that the best way to conduct these air strikes 
is by using -- by conducting them at night, when there would be fewer 
people on the street and fewer possible casualties. But, yo know, 
already, Brian, over this past two days, this is the largest and longest 
U.S. military campaign in Iraq since the gulf war. And it's not over 
yet. In the Persian gulf today, Navy warplanes take off from the deck 
of the carrier enterprise. For bombing runs against anti-aircraft 
sites in southern Iraq. Day two of "operation desert fox." But today's 
most powerful punch was delivered by American B-52s. Cruise missiles 
with 2,000-pound warheads launched from B-52's pounded downtown Baghdad. 
The targets, Saddam Hussein's intelligence service and his military 
industrial commission, both vital to Iraq's production and concealment 
of biological and chemical weapons. In two days, more than 300 cruise 
missiles have been launched against similar targets in Iraq. At the 
Pentagon today, the military was eager to show off the aftermath. 
In this case, this building right here, you'll notice down here there's 
nothing left but rubble. Surveillance photos before and after of Iraq's 
military intelligence. And buildings destroyed H. joint chiefs general 
Hugh Shelton says those troops are the keeper of Saddam's deadly weapons. 
These are the units that, in fact, guard the wmd. But these same kinds 
of targets, special guards, and military facilities also provide Saddam 
Hussein critical protection, keep him in power. Secretary of defense 
William Cohen denies Saddam is the target. The goal is to decrease 
and diminish his capacity to threaten his neighbors. But if Saddam 
is not the target and he stays in power and actually holds on to much 
of his power base there in Iraq, it's going to be pretty difficult, 
i think, for the administration to be able to tell us exactly how 
it is that these current air strikes achieve their goal. Brian? Jim 
Miklaszewski at the Pentagon tonight. And it's important to repeat 
that the number of cruise missiles fired off by now almost approaches 
that of the gulf war in all. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>