<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981217.2100.2722 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A lot of good-byes going on in the American south tonight. That is 
a picture of what's happening. The troops are leaving the Hunter army 
airfield near is a vana, Georgia, tonight, boarding a wide-bodied 
jet on their way to the gulf. With us tonight, the man who led forces 
against Iraq during 1991, general norman Schwarzkopf. General, we're 
about to enter dawn in Baghdad in Iraq proper. Why is it that we have 
not seen any daylight strikes? Is it just the avoidance of collateral 
damage, civilian casualties, or is it also because that's most of 
the time they're taking surveillance photos? I think it's a combination. 
They're trying to avoid civilian casualties, and they know most civilians 
are inside and not in the streets. That makes it simpler. I think 
the other thing, of course, is the fact that it's easier to see the 
cruise missiles during th daylight hours, and they can be shot down 
more easily during the D. and finally, that's when we assess the damage 
and decide what we have to do next. So, a rather rudimentary anti-aircraft 
gun, let's say the one right near our camera position on the ministry 
of information, could conceivably shoot down or alter the path or 
speed of one of these cruise missiles? Yeah. If it gets a direct hit, 
knock off some of the fins or something like that, that could affect 
the traject -- trajectory of the missile. But that's tough to do with 
that kind of missile because there's lead to it. That's not an easy 
task with that weapon. Vietnam, how would this weapon have changed 
the American conflict in southeast Asia? Well, that's a good question. 
The first thing would have been the willingness to use it. For a long 
time, we did not bomb Hanoi, and when we did, it was piecemeal escalation. 
When we went in with rolling thunder, that brought them to the conference 
table and we came up with a cease-fire. So, had those weapons been 
used En masse earlier in the war, it could have made a significant 
difference. You mentioned rolling thunder. That was the B-52. Would 
you have guessed that here we'd be sitting in 1998 talking about this 
sophisticated weapon, the cruise missiles, but the method of delivery, 
tonight, at least, has been airborne B-52 bombers? I was nervous about 
being inside the thing when I was back years ago. It's still around 
and doing a great job. No American casualties, no downed aircraft, 
very few aircraft, comparatively in this, though we have fired off 
apparently a number of cruise missiles approaching all that we used 
in the gulf war. That's fairly significant, is it not? Yeah. I think 
so. There was a deaf decision made very early on in the gulf war to 
stop using cruise missiles and using other munitions, based on the 
expense of the cruise missile and the limited arsenal and the fact 
we could do damage with other weaponry. So, that may account for the 
difference. General, personal opinion. In a few hours, they start 
debating the impeachment articles against the president. Should that 
be going on while forces are in the gulf? I don't think it makes a 
difference to the people in the gulf. They're just like the rest of 
the American people. They have their opinion one way or the other. 
As far as their actions, it'll be totally irrellvavent. -- Irrelevant. 
General, thank you very much. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>