<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981217.2100.0717 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It was until mid evening here tonight strange enough in Washington 
with preparations under way for impeachment proceedings tomorrow and 
with cruise missile strikes going on in Iraq. But about mid evening, 
the newly elected leader of the opposition party announced he, too, 
has had adulterous affairs. We get more on that from Claire Shipman. 
Just before he was briefed on the damage in Iraq by his military and 
national security team, the president forcefully denied that there 
was any political motive behind his decision to target Iraq. And I 
don't believe any reasonably astute person in Washington would believe 
that secretary Cohen and general Shelton and the whole rest of the 
national security team would participate in such an action. And at 
the United Nations, the chief weapons inspector insisted his blistering 
report on the Iraqi's refal to cooperate had not been timed to help 
the president. It was not written for anyone's purposes, including 
-- as some of to you have suggested -- for the purposes of the United 
States. And the White House can take some comfort in an NBC news overnight 
poll, which shows that 75% of Americans approve of President Clinton's 
decision to order military strikes. When asked whether the military 
action was timed to delay the impeachment vote, 59% said no, 27% said 
yes. But the president's political aides know that these scenes won't 
change the outcome of the impeachment VO. They openly admit "it's 
a lost cause, and lobbying efforts are all but dead." Privately, aides 
are furious that republicans would consider impeaching the president 
in the middle of a military campaign, but publicly, they're avoiding 
that debate. And, Brian, something else that the White House very 
much wants to avoid, the report you were talking about earlier, the 
news that the incoming speaker of the house, Bob Livingston, has admitted 
to his colleagues tonight that he had extramarital affairs. He also 
put it in a letter. We were told that the news was on the verge of 
becoming public and that he made the choice. He wanted to inform his 
colleagues. We were also told earlier this evening that he intended, 
in effect, to offer his resignation. It wasn't expected that that 
would be expected. Apparently he said, my fate is in your hands, and 
they gave him a standing ovation. And that, at least from the republican 
point of view, appears to be that. Of course, the question remains 
what all this will -- what all this will mean tomorrow. Claire, one 
network commentator was saying someone connected with the clinton 
White House was talking about this weeks ago. There are some trying 
to connect this politically. I don't get a sense at this point that 
there is any connection to the White House. And I think certainly 
the White House is not saying anything about this, and they're very 
concerned that -- that they not be perceived as being involved in 
this in any way. The reports generally are that another publication 
was going to publish this story and that essentially it got out and 
Livingston made the decision to go public with it before that story 
was published. At this point, there's no evidence to suggest that 
this was -- was any part of opposition research on the part of the 
White House. Claire Shipman on the north lawn of the White House. 
Claire, thanks. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>