<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981217.2100.2040 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This more now on our top story tonight. As we continue to watch the 
situation in Baghdad, a second wave, really, of the U.S.-British air 
attacks under way in Iraq, including some targets close to where journalists 
are in the city of Baghdad. Here is how day two unfolded as broadcast 
here on NBC news. Baghdad today is an absolutely eerie place. People 
are starting to Venture out of doors, starting to pick up the pieces 
as if nothing happened. In the early morning hours, the official Iraqi 
minders here took us out to see what they wanted us to see, some of 
the damage. They took us to hospitals where there were wounded. They 
claimed 45 killed, 200 wounded in last night's attack on Baghdad. 
No way to confirm it indepently. I pledge allegiance to the flag of 
the United States of America and to the republic for which it stands, 
one nation, under God, indivisible, with liberty, and justice for 
all. Please be seated. Whereas Congress and the American people have 
the greatest pride in the men and women of the United States armed 
forces and strongly support them in their efforts, now therefore be 
it resolved by the House of Representatives that, A, the Congress 
unequivocally supports the men and women of our armed forces bhor 
carrying out their missions with professionalism, dedication, pry 
trotism, and courage. The republicans are questioning the timing, 
suggesting this was a Diversionary tactic to avoid an impeachment 
vote on the house floor. What do you say to those critics? That it's 
not true, that what I did was the right thing for the country. I don't 
think any serious person would believe that any president would do 
such a thing, and I don't believe any reasonably astute person in 
washington would believe that secretary Cohen and general Shelton 
and the whole reast of the national security team would participate 
in such an action. This was the right thing for the country. The way 
this is broken down, we have an area one, which shows the pre-strike 
photo. This happens to be the building right here, along with one 
of the ancillary buildings shown over in this area that was also targeted. 
Down in this photo, where you -- or this photo up here, where you 
don't see anything but rubble is what formerly was this building. 
And where you see in this case this building right here, you'll notice 
down here there's nothing left but rubble. Big explosion. Huge explosion. 
Bright light in the sky. Artillery starting -- very, very loud. Flashing 
white lights, Tom. I don't know whether you can hear me because the 
noise is so loud. Did you see that one? A huge explosion right next 
to us, right in front of us over there. There's another one. Another 
blast. Another blast. Another massive blast. Tom baer, what's going 
on? Major -- outside the hotel. A very big explosion. Knocking the 
windows and rattling everything. Now anti-aircraft fire everywhere. 
oh, no! tom? We are going to hope for the best for our friend, Tom 
baer, who was describing an explosion outside his position at the 
hotel. Bare pair Bare has been through a lot. He's seen a lot of this 
before, and we are just going to hope that we find out we have only 
lost communications with Tom. We believe we've got to also look at 
how Saddam Hussein will perceive the idea and the information that, 
while he is under physical attack by the United States and its people, 
we are having a debate in our House of Representatives to remove the 
commander-in-chief from his office. We can't anticipate what Saddam 
Hussein will do. And yet we cannot refrain from advancing the people's 
business under this critical issue. This is an issue of impeachment 
which has not been before this body in 120 years, if I recall correctly. 
Excuse me. With one exception. That was Richard Nixon. When confronted 
with the issue, Bob Livingston admitted with great Candor his infidelity 
from years before and was prepared to accept the consequences. Think 
a lot of people would breathe a little easier with this White House 
if the president would speak as candidly with them and be prepared 
to accept the consequences for Candor. The anti-aircraft fire -- anti-aircraft 
guns just above my head are going off. They're sending up the same 
red pattern flare. So far, we've heard several thuds, which we would 
assume to be cruise missiles landing in this neighborhood. Now there's 
silence, so I can hear you, and hopefully you can hear me. This is 
the second wave as I said earlier tonight. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>