<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981217.0418 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In 1991, the American-led attack on Iraq was perceived the world round 
as a wondrous demonstration of military skill. Almost eight years 
later, with Saddam Hussein unbowed, unrepentant and untamed, the high-tech 
bombings are generating far more questions than awe. Even setting 
aside the unavoidable questions about the link between the bombings 
and impeachment, foreign policy experts are asking why the administration 
has so forcefully changed its mind, after long arguing that dislodging 
Saddam could create a dangerous vacuum, or that serious bombing would 
endanger the task of UNSCOM, the U.N. inspectors charged with ending 
Iraq's development of weapons of mass destruction. And the experts 
are asking exactly how the administration intends to control Iraq's 
arms programs now that the inspectors have been withdrawn, and what 
it will do about Saddam and his ambitions should he remain in power. 
``I'm not from the school that says everyone is a liar, but they have 
not convinced me, nor people like me who follow this, why this makes 
sense now, and why it didn't before,'' said Leslie Gelb, president 
of the Council on Foreign Relations in New York and a former columnist 
for The New York Times. ``They haven't convinced me that they can 
find or destroy the places where Saddam keeps the chemical and biological 
stuff, or that he can't rebuild it rather quickly. They haven't convinced 
me that this is better than having UNSCOM there.'' Indeed, military 
officials said Thursday that they had deliberately avoided bombing 
of suspected biological and chemical weapons plants for fear of unleashing 
deadly poisons. ``I'm very happy to hit Saddam over the head,'' Gelb 
added. ``But I want to know the answers.'' Other experts argued that 
the new attacks represent not so much a change in policy as the latest 
reaction to a most formidable foreign-policy puzzle since the American-led 
alliance stopped short of toppling Saddam in 1991. Since then, Saddam 
has succeeded in surviving, and in defying every turn of the economic 
and military screws, all the while strengthening his hold on power. 
``Iraq policy may not be the most important one,'' said Phebe Marr, 
a fellow at the Wilson Center for International Scholars in Washington. 
``Russia, China, the world economy are all much more important, but 
Iraq poses some incredibly difficult policy problems. ``There are 
no good answers in Iraq, only ones that are less good. At every turn 
we have to plot what course to take now. If we could get UNSCOM back 
in and could compel Saddam to comply, we'd all feel better. But that 
means UNSCOM has to be doing its job.'' This week's attack was ordered 
after Richard Butler, the chief inspector, produced a scathing report 
that Iraq had failed to give the cooperation it had promised in November. 
It was that promise that prompted President Clinton to abort the attack 
planned then. That pledge also insured that this time, the ante would 
have to be raised. With every successful defiance of international 
threats, force or demands, Saddam has insured that the next action 
would have to be tougher. Now at last the administration has declared 
that one of its goals is to bring about his downfall. The change is 
critical. However unpopular Saddam is, ousting him was never officially 
adopted as a goal by the Security Council, and there was a sense in 
the State Department and among some experts outside government that 
without a viable alternative, his fall would create a chaotic power 
vacuum that could destabilize the Mideast. Indeed, that argument stands. 
There is no indication that the fractured Iraqi opposition in exile 
is in any better shape today, nor that the Clinton administration 
has been actively preparing it to take power. Ahmed Chalabi, leader 
of the main Iraqi opposition group, the Iraqi National Congress, said 
he had met three times over the past month with Martin Indyk, the 
assistant secretary of state for Near East affairs. But Chalabi also 
said he learned about the current attacks only five hours before they 
began. Nonetheless, the administration has evidently concluded that 
whatever the consequences, they cannot be worse than Saddam. This 
time, as Secretary of State Madeleine Albright declared Thursday, 
``we have come to the determination that the Iraqi people would benefit 
if they had a government that really represented them.'' ``We know 
that this is something that cannot be done overnight,'' she said, 
``and we are working with the various opposition groups on a longer-range 
way of trying to help them help themselves to have a regime that represents 
them.'' Given the history of the past eight years, however, the question 
is whether air attacks, however severe, will pry Saddam loose without 
an operation on the ground, one that would inevitably entail casualties. 
``Saddam's a disaster, but will this get rid of him?'' asked William 
Quandt, a former National Security Council official under Presidents 
Nixon and Carter. ``We know what we want, but we're not prepared to 
pay the price to do it. Bombing is the compromise choice that makes 
us feel better, that we're somehow punishing Iraq, though not necessarily 
Saddam, and we won't take any significant risks of casualties ourselves.'' 
Politically, the bombings and the call for Saddam's overthrow already 
represent a major risk. In the past, the Arabs have angrily contrasted 
the pressures on Saddam to what they perceive as lack of pressures 
on Israel to live by its obligations. ``This may feed the feeling, 
even unfairly, among Arabs _ and Europeans, too _ that this is domestically 
driven rather than by a desire to bring balance to the region,'' said 
Zbigniew Brzezinski, a former National Security Policy adviser to 
Carter. But the greatest challenge will come when the smoke clears, 
when the United States must decide what to do if Saddam is still in 
power, or if he is not. If he remains, argues Robert Kagan, a senior 
associate with the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, Saddam 
could emerge greatly strengthened, putting pressure on the United 
States to take ever harsher action. And if he does not, the United 
States would have to commit a large force to support any new government. 
``This requires a very serious commitment of U.S. force,'' Kagan said, 
``to stay as long as it takes to establish a new democratic government.'' 
Richard Murphy, a former ambassador to Syria and a senior fellow at 
the Council on Foreign Relations, asked: ``Who knows what's in our 
interest after all that's happened in the past seven and a half years? 
We know that time has been inimical to our interests. As for the rest, 
we really have to keep an open mind for some time, until we get an 
accurate assessment of what damage has been done, both politically 
and on the ground.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>