<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981217.0439 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Gen. Hamilton Howze, who began his military career in the horse cavalry, 
served in tanks during World War II and then helped change how the 
Army fights by developing helicopter-warfare tactics used in the Vietnam 
War and beyond, died on Dec. 8 in Fort Worth, Texas. He was 89. Howze 
would not have surprised anyone if he had been devoted to the old 
Army ways. His great-grandfather, Hamilton Smith Hawkins, was an Army 
doctor who died in the Mexican War. His father, Maj. Gen. Robert Lee 
Howze, won the Medal of Honor fighting the Sioux and presided over 
the 1925 court-martial that found Gen. Billy Mitchell, the crusader 
for air power, guilty of insubordination. But the son was hardly shackled 
by tradition. In 1962, Howze presided over a military panel, the Howze 
Board, that issued a landmark report. It proposed that aircraft, mainly 
helicopters, carry soldiers into battle, resupply them, rain firepower 
upon the enemy and remove the wounded. The skies over Vietnam were 
filled with Huey helicopters, and the 1st Cavalry Division (Airmobile) 
used hundreds of helicopters in one of the first major encounters 
of the war, the Battle of the Ia Drang Valley, in November 1965. In 
the '90s helicopter-borne troops cut off Iraqi soldiers in the Persian 
Gulf war. ``The Huey was to our riflemen roughly what the horse was 
to the old cavalryman, close by and ready,'' Howze said. Hamilton 
Hawkins Howze was born on Dec. 21, 1908, at West Point, where his 
father was commandant of cadets. When the elder Howze commanded cavalry 
at Fort Bliss, Texas, his son shared the family house with two visitors 
who presumably left a youngster wide-eyed, Marshal Ferdinand Foch 
and Gen. John J. Pershing. Decades later Howze recalled having seen 
the two walking down ``our back upstairs hall in pajamas and bathrobe, 
toothbrushes in hand, on the way to what I considered to be my bathroom, 
but from which, of course, I was temporarily barred.'' After graduating 
from West Point in 1930, he joined the cavalry and spent the Depression 
in an Army in which officers honed polo skills while Germany and Japan 
built war machines. When the United States entered World War II, he 
commanded the 1st Armored Division in Tunisia and then Italy, taking 
part in the breakout from Anzio and the liberation of Rome on June 
4, 1944. He carried a thin book with a red cover, ``On War'' by Karl 
von Clausewitz. Lt. Gen. James Gavin, an early proponent of helicopters, 
which had seen limited use in the Korean War, named Howze as first 
director of Army Aviation in 1955. Howze later commanded the 82nd 
Airborne, Gavin's old unit. In October 1962, while commanding the 
umbrella 18th Airborne Corps, Howze was sent by the Kennedy administration 
to the University of Mississippi to command federal troops that quelled 
the violence over the admission of James Meredith, the first black 
student in the college. Before the end of October, President Kennedy 
summoned him again, for the Cuban missile crisis. Six decades after 
his father and both grandfathers had fought in Cuba in the Spanish-American 
War, he was ordered to help plan an invasion of the island. Howze, 
who would have commanded the invading troops, was awarded the Legion 
of Merit by Kennedy for his planning work. After having presided over 
the board that carried his name and set in motion the helicopter-warfare 
plans, Howze was U.N. commander in South Korea from 1963 to 1965. 
He then retired from the Army, in part, he said, because he had been 
passed over in favor of Gen. William Westmoreland as commander in 
Vietnam. Howze became an executive and consultant for Bell Helicopter 
Textron in Fort Worth. Surviving are his wife, Mary, whose grandfather, 
Col. Guy Henry, won the Medal of Honor in the Battle of Cold Harbor 
in the Civil War; two sons, Lt. Col. William Howze of Harker Heights, 
Texas, and Guy Howze of Austin, Texas; four grandchildren and five 
great-grandchildren. In retirement Howze pondered the Army way of 
doing things as it prepared for an all-volunteer force. Writing in 
Army magazine in 1971 he weighed the claims of the flexibility that 
he prized and the military tradition that his family embodied. Finally 
the old soldier made his choice, saying: ``I fully agree with the 
value of frequent talks by the commander with his subordinates, and 
the desirability of explaining why, as well as how, things must be 
done. But this must not be carried to the point where a conference 
must precede virtually every order. A compelling `why' must remain: 
because the Old Man said so.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>