<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981217.0360 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
House Republicans raised the ghosts of Watergate and Vietnam on Thursday 
to justify their decision to move ahead with the impeachment debate 
on Friday in the face of Democratic protests and continuing U.S. military 
strikes against Iraq. It was a strange, extraordinarily bitter day 
that seemed to relive the cultural wars of the 1960s and 1970s and 
a quarter-century of grudges between the two political parties. Democrats 
vehemently condemned the Republicans' plans, announced on Thursday, 
to return to the impeachment of President Clinton without waiting 
for the military action to conclude. ``We strongly object to this 
matter coming up tomorrow or the next day or any day in which our 
young men and women in the military are in harm's way protecting the 
interests of the people of the United States,'' Rep. Dick Gephardt 
of Missouri, the minority leader, said on the House floor. Gephardt 
said that the House should consider how ``Saddam Hussein will receive 
the idea and information that while he is under physical attack from 
the United States and its people, we are having a debate in our House 
of Representatives to remove the commander in chief from his office.'' 
But with Republicans eager to push forward with impeachment, Rep. 
Robert L. Livingston of Louisiana, whom Republicans have chosen as 
the next House speaker, said, ``There's no way to know when the troops 
will have completed their mission.'' He added, ``We cannot anticipate 
what Saddam Hussein will do, and yet we cannot refrain from advancing 
the people's business on this critical issue.'' In his first floor 
speech since he was chosen to be speaker, Livingston looked back to 
the Watergate scandal. He said that impeachment proceedings against 
Richard Nixon began when ``troops, American troops were deployed in 
the field in Vietnam and yet the Democrat Congress at the time undertook 
the responsibility of impeaching Richard Nixon.'' In fact, however, 
the last American combat troops left Vietnam on March 29, 1973, and 
Democratic leaders first asked the Judiciary Committee to look into 
impeachment nearly seven months later, on Oct. 22, 1973. The battle 
on the House floor, amplified in a series of competing news conferences 
across the day, set the stage for the first House debate on impeaching 
a president in 130 years. Even Democrats now say that Clinton will 
be impeached, after a stream of moderate Republicans came out against 
him in recent days. On Thursday, Rep. Heather Wilson, R-N.M., said 
that she too would vote for impeachment. ``I was looking for an explanation, 
a rebuttal of the facts, some justification to spare the country from 
impeachment,'' she said. ``I could not find it.'' Rep. Stephen Horn, 
R-Calif., a Republican, said ``Are all Americans, including the president 
of the United States equal before the law? My answer to that question 
is yes and so I will be voting for the articles of impeachment of 
President Clinton.'' Democrats all but conceded that Clinton was now 
going to face a Senate trial. Rep. Jim MOran, D-Va., said that he 
expected two of the four articles of impeachment approved by the House 
Judiciary Committee to pass and he thought that about six Democrats 
would vote for impeachment. ``It looks pretty bad,'' said Rep. Barney 
Frank, D-Mass., who has been one of the stalwarts in the Judiciary 
Committee against impeachment. Rep. Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., said the 
only thing she could conceive of that could stop impeachment now ``is 
if Saddam Hussein is taken out this weekend.'' Still, even if they 
were resigned to Clinton's impeachment, the Democrats fought the Republican 
plan to move ahead while air strikes continue in Iraq. They rebuffed 
a proposal by Livingston for 16 to 18 hours of debate beginning Friday 
and ending in votes on Saturday. ``We would look down on any activity 
of this body to go forward with impeachment while American men and 
women are engaged in armed conflict,'' said Rep. David E. Bonior of 
Michigan, the House minority whip. Rep. Maxine Waters, D-Calif., and 
a member of the Judiciary Committee, said of Livingston, ''I think 
he's a fool to proceed in spite of all this and to go ahead while 
we're still striking.'' Under the rules of the House, the impeachment 
articles are a ``privileged resolution'' entitled to one hour of debate, 
unless both parties agree to extend the time period and no one objects. 
Republican leaders were still looking on Thursday night at parliamentary 
ways to extend the debate hour by hour if the Democrats would not 
cooperate. Suspicious that Clinton had timed the air strikes against 
Iraq to stop the impeachment proceedings, Republicans on Thursday 
argued that impeachment would not weaken Clinton any further and said 
that the men and women in the armed services would not be affected. 
``That ladies and gentlemen is why our democracy is so wonderful,'' 
said Rep. Dick Armey of Texas, the House majority leader. ``As we 
engage in conflict, democracy does not stop in America.'' Irritated 
at being the ones accused of failing to show support for the military, 
the Republicans also tried to relive the party divisions over past 
wars in the Persian Gulf and in Vietnam. In a news conference, they 
showcased several of their members who served in Vietnam to rebut 
the Democrats. ``When we were over there the thing that demoralized 
us wasn't the fact that Congress was doing its work,''said Rep. Joseph 
R. Pitts, a Pennsylvania Republican who served in the Air Force from 
1963 to 1969. ``The things that disturbed us were the protesters like 
Jane Fonda and Bill Clinton.'' Rep. Randy Cunningham, R-Calif., who 
had a 22-year career in the military, said, ``When I was in Vietnam 
and coming down in a parachute, I didn't give a rat's rear what Congress 
did.'' For his part, Sen. Trent Lott of Mississippi, the majority 
leader, who had questioned the president's timing as the air strikes 
were announced, criticized Democrats for circulating statements he 
had made dating to the Persian Gulf War in 1991, supporting attacks 
on Iraq. ``When we had the vote in the House and the Senate on Desert 
Storm, I don't believe there was a single Democrat that voted for 
it,'' Lott said on CNN. A spokesman for Lott later said that he was 
wrong. In fact, 10 Democrats in the Senate and 86 in the House supported 
the Gulf War resolution. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>