<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981217.0332 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Here in the South, where strong strains of both militarism and morality 
course through the indigenous culture, Americans expressed deeply 
conflicted views Thursday about the bizarre intersection between the 
bombing of Baghdad and the pending congressional vote on the impeachment 
of President Clinton. Dozens of Southerners interviewed in six states 
voiced nearly unanimous support for the military strike on Iraq, even 
as many parroted the Republican line that the timing of Clinton's 
order seemed more than coincidental. And many showed a striking willingness 
to take Clinton at his word, even as they acknowledged that his word 
was not worth much these days. ``He lied to me,'' said Les Gardner, 
52, the manager of a personnel staffing agency in Greenville, S.C. 
But Gardner also said he believed the White House's assertion that 
the president's decision to order air strikes on Wednesday was unrelated 
to the impeachment vote that had been scheduled for Thursday. ``Despite 
his peccadilloes, he has got the good of the nation and the world 
at heart,'' Gardner said. ``He saw this as what was best for the world.'' 
Wesley Anderson, a hypnotherapist from Atlanta, said he supported 
the attack, although he questioned whether it ultimately would be 
decisive enough to force change in Iraq. He, too, gave Clinton the 
benefit of the doubt. ``He undoubtedly was aware of the political 
advantages of timing the bombing as he did,'' Anderson said. ``He 
could have waited a day, allowing the impeachment vote to proceed 
before the attack began. But did he decide to bomb Iraq cynically 
and only because he wanted to disrupt the impeachment vote? No. He 
used the timing to his advantage but such an operation takes much 
advance planning and must have been in the works long before.'' Even 
some committed Republicans dismissed the timing of the attack as a 
coincidence, despite strong statements to the contrary from some of 
the party's leaders in Washington. ``It came at a bad time, but I 
don't think impeachment had anything to do with it,'' said Bill Bowling, 
a truck driver in Little Rock, Ark., who said he voted Republican 
in both of the last two presidential elections. ``They just collided, 
it seems like.'' Others, of course, were less generous, and pointed 
out that Clinton had long ago tapped his reserves of credibility. 
``I think it's kind of odd that you're about to have an impeachment 
vote and all of a sudden he pulls this,'' said Jace Plaisance, a 21-year-old 
student at the University of New Orleans. ``He also did it when the 
Starr report came out. Just because I'm a Republican doesn't mean 
I hate Clinton, but I'm just not in favor of what he's doing. It is 
wrong for a president to use powers granted him by Congress to take 
the heat off of some presidential scandal.'' John Trivette, a 44-year-old 
Christmas tree farmer from Deep Gap, N.C., said he is a registered 
Democrat who voted for Clinton in both 1992 and 1996. But he said 
he does not fully trust Clinton's motives in Iraq. ``I think Iraq 
is a little bit of a thing to take away from the mess he's in,'' Trivette 
said. ``I think he's delaying it. He's a sly dog.'' If a common thread 
ran through the interviews Thursday, it was a sense of amazement at 
the surreality of this week's events. Some simply seemed stunned by 
the speed and magnitude of developments, saying that nothing in the 
country's postwar experience equipped them to make sense of it all. 
Many shook their heads at Clinton's capacity for stretching the boundaries 
of his already tumultuous presidency. ``Just when you think he can't 
amaze you anymore, he does it again,'' said Q. Whitfield Ayres, a 
Republican pollster based in the Atlanta area. Given its close ties 
to the armed forces and its innate patriotism, the South has long 
been quick to support military action. Forty-two percent of the country's 
military and civilian personnel are stationed in the 11 states of 
the Old Confederacy, according to the Pentagon, and a number of large 
defense contractors are located in the region as well. Three of the 
six Navy destroyers that fired the first Tomahawk cruise missiles 
at Iraq on Wednesday were built at Ingalls Shipbuilding in Pascagoula, 
Miss., the hometown of Sen. Trent Lott, the majority leader. Lott, 
who criticized the timing of the attack not long after the bombs began 
flying, has worked assiduously to procure contracts for the shipyard, 
the largest private employer in his state. Several authorities on 
the South said Thursday that the bonds between the South and the military 
have produced an almost instinctive support that is transferable to 
the commander in chief at times of combat. But the region is also 
deeply conservative, and contains pockets of fervent support for the 
president's impeachment. Clearly, the president benefited Thursday 
from the firmness of American opinion that the target of the attack, 
President Saddam Hussein of Iraq, has proven himself to be even less 
trustworthy than Clinton. ``Saddam has been making these chemical 
warheads and he's been warned several times to let the U.N. inspectors 
go and do their jobs,'' said Clark Wagner, 29, of Greenville, S.C. 
``Three strikes, he's out, so to speak. Saddam drew the line. Hey, 
this is as good a time as any.'' Ferrell Guillory, director of the 
program on Southern politics, media and public life at the University 
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, said that Americans have been conditioned 
for nearly a decade to view President Hussein as a serious threat. 
``It's not only that Clinton has defined him,'' he said. ``Bush defined 
him too. So I'm not terribly surprised that there's this lack of cynicism.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>