<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981217.0389 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Cancel the basketball season. And while you're at it, cancel the baseball 
season, too. There's no point playing ball, what with big television 
money creating a wedge between the haves and the have-nots. Our worst 
fears about the dreaded Rupert Gap were confirmed the other day by 
Sandy Alderson, who ran the Oakland A's in their glory days, and is 
now executive vice president of the major leagues. Having seen life 
from both sides now, Alderson estimated that only 12 to 15 teams have 
a chance to reach post-season play. Anybody can figure out the usual 
suspects _ the Warner-Turner Braves, the Tribune Cubs, the MSG/Cablevision 
Yankees, the Angelos Orioles, the Sold-Out Indians, the Disney Angels. 
Plus, the Los Angeles Dodgers _ owned by an Australian-speaking media 
mogul who wouldn't know Sandy Koufax from Fernando Valenzuela _ have 
already wrapped up their division because of the frightful $105 million 
contract to Kevin Brown. (Now those poor innocent executives like 
Larry Lucchino of San Diego are bleating because they consistently 
get fleeced by agents like Scott Boras _ as if they never fudged or 
exaggerated or bullied or bluffed to push a deal.) The Angels clinched 
by signing Mo Vaughn, the Diamondbacks clinched by signing Randy Johnson, 
the Mets clinched by signing Mike Piazza. No, the Braves clinched 
by signing Brian Jordan. And whoever signs Roger (I'm Homesick for 
Houston, but Not That Homesick) Clemens will clinch theirs, too. On 
the other hand, with so many egocentric owners out there, spending 
money, methinks Alderson is underestimating the delightful possibility 
for mistakes, injuries and downright bad karma. Not that I would wish 
anything bad on Kevin Brown, but let's say he's decorating the Christmas 
tree and he reaches up to hang the star, and, oops, feels a twinge 
in his back. Backs are funny things. Of course, it wouldn't be funny 
to Rupert, but what's $105 million to a swell guy like him? Let's 
see. According to Alderson, only 12 to 15 teams have a shot at the 
playoffs. The last I looked there were 30 major league teams, if you 
count the Florida Marlins, who won only 54 games last year after their 
post-world championship nuclear winter. Is there anything new about 
this gap between rich teams and poor teams? Ask fans who spent their 
early years rooting for dog teams like the Washington Senators, St. 
Louis Browns, Philadelphia Athletics, Boston Braves or Philadelphia 
Phillies, whose histories consisted of mostly six's and seven's and 
eight's, back when there were eight teams per league. The early National 
League always had a few dominant teams _ the Chicago Cubs and the 
New York Giants _ until Branch Rickey signed every plowboy and millhand 
for the St. Louis Cardinals and then signed African-Americans and 
earned a decade of pennants in Brooklyn. The American League? A few 
teams had their moments until the Yankees bought Babe Ruth and clamped 
a headlock on the seven other franchises. The most brazen form of 
collusion began in 1955 when the Kansas City Athletics served as a 
Yankee finishing school. In the good old days, superior teams kept 
their edge because of the reserve clause that bound a player to his 
club until his legs fell off. The sainted Brooklyn Dodgers played 
the diabolical New York Yankees in six World Series from 1947 through 
1956. Every winter, you sent a contract to Jackie Robinson or Mickey 
Mantle, and that was it. Once players gained free agency in the 1970s, 
the domination ended. Since the big strike of 1981, only three teams 
_ the Expos and the two recent expansion teams _ have failed to win 
a divisional title. The Expos are probably going to leave Montreal, 
but they rarely look like abject losers under Felipe Alou. Don't underestimate 
good managing, good scouting and good young players hustling for the 
minimal $175,000. Even with their wild-card gimmick, the baseball 
owners allow only eight teams into the playoffs. And if the lack of 
parity frightened the owners, they would share the television income, 
as the National Football League does. Also, don't underestimate the 
penalty for hubris. George Steinbrenner won nothing from 1982 through 
1994. Peter Angelos' Orioles have been underachievers with the frosty 
Cal Ripken, and now Angelos has brought in the truly antisocial Albert 
Belle. A lot of huge corporations and massive egos finish way back, 
and that is always fun to watch. Come to think of it, don't cancel 
the next baseball season. We'll enjoy it even more next spring without 
basketball. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>