<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981217.0340 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
``Hellbent'' is the word for Republicans at this eerie moment, and 
what they are hellbent on is the destruction of President Clinton. 
This passion does not present them in an ennobling light despite efforts 
to portray themselves as the Lord's righteous army wielding its terrible, 
swift sword (Republican majorities in the Congress) to stamp out immorality 
and mendacity. It is never easy to feel comfortable with politicians 
who claim to hold the high moral ground, as the Republicans now do. 
Few spectacles are more grotesque. A politician holding the high moral 
ground is like a hog in a bathtub. Yet this is the situation in which 
Republicans find themselves in their desperation to cleanse the Republic 
of a president they portray as abominable and loathsome, and quite 
possibly Satanic. The single-minded partisan intensity of their campaign 
for impeachment has the smell of fanaticism on it, and possibly a 
touch of madness. One can understand why, and even sympathize. No 
less an authority than the White House lawyer has conceded that the 
president's behavior is maddening. Still, maddened rage is not the 
best frame of mind in which to make great decisions of state. ``Whom 
the gods would destroy they first make mad'' may be nothing more than 
high-flown literature. Still, the Republicans suddenly seem ready 
to stampede over the cliff if that's what it takes to rid themselves 
of the insufferable Clinton. Thus Wednesday's military strikes against 
Iraq were immediately hauled into the all-absorbing impeachment melodrama, 
with Republicans suggesting that war was the last maneuver in a malevolent 
presidential scheme to escape his just deserts. Trent Lott, the Republicans' 
Senate leader, came out against the raids even before CNN showed the 
first pictures of lights in Baghdad's night sky. Instant TV analysts 
found Lott's position shocking. When the guns begin to speak and Americans 
go into battle, Senate leaders, whatever their politics, have always 
``closed ranks'' behind the president. Or so it was said. In any event, 
to do otherwise is to risk being judged unpatriotic. It seemed a dangerous 
risk for Lott to take, particularly since Republicans have traditionally 
compared themselves favorably to Democrats in the patriotism department. 
On Wednesday night, between TV pictures of explosions in Baghdad, 
Gerald Solomon, Republican chairman of the House Rules Committee, 
appeared in American parlors venting his conviction that the whole 
thing was a Clinton maneuver to prevent impeachment. It was ``the 
lowest thing'' he'd ever heard of. Neither Lott nor Solomon is famous 
for mental acuity, and the mass of Republicans quickly tried to recover 
from their lapses by announcing total support for American soldiers, 
sailors and airpersons, omitting only the president. As the day progressed, 
however, the TV screen filled with Republicans obviously boiling about 
the attacks on Saddam Hussein and seething with poisonous imputations 
that the president was risking American lives to save his own skin. 
Has there ever been a nastier day in politics? Probably. No congressman 
has yet clubbed another insensible, as one did during the preliminaries 
to the Civil War, but partisan hatreds are such that it might be wise 
to require all members to go through metal detectors before entering 
the Capitol. What we are seeing, as Geneva Overholser notes in The 
Washington Post, is the death of the political middle. Extremists 
are in charge. They are always plentiful in Congress, but they rarely 
rule. When Lyndon Johnson was majority leader he used to call them 
``the red hots.'' They were dominantly liberals then, and had no muscle. 
Now they are conservatives for whom accommodation and compromise amount 
to betrayal of faith. For six years they have tried to persuade the 
public to get rid of Clinton for general vileness. Maddened by the 
public's refusal to see the light, they have talked themselves into 
a frothing lather. They are hellbent on putting a stake through his 
heart, and public sentiment be damned. It is a tale of mythic grandeur, 
produced by those three modern Fates: Paula Jones, Linda Tripp and 
Monica Lewinsky. Like Abraham Lincoln and Betsy Ross, their names 
will long endure. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>