<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981217.0227 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
GAME OF THE WEEK Denver (13-1) at Miami (9-5). The Broncos and Dolphins 
are two of the league's most recognized and successful franchises, 
and this late-season Monday night matchup gives both a chance to glow 
anew. It was supposed to be The Game, the one that would decide if 
Denver recorded an unbeaten regular season, but the Giants took care 
of that last week. Denver-Miami, however, still provides plenty to 
anticipate. It gives us ballyhooed quarterbacks in Denver's John Elway 
and Miami's Dan Marino, the only two passers in league history to 
have compiled 50,000 passing yards. It gives us the terrific running 
back Terrell Davis against a Miami defense that has allowed just 8.7 
points a game at home, where the Dolphins are 6-1 this season. It 
can't be a perfect season for Denver, but 14-1 sounds awfully nice. 
Davis rips. Denver roars. Broncos, 27-17. SATURDAY Jets (10-4) at 
Buffalo (9-5). The Jets hammered Buffalo, 34-12, back on Nov. 8 and 
shut down Doug Flutie while Vinny Testaverde soared (258 passing yards, 
three touchdowns). The roles will likely be reversed. Flutie will 
want this game badly and he will play with emotion and determination. 
He led the Bills to 44 points against the Raiders last week and would 
love to hang a higher number on a Jets defense that four times this 
season has allowed 9 or fewer points. But the game will probably be 
reduced to the running of Antowain Smith for the Bills and Curtis 
Martin for the Jets. Who wins that battle? Go with Martin. Jets, 23-21. 
Tampa Bay (7-7) at Washington (5-9). Early on, the season fell apart 
for Tampa Bay. It fell to pieces for Washington long ago. The Redskins, 
however, are showing some life. Quarterback Trent Green has thrown 
14 touchdown passes and only two interceptions in his last seven games. 
Skip Hicks has provided a lift in the running game. Dan Wilkinson 
has seven sacks. But Tampa Bay still has plenty to play for: a shot 
at the playoffs if it ends with consecutive victories. The Tampa Bay 
offense cannot match Washington's, but the Tampa Bay defense far outshines 
the Redskins' defense. Buccaneers, 19-17. SUNDAY 1 P.M. GAMES Baltimore 
(5-9) at Chicago (3-11). Duane Starks, a Ravens cornerback, leads 
all rookies with five interceptions. That has been one of the few 
bright spots for the Ravens in a season of high hopes that spiraled 
into despair. Of course, the Bears have known little but despair for 
consecutive seasons now. This game could be full of mistakes; expect 
Baltimore to make a couple fewer, and that wins the game. It is a 
homecoming of sorts for Ravens quarterback Jim Harbaugh. He was a 
Bear from 1987 through 1993 and is second in Bears passing yards with 
11,567. He will find the Soldier Field turf familiar, the old Bears 
crowd friendly. Ravens, 28-23. Kansas City (6-8) at Giants (6-8). 
Kansas City beat Dallas and the Giants beat Denver last week; both 
teams enter on high notes, in a season when their identical records 
mean that their seasons have been busts. Both teams won their divisions 
last year but now see tougher times. Maybe the worst is over for both. 
They could settle in and play a hard-nosed game full of big hits and 
physical runs. The Chiefs have the edge in yards gained, in fewer 
yards allowed and in turnover differential (plus 6 to minus 3). But 
the momentum should swing the Giants' way, playing at home. Giants, 
24-21. Cincinnati (2-12) at Pittsburgh (7-7). The Bengals have won 
only two games this year and one was against Pittsburgh, back on Oct. 
11 in Cincinnati, a 25-20 victory. Carl Pickens earned 204 receiving 
yards in that game and scored the game-winning touchdown on a tricky 
Bengals call with 20 seconds left. No such magic this time. Pittsburgh 
is struggling mightily on offense but finds a cure in the Bengals. 
This is the game when quarterback Kordell Stewart rolls, when Jerome 
Bettis busts through the defense, when Steelers linebacker Jason Gildon 
adds to his team-high sack total and when Pittsburgh, for a game, 
feels good again. Steelers, 31-14. St. Louis (4-10) at Carolina (2-12). 
The Rams upset New England and now feature Steve Bono at quarterback 
for the rest of the season. He replaced the injured Tony Banks (knee), 
who suffered through a torturous season in which he was asked to do 
so much with so little around him and responded accordingly _ with 
little production. The Panthers cannot wait to get this season completed. 
Kevin Greene leads them in sacks with 14. He almost added another 
when he nearly sacked a Panthers assistant coach on the sideline last 
week. Horrible behavior. Greene apologized. The entire Panthers team 
needs to apologize for making fans suffer through this mess of a year. 
Rams, 21-9. San Francisco (11-3) at New England (8-6). Big game for 
New England. It loses, and its playoff chances are hurt immeasurably. 
And it must play without quarterback Drew Bledsoe and with Scott Zolak 
as his replacement. Who knows how the Patriots will respond? How Zolak 
will respond? The 49ers will blitz Zolak from every angle. He is big 
but not extra mobile. New England is fuming after losing at St. Louis 
last week. This is a game it must win with defense. Look for Ty Law 
and the Patriots' defense to answer. Patriots, 21-20. Tennessee (8-6) 
at Green Bay (9-5). The Packers' game begins and ends with quarterback 
Brett Favre. The last Super Bowl was a reminder, when Green Bay Coach 
Mike Holmgren let the Broncos score just so Green Bay could get the 
ball back for Favre to have a final shot at winning the game. Favre 
did not produce then, but he has in dramatic fashion over the last 
five seasons. He is three touchdowns short of another 30-touchdown 
passing season; it would be his fifth straight. This season, however, 
he also has 21 interceptions. The Oilers look at this game as a supreme 
test in their quest for respect and for the playoffs. Favre is the 
present, but Oilers quarterback Steve McNair is the future. And this 
is the type of matchup that makes McNair and the young Oilers look 
special. McNair will produce the last shot. And the decisive one. 
Oilers, 27-25. nn SUNDAY 4 P.M. GAMES Indianapolis (3-11) at Seattle 
(7-7). Seldom is a player on a 3-11 team rewarded, but Marshall Faulk 
was. He leads the Colts in rushing yards (1,228) and in receiving 
(78 catches for 862 yards) and was deservedly awarded with Pro Bowl 
honors. Peyton Manning, the Colts' rookie quarterback, has taken all 
865 snaps this season and that says a lot. Manning is tough and talented 
_ his rookie-record 24 touchdown passes attest to that _ and the Colts 
have a foundation on which to build over the next couple of seasons. 
Seattle, however, is a team that was supposed to have already built 
its foundation. It is one of the biggest underachievers in recent 
years. The Seahawks are better than their average record, and they 
show it for a game. Seahawks, 33-17. Oakland (7-7) at San Diego (5-9). 
The Raiders have sunk since losing quarterback Jeff George. One of 
the reasons is that they ran their offense as if George was still 
there, instead of turning games over to the energetic, game-swinging 
running back Napoleon Kaufman. He has 217 carries this season. Jamal 
Anderson of Atlanta has 362. Eddie George of Tennessee has 319. Even 
the rookie Fred Taylor of Jacksonville has more, with 220 carries, 
and he hasn't even been a starter the entire season. The visiting 
team in this matchup has won four of the last five meetings and nine 
of the last 12. Look for Chargers tight end Freddie Jones and the 
Chargers' defense to buck the trend. Chargers, 16-13. Atlanta (12-2) 
at Detroit (5-9). This game has ``Win One for Dan Reeves'' swirling 
all over it. Reeves, the Falcons coach, could be released soon from 
an Atlanta hospital after undergoing quadruple bypass surgery. He 
will not be in Detroit for this game and Rich Brooks, his offensive 
coordinator, will call the shots. But Reeves' players will be there 
and that is plenty. The Falcons are on the mark to score more than 
426 points this season; that is their club record for points set in 
1981. Jamal Anderson has 10 100-yard rushing games and will earn his 
11th against a shoddy Lions defense. The Lions lost by 35-13 at San 
Francisco on Monday night. The nation saw what they were: a team with 
so many holes, especially along the defensive line and at linebacker, 
and a club that continues to waste the special talent of Barry Sanders. 
Falcons, 23-17. New Orleans (6-8) at Arizona (7-7). Arizona makes 
the playoffs if it wins, Tampa Bay loses and the Giants lose or tie. 
It would be the Cardinals' first playoff appearance in 16 years. That 
is an awfully long time. That is a great incentive to win. And Arizona 
will, behind the running of Adrian Murrell (he needs 48 yards for 
his third consecutive 1,000-yard rushing season). Linebacker Simeon 
Rice (9 sacks) will provide a boost. And quarterback Jake Plummer 
(3,069 passing yards) also helps pave the way. Cardinals, 18-15. Philadelphia 
(3-11) at Dallas (8-6). Footsteps. Dallas hears them. They have slipped 
to only a one-game lead over Arizona with two to play. And Dallas' 
final two games are against divisional foes (the Eagles and Redskins) 
who know them well. Since Koy Detmer became the Eagles' starting quarterback, 
Philadelphia has averaged 16.7 points in three games; before that, 
it averaged 8.4 points. And did you know that the superb Eagles linebacker 
William Thomas is the only player in the league with at least a sack 
and an interception in each of the last seven seasons? Detmer on offense 
and Thomas on defense are reasons the Eagles might steal this one. 
Dallas, however, slips by. Cowboys, 21-20. SUNDAY NIGHT Jacksonville 
(10-4) at Minnesota (13-1). Randall Cunningham has a 107.2 quarterback 
rating. Robert Smith is averaging 4.7 yards per carry. Minnesota is 
averaging nearly 400 yards of offense a game. Randy Moss leads the 
NFL in receiving yards (1,209).The Vikings are on pace to score 549 
points and that would break the league record of 541 set by Washington 
in 1983. John Randle leads the Vikings defense with 8.5 sacks. Minnesota 
is rolling. In come the Jaguars. If Mark Brunell is healthy and can 
play four quarters, the Jaguars will make it fun. Without him, the 
Vikings will make it ugly. Either way, Minnesota wins. Vikings, 30-20. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>