<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981217.0468 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
House Republicans raised the ghosts of Watergate and Vietnam on Thursday 
to justify their decision to move ahead with the impeachment debate 
on Friday in the face of Democratic protests and continuing U.S. military 
strikes against Iraq. It was an extraordinarily bitter day that seemed 
to relive the cultural wars of the 1960s and 1970s and a quarter-century 
of grudges between the two political parties. Democrats vehemently 
condemned the Republicans' plans, announced on Thursday, to return 
to the impeachment of President Clinton without waiting for the military 
action to conclude. ``We strongly object to this matter coming up 
tomorrow or the next day or any day in which our young men and women 
in the military are in harm's way protecting the interests of the 
people of the United States,'' Rep. Dick Gephardt of Missouri, the 
minority leader, said on the House floor. Gephardt said that the House 
should consider how ``Saddam Hussein will receive the idea and information 
that while he is under physical attack from the United States and 
its people, we are having a debate in our House of Representatives 
to remove the commander in chief from his office.'' But with Republicans 
eager to push forward with impeachment, Rep. Bob Livingston of Louisiana, 
whom Republicans have chosen as the next House speaker, said, ``There's 
no way to know when the troops will have completed their mission.'' 
He added, ``We cannot anticipate what Saddam Hussein will do, and 
yet we cannot refrain from advancing the people's business on this 
critical issue.'' In his first floor speech since he was chosen to 
be speaker, Livingston looked back to the Watergate scandal. He said 
that impeachment proceedings against Richard Nixon began when ``troops, 
American troops were deployed in the field in Vietnam and yet the 
Democrat Congress at the time undertook the responsibility of impeaching 
Richard Nixon.'' In fact, the last American combat troops left Vietnam 
on March 29, 1973, and Democratic leaders first asked the Judiciary 
Committee to look into impeachment nearly seven months later, on Oct. 
22. The battle on the House floor, amplified in a series of competing 
news conferences across the day, set the stage for the first House 
debate on impeaching a president in 130 years. Even Democrats now 
say that Clinton will be impeached, after a stream of moderate Republicans 
came out against him in recent days. On Thursday, Rep. Heather Wilson, 
R-N.M., said that she too would vote for impeachment. ``I was looking 
for an explanation, a rebuttal of the facts, some justification to 
spare the country from impeachment,'' she said. ``I could not find 
it.'' Rep. Stephen Horn, R-Calif., a Republican, said, ``Are all Americans, 
including the president of the United States, equal before the law? 
My answer to that question is yes and so I will be voting for the 
articles of impeachment of President Clinton.'' Democrats all but 
conceded that Clinton was now going to face a Senate trial. Rep. Jim 
Moran, D-Va., said that he expected two of the four articles of impeachment 
approved by the House Judiciary Committee to pass and he thought that 
about six Democrats would vote to impeach. ``It looks pretty bad,'' 
said Rep. Barney Frank, D-Mass., who has been one of the stalwarts 
in the Judiciary Committee against impeachment. Rep. Nancy Pelosi, 
D-Calif., said the only thing she could conceive of that could stop 
impeachment now ``is if Saddam Hussein is taken out this weekend.'' 
Still, even if they were resigned to Clinton's impeachment, the Democrats 
fought the Republican plan to move ahead while air strikes continue 
in Iraq. In fact, they were almost openly gloating at the political 
opportunity the Republicans had handed them to change the impeachment 
drama into a debate over whether the Reopublicans were so eager to 
run Clinton from office that they would undercut the military in a 
time of combat. So the Democrats rebuffed a proposal by Livingston 
for 16 to 18 hours of debate beginning Friday and ending in votes 
on Saturday. ``We would look down on any activity of this body to 
go forward with impeachment while American men and women are engaged 
in armed conflict,'' said Rep. David E. Bonior of Michigan, the House 
minority whip. Rep. Maxine Waters, D-Calif., and a member of the Judiciary 
Committee, said of Livingston, ''I think he's a fool to proceed in 
spite of all this and to go ahead while we're still striking.'' Under 
House rules, the impeachment articles are a ``privileged resolution'' 
entitled to one hour of debate, unless both parties agree to extend 
the time period and no one objects. Republican leaders were still 
looking on Thursday night at parliamentary ways to extend the debate 
hour by hour if the Democrats would not cooperate. Suspicious that 
Clinton had timed the air strikes against Iraq to stop the impeachment 
proceedings, Republicans on Thursday argued that impeachment would 
not weaken Clinton any further and that men and women in the armed 
services would not be affected. ``That ladies and gentlemen is why 
our democracy is so wonderful,'' said Rep. Dick Armey of Texas, the 
House majority leader. ``As we engage in conflict, democracy does 
not stop in America.'' Annoyed at being the ones accused of failing 
to show support for the military, the Republicans also tried to relive 
party divisions over past wars in the Persian Gulf and Vietnam. In 
a news conference, they showcased several of their members who served 
in Vietnam to rebut the Democrats. ``When we were over there the thing 
that demoralized us wasn't the fact that Congress was doing its work,''said 
Rep. Joseph R. Pitts, of Pennsylvania, who served in the Air Force 
from 1963 to 1969. ``The things that disturbed us were the protesters 
like Jane Fonda and Bill Clinton.'' Rep. Randy Cunningham, R-Calif., 
who had a 22-year career in the military, said, ``When I was in Vietnam 
and coming down in a parachute, I didn't give a rat's rear what Congress 
did.'' For his part, Sen. Trent Lott of Mississippi, the majority 
leader, who had questioned the president's timing as the air strikes 
were announced, criticized Democrats for circulating statements he 
had made dating to the Persian Gulf War in 1991, supporting attacks 
on Iraq. ``When we had the vote in the House and the Senate on Desert 
Storm, I don't believe there was a single Democrat that voted for 
it,'' Lott said on CNN. A spokesman for Lott later said that he was 
wrong. In fact, 10 Democrats in the Senate and 86 in the House supported 
the Gulf War resolution. nn At the White House, the president answered 
questions from reporters and said he did not think the impeachment 
proceedings on the House floor would undercut his ability as commander 
in chief to carry out the air strikes. ``I think that, first of all, 
I'm going to complete this mission,'' he said. As Congress moved toward 
impeachment, several thousand supporters of Clinton, rallied on the 
steps of the Capitol, waving signs calling for censure or asking Congress 
to heed the popular will. ``The American people do not view Bill Clinton 
as a bad man,'' the Rev. Jesse Jackson told the crowd. ``They see 
him as they see themselves _ as flawed, as less than perfect.'' Back 
on the House floor, Livingston acknowledged that citizens and interest 
groups were demonstrating and jamming the congressional switchboard 
to register their opinion on impeachment. ``Let us disregard the outside 
influences,'' he said, calling for members of Congress to vote their 
conscience. Bonior replied that when Congress was dealing with ``two 
most profound issues'' _ combat and impeachment _ ``the country has 
the right to be involved in the decision.'' Many Democrats and a few 
Republicans have called for Clinton to be censured instead of impeached 
for his efforts to conceal his affair with Monica S. Lewinsky. But 
Livingston has said he will refuse to allow a censure proposal on 
the House floor. While Democrats were still looking for parliamentary 
procedures to allow them to bring up censure, they had stopped believing 
that they could use such a proposal to draw moderate Republicans away 
from impeachment. Some House members have argued that the Senate ultimately 
will not have the stomach to go through with a full trial of the president. 
Bob Dole, Clinton's 1996 presidential opponent, has argued that the 
Senate should avoid a trial and instead pursue a strong censure measure. 
But Lott said Thursday that the Senate would proceed to a trial if 
the House impeaches Clinton. ``There won't be any deal-making,'' he 
said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>