<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981217.0379 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A court-appointed review board has accused an official elected on 
James Hoffa's slate for the Teamsters' presidency with having lied 
to federal officials about an improperly large campaign donation. 
In filing charges this week against J.D. Potter, who was elected as 
a Teamsters vice president, the review board has now brought charges 
against three of the 19 people elected to be vice presidents with 
Hoffa, son of the famous Teamsters leader. The charges can result 
in acquittal, suspension or expulsion. On Dec. 5, Hoffa, a Detroit 
labor lawyer, won the presidency of the International Brotherhood 
of Teamsters, with his slate capturing all 19 vice presidential positions. 
Hoffa's opponents seized on the charges against Potter to criticize 
Hoffa for surrounding himself with unsavory people who are willing 
to lie and cheat. The charges against Potter mean that a total of 
seven officials who ran on Hoffa's slate either in this year's election 
or in his unsuccessful 1996 election have been accused of wrongdoing, 
with several of them kicked out of the union. The Independent Review 
Board has charged Potter, president of a Teamsters local in Texas, 
with having testified falsely about the source of $5,000 given to 
the Hoffa campaign. According to the charges, Potter originally donated 
$10,000, but that check was returned when the federal election monitor 
told him that the maximum he could donate was $5,000 under Teamster 
election rules. Potter, the review board asserted, then wrote a $5,000 
personal check to the campaign, while also giving a $5,000 cashier's 
check. Potter later told federal monitors that five union staff members 
had each given him $1,000 to donate to the campaign and that he had 
bundled those contributions together in his cashier's check. Last 
week, the review board also filed charges against Tom O'Donnell, a 
prominent New York Teamster, accusing him of lying in a campaign finance 
report. According to the board, O'Donnell, president of a movie drivers' 
local elected to a Teamsters vice presidency, provided false information 
when he failed to report that a convicted felon was on the Hoffa campaign 
payroll as one of the leaders of its 1996 effort in New York state. 
Neither Potter nor O'Donnell returned telephone calls made to their 
offices Thursday. The three-person review board and the federal monitor 
are part of a large government oversight effort that the Teamsters 
agreed to in a 1989 consent decree, which settled a federal racketeering 
lawsuit against the union. Responding to the charges against Potter 
and other members of his slate, Hoffa said in a statement Thursday, 
``These are allegations which have to be dealt with pursuant to the 
procedures set forth in the Teamsters' constitution and the consent 
decree, and we intend to see that those procedures are followed.'' 
Over the past two years, federal monitors have barred one Hoffa slate 
member from running after she pressured union officials into donating 
to her campaign. The official who was Hoffa's running mate for secretary-treasurer 
in 1996 was ousted from the presidency of a Chicago union local because 
the local signed contracts with companies run by the president's relatives. 
Ken Paff, national coordinator of Teamsters for a Democratic Union, 
which campaigned against Hoffa, said, ``He has people associated with 
him who embezzled union funds, people who ran businesses that interconnected 
with the union, people who extorted union employees for the Hoffa 
campaign, people who received illegal contributions and covered it 
up. You take that picture as a whole and it's not an attractive one.'' 
Tom Leedham, who was Hoffa's main opponent in this year's election, 
said the review board should bring charges against Hoffa like the 
false testimony charges it brought against Potter and O'Donnell. In 
April, Michael Cherkasky, the federal election monitor, issued a report 
that allowed Hoffa to remain in the Teamsters race even though he 
found that Hoffa had testified falsely about the source of some donations. 
``It defies logic,'' Leedham said, ``that you can charge vice presidents-elect 
with lying under oath, and not follow right up the chain of command 
to do the same thing. If anything, the president of the union should 
be held to a higher standard.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>