<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981217.0271 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The earth's average surface temperature in 1998 is the highest by 
far since people first began to measure it with thermometers in the 
mid-19th century, the World Meteorological Organization reported Thursday. 
The organization, an agency of the United Nations, said 1998 will 
be the 20th year in a row that the globe's surface has been warmer 
than its recent long-term average, which is the average for 1961 through 
1990. Seven of the 10 warmest years on record have occurred since 
1990 and the other three occurred after 1983. Most recently, new monthly 
high-temperature records were set in each of the 18 consecutive months 
ending in October 1998. The results, based on data through mid-December 
and reported in Geneva, will change slightly when final data is calculated. 
But experts say it is certain that 1998 will turn out to be the warmest 
year on record, and almost as certainly by an easy margin over the 
the previous warmest, 1997 According to the new figures, the average 
global temperature this year will turn out to be about 58 degrees 
Fahrenheit, a full degree Fahrenheit warmer than the 1961-1990 average. 
``This number's amazing,'' said Dr. Philip Jones, a climatologist 
at the University of East Anglia in England, speaking of a field in 
which records or normally set in fractions. Jones provided much of 
the information on which Thursday's announcement was based. While 
there are dissenters who believe the warmer climate can be explained 
by normal variation, the dominant view among climate scientists is 
that at least some of the warming trend is a result of emissions of 
heat-trapping waste industrial gases like carbon dioxide, which is 
produced by the burning of coal, oil, natural gas and wood. Despite 
the 1998 record, a number of scientists said they believed the world 
is likely to be cooler in 1999 and possibly 2000 as well. The reason, 
they said, is that a fair measure of the warming in 1998 can be attributed 
to the effects earlier in the year of El Nino. This is the extensive 
pool of warm water that develops from time to time in the tropical 
Pacific. It both warms the global atmosphere and disrupts worldwide 
weather patterns. But even though a dissipating El Nino may allow 
some cooling next year, several experts said they expected the underlying 
global warming trend to continue and temperatures to remain above 
average in the immediate future. The findings about 1998 were not 
a surprise, since highly publicized analyses by federal scientists 
had made it clear since mid-year that 1998 was shaping up as the warmest 
year on record. Among other contributors to the United Nations' agency's 
analysis were the NASA Goddard Institute for Space Studies in New 
York, the British Meteorological Office, the National Climatic Data 
Center in Asheville, N.C., the NASA Marshall Space Flight Center and 
University of Alabama in Huntsville, Ala., the International Research 
Institute in New York and the Climatic Prediction Center in Washington. 
Based on studies of indirect evidence like the annual rings of trees, 
Jones has been saying for some time that he believes 1998 to be not 
only the warmest year in the thermometer record, but also the warmest 
year of the millennium now ending. As new global high-temperature 
records have been established in the 1990s, they have usually exceeded 
old ones by mere hundredths of a degree at a time. But if the new 
estimate holds up, 1998 will top the 1997 record by about a quarter 
of a degree. The difference may appear small, but the world is only 
5 to 9 degrees warmer now than in the depths of the last ice age. 
According to the numbers announced Thursday, the globe is about 1.25 
degrees warmer than at the beginning of this century. The actual average 
surface temperature of the earth this year will come in at about 58 
degrees, according to the British data sets. Other data sets vary 
slightly. Mainstream scientists project that the surface will warm 
by an additional 2 to 6 degrees over the next century if carbon dioxide 
emissions are not reduced, with the largest increases in temperate 
and sub-arctic latitudes. Among other things, they say, this will 
make hot weather, droughts and floods more likely while reducing the 
number of extremely cold days, raise the level of the seas, cause 
climatic zones to shift and produce widespread environmental and economic 
dislocations. Not all regions of the world have warmed in recent years, 
and each year there are some cool spots; in 1998, Eurasia was one 
of these. One place that has often lagged in the warming trend is 
the United States. But this year, according to an analysis by the 
Goddard center in New York, North America led the warming trend, experiencing 
its warmest year in the last four decades. El Nino was said to be 
largely responsible, since its impact on North America is stronger 
than in many other places. Temperatures well above the surface, as 
measured from earth satellites, have not usually shown the same rise 
as the surface temperatures, though they do show a slight warming. 
This year, however, temperatures from the surface to an altitude of 
about four miles, were nearly a degree above average. The magnitude 
of this rise has also been attributed largely to El Nino. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>