<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981217.0465 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The defense lawyer for the mother and son charged with murdering an 
Upper East Side millionaire predicted an easy acquittal Thursday, 
but legal experts said the trial would be closely fought, focusing 
on what prosecutors say is a wealth of details in an elaborate fraud 
scheme. Mel Sachs, lawyer for Sante and Kenneth Kimes, said the case 
against his clients was based entirely on circumstantial evidence 
and irreparably flawed because the body of the millionaire, Irene 
Silverman, has not been found since she disappeared on July 5. At 
a news conference in front of the Manhattan Criminal Courts building, 
he questioned whether Mrs. Silverman was dead, and suggested that 
if she had been killed, someone else had done it. ``There are a number 
of people who could have benefited from the disappearance of Mrs. 
Silverman,'' he said. ``Where is proof that the Kimeses had anything 
to do with Mrs. Silverman's disappearance? Where is the proof of a 
murder?'' Legal experts say the proof will be in the details. The 
84-count indictment unveiled by prosecutors on Wednesday provides 
a step-by-step description of an elaborate scheme to defraud Mrs. 
Silverman, 82, out of her mansion on East 65th Street. ``The trial 
is going to be, certainly from the prosecution's point of view, a 
mass of evidence pointing to the conniving these people have done,'' 
said James Cohen, a Fordham University law professor and defense lawyer. 
``By including so many other crimes in the indictment, it makes it 
easier for the prosecutor to put all this circumstantial evidence 
in.'' Some of the most powerful evidence in the case, legal experts 
said, is a detailed account of activities that the Kimeses are said 
to have kept in notebooks in a gym bag they stored at the Plaza Hotel. 
The notebooks contain information and questions for lawyers about 
the transfer of property in Manhattan, as well as calculations on 
taxes that would be incurred in such a transfer, the indictment says. 
They also contain notes about Mrs. Silverman's bank accounts, her 
business manager, her accountant, her employees and the employees' 
work schedules. Also included is a list of instructions on management 
of the house for a man the Kimeses hired, according to the indictment. 
The notes could be used by prosecutors to explain how the alleged 
conspiracy worked. And in what legal experts said could prove to be 
pivotal evidence, Mrs. Kimes wrote down the aliases she used with 
different people in phone calls carrying out the scheme, prosecutors 
said. Steven Zeidman, a professor at the New York University School 
of Law, said that if prosecutors could show that the defendants committed 
dozens of acts progressing toward a murder, they might be able to 
win a conviction without actually proving that the murder occurred. 
``What a circumstantial case is about is building reasonable inferences 
and links,'' Zeidman said. ``Documents, reports and record-keeping 
by the defendant is valuable evidence.'' The notes and other documents 
detailed in the indictment could also prove to be damaging evidence 
of lesser crimes, like conspiracy and forgery. Even if the Kimeses 
are acquitted of murder, convictions for lesser crimes could result 
in decades-long prison sentences. Benjamin Brafman, a prominent defense 
lawyer, and other experts predicted that proving that Mrs. Silverman 
was dead would be difficult, but not impossible. Bereaved relatives 
and friends of Mrs. Silverman could testify, for example, about long-running 
weekly meetings or phone calls that abruptly ended after July 5. Close 
friends could testify about Mrs. Silverman's attachment to her home. 
And prosecutors could argue that Mrs. Silverman would never simply 
turn over her livelihood to strangers. The Manhattan district attorney, 
Robert Morgenthau, said Wednesday that the Kimeses would have had 
to kill Mrs. Silverman to get her mansion. But Brafman, as well as 
Zeidman and Cohen, said prosecutors would have to compile a devastating 
case and present it masterfully for a murder conviction. ``I don't 
for a second think this is going to be a slam dunk for the prosecution,'' 
Brafman said. ``A lot is going to depend on how the case is presented.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>