<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981217.0470 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The polls show Americans do not want President Clinton impeached. 
And they show that the public is squarely behind the president's bombing 
of Iraq. Nonetheless, Republican leaders are not only questioning 
Clinton's motives in attacking Iraq, but are rejecting pleas by Democrats 
to put off the House debate on impeachment, even by one more day. 
By pressing forward, even brazenly, against the president, Republicans 
are inviting attacks that they are so impatient to exile Clinton that 
they are rushing heedlessly forward to conduct a public vote on an 
unseemly scandal while American troops are in harm's way. Some Republicans 
worry that their party is increasingly perceived as motivated by a 
ferocious partisanship and a desire to cripple Clinton. In their zealous 
pursuit of Bill Clinton are they doing long-term damage to their political 
interests? Many Democrats hope so and some Republicans fear they are 
right. But others in the Republican Party insist they must press forward 
at any cost. Not only do they believe, fervently, that Clinton should 
be impeached, they are determined to act quickly before he somehow 
finds a way out. Rep. Todd Tiahrt, R-Kan., said that when his party's 
caucus met Wednesday night, members expressed fears that a delay would 
give the president time to find a way out. Rep. Bob Barr, R-Ga., who 
backed impeachment before anybody heard of Monica Lewinsky, put it 
this way: ``The administration will try to pull anything out of a 
hat. Whether it's a rabbit or a red herring remains to be seen.'' 
Still others are confident that by the next elections in 2000, the 
events of this week will be long forgotten. Republicans said they 
have grown so distrustful of Clinton that they cannot help but question 
his motives. That is why many Republicans say they were unapologetic 
about their accusations that Clinton's order to bomb Iraq was an attempt 
to put off the impeachment debate, which originally had been scheduled 
to begin Thursday. It was rescheduled for Friday. Q. Whitfield Ayres, 
a Republican pollster, said, ``Very few Republicans are willing to 
give this president the benefit of the doubt.'' Ayres said it was 
Clinton who appears suspect because the attack on Iraq ``deepens the 
cynicism among people who already think this guy will say anything 
or do anything to retain power.'' Rep. Michael Oxley, R-Ohio, said 
of Clinton: ``He's manipulated our military and his advisers for his 
own preservation. You'd have to be basically retarded not to think 
there was some manipulating going on.'' Many Republicans argue that 
Clinton has lost such credibility and is so mistrusted that most Americans 
would not blame any Republican for questioning his motives. Still, 
some in the party warned privately that the party's lawmakers should 
show more restraint because they risk being viewed as obsessed with 
impeachment at any cost. The admission Thursday night by Rep. Bob 
Livingston, R-La., the incoming House speaker, that he ``on occasion 
strayed from my marriage'' could only further weaken the Republicans' 
efforts to undermine Clinton. Already, polls show that the Republican 
Party's image has suffered in recent weeks; the long-term risk for 
the party would be if it was unable to shed an image of naked partisanship 
before the 2000 elections. While many Republicans questioned Clinton's 
motives in bombing Iraq, many in the party said they were particularly 
stunned that Sen. Trent Lott, R-Miss., the majority leader, asserted 
on Wednesday that ``both the timing and the policy are subject to 
question.'' Lawmakers have often denounced a president's military 
operations, but they usually do not do so at the moment of attack. 
More commonly, senior members of Congress in both parties rally behind 
the president to display a united front and out of deference to the 
fact that the administration has more access to confidential information. 
For the time being, at least, the comments by Lott _ and the Republican 
push to open the impeachment debate _ gave Democrats grist for trying 
to shift the discourse to the insensitivity of Republicans while American 
troops are in harm's way. Only a few days ago, the White House was 
struggling in an uphill battle to save Clinton from being impeached. 
While that threat seems undiminished, Republicans were on the defensive 
Thursday. They found themselves responding to attacks by Democrats 
that they were so single-mindedly out to get the president that they 
dared to question his motives _ and refused to postpone the impeachment 
vote for several days. Even Lott backed off from his statement on 
Wednesday night, and insisted Thursday that he himself had not questioned 
the president's motivations but that he was responding to the concerns 
of others. Rep. Herbert Bateman, of Virginia, reminded fellow Republicans 
that they might regret the political fallout of rushed action. ``We 
should not be perceived as doing things too precipitously by going 
ahead as if none of this had happened,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>