<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981217.0177 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Star Trek: Insurrection Patrick Stewart, Jonathan Frakes, Brent Spiner, 
Donna Murphy, F. Murray Abraham, LeVar Burton, Anthony Zerbe Directed 
by Jonathan Frakes PG 105 minutes Some radiational force or other 
in the rings around a faraway planet gives the Ba'ku tribe, who live 
there in bucolic reverie, eternal life and youth. But in their midst, 
observing from a concealed command center, the ancient Son'a wait 
their moment to gather up these celestial New Agers, ship them off 
to another location and soak up those regenerative powers themselves. 
Winging in to look over the place, Capt. Jean-Luc Picard (Stewart) 
and the crew of the starship Enterprise meet the Ba'ku and their amazingly 
well-preserved 309-year-old matriarch (Ms. Murphy), who explains in 
no uncertain terms that outside ways aren't welcome. That's fine with 
Picard, who takes a romantic shine to the woman and upholds the Federation's 
standing rule not to interfere with others. But such sentiments mean 
little to the San'o commander (Abraham), who needs a face lift about 
every hour to keep from disintegrating. It also turns out that a rogue 
Federation admiral (Zerbe) is allied with the San'o to harvest the 
youth substance for ``the universal good.'' Picard and crew revolt 
and a sprawling space battle, full of the old techno razzle-dazzle, 
is begun. VIOLENCE Warfare of any kind is obviously injurious to large 
numbers of people, but there is nothing gory or real about this variety. 
SEX A nude couple bathes together, but they're in water up to their 
necks and only talking. At other times there is mild innuendo. PROFANITY 
A slightly profane exclamation or two. For Which Children? AGES 3-5 
No damage would be done in all likelihood, but the film is too big, 
loud and complicated for many children this age. AGES 6-8 By now, 
there shouldn't be any serious problem. Parents, though, should be 
aware that this is an action film, albeit a refined one. AGES 9 AND 
UP Blast off. Jack Frost Michael Keaton, Kelly Preston, Mark Addy, 
Joseph Cross Directed by Troy Miller PG 100 minutes In Denver, a struggling 
rock musician named Jack Frost (Keaton) jumps in a very big old Cadillac 
for the drive to Aspen where he and his band are to play a command 
gig at a recording executive's party. Back at his cute snow-covered 
house, his perky wife, Gabby (Ms. Preston), and plucky 12-year-old 
son, Charlie (Cross), put up with another of Jack's absences. It's 
Christmas Eve, after all. Jack has barely gotten back from his last 
road trip. The kitchen sink needs fixing. Charlie, a hockey player, 
needs help with his wrist shot. Jack, who means well but is overextended, 
forgets to attend one of Charlie's games. On the road to Aspen, Jack 
starts thinking. To heck with the gig, he's going home to be with 
the family. On the drive back, the car leaves the road and Jack is 
killed. Cut to Christmas one year later. Still bereft, Charlie makes 
a snowman and puts his father's hat on it. That night it gets all 
windy and sparkly, the way it does in movies of this kind. The snowman 
comes alive. It's Jack, back from the beyond. Charlie is flabbergasted, 
but the two bond and finally get to do some dad-and-son things. But 
a warm front is approaching. Besides, as in life, Jack has to go. 
Amid more wind and sparkle he reappears as Jack to Charlie and Gabby, 
then departs secure in the knowledge that they know how he felt about 
them and can carry on. VIOLENCE Nothing is more violent than a car 
crash, but here there is no crash at all. Jack looks startled and 
there is a little flash of light. Otherwise, only a couple of respectable 
snowball fights. SEX Jack growls appreciatively at the little wisp 
of nothing Gabby dons one night. What transpires isn't depicted. Gabby 
also remarks that she is being hit on at her job, but the fellow is 
63, so it's a false alarm. PROFANITY One or two mild curses. For Which 
Children? AGES 3-5 This is one of those agonizingly sugarcoated movies 
that will have some older viewers ready to tear their seats out of 
the floor. Nevertheless, most children under 10 won't be unduly bothered 
by that element. But parental death is always sensitive no matter 
how cutely packaged, so that is a consideration. On balance, though, 
they should be entertained. AGES 6-8 Ditto. AGES 9-11 Life's priorities 
are a good subject, and the film has worthwhile things to say. Some 
older children may wish it had been done a little more realistically. 
AGES 12 AND UP No. Shakespeare in Love Gwyneth Paltrow, Joseph Fiennes, 
Geoffrey Rush, Colin Firth, Ben Affleck, Judi Dench, Simon Callow, 
Rupert Everett Directed by John Madden R 113 minutes In 1593, people 
behind on their debts got their boots burned (with their feet in them). 
With cash-flow problems at the Rose Theater, the heat is on for a 
marketable piece of work from a rakish and normally confident young 
man about the local drama scene named Will Shakespeare (Fiennes). 
Trouble is, about the best Will can offer at the moment is something 
he calls ``Romeo and Ethel, the Pirate's Daughter.'' Frankly, it's 
not his best work. Will's gifts, in fact, have dried up and with them 
his sexual appetite. Life, he tells his therapist, is like ``picking 
a lock with a wet herring.'' A rival up-and-comer named Christopher 
Marlowe (Everett) half-mockingly offers some pretty good suggestions 
for turning around ``Romeo,'' but it isn't until Will sights the gorgeous, 
high-born Viola de Lesseps (Ms. Paltrow) that he jump starts himself 
both creatively and sexually. Viola has dramatic aspirations herself, 
but since it is illegal for women to appear onstage, she dresses herself 
as a boy. A wildly passionate relationship ignites. In bed the two 
couple steamily. At the writing stand, Will strips feathers from his 
quill and scribbles madly, with the still-wet pages of the forming 
masterpiece rushed on stage to be rehearsed by his Juliet (Viola with 
a penciled mustache). For her, theirs is a ``love that overthrows 
life.'' Unfortunately, she has been promised to Lord Wessex (Firth), 
a union approved by Queen Elizabeth herself (Ms. Dench). And Will, 
it evolves, has a wife up in Stratford-on-Avon. It's a mess, but the 
play's the thing. VIOLENCE There is some knock-about, but it's natural, 
lighthearted and appropriate for the time and setting. SEX The humor 
is often bawdy. The sex is ardent but tasteful; the lovers are naked 
but not shown fully. For Which Children? AGES 12 AND UP The young 
loved both the 1968 ``Romeo and Juliet,'' with Olivia Hussey, and 
the 1995 ``William Shakespeare's Romeo and Juliet,''' with Leonardo 
DiCaprio. This version may well be vetoed because of the sex, but 
many teen-agers will find it full of fun and a witty treat. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>