<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981217.0427 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A bipartisan commission appointed by the White House to recommend 
what television broadcasters must do in exchange for their free licenses 
to use thousands of new channels is to submit its report Friday with 
watered-down voluntary measures on political advertising and on educational 
or public-affairs programs. The commission was set up in the summer 
of 1997 to advise President Clinton on whether the public-interest 
obligations of broadcasters _ to carry news and public-service announcements, 
for example _ should be increased with the vastly increased channel 
capacity that digital technology will soon give them. The report stops 
short of urging mandatory free broadcast time for political candidates 
or minimum amounts of educational and public affairs programming. 
But it does recommend that free broadcast time be provided as part 
of any overall campaign finance reform law if Congress passes one. 
It also urges Congress to establish a permanent trust fund for public 
broadcasting and to set aside some undetermined amount of future channel 
space for noncommercial educational programs and services, like distance 
learning or Internet access for schools and libraries. It advises 
that the projects be financed by the auction of space on the analog 
spectrum that is returned to the government when broadcasters convert 
to digital channels or by fees imposed on broadcasters that use added 
spectrum space for money-making channels, rather than for improved 
picture quality (high-definition television) on one channel. In one 
of the most contentious issues, the report suggests that giving free 
time to political candidates be voluntary, even though 14 of the commission's 
22 members favored mandatory free time and wrote dissenting opinions. 
The report recommends that broadcasters be encouraged to provide five 
minutes a night of free broadcast time for candidates in the 30 days 
before an election. The report's voluntary recommendations disturb 
Newton N. Minow, former commissioner of the Federal Communications 
Commission who served on the panel, the Advisory Committee on the 
Public Interest Obligations of Digital Television Broadcasters. ``The 
price paid for this laudable effort to accommodate conflicting views 
left us with a low common denominator at a time when we need a broader 
vision, equal to the promise of new digital channels,'' Minow wrote 
in a dissent. ``Our grandchildren will one day regret our failure 
to meet one of the great communications opportunities in the history 
of democracy.'' Because the report is advisory, Congress or the communications 
commission would have to impose any obligations on broadcasters. When 
digital television technology is complete, each station will be able 
to compress as many as five or six additional channels into its signal, 
or to use the entire signal for high-definition pictures (which requires 
more spectrum space). In 1996 Congress declined to auction the additional 
channel space, agreeing to let existing broadcasters keep it at no 
charge, and urging the communications commission to seek recommendations 
as to what public-service obligations broadcasters should meet in 
return for those public airwaves. Several independent reports by market-research 
firms have forecast that providing extra programs or other data on 
those new channels could be extremely lucrative. The advisory commission's 
report recommends that those ``who choose to multiplex, and in so 
doing reap enhanced economic benefits, should have the flexibility 
to choose between several options.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>