<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981217.0201 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Of the 300 objects in ``Edo: Art of Japan: 1615-1868'' at the National 
Gallery of Art, the screens depicting Japanese festivals are worth 
a trip to Washington all by themselves. In their scenes of outings 
and amusements associated with the festivals, the folding screens 
show society from top to bottom, warts and all. Priests, nursing mothers, 
shopkeepers, street musicians, fishermen, farmers and gamblers are 
all gently caricatured, almost like cartoons. Think Mardi Gras mixed 
with the Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade. ``The element of humor and 
parody really begins here,'' said Robert Singer, curator of the exhibition, 
which runs through Feb. 15, and an author of the excellent 480-page 
catalog, which sells for $35. ``Paintings of shrine festivals served 
as valued souvenirs for wealthy travelers, treasured emblems of family 
origin, or commodities offered in the negotiation of regional marriages,'' 
said Singer, the curator of Japanese art at the Los Angeles County 
Museum of Art. An eight-panel 17th-century screen at the National 
Gallery depicts the annual festival of the Tsushima Shrine in Owari, 
Japan. This celebration was held to secure protection against outbreaks 
of plague. On the screen, crowds watch on the riverbank as men propel 
sacred boats festooned with banners; people laugh at a man who has 
fallen overboard. ``Festival screens are often remarkably faithful 
to the key sites and activities of the particular festival portrayed,'' 
Singer writes in the catalog. The screens were ``produced by someone 
who observed the two-day event and made meticulous visual notes to 
produce such an accurate record.'' Lucky collectors can find similar 
screens, which were generally made in pairs, for sale in galleries. 
For example, Naga Antiques at 145 East 61st St. has a pair of six-panel 
screens from the mid-1600s of ``Scenes in and Around Kyoto'' by the 
Tosa school. One presents a panoramic view of ancient Kyoto dominated 
by the Nijo Castle. The other depicts the Gion Festival, another one 
held as protection against plagues. There is a delegation of holy 
men inspecting the Great Buddha Hall, a horse race and a procession 
of dignitaries going to the castle. Singer, who said he had not seen 
the Naga screen, explained in the catalog that a typical Gion screen 
``shows a rite that developed into a ritualized contest in the urban 
display of wealth, with neighborhood organizations of the merchant 
class vying with each other in the sumptuousness of their decorations.'' 
The screens are only one example of the art that flourished during 
the Edo period, when Japan was essentially closed to visitors. ``Edo 
closed the country, so it obliged the Japanese people to develop their 
own culture,'' Earl Powell III, the director of the National Gallery, 
explained. ``That's why you see such amazing creativity in the artwork.'' 
The year 1615 also ushered in a long period of prosperity and peace, 
which allowed popular urban culture to flourish. Edo, the old name 
for Tokyo, was the New York of its day. In the early 1600s, newly 
wealthy merchants were busy building houses and decorating them with 
textiles, scrolls and screens. Leighton Longhi, a private dealer in 
Manhattan, is selling an anonymous six-fold screen from around 1660 
that depicts the Sumiyoshi Festival, which was held every summer on 
the shores of Osaka Bay. This festival honored deities who brought 
prosperity to fisherman, travelers, poets and merchants. ``It involved 
transporting a cart from its permanent resting place to the shrine 
precincts,'' Longhi explained. Deities in palanquins were carried 
in a procession over an arched trestle bridge. Certainly the most 
beautiful screen in the National Gallery show is the six-panel Hikone 
screen, circa 1630, from the Hikone Castle Museum outside Kyoto. A 
National Treasure of Japan, it depicts a ``house of pleasure'' with 
courtesans and their admirers. The women, men and musicians are silhouetted 
against a gold-leaf background. In a garden, a young woman walks her 
exotic pet dog, pretending not to notice the foppish samurai warrior 
nearby. He is lazily leaning on his sword, perhaps a sign of his uselessness 
in a time of peace, admiring a woman who wears a pale blue robe printed 
with banana leaves. Her hair is loose. Behind her, a child holds a 
sprig of camellias, a symbol of innocence. Inside the house, denizens 
of the demimonde play a board game in front of a screen with a 16th-century-style 
landscape painting in sepia. A male client reads verse to a woman. 
Three musicians play string instruments. Each character and robe is 
distinct and individually portrayed. ``In a good screen, all the faces 
and costumes should be different,'' said Longhi. ``Screens reflected 
what was in vogue at the time: hairstyles, textiles and fashion.'' 
Singer said: ``This has become the `Mona Lisa' of Japan. Everyone 
reads something different into it. There is a melancholy and wistfulness 
for the past that comes through. But even I, who spent four years 
trying to borrow this for the show, cannot tell you exactly what it 
means and why there's a Chinese landscape scene in a brothel.'' Other 
Edo screens resemble cinematic close-ups. Naga has a $125,000 one 
showing a red banner hanging from a rope strung between two trees. 
On it, the artist has painted a rearing stallion and a docile mare. 
``Japanese artists had a whimsical sense of humor,'' said Jim Marinaccio, 
the owner of Naga. The screen is a trompe l'oeil take on what one 
might see if the banner were not there. But the joke is that there 
are no horses on the other side. Banners were used to enclose a space 
for a very private outdoor picnic. Liza Hyde, a private dealer in 
Manhattan who specializes in flower screens, has a $300,000 pair of 
large Edo flower-cart screens, signed and sealed by Ooka Shumboku 
(1680-1763). Each portrays a lacquered carriage that holds a basket 
with a profuse arrangement of flowers. One represents spring, the 
other, fall. Such screens were associated with aristocrats and carried 
their crests. The carts are drawn by a band of cherubic children who 
probably symbolize the wish for offspring and the continuation of 
the family line. Ms. Hyde surmises that the screens were used as wedding 
decorations. Others say they were used for all kinds of auspicious 
occasions. The flower arrangements are easily as elaborate as anything 
done today by the New York party impresario Robert Isabell. Flying 
Cranes Antiques, at 1050 Second Ave. in Manhattan, has more affordable 
screens, like a late-Edo horse race at Kamo Shrine painted by a Kano 
school master. This bird's-eye view of Kyoto, partly obscured by gold 
clouds, shows courtiers on horseback racing on a track of golden flakes. 
Considering the amount of gold, it almost seems reasonable at $22,500. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>