<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981217.0204 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When Meg Ryan's character gets the sniffles and retreats from the 
world in ``You've Got Mail,'' she puts on pajamas and curls up in 
bed with her trusty laptop or a favorite book. Someday, when this 
cozy romantic comedy becomes a videocassette, it too will be a comfort 
object perfect for such moments. Ms. Ryan, Tom Hanks and the archly 
funny Nora Ephron join forces, this time much more easily than they 
did in ``Sleepless in Seattle,'' to make an inviting love story that 
entangles a man, a woman, a couple of computers and a New York neighborhood 
so picturesquely idealized that it feels like Paris. Even if you already 
live on the Upper West Side, you might feel the urge to move there 
before the film is over. The essence of that place, its populace and 
this precise moment in our technological evolution are captured so 
endearingly here that ``You've Got Mail'' becomes a New York story 
reminiscent of early Woody Allen romances, turning the characters 
into charmingly neurotic products of the place they call home. And 
in this setting, as far as ``You've Got Mail'' is concerned, the most 
important landmarks are intimate little hangouts and good old-fashioned 
books. Being firmly on the side of the angels, this film treasures 
the written word so proudly that the closing credits thank a long 
list of publishing houses. And they really ought to be thanking Ms. 
Ephron in return. The film's mix of romance and reading matter is 
seductive in its own right, providing comfy book-lined settings and 
people who are what they read and write. When they fall in love, they 
do it wistfully, as if not quite believing that real life can measure 
up to really good fiction. The most important literary outpourings 
here are those exchanged through e-mail, which makes the film that 
much more amusingly attuned to its time. The screenplay by Ms. Ephron 
and her sister, Delia Ephron, adapts Ernst Lubitsch's 1940 delight, 
``The Shop Around the Corner,'' to the e-mail age with gratifying 
ingenuity and with its share of extra observations about how times 
have changed. The star-crossed correspondents, who in Lubitsch's film 
were employees of the same amazingly gracious retail establishment, 
have been promoted to people who run their own businesses. That makes 
their stress and loneliness all the more real, to the point where 
it's easy to see what drives Joe Fox (Hanks) and Kathleen Kelly (Ms. 
Ryan) into the world of cyberflirtation. By making Kathleen the second-generation 
owner of a sweet little bookstore for children (titles on the shelves 
have clearly been chosen with loving care) and Joe the tycoon whose 
megastore may stomp her out of business, the film gives an additional 
shrewd angle to its foolproof old story. It seems that Kathleen and 
Joe loathe each other in person but are unwittingly close confidants, 
electronically sharing their innermost thoughts. Should this sound 
merely like a lot of typing, Ms. Ephron finds plenty of ways to put 
laptops in bed and otherwise make e-mail visually interesting, starting 
with a nifty credit sequence that turns all New York into the environment 
for a video game. In addition, she makes time for shots at the big 
bookstore as a place that sells ``cheap books and legal addictive 
stimulants,'' in the wry words of Hanks' Joe. That's about as nasty 
as Joe needs to be under feel-good circumstances like these. The film 
wafts through its urban paradise, a litter-free place full of flowers 
and friendly passers-by, as it watches Kathleen and Joe warily circling 
each other. Complicating matters are a few too many supporting characters, 
though many of these get the screenplay's best lines. (Says Jean Stapleton, 
as a genteel older friend of Kathleen's, about an old flame: ``It 
wasn't meant to be. He ran Spain.'') But the film nicely incorporates 
its minor figures into its sociological milieu, like the two little 
children who are among Joe's next of kin. ``Matt is my father's son,'' 
he explains. ``Annabel is my grandfather's daughter. We are'' pause 
``an American family.'' Dabney Coleman and John Randolph play the 
much-married fathers, and at one point three generations of lonely 
male Foxes find themselves luxuriously ensconced on family boats at 
the 79th Street Boat Basin. Ms. Ryan plays her role blithely and credibly 
this time, with an air of freshness, a minimum of cute fidgeting and 
a lot of fond chemistry with Hanks. And he continues to amaze. Once 
again, he fully inhabits a new role without any obvious actorly behavior, 
to the point where comparisons to James Stewart (who starred with 
Margaret Sullavan in the Lubitsch film) really cannot be avoided. 
Though he has none of Stewart's lanky grace or leading-man patina, 
the wonderful Hanks has all the same romantic wistfulness and the 
same poignant shyness when he learns who Kathleen really is. He shares 
Stewart's lovely way of speaking from the heart. Hanks also makes 
fine use of the film's comic opportunities, as in a scene that has 
him explaining how ``The Godfather'' resembles the I Ching as a guide 
to life. ``What should I take on vacation?'' he asks rhetorically. 
Advice from ``The Godfather'' on this question goes this way: ``Leave 
the gun, take the cannoli.'' In a film that makes Kathleen's sensibility 
clear by having her quote Joni Mitchell, the principals' erstwhile 
mates are part of the trenchant local color. Parker Posey plays Joe's 
girlfriend, a piranha from the publishing world (``Patricia makes 
coffee nervous,'' Joe remarks), and Greg Kinnear plays a writer for 
The New York Observer prone to stupefying pronouncements. These characters 
are as apt a part of the scenery as Dan Davis' warm, audience-friendly 
production design. ``You've Got Mail'' deserves to trigger a revived 
interest in the late honey-voiced singer Harry Nilsson, whose music 
on the lighthearted soundtrack provides just the right mix of jauntiness 
and yearning. Nilsson's beautiful music hasn't figured this prominently 
in a film since it turned up in ``Midnight Cowboy,'' used to quite 
different effect. PRODUCTION NOTES `YOU'VE GOT MAIL' Directed by Nora 
Ephron; written by Nora Ephron and Delia Ephron, based on the Ernst 
Lubitsch comedy ``The Shop Around the Corner,'' written by Samson 
Raphaelson from the play ``Parfumerie'' by Miklos Laszlo; director 
of photography, John Lindley; edited by Richard Marks; music by George 
Fenton; production designer, Dan Davis; produced by Lauren Shuler 
Donner and Nora Ephron; released by Warner Brothers. Running time: 
110 minutes. This film is rated PG. It includes mild profanity and 
tender clinches. With: Tom Hanks (Joe Fox), Meg Ryan (Kathleen Kelly), 
Parker Posey (Patricia Eden), Jean Stapleton (Birdie), Dave Chappelle 
(Kevin Scanlon), Steve Zahn (George Pappas), Greg Kinnear (Frank Navasky), 
Dabney Coleman (Joe's father) and John Randolph (Joe's grandfather). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>