<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981217.0411 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The heart of the affluent Las Mercedes neighborhood in Caracas, Venezuela, 
got a 150-foot artificial Christmas tree this year. The avenue around 
the tree was blocked off last month so that thousands of people from 
the Venezuelan capital could be brought in to watch Santa Claus arrive 
on a Coca-Cola truck, scattering souvenirs to all. ``For many of the 
kids and people from the barrios who don't have shoes or shirts in 
any kind of repair, it was the first time you'd seen them in this 
area,'' said Brent Willis, president of the Coca-Cola division that 
oversees Venezuela. ``When Santa Claus came in, they got to see the 
free celebration, and nothing comes for free to these guys.'' Similar 
trees and mass gatherings are planned in scores of villages across 
the country. The Christmas campaign, aimed squarely at what Willis 
refers to as ``the hearts and minds'' of Venezuela's 22 million people, 
is one sign of how intensely the Coca-Cola Co. is battling for the 
soft-drink market in Venezuela, which for 50 years was one of the 
few places in the world where its rival Pepsico Inc. held an overwhelming 
lead. All that changed in August 1996 with a deal that ruptured Pepsico's 
joint venture with a local bottler and shifted everything that had 
been Pepsi's to Coca-Cola. The loss of one of its top-performing international 
markets was an enormous blow to Pepsi, which sued Coca-Cola over it 
and won $94 million in damages from an international arbitration court. 
For close to a year after that, it was difficult to buy any American 
soft drink but Coke in Venezuela. But these days, Pepsi is teamed 
up with another local bottler, Polar, and is roaring back with a combination 
of deep discounts, heavy advertising and more and more cold-drink 
coolers everywhere from airports to mom and pop grocery stores. This 
marks the first time Coke and Pepsi have been simultaneously present 
in the Venezuelan market at full strength, and analysts predict it 
will be a long and costly entanglement for both, particularly now 
that Coke's bottler is matching Pepsi's discounts. It is not just 
financial interests that are at stake in this country half the size 
of Texas, but issues of corporate identity deeply rooted in the past. 
``To dismiss the sentimentality of the Venezuelan market to Pepsi 
would be naive,'' said Andrew Conway, a beverage industry analyst 
for Morgan Stanley Dean Witter, who says Pepsi has ``steadily and 
consistently'' increased its market share over the last three months, 
to an estimated 29 percent. ``There are emotions and profitability 
at stake.'' Some analysts question whether Pepsi can continue spending 
as heavily as it has been. A spokesman for Pepsi said that along with 
its discounts, the company had installed more than 50,000 refrigerated 
display cases, known as ``visi-coolers,'' in the last year, trying 
to match the 75,000 that Coke's bottler has set up. Pepsi has about 
1,500 delivery routes operating and expects to add 200 more by the 
end of the year, covering about 90 percent of Venezuela, which extends 
from the Andean highlands in the south to the Caribbean in the north. 
Coke, meanwhile, has already spent more than $1 billion in stock and 
cash through its major bottler in the region to buy the former Pepsi 
bottler, owned by Oswaldo J. Cisneros, Gustavo A. Cisneros and other 
members of the Cisneros family, one of the country's leading business 
clans. The purchase was completed by the publicly traded Panamerican 
Beverages Inc., known as Panamco, nearly a year after Cisneros switched 
allegiances. The original move by Cisneros turned over what had been 
Pepsi's network and manufacturing assets to Coke almost overnight. 
One Pepsi executive, who arrived in Caracas in October 1996, one month 
after the Cisneros switch, said there was no sign that Pepsi had ever 
been in the country at that point. ``It was amazing, because there 
were 50 years of signs and machines that literally had been covered 
over in the matter of a month,'' said William Mullenix, Pepsi-Cola's 
franchise director in Venezuela. ``You could peel them back and see 
the Pepsi underneath.'' Even Coke claims to be slightly amazed at 
how fast it all happened. ``We're surprised that after almost two 
years, we have overtaken what it took Pepsi 50 years to build,'' Willis 
said. Coke's market share in Venezuela has dwindled recently. A year 
ago, it had 81 percent, but the combination of Pepsi's onslaught and 
a market weakened by devaluation of the Venezuelan bolivar has reduced 
that share to 70 percent. In addition, the decision in September to 
match Pepsi's aggressive discounting to retailers has squeezed profits, 
leading at least one analyst to conclude that it would not be a very 
merry fourth quarter for Panamco. ``Their profitability is going to 
be very weak, and you could see a loss,'' said Laura D. Meizler, a 
beverage industry analyst for Salomon Brothers Smith Barney. ``The 
discount is not even being passed on to the customer. The retailer 
is keeping it.'' Ms. Meizler expects the situation to stabilize eventually, 
with Panamco retaining a 70 percent market share and benefiting from 
its infrastructure and distribution network, both of which are larger 
than Polar's. Because Panamco did not have to invest in equipment 
in Venezuela, its focus has been on execution and brand-awareness 
programs for consumers, ``instead of focusing on building infrastructure 
as Pepsi has been forced to do,'' she noted. At the moment, however, 
``the current level of discounting is clearly not sustainable,'' according 
to a recent report by Ms. Meizler on the company's activity in Venezuela. 
And other industry experts say some of the Panamco equipment will 
need to be replaced before long, requiring additional capital from 
the bottler. In advertising, Coke has a budget of more than $50 million 
for Venezuela this year, Willis said, which includes 35 television 
commercials that are often locally made. And curiously, Coke's advertising 
is leaning on at least one old Pepsi slogan. ``Consumers see Coca-Cola 
as the choice of the new generation,'' Willis said, intentionally 
evoking the old Pepsi campaign. ``Here Pepsi is the historical brand, 
and Coca-Cola is the one that is new and exciting.'' What may turn 
out to be the wild card in all of this is the joint-marketing agreement 
announced last month between Pepsico's Frito-Lay division and Polar. 
The plan to sell potato chips and other salty snacks together suggests 
an even closer bond with Polar. Venezuela may prove an important international 
test for what Pepsico's chairman, Roger A. Enrico, has called ``the 
power of one,'' referring to the combined strength of Pepsi's products. 
In any case, Venezuela is turning out to be the stage for one of the 
more intense confrontations between the two soft-drink giants. ``Before 
now, there was a monopoly,'' Mullenix said. ``Over the last two years, 
this place went from blue to red to red and blue.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>