<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981217.0325 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A political crisis is unfolding at home and a military action is under 
way abroad. But when the Federal Reserve meets to consider interest 
rate policy on Tuesday, it will face an economic outlook that, while 
complex and a bit confusing, is more stable than it has been for months. 
The fear that had threatened to paralyze the bond market earlier this 
fall has ebbed, though it has not disappeared. The stock market is 
robust again, bolstering spending by consumers, who are also benefiting 
from the strongest growth in real income in years. Manufacturers and 
farmers continue to be hit hard by the global financial crisis, but 
even they got good news Wednesday when the Commerce Department reported 
that the trade deficit in October was $14.2 billion, much lower than 
expected, and that exports grew 2.8 percent. Asia is showing signs 
of stabilizing, and Brazil has managed to avoid a meltdown. Talk of 
a recession in the United States in 1999 has evaporated. And not only 
do analysts expect that the Fed will leave rates unchanged on Tuesday 
after cutting rates three times in the last three months, but chances 
are increasing that the central bank will remain on hold for months 
to come. ``The economy has proven stronger than they thought when 
they were easing, and the prospects for slowing ahead are much diminished, 
both on account of the consumer and the reopening of the fixed income 
markets to new issues,'' said Rosanne Cahn, an economist at Credit 
Suisse First Boston. Heading into 1999, Ms. Cahn said, ``the Fed will 
be on hold unless there is another financial market disturbance.'' 
Following its last rate cut, on Nov. 17, the Fed's policy-making Federal 
Open Market Committee signaled that it might hold off on further reductions, 
saying that financial conditions ``can reasonably be expected to be 
consistent with fostering sustained economic expansion.'' Still, Alan 
Greenspan, the Fed chairman, and a number of other Fed officials have 
remained concerned that financial market strains could put the nation's 
long expansion at risk if not reversed. By some measures, those strains 
have eased considerably; companies are finding it easier to issue 
new debt, for example. But by others, the problems remain significant. 
In particular, the spread between the yield on U.S. Treasury bonds 
and riskier forms of debt remains abnormally high, suggesting continued 
risk aversion on the part of investors and a lack of demand from hedge 
funds, banks and securities firms that suffered big losses in the 
spasms that gripped the markets in late summer and early fall. Yet 
Fed officials are closely studying the real economy as well as financial 
conditions. They see an economy that is slowing somewhat, tugged between 
the strength of consumer demand and weak and still fragile conditions 
in the industrial sector. The risk of a marked slowdown in growth 
appears greater to them than the risk of a rapid acceleration in growth, 
they said. The strength of consumer demand will be driven to a large 
degree by the stock market. While another big surge on Wall Street 
is by no means out of the question, they said, anything short of significant 
increases in paper wealth is likely to bring some slowdown in the 
growth of consumer demand. On the industrial side of the economy, 
much will depend on the recovery of export markets. Wednesday's trade 
figures were a hopeful sign, showing a rebound in exports of food, 
semiconductors and computer accessories and manufactured goods. Most 
big export markets, though, seem more likely to be flat or weaker 
in 1999 than to be stronger, Fed officials and analysts said. Japan 
has shown few signs of pulling out of its economic swoon. South Korea 
has shown some signs of recovery but remains fragile, as do most other 
Asian nations and Latin America. Europe appears to be facing a slowdown, 
a forecast that helped push most of the continent's central banks 
to cut interest rates earlier this month. Wednesday's trade report 
``does not necessarily indicate a turning of the tide'' for American 
exporters, said Howard Lewis III, vice president for economic policy 
at the National Association of Manufacturers, which is pressing for 
further rate cuts by the Fed. ``Looser monetary policy will help provide 
liquidity to cash-strapped nations in the Far East,'' Lewis said. 
``This will increase the demand for U.S. exports as the Asian economies 
get back on track.'' The Fed has been concerned in recent months that 
growth next year would dip to below 2.25 percent or 2.5 percent, which 
many economists consider the level at which the economy can grow over 
the long run without igniting inflation. But some Fed officials have 
been raising their growth estimates. Growth over the first three quarters 
this year has averaged 3.7 percent, and data in recent weeks suggest 
this quarter will be equally strong. ``The outlook for the fourth 
quarter of this year and for next year has strengthened considerably 
over the past six to eight weeks,'' Jack Beebe, the director of research 
at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, said in a report last 
week. He raised his forecast for growth in 1999 to 2.75 percent from 
1.5 percent, though he warned that the outlook is subject to ``enormous 
uncertainty.'' Balancing and perhaps even outweighing the concern 
about growth slowing too rapidly is concern among one camp within 
the Fed that inflationary pressures will continue to build. That camp 
sees the prospect of a period of below-trend growth as healthy, suggesting 
at a minimum that they will be unwilling to support further easing 
as long as unemployment remains low and the stock market remains buoyant. 
Although inflation is dormant by most measures, it is not dead, economists 
said. Ian Shepherdson, an economist at High Frequency Economics, a 
consulting firm, said the core Producer Price Index has risen at an 
annual pace of 2.2 percent over the last three months, its fastest 
rate of increase since January 1996. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>