<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981217.0446 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
On another day of surreal split-screen frenzy in the capital, the 
Republicans in the House of Representatives decided Thursday to begin 
debate on the impeachment of President Clinton on Friday, when U.S. 
warplanes will presumably be preparing for further raids on Iraq. 
An uproar over the timing of the impeachment debate broke out on the 
House floor Thursday afternoon while television screens outside were 
aglow with ghostly green images of bombs and missiles exploding in 
Baghdad. While there was no sign that any House Republicans were wavering 
on impeachment _ indeed, several more undecided Republicans said they 
would vote for impeachment _ it was evident that the party leadership 
had been thrown off stride by the strikes. The president's strategists 
conceded that the struggle in the House had been lost, though it was 
not clear whether the vote would come on Friday or Saturday, and turned 
grimly to the task of preparing for a Senate trial. Clinton also faced 
bitter criticism on the diplomatic front from a handful of foreign 
countries, notably Russia and China, for resorting to force. The Russians 
recalled their ambassador from Washington in protest Thursday. Democrats 
objected strenuously to moving ahead with impeachment while the bombing 
campaign was under way. It is expected to end by this weekend, a White 
House official said, when the Islamic holy month of Ramadan starts. 
The House majority leader, Rep. Dick Armey, R-Texas, said debate would 
begin at 9 a.m. Friday, with voting on the four articles of impeachment 
running into Saturday. No change was conceded by the Republicans, 
but discussions about the timetable and the rules, especially the 
one governing the time to be allotted for debate, continued deep into 
the evening. Barring some significant change, the stage was set for 
the spectacle of a House vote on impeaching a president for only the 
second time in 130 years, taking place while U.S. military planes 
were flying over hostile territory. ``I'm going to complete this mission,'' 
Clinton vowed as allied bombers and cruise missiles hit Baghdad and 
other parts of Iraq with a second wave of punishing airstrikes. Reports 
from the scene said that explosions in the capital were louder and 
more percussive than those in the first wave on Wednesday night. There 
were no reports of casualties among U.S. pilots, but in Baghdad, officials 
said that at least 25 Iraqis had died, and Clinton acknowledged that 
Iraqi civilian casualties were unavoidable. His eyes red and puffy 
with fatigue, the president forcefully but without visible rancor 
rejected suggestions from senior Republicans that he had ordered the 
strikes to dissipate momentum towards impeachment. ``I don't think 
any serious person would believe that any president would do such 
a thing,'' Clinton commented just before a briefing in the Oval Office. 
The president was told at the briefing, and reporters were later informed, 
that the first volley of more than 200 unmanned cruise missiles, launched 
from ships in the Persian Gulf at some 50 targets, had leveled President 
Saddam Hussein's military headquarters in Baghdad and four barracks 
of security guards at weapons sites. But Gen. Henry H. Shelton, the 
chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, conceded that other strikes 
were ``not as successful.'' Pointing at an aerial photo of one of 
Iraq's special security brigade headquarters, Shelton said, ``You 
don't see anything but rubble in what was formerly this building.'' 
The second wave on Thursday, which included British Tornado bombers 
for the first time, sent more cruise missiles deep into Iraq while 
navy planes with laser-guided bombs went after Iraqi air-defense sites 
along the border. Iraq, China and Russia all called for an immediate 
end to the attacks, but a divided U.N. Security Council took no further 
action. France, whose initial reaction was rather negative, seemed 
to be softening somewhat after President Jacques Chirac had what his 
spokeswoman, Catherine Colonna, called ``a good conversation'' with 
Clinton. ``Once again, responsibility lies clearly with the Iraqi 
president,'' Chirac said in a subsequent statement. ``The main point 
is to settle problems that, without a doubt, will not be settled by 
airstrikes.'' Americans overwhelmingly support airstrikes against 
Iraq, with four national polls taken on Wednesday evening after the 
bombing began showing that the action was viewed favorably by about 
three-quarters of the public. The support figures were 73 percent 
in an ABC News poll, 79 percent in a CBS News poll, 75 percent in 
an NBC News poll and 74 percent in a poll conducted by the Gallup 
Organization for CNN and USA Today. However, a significant fraction 
of those who support impeachment, a relatively small minority of the 
population in itself, believes that the imminence of a House vote 
may have affected the timing of the raids in some way. Some prominent 
Republicans who sharply questioned the honesty of Clinton's justification 
of the raids on Wednesday pulled back on Thursday, though none apologized. 
Notable in this group was former Secretary of State Lawrence F. Eagleburger, 
who said after a meeting with the present holder of that job, Madeleine 
Albright, that he would mute his language in coming days. Under criticism 
from both parties, Sen. Trent Lott, R-Miss., the majority leader, 
backed away from his charge that the strikes were linked to impeachment. 
After overnight reflection, he said, ``I am satisfied this was a military 
decision.'' In an interview on CNN, Lott also confirmed that the Senate 
would open a trial of the president if any of the articles of impeachment 
were approved, and he said there would be no deals to cut it short, 
as a number of Democrats have proposed recently. A parade of Republican 
senators, including John McCain of Arizona, Richard G. Lugar of Indiana, 
John W. Warner of Virginia and Jesse Helms of North Carolina, voiced 
support of the president's decision to strike now. All are prominent 
party spokesmen on defense and foreign policy matters. Others in the 
party worried that proceeding with the impeachment debate and vote 
might backfire on the speaker-elect, Rep. Robert L. Livingston of 
Louisiana, just as closing down the federal government a few years 
ago came to haunt the outgoing speaker, Newt Gingrich. A Republican 
senator deeply involved with foreign policy said, ``It is Bob's call, 
of course, but he had better watch carefully where he treads.'' The 
political future of Livingston himself was called into question on 
Thursday when, after being informed that a disclosure was imminent, 
he admitted to extramarital indiscretions. Gingrich, in what may have 
been his last speech as speaker, told the House: ``No matter what 
our debates at home, we are as a nation prepared to lead the world.'' 
Later, the House voted 417-5 in favor of a resolution expressing support 
for U.S. forces in the Gulf. Arguing against an impeachment debate 
now, Rep. Dick Gephardt, D-Mo., the House minority leader, said it 
could be ``misperceived as a sign of disunity'' by Saddam Hussein, 
the Iraqi president. Retiring Rep. Lee Hamilton, a widely respected 
Indiana Democrat, said it was ``unwise to weaken the president'' at 
a time when a new invasion of Kuwait, a missile assault on Israel 
or a peace initiative might be triggered by the allied air raids. 
But Armey quoted the president himself in rebuttal. Asked at the White 
House Thursday morning whether his authority would be undercut by 
an impeachment vote, Clinton said: ``No. I'm going to complete this 
mission, we're going to complete this mission. The Republican leadership 
have to decide how to do their job. That's not for me to comment on.'' 
The president also placed calls Thursday to at least two House Democrats 
who appeared to be wavering in their opposition to impeachment. A 
vote of support for Clinton came from former President Jimmy Carter. 
Though a Democrat, he has never been particularly close to Clinton, 
and he has said little about the prospect of impeachment. On Thursday, 
however, he said in a statement issued in Atlanta that charges that 
the president had launched the attacks ``for political purposes are 
both unjust and ill-advised.'' As Saddam visited sites struck by allied 
missiles, including the home of the youngest of his three daughters, 
Clinton talked by telephone with President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt, 
King Hussein of Jordan and Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel, 
as well as Chirac, searching for support. Albright said she had called 
officials in more than 20 countries. At the United Nations, the Russians 
and the Chinese demanded the resignation of Richard Butler, the head 
of the U.N. inspection team in Iraq, whose report triggered the American 
attack. But Albright said the United States would ``fight for him,'' 
and Butler defended his report as ``factual, clear, objective and 
honest.'' No one had orchestrated it, he said. Defense Secretary William 
S. Cohen sought to squelch any suggestions that Saddam or any members 
of his family were the targets of American weapons. ``We are targeting 
military or militarily related targets, period,'' the secretary declared. 
The Pentagon announced that it was sending reinforcements to the gulf, 
including 10 F-117 Stealth fighters, Patriot antimissile units and 
troops. Military police, communications specialists and Special Forces 
are among those to be rushed to the area. More than 3,000 other troops 
are already on hand in Kuwait in case Saddam should decide to strike 
back there. At home, meanwhile, security was tightened at airports, 
the Capitol and other federal buildings, to guard against any retaliatory 
terrorist attacks. Up to 40 U.S. embassies were closed by the State 
department for two days for the same reason, officials said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>