<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981217.0224 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In theory, the Duane Hanson retrospective at the Whitney Museum of 
American Art could not be better timed. Hanson was born in the tiny 
farming town of Alexandria, Minn., in 1925 and died in Davie, Fla., 
in 1996. A late bloomer, he spent the last three decades of his life 
making uninflected, minutely detailed cast replicas of resoundingly 
average Americans _ stoical, often fleshy denizens of malls, tract 
houses, group tours and gyms _ and enjoying what must have been a 
painful combination of financial success and critical neglect. He 
seems to have been a figurative sculptor almost from the start, born 
to do exactly what he ended up doing. The first piece in this exhibition 
was made when Hanson was 13 and had yet to see a real work of art. 
It is a life-size wood carving based on Gainsborough's ``Blue Boy,'' 
which he saw in reproduction in an art book. Weathered and chipped, 
it's like folk art _ perhaps an elegant ship's figurehead. Its narrow 
features and patchy surface also give it a tremulous, soulful fragility 
reminiscent of El Greco. Hanson studied art at Macalester College 
in St. Paul, Minn., the University of Minnesota and Cranbrook and 
then wavered between abstraction and figuration throughout the 1950s 
and much of the '60s. In the late '60s, he began making life-size 
polyvinyl acetate casts from living people, devoting his energy at 
first to sensationally violent subjects. The show includes, from 1967, 
a gruesome gangland murder victim just raised from sleeping with the 
fishes and a young man killed in a motorcycle accident, his leg shattered 
and his abdomen torn open. The artist's first New York show took place 
in 1970 at the OK Harris Gallery in SoHo, after which his work tended 
to be more subtle in its sensationalism. Throughout his career, his 
carefully painted trompe l'oeil figures, which sometimes took up to 
a year to make, were snapped up by a small band of collectors, given 
periodic museum shows, and included in history books and public collections. 
Still, although admired in Europe, especially Germany, his work was 
ignored or reviled in many sectors of the American art world. Times 
have changed. The last 20 years have brought an end to abstract art's 
dominance and a widespread resurgence of various realisms among younger 
artists. Dummies and artificial body parts are routine in nearly every 
medium, from photography to performance art. Sculptors, in particular, 
have returned to realistic renderings of the human form with a kind 
of vengeance, and the vengeful include such well-known talents as 
Robert Gober, Kiki Smith, Juan Munoz, Charles Ray, Jake and Dinos 
Chapman and Jeff Koons. In this climate, one would think that Hanson's 
work might emerge as an interesting and important precursor, that 
it might be time for his stolid waitresses, tourists and construction 
workers to have their moment in the sun. It's hard to say. People 
who have long disdained Hanson's figures may not be converted by this 
exhibition, but they will definitely find him harder to dismiss or 
pigeonhole. In all, 25 of Hanson's fully detailed Americans, made 
between 1967 and 1995, loiter around the Whitney's third floor. On 
crowded days some of the pieces, especially a policeman leaning against 
a wall like a museum guard, may blend with the public. Others will 
be hard to miss. Hanson favored types who don't often go to museums: 
construction workers on a lunch break, a retired couple in gaudy vacation 
wear, a weight lifter, a cowboy, an obese man sitting on a lawn mower, 
and two blond children playing Connect Four. There are several women, 
demoralized, and conscious of it, to varying degrees. One pushes a 
toddler in a stroller. Another, heavy-set, slovenly and slightly hostile 
of expression, struggles with packages. A third, with frazzled gray 
hair and slip showing, sits lost in thought, reading a letter with 
opened mail piled on her knees. A fourth, a dignified black woman 
with a rolling trash barrel slung with cleaning equipment, is clearly 
a janitor. A fifth is a weary waitress slumped against a wall. A sixth, 
sitting on a folding chair surrounded by books and amateur paintings, 
is a flea-market vendor. She is reading a 1985 issue of a magazine 
named Sky, the pages open to an article on Hanson's work. In the presences 
of these figures a kind of critical tug of war ensues. On the one 
hand there's an undeniable intensified reality to Hanson's work. As 
surely as Pollock's drips or Donald Judd's fabricated boxes, his figures 
eliminated the artist's touch and personal history. Instead they emphasized 
physical facts, planting themselves in the viewer's space and consciousness 
with a new aggressiveness. A good Hanson _ one whose pose is natural 
and whose skin tones are convincingly painted _ confronts us with 
an obdurate sense of physical and psychological weight. The female 
half of ``Old Couple on Bench'' of 1994, for example, is shocking 
in its implacable, unchanging immobility, at once lifelike and yet 
so very unlike life. Against this reaction is the frequent suspicion 
that one is looking at little more than a finely tuned mechanical 
skill _ a high-level form of taxidermy backed by a feel for the class 
codes and subliminal signals of American dress and accessories that 
would do a Hollywood wardrobe designer proud. Sometimes a Hanson figure 
reads as pure subject matter, a punch list of telling details as legible 
as the attributes of a Renaissance saint. Another woman, part of the 
couple that is ``Tourists II,'' wears flip-flops better suited to 
her back yard and carries two bulky tote bags and a camera. Every 
detail adds substance to the glazed, uncomprehending expression of 
someone traveling the globe but missing everything, forming a giant 
cliche. Yet these details anchor an experience of this character as 
a totality, an unavoidably present being and object displacing substantial 
amounts of psychic and physical space. Just as Hanson's figures seem 
to occupy a zone that is not quite art and definitely not life, the 
artist is in a category by himself. He may be a kind of naive and 
aberrant pop artist. He didn't cull the signs and symbols of the vast 
American unconsciousness from popular culture, like Warhol or Lichtenstein. 
Rather he went directly to the source, the origin of that unconsciousness 
in the American mind and body. In the flesh, the precursor theory 
falls flat. Hanson's straightforward evocation of American stereotypes 
may sometimes find echoes in the work of '80s appropriation artists 
like Richard Prince and Cindy Sherman. Like their images, his sculptures 
trigger full-blown narratives, daily American tragedies, almost before 
you know it. But his work hardly presages the figurative sculpture 
of the '90s, which almost invariably represents the body fragmented 
or truncated, disturbingly distorted in form or scale, caught in one 
private act or another, or with its constituent parts savagely rearranged. 
(Its role models are more likely to be Jasper Johns and Bruce Nauman.) 
Hanson's art is less a harbinger of the new realism than a last gasp 
of the old, the end point of a centuries-long tradition of meticulous, 
devotional verisimilitude that began in Northern Europe in the late 
15th century. (Its roots are abundantly visible in ``Van Eyck to Bruegel'' 
at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.) Like the artists of the Northern 
Renaissance, Hanson viewed the figure as whole and inviolate, something 
to be respectfully replicated down to the last detail and presented 
as is, in all its everyday ordinariness. The most affecting quality 
of his art may simply be his own careful attention to his figures' 
painted surfaces and telling details. It balances the brutal honesty 
of his approach with a tenderness that is reverential, sweet and self-effacing. 
The clue here is a piece from 1979 that opens the exhibition. Titled 
``Self-Portrait With Model,'' it portrays Hanson seated at a small 
coffee-shop table across from a heavyset woman who has just finished 
a chocolate sundae: A slight figure, he gazes at her in quiet awe, 
like one of the Magi at the adoration. ``Duane Hanson: A Survey of 
His Work From the '30s to the '90s'' is at the Whitney Museum of American 
Art, 945 Madison Ave., New York, through March 21. It was organized 
by the Whitney and the Museum of Art, Fort Lauderdale, Fla., and will 
travel to the Memphis Brooks Museum of Art in Tennessee, April 18 
to June 13, 1999. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>