<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981217.0217 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The spirit of Christmas resides in Brooklyn, at 7823 12th Ave. in 
Dyker Heights. There, in a four-bedroom brick row house, Peter and 
Janet Marcolini have hung, strung and sprung a dazzling array of decorations 
for a quarter century, each year noticeably more than the year before. 
They may be running out of space, but they will never run out of heart. 
This year, they have transformed their house into a wild, psychedelic 
eruption of seasonal sensation _ an electrical exclamation of elves, 
Santas, reindeer and, of course, a prominent manger scene, although 
one in which, on the night I saw it, Mary's light had just burned 
out. Hope, children and all the other Christmas verities are the Marcolinis' 
touchstone. Why else would they have felt the need for a baby when 
their two children were approaching the age of leaving home? But they 
did feel the need, and so 5-year-old Jessica was strolling the family's 
personal winter wonderland in pajamas and overcoat, smiling and pointing 
out the marvels that her parents, one a mozzarella and salami salesman 
and the other a full-time homemaker, had labored more than two months 
to build. ``I just love Christmas,'' Jessica said. My friend Danny 
and I found the Marcolinis on our recent prowl for the spirit of the 
season, the latest in our periodic silly walks. We favor themes. During 
one stroll we walked 27 miles around the edge of Manhattan, enduring 
both 98-degree heat and a three-hour rainstorm. We circled Staten 
Island, in search of the borough's soul, finding it in the perfect 
calzone. And we walked the length of Flatbush Avenue in Brooklyn, 
managing to get lost on a straight boulevard with numbered cross streets. 
We came to southern Brooklyn, where Danny grew up in northern Bay 
Ridge, on a less directed, considerably more spiritual mission. Hereabouts 
is supposed to be the city's most ostentatious Christmas finery _ 
though some connoisseurs prefer Howard Beach in Queens, and Brooklyn's 
Mill Basin _ with attractions like 40-foot Nutcrackers with moving 
arms, the closest stuff to what's displayed in suburban Florida, Texas 
and other citadels of Christmas decoration. Whole streets glow like 
diamonds. Outside of sputtering air-conditioners on a hot August afternoon, 
Dyker Heights at holiday time is surely Con Ed's warmest heartthrob. 
Danny, too, really, really loves Christmas. I was willing to be persuaded. 
So he told me his youthful memories of seeing trees planted in wooden 
milk containers and listening to Lionel Barrymore perform ``A Christmas 
Carol'' on the radio. He says that in Dyker Heights, Christmas is 
the kind of day when you could have had two legs amputated the day 
before and still feel pretty good. But that would not be good for 
walking, which has become Danny's main thing. He is diabetic, and 
long saunters, 10 miles or more regularly, help keep his insulin intake 
down. He also enjoys the activity, though he suggests that might be 
a genetic defect. ``Insanity doesn't run in my family,'' Danny says. 
``It walks.'' Whatever. Daniel Anthony Perasa is indisputably crazy 
about holidays. He dyes his beard green for St. Patrick's Day, wears 
a diaper and a sash on New Year's Eve, and likes to dress up as Santa 
for Christmas in July celebrations. He loves to tell how he asked 
his wife, Annie, to marry him on the same day he met her, and she 
immediately said yes. He is always saying how much he loves her. His 
second-best story is about the doctor who delivered him on Oct. 9, 
1938, and who predicted that the weak baby would live no more than 
five years. As it happened, Dr. Nicholas died on Oct. 9, 1943, the 
very day Danny was not supposed to live to see. ``It was my first 
funeral,'' Danny says, chortling.``I enjoyed it immensely.'' We meet 
at the 86th Street subway stop on the R Fourth Avenue line. Danny, 
who is wearing a battered leather jacket, has the day off from his 
job taking telephone bets at OTB. His opening remark is that he has 
just seen two nuns jaywalking, and is contemplating whether that constitutes 
a venal sin. He says he is happy about the chilly rain that is beginning 
to fall, because the heretofore unseasonably fine weather had threatened 
to provoke his Florida relatives to visit. ``You don't need Christmas 
on a nice day,'' Danny declares. ``This is the kind of day you need 
Christmas.'' We lumber squishily down 86th Street and turn left on 
11th Avenue. We had heard that the epicenter of Christmas in Dyker 
Heights was on 83rd and 84th Streets roughly between 11th and 13th 
Avenues, so we head in that direction. Dyker Heights is a small neighborhood 
of cozy row houses, million-dollar mansions and a few apartment buildings. 
Once Scandinavians predominated, then Italians, who still do. In the 
rush to suburbia, this wasn't a section of the city that people left. 
New groups, from Russians to Arabs, are gradually coming in, and free 
space remains dear indeed. We trundle down 83rd Street in the fading 
light. We admire a lawnful of dolls from around the world. Nicole 
Dofrio, a 13-year-old eighth grader, approaches us. We ask her if 
her family has any outside decorations. Mommy is still ``browsing,'' 
she says. So what does she think of her neighborhood's vaunted Yuletide 
displays? ``The people are usually snobby, noisy and only care about 
themselves,'' she says sweetly. ``I think they only put up good decorations 
because they're rich.'' About a quarter block later, Danny has put 
that comment in perspective. ``Christmas decorations don't mean the 
guy inside the house isn't a grouch,'' he says. ``It just means he 
went to the trouble to tell the world he's not a grouch.'' We begin 
to notice a curious but persistent characteristic. Most lawns contain 
a mix of religious and secular symbols, usually with as much separation 
between the two as the often limited space allows. In the creche scenes, 
the star of the show, Baby Jesus, is uniformly absent. We later learn 
that he is placed in mangers at the peak moment, at midnight on Christmas 
Eve. But the mix of images is strange, to say the least. ``You get 
the impression the Blessed Virgin is going to switch seats and end 
up behind Rudolph,'' Danny says. Waiting for true darkness, we find 
ourselves on 13th Avenue, a commercial street where some of the signs 
on stores are in Italian. At B&AMP;A Pork Store at 7813, neon signs 
have been placed in the window, in front of massive logs of dangling 
provolone, depicting a bowed wreath and wishing one and all a Merry 
Christmas and a Happy New Year. Another butcher shop urges people 
to order baby lambs and baby goats for the holidays. On 84th Street 
between 13th and 14th Avenues, reindeer are dramatically mounted on 
a light wire, literally spilling over the street. Many homes play 
music on loudspeakers. We often hear Nat King Cole singing ``The Christmas 
Song,'' an absolutely wonderful tune. Stone figures of lions, which 
grace the entrances to grander homes, often wear garlands and lights. 
In the view down some streets, white lights coalesce in a shimmering 
vision of the North Pole. Sometimes, we pass a little house where 
a single window is framed by colored lights. The crown jewel is 84th 
Street between 11th and 12th Avenues, with huge revolving displays. 
But a smaller one makes what some would consider the biggest statement. 
At 1158, the owner has put some tasteful ribbons on evergreens, set 
up two wooden deer and built a little wall of white branches. No lights. 
There is a small sign, partly obscured by evergreens. It says: ``Jesus 
is the reason for the season.'' Up the block, a huge house shows the 
complete story of Dickens' ``Christmas Carol,'' with bigger than life-size 
figures on the ground, suspended in the air and whirling about. It 
is truly spectacular. A sign says: ``God bless everyone. The Cabo 
family.'' The display draws a continuing audience. Paula Apesa, who 
lives in nearby Bensonhurst, drives by with her children, Vincent, 
8, and Samantha, 6. ``They make me drive by every day,'' she says. 
``They love it.'' Two men who grew up in the neighborhood and still 
live there stop by, as they say they often do. ``This is a Brooklyn 
thing,'' says Henry Ruiz, 21, a stockbroker on Wall Street. Even a 
few weeks before Christmas, we see cars with license plates from California, 
Oregon and Texas, cruising by to check out the displays. As Christmas 
approaches, many families post Santas outside their houses, many of 
them giving away candy or other gifts. There will be brass bands and 
costumed characters meandering through the neighborhood. Tour buses 
of senior citizens, groups of Hasidic Jews and cars with families 
will line up for blocks, some waiting for hours to see the show. We 
meet Robert Brenton, a 19-year-old business student at Hunter College. 
He says that the ostentatious displays surely reflect the neighborhood's 
wealth, but that there is more than that. ``With the way most of the 
world is now, it's just a real good thing to see a traditional Christmas,'' 
he says. We stop a few houses away to talk to Frank and Lydia Nola, 
who have made their small grounds an electric reindeer farm. We ask 
why their display, like so many others, relies mainly on white light. 
``We used to do it all in color, but now we do it all in white,'' 
she said. ``Not so bright. More light.'' Mr. Nola volunteers, ``We 
need another deer, but they're not so easy to find.'' We continue 
to walk. Danny tells about the time his sister's wreath was stolen 
from her front door in Bay Ridge and the next day, someone knocked 
on the door to sell her the same wreath. Over at 1224, where a glowing 
deer appears to drink from a real fountain, Joe Deturo, an off-duty 
police officer, stops with his year-old son to admire the sight. ``You 
wish a lot more people would do something like this,'' he says. Nella 
Comisi happens to come out of her house, and we ask her about the 
display in front of it. She says her brother Rocco has spent years 
building it. ``He yells and yells when the lights don't work, but 
every year, he buys more and more.'' She also says what we suspect: 
that competition is not unheard of. ``One neighbor does it, then the 
next does,'' she says. ``I think they try to keep up with each other.'' 
Ms. Comisi's father has come out of the house to see what's going 
on. Danny asks him what he thinks. His daughter translates the question 
into Italian. He listens to the translation, then appears to search 
for a word. Finally, he smiles from ear to ear. ``Bellissimo,'' he 
says Several people have told us about a wonderful ``Nutcracker'' 
display on 84th Street between 11th and 12th Avenues. All the characters 
in the story are dramatically and enormously depicted in a design 
that works off the tall pillars in front of the mansion. We go to 
the house, ring the bell and Florence Polizzotto answers the door. 
She says her husband, Alfred, a local lawyer, had cancer 10 years 
ago and wanted to express his love of life after recovering. He hired 
designers to come up with the display, but wouldn't tell her what 
it cost. She also says they plan to give away 5,000 presents to children 
this year, as they did last year. And she says they are collecting 
donations for the Make a Wish Foundation. She says that in one instance 
children suffering from cancer came to their home in their wheelchairs 
to say thank you. Next year, she says, there may be something completely 
new. ``There's going to be a tremendous change,'' she says. We happen 
upon the Marcolinis' home next. They tell us that in addition to the 
40 moving sculptures in the window, they have 30 more in reserve. 
They rotate them each year. They say that they also do big electrical 
displays for Halloween and Easter, but that these pale before what 
they do for Christmas, their favorite holiday. Three years ago, they 
say, when Marcolini's sister passed away, they didn't put up their 
decorations. Hundreds of people knocked on the door to ask what was 
wrong. The Marcolinis know their house does not blow people away like 
the ``Nutcracker,'' ``Christmas Carol'' or other newer displays people 
have paid experts to install in recent years. ``Now my house is like 
nothing,'' Mrs. Marcolini says, almost as if she believed it. ``But 
it's not a competition, and my house is beautiful.'' They say their 
whole crazy Christmas adventure began when somebody gave them a seven-foot-high 
electric Santa. They felt they had to do something with it, and one 
thing kind of led to another. Danny and I like that story. We say 
goodbye and begin to whistle as we stroll toward Christmas. Magically, 
the rain changes to snow, and the tinkling of sleigh bells can be 
heard. Oh, all right. I made up the snow. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>