<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981217.0198 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As a film bearing Dreamworks' great expectations and the scrutiny 
of so many religious advisers, ``The Prince of Egypt'' is one animated 
biblical epic with understandable jitters. What it meant to achieve, 
a new breakthrough for the animator's art and a sacrosanct yet frisky 
entertainment for viewers large and small, may have been as impossible 
as it sounds. But ``The Prince of Egypt'' is a well-made work with 
much to recommend it, even if its worthiness is not the brightest 
flare on the movie horizon this season. ``The Prince of Egypt'' tries 
to do something different, and often winds up better than you'd think, 
especially once the obvious unease is out of the way. In a film whose 
souvenir program describes Moses as one of ``the greatest heroes of 
all time,'' a big show of action-adventure bravado may be unavoidable. 
But it's still a jolt to find the animated Moses in a madcap chariot 
race (with the Pharaoh to be, Ramses) that topples assorted archeological 
treasures or to find armies of animated Hebrew slaves singing about 
their plight. The film's strenuous efforts to deliver entertainment 
value are jarring at first. (Will baby Moses, floating through the 
bulrushes toward the flimsily clad Egyptian princess destined to adopt 
him, be struck by an oar en route?) But they give way to an intriguing 
if highly abbreviated translation of the Book of Exodus into the realm 
of animation. This is, after all, the film medium in which the miraculous 
is most possible, and the subject matter readily lends itself to the 
visual milieu. Even if the biblical plagues have been reduced to a 
brief montage (doubtless to avoid scaring the wits out of young viewers), 
they've also been designed with creative audacity. The spectral plague 
upon firstborn children is one of the most hauntingly vivid sights 
here, even if it's followed a shade too soon by a song of celebration 
from the departing Hebrew slaves. ``The Prince of Egypt'' touches 
biblical bases from Moses' adoption to his receiving the Ten Commandments 
and manages to have different personalities for each stage along the 
way. As a young scamp (with the voice of Val Kilmer), Moses seems 
dangerously close to the standard-issue Disney adventurer, right down 
to that fatuous ballad about what to do with his life. (``Here among 
my trappings and belongings I belong/And if anybody doubts it, they 
couldn't be more wrong!'') The film works best when it stops relying 
on easy fluff and lets what is, after all, a mighty strong story, 
speak for itself. Later, after Moses leaves his Egyptian foster parents, 
marries a very foxy Zipporah (with the voice of Michelle Pfeiffer) 
and discovers the magnitude of his mission, the film at last assumes 
the gravitas that would have elevated it from the start. Nobody need 
count on animation for theology instruction, but ``The Prince of Egypt'' 
does illustrate the epic nature of the Exodus story. And the Dreamworks 
team, led by the directors Brenda Chapman, Steve Hickner and Simon 
Wells, rises to occasions like the parting of the Red Sea with all 
the computer-generated splendor at its disposal. The film's most visually 
daring moments, including a dazzling fantasy sequence in which hieroglyphics 
come to life, offer glimpses of how breathtaking an even riskier, 
less conventional work of Bible-based animation could have been. ``Prince'' 
gets its rather superfluous star power from a cast that includes Ralph 
Fiennes as Ramses; Sandra Bullock as Moses' sister, Miriam; Jeff Goldblum 
(one of the few really identifiable voices here) as Aaron, and Steve 
Martin and Martin Short as two jokey minor characters whose clowning 
is kept minimal. Patrick Stewart makes a lofty, Scottish-sounding 
Pharaoh, and Helen Mirren plays the Queen. The biggest voices here 
are the extraneous ones of Whitney Houston and Mariah Carey, belting 
out that obligatory ballad from Stephen Schwartz's mostly unremarkable 
score. The animation itself is expert and eye-filling, though two-dimensional 
backdrops (as in Disney's ``Mulan'') remain lifeless relative to the 
three-dimensional characters. ``The Prince of Egypt'' is rated PG 
(Parental guidance suggested) and is not suitable for very young children. 
Biblical plagues, the suffering of slaves and the drowning of Pharaoh's 
army are essential parts of its story. PRODUCTION NOTES: `THE PRINCE 
OF EGYPT` Directed by Brenda Chapman, Steve Hickner and Simon Wells; 
edited by Nick Fletcher; score by Hans Zimmer, with songs by Stephen 
Schwartz; art directors, Kathy Altieri and Richard Chavez; production 
designer, Darek Gogol; produced by Penney Finkelman Cox and Sandra 
Rabins; released by Dreamworks Pictures. Running time: 93 minutes. 
WITH THE VOICES OF: Sandra Bullock and Sally Dworsky (speaking and 
singing voices of Miriam), Ralph Fiennes (Ramses), Danny Glover and 
Brian Stokes Mitchell (speaking and singing voices of Jethro), Jeff 
Goldblum (Aaron), Val Kilmer and Amick Byram (speaking and singing 
voices of Moses), Steve Martin (Hotep), Helen Mirren and Linda Dee 
Shayne (speaking and singing voices of the Queen), Michelle Pfeiffer 
(Zipporah), Martin Short (Huy), Patrick Stewart (Pharaoh Seti), Eden 
Riegel (young Miriam) and Ofra Haza (Yocheved). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>