<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981217.0387 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Russia recalled its ambassador to Washington Thursday to protest airstrikes 
against Iraq in one of Moscow's angriest ripostes to American policy 
since the end of the Cold War. The Kremlin's unusual decision to withdraw 
Ambassador Yuly Vorontsov came as politicians across Russia's political 
spectrum, usually divided over how to solve the country's own tangled 
problems, united to denounce the American attacks. Almost immediately, 
the Communist-led Parliament registered its dissent by shelving plans 
to ratify the START II treaty slashing strategic nuclear arms. Winning 
approval of the treaty from Russia has been a major objective of the 
United States and one that had seemed tantalizingly close. A vote 
on the treaty, which was widely expected to be approved, was scheduled 
for Dec. 25. Russia's protest stems, in part, from its long-standing 
ties to Iraq. Prime Minister Yevgeny Primakov, a former foreign minister 
and senior intelligence official, has maintained close relations with 
Baghdad since Soviet days. Before the Persian Gulf War, Primakov engaged 
in a hectic round of shuttle diplomacy as he sought unsuccessfully 
to try to head off the allies' attack on Saddam Hussein's forces. 
Iraq also owes Moscow billions of dollars _ loans that stand no chance 
of being repaid unless the war clouds in the Middle East clear and 
economic sanctions against Iraq are lifted. But the unusually acerbic 
tone of Russia's reaction Thursday has more do with Russia's attitude 
toward the United States. Much of Russia's political elite, as well 
as many ordinary Russians, believe that Washington has begun to throw 
its weight around since the end of the Cold War. ``Russia's opinion 
was ignored,'' complained Gen. Igor Sergeyev, the Russian minister 
of Defense. Sergeyev conveyed his displeasure by skipping a meeting 
with NATO officials in Brussels on Thursday to fly back to Moscow. 
Russia's decision to withdraw Vorontsov was conveyed to Secretary 
of State Madeleine Albright by the deputy chief of the Russian Embassy 
in Washington during a meeting on the Iraq crisis. ``Secretary Albright 
was informed that Russia is calling its ambassador for consultation,'' 
State Department spokesman James Rubin disclosed. ``That is unfortunate. 
But we continue to work with Russia on a variety of levels to manage 
our differences on this use of force.'' The last time U.S. relations 
with Moscow turned this frosty goes back to the Soviet era when Washington 
recalled its ambassador in early 1980, after the Soviet Union had 
voiced support for the revolution in Iran. Although the Soviet ambassador, 
Anatoly Dobrynin, was not formally recalled, he left Washington to 
return to Moscow a month early. There are limits, of course, on how 
far Russia can go in voicing its objections. Russia is too broke to 
launch a military buildup. It also needs aid from Western organizations 
like the International Monetary Fund, where the United States has 
substantial influence. President Clinton tried to call President Boris 
Yeltsin to discuss the Iraq situation, but was unable to reach him, 
American officials said. Vice President Al Gore spoke by telephone 
with Primakov, who asked that the bombing be stopped. Primakov also 
denounced Richard Butler, the head of the U.N. organization that oversees 
the inspections in Iraq. Gore said that the bombing would continue 
until Washington achieved its military aims, American officials said. 
The indignant mood here appears to confirm a deeper shift in Russian 
opinion against the United States, sentiment which has only been exacerbated 
by Russia's economic crisis. Former Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin 
denounced the attack as political ``egoism.'' Yuri Luzhkov, Moscow's 
mayor and a leading presidential hopeful, assailed the strikes. Vladimir 
Zhirinovsky, the flamboyant nationalist, led a noisy demonstration 
outside of the American Embassy. Even Alexy II, the patriarch of the 
Russian Orthodox Church, denounced the bombing as a ``crude violation.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>