<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981217.0464 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial on Friday, Dec. 18: The American 
and British air attacks against Iraq should be the opening move in 
a new approach for dealing with Saddam Hussein. Several opportunities 
may exist, notably through new diplomacy in the Middle East. Taking 
advantage of them will require creative thinking by Washington. Some 
of the familiar mechanisms employed over the last seven years to restrain 
Iraq are unlikely to work when the bombing ends. U.N. weapons inspectors 
will probably not return to Iraq any time soon. A divided U.N. Security 
Council cannot provide firm leadership on Iraq. Washington should 
look to the Middle East for leverage against Baghdad. Iran is one 
possibility. Larger and more populous than Iraq, Iran can serve as 
a counterweight to Baghdad's ambitions. Since Mohammad Khatami was 
elected Iran's president, Washington and Tehran have moved cautiously 
to end two decades of estrangement. Better relations between America 
and Iran would serve both countries and intimidate Iraq. The United 
States also needs to reinforce its relations with Saudi Arabia, Syria 
and Egypt. That will require redoubled American efforts to save the 
Israeli-Palestinian peace, now hostage to probable Israeli elections 
next year. Israel's prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, has compounded 
Washington's problems with his unjustified suspension of Israeli compliance 
with the Wye accords. The Saudis, who have themselves begun to repair 
relations with Iran, can provide the airfields America will need for 
long-term military containment of Iraq. But Saudi rulers are wary 
of domestic opposition to such basing arrangements and will be able 
to move ahead only if there is further progress on Israeli-Palestinian 
issues. Egypt and Syria both took part in the American-led coalition 
against Iraq in 1991 and last month joined the Saudis and the gulf 
emirates in publicly blaming Iraq for forcing a military confrontation 
with Washington. Both could again become important American partners, 
reinforcing Arab diplomatic and economic pressures on Baghdad. In 
Egypt's case, partnership depends on advancing the Oslo peace agreements. 
Cairo sees economic and political gains for the Palestinians as crucial 
to its own security and prestige. Relations with Syria, never easy, 
could be improved by encouraging a resumption of peace talks between 
Israel and Syria over Lebanon and the Golan Heights. Syria and Iran 
have sponsored terrorism in the past, and harbor their own ambitions 
to develop mass-destruction weapons. But a collective effort to contain 
Iraq, linked to a firm break with terror and guarantees on weapons 
programs, may be possible. America is not the only nation interested 
in restraining Iraq. Saddam Hussein's neighbors have even greater 
reason to fear his weapons. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>