<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981217.0269 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Ethnic Albanians abandoned the streets of this western Kosovo town 
Thursday afternoon, fearing vengeance for the killings of six Serbian 
youths in a cafe this week. The cafe shootings have enraged and galvanized 
Kosovo's frightened Serb minority. Revenge killings of Albanians could 
destroy not only the tenuous cease-fire in this southern Serbian province, 
but also the nearly stalled U.S. efforts to negotiate peace. Serbian 
police in camouflage uniforms, their faces covered by masks or bandanas, 
surrounded a neighborhood here where they said suspects in the cafe 
murders could be hiding. Thursday evening, nervous police were hiding 
in darkened doorways and behind garden walls, pointing assault rifles 
at ethnic Albanian homes. Inside the neighborhood, the twisting cobblestone 
streets and ancient houses gave the feeling of an abandoned village 
in the Middle Ages. Residents stayed hidden in their homes with all 
lights out. Not even a cat ventured outside. Just outside the city, 
paramilitary police units equipped with armored personnel carriers 
combed villages, they said, also in search of suspects. Police mounted 
cannons and set up at least one base in a village that, until Thursday, 
had been controlled by ethnic Albanian rebels seeking independence 
for Kosovo, whose population is 90 percent ethnic Albanian. U.S. and 
European observers who are supposed to monitor any police or rebel 
movements were barred from the area where police were advancing. The 
observers said they heard mortar fire which they assumed was coming 
from police positions. At nightfall, with heavy machine gun fire less 
than a mile from their new base, police said the rebels were starting 
a counter-attack. The extreme edginess in Pec stems from Monday's 
murders. Masked men sprayed automatic weapons fire through a coffee 
shop frequented by ethnic Serb high school students, killing six. 
Since the slayings, foreign diplomats and Serbian officials have braced 
for revenge attacks on ethnic Albanian civilians, fearing that the 
war _ largely fought in the countryside until an uneasy truce negotiated 
by the Americans in October _ will now move to Kosovo's cities, where 
Serbs and Albanians who live side by side could become locked in an 
even more brutal cycle of killing. Serbian authorities say their sweeps 
in and near this city Thursday brought in three men who are tied to 
Monday's killings and another 14 who may have been. They also say 
two guerrillas were killed fighting the police. The rebels, known 
as the Kosovo Liberation Army, deny involvement in Monday's murders. 
The main suspect, according to the Serbian authorities, is Ramush 
Haradinaj, the rebel commander for this part of western Kosovo. Haradinaj 
is in his early 30s with a reputation for being something of a dictator 
in areas under his control. Serbian officials say Thursday's police 
action is aimed at trapping Haradinaj. But the methods may only add 
to Albanians' hatred of the government. ``They rushed into our house 
and grabbed all the men, eight of us, and took us to the police station,'' 
said Jusuf Lataj, the Muslim religious leader in a village near Pec. 
``As soon as we got to the police station they began beating people.'' 
One of those detained and questioned was Lataj's son, Jahja 21, who 
after release had bright bruises across his back, a bruised and immobile 
left elbow, a badly bruised and swollen right hand, and a left ear 
blackened by what he said was a kick in the head from police. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>