<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981217.0016 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After meeting with his top military advisers in the Situation Room 
at the White House Wednesday, President Clinton made a rare appearance 
just after 8 a.m. at the daily meeting of his top aides, in the corner 
office of John Podesta, his chief of staff. Only three or four of 
the 30 staff members in the room knew that, within hours, American 
missiles would strike Iraq. But they all knew that the House would 
probably vote soon to impeach the tired-looking man in the doorway, 
and they stood to applaud him. Clinton thanked them for their hard 
work, according to people who were present, and he assured them that 
if they kept at it, the American people would support them. ``They'll 
figure it out,'' he said. ``They always get it right.`` For the last 
24 hours, from the time he left Israel until he addressed the nation 
Wednesday night, Clinton worked feverishly on two momentous matters 
that he insisted Wednesday night were wholly unrelated: the pending 
impeachment vote in the House of Representatives and the air assault 
on Iraq. The strain showed. ``He's whipped,'' said Rep. Amo Houghton, 
R-N.Y., who met with Clinton in the Oval Office on Wednesday afternoon 
to discuss heading off impeachment. He attributed the president's 
apparent exhaustion to ``the physical and emotional presure on him 
day after day after day.'' Referring to both impeachment and Iraq, 
he said, ``This is life and death stuff.'' Clinton made the initial 
decision to strike Iraq on Tuesday night, as he flew back from a four-day 
trip to the Middle East. Before focusing on Iraq, he spent some time 
chatting with the members of the congressional delegation he had taken 
with him. They talked about the Middle East and about the international 
economy. But for the first time, Clinton also spoke directly to one 
member of the delegation about the impeachment vote. White House aides 
said that Clinton spent about 10 minutes talking one-on-one with Rep. 
John Fox, R-Penn., who has said he is undecided. Although Clinton 
was clearly enjoying the company of his fellow politicians, his aides 
were anxious that he turn his attention to Iraq. They also wanted 
to make sure that he slept on the flight, since three days of high-stakes 
diplomacy had clearly exhausted him. After finishing with the congressmen, 
the president was briefed on the report from Richard Butler, chairman 
of the United Nations group overseeing the disarmament of Iraq. Clinton 
quickly concluded, aides said, that Iraq was flouting the rules of 
the international weapons inspection program imposed after the end 
of the 1991 Persian Gulf war. Clinton, Secretary of State Madeleine 
Albright and National Security Adviser Sandy Berger _ all aboard the 
plane _ conducted a secure telephone conference call with Vice President 
Gore, Secretary of Defense William Cohen, CIA director George Tenet, 
and Gen. Henry Shelton, chairman of the joint chiefs, and other officials 
in Washington. ``The recommendation was unanimous that the president 
should go forward,'' Berger said. Later, Clinton wandered into a conference 
room on the plane to watch his aides play hearts, before returning 
to his cabin and sleeping for about five hours until the plane reached 
Andrews Air Force base. On reaching the White House about midnight, 
he sat down with Berger and Podesta. And from his private study in 
the White House residence, he telephoned Rep. Dick Gephardt, the House 
minority leader, and Sen. Tom Daschle, the Senate minority leader, 
to tell them about the decision. Cohen, a former Republican senator 
from Maine, called Republican leaders on Tuesday night with the same 
news. The decision was confirmed Wednesday morning at the Situation 
Room meeting, which began at about 7:15. Berger said that once again 
the decision was unanimous. After stopping by the staff meeting, Clinton 
was not done with the question of impeachment. He spent about half 
an hour in the Oval Office early Wednesday afternoon with Houghton. 
Houghton gave the president a biography of Isaiah Berlin, a don at 
Oxford when Clinton studied there, and the president and the congressman 
discussed the censure resolution that Houghton plans to present on 
Thursday. Clinton then set to work on the 15-minute speech that he 
delivered from the Oval Office on Wednesday night, and made several 
telephone calls to foreign leaders as well. Berger and Podesta updated 
him several times on the course of the operation. The White House 
was in for a couple of shocks before the assault began. After the 
president told Sen. Trent Lott, R- Miss., the majority leader, of 
his planned strike, White House advisers were astonished to hear Lott 
criticize it publicly as a political move. ``The rules we've always 
had is that politics stop at the shore,'' said one senior White House 
official, speaking on the condition of anonymity. ``Somebody changed 
the rules and it wasn't us.'' But Clinton advisers said that they 
expected Lott's comments to backfire. It was only at the very end 
of his remarks Wednesday night that Clinton brought the two tracks 
of his day together. ``Saddam Hussein and the other enemies of peace 
may have thought that the serious debate currently before the House 
of Representatives would distract Americans or weaken our resolve 
to face him down,'' he said. But, he said, Wednesday proved that ``when 
we must act in America's vital interests, we will do so.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>