<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981217.0397 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When impeachment came, after long months of legislative stalemate 
and partisan struggle over how to rebuild the Union, it came swiftly. 
No long-winded preliminaries in committee hearings. No careful testing 
of the political waters back home. Swept up in oratorical passion 
for the sanctity of the Constitution and the Republic, the House of 
Representatives debated for a scant 14 hours and then voted, for the 
only time in history, to impeach a president. The president was Andrew 
Johnson, derided by his enemies as the ``accidental president'' who 
had taken office on Lincoln's assassination and who, they maintained, 
was bent on mocking the will of Congress. The date was Feb. 24, 1868, 
and the country was deeply divided over Reconstruction. With the House 
visitors' gallery packed to overflowing and a snowstorm raging outside, 
Johnson was impeached on a partisan vote of 126-47, with 12 members 
absent. The ardor of that distant drama may well echo in the same 
hall Friday when the House convenes to debate whether to impeach President 
Clinton. For Johnson, whose Senate trial began a month after impeachment, 
the process ended in acquittal, by only one vote. He served out the 
few months remaining in his term and even found a measure of accommodation 
with his accusers. But the House debate, lofty and hackneyed by turns, 
gave no hint of that outcome. As the congressional anger at him peaked 
that stormy week in February, a Washington correspondent for The New 
York Times wrote that ``if anyone can believe what he sees with his 
own eyes and hears with his own ears, Johnson's term of office is 
likely soon to come to a miserable, mortifying and ignominious end.'' 
Johnson, a pro-Union Democrat, had clashed with the Republican-controlled 
Congress ever since assuming office three years earlier. At its heart, 
their conflict was over how to treat the defeated Confederacy. It 
was a battle not only of ideology but also of politics: Democrats 
and Republicans alike hoped to win Southern votes in any postwar reunification. 
Johnson favored leniency to the former rebels and a speedy return 
to civil government in the South. To undermine the Republicans' Reconstruction 
policy, which demanded that Southern states guarantee racial equality 
and voting rights for freed slaves before rejoining the Union, the 
president had begun purging military officers in the South who favored 
the Republicans' Reconstruction policy. The Republicans' radical wing 
twice tried to impeach him. The first effort failed to clear the House 
Judiciary Committee. The second made it to the House floor in December 
1867 but was doomed by intraparty fighting. Barely two months later, 
however, Johnson went further to challenge Congress than he had before: 
On Feb. 21, he discharged the secretary of war, Edwin Stanton, an 
ally of Johnson's enemies. The summary dismissal amounted to an invitation 
to a showdown, since it violated the Tenure of Office Act, which Congress, 
over the president's veto, had enacted the year before to limit his 
ability to remove federal appointees. Word of Stanton's dismissal 
set Washington afire. The ousted secretary locked himself in his office 
overnight, and his Republican congressional allies rallied to his 
side. When the House convened the next morning, members once again 
called for Johnson's impeachment. This time the proposal was referred 
not to the Judiciary Committee but to the Reconstruction Committee, 
which met behind closed doors for two hours and, after a party-line 
vote of 7-2, emerged with a recommendation for impeachment. With barely 
a pause for breath, the House debate began, although the committee 
had not spelled out what high crimes and misdemeanors Johnson had 
committed. (Eleven articles of impeachment, with violation of the 
Tenure of Office Act as the centerpiece, were not written until after 
the House vote two days later.) The debate now under way, James Brooks 
of New York City, leader of the House Democrats, compared the rush 
toward impeachment to the excesses of the French Revolution. Other 
Democrats gamely tried to focus the House's attention on the fact 
that it was the anniversary of George Washington's birth. One suggested 
that the House hear a reading of Washington's farewell address and 
then adjourn. The majority, laughing, agreed to the first proposal 
but rejected the second. The House debated until 11:15 that night, 
a Saturday, and, after a one-day break, resumed at 10 a.m. on Monday, 
Feb. 24. People began lining up outside the Capitol at dawn, in the 
snow. Three thousand were allowed in to watch. Reporters estimated 
that at least three times that many were turned away. As the debate 
continued, telegrams poured in and were read on the floor. The Republican 
Party of the city of Chicago demanded impeachment. The Democrats of 
the 4th Ward in Philadelphia opposed it. The emotion of the day boiled 
over. One member accused Johnson of embracing the defeated Southern 
rebels, ``men fresh from the halls of treason and the fields of blood.'' 
But another warned of a collapse of the currency and economic ruin 
if the president was impeached. During it all, Johnson appeared unperturbed. 
He sent his private secretary to the Senate several times with routine 
messages. On Saturday and Sunday evenings, he played host at elegant 
White House dinners for Cabinet officers. Impeachment drew the routinely 
split Republicans together as no issue had before. One of them, Rep. 
James Wilson of Iowa, was chairman of the Judiciary Committee and 
had been roundly criticized for refusing to back impeachment in December. 
Now, rising in support of it, he said, ``Guided by a sincere desire 
to pass this cup from our lips, determined not to drink it if escape 
were not cut off by the presence of a palpable duty, we at last find 
ourselves compelled to take its very dregs.'' At 4:30 p.m., one of 
the fieriest of Johnson's foes, Thaddeus Stevens, rose to speak but 
found his voice too weak. The clerk read his written statement. It 
was the last speech before the fateful vote. ``This is not to be the 
temporary triumph of a political party,'' Stevens said, ``but is to 
endure in its consequence until this whole continent shall be filled 
with a free, untrammeled people or shall be a nest of shrinking cowardly 
slaves.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>