<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981217.0208 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The tree is a sermon in itself. A big, sturdy oak with serpentine 
limbs, it's the first thing the audience sees in ``Parade,'' the solemn, 
high-reaching new musical directed by Harold Prince that opened Thursday 
night at the Vivian Beaumont Theater at Lincoln Center. The oak's 
branches glow, in sinister abstraction, through a scrim before a single 
note is sung, and it will be a dominant presence throughout the evening, 
casting a metaphoric shadow that is both premonitory and admonitory. 
A man, a good man, will be hanged from that tree before ``Parade'' 
is over. It is the image of a brutally unfair fate awaiting its victim, 
and we are never, ever allowed to forget what it signifies. Not that 
we would have anyway. One thing ``Parade'' cannot be accused of is 
fuzziness of focus. Inspired by the story of Leo Frank, a Jewish man 
who was lynched in Marietta, Ga., in 1915 for the murder of a 13-year-old 
girl, this musical provides a painstakingly rendered chart of the 
wheels of injustice. And it never lets up in its insistence on the 
innocence, on several levels, of its protagonist and the moral blindness 
and corruption of his persecutors. That the result is often more podium-thumping 
screed than compelling story is in itself a heartbreaker. ``Parade'' 
prompted raised eyebrows and arch jokes (have you heard the one about 
the dancing lynch mob?) long before it went into previews, and the 
involvement of Livent Inc., the financially ailing Canadian-based 
theatrical company, as one of its producers only added to the air 
of gallows humor. Yet ``Parade'' also represented the possibility 
of answered prayers for anxious lovers of the American musical. The 
genre, after all, is represented this season in new productions on 
Broadway only by the flaccid ``Footloose'' and the revivals of ``Peter 
Pan'' and ``On the Town,'' and this is by no means an atypical season. 
Here at last was a show of daring aspiration, shaped by a young composer 
of talent and invention, Jason Robert Brown, and a Pulitzer-Prize 
winning playwright, Alfred Uhry (``Driving Miss Daisy''). What's more, 
it was to be overseen by the director who had done more than any other 
to extend the boundaries of the Broadway musical and to confound expectations 
of what the form's proper subject matter is. The rise of the Nazi 
party, a portrait of marital disharmony set in the gloom of a decrepit 
show palace, the rise of a politician and his ravenously ambitious 
wife in Argentina, a homicidal barber in Victorian London: Prince 
repeatedly turned ostensibly sour material into scintillating theater 
with his fabled productions of ``Cabaret'' (1966), ``Follies'' (1971), 
``Evita'' (1978) and ``Sweeney Todd'' (1979). As recently as 1993, 
he was still breathing hit-making musical life into unlikely themes 
with ``The Kiss of the Spider Woman,'' the Kander-Ebb show about South 
American political prisoners that joltingly juxtaposed cinematic fantasy 
sequences with scenes of barbaric torture. Given this context, is 
``Parade'' really such a stretch, especially given the participation 
of its star, Brent Carver, who appeared to such resonant effect in 
``Spider Woman''? That Carver, through no fault of his own, is a far 
less compelling presence here says much about what has gone wrong 
with ``Parade.'' As the gay, escapist story spinner forced into political 
engagement in ``Spider Woman,'' this first-rate actor guided his audiences 
through the labyrinth of one man's very conflicted interior. The role 
of Leo Frank in ``Parade'' offers him no such opportunities. The character, 
a Jewish scapegoat in a blood-lusting Southern society, is a martyr, 
pure and simple, a man whose worst crimes are emotional reserve and 
fastidiousness. Carver renders these traits, in both his singing and 
acting, with delicacy. But there's no getting beyond the impression 
that his Leo is as flat and iconic as a bleeding saint in a religious 
mural. With the exception of Carolee Carmello, who gives a stirringly 
heartfelt performance as Leo's wife, Lucille, all of the actors in 
``Parade'' appear claustrophobicly trapped in that mural. It is sometimes 
hard to distinguish them from the two-dimensional cutout figures used 
to fill out the crowd scenes in Riccardo Hernandez's visually arresting 
but oddly distancing set, in which only vistas of picturesque landscapes 
give off any warmth at all. Correspondingly, Brown's songs, while 
artfully shading classic hymn and march forms with dark dissonance, 
also keep you at an intellectual remove. He has a tendency to use 
martial drumbeats and knell-like chords to underscore his melody lines, 
and the devices give the effect of someone continually whispering 
in your ear: ``Look at what these people are doing to a blameless 
man. Just look.'' Several people involved with the creation of ``Parade,'' 
which has been incubating for six years, have said that its real center 
is the love story of the Franks, partners in a sterile arranged marriage 
who finally fall in love during Leo's trial and imprisonment. Yet 
in the performance, the balance of the show is elsewhere. The evening's 
first act is devoted almost entirely to the mechanics of framing Frank 
and the agitating of popular sentiment against a social outsider by 
a yellow press. As a jaded journalist, played by Evan Papas, sings, 
shortly after Leo's arrest, ``Take a superstitious city and a little 
Jew from Brooklyn with a college education and a mousy little wife.'' 
That's the recipe, all right. From the beginning, both Uhry's book 
and Brown's lyrics baldly set up Frank's status as an alien, with 
references to his disdain for Southern cooking and tendency, as a 
song lyric puts it, to say ``shalom'' instead of ``howdy.'' When Mary 
Phagan (the appealing Christy Carlson Romano), a teen-age worker in 
the National Pencil Factory where Frank is a superintendent, is found 
murdered in the factory's basement, the police immediately fix an 
accusatory gaze on the exotic Frank. Thus begins a streamlined railroading 
process of the sort that has become common fodder for socially sensitive 
television movies of the week. The expediency of pinning the crime 
on Leo is established through a series of scenes in which blatantly 
corrupt politicians say things like: ``You got a lousy conviction 
record, Hughie. How long you think they're going to keep you in office 
if you let this one off the hook?'' The citizens of Atlanta grow ever 
louder in their cries for vengeance, goaded by a satanic newspaper 
publisher, Tom Watson (John Leslie Wolfe), who is given to statements 
like ``Jesus was not a Jew.'' An ambitious prosecuting attorney, Hugh 
Dorsey (Herndon Lackey), is seen cutting a deal with a black factory 
janitor with a prison record (Jim Conley, who brings some flair and 
fire to the proceedings) to testify against Frank. When three young 
female factory employees show up in court to speak of Frank's lascivious 
behavior toward them, you have no doubt that they have been coached 
to lie, despite an all-too-brief fantasy interlude in which Frank 
becomes the leering, worldly figure of their testimony. (The vignette 
provides what is by far the best work of Carver and the choreographer 
Patricia Birch in the show.) As Lucille sings passionately to a reporter: 
``He is a decent man! He is an honest man!'' As any number of Alfred 
Hitchcock movies confirm, ``wrong man'' plots, even rudimentary ones, 
can generate alarming levels of suspense. But to do so, they have 
either to admit you, Kafka-style, into the baffled, frightened mind 
of the persecuted or to sweep you up into the frenzy of the persecutors, 
making you feel vicariously implicated. That was the strategy of ``They 
Won't Forget,'' the 1937 Mervyn LeRoy film inspired by the same events. 
Yet even as Prince and Ms. Birch use the ensemble to create tableaux 
of tidal waves of crowds, in ways that recall the mob scenes in ``Evita,'' 
you never escape an overriding feeling of disdain, a chilly indignation. 
Nor is Leo ever allowed to doubt himself, to wonder (as most of us 
surely would) if he had somehow gone mad. The shy Lucille is clearly 
tortured by the public scrutiny of herself and her husband, but she 
also never seems to wonder if her husband might indeed be guilty. 
Ms. Carmello nonetheless creates a vital and affecting portrait of 
a sheltered woman thrust out into a harsh and dangerous world. Made 
up and dressed to look a bit like Eleanor Roosevelt (the period-appropriate 
costumes are by Judith Dolan), the actress' very accent and vocal 
inflections bespeak both a heritage of Southern Jewish gentility and 
a fluttery primness that never quite conceals a yearning for a more 
fully lived life. The second act is mostly hers, as Lucille convinces 
Georgia's governor, John Slaton (John Hickok), to reopen her husband's 
case. Though much of what follows has the feeling of a historical 
detective story, there is something infinitely touching about the 
valiant hope that Ms. Carmello projects. In her climactic love duet, 
during a conjugal visit to Leo in prison just before his abduction 
and murder by a mob symbolically commanded by a Confederate Civil 
War veteran, you suddenly feel you've been given emotional entry to 
a show that has determinedly kept you outside of it. That moment arrives 
too late. The death of Leo Frank may be an unlikely subject for a 
musical, but that is not what sabotages ``Parade.'' Musicals can be 
grim and even grotesque as long as they let you feel their heartbeat, 
the pulse that animates the behavior onstage. You need only think 
of ``Sweeney Todd,'' which drew its audience into improbable identification 
with its crazed, murderous title character. In this sense, the odds 
are comparatively in favor of ``Parade.'' It arrives with an innately 
sympathetic hero, undoubtedly worthy of our tears. But for those tears 
to flow, we have to get to know Leo Frank as a man, not a symbol. 
The civics lesson that is ``Parade'' forbids our ever approaching 
such knowledge. PRODUCTION NOTES: `PARADE' Book by Alfred Uhry; director 
and co-conceiver, Harold Prince; music and lyrics by Jason Robert 
Brown; sets by Riccardo Hernandez; costumes by Judith Dolan; lighting 
by Howell Binkley; sound by Jonathan Deans; choreography by Patricia 
Birch; production stage manager, Clayton Phillips; production manager, 
Jeff Hamlin. Presented by Lincoln Center Theater, under the direction 
of Andre Bishop and Bernard Gersten, in association with Livent (U.S.) 
Inc. At the Vivian Beaumont Theater, Lincoln Center. With: J. B. Adams, 
(Floyd MacDaniel, Luther Rosser) Ray Aranha (Newt Lee), Rufus Bonds 
Jr. (Jim Conley), Carolee Carmello (Lucille Frank), Brent Carver (Leo 
Frank), Don Chastain (old soldier, Judge Roan), Jeff Edgerton (young 
soldier, Fiddlin' John), John Hickok (Governor Slaton), Herndon Lackey 
(Hugh Dorsey), Kirk McDonald (Frankie Epps), Jessica Molaskey (Mrs. 
Phagan), Evan Pappas (Britt Craig), Christy Carlson Romano (Mary Phagan) 
and John Leslie Wolfe (Tom Watson). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>