<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981217.0337 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Financial markets around the world shrugged off the uncertainty posed 
by the U.S. military strikes on Iraq and the looming impeachment vote 
in the House of Representatives, as investors viewed both events as 
potentially serious but had little doubt about the outcome. Across 
the globe, markets reversed the course they set on Wednesday as events 
unfolded. Stock prices rose in Asia, Europe and the United States, 
crude oil slumped nearly 11 percent in New York trading, to about 
$11 a barrel, the dollar fell and bond prices slipped lower. By the 
time stocks started trading in the United States, investors had more 
pressing things on their minds than bombs or impeachment. Shares of 
Amazon.com opened down $25 _ a drop of nearly 10 percent _ presenting 
Internet-mad stock traders with one of their best buying opportunities 
in weeks. Traders and financial analysts said several factors accounted 
for the relative calm on Wall Street. Unlike in 1990, when Iraq suddenly 
invaded Kuwait, or even more recently, when the United States had 
unleashed reprisals on Baghdad or terrorist hideouts in Sudan, Wednesday's 
assault evoked little real surprise. President Clinton had backed 
off a similar attack weeks ago when it appeared that Iraq might cooperate 
with U.N. weapons inspectors. And while oil prices rose sharply on 
Wednesday in anticipation of the bombing strike, their larger retreat 
on Thursday signaled that the economy was probably in little danger 
of feeling the jolt that was produced by a sharper and ultimately 
longer-lasting rise in oil prices after Iraq's aggression in 1990. 
Similarly, the impeachment of President Clinton by the House of Representatives 
is viewed by many on Wall Street as all but certain, and only mild 
anxiety so far surrounds a possible Senate trial next year. In the 
meantime, said Edward Collins, head of trading at Daiwa Securities 
America, the financial markets have other events in view, namely the 
release of fourth-quarter corporate earnings reports. ``It's probably 
sacrilegious to say it, but I don't think whoever is in the White 
House has as much to do with what goes on in the business world or 
the market as the fact that right now the Federal Reserve is being 
extremely friendly,'' Collins said. By keeping interest rates low 
and the supply of money flowing, the Federal Reserve Board has most 
investors feeling they have little reason to worry about a quick downturn 
in the economy. Those generally positive views caused investors to 
push stock prices higher across the board on Thursday. The Dow Jones 
industrial average rose 85.22 points, or nearly 1 percent, to 8,875.82, 
while the Standard &AMP; Poor's 500-stock index gained 18.04 points, 
or 1.55 percent, to 1,179.98. Since the stock market's midsummer slump, 
both of those benchmarks have lagged behind the Nasdaq composite index, 
which is heavily laden with the technology stocks that have been the 
hottest performers this year. On Thursday the Nasdaq index jumped 
34.52 points, or 1.7 percent, to 2,043.88, finishing the day more 
than 30 percent above where it started the year. That is more than 
double the 12 percent rise in the Dow industrials and well ahead of 
the 22 percent gain in the S&AMP;P 500. In the bond market, Treasury 
prices fell as reports on trade, jobs and manufacturing signaled that 
the economy was stronger than some investors had expected. The price 
of the benchmark 30-year issue fell 11/32, to 103 24/32. Its yield, 
which moves in the opposite direction from the price, rose to 5.01 
percent from 4.99 percent on Wednesday. Certainly events could turn 
darker for the markets and the economy generally, and investors could 
even see the return of a bit more volatility to the market on Friday, 
traders said. Friday's session marks the quarterly occurrence known 
as ``triple witching,'' when options, futures contracts and options 
on futures all expire, sometimes accompanied by more frenetic trading. 
The greatest activity on Thursday could be found among financial and 
technology stocks, as investors reacted positively to Chase Manhattan 
Bank's announcement on Wednesday that its fourth-quarter profits would 
be better than expected. Chase shares gained 6 3/8, to 69 7/8, their 
highest level since mid-August. In addition, shares of the semiconductor 
manufacturer Micron Technology rose 6, to 52 7/8, as some financial 
analysts sensed improving demand for computer-memory chips. Abby Joseph 
Cohen, the widely followed investment strategist at Goldman, Sachs 
&AMP; Co., told clients in a recent report that many semiconductor-related 
companies might be well situated to generate earnings gains. That 
view helped to pull technology stocks generally higher, and as they 
are wont to do, investors used any hint of good news as an excuse 
to buy shares of Internet-related companies like Yahoo and America 
Online. Even Amazon.com, which opened the day at 264 after trading 
above 300 for the first time on Wednesday, cut its losses in half 
by the end of the day, finishing down 12\, at 276}. As investors look 
ahead to the beginning of the year, there are several things that 
are likely to weigh more heavily on their minds, if they have not 
begun to do so already. In the wake of the market's October reprise 
of its August decline, mutual funds have been a bit slower than usual 
to put new cash to work, financial analysts say. In addition, there 
is every reason to expect that January will bring a flood of new money 
into those portfolios as a new cycle of payments into retirement plans 
begins. Therefore, institutional investors ``are feeling the need 
to put money to work beforehand,'' Collins said. But other factors 
could begin to temper the optimism of investors as the year progresses. 
Jeffrey Applegate, chief U.S. strategist at Lehman Brothers, said 
that the new year would only bring more discussion and confusion about 
the possible effect of the Year 2000 problem. ``It's hard to see how 
Y2K isn't going to create some distortions in market and economic 
activity,'' Applegate said. ``For example, the preference for just-in-time 
inventory could turn into just-in-case, and we could see an inventory 
buildup,'' he said. In addition, he said, ``there are likely to be 
a whole lot of little credit crunches going on, even before the year 
2000 gets here.'' Ms. Cohen, of Goldman, Sachs, released a report 
to clients late Wednesday in which she said that stock prices could 
still gain but at slower rates than in recent years. And stock picking 
would become more important than simply buying a market index, she 
added. ``We believe that the S&AMP;P 500 is roughly at fair value 
based on our views for the coming year,'' she wrote. ``But several 
sectors appear to offer more attractive value opportunities,'' among 
them semiconductor-related companies and energy stocks. Applegate, 
too, has indicated that gains in the market next year should be more 
in line with long-term trends _ and far below the returns of 25 percent 
or more experienced over the last four years. Applegate said his 1999 
price target for the S&AMP;P 500 was 1,250, less than 6 percent above 
Thursday's close. Ms. Cohen, meanwhile, said her year-end price target 
was 1,275, or 8 percent above the index's current level. That is roughly 
equivalent to 9,850 for the Dow industrials, she added, or about 10 
percent above the gauge's current price. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>