<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981217.0460 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
American and British forces are taking care to avoid hitting Iraqi 
factories suspected of producing chemical and biological weapons, 
Pentagon officials said on Thursday, adding that bombing and missile 
strikes had caused extensive damage to military, intelligence and 
communications targets. Iraq's refusal to allow U.N. inspectors to 
determine whether it had destroyed its stocks of those weapons led 
to President Clinton's order on Wednesday to begin the air assault. 
But the Pentagon said on Thursday that although the elimination of 
chemical and biological weapons was the ultimate aim of the United 
States, the strikes avoided those plants for fear of unleashing deadly 
plumes of poisons and causing civilian deaths. The strikes, which 
resumed Thursday night after a daytime lull, were inflicting significant 
damage to Iraq's air defenses, intelligence and security headquarters 
and barracks belonging to the elite Republican Guards, according to 
an early assessment offered at the Pentagon on Thursday. The initial 
strikes appeared to catch the Iraqis by surprise, since they had done 
little to deploy troops or weapons to avoid attacks, Pentagon officials 
said. The Republican Guards, who help maintain President Saddam Hussein's 
grip on power, were a focus of the strike, but the Pentagon could 
not yet estimate the number of casualties. Secretary of Defense William 
S. Cohen, who appeared at the Pentagon with Gen. Henry H. Shelton, 
the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said the United States 
did not intend to destroy suspected weapons factories that might also 
make benign commercial products, even though those plants could be 
essential to the covert development of chemical or biological weapons. 
``We're not going to take a chance and try to target any facility 
that would release any kind of horrific damage to innocent people,'' 
Cohen said earlier on NBC's ``Today'' program. Cohen's remarks underscored 
the fact that even three or four days of heavy attacks _ as Pentagon 
planners now envision _ would not be enough to destroy Iraq's ability 
to produce even small amounts of weapons. Having conceded that, Cohen 
and Shelton outlined a mission with the objective of weakening Saddam's 
government and military, including missile sites and military bases 
central to launching chemical or biological weapons. ``We have no 
illusions of how difficult it is'' to destroy chemical or biological 
weapons production, Cohen said at the Pentagon. ``We intend to focus 
on the military aspects of his regime.'' To that extent, the first 
wave of strikes appeared to succeed, officials said. Nearly 250 cruise 
missiles launched from seven warships and a submarine in the Persian 
Gulf _ followed up by 40 attacks by fighter jets launched from the 
aircraft carrier Enterprise _ struck more than 50 targets in the first 
day of the attack, Shelton announced. Shelton unveiled satellite photographs 
showing extensive damage to two targets in the Iraqi capital, Baghdad: 
the military intelligence headquarters and barracks belonging to Republican 
Guard units. ``This building right here,'' Shelton said, pointing 
to a photograph of the intelligence building, ``you'll notice down 
here there's nothing left but rubble.'' Air force bombers and fighters 
_ including B-52s armed with more powerful cruise missiles _ and British 
attack jets based in Kuwait joined in the assault for the first time 
just as dusk fell in Baghdad. In the Iraqi capital, sirens again sounded 
and anti-aircraft fire speckled the dark with flashes and bursts. 
Afterward loud explosions reverberated throughout the city center. 
Iraqi Foreign Minister Mohammed Said al-Sahaf said the attacks struck 
civilian areas of Baghdad and inflicted heavy casualties. He described 
damage at several targets, including a factory producing batteries 
and several government buildings. Iraq's health minister said at least 
25 people had died and 75 others were wounded in Baghdad alone. One 
of the strikes also damaged a palace belonging to Saddam's daughter, 
Hala, who was uninjured, Iraqi officials said. ``The last time I checked, 
Saddam had something like 80 palaces,'' Cohen said when asked whether 
the strikes were deliberately aimed at Saddam or his family. While 
the Pentagon offered few details of the strikes, officials said that 
nearly 100 missiles, each with 2,000-pound warheads, struck targets 
in Iraq Thursday. They said they were fired by B-52s based on the 
British island of Diego Garcia in the Indian Ocean. Other American 
and British pilots flew deep into Iraq on Thursday, officials said. 
By late Thursday night, after two days and dozens of strikes, no American 
or British pilot had been killed, the Pentagon said. Despite the bursts 
of anti-aircraft fire in Baghdad, few of the fighter jets involved 
encountered significant challenges from surface-to-air missiles, though 
most of the aircraft flew high enough to avoid low-level threats. 
Officials also said the initial cruise missile strikes succeeded in 
striking their first targets: Iraq's air defenses, especially in the 
southern half of the country. ``The cruise missiles softened things 
up pretty well,'' one official said. Attacks Thursday continued through 
the night. The heavier cruise missiles launched from the B-52s _ with 
their 2,000-pound warheads able to penetrate thick layers of concrete 
_ were aimed at more heavily fortified targets in Baghdad, including 
underground bunkers used by the Iraqi military and political leadership. 
Cohen and Shelton said the objective was to erode Saddam's ability 
to threaten attacks against neighboring countries _ like Kuwait, Saudi 
Arabia or Israel. With the Clinton administration now advocating the 
overthrow of Saddam, Shelton conceded that anything that weakened 
his grip on power ``would be value added.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>