<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981217.0315 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
At the crowning moment in Thursday's balloons-and-marching-band ceremony 
to roll out the first Buick made in China, John F. Smith Jr., chairman 
of General Motors Corp., got behind the wheel of a shiny white 1999 
sedan, strapped on his seat belt, and was unable to make the car move. 
Smith reached down to release the emergency brake, but could not find 
it. Instead, he popped the hood open. Only after engineers rushed 
frantically to Smith's side was he reminded that the Buick's brake 
release was a foot pedal. Finally on his way, he drove the Buick up 
a red carpet onto a broad stage, to cheers from a crowd of more than 
2,000 staff members and guests. ``You don't use that brake in America,'' 
Smith said later, chuckling at himself. It was a small fumble on a 
day that signified a start for General Motors' grand plans to break 
into the car market here. But it hinted at the steep challenges facing 
the company in China, where oversupply and a heavily politicized bureaucracy 
have to be mixed with the ample difficulty in weaving a merger of 
two vastly different car cultures. General Motors is making a big 
bet on China, sinking $2 billion into 16 ventures here, mostly for 
auto components. The Shanghai General Motors plant is the biggest 
of them all, with 1,700 employees and plans to build 100,000 Buick 
sedans a year. The automaker's $750 million investment in the factory 
represents the single biggest American investment in China. The main 
question is who will buy the cars. Priced at roughly $40,000 each, 
the large-engine Buick is not obviously well suited to a poor country 
with crowded city streets and bumpy country roads. Demand is falling, 
and the best-selling car in China so far is an unadorned Volkswagen 
that costs about $15,000. The next question is whether an experienced 
car manufacturer like GM will have the control it needs to make operations 
work in areas more complex than the simple use of an emergency brake. 
China's clunky bureaucracy still wields tremendous influence over 
the car industry. Although being in a 50-50 joint venture theoretically 
means that decisions are shared with its Chinese partner, Shanghai 
Automotive Industrial Corp., having the plant in China inevitably 
favors the local partner. The fact that the ceremony was held Thursday 
is an example. Shanghai General Motors will not actually begin regular 
production of the car until next April, but the Chinese partner insisted 
on rolling out the first Buick before the end of 1998, in order to 
keep to its original state-mandated schedule, so out it came. Smith 
and other GM executives insist that they are happy with the arrangement 
and enjoy strong support from China's government. They also maintain 
that they will find a market for an expensive American sedan among 
the Chinese elite, who have in the past relied largely on imports 
of 100,000 vehicles a year from Japan and Germany, most of them smuggled 
to avoid sky-high tariffs. ``We're confident that we'll meet our sales 
targets,'' Smith said in an interview. He also predicted that the 
Shanghai operation would start turning a modest profit once it passed 
a break-even mark of 40,000 to 50,000 cars, perhaps in the third or 
fourth year. Many auto-industry analysts argue that General Motors 
is making the Buick here, and cooperating with China's demands that 
it bring up-to-date auto technology for a luxury car, because it was 
the only way to get into China's car-assembly market. Demand may balloon 
one day in the distant future, but right now the China market does 
not show a hunger for a high volume of high-end cars like Buicks. 
Smith contended that General Motors is fully committed to making the 
Buick project a success, but conceded that timing was a factor. ``I 
think it is extremely important to be in early,'' he said. ``This 
is going to be a huge market.'' The flexibility built into the new 
plant, Smith also said, means that it may be able to shift to making 
other vehicles in the future. But he denied reports that there are 
already plans to make a smaller car, like the Opel, if the Buick falters. 
Hu Maoyuan, president of Shanghai General Motors, put it another way 
when asked whether a smaller car would emerge from the Shanghai plant. 
``Meeting market demand is our aim,'' Hu said. ``Wherever we are able 
to meet consumer demands, we will.'' Shanghai is not General Motors' 
first stop in China. In the early 1990s, bureaucrats in Beijing steered 
the company into a light-truck venture with a Chinese partner in the 
northeastern city of Shenyang. The trucks did not sell well and the 
venture was suspended. Persuaded that passenger cars represented the 
future in China, where a fast-growing economy seemed to point toward 
budding consumer demand, General Motors bid aggressively for a partnership 
with Shanghai Automotive, which is generally seen as the best in a 
bunch of old-fashioned, state-owned automakers. However, after it 
was selected as a partner in 1995, beating out Ford Motor Co. and 
Toyota, GM had to endure two years of feasibility studies and other 
bureaucratic hurdles before it could sign a contract. During that 
time, the sheen on China's car-market projections began to fade. Other 
foreign car ventures went south: Peugeot abandoned its plant in Guangzhou; 
Chrysler cut its production of a Beijing Jeep Cherokee by nearly two-thirds, 
to 8,972 this year from 25,127 in 1995, and Citroen struggled at its 
plant in Wuhan, sinking to a low of 3,797 cars in 1995 before rebounding. 
The only foreign car venture that has thrived is Shanghai Volkswagen. 
Although the company will not discuss its profits, or the trouble 
it has in getting them back to Germany, Shanghai Volkswagen's Santana 
has won nearly 50 percent of China's passenger-car market, making 
235,295 sedans in 1998. General Motors executives say that much of 
Volkswagen's success has to do with its partner, Shanghai Automotive, 
which is now a GM partner, as well. As to whether Shanghai Automotive 
can simultaneously share partnerships with VW and General Motors without 
dividing its loyalty, Smith said he was not concerned. Instead, he 
praised the can-do spirit and bottom-line orientation at Shanghai 
Automotive. The new plant in the Pudong section of Shanghai, he noted, 
was built in just 18 months, and is as modern as any in the world. 
Other car experts agreed. ``I think the plant is spectacular,'' said 
Michael Dunne, president of Automotive Resources Asia, a consultant 
on the Asian auto market. ``They put a lot of money into it; they 
did not cut corners.'' General Motors' plans to produce nearly 20,000 
cars in 1999, Dunne said, will make it the most productive start-up 
car operation ever in China. At the outset, only 40 percent of each 
Buick will be made with Chinese parts, but that is projected to rise 
to 80 percent in a few years. If making Buicks is not an insurmountable 
challenge, selling them here may be. A big chunk of Shanghai General 
Motors' intended market is bureaucrats in China's government and in 
its large state-owned industry. Yet last year Beijing issued a directive 
barring officials below the rank of minister from buying cars with 
engines exceeding 2.5 liters in cylinder volume. The Buick uses a 
2.98-liter engine, and GM executives say they are hoping that government 
support will mean an exception. Worse perhaps for the American producer, 
China is mulling over plans to reduce vast state spending on cars, 
in favor of compensating officials with a monthly subsidy in place 
of the existing practice of simply buying cars for officials. Large 
or small, a subsidy would not likely be spent on luxury cars. ``I'm 
sure there will be difficulties along the road,'' Smith said. ``But 
we want to be here.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>