<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981217.0373 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Acting on early word from the chief weapons inspector in Iraq, President 
Clinton set in motion Wednesday's military strikes a full two days 
before the inspector formally declared to the Security Council that 
Saddam Hussein was once again in defiance of the U.N. inspection program, 
officials said Thursday. The president and senior administration officials 
said that Clinton had not made the final decision to unleash a barrage 
of missiles and bombs on targets across Iraq until Tuesday, hours 
after receiving the report by Richard Butler, the weapons inspector. 
But a full two days earlier, Butler had informed Clinton what he intended 
to say in his report, and when he would say it. And the president 
issued a highly classified order to the Pentagon on Sunday morning 
that began a 72-hour countdown to the air assault. Clinton was in 
Jerusalem on the first day of a whirlwind trip to Israel and the Palestinian 
territories. Butler's report was delivered formally to the U.N. Security 
Council and American officials as Clinton was flying home from the 
Middle East on Tuesday. About two hours into the 10-hour flight from 
Jerusalem to Washington, Clinton gave the order to U.S. forces to 
be prepared to strike within 24 hours. But Butler's report was in 
many ways a simple formality. Officials in New York and Washington 
said that there was little in the Butler report that had not been 
available to American officials days, even weeks, earlier. Military 
plans and hardware were already in place for raids that could have 
come at any time after Dec. 1. The timing of the strikes, coming on 
the eve of the impeachment vote, set off protests from Republicans, 
who charged on Wednesday that Clinton had orchestrated a crisis to 
slow the seemingly inexorable momentum toward impeachment. Speaking 
to reporters at the United Nations on Thursday, Butler forcefully 
rejected suggestions from Republicans and others skeptical of the 
timing of the bombing campaign that he had tailored his report or 
the timing of its release to give Clinton a pretext to act. ``That 
is utterly wrong,'' Butler said. He said he had always planned to 
present his report to the Security Council on Monday or Tuesday, and 
he said that plan had not been changed by pressure from the United 
States. ``I want to say as simply and plainly as I can,'' Butler said. 
``That report was based on the experts of UNSCOM. It danced to no 
one's tune. It was not written for anyone's purposes, for the purposes 
of the United States, for example. It was my report, as promised, 
on time, based on the facts.'' With Clinton in Israel through the 
weekend and the Muslim holy month of Ramadan beginning on Saturday, 
the window for American and British military action was very narrow, 
officials said. The administration did not want to offend Arab allies, 
or put the president's safety in jeopardy, by ordering an attack on 
Iraq while Clinton was in Israel, a senior American official said 
Thursday. Clinton did not make the final decision to undertake military 
action until after he had held a discussion aboard Air Force One with 
Secretary of State Madeleine Albright and a half-dozen members of 
Congress who traveled with them to the Middle East. Albright informed 
the members of Congress of Butler's latest findings, saying the U.N. 
inspection group had presented a clear-cut case of Iraqi defiance. 
Clinton asked the lawmakers for their reactions. Although the question 
was not explicitly put to them, Clinton was clearly seeking to gauge 
the political impact of ordering American forces into action on the 
very eve of the scheduled impeachment vote in the House, one of the 
lawmakers present said. ``I said there could be no considerations 
other than the national security of the United States and the safety 
of our service personnel,'' said Rep. Sam Gejdensen, D-Conn., the 
ranking minority member of the House International Relations Committee. 
Gejdensen said that one of the lawmakers told the president that there 
was a danger that Congress and the public would ``misinterpret'' a 
decision to take military action against Iraq as a means of diverting 
attention from Clinton's political peril. But the group concluded, 
and Clinton agreed, that that was a risk that had to be borne. According 
to accounts from several participants in the decision making that 
led to Wednesday's strike, Butler had briefed American officials as 
early as last Friday on his most recent conclusions, which were consistent 
with weekly reports he had been filing to the U.N. for the past month. 
Secretary of Defense William Cohen said the administration was prepared 
to act any time during the month of December, but chose to await Butler's 
most recent report before making the final decision to strike. ``We 
have always been prepared to go during the month of December, to take 
action,'' Cohen said. ``We were not going to take any action until 
such time as a report was filed, we knew what was said, and the president 
actually called for a strike.'' A diplomat involved in the U.N. deliberations 
said that there were no surprises in Butler's latest report, nor in 
the rapid American and British decision to launch air strikes. ``We 
were conscious on Monday that we needed to be prepared for action 
when Mr. Butler's report came out,'' this diplomat said on condition 
of anonymity. Clinton reconfirmed his decision to act at a meeting 
at the White House early Wednesday morning. Military aides told the 
president that he had to make a firm go/no-go call no later than 8 
a.m. Conscious of the likely political fallout _ but unprepared for 
the harsh condemnation from Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott and 
other Republicans who questioned the president's motives _ Clinton 
began working on the address to the nation that he delivered Wednesday 
evening. At the end of the 15-minute speech, he made a brief reference 
to the impeachment debate raging in Washington, but said that domestic 
politics would never weaken American resolve to act in its own interests. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>