<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981217.0365 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial on Friday, Dec. 18: At a time 
when its members would normally be in holiday recess, Congress is 
wrestling with its two most solemn responsibilities _ whether to impeach 
the president and whether to support his decision to send American 
troops into combat. Democrats made a strong case against starting 
the impeachment debate while American forces are attacking Iraq. But 
in discussing that issue, the Democrats were also playing to an emerging 
theme in popular opinion that the impeachment process is being guided 
by Republican muscle rather than sober judgment. ``There is something 
about this whole process that shows a lack of judgment, a lack of 
proportionality, a lack of common sense,'' warned the Democratic whip, 
David Bonior of Michigan. If Republicans as eminent as Gerald Ford 
and Bob Dole favor censure, Bonior asked, why was the House limited 
to a yes-no vote on impeachment? The answer, of course, is that the 
incoming speaker, Robert Livingston, and his whip, Tom DeLay, were 
certain they could win an impeachment vote. They will be counting 
votes on Friday to see if Livingston's confession of marital infidelity 
has weakened their hold on Republican moderates who might fear that 
voting against Clinton would look hypocritical. Until now, the headlong 
rush toward an impeachment that is opposed by the public has made 
this a time in Washington unlike any other in living memory. Even 
at the depths of Watergate, there was a sense of strong hands reaching 
for the rudder that President Nixon had relinquished. But at this 
crucial moment, the capital lacks two ingredients that are essential 
to the steady guidance of a government designed around checks and 
balances among coequal branches. One is the emergence of leaders capable 
of growth in the midst of crisis. The other is a shared commitment 
to compromise. To look for those qualities in the new GOP is to understand 
that Ford and Dole, with their urgings toward bipartisan censure, 
are dinosaurs. The voters in the Sun Belt congressional districts 
that now control the House Republican Conference do not elect compromisers. 
At the same time that the GOP devalued compromise, the Democrats have 
been hobbled by congressional losses and a vitiated president. In 
this chaotic atmosphere, events are being shaped by the Republicans' 
hunger for maximum partisan advantage rather than the best outcome 
for the country. The strategy of the Senate majority leader, Trent 
Lott, seems to envision using the Senate trial to drive President 
Clinton toward resignation if impeachment passes the House. The clearest 
thinking in the Republican Party is coming from two New Yorkers, Reps. 
Amo Houghton and Peter King. On Thursday they introduced a censure 
resolution noting that Clinton ``lied under oath.'' Clinton now seems 
willing to consider that essential language, but as is typical of 
his every action since his landmark falsehoods of Aug. 17, he has 
waited too long to make a saving move. The public has defined the 
correct punishment for Clinton. It wants a condemnation occupying 
the serious space between a vengeful Republican leadership and those 
mindless speakers at anti-impeachment rallies who see the president 
as a victim of bad dating etiquette. Although we have called for swift 
completion of the constitutional process, we think Livingston is mistaken 
to conduct the impeachment during combat operations in Iraq. He is 
even more mistaken to exclude the only resolution that fulfills justice 
and the public will. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>