<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981217.2000.2574 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
UN humanitarian workers are still in Baghdad. They've been overseeing 
Iraq's purchase and distribution of humanitarian aide under its oil 
for food deal with the United Nations. The short term future of their 
mission is of course uncertain, but the humanitarian needs in Iraq 
remain dire. Muthani el Huniti is media director with the International 
Relief Organizations, that's a non-profit humanitarian assistance 
program. It's based here in the United States. He says he got a fax 
this morning from one of the groups representatives in Baghdad. Basically, 
the fax tells us about a great need for medical supplies; especially 
antibiotics and IV solutions and syringes which is very basics. But, 
because they're expecting to have a lot of casualties tonight, tomorrow, 
you know. And other reps in Iraq are preparing for a big humanitarian 
kind of work or mission in Baghdad. Now, is it your impression that 
they were asking for these strictly in anticipation of casualties 
or was there any kind of mention made of casualties that have happened 
over the last 24 hours? Well, what we heard is they were tens of casualties. 
It's doesn't even reach a hundred. But, there was a big expectations 
that it will be much, much worse tonight and tomorrow. That's at least 
what the people feel in Iraq that they're expecting a very hard days 
to come. So, beside the fact that already they have a lack of a lot 
of medical supplies. I mean from sutures to anything you can imagine 
of. They are lacking everything there. But because of the situation 
now they are urging us to do it as soon as possible and as much as 
possible. Could you also describe for us the conversation that you 
had with your sister who lives in Baghdad and you spoke with her last 
night. I assume it was during sometime around the bombing. What do 
she have to say? And how is she coping? Actually, the call was about 
in the morning in Baghdad. It was too emotional actually. We didn't 
talk a lot, because she couldn't say that much. She was crying most 
of the time. I just told her that I called to see that everything 
is OK with you and with family. And she was describing to me that 
her children were hearing bombing everywhere, like around where they 
live. And basically, they live in a area close to a major oil refinery 
and a major power plant which like expect it to be bombed anytime. 
So, there were scared. And that time, like it was 3:00 in the morning, 
everybody was up and they were calling each other like families to 
make sure that everybody was OK. If she lives in an area that seems 
to be near one of the targets, or at least something that she would 
suspect would be a target, do you know why she hasn't left? I think 
she is leaving tonight. I think-you see, they didn't expect it. I 
mean for them-they know that something will happen, but they didn't 
expect to be that early. It looks like they though what happen with 
the president and with the impeachment will delay the bombing. So, 
I think everybody's moving-or they start to move already yesterday. 
But, I'm sure she's moving. Because she did this when they first bombed 
Iraq in 1990. Everybody was out of Baghdad actually. They were in 
the villages. But, sometimes some families they don't have a choice 
even if they don't have the resources or the money even to move. I 
mean it's too much. I've seen people there they can't even afford 
to just take a bus to go anywhere. It's also interesting in some of 
the reports that we're hearing from Iraq that unlike your sister there 
is some people who do not seem to be quite so frighten in terms of 
the attacks themselves. People went to work earlier in the day. People 
do not seem to be going to shelters. Well, basically the Iraqis because 
of the long experience with Iran-Iraq war, they have become rigid, 
very kind of daring actually. Maybe the kids and my sister, because 
she was living in Kuwait, she didn't experience that that much, you 
know. Because Iran-Iraq war for 8 years, it taught the Iraqi people 
a lot about war, you know. That's true, but especially with women 
they are maybe more emotional and they worry more about their children 
actually more than anything else. Will you be talking to your sister 
tonight? I'll try, but I don't think I'll be lucky like last night 
because I expect that they will bomb the communications system tonight. 
But even if this doesn't happen, hopefully it's not going to happen, 
but that's what I expect at least. I think the lines will be jammed 
because of everybody's calling, you know. Muthani El Huniti of the 
International Relief Organization speaking to us from Southfield, 
Michigan, thank you very much. You're welcome. Thank you so much. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>