<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981217.2000.2998 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is The World. I'm Lisa Mullins. The bombs are raining down on 
Iraq, but few believe they will put a halt to Saddam Hussein's biological 
and chemical weapons programs. When the airstrikes cease, Iraq will 
almost certainly still have the ability to develop weapons of mass 
destruction. Once more, it's unclear how the international community 
will contain that threat. The World's Patrick Cox reports. The official 
aim of the airstrikes is to pick up where the UN weapons inspections 
left off and destroy Iraq's ability to use chemical and biological 
weapons to devastating effect. President Clinton said today it would 
have been a disaster to stand by and allow Iraq to develop weapons 
of mass destruction. Meanwhile, his Defense Secretary William Cohen 
laid out a bombing strategy targeted at Saddam Hussein military hardware. 
We're targeting those facilities where he can deliver weapons of mass 
destruction to the extent that we can identify those facilities where 
they're being manufactured and can do so with a minimum amount of 
damage to innocent people, we will do so. But, few consider the chances 
for success high. After a far more intense pounding during the Gulf 
War, Baghdad's weapons of mass destruction more than survived, although 
the west appears to have succeeded in denting Iraq's nuclear weapons 
program. UN weapons inspectors did find evidence of missile warheads 
and bombs loaded with, among other agents, VX nerve gas and Anthrax. 
In the past seven years, weapons inspectors have destroyed bomb factories 
and munition sites, but they suspect that the Iraqis have kept much 
of their biological and chemical programs secret and intact. And as 
far as biological weapons are concerned, there may not be much inspections 
or airstrikes can do. There is no way that we can prevent Iraq from 
developing certainly biological weapons. If they have hospitals, if 
they can make beer, they can develop biological weapons. Harlan Oldman 
is with The Center for Strategic and International Studies and is 
the author of several books on US military strategy. He says US leaders 
raise unrealistic expectations that Iraq could be permanently stripped 
of its biological weapons. Even before the Gulf War, and by its own 
admission, Iraq produced more than 2000 gallons of Anthrax, enough 
in theory to kill billions of people. The Iraqis have also admitted 
to producing several other killer germs for military uses. All these 
agents can be produced in small spaces and transported at a moments 
notices, evading both weapons inspections and bombing raids. But where 
it may be impossible to stop the development of these warfare germs, 
Oldman says it may be possible to prevent their deployment on missile 
heads. We have ways of understanding their weapons systems, knowing 
where those are, because those can be detected by overhead satellites 
and other means. And if we feel that he is developing the actual delivery 
capability, then we have the right to destroy that capability. Administrations 
officials are all but conceding that the airstrikes signify the end 
of the UN weapons inspections. So, how the international community 
keeps tabs on Iraq's weapons of mass destruction once the bombing 
raids end is an open question. Fred Eclay, a Former Pentagon Advisor 
to President Reagan, says the key to ending Iraq's weapons program 
is Saddam. The only solution it seems to me to overcome the danger 
of this is to get rid of him. And the president has now finally embraced 
that goal. But that is really the only way which you can put an end 
to this constant effort by Saddam Hussein to withdraw, rebuild, to 
hide these forbidden and horrible weapons. One scenario floated by 
the administration is that with Saddam removed, itself a tall order, 
his successor would rapidly seek to end crippling sanctions. Then, 
for the first time, Iraq would allow an international weapons team 
to totally destroy its biological and chemical weapons stockpiles, 
followed up monitoring for any future development. For The World, 
this is Patrick Cox. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>