<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981217.2000.1260 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Hello, I'm Lisa Mullins. The military operations against Iraq are 
being directed from McGill Air Force base in Tampa, Florida, the headquarters 
of General Anthony Zene, commander-in-chief of Central Command. For 
there, his spokesman Major Gil Lamarket joins us now. Major Lamarket 
could describe for us exactly what goes on on days like this at Central 
Command? Sure. Well, our primary focus at US Central Command is to 
plan and direct missions to carry out the order of the National Command 
Authority; the president and the secretary of defense. As such, we 
were tasked to carry out the strike that began last night against 
Saddam Hussein and Iraq in hopes of destroying and targeting facilities 
that he uses to develop weapons of mass destructions. And so, specifically 
what does that mean? Today is the second day that operation is under 
way. What's happening there? Again, we continue, we have a target 
list that we developed that we believed would achieve that objective 
of trying to squash basically Saddam's ability to develop weapons 
of mass destruction. Can you describe the extent of the damage that's 
been done? We understand that about 50 targets were hit last night 
including some facilities of military intelligence, some of the barracks 
of the Republican Guards. Well, I can't go into the specifics. I can 
say a couple of things. You know, Secretary Cohen's already stated 
that we're pretty satisfied that we got the right targets that that 
we were going after. We have looked at some of the reconnaissance 
photos. Obviously, there's more still coming in. And it appears that 
we were very successful in our strike last night. And what do you 
know at this point about civilian casualties? Really I don't have 
any information on casualties in Iraq beyond what the news media are 
reporting. And in terms of United States or British casualties? We 
have not had any casualties to US or British or coalition forces. 
As you mentioned, the president has talked about a sustained strike. 
How do you interpret that? How long do you think this could possibly 
go on? We interpret that as it will be sustained until we've accomplished 
what it is we've set out to do and that's to disrupt Saddam Hussein's 
capability to develop weapons of mass destruction and that we're satisfied 
that we've done that. Major Joe Lamarket, thank you very much for 
speaking with us. Barry Posen is professor of Political Science and 
Security Studies Program at MIT. Professor Posen, you heard our conversation 
with Major Lamarket. When the armed forces talks about sustained operations, 
how do you interpret that? Normally, when the armed forces talk about 
sustained operations, I expect they're talking days and weeks, but 
we're in a special situation here. And it's clear that the spokesperson 
are being very canny about their intentions. Is the constraint that 
you're talking about Ramadan ? Or is it simply that they don't know 
how long it's going to go? Well, it seems to me that there's two issue 
here. One issue is the political shadow cast by Ramadan, whether they're 
going to take seriously the possible political damage associated with 
attacking during these religious times for the largely Muslim population 
of the Persian Gulf. And they've been canny about that. We don't know 
how seriously they're going to take that in the end. Now, the second 
how that interacts with how quickly they're able to cover the targets 
that they want to cover and how much damage they can do to it, which 
will depend in part on how will the weapons worked, what the damage 
assessment tells them, and whether or not they run into weather problems 
over the next couple days. Because as most people know now, airplanes 
in particular delivering laser guided bombs tend to require favorable 
weather in order to get the precision that they want. So, if you ended 
up with bad weather, it would slow the rate at which you can cover 
the targets and might cause you to want to lengthen the operation. 
In addition, you also heard what Major Lamarket said about the extent 
of the number of aircraft and personnel ships that are involved in 
this. How long can the armed forces sustain this kind of intensity 
of this operation? And what are the constraints aside from those that 
you mentioned? There's a constraint on what they've been doing in 
the last day or so which is they've largely been launching cruise 
missile and the ships in the Gulf have a finite number of cruise missiles. 
And when they've shot those off, they have to go get so more. And 
there may be tenders out there in the gulf that can crossload reloads 
for those cruise missiles, so there could be more out there then we 
know about and there's no reason why they should have admitted this 
to us. The air launched cruise missiles are a little different because 
they can keep sending the air launch cruise missiles out by air to 
Neagro Garcia and then loading them out to the B-52s right there and 
then flying north and keep shooting. The constraint on the air launched 
cruise missiles is that most people suggest that there aren't that 
many in the inventory. In other words, the total number of air launched 
conventional cruise missile that the United States owns is measure 
in the low hundreds, you know, 2, 3, 400 of these systems, which means 
it doesn't take very long to fire them all off. Professor Posen, thank 
you very much. OK. Bye-bye. Barry Posen is professor of Political 
Science in the Securities Studies Program at MIT. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>