<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981217.2000.0374 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is the World. I'm Lisa Mullins. American and British warplanes 
strike Baghdad this evening in a second wave of attacks aimed at smashing 
Iraq's weapons of mass destruction. At least 13 huge explosions from 
incoming missiles and bombs rocked the capital city. This afternoon 
US Defense Secretary William Cohen made it clear the raids on Iraq 
will continue until American achieve their strategic objectives regarding 
Saddam Hussein. We're diminishing his ability to attack his neighbors 
either conventionally or with weapons of mass destruction. And since 
Iraq has now prevented the United Nations inspectors from doing their 
job, we have to resort to military action to continue to contain him. 
Our targets include Iraq's air defense system, his command and control 
system, air fields, and other military infrastructure and facilities. 
One thing should be absolutely clear, we are concentrating on military 
targets. We are not attacking the people of Iraq. And we have no desire 
to increase the suffering that Saddam Hussein has imposed on his people. 
But, in Baghdad, the Iraqi Foreign Minister Muhammad El Suhaf said 
that yesterday's attacks have caused heavy civilian casualties. They 
did so when American cruise missiles stuck industrial areas and residential 
neighborhoods. They attacked different district in Baghdad which is 
heavily populated with civilians. And one of them is a voclame district. 
There is heavy casualties and collateral damage in those civilian 
quarters. They attacked individual houses. In Washington, the Chairman 
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff General Henry Shelton said more than 
50 separate Iraqi targets were hit during the first night of the air 
raids. General Shelton said more than 200 tomahawk cruise missiles 
were fired, 70 US Navy planes were also involved. The general said 
the attacks on the first night targeted Iraqi intelligence operations 
and the headquarters of Iraq's special forces. The BBC's Nick Springate 
is in the Iraqi capital. He says that Baghdad has once again been 
barring the brunt of missile strikes tonight. There's been large explosions 
around central Baghdad. Some very heavy anti-aircraft fire. You see 
the tracer rising into the sky. We do not know if these explosions 
are from bombs, from planes, or sent from the ship, or if they are 
purely from anti-craft. But, what I have been told is that a number 
of injured civilians have been taken to a hospital and the people 
are now running in the street and taking cover. When you talk about 
injured civilians, the United States has made a point of saying that 
civilians are not being targeting in this attacks, but it's impossible 
to assure no such injuries. Do we know much about the extent of civilian 
casualties? We do not. Some colleagues of mine have been taken to 
a hospital. But what we do know is that today five people were killed, 
we've been told due to the action last night. We are basically not 
being given full access to actually see the full extent of the damage 
yet, but I'm sure when daylight comes, we'll actually see what damage 
these bombs have caused. Can you talk a little bit more, Nick, about 
what's happening out on the streets at this point. We understand that 
at least earlier today people seemed to be coping fairly well. Some 
people even went out to work and headed out on the streets. Have people 
taken special precautions? Absolutely. There's been an amazing calm 
here throughout the day. Driving around Baghdad, you would have expected 
that there would be no one on the streets. But, people have been going 
around keeping up their daily basis. You see people playing football 
in the park. You see people shopping in the market. And nothing seems 
to have changed. Literally, when the explosions started to happen, 
people were running for cover. But, there is this amazing sense that 
tomorrow will yet again be out on the streets normally. They seem 
to now feel that they've been living under 8 years of sanctions and 
there is nothing worst that can happen to them. And so, they very 
much have an attitude of they're just going to go about their daily 
lives. You are speaking to us from Baghdad. Do you know how widespread 
some of the attacks have been outside of the city? We don't. I mean, 
we are very, the division where we are in in the city, we do not have 
access to go outside and to see where other targets may have been 
attack. I mean, what I can say is myself and my colleagues here are 
very sure that other places within Iraq have been attacked. Military 
installations and possibly some of the presidential palaces, but we 
do not know this. And it is very unlikely that we will be given access 
to see this for some time, if it all. The BBC's Nick Springate speaking 
to us from Baghdad. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>