<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981217.2000.2021 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is the World, a co-production of the BBC World Service, PRI, 
WGBH in Boston. I'm Lisa Mullins. On Capitol Hill today, attention 
was again diverted from the impeachment debate to the Iraq air strikes, 
but Republican leaders continue to press for a prompt vote on the 
four Articles of Impeachment. House Minority Leader Democrat Richard 
Gephardt. Our young men and woman, our sons and daughters are in harms 
way while we are beginning a debate on whether or not to remove the 
President of the United States from office. That is wrong!. That is 
wrong! That is wrong! Right or wrong, House Majority Leader Richard 
Armey said this afternoon that the debate on impeaching the president 
will begin tomorrow morning. The World's Emily Harris is in Washington, 
DC now. Emily, it sounds as if it's been another pretty tense day 
at the Capitol. I wonder if you could give us a sense of what this 
day has been like. It really has been a tense day and it's been a 
very uncertain day with no one really knowing moment to moment what 
exactly is going to happen, but a lot of feeling that this is a very 
serious time, a lot of back and forth. It's been unclear moment to 
moment are we going to do this, are we not going to do this. This 
being the impeachment debate. And that has crystallized. The impeachment 
debate will start tomorrow. There seems to be a real sense developing 
among Republicans that this is our Constitutional duty. We're just 
going to get it over with and be whatever it may be. And on the Democrat 
side, they are still fighting fiercely to not have the impeachment 
debate coming up with whatever reason seem to fit the current and 
very quickly changing political scene here. And can you explain the 
reasoning behind the Republicans decision? Why the decision to conduct 
the debate tomorrow when it was postponed once because of the air 
strikes and the strikes are continuing now? Well, Bob Livingston, 
the speaker of the House, made it fairly clear he went back to the 
Nixon impeachment hearings and said that those were going on during 
Vietnam. Sort of offering up proof that the two things can happen 
simultaneously. And then, he referred back to Chairman Henry Hyde, 
chairman of the House Judiciary Committee's committed to get this 
"unpleasant business done" before the year is out. Now, it's interesting 
because the Democrats are of course pushing Henry Hyde very hard on 
that. They want to get it over and done with as it was beginning several 
weeks ago. Now of course, they've sort of switched sides on that. 
So, Livingston said basically historically you can do it. We have 
made a committed to finish it by the end of the year, so we're going 
to. And we just people to disregard any outside pressures and vote 
and whatever happens, happens. And let's adjourn the 105th Congress. 
And the Democrats on the other hand, as we heard from Richard Gephardt, 
are not taking kindly to that kind of logic being voiced by Congressman 
Livingston and others. No, Gephardt, you heard him at a rally on the 
Capitol steps where he was addressing people who had-about 1000 people-who 
had gathered to protest impeachment. And Gephardt spoke later on the 
House floor as well and offered a little more reason behind his determination 
that it's wrong to both bomb Iraq and have impeachment hearings at 
the same time. And he said that basically the reason behind that stance 
is that the Democrats think that they have to consider how Saddam 
Hussein might interpret this action implying that perhaps is Saddam 
Hussein sees that Clinton is in trouble, he will take a firmer stance 
or do whatever Saddam Hussein might do. Gephardt didn't speculate 
on that, but he just was concerned about the image that the United 
States would be presenting to Saddam Hussein. And Emily, I wonder 
how today compares to yesterday in Washington in terms of the amount 
of criticism that the president is taking for the timing of the military 
action and what is he saying in response? Oh, actually, people are 
backpedaling on that. Trent Lott made some statements that he had 
criticized the timing yesterday that it was purely based on policy 
considerations not implying that the president may have been trying 
to duck impeachment. Dick Armey pointed out, the majority leader pointed 
out that Clinton himself has said that bombing Iraq undercut his authority 
even while the impeachment hearings are going on. So, the message 
out here is if there's criticism at all, we're just criticizing it 
on policy grounds. It should have been taking care of a long time 
ago is the message coming from the Republicans and there is a distinct 
message coming out that in January, in the upcoming months, we've 
got to deal with this on a long term basis. We've got to figure out 
some way to quit having Saddam Hussein come back and needle us time 
and time again. The World's Emily Harris, thank you for the update. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>