<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981217.2000.0764 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Israeli has reason for concern about the military action against Iraq. 
The Jewish state was a target of Saddam Hussein during the 1991 Gulf 
War when Iraq fired SCUD Missiles at the country. While Israeli military 
commanders rate the chance of an Iraqi attack this time as remote, 
another echo of 1991 is already ringing in Israeli ears; Palestinian 
protest. The World's Richard Myrna reports. Just a few days ago during 
his visit to Bethlehem and Gaza, Palestinians were hailing President 
Clinton Today, they were cursing him. "Clinton, you pig", they chanted, 
"Go a chance women". Hundreds of Palestinians from the Hasha Refugee 
Camp near Bethlehem in the West Bank demonstrated against the air 
strikes. They waved Iraqi flies and held aloft pictures of Saddam 
Hussein. The Stars and Stripes, which Palestinians had waved during 
the president's visit to Bethlehem, was now being burned to protest 
the attack Iraq. Demonstrators clashed with the Israeli army in several 
locations in the West Bank. The demonstrators threw rocks and burned 
tires. The Israeli army responded with tear gas a rubber coated metal 
bullets, killing one Palestinian teenager near the town of Rumala. 
During the Gulf War, Palestinian Leader Yassir Arafat sided with Saddam 
Hussein. Today, the Palestinian leadership condemned the American 
and British attack. Palestinian Legislator Ziabu Ziad said force is 
the wrong response. Well, it's sad. I'm really sad. I'm worried about 
this attack. I don't think that power can solve the problem. I don't 
think that this attack will achieve its purpose. I think the best 
way should be by the to bring Iraq back to the international arena 
and enable the Iraqi people to live in peace and dignity like any 
other people. The Israeli leadership backs the air strikes. David 
Bareland, a senior Israeli government officials, says that his country's 
worried that unless Saddam Hussein is stopped, he could attack the 
Jewish state with biological or chemical weapons. As anyone who has 
been a victim of Saddam Hussein's aggression and the government of 
Israel was a target eight years ago of SCUDS which were fired at this 
country by the Iraqis. We obviously realize that danger still exists 
and it has to be dealt with. The attack on Iraq was an American decision, 
but we can't indifferent to it. And we feel that this aggression has 
to be dealt with one way or another. Batteries of Patriot missiles 
which are designed to hit income missiles have been stationed around 
Israeli. The Israeli arm has advised people to upgrade old gas masks 
and to stock up on nylon sheeting and masking tape used to seal up 
rooms against the gas attack. Lili Selverman is taking the army's 
advice. She's come to her local hardware store in the Emik Afine neighborhood 
in Jerusalem to buy nylon sheeting. But, Selverman says she's not 
to concerned by the events in the Gulf. No, I am not so worried. So, 
why are you getting this plastic sheeting today? I make my duty, my 
citizen duty to have this home, so I put it in my home. That's all. 
To be ready. What do you think of the attack? I think it's the right 
thing. I hope this time it will some solution to this problem. The 
attacks come at a difficult time here. The Wye Peace Accord between 
Israeli and the Palestinian is on hold. And even before the air strikes, 
tension was high in the West bank and Gaza Strip. Israeli may not 
be directly affected by the strikes against Iraq, but as the attacks 
continue, it may start feeling the heat of growing Palestinian anger. 
For The World, This is Richard Myrna in Jerusalem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>