<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981217.2000.2301 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Arab view of the air strikes against Iraq is muted. Most Arab 
nations take a dim view of Iraq's leader Saddam Hussein, but they 
don't approve of the attack on his country either. The World's Andrew 
North has our story. Not one Arab government has backed the US and 
British strikes on Iraq, but only a few have been openly critical. 
Most have little sympathy for Saddam Hussein, but they also fear the 
potential instability that outside military intervention risks bringing 
to the region. Saudi Arabia, one of America's key Gulf allies, has 
been silent on the attacks, while Kuwait issued a cautious statement 
expressing the hope that further tension could be averted. Only the 
Arab League which represents all 22 Arab states and two of its members; 
Syria and Lebanon, have voiced open condemnation of the attacks. Ahed 
Madel, assistant secretary general of the Arab League, says strikes 
won't solve anything. We don't believe in using force to solve problems. 
Using the force will not solve the problem. It will complicate it. 
This weekend, the Arab League plans to hold an emergency summit on 
the airstrikes at the request of Iraq. But, there's a wide gap between 
the cautious pronouncements of most Arab governments and the vies 
of ordinary Arab people. In Gaza and the West Bank today, Palestinians 
demonstrated against the US airstrikes. Clashes with Israeli troops 
lead to one Palestinian being killed. It's a dramatic turnaround from 
the scene just two days ago when the American flag was held high in 
the Palestinian Territories. The same flag that our people were raising 
and receiving warmly President Clinton are being now burned by the 
Palestinian demonstrators all over. Palestinian Analyst Gasan El Kantin 
in Jerusalem says the airstrikes have put Palestinian Leader Yassir 
Arafat in a difficult position. Arafat was presenting Clinton as an 
honest broker in the peace process and as a person who is having sympathy 
with Palestinians. Now this same president appeared to be launching 
an aggression against innocent people at least in the perception of 
the Palestinian public. That public perception harks back to 1991 
when many Palestinians backed Saddam Hussein during the Gulf War, 
largely because they saw him as standing up to Israel. And Israel 
remains the key to understanding Arab reaction to these latest US 
led strikes. As far as most Arabs are concerned America employs double 
standards, forcing Iraq to comply with UN resolutions to the letter 
while allowing Israeli to flaunt long-standing UN resolutions calling 
for it to withdraw from Arab lands. This time around, many Arabs also 
suspect President Clinton's domestic concerns played a role in the 
decision to strike Iraq, According to Egyptian Political Analyst Muhammad 
sid Ahmed. Nobody would be convinced that it's a coincidence that 
this measure was taken the very the day the impeachment had. One group 
of Arabs who have traditionally given cautious support to US attacks 
on the regime of Saddam Hussein is the Iraqi opposition. This time 
though even some Iraqi dissidents are expressing doubts. Ahmed Chulabe, 
leader of the Iraqi national congress, one of the main opposition 
groups, fears these strikes will achieve little. Their point is that 
the weapons of mass destruction will not go by bombarding Saddam for 
a few hours with a few missiles. Any campaign to bomb Iraq without 
the comprehensive strategy to remove Saddam will be counter-productive. 
That has been our position all along for some time now. Chulabe and 
other Iraqi dissidents are calling for a concerted effort to remove 
Saddam Hussein involving Iraqi rebel fighters and sustained US military 
support, possibly requiring ground troops. But Washington is well 
aware that such actions could insight greater anti-US feeling in the 
Middle East and possibly lead to new attacks on American targets both 
in the region and in the wider world. Just yesterday, the Clinton 
Administrations ordered a comprehensive review of its already tight 
security measure at US embassies and military installations in the 
Gulf region in response to intelligence reports that Saudi Exile Osana 
bin Laden may be planning new attacks on America targets. For The 
World, I'm Andrew North. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>