<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981101.0857 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Rescue workers recovered hundreds of bodies Sunday from communities 
buried when a lake in a volcano crater overflowed and sent tons of 
mud and rock hurtling down on villages below. The finds boosted the 
death toll from former Hurricane Mitch to 978. Authorities feared 
that many more bodies would be found in 10 communities at the foot 
of the Casitas Volcano in northern Nicaragua. Mitch was one of the 
most violent hurricanes to hit the Caribbean, causing heavy rain and 
floods as it cut a fatal path along the coasts of Honduras, Nicaragua 
and other Central American countries. The first army rescue helicopters 
to reach the volcano on Sunday found widespread destruction, army 
spokesman Capt. Milton Sandoval said. Rescue workers recovered 360 
bodies in four villages near Posoltega, about 50 miles (80 kms) northwest 
of Managua. A river of mud and rubble collapsed on the villages Friday 
after a crater lake near the volcano's peak overflowed and caused 
part of the mountain to crumble, Sandoval said. Only 92 of the estimated 
2,000 area residents were found alive, some injured, and the remainder 
were listed as missing, Sandoval said. Rescuers aboard the first army 
helicopters to reach the communities found hundreds of decomposing 
bodies, he said. One hundred soldiers working at the scene were burying 
the rotting bodies of the victims where they lay because of public 
health concerns, Sandoval said. It was unclear whether any residents 
of the villages of El Porvenir, Versalles, Rolando Rodriguez and Santa 
Narcisa had fled in time to avoid the mudslide or all were asleep 
in their homes when it struck. A woman who claimed to have survived 
the disaster told Radio Nicaragua on Sunday that she had seen ``many 
unburied bodies'' in orchards near the volcano. The survivor, Mercedes 
Rodriguez Zapata, claimed to have left the area Saturday and traveled 
on foot and horseback to the capital, Managua. Unconfirmed radio reports 
said as many as 4,000 people may have died when mudslides struck in 
the northwestern province of Chinandega. The newspaper El Nuevo Diario 
on Sunday called Mitch's death toll ``apocalyptic'' and said it may 
be the country's worst natural disaster since a magnitude-6.2 earthquake 
killed 5,000 people in 1972. By official count, 225 people have been 
killed in Nicaragua alone from heavy rain and flash flooding _ apparently 
in addition to the 360 dead in Posoltega _ for a total of 585. Another 
253 people were listed as missing, the National Civil Defense reported. 
Nicaragua has asked the United States to lend it several large helicopters 
to help deliver supplies and assess damage in remote areas, Defense 
Minister Pedro J. Chamorro Barrios said Saturday. In Honduras, at 
least 231 deaths have been blamed on Mitch, the National Emergency 
Commission said Saturday. El Salvador _ where 140 people died in flash 
floods _ declared a state of emergency Saturday, as did Guatemala, 
where 21 people died when floods swept away their homes. Mexico reported 
one death from Mitch last Monday. In the Caribbean, the U.S. Coast 
Guard widened a search for a tourist schooner with 31 people aboard 
that hasn't been heard from since Tuesday. By late Sunday, Mitch's 
winds, once near 180 mph (290 kph), had dropped to near 30 mph (50 
kph), and the storm _ now classified as a tropical depression _ was 
near Tapachula, on Mexico's southern Pacific coast near the Guatemalan 
border. Mitch was moving west at 8 mph (13 kph) and was dissipating 
but threatened to strengthen again if it moved back out to sea. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>