<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981101.0180 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A new Protestant gang opposed to Northern Ireland's prevailing cease-fires 
claimed responsibility Sunday for the killing of a Catholic civilian. 
A caller representing the Red Hand Defenders also claimed responsibility 
for another gun attack on a pub in Catholic west Belfast in which 
nobody was hurt. The killing demonstrates a new dissident threat within 
the ranks of Northern Ireland's many outlawed pro-British groups: 
the Ulster Defense Association, Ulster Volunteer Force and Red Hand 
Commando, which have observed a joint cease-fire since 1994, and the 
Loyalist Volunteer Force, which joined the truce after politicians 
struck a historic peace accord six months ago. Such groups have killed 
more than 900 people, mostly Catholic civilians at random, in a three-decade 
campaign aimed at matching violence committed by the Irish Republican 
Army. The IRA, the major anti-British paramilitary group with power 
bases in working-class Catholic areas, has observed a truce for 15 
months. There was no violent reaction when IRA dissidents committed 
Northern Ireland's worst-ever atrocity in August, a car bomb that 
killed 29 civilians and wounded 370 others in the religiously mixed 
town of Omagh. But Saturday's killing coincided with the failure to 
meet an important deadline in April's peace accord, which a strong 
minority of Protestants oppose on the grounds it gives too much to 
the IRA and its allied Sinn Fein party. The agreement, supported by 
eight parties after 22 months of negotiations, called for a new Northern 
Ireland government to hold an inaugural summit with the Irish government 
by the end of October. But that symbolically important development 
has been delayed because Protestant politicians are refusing to include 
Sinn Fein in the new government unless the IRA starts disarming. The 
accord called for both the IRA and outlawed pro-British groups to 
disarm by mid-2000, but didn't specify a starting point. Both camps 
have vowed to retain their weaponry indefinitely. The name ``Red Hand 
Defenders'' emerged this summer in Portadown, Northern Ireland's most 
staunchly Protestant town, where an annual confrontation between Protestant 
marchers and Catholic protesters has triggered widespread violence. 
After police successfully blocked this year's march, the Red Hand 
Defenders issued death threats against leading Catholic protesters 
and claimed responsibility for a grenade attack that mortally wounded 
a police officer. Portadown is also the power base for the Loyalist 
Volunteer Force, which killed a dozen Catholics earlier this year. 
Police and politicians suspect that the Red Hand Defenders is a cover 
name for Loyalist Volunteers who oppose the group's May cease-fire. 
A red-colored hand, the traditional symbol of the province of Ulster, 
adorns many Protestant flags and wall murals today. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>