<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981101.0339 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
They funded China's drive towards modernization, building power plants, 
new roads, and flashy real estate developments that were touted as 
the pride and glory of provincial governments. But the plants are 
generating more electricity than the market needs, the roads have 
only a handful of drivers on them, and the properties have few tenants. 
It all adds up to a financial nightmare for the companies who lent 
money on the projects. They're struggling with billions of dollars 
of foreign debt and one big one has been closed by the central government 
_ an admission that it went bust by ill-fated attempts to build up 
China's infrastructure. The plight of China's non-bank financial institutions, 
known as international trust and investment corporations, or itics, 
has rattled investor sentiment in a region that's already fighting 
hard to bounce back from its economic crisis. And some analysts warn 
that the troubles are just the tip of the iceberg, with problems in 
Chinese banks likely to emerge next. ``Itics are in worse shape than 
banks, but banks are not in good shape either,'' said Andy Xie, a 
Hong Kong-based economist who follows China for the Wall Street investment 
bank Morgan Stanley. Sooner rather than later, China will have to 
address not only its non-bank financial institutions, which make up 
just 3 percent of the financial system, but the banks themselves, 
Xie predicted. For now, concerns have centered on China's approximately 
240 itics, which act largely as provincial government investment arms. 
They are run mainly by politicians, rather than financial professionals. 
Many of them secured foreign funding for provincial government projects 
by using official backing to gain the trust of foreign bankers. But 
critics say many of the itic projects were developed not because they 
were financially viable, but because they reflected the demands of 
government officials who were more concerned about having impressive 
developments in their territories. It leaves investors wondering whether 
that official backing will lead to public cash being used to pay off 
the bad loans _ or whether they'll have to take the losses from their 
bad decisions. Earlier this month, China's central bank stunned the 
financial world by abruptly ordering the closure of the debt-laden 
Guangdong International Trust and Investment Corp. The closure was 
largely seen as a part of Premier Zhu Rongji's reform program that 
includes cracking down on corruption and unhealthy financial dealings. 
The company is now in the hands of liquidators, and it remains unclear 
whether it can repay debts that are reported at U.S. dlrs 2 billion. 
Gitic executives did not return repeated phone calls from The Associated 
Press. Taking the long view, economists have lauded China's decision 
to shut Gitic as a step in the direction of sound financial management. 
But short term, analysts are watching the situation nervously. They 
say foreign banks could lose the money they invested, and a credit 
crunch could worsen as investor confidence is shattered, making it 
difficult and expensive even for sound Chinese companies to obtain 
loans. ``What I'm worried about is the likely result of how foreign 
banks see the nature of guaranteed loans,'' said banking analyst Raymond 
Lee at Salomon Smith Barney. While China could repay the itics' foreign 
debt with the country's massive foreign reserves of more than U.S. 
dlrs 140 billion, that could undermine Beijing's resolve to clean 
up the financial sector. ``The government has the resources to bail 
them out, but it cannot,'' Xie said in a telephone interview. ``That's 
the bottom line for foreign creditors.'' Any government bailout would 
basically be sanctioning unsound financial decisions, the economist 
said. Exactly how much foreign debt the itics have is unclear. Part 
of the reason Gitic was shut down and others are on review is that 
they circumvented the State Administration for Foreign Exchange, China's 
official channel for registering foreign loans. They did this by borrowing 
money through offshore subsidiaries, mostly in Hong Kong. That means 
that both the itics and the banks are responsible for the risky lending, 
economists say. Some 80 banks made loans to Gitic worth a combined 
dlrs 1.4 billion _ and exposure to other itics is far greater. The 
Hong Kong's Monetary Authority says foreign and Hong Kong banks have 
U.S. dlrs 5.6 billion in exposure to the itics. The international 
credit rating agency Moody's just downgraded its ratings on five itics 
and is considering downgrading China's first trust and investment 
company, China International Trust and Investment Corp. Rival credit 
watchers at Standard and Poor's immediately followed suit, lowering 
its rating on Gitic's U.S. dollar bonds. Worse credit ratings for 
itics means that many Chinese companies will find it harder to borrow, 
and even if they can find a lender their interest payments will be 
higher, said Dong Tao, an Asia economist for Credit Suisse First Boston. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>