<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981101.0881 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Rescue workers recovered hundreds of bodies Sunday from communities 
buried when a lake in a volcano crater overflowed and sent tons of 
mud and rock hurtling down on villages below. The finds boosted the 
death toll from former Hurricane Mitch to 978. Authorities feared 
that many more bodies would be found in 10 communities at the foot 
of the Casitas Volcano in northern Nicaragua. Mitch was one of the 
most violent hurricanes to hit the Caribbean, causing heavy rain and 
floods as it cut a fatal path along the coasts of Honduras, Nicaragua 
and other Central American countries. Its winds have weakened in recent 
days. The first army rescue helicopters to reach the volcano on Sunday 
found widespread destruction, army spokesman Capt. Milton Sandoval 
said. Rescue workers recovered 360 bodies in four villages near Posoltega, 
about 50 miles (80 kms) northwest of Managua. A river of mud and rubble 
collapsed on the villages Friday after a crater lake near the volcano's 
peak overflowed and caused part of the mountain to crumble, Sandoval 
said. Only 92 of the estimated 2,000 area residents were found alive, 
some injured, and the remainder were listed as missing, Sandoval said. 
Rescuers aboard the first army helicopters to reach the communities 
found hundreds of decomposing bodies, he said. One-hundred soldiers 
working at the scene were burying the rotting bodies of the victims 
where they lay because of public health concerns, Sandoval said. It 
was unclear whether any residents of the villages of El Porvenir, 
Versalles, Rolando Rodriguez and Santa Narcisa had fled ahead of the 
mudslide or whether they were asleep in their homes when it struck. 
A woman who claimed to have survived the disaster told Radio Nicaragua 
on Sunday that she had seen ``many unburied bodies'' in orchards near 
the volcano. The survivor, Mercedes Rodriguez Zapata, claimed to have 
left the area Saturday and traveled on foot and horseback to the capital, 
Managua. Unconfirmed radio reports said as many as 4,000 people may 
have died when mudslides struck in the northwestern province of Chinandega. 
The extent of Mitch's damage elsewhere also appeared to be widespread. 
Army rescue helicopters on Sunday morning lifted 52 famished and ailing 
men, women and children out of San Francisco Libre, on the northern 
banks of Managua Lake, about 25 miles (40 km) north of the capital. 
In that community alone, 1,600 families were left homeless. Candido 
Mejia, 58, was so weak that he could barely give his name after he 
and his two children were airlifted out of the town using rope harnesses. 
Inhabitants said they had to climb up into trees and on the roofs 
of their houses last week when the lake's edge expanded by 3 kilometers 
(2 miles) and flooded the farming town. No deaths were reported, but 
many people had not eaten for days. Rescue workers left behind provisions 
of rice, corn, beans, cooking oil and milk before taking the sick 
to get medical care. It was unclear how many other towns across Nicaragua 
were left in similar circumstances. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>