<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981101.0587 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu laid a wreath at a graveside memorial 
ceremony as Israel paid solemn tribute Sunday to Yitzhak Rabin, three 
years after his assassination. At Jerusalem's Mt. Herzl cemetery where 
Israeli leaders, family and dignitaries gathered to lay flowers and 
stones, a Jewish tradition, several Israelis heckled Netanyahu and 
shouted ``murderer, murderer.'' On November 4, 1995, Rabin was shot 
and killed as he left a peace rally in Tel Aviv by a Jewish ultranationalist 
bent on stopping Rabin's land-for-peace policies with the Palestinians. 
Netanyahu, leader of the opposition when Rabin was prime minister, 
was blamed by both Rabin's family and members of the left-wing Labor 
party for contributing to the violent political atmosphere leading 
up to the assassination. None of the unarmed hecklers approached Netanyahu, 
but their shouts clearly disturbed the somber ceremony. Police spokeswoman 
Linda Menuhin said five people were arrested for incitement. In a 
speech to Israel's Knesset, Netanyahu said ``there is no place and 
no justification to accuse an entire public for the guilt of a sole 
person,'' he said. Netanyahu said that while he disagreed with Rabin's 
policies, he aimed to achieve a peace which would unify Israelis. 
``We are one people, with one fate, with one hope in one country. 
I pray that we can extend hands to each other and together put out 
the flame of hate without distorting the disagreements between us, 
because peace is made first between brothers,'' Netanyahu said. On 
the third anniversary of Rabin's death according to the Jewish calendar, 
Netanyahu opened his weekly Cabinet meeting with a minute of silence 
and Israel's parliament held a special session in memory of the former 
Israeli premier, defense minister and war hero. Saturday in Tel Aviv, 
some 300,000 Israelis jammed the square where Rabin was killed and 
stood shoulder-to-shoulder on streets for blocks in all directions, 
to pay tribute and voice support for the continuation of the Israeli-Palestinian 
peace process he began. Sunday, hundreds more stopped by a permanent 
memorial at the square now named for Rabin to light candles and write 
messages of peace at the site. Israeli flags were lowered to half-staff 
on government buildings and at army bases. At many Israeli schools, 
students gathered for memorial ceremonies and discussions about the 
meaning of the assassination to Israel's future. Radio and television 
channels broadcast documentaries and discussions about Rabin's life 
and his violent death. Israel's government decreed an annual memorial 
day for the only Israeli leader to be assassinated, but did not declare 
it a work or government holiday. President Ezer Weizman lit a memorial 
candle at his official residence, beginning the day of remembrance. 
Representatives of many segments of Israeli society attended the smaller 
ceremony, where Weizman warned that the lessons of Rabin's assassination 
had not been learned. ``Could it happen again?'' asked the Israeli 
president, a retired Air Force commander and veteran peace activist 
now in a largely ceremonial role. He answered his own question, warning, 
``I regret to say that lately there are signs that the answer is not 
necessarily a no.'' After Netanyahu signed a recent peace agreement 
with Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat, in which Israel will turn over 
another 13.1 percent of the West Bank to the Palestinians, there have 
been violent demonstrations against the government, recalling some 
of the protests before Rabin was killed. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>