<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981101.0200 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As Israel marked the third anniversary of the assassination of the 
prime minister who launched the Mideast peace process, its Cabinet 
on Sunday put off discussion of the latest peace deal. At the Cabinet 
meeting, ministers held a moment of silence to remember Prime Minister 
Yitzhak Rabin, who was slain three years ago by an ultra-nationalist 
Jew who opposed ceding land to the Palestinians. Flags flew at half-mast 
and ceremonies were held across the country in a national day of remembrance 
for Rabin, who was gunned down Nov. 4, 1995. On Saturday night, about 
300,000 people gathered in a Tel Aviv square now named after Rabin 
to pay tribute to him. Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said he would 
not bring the Wye River agreement, signed Oct. 23 in Washington, to 
his Cabinet until after Palestinians had submitted a security document 
on fighting terrorism. The Palestinians said the document would be 
turned over to the Americans on Monday. Netanyahu's spokesman David 
Bar-Illan said the Cabinet was expected to discuss and approve the 
accord on Tuesday. Netanyahu has said he will not begin implementing 
the pact, which calls on Israel to turn over another 13.1 percent 
of the West Bank, until after he gets Cabinet approval. His security 
Cabinet, however, did meet to discuss the accord's implementation 
and the scheduled arrival of U.S. Middle East envoy Dennis Ross, Israel 
Radio reported. Israel was also waiting to receive clarification from 
the United States on several points. The so-called letters of reassurance 
address several matters, including the status of a later additional 
troop pullout from the West Bank, Bar-Illan said. Netanyahu also repeated 
Israeli calls for the arrest of Mohammed Deif, a military leader of 
the radical Islamic group Hamas, in the wake of a suicide bombing 
on Thursday in the Gaza Strip. The Gaza Strip's head of security, 
Abdel Razak Majaydeh, said the Palestinian Authority was working to 
apprehend Deif, Israel Radio reported. Deif is believed to have been 
behind several deadly attacks against Israelis and to have been hiding 
in Gaza for the past three years. Thursday's suicide attack was aimed 
at a busload of settler schoolchildren, but a military jeep escorting 
the bus took the brunt of the blast instead. An Israeli soldier died. 
Israel's military chief-of-staff and the head of the Shin Bet security 
service internal met with top Palestinian security officials Saturday 
in an effort to coordinate efforts, Israel Radio reported. Also Sunday, 
in traditionally Arab east Jerusalem, Israeli peace activists chained 
themselves to a tractor where Jewish settlers were clearing land and 
preparing to build a fence. Four of the peace activists were arrested. 
The site in the Ras al Amud neighborhood of about 11,000 Palestinians 
was the scene of violent protests last fall when a small group of 
Jewish settlers moved into a home owned by Miami millionaire Irving 
Moskowitz, a benefactor of Jewish settler causes. To date, the Israeli 
government has held up work at the site, citing public safety concerns. 
However, Israel radio reported that over the weekend the government 
gave the go-ahead for the fence to be built. Palestinians object to 
any construction on the site, which they consider an illegal settlement. 
Left-wing Israeli lawmaker Nomi Chazan was among the small group of 
peace activists protesting the activity. Chazan called the settler 
action ``incitement and provocation,'' especially coming on the anniversary 
of Rabin's death. Also present was the top Palestinian representative 
in Jerusalem, Faisel Husseini. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>