<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981101.0173 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A defiant Iraq said Sunday it would not back down from its decision 
to ban U.N. weapons inspectors from working in the country, even if 
military action were threatened. Vice President Taha Hussein Ramadan 
said in a speech opening a trade fair here that ``there will be no 
cooperation (with the inspectors) before Iraq's demands are met'' 
and that the country would maintain this stance ``until the sanctions 
are lifted.'' His comments came the morning after the U.N. Security 
Council issued a statement condemning Iraq's decision Saturday to 
cut off all dealings with arms inspectors as ``a flagrant violation'' 
of U.N. resolutions. The council also repeated its offer to review 
Iraq's compliance with U.N. resolutions if it resumes cooperation 
with U.N. weapons inspectors. ``Iraq rejects the latest U.N. Security 
Council statement and will not back down,'' Ramadan told reporters 
at the trade fair. Asked about the possibility of military action 
to force Iraq to cooperate, he said: ``Iraq does not fear the threat 
of the United States because it has been threatening Iraq for the 
past eight years.'' Iraq's decision halts all activities of the U.N. 
Special Commission _ which is charged with eliminating Iraq's chemical 
and biological weapons as well as long-range missiles _ in Iraq. In 
effect, that means stopping U.N. monitors from visiting already inspected 
weapons sites, which was allowed to continue when Iraq stopped inspections 
of new suspected arms-making sites in August. The decision exempted 
monitoring by the Vienna-headquartered International Atomic Energy 
Agency, which is charged with eliminating nuclear weapons. On Sunday, 
a four-man team from the IAEA left their headquarters on the edge 
of Baghdad for a monitoring assignment, refusing to speak to reporters. 
A U.N. official said other weapons monitors would not be working. 
He spoke on condition of anonymity. The sanctions, imposed after Iraq's 
1990 invasion of Kuwait, limit the sale of oil and other trade activities 
and have devastated Iraq's economy, turning a once-prosperous nation 
into a country of paupers. The sanctions cannot be lifted until the 
U.N. inspectors certify that Iraq has eliminated its weapons of mass 
destruction. Iraq insists it has done so, but the commission says 
Baghdad continues to hide information, especially about biological 
and chemical weapons. Iraq's statement Saturday said the ban on U.N. 
inspections would continue ``until the United Nations looks at the 
issue in an honest and positive way, leading to Iraq's right to the 
lifting of the unjust sanctions.'' Iraq also insisted that the Security 
Council fire Richard Butler, chief of the U.N. Special Commission 
that oversees weapons inspections. Iraq has long accused Butler of 
working on behalf of the United States to prolong sanctions. It was 
unclear if Saturday's decision would provoke the United States and 
Britain to threaten military action against Baghdad, as they did earlier 
this year after Iraq prevented U.N. inspectors from entering Iraqi 
leader Saddam Hussein's presidential palaces. Both U.S. and British 
officials condemned Iraq's latest move. In Washington, U.S. President 
Bill Clinton's national security advisers were reviewing the situation 
and consulting with allies and U.N. officials, said David Leavy, a 
spokesman for the U.S. National Security Council. U.S. Defense Secretary 
William Cohen canceled a weeklong Asian tour to return to Washington 
and participate in U.S. administration discussions over the new standoff 
with Iraq. Saddam's decision caused jitters in Baghdad. Currency traders 
said the already depressed Iraqi dinar fell from 1660 to the dollar 
to 1760 from within minutes of the announcement. Trading opened at 
1720 on Sunday. The Iraqi Information Ministry issued a statement 
late Saturday saying the government was not asking the roughly 120 
U.N. monitors and support staff to leave Iraq. It added that the monitoring 
cameras and sensors installed at weapons sites could continue to operate. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>