<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981101.1000.0055 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The man in charge of the U.N.'s Iraqi weapons inspections is stepping 
down. Swedish major general nils carlstrom says he's departing because 
his contract I up, not because Iraq is once again refusing to cooperate 
with inspectors. Iraq's vice president today repeated his country's 
decision. Baghdad says one of the main reasons for the policy change 
is because of the U.N. security council's refusal to lift trade sanctions 
in place since the gulf war. Iraq argues it's destroyed all its weapons 
of mass destruction. But U.N. arms experts say they don't believe 
it. The Iraqis are accusing inspectors of spying for the U.S. Richard 
Roth reports, international observers wonder how the U.N. will react 
to this latest challenge to its authority. Through the years, ambassadors 
on the security council have gotten used to rushing in to react to 
a decision taken in Iraq. This time, after only 90 minutes of closed-door 
discussion, the council unanimously condemned Baghdad's latest act 
of defiance. Members considered this decision a flagrant violation 
of relevant council resolutions and of the memorandum of understanding 
signed between the secretary-general and the deputy prime minister 
of Iraq. The council demanded the Iraqi government reverse itself 
and re-establish cooperation with the U.N. inspectors. Tough talk, 
but at this end of the last crisis, the security council threatened 
Baghdad with the severeest consequences if there were any further 
violations. For right now, we're taking this on a step-by-step basis. 
We want to make sure the UNSCOM personnel and Iraq are safe and secure. 
Officials went to the security council to tell Iraq they plan to monitor 
suspect sites. It stops our ability to do any monitoring work on the 
ground. The inspectors are not being expelled, but Iraq hinted they 
might as well leave. I presume, because they have nothing more to 
do in the country, both on the inspections front and also on the monitoring 
front. Iraq is furious that a promised security council review of 
baghdad's level of disarmment compliance was not dreshgtly linked 
to a Lifting of economic sanctions. Is the world back at crisis stage? 
It's not one of the normal event that is we deal with every day. So 
the council will have to decide what next it is going to do. Neither 
Iraq, nor the United Nations wants to be the one to provoke a showdown 
with no return. 7 1/2 years after the end of the gulf war, this dispute 
may reveal hoy high a price the security council is willing to pay. 
Richard Roth, CNN. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>