<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981101.1130.1476 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
He has played a lovable alien in "my favorite Martian" and a Devil 
in "damn yankees." Now, Ray walston is playing a role a little more 
down-to-earth in a family drama on the WB network. Paul Vercammen 
reports. You stop that. You ought to be ashamed of yourself. Look, 
MA'am, I'm just doing my job. Manager's tired of these people hanging 
out and begging. It's scaring away the customers. I'm not these people. 
Ray walston is a homeless world war II veteran on "7th heaven." The 
actor who played "my favorite Martian" found old fans and new converts 
on the set of "7th heaven," about a minister and his family. I used 
to have someone to share a soda with before the war. Kind of all-around 
funny guy, but he still, he didn't stray off what he was doing. Which 
is a really, really good quality in an actor. All I ever wanted to 
do in life was be in "damn Yankees" and sing that great number he 
Sang, "those were the good old days." Antoinette, dainty queen with 
her quaint guillotine those were the good old days. Walston's "damn 
Yankees" performance helped inspire Stephen collins to become an actor. 
He goes around on the set, as a matter of fact, singing the song that 
I had in "damn Yankees," "those were the good old days." He was the 
Devil in "damn Yankees," and I'm giving him my house keys, my car 
keys. You know, am I insane? When the creators of "7th heaven" began 
thinking about who could play a homeless vet, well, their thoughts 
turned to walston and his impressive resume, including his "picket 
fences" experience. Walston won two Emmy awards for his performance 
in the small-town drama. There are things that we had in "picket fences," 
family-wise, that are inherent in this show. The probing of serious 
topics, moral dilemmas has allowed "7th heaven" to survive three years. 
I get stopped everywhere and saying, "oh, I love your show. It's the 
only show I let my kids watch. And you know, they really learn stuff 
from it." Collins says many more people now recognize him, quite a 
change. A year ago people were stopping me and saying, "so, are you 
working?" You know? I'd say, "well, yeah, actually I'm starring in 
this little series." "Oh, that's nice. What?" "It's called '7th heaven.'" 
"when's that on?" "7th heaven," on the WB, where the Ray walston's 
of the acting world now enter its pearly Gates. I've seen it. And 
I've seen the guys who live in it. They need that kind of care. But 
I'm not ready for a government handout. Paul Vercammen, "CNN Entertainment 
News," Hollywood. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>