<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981101.1300.0151 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu drew hecklers today at a 
memorial ceremony for assassinated prime minister yitzhak Rabin. Jerrold 
Kessel has more on the aftermath of the wye river talks. Israel marked 
the third anniversary of yitzhak Rabin's assassination. But prime 
minister Benjamin Netanyahu doesn't see himself fulfilling a Rabin 
peace legacy. He's making, he says, much tougher demands on the Palestinians 
to prove they're really cracking down on militants who oppose the 
wye agreement. The first step in that would be the arrest, the apprehension 
and arrest of muhammad deif, who's the head of the Hamas military 
arm in Gaza. That, so far, has not happened. That has to happen immediately. 
And if it doesn't happen, we'll have more attacks, and this will bring 
to a Halt the political process. Israel asserts that deif was behind 
last Thursday's attempt to bomb a bus full of Jewish settler children. 
Yasser Arafat has indicated he also believes the militant Islamic 
group was responsible for the Gaza strip attack. The Palestinian leader's 
security forces have since put Hamas' spiritual leader, sheikh Ahmed 
Yassin, under house arrest, detained around 100 activists, and are 
said to be hunting for deif. Now, a strong response from Hamas. In 
a leaflet, izadin Al kassam, Hamas' military wing, charges the security 
action could cause some of its men to turn their guns on Palestinian 
police. The group accuses Mr. Arafat of treason and says -- "we appeal 
that you stop the crackdown to spare Palestinians the horrors of civil 
war." But while it is seeking to put the crunch on Hamas, the Palestinian 
leadership says the onus for the success of the wye accord is on Israel. 
There will be a trend in the Israeli government to run away from the 
implementation. We are not willing to give them any excuse or pretext 
not to do so. It's unilateral Israeli actions that worry Palestinians 
more. They were ruffled by the erection of a fence and clearing work 
on a Controversial site in east Jerusalem, where Israeli ultranationalists 
want to create a major new Jewish housing project in the midst of 
an Arab neighborhood. After a long lull in work on the project, the 
Jewish radicals received on friday from Mr. Netanyahu the green light 
to resume preparatory work, but not actual building. So fragile does 
this agreement seem that it's not only a bomb, but also a Tractor, 
which could scuttle its implementation. With so much fierce antagonism 
towards the wye agreement, much hard work will be needed to ensure 
it doesn't all go up in smoke. Jerrold Kessel, CNN, Jerusalem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>