<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981101.1830.0908 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In "focus" this evening -- why so many Foster parents find themselves 
raising their relatives. NBC's Betty Rollin has our report. Laterra 
and Whitney, ages 10 and 8, are not only donnie and John green's grandchildren. 
Two years ago, they became their Foster children, as well. A protractor 
is something for angles. The girls' parents were deemed unfit, and 
the state of Maryland took custody. When they were getting money from 
social service instead of spending it on the kids, to take care of 
the kids, they were just taking the money and spending it on drugs. 
During the crack cocaine epidemic in the '80s, there were suddenly 
many more children in need of Foster care than there were Foster homes 
to put them in. Many states turned to Kin. Instead of disrupting their 
lives and getting them to someone they don't recognize, they're now 
with a relative they know. They're still able to interact, usually, 
with sisters and brothers. They're still able to keep up family relationships. 
About 150,000 American children are in kinship Foster care, comprising 
approximately one-third of all Foster care placements. In most states, 
when caregivers go through training and pass licensing requirements, 
they receive stipends, like any other Foster parent, even though they're 
the children's relatives, mostly their grandmothers. But some are 
aunts, like Elizabeth Patterson, who took in three of her sisters' 
children and a few years ago become their Foster mother. When he first 
moved in, Kenneth, now 15, was a major problem. I simply told him, 
"look, I don't tolerate those things." Now he sings in the choir in 
church. He's a great kid. If you're a growing guy, you have to eat 
right. Elizabeth works full time as a nursing technician, but says 
she wouldn't be able to provide for three boys without the money that 
Foster parenting brings. Kinship Foster care payments vary by state. 
In Maryland, where Elizabeth Patterson lives, a licensed relative 
gets $550 a month per child. An unlicensed relative, who has not yet 
gone through training or passed requirements, receives only $167 a 
month. In both cases, the state has custody. But kinship Foster care 
is still Foster care, and the downside, experts say, is that when 
family members are the caregivers, it often goes on too long. The 
state wants these Foster parents to commit to parenthood, that is, 
to adopt. To make adoption more appealing, the state continues to 
pay the Kin for providing care. We feel that children should have 
the option of having parents who they really belong to, as opposed 
to belonging to the state. Although the grandmothers in this Baltimore 
support group were concerned that adoption would terminate the parental 
rights of their own children, some are so fed up they plan to adopt 
anyway. Three of my grandchildren, they're my son's children. The 
mother, she has not been to see them in over two years, and she lives 
about ten blocks down the street. My whole concern is that my children 
stay in the family, that they stay connected in the family. That connection 
is good for children, says caseworker Cynthia sheffield, but she worries 
that kinship care makes it too easy for irresponsible parents not 
to shape up. I've been here for nine years, and I can probably count 
on my hands how many children have gone back home to their parents. 
They don't feel they need to work towards reunification, because they'll 
get to see their children whenever they want to and still do whatever 
they need to out on the streets. Caseworkers have found some Foster 
relatives unfit, but studies show that children are probably safer 
and childhood more stable in Foster homes with Kin than with strangers. 
In part, perhaps, because the children feel more loved. She loves 
us. I don't even be thinkin' about we Foster kids. Betty Rollin, NBC 
news, Baltimore. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>