<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981101.0050 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When Conrad Black, one of the world's most powerful media barons, 
decided to start a national daily newspaper in Canada, he knew he 
had to do it in Toronto, the country's largest city and one of the 
most competitive newspaper markets in North America. But Toronto is 
already home to Canada's three largest English-language daily newspapers. 
Long before The National Post made its debut last Tuesday, the dailies 
had prepared for a newspaper war by fortifying their staffs and adding 
sections. The Globe and Mail, Black's primary competition both in 
Toronto and nationally, switched to color photographs and expanded 
its sports section. To attract attention, all three existing dailies 
ran sensational special reports, like the Toronto Sun's weeklong series 
on the sexual habits of Canadians. If that was not enough, Torstar 
Corp., publisher of The Toronto Star, Canada's largest newspaper, 
shook things up even more last week with a $486 million (U.S.) hostile 
takeover bid for The Toronto Sun and 14 other Canadian papers owned 
by Sun Media Corp. ``There's a good old-fashioned newspaper war going 
on,'' John Honderich, publisher of The Star, told reporters when the 
surprise bid was announced a day after The National Post started publishing. 
Sun executives have pledged to fight the takeover. But if the bid 
is successful, Torstar would become Canada's second-largest newspaper 
chain, putting it in a better position to compete with The National 
Post and Black's other papers for national advertising. Black's companies, 
including Southam Inc., control more than half of all Canadian newspapers 
and account for almost 42 percent of Canada's weekday newspaper circulation. 
In one more twist in this newspaper war, Sun Media had provided Black 
with ammunition by selling The Financial Post last summer to Southam, 
giving him an extensive business section, and a name, for his national 
newspaper. In exchange, Black sold the Sun chain four large dailies 
in southern Ontario that Torstar now covets. Toronto's newspaper war 
will test the ability of Canada's largest city to support four daily, 
general-interest, English-language newspapers, something that few 
other cities in North America can do. The National Post's goal is 
a weekday circulation of about 300,000, with two-thirds outside the 
Toronto market. The Globe and Mail, which considers itself a national 
paper, has an audited weekday circulation of 309,000, two-thirds in 
the province of Ontario. The Toronto Star, meanwhile, has a weekday 
circulation of 463,000, while The Toronto Sun has 238,000; both papers 
circulate mainly in Toronto and surrounding Ontario. While the concept 
behind The National Post is similar to Gannett Co.'s USA Today, the 
two papers share few similarities. With a daily circulation of 2.2 
million, Gannett's paper is most popular with traveling businessmen 
who can read it on airplanes and in hotels where they often get it 
free. Its articles are quick and to the point. The National Post is 
aiming for ``slightly higher-brow readers and slightly more sedentary 
readers,'' than USA Today, said Black, who is hoping regular buyers 
will also continue to pick up one of his local Canadian papers. Black, 
a Canadian, is chairman of Hollinger International. The company and 
its subsidiaries own 111 daily newspapers from The Chicago Sun-Times 
and The Jerusalem Post to 57 dailies in Canada. The National Post's 
broadsheet format is lightened with color photographs and line drawings 
of prominent columnists, some on the front page. The new daily's appearance 
is similar to The Globe and Mail. But while The Globe's style is formal 
and comfortably in the center of the political center, what most sets 
apart the new daily is its tone: clubby and confident, with a slight 
British affectation and a strong conservative bent. ``Please, without 
presenting me as some raving maverick, you should note that I do dissent 
from what I think has been the consensus on key issues,'' said Black, 
who speaks out freely against the ``shrieking leftists'' and ``weedy 
socialists'' he blames for many of Canada's ills. Any doubts about 
the new paper's line disappeared with the first issue. The lead article 
on the front page dealt with a western provincial premier's hint of 
support for a ``unite the right'' movement to rebuild the Conservative 
Party. The editor in chief of The National Post, Kenneth Whyte, 38, 
has a long association with Black and generally supports his ideas. 
The paper aims to be national in scope but not nationalistic in its 
approach to news. The front page of the first issue carried a large 
article on the American astronaut John Glenn, which drew complaints 
that the paper was not Canadian enough. ``We judge stories on the 
basis of whether they are interesting or not,'' Whyte said, ``not 
on the basis of whether they are Canadian.'' Black expects operating 
losses of about $40 million (U.S.) over four years before The National 
Post turns a profit, estimates that some newspaper analysts find overly 
optimistic. Several years ago, Black made an unsuccessful attempt 
to buy The Globe and Mail from Thompson Corp. Many people, including 
Vince Carlin, chairman of the Journalism School at Ryerson Polytechnic 
University in Toronto, say they believe he still wants to own the 
paper. ``The endgame of all this competition is that The Globe ends 
up having to sell or be merged,'' Carlin said. Black said he had wanted 
The Globe and Mail to give Southam a presence in Toronto as well as 
to publish a national newspaper. With the introduction of The National 
Post, he said, ``those two ambitions have now been fulfilled.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>