<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981101.0241 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Jets learned something else about Vinny Testaverde Sunday. He 
can carry them even when Curtis Martin struggles. Perhaps even more 
significant, they found the resources to win here, where visiting 
teams routinely get crushed by the noise at Arrowhead Stadium and 
the mystique generated by the red and gold Chiefs uniforms. Yes, that 
was John Hall shouting to himself with two seconds remaining and the 
ball about to be snapped at his feet for the winning field-goal attempt. 
He stopped talking at the snap and kicked the ball 32 yards through 
goal posts and sheets of rain to produce a 20-17 victory for the Jets. 
``It's the biggest game since I've been here,'' Coach Bill Parcells 
told the Jets. Every day, they go into their locker room past a sign 
that reads: ``Prove you can win on the road.'' They proved it Sunday 
with their third straight victory as they improved their record at 
the midway point of the season to 5-3. That nudged them into a four-way 
tie for first in the American Football Conference East with Buffalo, 
the team they play next Sunday, the Dolphins and the Patriots. But 
the Jets are the only one of the four that is unbeaten in division 
play, which could be the tie breaker at season's end. The final drive 
to victory began with 1 minute 50 seconds remaining and the Jets on 
the Chiefs' 43 following a wind-interrupted punt by Kansas City's 
Louie Aguiar. To that point, Martin had produced the worst statistical 
game of his career with only 32 yards rushing on 27 carries. So Testaverde, 
who a few moments earlier had tossed a 20-yard touchdown to Kyle Brady 
but who had also tossed his first interception after 141 straight 
passes, took over. Testaverde said: ``I went into the huddle and told 
the guys, `This is what great teams do. They finish off games on the 
road.' '' The Jets met Testaverde's definition Sunday, half way through 
a six-game stretch that Parcells told them would be pivotal to their 
success. First, they won at New England, then they beat the Falcons 
at the Meadowlands and now they have added Sunday's game to their 
winning streak. Martin, who had a 7-yard run on the winning drive, 
finished with 42 on 30 carries. It was the first time that the Testaverde-led 
Jets won a game without a 100-yard rushing effort from Martin. Testaverde 
is now 5-0 as the starter. He completed 20 of 34 passes for 260 yards. 
And even that interception wasn't Testaverde's fault, according to 
Parcells. He said Keyshawn Johnson ran the wrong route, going behind 
linebacker Anthony Davis, who picked it off and ran the ball back 
27 yards to the Jets' 8 to start the final period. Three plays later, 
Donnell Bennett scored from the 1 to give the Chiefs a 17-10 lead. 
It took only seconds for the Jets to tie the game, though. Aaron Glenn 
returned the kickoff 62 yards to the Chiefs' 28. Testaverde took over 
on first down, running for 8 yards. On second down he connected with 
Brady on a 20-yard play. The point-after tied the score. ``When you 
win a game like that,'' Martin said later, ``you realize how important 
it is. I believe it helped us mature as a team. You're not going to 
win every game with 300 yards passing and 150 yards rushing.'' The 
offense had major help from Dwayne Gordon, who was playing out of 
position at outside linebacker but still managed to produce the biggest 
play of the opening half _ an interception in the flat that he returned 
31 yards for a touchdown. All week Gordon had fretted over defending 
just such a pass. ``I'm usually an inside linebacker,'' he said, ``I'm 
not used to playing in space.'' But there he was, in the prairie part 
of the field as Chiefs quarterback Elvis Grbac sought out the redoubtable 
receiver, Andre Rison. Gordon had blown the play in practice, had 
seen it on practice video over and over and now here it was in front 
of him. He had never before intercepted a pass in his career and certainly 
had never scored a defensive touchdown. But he saw what Grbac and 
Rison were doing, and this time Gordon plucked the ball out of the 
air and ran it all the way into the end zone with 2:34 to go in the 
second quarter. That lifted the Jets to a 10-7 lead that they took 
into halftime. It also was one more play that frustrated Rison, the 
longtime star who did not have a single reception Sunday. Grbac, in 
fact, generated only 120 passing yards in completing 13 of 28 attempts 
with three interceptions. Testaverde was in control most of the half, 
but it wasn't until late in the second quarter that he was turned 
loose. By then, it was apparent it simply wasn't working with Martin. 
His eight carries in the opening quarter resulted in a net 2-yard 
loss. On one play he was stuffed by Derrick Thomas 8 yards behind 
the line of scrimmage. All Martin could generate through the first 
half was a grand total of 8 yards with 16 carries. Testaverde continued 
to display elusiveness from the pass rush and accuracy at the same 
time _ he connected on 13 of 17 attempts for 173 yards. He even ran 
once on third-and-1, picking up a first down. Such plays have been 
a problem for Martin this season; he has repeatedly failed to produce 
on third-and-1. But this was a game of severe momentum shifts, with 
the wind playing a role in field position. The Chiefs had opened the 
scoring in the first quarter on Tony Richardson's 2-yard run. On the 
drive, Derrick Alexander caught a 34-yard pass over Glenn. On another 
pass, Alexander picked up 22 when Jerome Henderson missed him in the 
open field. On the opening drive of the second quarter, Hall booted 
a 20-yard field goal. Hall, however, missed a 31-yard field goal with 
2:48 to go in the second quarter, prompting Parcells to scream at 
him and his holder, Brian Hansen. The Jets continued to struggle with 
what had been their bread-and-butter Martin play _ a pitchout from 
Testaverde on which Martin usually has the room to slither to where 
he finds a crease. But he wasn't getting any time Sunday to change 
his mind. The Chiefs were on him as soon as he cradled the pitch. 
Finally, there was the fourth-quarter pass to Brady, and then the 
winning field-goal drive that led an exhausted Parcells to wonder 
later, ``If this is such a great business, you wonder why there aren't 
more in it.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>