<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981101.0090 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
International negotiators will resume talks on Monday in Buenos Aires 
over details in the treaty to fight global warming, but with their 
expectations sharply lowered. Last year in Kyoto, Japan, more than 
150 nations hammered out a far-reaching agreement for steep reductions 
in emissions of heat-trapping greenhouse gases by industrialized countries 
during the next 10 to 15 years. They also agreed, in principle, to 
establish a system that would allow the sale or trade of emissions 
permits between countries and to do more to bring developing countries 
into the effort, two key demands made by the United States. In theory, 
trading emissions credits would lessen the overall cost of reducing 
greenhouse gases in the atmosphere by letting one country pay another 
to reduce emissions to meet global targets. But there has been little 
progress since the Kyoto Protocol was approved. And it now appears 
highly unlikely that an agreement on the details will be reached in 
time for the U.S. Senate to vote on ratification before the presidential 
elections in 2000. The Kyoto Protocol continues to face substantial 
opposition among major U.S. energy producers and consumers, who say 
it would be too costly. Treaty supporters in this country, acknowledging 
the slow pace of negotiations, have begun to emphasize steps that 
can be taken before mandatory emissions restrictions go into effect. 
They want Congress to guarantee that companies voluntarily reducing 
emissions of waste industrial gases believed to be a factor in global 
warming will receive credit for these actions when a treaty finally 
takes shape. Signaling the lowered expectations, Stuart Eizenstat, 
the senior U.S. negotiator, cautioned that the administration's first 
objective is to avoid what he called ``backsliding'' by other nations 
on the agreement that the United States brokered last year. In Kyoto, 
the Clinton administration agreed to cut U.S. emissions over the next 
10 to 15 years to a level 7 percent below 1990's emissions _ if international 
trading of emissions credits is allowed. That would let the United 
States meet a big part of its obligation by paying other countries 
to reduce their emissions more than the treaty requires. European 
nations are calling for limits on how much a country could rely on 
emissions trading to meet its treaty obligations. But Eizenstat said: 
``I want to drive home as strongly as I can that we adamantly oppose 
efforts by the European Union or others to set arbitrary limits on 
trading. That is not consistent with either the letter or the spirit 
of Kyoto, and it would impose unsustainable costs on the U.S. economy.'' 
After Kyoto, the parties to the treaty were also expected to work 
out what roles the developing nations would accept and what aid the 
industrial powers would provide them. Big developing nations are expected 
to overtake the United States in emissions of greenhouse gases sometime 
in the next century. But many developing countries still are resisting 
commitments to reduce their emissions until they see action by the 
developed countries like the United States, which produces a quarter 
of the world's greenhouse gases. Some developing nations _ even China, 
which at Kyoto was skeptical of measures to increase the role of developing 
nations _ are said to be intrigued by the ``clean development mechanism'' 
included in the protocol. It would funnel money and technology to 
energy efficiency projects in developing countries, letting industrialized 
nations take some of the credit for the resulting reductions in emissions. 
But the details of this, too, remain to be resolved. Another source 
of delay is scientific uncertainty over how to count deforestation 
and reforestation in each country's contribution to the atmosphere's 
carbon dioxide. Growing trees absorb carbon dioxide, storing the carbon 
in wood and releasing oxygen. But the treaty partners will not decide 
how to score forestry until a science panel reports in about two years. 
In the next two weeks, negotiators are expected to do little more 
than to agree on a pace for further talks and studies. ``I think a 
success at Buenos Aires would be a work plan and timetable,'' Melinda 
Kimble, acting assistant secretary of state for international environmental 
issues, said at a recent briefing for foreign reporters. Christopher 
Flavin, an energy expert at the Worldwatch Institute, an environmental 
research organization, said: ``The Kyoto Protocol has been moving 
forward more slowly than most people had hoped for. The number of 
new, complicated issues added in the six months before the Kyoto Protocol 
was negotiated created a level of negotiating complexity that I fear 
has got us to the point that this protocol is in real danger.'' But 
advocates are pressing industrial companies to reduce their emissions 
anyway. In Congress, a bipartisan group has introduced legislation 
that would guarantee that those who act soon will be given financial 
credits under any final agreement, whether it applies only in the 
United States or around the world. Last week, members of the President's 
Council on Sustainable Development, which brings together industry, 
government and citizen groups, also endorsed steps to give credit 
for voluntary early actions to reduce emissions. Several big companies, 
including British Petroleum, United Technologies and Du Pont, have 
already pledged to cut their emissions and have begun to urge Congress 
to approve credits for early actions. Even industry groups like the 
Global Climate Coalition, which opposes the Kyoto Protocol, are supporting 
the administration's insistence on unfettered trading. ``If emission 
caps are ever imposed, these market tools will be absolutely necessary 
to lessen high economic burdens placed on our citizens,'' said Connie 
Holmes, the organization's chairwoman. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>