<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981101.0113 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
If the Scotsman Colin Montgomerie looked and sounded triumphant Sunday, 
it was not because he had won the Volvo Masters. He finished third 
on the Montecastillo course, three strokes behind Darren Clarke of 
Northern Ireland, who shot a sparkling 63 in the final round to equal 
the course record. But Montgomerie would end up with the more prestigious 
trophy: the one named for Harry Vardon that is awarded to the winner 
of the European order of merit. Perhaps it is time to retire the trophy 
and cast a new one. Montgomerie has finished on top six times in a 
row, which is both a compliment to his straight driving, steady play 
and combative temperament, and a backhanded slap at the competitiveness 
of the European Tour on which he makes the bulk of his excellent living. 
``The standard is improving, and I've had to improve every year along 
with it,'' Montgomerie, who has yet to improve enough to win a major, 
said. The Europeans hold the Ryder Cup, which they won a short drive 
south from here at Valderrama last year. But the Europeans do not, 
for the moment, hold the face cards in a sport whose main attractions 
are based on the other side of the Atlantic. The South African Ernie 
Els played at Montecastillo this past week, as did Nick Faldo of England 
_ both big names _ but that was only because they did not qualify 
for the PGA Tour Championship that was being held in Atlanta. First 
prize there was worth more than double what it was worth here, and 
though money is often an unreliable measure of a man, it speaks volumes 
to sportsmen these days. Faldo, who has won six majors, is in one 
of the worst slumps of his career, and he finished one over par on 
the undulating Jack Nicklaus-designed course. Montecastillo is no 
longer controversially easy, as it was a year ago, but it is not yet 
a genuine gauntlet through the stark hills and olive trees. Clarke's 
gaudy score _ a 17-under-par 271 _ was testimony to that, and to his 
undeniable talent. Like Nicklaus, Clarke's bearish build belies his 
fine touch on the greens. He earned a share of the lead Thursday with 
a 67, faltered on Friday with a 73 and then recovered completely on 
the weekend. Sunday, he started play three shots behind the leaders, 
Lee Westwood and Peter O'Malley, and changed that in a hurry. He was 
four under after five holes and sank a 10-foot eagle putt on No. 9 
to make the turn in 30. He would make three more birdies on the back 
nine, including one on No. 18 that would widen the final gap to two 
strokes between him and the runner-up Andrew Coltart of Scotland. 
Clarke attributed some of his fine play to a putting tip Westwood 
gave him Tuesday morning: His elbows were out of alignment when he 
addressed the ball. Perhaps Clarke should have returned the favor 
Sunday morning. Westwood started the day with a good chance of defending 
his title and ending Montgomerie's record string, but missed out on 
both with a three-over-par 75. He failed to hole several short putts 
but was still in contention until the par-3 14th, where he hit a mind-bending 
four tee shots. He hit his first into some bushes, and then hit a 
provisional tee shot that landed 10 feet from the pin. His first ball 
was located and was unplayable. He returned to the tee and this time 
hit out of bounds. When the suffering finally ended, he had a quadruple-bogey 
7 and no chance of challenging Montgomerie, who only needed a top-eight 
finish to clinch the year-end No. 1 spot ahead of Clarke. In 1997, 
Montgomerie became the first golfer to win five European money titles 
in a row. Now, he has one-upped himself. ``They'll have to wait one 
more year, but it's getting closer, unfortunately,'' Montgomerie said. 
``It's been tough to stay ahead of these two guys who are ambitious. 
Maybe as ambitious as I am.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>