<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981101.0262 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Everybody has been waiting for the Jets' bubble to burst; Vinny Testeverde's 
bubble in particular. Nothing personal, it's just that the residue 
of so many years of grimy play and grimy coaching is so thick that 
it can't all be scraped away in one season. Coming into the game, 
Testeverde had thrown just one interception in 132 attempts this fairy-tale 
season. But when he finally threw another with 14 minutes left to 
play Sunday _ when Keyshawn Johnson ran the wrong route _ and Kansas 
City scored three plays later to take a 17-10 lead, the Jets' bubble 
seemed about ready to burst. If you were a Jets fan, your heart sank, 
you cursed. You said ``too bad'' and took solace _ again _ in a great 
effort. But deep down you knew that this was a game the Jets really 
needed. Not in a statistical sense; but in the sense of keeping up 
with the Joneses in the division. This was a game the Jets needed 
to scrape away a large patch of grime that has clogged the organization's 
veins and arteries and blocked a much-needed supply of respect from 
circulating. But then something happened on this rain-swept day that 
made Jets hearts leap: Aaron Glenn took the ensuing kickoff and ran 
it back from the Jets' 10 to the Kansas City 28 yard line. After the 
game Bill Parcells would call Glenn's run ``a big momentum changer.'' 
Maybe it was a season saver. A play later, Testeverde, his bubble 
very much intact, went back to pass, then ran for 8 yards. On the 
next play, Testeverde hit Kyle Brady, his suddenly dependable tight 
end, with a 20-yard touchdown pass. Tie game. But there was much more 
to come. Everything negative that used to happen to the Jets flipped 
over and went the Jets' way. On its next possession, Kansas City rumbled 
to the Jets' 30 yard line. On fourth down and 6 the Chiefs lined up 
for what appeared to be a field goal. It was a fake. Instead, Pete 
Stoyanovich punted the ball 29 yards to the Jets' 1 yard line. In 
the tangle of chaos by the goal line, Corwin Brown of the Jets appeared 
to touch the ball, a Kansas City player scooped it up and tumbled 
into the end zone. An official signaled a Chiefs touchdown, and one 
Jet put his hands over his helmet in an ``Oh, No'' pose, familiar 
to Jets fans. When the chaos subsided, the officials ruled that Kansas 
City's Ty Parten had already touched the ball and downed it. Two years 
ago _ well, you know what would have happened. Jets disaster. But 
this time the Jets took the ball on their own 1 yard line, and what 
happened then should send a warning throughout the league. It probably 
won't, but it should. On the first play from scrimmage Testeverde 
dropped back, threw a swing pass to Keith Byars who turned upfield 
and, at the point of contact, stretched out and squeezed the final 
inches out of an 11-yard gain. Later in the same drive on third down 
and 9 at the Jets 26 yard line, Testeverde zipped a sharp pass to 
Fred Baxter for a 23-yard gain. The Jets got as far as the Kansas 
City 45 when Testeverde was sacked and the Jets were forced to punt. 
But the Jets had scored a major victory: They had seized the momentum. 
If you were a Jets fan, you could sense that the team would get the 
ball back and win in regulation or overtime. That word _ inevitable 
_ came to mind for the first time since who knows when. This time 
it was the other team that bungled. The Chiefs' punter kicked the 
ball 25 yards off the side of his foot. The Jets took over with 1 
minute 50 seconds left at the Kansas City 43. Just before they broke 
the huddle, Testeverde told his team that this was what great teams 
do: They finish tough games on the road and go home with victories. 
That was it: Kansas City had no time-outs, the Jets had three. They 
backed the Chiefs down the field like a chess master closing in on 
Checkmate in eight moves. Testeverde to Chrebet for 6 yards to the 
30. Timeout. Martin for 2 yards, Testeverde to Chrebet for 9. Time. 
16 seconds left. Timeout. Martin around right end for 1 yard to the 
18. Two seconds left. Timeout. John Hall comes on for the field goal. 
Fittingly, the Chiefs commit one final blunder: Derrick Thomas jumps 
offside, moving the Jets five yards closer. Hall nails a 32-yard field 
goal. Game over. While his teammates mob Hall, Ray Mickens knelt in 
the middle of a muddy field and clenched fists, punched the air. His 
uniform was covered with mud, but this was the kind of grime you don't 
mind. Now the game was over and reporters made the mad rush to the 
locker room to get reactions. I got up, then looked down at the rain 
soaked field, thought about the Jets' heroic effort and eased back 
down in my chair. This was a game that speaks for itself. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>