<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981101.0191 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Crouching by the door in his brown pants and pink hand-me-down shirt, 
Han Seung-ghil might have been preparing for his first day of kindergarten 
as he stared around the brightly painted room at the tangle of other 
boys jumping around him. Instead, Seung-ghil, who is 5, saw almost 
nothing through his mask of tears on the first day of what will probably 
become his life as an orphan. Seung-ghil's father, an architect whose 
wife left him, lost his job and could no longer care for the boy and 
his two sisters, particularly after relatives stopped pitching in. 
So the father took his children to Anyang Baby's Home, a shelter that 
places children in orphanages, and then he walked away without leaving 
an address. ``Whenever the economy is doing badly, we always have 
an abundance of children here,'' said Sim Yang-keum, the home's director. 
``But now, the children come from very normal families, from parents 
who tried their best to give their children a good life _ highly educated 
parents. That's what really breaks my heart.'' These growing numbers 
of ``economic orphans,'' though still rare, are just one symptom of 
the psychological distress tearing at families as South Korea's economy 
descends in a tailspin. Asia's financial collapse has whipsawed throughout 
the country, and the stricken have turned to suicide or swindle, or 
they are living in limbo _ at the homes of relatives, in shelters 
or on the streets. ``It's clear there is lots of unusual _ a high 
level of _ psychological distress,'' said Choi In-sub, a sociologist 
at the Korean Institute of Criminology. ``People sometimes may look 
a little hysterical.'' That's not surprising, since a staggering number 
of companies have collapsed over the past year, leaving entrepreneurs 
with empty pockets and huge debts. And with companies ailing and collapsing, 
hundreds of thousands of workers are out of work across the country. 
Such hardship has led some people to take radical steps that would 
probably be unthinkable in better times. The incidence of insurance 
fraud, for instance, has jumped, sometimes with grim results, and 
the more horrifying cases have seized national attention as they underscore 
how the economic crisis has sent some people over the edge. That seemed 
to have been the case with Kang Jeung-ryul, a 42-year-old fortune 
teller. He had lost almost all his customers, and was in debt and 
destitute. One day last month, Kang told the police that three masked 
men had robbed his home, and he had what seemed to be grisly evidence 
that the crime had occurred and that he was entitled to insurance 
money: His 10-year-old son's little finger had been cut off, supposedly 
by the robbers in an act of viciousness. The only part of the story 
that was true was the severed pinkie, which the father had cut off 
with scissors in the family's one-room home. Kang had reportedly persuaded 
his son to sacrifice his finger by saying that he was dying and, ``If 
you let your finger be cut off, I will be able to live.'' The boy 
complied, and remained silent even during the police investigation. 
Only after his father confessed to the police did the boy admit to 
the scheme. By then, it was too late to reattach the finger. The father 
was put in prison and the boy went to live at his grandmother's house. 
``He has had a difficult time, and we want him to readjust back to 
school life,'' said his aunt, who declined to give her name in a telephone 
interview. In another sign of desperation, the number of suicides 
is up by one-fourth in the first quarter of this year, compared with 
the corresponding period in 1997. Some of these are family suicide-murders, 
often with the father killing his family before taking his own life, 
or with the entire family taking poison together, according to Choi 
at the Institute of Criminology. It is not all bleak, though. As one 
walks the sidewalks of Seoul, it does not feel overwhelmingly depressed 
nor even so obviously different from a year ago. Shoppers still prowl 
the department stores, and cars still clog the streets. In fact, crime 
rates fell in the first months after South Korea turned to the International 
Monetary Fund for $58 billion in assistance. One explanation, according 
to Choi, is that economic hard times may actually be bringing some 
families closer together. Fewer people go out at night and fewer people 
are shopping, which narrows the opportunities for pickpockets and 
purse-snatchers. But one of the more visible signs of the recession 
is that many people are being kicked out of their homes into the streets 
when they can no longer afford the rent. While the government has 
tried to place some of the stranded in shelters, others have slipped 
through the cracks in a society where homelessness has been rare. 
So Lee Ki-young, a 42-year-old construction worker, has taken his 
wife and two young children to the streets to live. When floods chased 
them from a river bank, they moved to a bare spot on a path in Seosomoon 
Park, where they set up their new home in a tent about five months 
ago. ``I pleaded with the landlord to give us three more months to 
pay the rent, and I cried and begged, but we were forced out onto 
the streets,'' said Han Hyun-sook, Lee's 40-year-old wife. ``I've 
spent all the money we had saved up.'' Jobs became scarce for Lee 
in the summer of last year, as Korea's economy began unraveling. Then 
their 4-year-old son, Lee Jae-jin, fell sick and the hospital bills 
consumed their savings because Lee, as an itinerant construction worker, 
had no health coverage. Like many other jobless people, Lee finds 
it difficult to pay for food, let alone medical insurance. To get 
work these days, Lee, a junior high school dropout, awakes at 4 a.m. 
to line up at a job-assignment office an hour away. He turned down 
a chance to move into a temporary government shelter, because his 
wife would not have been allowed to cook for the children there and 
they would have had to move out three months later. His wife has been 
working temporarily, cooking meals at a kindergarten, where she can 
take her children during the day, but that job will end soon, and 
then she will have to look for another. But she refuses to put her 
children in an orphanage, perhaps because she herself became a foster 
child when her mother said one day that she was going to the market 
_ and never returned. ``As long as their father has hope and I have 
hope,'' she said, she would not leave her children. ``I have to live 
for my children,'' she said. The real victims of the crisis, though, 
are usually the silent ones, and among them are the nearly 300 new 
orphans who have lost their homes in Korea over the last year. That 
is only a small fraction of the 17,000 orphans and foster children, 
but the rise reverses a trend that for years saw the number of orphans 
dwindle throughout the country. So now, orphanages and foster homes 
are seeing their rooms fill up once again. In response to the crisis, 
the government has created and expanded the shelters for children 
of unemployed workers in the hope that by taking away the burden of 
child raising, they will enable parents to reorganize their lives, 
get back on their feet and then take their children back. Though some 
parents ultimately retrieve their children, social workers say they 
expect that most will not and that the children will move from orphanage 
to orphanage. In the past, documents have often been lost, so even 
if their parents tried to recover the children, they would not be 
able to find them. ``I've seen only three to four, out of an average 
group of 45, in which parents have come back for their kids,'' said 
Koh Jae-kwon, the manager at Angels' Haven Social Welfare Society. 
``The rest are abandoned.'' So Koh is not hopeful for Choi Jin-young, 
a 7-year-old boy who has been at this orphanage for four months. Jin-young's 
mother died, and his father turned him over to Angels' Haven because 
he ran out of money and his relatives no longer could afford to take 
care of the boy. But there is still a chance: Jin-young's 36-year-old 
father, Choi Seok-koo, calls from a pay phone once a week to talk 
to his son and he visits twice a month. ``I felt like there were no 
options,'' said Choi, on the phone one evening after he talked with 
his son. ``I hope to get remarried as fast as possible. I plan to 
pick up my son when I can start fresh again.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>