<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981101.0131 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For Washington state residents who step into the polling place here 
on Tuesday, deciding whom to vote for may be the simple part. Then 
there are the whethers: whether to ban most forms of state-sponsored 
affirmative action; whether to approve the use of marijuana for medical 
purposes; whether to make it a felony crime to terminate ``a fetus' 
life during the process of birth''; and whether to raise the state's 
minimum wage and, for the first time in any state, require automatic 
future increases tied to the inflation rate. In California, voters 
have another dizzying array of choices, including a measure to expand 
Indian casino gambling that has sparked the most expensive campaign 
battle over a ballot initiative in the nation's history. In many other 
states, there are constitutional questions. Several states have so-called 
``mini Equal Rights Amendment'' measures on their ballot, requiring 
more gender-neutral language in their constitutions. South Carolinians 
will decide whether to remove a 103-year-old passage in their constitution 
that forbids marriage between a white person and a black person, a 
provision that the U.S. Supreme Court has already ruled unenforceable. 
In South Dakota, voters will decide whether to change a technical 
oddity in that state's constitution that allows anyone as young as 
2 years old to be elected governor. No toddler has ever managed to 
get elected to the post, but if voters agree, the official minimum 
age will be changed to the presumably more sensible age of 21. And 
in Oregon, voters will go to the polls Tuesday to decide, well, whether 
they will ever go to the polls again. If Oregonians approve an initiative 
on the ballot, and they are widely expected to do so, all future elections 
in the state will be conducted entirely by mail. Exactly 100 years 
after South Dakota became the first state in the union to allow direct 
citizen lawmaking through a process generally known as ``initiative 
and referendum,'' voters around the nation face many such measures 
this week, with the battles around some of them so intense that they 
have generated at least as much attention as congressional races. 
All told, citizens in 16 states will decide on 61 such initiatives 
on Tuesday, while more than 170 other measures will deal with constitutional 
amendments and bond issues, according to the Washington, D.C.-based 
Initiative &AMP; Referendum Institute, a non-profit organization that 
tracks the measures. About half the states, most west of the Mississippi 
where strong populist movements pushed for the right of citizens to 
make laws, have some method for getting initiatives on the ballot. 
Over the last 100 years, initiatives have been used to advance a disparate 
collection of causes, including women's suffrage, the minimum wage, 
the taxpayer revolt, freezes on nuclear-weapons production and term 
limits for public officeholders. And while experts disagree on whether 
liberals or conservatives are more likely to push their causes through 
initiatives, there is ample evidence that both see it as an important 
strategy tool. In Alaska, for instance, voters this week will face 
measures whose sponsors come from all over the ideological map. The 
Alaska initiatives would ban same-sex marriages; make English the 
state's official language; establish a term-limits pledge for political 
candidates; allow medical use of marijuana; ban billboards on state 
highways; and prohibit the trapping of wolves with snares. ``Looking 
across the board, there's no way you can say whether the process is 
used more by the right or the left,'' said M. Dane Waters, president 
of the Initiative &AMP; Referendum Institute. ``There are a lot of 
issues this year used by causes associated more with conservatives 
_ school vouchers, parental notification on abortion, taxes _ but 
there's just as much driven from the left: animal-rights issues, environmental 
issues, the minimum wage.'' And even as the 1990s are the most prolific 
decade for initiatives in the nation's history _ including 1994, when 
an all-time record of 102 initiatives appeared on state ballots _ 
there are growing signs of a backlash. Many lawmakers have complained 
that initiatives that sound good on paper can wreak havoc with state 
budgets. But proponents of the process argue that many legislators 
do not like initiatives because they represent a direct usurpation 
of their own power, especially those proposing term limits, which 
have been forced into law in several states through the initiative 
process. In any event, in at least four states this year _ Mississippi, 
Missouri, Oregon and Wyoming _ there are measures on the ballot that 
would themselves, in effect, limit the initiative process. Some of 
these measures would require ``super-majorities,'' such as a two-thirds 
vote, for initiatives to pass, while in Wyoming, lawmakers there are 
asking residents to approve new rules that critics say may make it 
impossible to get any future initiatives on the ballot. Under the 
measure placed on the ballot by the Wyoming legislature, supporters 
of future initiatives would be required to obtain signatures from 
5 percent of all registered voters in at least two-thirds of the state's 
counties. The initiative process is facing a major legal challenge 
as well. Just this month, the U.S. Supreme Court heard arguments in 
a Colorado case involving new regulations in that state that would 
require that all signature gatherers for initiative petitions be registered 
state voters and that they wear identification badges. If upheld, 
critics say, the regulations could spark restrictions in other states 
that would make getting initiatives on the ballot even more onerous 
and expensive. Still, with the proliferation of initiatives _ Oregon, 
California and Colorado all have at least seven this year _ there 
are concerns that the process could be overused. One measure that 
has aroused particular discussion is an Arizona initiative pushed 
by a tax-reform group hoping to influence the state's presidential 
primary in 2000. The measure would allow candidates for Congress or 
the presidency to sign a pledge vowing to work for the abolition of 
the Internal Revenue Service and replacement of the income tax with 
a national sales tax. Those who sign the pledge would then get a special 
designation reading ``Signed the IRS Elimination Pledge'' next to 
their names on ballots and in voter guides. While critics in Arizona 
say the initiative could set a precedent leading to ballot chaos, 
with future candidates angling for special designations indicating 
their support for a range of other causes such as term limits or cancer 
research, a spokeswoman for the effort describes the tax designation 
as a valid way of ``holding politicians' feet to the fire'' on the 
tax issue. The pledges themselves would not be legally binding. Across 
the nation, the most controversial and closely fought initiatives 
this fall include the gambling measure in California and another measure, 
promoted by Rob Reiner, the actor, that would boost tobacco taxes 
by 50 cents a pack and designate the proceeds for children's programs. 
Measures to restrict the late-term procedure that abortion opponents 
call ``partial-birth abortion'' are also being fiercely contested 
in Washington and Colorado. Voters in both states are being asked 
whether to criminalize the rarely used procedure, but abortion-rights 
advocates say the term ``birth'' is so vaguely defined that the measure 
could be used to impose much greater restrictions on abortion in general. 
In Washington, the question before the voters is: ``Shall the termination 
of a fetus' life during the process of birth be a felony crime except 
when necessary to prevent the pregnant woman's death?'' In Washington, 
D.C., and Washington state, Oregon, Nevada and Alaska, voters will 
be asked whether to approve the use of marijuana for medical purposes. 
Such measures passed in California and Arizona in 1996, but have been 
blocked from implementation by federal lawsuits. And while supporters 
say the drug is a highly effective way of alleviating pain for those 
who are ill, the Clinton administration has come out against the measures. 
Barry McCaffrey, the administration's chief anti-narcotics official, 
solicited letters of opposition to the measures from former Presidents 
George Bush, Jimmy Carter and Gerald Ford, and last week McCaffrey 
denounced proponents of the ballot measures. ``Let's have none of 
this malarkey on marijuana smoking by cunning groups working to legalize 
drugs,'' McCaffrey, a former Army general, said. ``American medicine 
is the best in the world for pain management.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>