<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981101.0062 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When the Whitney Museum of American Art entertained a crowd of 200 
collectors and friends a few days before the official opening of its 
Mark Rothko retrospective in September, Dr. Kate Rothko, the artist's 
daughter, was one of the speakers. Trying to avoid controversy, she 
only alluded to the convoluted battle over her father's estate, a 
long-ago case of underhanded greed that bared the inner workings of 
the supposedly genteel art world. Still, a friend later told her, 
someone criticized her for resurrecting the past. ``There is a feeling 
in the art world,'' said Dr. Rothko, a pathologist who was 19 when 
her father committed suicide in 1970, ``that this is something they'd 
rather forget.'' But it is not that easy. The Rothko case may be rarely 
mentioned nowadays, but there is little doubt that it had a lasting 
effect. For nearly a dozen years beginning in 1971, the art world 
and the public were transfixed by the battle between Rothko's executors, 
all of them his good friends, and his two children, who accused the 
executors of waste and fraud, and by the ensuing appeals and related 
litigation. As a result, many of Rothko's luminous Abstract Expressionist 
paintings, which had been sold or consigned by his estate to the Marlborough 
Gallery in Manhattan at deflated prices, were donated to museums, 
probably enhancing their value. Rothko and his work became better 
known, further establishing his reputation. Marlborough lost its pre-eminence 
in contemporary art. Its flamboyant owner, Frank Lloyd, never recouped 
his reputation, and neither did Theodoros Stamos, a painter Rothko 
chose as an executor. Kate Rothko, who grew up in the middle of the 
New York art scene, grew disillusioned with her father's world. Even 
the public lost some innocence. ``The Rothko affair was a flashing 
red light to many that in this field of high values and mysterious 
goings-on there's always a potential for this kind of dealing,'' said 
Andre Emmerich, the Manhattan dealer. Over the years, artists, dealers 
and museums have seen their share of scandals, but few if any have 
approached the level of the Rothko affair in size or notoriety. Day 
after day, newspapers recounted courtroom testimony under headlines 
like ``Angry Exchange in Rothko Case'' and ``New Rothko Charges Denied 
by Gallery.'' Before Marlborough was stopped by a court ruling, it 
had sold more than 100 paintings _ including a few that Rothko's children 
now say they would have kept _ at less than market value to favored 
clients while it collected inflated commissions as high as 50 percent, 
compared with the 30 percent usually charged for an artist of his 
caliber. The executors, meanwhile, divided the estate's proceeds from 
Marlborough as their fees. Ultimately Dr. Rothko and her brother, 
Christopher, who was 6 when their father died at 67, were vindicated. 
In 1975, a New York state court ousted the executors, canceled their 
sweetheart contracts with Marlborough and fined them and the gallery 
$9.2 million. Later, while at his home in the Bahamas, Lloyd was indicted 
by the Manhattan district attorney for tampering with evidence in 
the case. He surrendered after years as a fugitive and was convicted 
on three counts in 1983. He died on April 7. In a telephone interview, 
Dr. Rothko, who runs a blood bank in Washington, recalled that the 
case marked something of an intellectual coming of age for her. ``I 
mainly remember my disillusionment with the art world,'' she said. 
``I hadn't thought of it as a business world. I had grown up with 
an idealized view of the art world.'' Through their legal victory, 
she and Christopher, who had directly inherited only a tenth of their 
father's paintings through the estate of their mother (who also died 
in 1970), won possession of half of the 2,000 works Rothko left behind. 
In the late 1970s they were valued at $50 million. Dr. Rothko, 47, 
said the case continued to cause her pain. Although she and her brother 
still own many of the paintings from the estate, she said she was 
frustrated that some paintings were sold by Marlborough before the 
ruling. Among those she says she would have kept is ``Homage to Matisse,'' 
now owned by the Edward R. Broida Trust. ``I haven't seen it since 
the time of my father's death,'' she said. Dr. Rothko is ``largely 
outside the art world now,'' she said. She and her husband, Ilya Prizel, 
a professor of international studies at Johns Hopkins University, 
see only a few people from those times, like the artist William Scharf. 
Her three children, a boy, 17, and girls, 14 and 8, ``are just finding 
out about this now,'' she said. ``I'm making them aware of how difficult 
it was to get the paintings.'' Christopher, 35, is also detached from 
the art world. He is a clinical psychologist who lives in Ann Arbor, 
Mich., and is married with two toddlers. He remembers nothing about 
the courtroom drama, he said, but added that it left him with ``a 
certain cautiousness in dealing with the business world, the legal 
world and the business side of the art world.'' Both Rothkos are keen 
protectors of their father's legacy. They disagree with people who 
say their father's work is mainly about beauty, as well as with those 
who see specific religious references in it. ``I grew up knowing that 
content was very important to him,'' Kate Rothko said. ``He did not 
consider the Color Field artists of the '70s in any way an outgrowth 
of his work. He was stressing the emotional content and a spiritual 
content in the broad sense.'' She said the case also taught artists 
a worldly lesson. ``It opened artists' eyes to the concept that this 
was a business, not just an intellectual world,'' she said, ``and 
it probably affected their estate planning.'' John Silberman, a lawyer 
who counts many artists among his clients, agreed. ``The positive 
side of the Rothko case was to heighten artists' sensibilities about 
the long-term care and disposal of their estates,'' he said. ``Choosing 
the right people is a constant issue.'' When Rothko died, he left 
his works in the care of three friends, all of whom have died: Morton 
Levine, an anthropology professor; Stamos, a Greek-born Abstract Expressionist; 
and Bernard Reis, an accountant and director of Marlborough. Reis 
drew up Rothko's will, bequeathing nearly all of his works to the 
Mark Rothko Foundation, which was supposed to see that they went to 
the right museums and collectors, with the proceeds put to charitable 
or educational purposes. In late 1970, the trustees changed its charter 
to make it focus on awarding grants to artists, necessitating sales 
of Rothko's works and allowing the new sweetheart deal with Marlborough. 
Levine depicted himself as a passive accomplice; he testified that 
important details of the contract had been withheld from him. Stamos 
was affiliated with Emmerich's gallery but had been offered a more 
generous contract by Marlborough, and willingly joined the conspiracy. 
``The mystery was Bernard Reis,'' said Emmerich, who recently sold 
his gallery to Sotheby's and is now semi-retired. ``He delivered his 
great good friend Mark Rothko into the hands of Frank Lloyd. He was 
seen as a wonderful man, yet he did something so base, so inexplicable.'' 
The trustees and Lloyd escaped with what were seen as light sentences. 
Reis staved off creditors by filing for bankruptcy 11 months before 
his death. Stamos paid his share of the fine by signing over his house 
to the Rothko estate, but he was granted life tenancy. Lloyd, who 
could have served up to four years in prison, was ordered to create 
a scholarship fund and to sponsor art lectures and gallery visits 
for New York City students. (No one contacted could recall any details 
of the program or how long it lasted.) But Stamos never recovered 
as an artist. ``His market is weak,'' said Diane Upright, a private 
dealer in Manhattan. The Rothko case was less to blame for Stamos' 
decline than ``a stand-back assessment of his art,'' she said. ``His 
work is perceived as low, second-tier or third-rank Abstract Expressionism.'' 
Still, after the case, no gallery on Emmerich's level stepped forward 
to represent Stamos, and that hurt. ``If he had been handled by a 
better gallery, that would have given collectors a greater sense of 
security,'' Ms. Upright said. Art dealers said that the biggest business 
effect was on Marlborough, though they would not speak for attribution. 
``It didn't destroy the gallery, but it damaged it severely,'' said 
one. ``It was at that time the No. 1 gallery for contemporary art 
in New York.'' Artists like Robert Motherwell and Adolf Gottlieb fled 
to other dealers. Pace Gallery won the Rothko estate. Fellow art dealers 
also rejected Lloyd. Richard Feigen, a Manhattan dealer, remembers 
a stormy meeting of the Art Dealers Association of America. Afterward 
Marlborough resigned its membership under pressure. Though it is now 
healthy, Marlborough has never tried to return to the organization, 
the most important dealers' group. Gilbert Edelson, administrative 
vice president of the association, maintains, however, that the case 
made no difference in the trade because Lloyd was sui generis, a man 
who always played by his own rules. ``Everybody talked about it then, 
but it was a unique case, so I can't say it had any effect,'' Edelson 
said. Perhaps paradoxically, Rothko's status benefited from the scandal, 
partly from the exposure. ``It didn't hurt his reputation,'' Emmerich 
said. ``It's a little like van Gogh's ear.'' Perhaps more important, 
the Rothko Foundation, which was reconstituted by the court and awarded 
the half of the estate his children did not receive, made a crucial 
decision. It shed the idea of supporting artists and donated the works 
to museums, 29 in the United States and six in other countries. ``By 
having fewer works on the market, that had a long-term effect,'' said 
Donald Blinken, the investment banker who was made foundation president. 
Rothko's works are indeed selling well. Last November, the San Francisco 
Museum of Modern Art paid a record auction price, $5.9 million, twice 
the pre-sale estimate, for ``No. 14, 1960,'' a work in deep red and 
blue. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>