<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981101.0157 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It's 3:30 p.m. and the Mexico City state's attorney, Samuel del Villar, 
is seated at a conference table in a meeting with a dozen subordinates. 
Nobody has eaten since breakfast, if then. Stomachs are growling. 
It's time to go out to a restaurant for lunch. Instead, del Villar 
says, ``Let's just eat here.'' Aides ferry in a tray of BLT sandwiches, 
and the city's top prosecutors lick bacon drippings from their fingers 
through a meeting that continues past 5. Del Villar's improvised meal 
one recent afternoon might seem routine to Americans, but here it 
was a sign of a dramatic cultural shift. Mexico City's leisurely lunch, 
which may wander for three hours or more, from an opening tequila 
through several courses and plenty of conversation, has been as characteristic 
of this capital and its way of life as evening tapas are of Madrid 
and the late-night churrasco dinner of Buenos Aires. But many Mexico 
City residents are giving up the once-sacrosanct tradition because, 
like del Villar, they have grown too busy, or because they now follow 
an international corporate schedule, or because they consider fast-food 
dining more efficient. Many working-class Mexicans simply can no longer 
afford the slightest culinary extravagance. ``There's been an enormous 
change,'' said Guillaume Martin, who for 15 years has managed the 
Estoril restaurant, an elegant eatery in the Polanco neighborhood 
frequented by executives and government officials. ``When I started 
in this business, people would fill our tables at 3, and many would 
still be seated at 7 or 8 p.m. drinking cognac. Now by 5, practically 
everyone's left. Lunches are getting earlier and shorter.'' The meal 
is called la comida in Spanish, which is usually translated as ``lunch.'' 
But don't confuse la comida with el almuerzo, which also translates 
as lunch but is something quite different, a mere late-morning snack, 
often a tamale purchased on the street and gobbled on the run. La 
comida is the main culinary event of the day in a capital city whose 
biorhythms have adapted to the singular schedule of the vast government 
bureaucracy. Most middle or senior government officials work from 
9 or 10 a.m. until 3 p.m., break for lunch until 6 p.m., and return 
to work until late evening, often until 10 or 11 p.m., even midnight. 
Within this peculiar schedule, officials or business people with a 
generous expense account have over the years made the afternoon meal 
a long feast. In its classic expression a few decades back, senior 
functionaries would regularly begin with a plate of tacos, graze their 
way through a rich soup, a steak, and a rice dish or baked potato, 
and wash it all down with a few whiskys. Many would only wobble back 
to work after sipping a cognac with espresso. Some social historians 
trace the meal's origin to Spain, where public offices also shut down 
in late afternoon. But it has been classically Mexican in its languorous 
pace and voluptuous quantities. ``This long meal has been a form of 
compensation, a special retribution for the suffering that you go 
through as a public servant, ready to serve at any moment of day or 
night if the boss calls,'' said Javier Gonzalez Rubio, who transferred 
to the private sector recently after working for several years in 
the Mexican White House, known as Los Pinos, as an aide to President 
Ernesto Zedillo. Mexico has passed through years of economic crisis, 
and only the most senior officials can today afford the long lunch 
in its classic form. Lower and mid-level officials still keep the 
same hours but eat simple food. Javier Becerra Marquez, the press 
coordinator to the borough president of Mexico City's downtown Cuauhtemoc 
section, keeps a typical schedule and eats like thousands of other 
government employees. Breakfast is minimal, and he is at his desk 
before 9 a.m. One hectic recent afternoon he could not break away 
for lunch until 4:30, when at an open-air corner eatery he ordered 
a peppery tripe soup with tortillas, followed by a dessert of fried 
bananas. He was back on the job by 6, worked until 10, and once at 
home, ate a few tacos before bed. ``Many days, we're poorly fed,'' 
Becerra said. The corollary to the lavish lunch has been the abbreviated 
breakfast. A 1997 study commissioned by McDonald's, which now has 
52 restaurants in the Mexican capital, found that ``many people here 
didn't eat breakfast at all,'' said Manuel Juarez Torres, a company 
spokesman here. Seeing an opportunity, McDonald's has been marketing 
a Mexicanized form of its McMuffin breakfasts with a slogan that attacks 
Mexico City's long-lunch habit head on: ``Breakfast is the most important 
meal of the day.'' But traditions die hard, Juarez said. Most Mexico 
City residents still plan their day around lunch, albeit one that 
is considerably shorter than it was in its classic period, which most 
food experts trace to the 1950s. The president then was Adolfo Ruiz 
Cortines, an enthusiastic gourmand who made it his pattern to loiter 
at table following the afternoon meal, calling for a set of dominoes 
and playing a few rounds with his friends. In contrast, aides to Zedillo 
count on one hand the times he has spent the afternoon at a restaurant. 
A frugal man, Zedillo instead almost always lunches in private at 
the presidential residence. He has explained this as a preference 
for spending time with his family. But his pattern seems to fit the 
national mood, in which many Mexicans who live outside the capital 
view Mexico City's long lunches as a sign of profligacy they associate 
with government waste. People in Monterrey, Mexico's northern business 
capital, are particularly critical. ``This long lunch originated with 
Mexico City's government bureaucracy,'' said a business executive 
who is a Monterrey native but now spends part of each week in Mexico 
City. ``Monterrey has a business culture. Time is money. When you 
go to lunch, you arrive, you order food and you talk business. Once 
that's over, you can chat about other things.'' ``In Mexico City, 
the point is to build relationships with influential people who can 
do favors for you, so you spend time telling jokes and gossiping,'' 
he continued. ``You start lunch by chatting about many topics other 
than the business at hand, then you eat, and only at the end will 
anybody tell you what they really wanted to talk to you about.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>