<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981101.0243 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In his final barnstorming trip of the campaign year, President Clinton 
on Sunday invoked Newt Gingrich, Martin Luther King Jr. and Rosa Parks 
in an impassioned plea that was part of a full-scale drive by Democrats 
to spur turnout by black voters in the election on Tuesday. While 
Clinton's appearance at the predominantly black New Psalmist Baptist 
Church was the most high-profile campaign stop, Republicans and Democrats 
alike fanned out at churches, picnics, party clubhouses and rallies 
around the United States, struggling in the final 48 hours to galvanize, 
if not electrify, an electorate lulled by a campaign season that still 
seems to be searching for a national theme. ``Your vote counts just 
as much as mine, just as much as Speaker Gingrich's,'' said Clinton 
in the latest move by his party to turn the speaker into an incentive 
for Democrats to vote. Halfway across the country in Green Bay, Wis., 
Gingrich sought to stir his party's faithful as well. At a rally outside 
the 49ers-Packers football game on Sunday afternoon, the speaker extolled 
the virtues of Rep. Mark Neumann, who has mounted a fierce challenge 
to oust Sen. Russell Feingold, D-Wis. ``This Tuesday's election is 
a choice between two teams,'' Gingrich said. ``One that believes in 
higher taxes, bigger government and more power in Washington. The 
other believes in lower taxes, smaller government and more power in 
Wisconsin. You have a chance on Tuesday to dramatically change the 
direction of Wisconsin by sending Mark Neumann to the Senate.'' The 
highly charged advances to break though to voters come not only because 
the stakes are high in Tuesday's elections _ 34 Senate seats, 36 governorships 
and all 435 House seats are up for grabs _ but also because the latest 
polls show that many critical elections are too close to call. At 
least five Senate races and 10 contests for governor could easily 
come out either way, according to strategists in both parties. Some 
of the most hard-hitting, and often unsavory, appeals came not on 
the stump or from the interminable onslaught of television commercials 
but in massive telephone calling, leaflet drops and election-eve radio 
advertisements. These messages were below the political radar screen 
and, in many cases, were intended to sway voters while depriving a 
candidates' opponents of ammunition, or time, to fire back in the 
closing hours of the campaign. In Seattle, where Brian Baird, a Democrat, 
is locked in a tight race against Don Benton, a Republican, for an 
open House seat, the National Republican Congressional Committee sent 
out a leaflet at the weekend with this warning in big bold letters: 
``Oh, my! Did you know that Brian Baird supports requiring our churches 
to perform same sex marriages?'' Baird campaign officials said Baird 
opposes same-sex marriage. But he does not support the Defense of 
Marriage Act, which withholds benefits in federal taxes, pensions 
and other areas to partners of homosexuals. The Democrats have not 
been timid either. In Missouri, the state Democratic Party has begun 
running a radio commercial with a bald appeal to blacks: ``When you 
don't vote, you let another church explode,'' the narrator says. ``When 
you don't vote, you allow another cross to burn. When you don't vote, 
you let another assault wound a brother or a sister. When you don't 
vote, you let the Republicans continue to cut school lunches and Head 
Start.'' The furious efforts to gain partisan advantage are coming 
not only from the candidates and the political parties but from outside 
groups that are pumping millions of dollars into get-out-the-vote 
drives. The Christian Coalition distributed an estimated 35 million 
voter guides at churches on Sunday that are aimed at prodding religious 
conservatives to go to the polls. In a counter-offensive, the AFL-CIO 
was running large phone banks around the country, in most cases imploring 
Democrats to vote. But even as campaigns offered free rides to voters 
to get them to the polls, some also accused their opponents of trying 
to discourage people from voting. In a technique known as push polling, 
campaigns hired telemarketing firms to spread dirt about their opponents 
in the guise of a poll. These calls are usually very difficult to 
trace and often are detected too late to be rebutted. Clinton's trip 
to Baltimore on Sunday was noteworthy because while his efforts on 
the fund-raising circuit never seemed to diminish, his campaign on 
the hustings has been limited this year, largely because he was distracted 
by the White House scandal. At the height of the embarrassing publicity 
over his affair with Monica Lewinsky, many Democrats, including Gov. 
Parris Glendening of Maryland, did not want the president to campaign 
with them. But one reason Clinton traveled to Baltimore is that Glendening 
is virtually tied in the polls with Ellen Sauerbrey, his Republican 
challenger, in what has shaped up as one of the closest races anywhere. 
Clinton, who was greeted by frenzied applause from thousands of parishioners, 
laced his message with Biblical references. ``There are only two places, 
only two, where we have fulfilled both the admonition of the Scripture 
and the promise of the founders that all of us are created equal,'' 
said Clinton, who was accompanied by Glendening and a host of other 
Maryland Democrats. ``One is when you come into your house of worship 
on Sunday and the other is when you show up at the ballot box.'' In 
a gibe at Ms. Sauerbrey at a rally on Halloween, Sen. Barbara Mikulski 
also invoked Gingrich. But her message, that Ms. Sauerbrey was ``masquerading'' 
as a moderate, was even blunter than the president's: ``When she takes 
off the mask, takes off the makeup, she's nothing but Newt Gingrich 
in high heels and an earring.'' The Sauerbrey campaign, hardly sitting 
still, unleashed a harsh commercial attacking Glendening's credibility. 
It closes with these words filling the screen in red: ``People don't 
trust Parris Glendening.'' For those voters in Maryland who somehow 
missed the pitches on either side, there is another opportunity. Republicans 
and Democrats are calling people across the state with taped appeals 
from figures including Clinton and, on the other side, Bob Dole, the 
Republican presidential nominee in 1996. The often ferocious _ and 
sometimes creative _ efforts to spark the electorate come in part 
because so many races are so close. While most Republicans said they 
did not expert their party to capture the five additional seats in 
the Senate that would be needed for a majority of 60 (the magic number 
to cut off Democratic filibusters), the contests in at least five 
states were viewed as anyone's for the taking: New York, North Carolina, 
Kentucky, Nevada and Wisconsin. Besides Maryland, at least nine races 
for governor were also considered too close to call: those in Nevada, 
Hawaii, Georgia, South Carolina, Massachusetts, Minnesota, Iowa, Ohio 
and Rhode Island. Republicans now control 32 of the governors' offices. 
And some of the most intense campaigning is in the competition for 
the House, where Republicans hold only an 11-seat majority. Most Republicans 
and Democrats are now forecasting a Republican pickup of fewer than 
a dozen seats. Still, after an election year that has been marked 
by the unpredictable, no strategist in either party could, with full 
confidence, forecast what might happen on Tuesday. No one knows the 
effect of a last minute, multimillion-dollar infusion of commercials 
by the Republican Party reminding voters of the Clinton scandal _ 
and counter-advertisements by the Democrats assailing their opponents 
as scandalmongers. It is also unclear how much Republican candidates 
will benefit from their party's lopsided financial advantage in the 
last days of the campaign. Political strategists were also watching 
for unexpected turns in the dynamics. In Illinois, for instance, analysts 
were debating a new poll suggesting that Sen. Carol Moseley-Braun, 
a Democrat who had for weeks been badly lagging in the polls, had 
actually pulled ahead of Peter Fitzgerald, a Republican. Even the 
poll's author, Andrew Kohut, said he was baffled by a poll released 
Sunday by the Pew Research Center for the People and the Press showing 
that likely voters were divided equally between Democrats and Republicans. 
In three previous surveys since August, Kohut's survey found that 
general support for Republican candidates was consistently greater 
than for Democrats. ``I'm a little rattled,'' Kohut said. ``I was 
pretty confident of small Republican gains. But these results would 
suggest a Democrat seat gain which a couple of weeks ago was certainly 
inconceivable.'' Yet many officials in both parties said that at this 
stage they were no longer dwelling on polls, instead concentrating 
on the single-minded goal of cajoling people to vote. In Southern 
California, Democrats sent out this mailing intended to tarnish Randy 
Hoffman, a Republican who is taking on Rep. Brad Sherman. The leaflet 
features a photograph of Kenneth Starr, the independent counsel, on 
a television screen. ``If you like Kenneth Starr,'' the mailing says, 
``vote for Republican Randy Hoffman for Congress. And you'll be seeing 
a lot more of him.'' In another effort to capitalize on Gingrich's 
unpopularity, the mailing includes a copy of an invitation to a Hoffman 
rally that featured the speaker. ``Newt Gingrich has raised tens of 
thousands of dollars to elect Randy Hoffman to Congress,'' the flier 
says. Many candidates, it seems, could not but help but go negative. 
Sen. Christopher Bond of Missouri, a Republican, broadcast a television 
commercial in which he said, ``I think all of us are tired of negative 
campaigning. Missouri deserves a better campaign.'' But by Friday, 
Bond had reversed course with a new ad. It featured a small-business 
owner attacking Bond's Democratic rival, Jay Nixon, as having ``argued 
for the largest tax increase ever forced on Missouri.'' In Athens, 
Ohio, on Sunday, Hillary Rodham Clinton held forth at a rally at a 
school gym and suggested a new approach to encourage people to vote 
for Rep. Ted Strickland, who is in a tight race. Mrs. Clinton offered 
this advice: ``You can even change your telephone answering machine: 
`Hello. I'm not here right now. Vote for Ted Strickland.''' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>