<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981101.0060 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Unquestionably the most exciting boxing match this reviewer ever saw 
was the one between Muhammad Ali (then Cassius Marcellus Clay) and 
Charles (Sonny) Liston on Feb. 25, 1964. Not that this fight was so 
outstanding as far as the skills on display were concerned, but the 
tension and hype building up to it were something else again. These 
days, as David Remnick rightly points out in his penetrating book 
``King of the World: Muhammad Ali and the Rise of an American Hero,'' 
``boxing has become a marginal event in American life.'' The wonder, 
then, is that he has managed to re-evoke the heart-pounding emotion 
of that evening nearly 35 years ago, when Clay against all odds and 
expectations decisively outfought the man who was predicted to be 
his destroyer. Remnick, the recently appointed editor of The New Yorker, 
accomplishes this feat in two complementary ways. First, he makes 
the fight the climax of a morality play starring not two but three 
principal actors. One was Liston, who was perceived in the racially 
tense atmosphere of the 1960s as what Remnick calls ``the Threatening 
Negro,'' a perception based on his brutal demeanor, his criminal record 
and his known connection to the mob element in boxing. The second 
player was Floyd Patterson, seen for his polite, nervous manner as 
``the Good Negro,'' whom Liston thrashed twice in contests that many 
in the sports establishment said ought not to have been permitted 
to take place because of Liston's unsavory background. One exception 
was the newspaper columnist Murray Kempton, whom Remnick quotes on 
the subject of Liston, ``He will help us grow up further if he destroys 
the illusion that a man whose trade it is to beat another man senseless 
for money represents an image which at all costs must be kept pure 
for American youth.'' Then along came Cassius Clay, a man whom Remnick 
depicts as being outside any conventional categories. As the child 
of modestly better-off people, he felt relatively unoppressed. As 
a heavyweight who danced on his toes and carried his fists at his 
waist, his style was considered self-destructively unconventional. 
As a braggart who wrote poetry predicting the rounds his opponents 
would be knocked out in, he was seen as a frivolous showman. No one 
gave him even Tweetybird's chance against the sledgehammer that was 
Liston. But astonishingly he won in six rounds, with Liston refusing 
to come out of his corner for the seventh. (``That wasn't the guy 
I was supposed to fight,'' Liston said afterward. ``That guy could 
hit.'') Then he further defied expectations by declaring his allegiance 
to Elijah Muhammad's Nation of Islam and by refusing to be drafted 
into the Army, saying, ``Man, I ain't got no quarrel with them Vietcong.'' 
In every way he was something new and original on the scene; those 
who were in favor of him loved him and those who were against him 
loathed him. Another way in which Remnick animates his story is by 
going behind the scenes and revealing details that even close followers 
of his subject might not have known. How Ali calculatedly psyched 
Liston by playing crazy and persuading him he was nothing but a clown, 
even though at the start of their first fight he was in fact afraid 
of Liston. (``That's the only time I was ever scared in the ring,'' 
Ali said. ``Sonny Liston. First time. First round. Said he was gonna 
kill me.'') Or how Liston, when he realized the trouble he was in, 
probably told his main cornerman to ``juice the gloves'' with ``a 
liniment-like oil of wintergreen, or ferric chloride, which was used 
to seal cuts,'' which blinded Ali throughout most of the sixth round, 
although he escaped being knocked out by groping for Liston with one 
glove and dancing away. Or how in the rematch 15 months later, in 
Lewiston, Me., Ali connected with a punch so difficult to see that 
many thought, as the sportswriter Red Smith put it, that Liston had 
taken a dive ``that raised the level of the Androscoggin River by 
a foot.'' What knocked Liston out, Remnick argues, was a combination 
of the punch's force and Liston's overtraining to a point where he 
had lost his edge. The conclusion of Remnick's account seems a little 
truncated. There is so much more to his subject's career than he tells 
in any detail, particularly the three draining battles against Joe 
Frazier and the rope-a-dope triumph over George Foreman in Kinshasa, 
Zaire. But Remnick chooses to conclude with the match, in 1965, against 
Patterson, which serves to close the circle of his morality play and 
to punctuate the surpassing of the Good Negro by the liberated black 
man, so to speak. Unfortunately, this fight was an ugly, unnecessarily 
drawn-out affair in which Ali displayed mainly cruelty in punishing 
someone he saw as an ideological rival. It calls to mind a less pleasant 
side of Ali's legacy unacknowledged by Remnick, the insufferable strutting 
and chest-pounding so prevalent today in professional football and 
basketball. ( Remnick fails to mention the fancy footwork that became 
known as the Ali Shuffle, or that at the 1960 Olympic Games in Rome, 
the young boxer was warned that if he danced unnecessarily in the 
ring he would be disqualified.) Still, by the end, ``King of the World'' 
accomplishes its author's stated purpose of showing how Ali created 
himself in the early 1960s, ``the way a gangly kid from Louisville 
managed to become one of the most electric of American characters, 
a molder of his age and a reflection of it.'' Somehow, in relatively 
little space Remnick transforms the gangly kid into a beloved American. 
If Ali wants to be remembered, in his own words, ``as a black man 
who won the heavyweight title and who was humorous and who treated 
everyone right,'' few will deny him on the basis of the record set 
down here. It has been an amazing story, and Remnick captures the 
best of it in ``King of the World.'' PUBLICATION NOTES: `KING OF THE 
WORLD: MUHAMMAD ALI AND THE RISE OF AN AMERICAN HERO' By David Remnick 
Illustrated. 326 pages. Random House. $25. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>