<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981101.0115 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Rep. Henry Hyde is counting on an insider and an outsider in the impeachment 
investigation of President Clinton. As the House Judiciary Committee 
weighs its next steps on the path toward impeachment, Hyde is listening 
closely to two senior committee lawyers assigned disparate duties 
in the Republican-led inquiry. The outsider is David Schippers, a 
blunt Chicago Democrat hired by Hyde to be the committee's chief investigator 
and to present the legal case against the president. The insider is 
Thomas Mooney Sr., the panel's chief of staff, who earned a reputation 
as a consensus builder 24 years ago when he drafted the first two 
articles of impeachment against President Richard Nixon. ``Hyde relies 
on Mooney for his congressional experience and institutional history 
and on Schippers for the investigation itself, from witnesses to documents,'' 
said Rep. Asa Hutchinson, an Arkansas Republican on the panel. Schippers 
presented 15 possible impeachment counts to the committee last month 
(the panel is collapsing them into three broad charges), but it was 
Mooney who helped Hyde shepherd the vote for a formal inquiry through 
the House. And when Hutchinson discussed strategy with Hyde over dinner 
late last month in Washington, Mooney was the only other person at 
the table. Simply put, Schippers' role is to get the facts and make 
his case. Mooney then has the arguably trickier task of deciding what 
to do next. ``Tom's in charge of strategy, timing, tactics and the 
big picture,'' said Julian Epstein, Mooney's Democratic counterpart, 
with whom he has an unusually close professional relationship. Ultimately, 
of course, Hyde and his 36 committee colleagues will decide the president's 
fate and pass that judgment to the full House _ unless higher political 
powers step in to broker a deal. But in telephone calls, late-night 
meetings and strategy sessions over lunch in the House dining room, 
Schippers and Mooney _ each of whom Hyde has known for years but who 
did not know each other until this drama unfolded _ and their boss 
are mapping out an impeachment endgame. Republican aides say that 
there is no rivalry between Schippers and Mooney and that the two 
are cooperating well with only a few minor bumps. Schippers has balked 
at a few procedural steps the committee has taken. So deep is his 
lack of interest in political scuffling that he voiced reluctance 
at having to attend the meeting late last month between committee 
counsels and White House lawyers to discuss ground rules for hearings 
and depositions. Mooney did most of the talking for the Republicans. 
``Schippers is at home in the courtroom; I'm at home in the committee 
room,'' Mooney said in an interview. ``I'm here to help Schippers 
and Chairman Hyde navigate through the legislative shoals.'' The two 
lawyers are different in many other ways. Mooney, 55, and his deputy, 
Jon Dudas, a 30-year-old University of Chicago law-school graduate, 
run the committee's permanent staff from the majestic Rayburn House 
office building. A few blocks away on Capitol Hill, Schippers and 
his seven-member team of former prosecutors, FBI agents and police 
officers, all from Chicago, are ensconced in ground-floor offices 
of an obscure federal building. An armed police sentry prevents unannounced 
visitors from entering the posted ``restricted area.'' Schippers' 
opposite number, Abbe Lowell, the prominent Washington defense lawyer 
who is the Democrats' top investigator, works down the hall. Schippers, 
who turns 69 on Wednesday, is a career courtroom lawyer who prosecuted 
organized-crime figures for Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy in 
the 1960s, and later in private practice defended police officers, 
federal agents, a pornography star and even a defendant accused in 
serial killings. ``Schippers does not see himself brought in to achieve 
a certain goal of impeaching the president,'' said a Republican aide. 
``He was brought in to provide a seasoned lawyer's guide through it. 
Henry Hyde and the committee are his clients.'' Investigators are 
poring over the report from the independent counsel Kenneth Starr, 
rather than trying to break new ground, Republican aides say. ``They're 
looking at transcripts, the adequacy of questioning, what areas were 
not covered,'' one aide said. In contrast, Mooney has spent almost 
his entire career on Capitol Hill, working for the Judiciary Committee. 
Until Hyde named him chief of staff last year, Mooney labored on a 
relatively quiet subcommittee on intellectual property, writing landmark 
copyright and patent-protection bills. ``At the end of the day, Mooney 
wants the process to work,'' said Paul McNulty, a Republican committee 
spokesman. ``He wants to make sure the committee's stature and integrity 
is not diminished. Mooney's given his whole professional life to this 
committee.'' If a censure deal, or some other compromise, is brokered, 
Democrats more than likely will hear about it first from Mooney. Hyde 
dismissed such speculation last week, telling a suburban Chicago newspaper: 
``Our responsibility is simply to impeach or not to impeach. That's 
it.'' Meanwhile, a group of 10 Republicans and Democrats are trying 
to scratch out some common ground, a struggle on one of the most polarized 
committees in Congress. These lawmakers, including Hutchinson, look 
at Mooney's Watergate experience as a possible bridge to that goal. 
But Mooney isn't tipping his hand. If anything, he seems girded for 
the worst in the weeks to come. ``This isn't going to be fun, and 
it isn't going to be pleasant,'' Mooney said. ``But having been there 
and done that is helpful. You don't panic. You don't jump off a cliff. 
You stay the course and do the right thing.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>