<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981101.0129 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
On the third floor of an old house, Boyd McCamish unfurls a computer 
sheet listing his fellow members of Local 204 of the United Food and 
Commercial Workers Union. And he starts dialing the phone. ``We're 
just calling some of our union brothers and sisters about this upcoming 
election,'' he says by way of introduction. Then he makes a friendly 
but efficient pitch on behalf of John Edwards, the Democrat who is 
challenging Sen. Lauch Faircloth here in one of the closest Senate 
races in the country. ``Get the friends and family out there November 
3,'' he says on the phone. ``Maybe we can turn the corner.'' McCamish, 
27, is a foot soldier in the battle to prod voters to turn out on 
Election Day. Here and in scores of other tight House and Senate races 
across the country, men and women are applying the personal touch 
and their powers of persuasion in these final hours to rally their 
most ardent supporters. In a nonpresidential election year like this, 
with the economy humming and no national issues stirring passions, 
only committed voters _ fewer than four in 10 of those eligible _ 
are expected to vote on Tuesday. This means that candidates are in 
a fierce struggle to make sure that their core supporters vote, or 
as political professionals put it, that they ``energize their base.'' 
In such a climate, many of the big national interest groups that normally 
pump millions of dollars into television commercials have decided 
that television is a waste of money. It reaches too many people who 
do not care, and it has the potential to incite the opposition. As 
a result, while the national political parties are still spending 
millions on television, many groups with specific constituencies have 
adopted a more back-to-basics strategy. They are going directly to 
their supporters with repeated personal phone calls, strolls through 
neighborhoods, small information sessions and multiple direct-mail 
appeals. The AFL-CIO, under whose umbrella McCamish was making his 
phone calls, has undergone the most noticeable transformation. In 
1996, big labor spent $35 million on the election, all of it on television 
advertisements. This year, it is spending $20 million on grass-roots 
organizing, mail and phone banks, and almost nothing on television. 
``We've found that one-on-one contact, with union members talking 
personally to union members, pays huge dividends,'' said Steve Rosenthal, 
political director of the AFL-CIO. It is especially crucial in a state 
like North Carolina, he said, ``where the right has proven it can 
get its vote out.'' Because of the intensity of the Senate race here, 
state officials are predicting a turnout of about 47 percent of eligible 
voters, slightly higher than the average for a nonpresidential year 
and much higher than predictions for turnout nationally. Curtis Gans, 
director of the Committee for the Study of the American Electorate, 
estimated that nationwide a relatively low 36 percent to 38 percent 
of those eligible would go to the polls. Still, he said, ``Small amounts 
of votes might make a difference in a lot of close races.'' The intense 
get-out-the-vote war is evident here, engaging groups as diverse as 
the AFL-CIO and the Christian Coalition, Planned Parenthood and the 
National Rifle Association, the Friends of Tobacco and the black churches. 
``Everything we're doing is targeted specifically to our base, to 
get them out to the polls,'' said Wayne LaPierre, the executive vice 
president of the National Rifle Association, which is concentrating 
on direct mail to its members here and a few strategically placed 
radio ads. ``This election isn't about convincing people who's right; 
it's about getting your supporters who already believe you're right 
to the polls. Everyone is after that 2, 3 or 4 percent that can turn 
these races.'' Nina Miller, a strategist for the political arm of 
the Planned Parenthood Federation of America, said: ``It's all mail 
and phones. We're hitting people as many times as they will tolerate 
being hit.'' She said that one of the main reasons for campaigning 
strictly among Planned Parenthood's core supporters was that the mere 
mention of the incendiary issue of abortion in a scatter-shot radio 
or television commercial could rouse as many opponents as supporters 
to go to the polls. ``If we did a radio ad, for every pro-choice voter 
we'd reach, we'd reach an anti-choice voter,'' Ms. Miller said. ``We 
don't want to get the wrong people out to vote.'' The Christian Coalition 
here is augmenting the 35 million voter guides it puts out nationally 
with 160,000 postcards to North Carolina households that it has identified 
through church lists as Christian conservatives. ``We try to place 
these cards in the hands of people who want them,'' said Simm Delapp, 
the state chairman. ``We don't do the general marketplace, or churches 
that don't want us, or stores or windshields,'' he said. ``That's 
litter.'' Likewise, the U.S. Chamber of Commerce is sending mail and 
organizing phone banks on behalf of Faircloth. ``Our money is better 
spent in specific, targeted, get-out-the-vote efforts for pro-business 
candidates'' than on television, said J.T. Taylor, a lobbyist for 
the chamber. North Carolina has more registered Democrats (53 percent) 
than Republicans (34 percent). But many Democrats are conservatives, 
known here as Jessecrats, after the state's senior senator, Jesse 
Helms, and they cross party lines to vote Republican. They have harbored 
an intense dislike for President Clinton for years, long before the 
Lewinsky scandal, and Faircloth has been building on the anti-Clinton 
sentiment. As he framed the matter in a visit to North Carolina State 
University: ``How long do you think Bill Clinton would last as a professor 
at a state college if he acted the way he has in Washington?'' The 
importance of the Jessecrats has forced Edwards, a millionaire trial 
lawyer, to disavow any liberal label. ``I grew up in rural North Carolina. 
I grew up in the Baptist church,'' he declared during a visit Thursday 
to Faircloth's hometown. ``I support the death penalty, a balanced 
budget, no tax increases, and some tax cuts.'' The state Republican 
Party has a huge operation dedicated to identifying the crossover 
voters, sending them mail and urging them to the polls. And for the 
first time this year, the party has also sent out hundreds of thousands 
of applications for absentee ballots that include a picture of Faircloth. 
In a further effort to win over the Jessecrats, the Republican Party 
is warning voters that if Edwards is elected, he will cancel out Helms' 
vote, effectively leaving North Carolina with no vote in the U.S. 
Senate. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>