<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981101.0094 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The front-line soldiers of the body's immune system are the T-cells, 
which identify, attack and eradicate infection or disease. But like 
troops facing an enemy in battle, T-cells can be outnumbered. Cancerous 
cells or such viruses as HIV can multiply and overwhelm them; once 
the immune system is thus disarmed, disease or infection can spread 
freely. Unfortunately, the body cannot simply call in more troops; 
T-cell production does not work that way. Vaccines and drugs like 
the protease inhibitors given to HIV patients are meant to stimulate 
the body's production of T-cells, but their effects are limited. That 
has led to research in adoptive immunotherapy, or the science of giving 
patients the T-cells their bodies cannot produce. First, those cells 
have to be grown in a laboratory in huge numbers. One reason the body's 
T-cells are at least initially so efficient is that they are essentially 
programmed to fight specific diseases. T-cells bear receptors on their 
surfaces that recognize specific viruses or malignant cells. The T-cells 
grown in a lab, however, tend to lose their ability to recognize specific 
diseases. Though scientists have grown T-cells in culture for decades, 
they could not grow them for extended periods of time, or in large 
numbers. Now two researchers at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research 
Center in Seattle have patented a method of growing large numbers 
of a patient's own T-cells that remain able to identify specific diseases. 
Dr. Stanley Riddell and Dr. Philip Greenberg, both professors at the 
University of Washington, say their technique makes it possible to 
withdraw a small amount of a patient's blood, isolate the T-cells 
needed to fight a specific disease, grow billions more of them in 
less than a month and then give those additional cells back. ``What 
we've done is essentially accomplished the kind of cell proliferation 
that occurs in the body when it encounters infection,'' Riddell explained. 
When a healthy person's T-cells meet enemy cells, their receptors 
are activated, and they multiply; within 20 hours the number of disease-specific 
T-cells in the body can double, Riddell said. ``You quickly go from 
a very few cells that recognize the pathogen to having many,'' he 
said. ``That's important in order to kill the virus before it kills 
you.'' From that fact, the researchers knew that in order to grow 
similar cells in a lab, they would have to isolate T-cells with specific 
disease receptors. ``What's new here is that we spent time defining 
the conditions used in the culture to expand the cells rapidly,'' 
Riddell said. ``We tried to provide the one thing we knew was required, 
the T-cell antigen receptor signaling. When that receptor engages, 
the first signal tells the T-cell to activate and divide. We provided 
that signal, and then used a large number of the filler cells that 
regulate the T-cell's actions. ``That lets us clone out T-cells specific 
to a tumor or virus, and give them back to the patient,'' he said. 
The ability to grow billions of T-cells ``provides you with an enormous 
immune response, much greater than can be grown naturally in the body.'' 
Riddell said healthy people use about 10 percent of their T-cells 
to fight an infection like mononucleosis. ``That's probably in the 
range of several billion cells,'' he added. ``We know that to control 
acute infection, you need an enormous number of T-cells.'' Researchers 
hope T-cells can be grown to fight cancerous cells as well as specific 
viruses, but Riddell cautioned that cancer presents a separate set 
of problems. ``The difficulty with cancer is that cancer cells don't 
display the antigens that T-cells can see,'' he explained. In other 
words, without the signal to turn on their receptor, T-cells often 
overlook cancer cells. One exception is melanoma, which does emit 
an antigen. Riddell and Greenberg have licensed their invention to 
Targeted Genetics Corp., a Seattle biotechnology company that has 
used it in human clinical trials for treatment of HIV and late-stage 
melanoma, and to treat hepatitis B in chimpanzees. The invention received 
patent 5,827,642. Self-Opening Envelope Could End Paper Cuts Ever 
used a butter knife, a ballpoint pen or a finger to open mail when 
there was no letter opener within reach? Those improvisations often 
leave envelopes in a jagged mess, and fingers with paper cuts. Carlos 
Castro, president of Lanyard Envelopes Inc., in Budd Lake, N.J., has 
patented an envelope with a built-in opener. He has added a piece 
of string to conventional envelope design, creating an opener that 
mimics those small packages containing adhesive bandages. Castro's 
envelopes follow the conventional pattern cut from a blank sheet of 
flat paper stock. Large flaps on three sides are folded inward to 
form the body of the envelope, and a fourth shallow flap serves as 
the top lip. But Castro glues a piece of string to the fold between 
the front of the envelope and one of the side panels. The string attaches 
to a small tab that extends from a corner of the back of the envelope 
where the folding side and center panels meet. If one pulls on the 
tab, the string slices through the fold along the envelope's edge 
from bottom to top, leaving that side open. Castro received patent 
5,752,652. Patents are available by number for $3 from the Patent 
and Trademark Office, Washington, D.C. 20231. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>