<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981101.0227 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
By Sunday night, Michael Leone, a bank loan coordinator who is working 
on the side as a Democratic Party organizer, had sent a battalion 
of more than 500 volunteers marching across Rochester and its suburbs 
to pass out 70,000 fliers urging voters to go to the polls and vote 
for Rep. Charles Schumer and other Democrats. The day before, it was 
``Saturation Day'' in Nassau County, where the Republican Party sent 
out nearly 2,100 volunteers to distribute sample ballots with the 
names of Republican candidates, including Sen. Alfonse D'Amato, to 
many of the county's 1.3 million residents. And along with the customary 
mailings, fliers and telephone banks, both parties are using a new 
technique: calls to potential voters that feature recorded messages 
from the candidates and political celebrities, like the president's 
voice plugging for Schumer. In a Senate race where victory could well 
be determined by a few percentage points at most, D'Amato and Schumer 
and their parties are working _ and spending _ feverishly to get their 
voters out. Over the weekend, the Democratic Party conducted a telephone 
conference call in which President Clinton, who has been to New York 
City twice to campaign for Schumer, spoke to party officials in all 
62 counties in the state about the need to get Democratic voters to 
the polls. With the closeness of the Senate race, widespread predictions 
of low voter turnout and uncertainty over how, or whether, Clinton's 
troubles in the Lewinsky matter will affect voters, the effort has 
taken on greater significance than usual. Democratic and Republican 
officials say they are working with unprecedented zeal and devoting 
more resources than ever on turnout. ``They are going to get out across 
the length and breadth of this county and place these sample ballots 
in every home,'' said Joseph Mondello, the Nassau County Republican 
chairman. ``We have a lot at stake this year and we are pulling out 
all the stops.'' While both parties maintain that their goal is to 
support their respective slates of candidates for local offices and 
the statewide races for governor, attorney general and comptroller, 
much of the effort, officials concede, is aimed at shaping the outcome 
of the Senate race. ``With the Senate race as tight as it is, both 
sides realize that the election will be decided by Election Day operations,'' 
said Judith Hope, the state's Democratic Party chairwoman. ``The question 
for each side is whether we can get our people inside the voting booths. 
We are putting everything we've got into that effort.'' State Democratic 
officials said that the party would have more than 2,300 people working 
on Tuesday throughout the state and that they intended to contact 
nearly 2 million Democratic voters by telephone in the last few days 
of the campaign to remind them to vote. And the party's efforts will 
be complemented by several of the state's large labor unions. Republicans 
are planning a similarly intense effort. ``We are doing everything 
we can to reach out to the voters who we think will vote Republican,'' 
said Terry O'Brien, a spokesman for the state Republican Party. ``We 
have spent the last few months identifying our voters, essentially 
by telemarketing and mailings, and we're reaching out to them to make 
sure they will vote.'' O'Brien said he did not know the specific amount 
the Republican Party had spent, but said one recent mailing alone, 
to remind voters to go to the polls, had cost about $1 million. In 
addition, O'Brien pointed out that the Civil Service Employees Association, 
which has a membership of about 200,000 state employees, was working 
on behalf of Gov. George Pataki. While the most noticeable aspect 
of the campaigns in the last month has been television and radio advertisements, 
the parties have been engaged for months in the more behind-the-scenes 
effort of developing strategies to get their voters to the polls. 
And while the methods have largely been traditional, party officials 
say their efforts this year have been far more intense. For the Democrats, 
a big target was the more than 250 black churches throughout the state. 
From the Convent Avenue Baptist Church in Harlem to the Memorial A.M.E. 
Zion church in Rochester, thousands of workers greeted congregants 
for the third successive week on Sunday with leaflets carrying the 
slogan, ``When We Vote, We Win,'' which urged black New Yorkers to 
vote for the entire Democratic slate. The Democratic and Republican 
parties are not the only ones with intensified get-out-the-vote efforts. 
The Working Families Party, founded this year by an alliance of labor 
unions, politicians and the Association of Community Organizations 
for Reform Now, or Acorn, has been working to secure 50,000 votes 
for Peter Vallone on its ballot line, which would earn it an automatic 
spot on the ballot in the next election. ``We will have about 1,500 
people on Election Day helping and urging people to vote,'' said Adam 
Glickman, a spokesman for the party. The party, which is seeking votes 
from traditionally liberal voters, held a rally Sunday night at the 
Evangelical Crusade Christian Church, a largely Haitian congregation 
in Flatbush, Brooklyn, where Vallone and former New York City Mayor 
David Dinkins addressed a crowd of 750 people. Meanwhile, Raymond 
Harding, the Liberal Party's chairman, said 900,000 pieces of mail 
had been sent to voters considered likely to vote on the party's line. 
The Liberal Party, too, needs 50,000 votes for its gubernatorial candidate, 
Lt. Gov. Betsy McCaughey Ross, to retain its ballot line _ and political 
influence. With Ms. McCaughey Ross far behind in most polls and the 
Working Families Party's challenge, it is unclear whether the Liberals 
can reach the threshold. But Harding said, ``I'm confident that we 
will get the votes that we need.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>