<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981101.0088 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Suddenly on Wall Street, it's the wonderful world of Time Warner. 
In a remarkable turnaround, the media company that investors love 
best is no longer Disney. Only a few years back Walt Disney Co. was 
seen as the stable, sure-growth operation that investors adored, while 
Time Warner Inc. was tarred as the debt-ridden, cable-crazed drag 
on many a media portfolio. But in the last 12 months, Time Warner's 
stock has risen 61 percent, compared with a rise of only 20 percent 
for the Standard &AMP; Poor's 500 index and a 2 percent decline for 
Disney, which has historically been the industry's best performer. 
``Any sector will have any one or two leading companies,'' said Christopher 
Dixon, a media analyst at Paine Webber Inc. ``We are seeing major 
rotation from Disney to Time Warner.'' Yes, Time Warner still has 
problems _ particularly in the erratically performing Warner Brothers 
movie, television and music units jointly run by Terry Semel and Robert 
Daly. And overall, Time Warner, with $13.1 billion in 1997 sales and 
$246 million in profits, is dwarfed by Disney's $22 million in sales 
and $1.9 billion in profits. But Time Warner's stock price represents 
at least temporary vindication of the strategy of the company's chairman, 
Gerald Levin, 59. Since taking the job in 1993, he has labored under 
a debt that now stands at $16 billion, a big chunk of it from the 
$5.5 billion he has spent acquiring additional cable television systems. 
But lately gains in cash flow have investors worrying less about the 
debt. Cable systems now account for 40 percent of Time Warner's operating 
income, which was $3 billion for the first nine months of the year, 
up 16 percent from the period a year earlier. And with 12 million 
subscribers, the company under Levin has become the industry's largest 
cable operator _ the largest customer, in other words, for its own 
CNN, TNT, HBO and other cable programming services, which together 
account for an additional 27.2 percent of its operating income. ``Like 
a phoenix, cable has risen from the ashes, and the stock has risen 
with it,'' said Time Warner's president, Richard Parsons. To some 
extent, Time Warner is benefiting from economic uncertainty. With 
some investors fearing a recession, many may feel that Disney's theme 
parks, which accounted for about a third of the company's cash flow 
through this year's first three quarters, could be hurt more than 
Time Warner's less cyclical cable operations. Moreover, as owner of 
ABC, Disney is much more exposed to the various problems facing the 
major broadcast networks. ``Cable advertising is cheaper than broadcast 
advertising and less likely to be hurt in a recession,'' said Dixon, 
the analyst. Levin, who came up the corporate ladder in the 1970s 
and '80s through Time Inc.'s cable business, remained a strong supporter 
of cable even when his critics predicted _ incorrectly, so far _ that 
it would be rendered obsolete by direct-broadcast satellite networks. 
And though his 1996 stock deal to acquire Turner Broadcasting System 
for $7.5 billion was criticized by some as far too costly, Turner's 
cable programming services have complemented Time Warner's movie and 
television production operations. The deal also brought what have 
proved to be invaluable management benefits by making Ted Turner a 
board member, vice chairman and 11 percent owner of Time Warner. Under 
Levin's predecessor, the late Steve Ross _ who had engineered the 
debt-defying $14 billion merger of Time with Warner Communications 
in 1989 _ the company developed a reputation for profligate spending, 
symbolized by a fleet of corporate jets and huge salaries and stock-option 
plans. Though Levin had trimmed some of those extravagances, the Turner 
deal brought on board an owner-shareholder who had run his own company 
on a tight budget and was determined to monitor spending. ``Jerry 
has done a great job,'' Turner said enthusiastically in a telephone 
interview. This is despite a difficult time for Levin after the 1997 
murder of his son and in the current widely publicized trial of one 
of his son's accused killers. Levin _ never particularly comfortable 
with the news media, declined repeated requests for an interview for 
this article. Confounding those who predicted a leadership battle, 
Levin and Turner appear to have developed an amicable relationship. 
They may not always agree, but Turner probably finds little to be 
unhappy about, given that each share of his Time Warner stock has 
risen from $41.375 when the merger closed on Oct. 10, 1996, to $92.875 
last Friday. Still, Levin has been faulted for a shakeup at Warner 
Music, once the most successful company in its industry. After the 
controversial departure of its veteran management team several years 
ago, Levin handed leadership first to Michael Fuchs, the former chairman 
of HBO, and then to Daly and Semel. The division is only now beginning 
to recover from management turmoil as well as an industry slump. But 
Levin has earned the industry's respect by bringing in Parsons, formerly 
chairman of Dime Savings Bank, and promoting a senior vice president, 
Richard Bressler, to chief financial officer. Levin and Parsons have 
taken steps to clarify corporate control and get the company's cable, 
publishing and entertainment divisions working together more effectively. 
Though bonuses are still based solely on the performance of individual 
divisions, rather than the whole company, Levin meets with the six 
divisional heads a half-dozen times a year to explore ways their operations 
can complement one another better. Turner, meanwhile, has been particularly 
active in seeing that Turner's cable services benefited from their 
association with Warner Brothers films. In his most publicized move, 
he pushed Warner Brothers to break off a planned sale to CBS and sell 
a package of films including ``Space Jam'' and ``Mars Attack'' to 
Turner's TNT and TBS cable channels instead. Still, the road to synergy 
has had its chuckholes, most notably an incident last summer involving 
the cable news network CNN and the company's prestigious news weekly, 
Time magazine. After CNN produced a piece claiming that the U.S. military 
had used lethal sarin nerve gas in a secret 1970 mission in Laos, 
both CNN and Time, which had published a version of the story, had 
to issue retractions. And by any measure, the company's film business 
is in disarray. The Warner studio has had one of Hollywood's weakest 
records in recent years with box-office disappointments like ``Midnight 
in the Garden of Good and Evil,'' ``Mad City,'' ``The Postman,'' ``Why 
Do Fools Fall in Love?'' and ``The Avengers.'' Hollywood executives 
and top talent agents pin the blame squarely on Daly, 61, and Semel, 
52, the co-chairman of Warner Brothers, which accounts for 13.4 percent 
of Time Warner's cash flow. During the 1980s the veteran executives 
were responsible for hits like the ``Batman'' movies and the television 
series ``Murphy Brown. Then, several years ago they took over the 
music division, which gave them responsibility for another 10 percent 
of cash flow, a move that some critics say spread them too thin. Daly 
has argued that if each man were running one division, there would 
have been no criticism. But agents, producers and rival studio executives 
said that Daly and Semel had lost touch with the moviegoing public 
and had focused too much on longstanding stars like Mel Gibson (``Lethal 
Weapon'') and Kevin Costner (``The Postman''). In one widely related 
incident, several Warner executives were discussing a project called 
``The Wedding Singer'' that was to star Adam Sandler, the hot young 
former ``Saturday Night Live'' comedian who had broken into films 
with his role in ``Happy Gilmore.'' Though some younger Warner executives 
pushed hard for the project, ``the attitude of the bosses was `Who 
is Adam Sandler anyway?''' said a person involved in the discussions 
who insisted that Semel was offered the project and rejected it. Semel 
contends that Warner never had the offer. Another studio, New Line 
Cinema, subsequently turned ``The Wedding Singer'' into a hit. And 
depending too heavily on established stars is expensive. Although 
Warner Brothers claimed that ``Lethal Weapon'' made money, several 
Hollywood lawyers said that the payoffs to Gibson, actor Danny Glover, 
director Richard Donner and producer Joel Silver resulted in marginal 
profits at best for Warner. In a recent interview, Daly argued that 
the company has simply been through its share of ups and downs and 
has invested in many films that any studio would have bet on. He cited 
the example of ``The Postman,'' with Kevin Costner and said, ``I don't 
think there would have been one studio that would have turned it down.'' 
Both Daly and Semel contend that the studio has a strong slate of 
films starting with Christmas releases, including ``You've Got Mail,'' 
starring Tom Hanks and Meg Ryan. And Daly pointed out that he and 
Semel have brought in a younger team led by Lorenzo di BonAventura, 
40, the president of production. Turner dismissed suggestions by several 
executives close to the company that he was unhappy with the film 
results and particularly with Semel, who is most directly responsible 
for the movie operation. ``That's ridiculous,'' Turner said. ``Warner 
Brothers is not good, but they are doing great in television,'' he 
continued. ``The whole idea of merging was to get new programming 
for the cable services. Now we have ``E.R.''' Indeed, led by ``E.R.'' 
and ``Friends,'' both among the most highly rated shows in prime time 
and already playing in syndication, Warner's television and film production 
business has shown impressive profit growth. Daly, who was president 
of CBS Entertainment until he joined Warner in 1980, is actively involved 
in the TV unit and is credited with the deal in which NBC reportedly 
paid $13 million an episode for the next five years of ``E.R.'' Whatever 
the operational successes and failures of the Daly-Semel team, speculation 
about the size of their paychecks draws almost as much attention in 
Hollywood, where each man is widely thought to take home $10 million 
or more a year in compensation. The two are not corporate officers, 
so Time Warner does not have to divulge their pay and has chosen not 
to. But events such as Semel's recent purchase of a $12 million cooperative 
apartment have triggered more talk. Fortune magazine, which is owned 
by Time Warner, skirted any discussion of the two men and their pay 
in an article last June that took both Paramount Pictures and Disney 
to task for not revealing the salaries of their studio heads. Asked 
about the article last week, Fortune's editor-in-chief, John Huey, 
said: ``I don't recall the particular story. It sounds like it would 
have been appropriate to mention Time Warner.'' The ongoing Semel-Daly 
controversy is not the only challenge facing Levin. He is still grappling, 
for instance, with an unwieldy corporate structure created several 
months before Ross' death, when Time Warner sold stakes in Time Warner 
Entertainment to two Japanese companies and U S West. Roughly 80 percent 
of Time Warner's cable subscribers and all of Home Box Office and 
Warner Brothers are owned by Time Warner Entertainment. Though the 
Japanese companies, Toshiba and Itochu, have since sold the bulk of 
their stakes, a 25 percent portion is still held by the U S West cable 
spinoff, Media One, and Time Warner had tried to extricate itself 
from this arrangement. But, unable to reach severance terms, the company 
and Media One announced in July 1997 that they had decided to stay 
together. ``Both companies can achieve their financial objectives, 
and there is no need to restructure,'' Levin said at the time. It 
was hardly a passionate pledge of devotion. And the marriage remains 
financially unsatisfying, in the view of Jessica Reif Cohen, an analyst 
with Merrill Lynch. ``They have two structures _ Time Warner and Time 
Warner Entertainment,'' she said. ``Long-term, it is not workable. 
Just to get anything done with cable, they have to go to Media One 
for approval. It is not the ideal way to do business, having to ask 
your partner for permission.'' But then, no one said Time Warner was 
the ideal media company. It is just that for now, because of its strong 
cash flow and in light of investor disillusionment with Disney, Time 
Warner is looking better than it has in years. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>