<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981101.0213 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Halfway through the season with a 3-5 record, there's no way the Giants 
will qualify for the Super Bowl XXXIII playoffs. Not the way they 
played so impotently with their season at stake in the fourth quarter 
of Sunday's embarrassing 21-14 loss to a Redskin team that hadn't 
won a game. Not with their imposing second-half schedule, starting 
with the Cowboys next Sunday and including the Packers, 49ers, Broncos 
and Chiefs _ five likely losses. Only three of their eight remaining 
games, the Eagles twice and the Cardinals in Arizona, could be considered 
likely victories. But with the Giants, likely victories are dangerous. 
Judging by the way the Giants performed Sunday, they considered the 
Redskins a likely victory even though coach Jim Fassel had warned 
them not to be overconfident. ``You can say it 100 times, pound at 
'em, pound at 'em,'' Fassel would say later, ``but we didn't play 
with a sense of urgency, didn't play as if our backs were against 
the wall. We must've thought the Redskins weren't going to play hard.'' 
And now, for the first time, Fassel, last season's Coach of the Year, 
will be under the microscope as never before. When the Giants coasted 
to a 9-6-1 record last year, Fassel never had a real crisis as a rookie 
head coach. But now he must lift the Giants out of their lethargy. 
He can't afford another sleepwalk next Sunday against the Cowboys, 
who would go to 5-3 with a triumph Monday night in Philadelphia. ``We're 
in trouble, no doubt about it,'' Fassel acknowledged. ``Are we out 
of it? No.'' But unless the Giants suddenly emerge as a much better 
team than they've been so far, they are out of the playoffs. It's 
also time to reassess last year's first-place Giants as mostly a mirage 
created by a soft schedule and an Eastern Division that collapsed 
around them. The Giants didn't lose a divisional game last year, going 
7-0-1, the tie a 7-7 overtime snooze here in their first visit to 
Jack Kent Cooke Stadium. So far this season, they're 2-2, losing to 
the Cowboys and now to the Redskins, who had been an 0-7 joke. It 
wasn't as if the Redskins suddenly were bolstered by returning players. 
If anything, they were weakened by the absence of both defensive tackle 
Dana Stubblefield with a twisted knee and wide receiver Michael Westbrook, 
fined and benched for having missed Saturday's practice. Perhaps that 
made the Redskins even more desperate for a victory, especially with 
their defensive coordinator, Mike Nolan (the Giants' defensive coordinator 
under Dan Reeves for four seasons), able to focus on stopping the 
Giants' already sputtering running game. ``The Giants don't quite 
present the type of problems that Denver or San Francisco do,'' said 
Norv Turner, the Redskin coach, ``so you can zero in on some things. 
Our linebackers certainly zeroed in on their run.'' Trailing by 14-7 
at halftime, the Giants had scored only on David Patten's 90-yard 
kickoff return. Other than that, they had accumulated only 92 yards 
of total offense, only 28 on 6-of-14 passing by quarterback Danny 
Kanell, who insisted that he was 100 percent healthy after a flu siege. 
By the end of the game, Kanell had completed 17 of 32 for 151 yards, 
including an 11-yard arrow to wide receiver Ike Hilliard that pulled 
the Giants to 21-14 going into the fourth quarter. The Giants' defense, 
even without pass-rusher Michael Strahan (out with spinal spasms after 
the game's second play), kept the Redskins out of field-goal range, 
but in four possessions, Kanell couldn't get the Giants' disorganized 
offense past its own 34, 16, 10 and 44-yard lines. On those series, 
Kanell completed 7 of 13 passes, but he fumbled a botched handoff 
to Charles Way on a third-and-1. He misfired on a pass to Hilliard 
on a third-and-10 and again on a fourth-and-3. On a third-and-1 at 
their 16, Gary Brown ran for no gain. ``I thought about going for 
it there on fourth down,'' Fassel said, ``but with the amount of timeouts 
we had left, I think I did the right thing.'' But as a team, the Giants 
couldn't and didn't do the right thing. Had they rallied to win in 
the fourth quarter, they would be going to Dallas on a high with a 
credible 4-4 record. Instead, they've never been lower in Fassel's 
tenure. ``We had a sense of urgency last year, we had something to 
prove,'' defensive tackle Keith Hamilton said. ``Somewhere along the 
way, we lost it.'' With it the Giants have already lost their chance 
of making the playoffs again. But in all the adversity sure to occur 
for the rest of the season, Jim Fassel, reputedly an offensive guru, 
will have his chance to prove just how good a head coach he really 
is. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>