<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981101.0194 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Building on his background as a popular Democratic mayor of this Sunbelt 
city, Martin Chavez would like to picture himself as New Mexico's 
future governor. But with his wire-rimmed glasses and the beleaguered 
status of Democrats in the region, political cartoonists might sketch 
him as a New Mexican spotted owl. With Tuesday's election, Democratic 
governors in the interior West risk falling in status from endangered 
to nearly extinct. In the 14-state area bounded by the Sierra Nevadas 
on the West and the Missouri and Arkansas Rivers on the East, 11 of 
the governors are Republicans. In the Republican-led states that have 
races, Democrats are not expected to make inroads. In the three states 
with Democratic governors, Colorado, Nebraska and Nevada, Republican 
candidates approach the elections with leads in opinion polls. ``In 
the Rocky Mountain area, it's tough, we just don't have the kind of 
representation we used to,'' Roy Romer, Colorado's governor and chairman 
of the Democratic National Committee, said last week, while campaigning 
in Colorado for Gail Schoettler, the Democratic candidate in the race 
to succeed him. In contrast, when Romer was first elected governor 
in 1986, the Western Governors' Association was a Democratic club. 
Fifteen years ago, only two states in the 14-state region, North Dakota 
and South Dakota, had Republican governors. Some political analysts 
attribute the change to ``the Valhalla syndrome'' _ white conservatives 
fleeing social strife in California and Texas for a low-crime, mountain 
paradise. In Colorado, for every Democrat who moved to the state in 
the last decade, two Republicans did. Evenly balanced only a decade 
ago, voter registration in Colorado now favors the Republicans by 
130,000 voters. Here in New Mexico, there are 60 percent more registered 
Democrats than Republicans. But the governor, Gary Johnson, is a Republican, 
and four members of the five-member congressional delegation are Republicans. 
``There has been a real change in New Mexico, we are becoming more 
Republican in voting,'' said Chris Garcia, who has taught political 
science at the University of New Mexico for the last 29 years. ``The 
people coming in from California and Texas are a lot more conservative, 
more affluent, more likely to support the Republicans.'' Garcia was 
speaking at the end of a campus forum, featuring the two contenders, 
Chavez and Johnson. ``There is the clearest philosophical choice between 
two competing visions of government,'' the political scientist continued. 
``Martin Chavez is in the classical mold of New Deal government and 
programs. Gary Johnson, in contrast, hews not only to the traditional 
Republican view of low taxes, but extends into libertarianism.'' In 
Colorado, Ms. Schoettler, who is the state's lieutenant governor, 
often plays down her party affiliation and offers a centrist, pragmatic 
approach. Her Republican opponent, Bill Owens, is the state treasurer, 
and he offers white-collar, Christian conservatism. In a measure of 
shifts in Colorado, The Denver Post, once the state's liberal voice, 
endorsed Owens and almost all Republicans running for Congress, including 
Bob Greenlee, the candidate to represent the 2nd District, which includes 
Boulder. In the Senate race, The Post editorial board endorsed Ben 
Nighthorse Campbell, the Republican, spurning Democratic candidate 
Dottie Lamm, its former columnist. ``There has been a massive movement 
of people into Colorado and New Mexico from California, and that has 
changed the political complexion of those states,'' said Federico 
Pena, a Democrat and former member of the Clinton Cabinet. Mayor of 
Denver in the mid-1980s, Pena returned to Denver this fall to be an 
investment banker, deflecting appeals from some Colorado Democrats 
that he run for statewide office. In Nevada, the other interior Western 
state with a Democratic governor, polls indicate that Kenny Guinn, 
the Republican candidate, has a small edge over the Democrat, Jan 
Jones. In a state where party registration is evenly split, Ms. Jones 
was mayor of Las Vegas, Nevada's largest city. Guinn has been a banker, 
the president of a gas corporation and a superintendent of schools. 
In Nebraska, Mike Johannes, the former mayor of Lincoln and a Republican, 
is leading strongly in polls against Bill Hoppner, a Democratic lawyer. 
In Denver, Dick Wadhams, campaign manager for Owens, said of the shifts 
he has seen in recent decades: ``The generation of Democrats that 
dominated the Rockies in the '70s and '80s has basically come and 
gone. The West is becoming more conservative in its outlook.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>