<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981101.0215 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Frederick and Tina Blanchard had driven some 250 miles from Fairfax, 
Va., to watch their oldest daughter, Kimberly, run in her eighth New 
York City Marathon on Sunday. The Blanchards had been there for Kimberly's 
first seven, so they knew the drill: a quick brunch at any restaurant 
near Central Park, then off to Park Drive to find Kimberly amidst 
the throngs of 32,000 marathoners and loft their voices high enough 
above the crowd so that she might hear and recognize their cheers 
of encouragement. Afterward, they would make their way to the family 
reunion area _ the site designated for marathoners to meet relatives, 
friends and loved ones. In past years, families met their runners 
inside the park on the Great Lawn near the 81st Street entrance. This 
year, marathon organizers designated a half-mile stretch of Central 
Park West, from 73rd Street to 84th Street, as the reunion area because 
city officials were worried that if there were inclement weather, 
that mixed with 32,000 pair of feet could wreak havoc on the newly 
sodded lawn. Surnames ending in A started at 84th Street; surnames 
ending in Z were at 73rd Street. Although there are 26 letters in 
the alphabet, 35 reunion stations had been set up to make it easier 
for loved ones to be reunited, said organizers. ``We have volunteers 
at each station,'' said Joe Smith, a volunteer supervisor whose normal 
day job is director of operations for Basketball City at the Chelsea 
Piers. ``If somebody drops out, that information is radioed to us, 
we record the information, then one of our volunteer runners takes 
the information to the lettered area where the family or friend is 
waiting.'' So how does the volunteer runner know who's waiting for 
whom? They hold up a placard with the runner's name. If that doesn't 
work, the person is paged over loudspeakers. But even the best laid 
plans can go astray. The Blanchard family can attest to that. They 
thought they could enter the park at 85th Street to catch a glimpse 
of Kimberly running by, but the police had closed off the entrance. 
The family tried the 81st Street traverse. ``That's only going to 
get you to Fifth Avenue and if she's as good as you say, she'll be 
long gone by then,'' said a police officer whose name tag read Vargas. 
Undeterred, the family headed south to the 65th Street entrance, only 
to get there and find police barricades and crowds of onlookers blocking 
their sight-lines. By now it was 2:30 p.m. and Kimberly, whose personal 
best was just over three hours, had probably passed the 24-mile mark, 
so the family decided to head north toward 83rd Street where they 
stood beneath the placards lettered: Bl-Bo. ``Seems like we've walked 
half the distance of the marathon,'' said Mrs. Blanchard, who chose 
black suede pumps, which she swore were better for her high arches 
than athletic shoes. Every few minutes, Fred and Tina would lean over 
the police barricades and peer north, looking for a petite woman with 
smooth nutmeg skin and easy smile. ``She started running several years 
ago and she got hooked,'' said Fred, who showed no outward signs of 
worry except to wonder aloud whether Kimberly had brought enough clothing 
along. ``She never thinks to bring a jacket, so we brought a blanket, 
just in case,'' he said. A few feet away, Yolanda Boles had found 
her husband, John, who had just completed his sixth city marathon 
for which he was presented a congratulatory kiss and a bouquet of 
roses. Then, the Boles were off for a nice quiet dinner. Diagonally 
across from the Boles, Jim and Leah Boyd had found their son, Timothy, 
a second-year student at Downstate Medical College, who had just completed 
his first marathon in 3 hours, 51 minutes. His mom had but one question: 
``How do you feel?'' Assured by the future doctor that he was none 
the worse for the wear, dad took a picture of mom and son, then mom 
took a picture of father and son and the Boyds were gone: Timothy 
to his Park Slope apartment and Mr. and Mrs. Boyd to Millwood. It 
was 3:15 p.m. and the Blanchards were still waiting. Tina saw her 
first. Draped in the silver heat-sheet with royal blue tights and 
a red fleece top peeking through, their daughter walked with a purposeful 
stride as though headed to her job as a marketing director at ``In 
Style'' magazine. At the sight of her, Fred's arms flew open and Kimberly 
accepted his bear-hug embrace. Tina was taking photographs. ``Where's 
my nephew?'' asked Kimberly, who had finished in 3 hours, 45 minutes. 
``I told you, that's the first thing she'd ask,'' said Tina. Last 
year, having completed her 26.2 miles, Kimberly was ready to walk 
to her apartment on West 11th Street where neighbors and friends toasted 
her feat with beer and pizza. ``Can we take the subway,'' Mrs. Blanchard 
asked. She got no argument from Kimberly. When last seen, the Blanchards 
were heading south, only this time they were taking the A-Train. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>