<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981101.0204 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When it was over, when this wayward Giants season had sagged to a 
new low with the 21-14 loss to the heretofore victoryless Washington 
Redskins, Giants coach Jim Fassel's face was blank of expression. 
His Giants, long criticized for not being able to throw the football 
deep, discovered Sunday that they couldn't run the football in small 
increments either _ twice failing to advance the football on pivotal, 
fourth-quarter, third-down plays. The Giants' medium-sized plays were 
generally fruitless, too. The once proud Giants defense fared no better. 
Known for a ferocity that forced turnovers, the Giants created no 
such havoc Sunday. There were no turnovers in the game and the Redskins 
battered the disjointed Giants' defense for 124 yards on the ground. 
And worst of all, the Giants and their coaches acknowledged afterward 
that what the team lacked most Sunday was the desire to win _ or in 
the parlance of the moment, they lacked focus. Which moved Giants 
defensive tackle Keith Hamilton to say: ``We were 3-4 coming into 
this game. How do we lose focus at 3-4? That's hard to believe.'' 
It was a game that left Fassel, who thought his team had turned a 
corner with its commanding 34-7 victory over the Arizona Cardinals 
two weeks ago, at a loss for words. He found he had no one on his 
team to praise beyond the punter Brad Maynard. And a football coach 
lauding the punter after a game is like a ship captain congratulating 
the oceanographer who discovered the wreck of his vessel on the ocean 
floor. ``We're in trouble,'' Fassel said after watching his team drop 
to 3-5. He added: ``Are we out of it? In terms of the division race, 
no. But we're going to need some help.'' In the stumbling, bumbling 
National Football Conference East, the Giants remain one and a half 
games behind the Dallas Cowboys, who play the Philadelphia Eagles 
on Monday night. But considering the strength of the remainder of 
the Giants' schedule, the Giants are one division loss from losing 
nearly all hope. And next week's game is at Dallas. Throughout the 
Giants' locker room Sunday, the sentiment was expressed that a Giants 
rebound may be in order since this team plays best when facing adversity. 
But it sounded empty, and it could not erase the comments of last 
week, when players and coaches conceded that there was a huge difference 
between a 4-4 record and a 3-5 record. ``We keep making it harder,'' 
safety Percy Ellsworth said. ``We were on the bottom and climbed up 
last year. I guess we're back down on the bottom now.'' The Giants 
lost Sunday to a team that not only entered the game 0-7, but was 
also without two key players _ defensive tackle Dana Stubblefield, 
who has a knee injury, and wide receiver Michael Westbrook, who was 
benched because he missed a team workout and meeting on Saturday. 
Fassel said he noticed early in the game that the Redskins were playing 
with more fire than his team. ``You could see we were getting off 
on the wrong foot,'' he said. ``They were getting off the ball quicker. 
And that was very disappointing. We didn't have that sense of urgency.'' 
As much as the Giants' more dramatic lapses came late in the game 
when they were trying to rally, they lost the game in the first half. 
It was in the first half that Washington quarterback Trent Green repeatedly 
found his tight end Jamie Asher, who riddled a sloppy Giants secondary. 
Asher had four of his five catches in the first half, setting up two 
Redskins touchdowns. Also, when the Giants' Pro Bowl defensive end 
Michael Strahan left the game after the first series because of back 
spasms, the Redskins ran often at his replacement, Cedric Jones. Washington 
also seemed eager, as other teams have, to push its running game in 
the direction of the Giants' strongside linebacker Marcus Buckley, 
who has replaced the injured Corey Miller. Washington scored its first 
touchdown on a 1-yard bootleg by Green _ Green slipping past Ellsworth, 
who appeared to overpursue the play. Green later connected with running 
back Stephen Davis for a 12-yard touchdown pass. In between, David 
Patten momentarily rescued the Giants' offense with a 90-yard kickoff 
return, the Giants' first kickoff return for a touchdown in nearly 
three years. Trailing by 14-7 at intermission, the Giants were not 
far off the course of a normal game for them. But when the Redskins 
scored on their first possession of the second half _ a 10-play, 79-yard 
touchdown drive that took nearly five minutes _ the Giants' offense 
knew that the defense wasn't going to win the game for it as the defense 
has so often in the past. This realization almost seemed to benefit 
the Giants. Down by two touchdowns, the Giants started throwing the 
football deep late in the third quarter. Quarterback Danny Kanell, 
who again had an uneven game with several poor throws at important 
junctures, had not looked decisive up to that point. But in one series, 
Kanell completed three passes in quick succession _ one for 46 yards 
to Ike Hilliard. In 1 minute 48 seconds, the Giants moved 70 yards, 
scoring on an 11-yard touchdown pass from Kanell to Hilliard. ``It 
shows what we can do,'' said Kanell, who completed 17 of 32 passes 
for 151 yards and no interceptions. ``I wish I could say why we can't 
do that more often.'' Kanell said he was not hampered by the stomach 
flu he had last week, nor hindered by the chest surgery he had to 
remove a benign growth nearly two weeks ago. The Giants did get the 
football four more times in the game, but never made it into Redskins 
territory in the fourth quarter, in part because of the spectacular 
punting of Washington's Pro Bowler Matt Turk. It was also because 
the Giants' play calling seemed to lack the abandon evident when the 
Washington lead was 14 points and the Giants appeared more desperate. 
Trying to tie the score, Kanell's passing options once again tended 
toward the short pass. And hence, the short gain. With a little more 
than six minutes to play, Giants running back Gary Brown, who had 
just 43 yards on 12 carries, was stopped on a third-and-inches, forcing 
the Giants to give up the football at their own 16-yard line. Almost 
three minutes later, the Giants again faced a third-and-short. Fassel 
called a fullback sneak to Charles Way, but Kanell and Way fumbled 
the exchange. Again, no gain. Fassel elected to give up the football 
again, forgoing the fourth down attempt at his own 10-yard line. The 
Giants got the football back with 1:52 to play, but never advanced 
past their own 44-yard line as Kanell continued to throw erratically. 
After the game, Fassel uncharacteristically refused to praise Kanell, 
who threw a number of passes behind his receivers. The coach, in fact, 
didn't seem to know what to say. ``It was a trap game,'' he said. 
``They hadn't won, they had guys out, and they were the better team 
today, no doubt.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>