<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981101.0171 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In his final barnstorming trip of the campaign year, President Clinton 
on Sunday invoked Speaker Newt Gingrich, Martin Luther King Jr. and 
Rosa Parks in an impassioned plea that was part of a full-scale drive 
by Democrats to spur turnout by black voters in the election on Tuesday. 
While Clinton's appearance at the predominantly black New Psalmist 
Baptist Church was the most high-profile, Republicans and Democrats 
alike fanned out at churches, picnics, party clubhouses and rallies 
around the United States, struggling in the final 48 hours to galvanize, 
if not electrify, an electorate lulled by a campaign season that still 
seems to be searching for a national theme. ``Your vote counts just 
as much as mine, just as much as Speaker Gingrich's,'' said Clinton 
in the latest move by his party to turn the speaker into an incentive 
for Democrats to vote. Halfway across the country in Green Bay, Wis., 
Gingrich sought to stir his party's faithful as well. At a rally outside 
the 49ers-Packers football game on Sunday afternoon, the speaker extolled 
the virtues of Rep. Mark Neumann, who has mounted a highly competitive 
challenge to oust Sen. Russell Feingold, D-Wis. ``This Tuesday's election 
is a choice between two teams,'' Gingrich declared. ``One that believes 
in higher taxes, bigger government and more power in Washington. The 
other believes in lower taxes, smaller government and more power in 
Wisconsin. You have a chance on Tuesday to dramatically change the 
direction of Wisconsin by sending Mark Neumann to the Senate.'' The 
highly charged advances to break though to voters come not only because 
the stakes are high in Tuesday's elections _ 34 Senate seats, 36 governorships 
and all 435 House seats are up for grabs _ but also because the latest 
polls show that many critical elections are too close to call. At 
least five Senate races and 10 contests for governor could easily 
come out either way, according to strategists in both parties. Some 
of the most hard-hitting, and often unsavory, appeals came not on 
the stump or from the interminable onslaught of television commercials 
but in massive telephone calling, leaflet drops and election-eve radio 
advertisements. These messages were below the political radar screen 
and, in many cases, were designed to sway voters while depriving a 
candidates' opponents of ammunition, or time, to fire back in the 
closing hours of the campaign. In Seattle, where Brian Baird, a Democrat, 
is locked in a tight race against Don Benton, a Republican, for an 
open seat, the National Republican Congressional Committee sent out 
a leaflet at the weekend with this warning in big bold letters: ``Oh 
My! Did you know that Brian Baird supports requiring our churches 
to perform same sex marriages?'' Baird campaign officials said Baird 
opposes same-sex marriage. But he does not support the Defense of 
Marriage Act, which withholds benefits in federal taxes, pensions 
and other areas to partners of homosexuals. The Democrats have not 
been timid either. In Missouri, the state Democratic Party has begun 
running a radio commercial with a bald appeal for blacks to vote: 
``When you don't vote, you let another church explode,'' the narrator 
says. ``When you don't vote, you allow another cross to burn. When 
you don't vote, you let another assault wound a brother or a sister. 
When you don't vote, you let the Republicans continue to cut school 
lunches and Head Start.'' The furious efforts to gain partisan advantage 
are coming not only from the candidates and the political parties 
but from outside groups that are pumping millions of dollars into 
get-out-the-vote drives. The Christian Coalition distributed an estimated 
35 million voter guides at churches on Sunday that are aimed at prodding 
religious conservatives to go to the polls. In a counter-offensive, 
the AFL-CIO was running massive phone banks around the country, in 
most cases imploring Democrats to vote. But even as campaigns went 
so far as to offer free rides to voters to get them to the polls, 
some also accused their opponents of trying to discourage people from 
voting. In a technique known as push polling, campaigns hire telemarketing 
firms to spread dirt about their opponents in the guise of a poll. 
These calls are usually very difficult to trace and often are detected 
too late to be rebutted. Clinton's trip here on Sunday was noteworthy 
because while his efforts on the fund-raising circuit never seemed 
to diminish, his campaign on the hustings has been limited this year, 
largely because he was distracted by the White House sex scandal. 
At the height of the embarrassing publicity about his affair with 
Monica Lewinsky, many Democrats, including Gov. Parris Glendening 
of Maryland, did not want the president to campaign with them. But 
one reason Clinton traveled to Baltimore is that Glendening is virtually 
tied in the polls with Ellen Sauerbrey, his Republican challenger, 
in what has shaped up as one of the most competitive races anywhere. 
Clinton, who was greeted by frenzied applause from thousands of parishioners, 
laced his message with Biblical references. ``There are only two places, 
only two, where we have fulfilled both the admonition of the Scripture 
and the promise of the founders that all of us are created equal,'' 
said Clinton, who was accompanied by Glendening and a host of other 
Maryland Democrats. ``One is when you come into your house of worship 
on Sunday and the other is when you show up at the ballot box.'' In 
a jibe at Ms. Sauerbrey at a rally on Halloween, Sen. Barbara Mikulski 
of Maryland also invoked Gingrich. But her message, saying the Republican 
was ``masquerading'' as a moderate, was even blunter than the president's: 
``When she takes off the mask, takes off the makeup, she's nothing 
but Newt Gingrich in high heels and an earring.'' The Sauerbrey campaign, 
hardly sitting still, unleashed a harsh commercial attacking Glendening's 
credibility. It closes with these words filling the screen (in red 
ink): ``People don't trust Parris Glendening.'' For those voters in 
Maryland who somehow missed the pitches on either side, there is another 
opportunity: Republicans and Democrats are calling people across the 
state with taped appeals from figures including Clinton and, on the 
other side, Bob Dole, the Republican presidential nominee in 1996. 
The often ferocious _ and sometimes creative _ efforts to spark the 
electorate come in part because so many races are so close. While 
most Republicans said they did not expert their party to capture the 
five additional seats in the Senate that would be needed for a 60-vote 
majority (the magic number to cut off Democratic filibusters), the 
contests in at least five states were viewed as totally up for grabs: 
New York, North Carolina, Kentucky, Nevada and Wisconsin. Besides 
Maryland, at least nine races for governor were also considered too 
close to call: Nevada, Hawaii, Georgia, South Carolina, Massachusetts, 
Minnesota, Iowa, Ohio and Rhode Island. Republicans now control 32 
of the governors' offices. And some of the most intense campaigning 
is in the competition for the House of Representatives, where Republicans 
hold only an 11-seat majority in the 435-member chamber. Most Republicans 
and Democrats are now forecasting a Republican pickup of fewer than 
a dozen seats. Still, after an election year that has been marked 
by the unpredictable, no strategist in either party could, with full 
confidence, forecast what might happen on Tuesday. No one knows the 
effect of a last minute, multimillion-dollar infusion of commercials 
by the Republican Party reminding voters of the Clinton scandal _ 
and counter-advertisements by the Democrats assailing their opponents 
as scandalmongers. It is also unclear how much Republican candidates 
will benefit from their party's lopsided financial advantage in the 
last days of the campaign. Political strategists were also watching 
this weekend for unexpected turns in the dynamics. In Illinois, for 
instance, analysts were debating a new poll suggesting that Sen. Carol 
Moseley-Braun, a Democrat who had for weeks been badly lagging in 
the polls, had actually pulled ahead of Peter Fitzgerald, a Republican. 
And even its author, Andrew Kohut, said he was baffled by a poll released 
Sunday by the Pew Research Center for the People and the Press which 
shows that likely voters were divided equally between Democrats and 
Republicans. In three previous surveys since August, Kohut's survey 
found that general support for Republican candidates was consistently 
greater than for Democrats. ``I'm a little rattled,'' Kohut said. 
``I was pretty confident of small Republican gains. But these results 
would suggest a Democrat seat gain which a couple of weeks ago was 
certainly inconceivable.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>