<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981101.0205 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In a day of old-style politicking, Rep. Charles Schumer campaigned 
in black, Jewish and Hispanic neighborhoods across New York City on 
Sunday, bringing in Vice President Al Gore in an attempt to rally 
support for Tuesday's election. Sen. Alfonse D'Amato went to Orthodox 
Jewish communities in Brooklyn, portraying himself as an underdog 
in the final weekend of the bruising race. D'Amato gave brief speeches 
Sunday at two rallies in Brooklyn before groups of voters _ conservative 
Jews in Borough Park and Williamsburg _ who have been a reliable and 
enthusiastic part of his political base. Both rallies drew fairly 
large crowds, but both were notable for their lack of obvious enthusiasm. 
Throughout the day, D'Amato, a Republican running for a fourth term, 
suggested that he was running behind Schumer, telling his supporters 
not to be discouraged by polls or pundits saying his campaign was 
in trouble. In truth, all public polls are showing that the race is 
effectively a tie. ``You know what you can say about those polls?,'' 
D'Amato said in Borough Park. ``We're going to win in spite of all 
the predictions. And we're going to win this. And I'll tell you this: 
I'm going to fight harder, the people have a right to know that when 
they send someone to the United States Senate or the Congress, they're 
going to be there fighting for them every day.'' Schumer, looking 
confident and bit ajitter with nervous energy, gave speeches at two 
black churches in Brooklyn that brought parishioners to their feet, 
held a news conference with prominent Jewish politicians outside a 
Manhattan delicatessen _ Ratner's _ that is a standard campaign stop 
for politicians, and addressed more 1,000 mostly Hispanic residents 
of the Bronx in events intended to energize the Democrats' most loyal 
constituencies. At each of his events, Schumer, a nine-term Democrat 
from Brooklyn, steered away from the attacks on D'Amato's integrity 
that have been at the heart of his campaign. Instead, he sought to 
deliver his most upbeat message in weeks, pledging to unify the state's 
diverse regions and communities and focusing on core Democratic themes: 
rebuilding schools, improving health insurance and protecting Social 
Security. ``We know that education is the key to the future and that 
is the same in Buffalo and in Brownsville, that is the same from one 
end of the state to the other,'' Schumer said in a raspy but forceful 
voice before 600 congregants during a rollicking early morning service 
at the St. Paul Community Baptist Church in Brooklyn. ``We are one 
state. We share the same concerns. We have the same hopes.'' But even 
as his final Sunday of campaigning was largely positive, Schumer continued 
to broadcast sharply negative commercials across the state that attack 
D'Amato's trustworthiness and ethics. Schumer's advisers said they 
are also running more positive spots recounting the congressman's 
record on cable stations around the state. With the race too close 
to call, both sides are deeply concerned about turning out their supporters 
on Election Day, and Sunday's events were intended to ignite some 
enthusiasm among their most loyal supporters. In 1992, exit polls 
showed that 86 percent of black voters, 70 percent of Hispanic voters 
and 59 percent of Jewish voters supported the Democratic candidate, 
Robert Abrams. Those groups represented between a quarter and a third 
of the entire electorate that year. But a key to D'Amato's ability 
to defeat Democratic candidates in a state where Democrats hold a 
3 to 2 edge over Republicans has been his ability to win consistently 
a large chunk of the Jewish vote _ particularly in Orthodox communities. 
As he has done on many Sundays this year, Schumer spent Sunday visiting 
two of Brooklyn's largest and best-known black churches, where he 
sounded a theme Democrats have used across the country: that Democrats 
try to unify the nation's diverse communities, while Republicans thrive 
on dividing them. Speaking before nearly 1,000 people at the New York 
Christian Life Center in Brownsville, Schumer accused D'Amato, though 
not by name, of pitting different communities against each other. 
``Some candidates, I won't mention any names, try to get ahead by 
dividing people,'' Schumer said, evoking laughter from the congregation. 
``It's them-us, them-us, them-us. I have always tried to unify people.'' 
From Brooklyn, Schumer crossed the Williamsburg Bridge to lower Manhattan, 
where he shared blintzes and a microphone at Ratner's Delicatessen 
with prominent Jewish politicians and described himself as a ``strong 
fighter'' for Jewish issues. At the event, Sen.Joseph Lieberman, a 
Democrat from Connecticut, described Schumer as a ``moderate Democrat'' 
who is pro-business and anti-crime. ``He is a Democrat who is in touch 
with, believes and expresses through his work mainstream American 
values,'' Lieberman said. Two hours later, Schumer addressed more 
than 1,000 placard-waving residents, most of them Hispanics, at a 
Democratic rally at the Edger Allen Poe Park in the Bronx. The event 
was headlined by the vice president, who, in throaty, preacher-like 
cadences sprinkled with Spanish phrases, accused D'Amato of ``walking 
with'' Republican conservatives like House Speaker Newt Gingrich in 
trying to decimate programs important to New Yorkers. Though Schumer's 
advisers contend that most New Yorkers are angry with congressional 
Republican leaders for bringing impeachment proceedings against President 
Clinton, they have stopped short of raising the issue in the campaign 
out of fears that it would energize D'Amato's core Republican supporters. 
But on Sunday, Gore raised the issue in a chant he has used before 
when stumping for Democratic candidates around the country. ``We say 
legislate, they say investigate,'' Gore said, causing the audience 
to break into loud applause. ``We say educate, they say interrogate.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>