<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981101.0153 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There is not much in their resumes to unite the leaders of the three-month-old 
rebellion in this huge, and hugely combustible, nation at Africa's 
heart. Some are academics, exiles or idealists with ties to the United 
States. Some are disaffected army commanders with their own ties to 
neighboring countries. Some, like Kin-Kiey Mulumba, a dapper rebel 
in a charcoal suit, served the enduring dictator, Mobutu Sese Seko, 
then fled the capital last year when a new leader, Laurent Kabila, 
rolled into power. ``I crossed the river in a canoe,'' Mulumba, 48, 
said, sounding pleased with himself. ``Since that day, I've been fighting 
Kabila. I think I was the first.'' Their only clear bond is a common 
goal: that Kabila, whom they accuse of becoming yet another dictator, 
must go. The question many Congolese _ as well as other nations watching 
nervously _ ask is whether this hodgepodge of men, with divergent 
histories and alliances, can make good on a promise that has rarely 
been delivered in post-colonial Africa: to establish the kind of representative 
democracy they claim to support. The question becomes especially sharp 
given that many of the rebels this time fought alongside Kabila last 
year. Whatever the answer, the rebels have set into motion a struggle 
that many experts say is widening into a major regional conflict as 
Congo's neighbors have taken sides and sent in troops since the rebellion 
ignited in August. Sunday, a delegation of U.S. officials _ led by 
Susan E. Rice, Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs _ 
left the capital of Kinshasa after two days of talks aimed at heading 
off what Ms. Rice recently warned could become ``Africa's first world 
war.'' It was not immediately clear if the visit produced any results. 
But her trip came after several weeks of intensifying action, most 
of it favoring the rebels, who now claim to control vast swaths of 
territory housing about 20 million of Congo's roughly 50 million people. 
Two weeks ago, they captured Kindu, a key garrison town for Kabila 
that helped firm their grip on eastern Congo. Then one of Kabila's 
closest allies, President Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe, sent in several 
thousand more of his own combat troops to fight the rebels. ``We are 
going east,'' Mugabe announced grandly as the rebels _ known as the 
Congolese Rally for Democracy _ appeared poised to move toward the 
diamond mines near Mbuji-Mayi. In addition to Zimbabwe, Angola, Namibia 
and Chad have officially sided with Kabila, with varying degrees of 
involvement. On the rebels' side, Rwanda and Uganda _ which directed 
the rebellion in 1996 and 1997 and helped propel Kabila to power _ 
are widely assumed to be playing a major role in the fighting, though 
each country has denied it. The United States has called for the withdrawal 
of all foreign troops in Congo, and Ms. Rice is trying to find terms 
for a cease-fire, even though Kabila has refused so far to speak with 
the rebels. ``She's very worried about Congo,'' said a U.S. official 
who spoke on the condition of anonymity. ``She's concerned that the 
conflict appears to be widening, that more and more people are getting 
involved.'' A nation that is potentially one of Africa's richest _ 
its soil runs deep with diamonds, gold, copper and cobalt _ Congo 
was ruled and wrecked for 32 years under Mobutu's dictatorship. Its 
politics are spectacularly complicated, in part because its borders 
are a gathering ground for rebels fighting to overthrow other governments, 
including those of Uganda, Rwanda, Angola and Sudan. So each of those 
countries has a strategic interest in Congo's rebellion. When skeptics 
both inside and outside of Congo talk about the rebels _ based in 
this former resort town beside Lake Kivu on the Rwandan border _ many 
argue that who they are is largely irrelevant. Critics claim the insurrection 
is actually being directed by Uganda and Rwanda, as it was last time, 
when the armies of those two countries moved into Congo, then known 
as Zaire, to secure their own borders. Kabila, in fact, has shored 
up some public support _ even here in the rebels' base _ by casting 
the uprising as an ``invasion'' by the Tutsi-led government of Rwanda, 
hated by many Congolese. But the rebels claim they are by no means 
puppets of their neighbors and say they are working slowly to build 
the people's trust. ``We are going to win because our cause is just,'' 
said the rebels' military commander, Jean-Pierre Ondekane, 36, who 
was a top military aide to Kabila. He said the Rwandans and the Ugandans 
were only interested in their own borders. This struggle, he said, 
is about overthrowing Kabila, who he said never delivered on his own 
promises of making Congo a democracy. ``We know that the decision 
to start a war was a grave one,'' said Ondekane, who shed his fatigues 
on a recent morning for a black Nike running suit and high-top sneakers. 
``But when people have been imprisoned in a dictatorship, they can 
decide to make the supreme sacrifice with their lives.'' So far the 
rebels have painted their vision largely in general terms, saying 
they want free elections, educational reform and a government that 
rules Congo's diverse regional and ethnic groups with fairer representation. 
``This is something everybody wanted to have happened'' after Kabila 
first came to power, said Jacques Depelchin, 56, one of the top rebel 
leaders and a professor of African history who has taught at the University 
of California at Berkeley. But most rebellions promise much the same 
thing, and the Congolese, as well as outside observers including American 
officials, are looking for clues to what these rebels stand for and 
who, precisely, they are. But that is proving difficult: It is unclear 
exactly who is in charge of what they call their ``collective'' leadership. 
The official head is Ernest Wamba dia Wamba, a 56-year-old academic 
who went to college in Michigan and whose wife still has relatives 
in Detroit. Wamba, who taught for many years in Tanzania, had been 
imprisoned twice by Mobutu. A question mark hovers over Wamba's influence: 
Some observers, both in and outside of the rebellion, say that his 
role as president is largely ceremonial. But last week he visited 
Zambia and South Africa for talks with potential mediators in the 
conflict. Other prominent members include: Arthur Z'Ahidi Ngoma, a 
former UNESCO official who had been an outspoken Mobutu opponent; 
Bizima Karaha, Kabila's former foreign minister who was trained as 
a doctor in South Africa; and Lunda Bululu, a former prime minister 
under Mobutu who later joined the opposition. In an interview here 
at Mobutu's former summer villa, Bululu laid down two ways people 
could judge the rebellion: how the rebels act in the territory they 
control and the record of their leaders. ``We have people who have 
a reputation for keeping their promises,'' he said. Despite Bululu's 
pledge of good behavior, aid agencies and local people report kidnappings 
by rebel troops around Goma, and the issue of their behavior seems 
to expose at least a small fissure in what has been a united public 
front in the rebel leadership. Depelchin acknowledged that there had 
been cases of soldiers taking ``justice into their own hands.'' He 
asserted that the instances were few, but stemmed from a larger issue: 
a gap between the military and the political wings. The military largely 
does what the politicians say, he said, ``but it's one thing to say, 
and it's another thing to do. There is no need to hide it is an uphill 
battle.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>