<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981101.0177 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Everything hurts. My head is throbbing, my stomach is unsettled. My 
knees are swollen. I'm a little dizzy. And my thigh muscles? I don't 
know when I'll be climbing stairs again. In other words, I feel terrific. 
The euphoria of completing my first marathon, and doing it in New 
York, is helping to push the pain aside. After having told myself 
``Next year'' again and again, next year finally arrived Sunday. Friends 
who have run marathons had been telling me for weeks what to expect. 
I have read about the spectators, the neighborhoods, the wall of people 
when the runners come off the Queensboro Bridge, the wall of pain 
after the Madison Avenue Bridge. But nothing truly prepared me for 
the emotions of the day, the triumphant highs and the demoralizing 
lows. I had seen the race before on TV and in person, but not until 
Sunday did I fully appreciate the sense of fun and celebration, the 
spectacle that is uniquely New York. The beginning of the day seems 
like ages ago. I woke up a little before 6 a.m. and took the subway 
to the New York Public Library's main branch, where buses were shuttling 
runners to Staten Island. At the library, a line of thousands stretched 
along 42nd Street from Fifth Avenue to Avenue of the Americas and 
then down to 41st Street. The bus ride was smooth and quick _ that 
is, until we approached the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge. There we crept 
along for at least half an hour (with no restroom on the bus!) until 
we reached the athletes' village at Fort Wadsworth. The perfect weather 
made the wait for the race tolerable _ so did competitors dressed 
as the Blues Brothers, Superman and a clown. The nervous energy and 
the smell of Ben-Gay ointment brought back memories of giant high 
school track meets. Finally, competitors lined up, threw their sweats 
into the trees and every which way, and the race began. The opening 
miles were both frustrating and fun. They were frustrating because, 
having received a number that began with an X, I started near the 
back of the pack. I had plans of running eight-minute miles or faster, 
but I didn't reach Mile 1 for 17 minutes, and Mile 3 for 33 minutes. 
I felt like a running back, darting around other runners, accelerating 
and slowing, trying to find daylight. But I'm also glad I started 
back there. The atmosphere was light and fun rather than competitive. 
Runners hooted and hollered right along with the spectators. I wore 
a permanent grin the first half of the race, high-fiving children 
along the course and enjoying the live music. I especially enjoyed 
Lafayette Avenue in Brooklyn, where an entire block of people was 
moving to the song ``Funky Town'' while screaming in support. On the 
next block, the Bishop Loughlin High School band had runners _ competitors 
_ dancing during a marathon. I was entranced by the character of the 
neighborhoods we raced through: Bay Ridge, Sunset Park, Bedford-Stuyvesant, 
Williamsburg, Greenpoint. The look of the crowds changed every few 
blocks, but the good will never ended. I had ``Bri'' marked on my 
shirt, and I drew a little energy each time someone yelled, ``Come 
on, Bri!'' Actually, most shouted ``Let's go, Brie,'' as in cheese, 
but that was nice, too. Gradually, I found room to pick up the pace, 
reaching the halfway point on the Pulaski Bridge in 1 hour 57 minutes. 
But it wasn't until I exited the Queensboro Bridge and stepped onto 
First Avenue, after Mile 16, that there was enough room to reach a 
full, consistent stride. The crowd on First Avenue was thick and loud, 
but I stopped paying attention to the surroundings and instead worried 
about my running. No more grinning, no more high-fives. I tried to 
do the math. Could I run 3:30, my goal, after reaching the halfway 
point at a 3:54 pace? Not likely, but I was going to try. Up First 
Avenue, into the Bronx, back into Manhattan and down into Central 
Park, I ran at a quick, steady clip. Maybe I could do it, after all. 
But then came Mile 25. My home turf, Central Park, where I run several 
times a week, didn't seem so familiar. My quadriceps muscles wanted 
to quit, and my joints were aching. Ah, so this is the wall. The last 
mile, where most runners seem to have recovered a bit, was unpleasant. 
I struggled through in 3:34:55, a few minutes slower than my goal. 
The walk through the finish chute was agonizing. The volunteers were 
perfect, though, as they had been all day, steering us wobbly runners 
straight. But at this point, merely walking was a challenge. I was 
hurting and I wanted to lay down. Minutes later, though, as I began 
to assess the entire experience, I forgot about the pain, and that 
grin I had back in Brooklyn returned to my face. I finished the marathon, 
I thought. Now I'm hooked. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>