<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981101.0114 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After 26 miles of distance running accelerated into a grimacing sprint 
to the finish Sunday, John Kagwe of Kenya repeated as champion of 
the New York City Marathon. And for that, he can thank the British 
Royal Family. At the 1908 Summer Olympics in London, the distance 
of the marathon was randomly extended to 26 miles 385 yards, so that 
the race would finish in front of the Royal Box of Queen Alexandra. 
Ninety years later, Kagwe of Kenya needed every one of those extra 
yards to drop his countryman Joseph Chebet by just three seconds, 
winning in 2 hours 8 minutes 45 seconds. It was the second-closest 
finish in the 29 years of the New York City Marathon, which does not 
produce fast times because of its bridges and hills but which continues 
to provide races of spectacular competitiveness. In the 23rd mile, 
the lead pack was whittled from nine runners to three _ Kagwe, Chebet 
and Zebedayo Bayo of Tanzania. As the race moved along Central Park 
South in the 25th mile, Chebet made a move and Bayo could not hold 
on. Bayo's personal best in the marathon is a full three minutes' 
slower than Kagwe's, and he would have to settle for third in 2:08:51. 
That left the two Kenyans to decide the race, just as they had done 
a year ago. Kagwe easily covered Chebet's move with about a half mile 
remaining, his stride smooth, his arms carried loose and high, his 
face unworried. He had been running 800-meter repeats in recent weeks 
and had confidence in his kick. ``I knew I was strong,'' Kagwe said. 
``When he passed, I didn't get distressed. I knew I could keep up 
with his speed.'' In 1997, Kagwe dropped Chebet in the hills of Central 
Park, more than two miles from the finish. Sunday, they were still 
running shoulder to shoulder with 600 yards remaining, when Kagwe 
surged and built a small lead as the race turned back into the park 
at Columbus Circle. Arms chopping furiously, as if slapping the air, 
his teeth bared in grinding exertion, Kagwe endured to hold on. But 
on and on they sprinted, and Chebet would not concede more than a 
couple of strides. Still, he knew he was in trouble. ``I tried to 
kick, but I knew I wasn't going to win,'' Chebet said. Finally, with 
about 200 yards remaining, as the course makes one final, draining 
rise toward the finish, Kagwe began to draw away. Chebet could not 
catch him and defeat came into his face. He would finish three seconds 
behind in 2:08:48. The only closer New York race occurred in 1994, 
when German Silva of Mexico made a wrong turn into Central Park and 
recovered to defeat his countryman Benjamin Paredes by two seconds. 
Second-place finishes have become an exasperating regularity for Chebet, 
who was also outsprinted in the final 200 meters by Moses Tanui of 
Kenya last April at the Boston Marathon. ``Sometimes, it's hard,'' 
Chebet said. ``I must sit down with my coach and plan something better.'' 
The top American, Alfredo Vigueras of Woodland, Calif., finished 18th 
in 2:16:14. The top local runner was Tesfaye Bekele, an Ethiopian 
who lives in Harlem and finished 16th in 2:15:23. On a day when Kenyans 
took six of the top 10 places, Kagwe did not threaten his personal 
best of 2:08:12, run last year in New York when he had to stop twice 
to tie his shoelaces. But he ran a tactically brilliant race and demonstrated 
the resourcefulness of a great marathoner, running the 25th mile in 
a searing 4:44 and the final 1.2 miles in 5:52. His victory was worth 
$85,000 in prize and bonus money. ``Last year, a few guys were too 
aggressive and I let them lead the pace,'' said the 29-year-old Kagwe. 
``This year, they were all depending on me, seeing what I would do. 
I tried to push the pace, but they didn't go with me. So I initiated 
another plan, not to break in the last four miles, but to break in 
the last 800 meters.'' Kagwe made his first move in the 13th mile 
and crossed the halfway point in first place in 1:04:19. It was about 
a minute slower than the searing pace of 1997, and it was clear that 
Kagwe was in a comfortable position with the temperature in the 50s, 
perfect for marathoning. He surged again, reeling off the 17th mile 
in 4:44. During the 18th mile, the world champion Anton Abel of Spain 
dropped out, and Kagwe would not have to worry about Abel's ferocious 
kick at the finish. At 20 miles, the race also lost Josia Thugwane, 
the 1996 Olympic champion from South Africa, who left the course. 
``When you get someone, get them hard,'' Kagwe said. When Kagwe, Chebet 
and Bayo broke away just before the hills of Central Park, Silva, 
the two-time champion, thought he would be able to catch them. He 
was wrong, and he settled for fourth in 2:10:24. Kagwe thus became 
the first repeat winner since Silva in 1994 and 1995. ``He's a great 
runner,'' Kagwe said of Chebet. ``He gave me the hardest challenge 
I've ever had in my life.'' A member of the Kikuyu tribe, Kagwe played 
soccer until he was 18, when he left the team game for the solitude 
of distance running. He came to the United States in 1994 to run the 
Boston Marathon and remained, moving eventually to the suburbs of 
Philadelphia where he could train in the rolling hills of Valley Forge 
Park. His training was interrupted in August by a trip home to Kenya 
for personal business, and hot, humid weather left him with unimpressive 
preparatory races. Humble and reserved, Kagwe said on Friday that 
he was not particularly confident in his chances. ``I tried not to 
say I was confident, because the field was tough and I didn't train 
with those people,'' Kagwe said. ``You don't expect to win, you expect 
to give a race and that's what I did.'' Two days before the race, 
his wife, Beatrice, had called from Kenya, saying she had by chance 
pulled from a drawer a t-shirt from the New York City Marathon. It 
seemed a good omen, Kagwe said. ``I felt like something was going 
to go my way,'' Kagwe said. He nimbly avoided a race official who 
strayed onto the course in Central Park (``I was wondering what he 
was doing''), and he tied his shoelaces so tight ``that they could 
not be untied unless someone tried hard.'' When no one followed his 
earlier surges, he changed his strategy and decided to outkick any 
challenger to the finish. ``Everyone was following and I was using 
a lot of energy for them, so I decided to drop back,'' Kagwe said. 
``When we made the last turn into the park, I knew I should give everything 
and try to outsprint anybody.'' In the end, he left everyone in his 
wake. Anton, the world champion. Thugwane, the Olympic champion. Chebet, 
the perennial nemesis. ``Last year, there was an article that said 
John's victory was fluke,'' said Lisa Buster, who is Kagwe's manager. 
``He really wanted to win again to show that was not a fluke. No one 
should think he did it by accident.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>