<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981101.0230 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Peter Vallone, the Democratic candidate for governor, debated what 
he called ``an empty chair'' Sunday, participating in a televised 
forum without his Republican opponent, Gov. George Pataki, who skipped 
the event and stumped upstate. The governor, who spoke to reporters 
at a Republican Party rally in Albany, said he had bypassed Sunday's 
face-off on WNBC-TV with Vallone, as well as other proposed debates, 
because the Democratic candidate ``just never stopped with the personal 
attacks.'' In fact, Vallone has said very little during this campaign 
that could be construed as personal, but he has been vigorous in attacking 
Pataki's policies. The governor has simply pursued a traditional front-runner's 
strategy of refusing to meet his opponent in head-to-head debate, 
while insisting that he would like to. And Pataki himself was under 
fire Sunday for a new set of attack advertisements. The ads are aimed 
not at Vallone, whom polls show to be trailing by a 2-1 margin, but 
at a third-party candidate _ B. Thomas Golisano of the Independent 
Party _ whom polls show to be draining votes from Pataki. The ads 
accuse Golisano of favoring legalized drugs and prostitution. Unable 
to negotiate a debate between the two major party candidates in the 
governor's race, WNBC-TV's Gabe Pressman instead interviewed Vallone 
for 30 minutes, often being as combative in his questioning as the 
governor himself might have been. Vallone, speaker of the City Council, 
used much of the time to lash out at Pataki for not appearing, repeatedly 
gesturing to the unoccupied seat next to him and asking, ``What is 
he afraid of?'' The speaker accused the governor of ignoring the issue 
of campaign finance reform, cutting funds for education and child 
care, vetoing a bill that would have given preferences to New York 
state firms competing for state business, and raising tuition at the 
State University of New York. Referring to the fact that Pataki has 
said that he speaks for honorariums partly because the cost of college 
for his children will be so prohibitive, Vallone said, ``If George 
Pataki can't afford tuition and he makes $130,000 and has free room 
and board and a free mansion to live in, what's happening to the rest 
of the middle class? Why did he raise tuition by 30 percent?'' He 
also criticized the governor for trying to divide the state, a reference 
to Pataki's remark on Saturday about the Democratic statewide ticket 
that ``They're all from New York City.'' But the Republican governor, 
as has been his strategy throughout this most low-key of campaigns, 
ignored the opposition and skirted the media, for the most part, as 
he spoke at campaign rallies in Rochester, Elmira and Albany. At a 
rally in a cavernous hangar at the Albany International Airport, 300 
cheering, stomping supporters _ a good number of them political appointees 
to state jobs, and their families _ gave Pataki a rock star's welcome. 
``Is New York state not a better place than it was four years ago?'' 
he asked, to a thunderous response. ``You give us the opportunity 
to lead this state into the 21st century, and in 1999 and 2000 and 
2001 and 2002, New York will lead the nation in cutting taxes every 
one of those years,'' he said at the rally, which included Sen. Alfonse 
D'Amato, Attorney General Dennis Vacco and a raft of other Republican 
candidates. The governor took credit for the state's economic expansion, 
the dropping crime rate and declining welfare rolls, as well as for 
his tax cuts. As if the two men were conducting a virtual debate, 
Vallone repeatedly accused the governor of taking credit for successes 
that were not his. ``He is responsible for all these things that have 
happened, including Mark McGwire's 70th home run, whatever has happened, 
the rain comes, the sun shines, it's all because George Pataki's in 
office,'' Vallone said. ``But it's all orchestrated, folks, it's all 
a paid commercial.'' Vallone seemed so consumed by his absent opponent 
that he sometimes missed opportunities to define himself and his policy 
positions. Asked about his Quality First Health Care plan, a proposal 
which would provide health care to all New Yorkers, Vallone began 
by saying, ``Wouldn't it be wonderful if Pataki were sitting here, 
and I could say, governor, do you understand that there are 3 million 
New Yorkers who are working right now who can't afford health insurance?'' 
He barely explained how the plan would work. Vallone was in a car 
accident on Friday in the Rockaways, and suffered bruises on his neck 
and back. Sunday he wore an electrical device, with nodes attached 
to his neck and back, by which he can stimulate areas that feel pain. 
Pressman asked him how he was feeling, and Vallone jested, ``Well, 
if the election was as far apart as they thought, they never would 
have tried to kill me.'' Vallone noted that the accident occurred 
when a media van, driven by a freelance photographer, slammed into 
his car after it had stopped at a red light. The Democratic candidate, 
whose campaign has sometimes complained about media coverage, commented 
wryly, ``You could say that maybe I've been rear-ended a little bit 
too often by the media in this campaign.'' Golisano, the Independence 
Party candidate who is running a distant third in the polls, held 
a press conference in Albany, shortly before Pataki's rally. He angrily 
protested the governor's new television advertisement. The ad, Republican 
strategists say, is aimed primarily at depressing the Independence 
Party line vote because the party's nominee for senate is Rep. Charles 
Schumer, the Democrat trying to unseat D'Amato. Speaking of his four 
grandchildren, Golisano said: ``Tonight they're going to be watching 
television and they're going to see an ad saying their grandfather 
wants to legalize drugs and prostitution.'' Golisano, who is spending 
up to $20 million of his own money on his race, has said repeatedly 
that he does not think the war on drugs is working, and that he does 
not believe people should routinely be jailed for low-level possession 
charges. ``The punishment doesn't fit the crime,'' he said. He conceded 
that one of the ideas he has spoken of as being worthy of consideration 
is making drugs available to addicts under a doctor's supervision. 
As for prostitution, he insisted that he had never advocated legalization, 
but rather has said it should somehow be more closely controlled to 
prevent the spread of the AIDS virus. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>