<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981101.0149 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Almost out of thin air and certainly right out of the American marathoners' 
glory days, Joan Benoit Samuelson appeared at the finish line early 
Sunday afternoon in Central Park, a cramping inspiration to the aging 
athlete, and graying soccer moms. ``The first I heard of her running 
is now,'' said Allan Steinfeld, the New York Marathon director, smiling 
as if, by chance, he'd run into an old friend on a mobbed Manhattan 
street. Not only did Samuelson run, but she finished, and not only 
did she finish, but she ran 12th, ahead of Anne Marie Lauck, the 29-year-old 
New Jerseyan who was 10th in the 1996 Atlanta Olympics. That cut to 
the heart of why Samuelson left her husband and two children back 
in Freeport, Me., even missing Saturday's soccer tournament for a 
marathon she once ``swore up and down'' she would never run again. 
She wanted the mandatory sub-2-hour-50-minute Olympic trials qualifying 
time. In the year 2000, when she will be 43 years old and 16 years 
removed from her 1984 gold medal in Los Angeles, she wishes to chase 
another 26.2-mile dream. At the finish in 2:41.06, where not even 
Steinfeld expected her, Samuelson calmly slowed to a walk, hands on 
hips. She did not have to check her watch to know she had the time 
she'd come for. She headed straight for a massage table in the elite 
runners' area, the rehabilitative reward she had proved to herself 
she still deserved. The Olympic trials for Sydney are a long way off, 
but the tribulations of running New York's grueling course demanded 
immediate care. On her stomach, fumbling with the wrapper of a miniature 
candy bar, Samuelson asked the volunteer trainer, ``Do you feel it?'' 
The trainer, working on her right calf muscle, located the throbbing 
spot. ``It feels like a piano string,'' she said. Another runner named 
Gillian Horovitz walked slowly up to the table in one of those shiny 
post-marathon wraps and greeted Samuelson with a warm smile. Horovitz, 
43, had managed a pretty fair performance herself, 19th place. She 
said even she had had no idea her friend of 20 years was running until 
the elite runners gathered on the Staten Island side of the Verrazano-Narrows 
Bridge. Samuelson looked up at Horovitz and said: ``I made it without 
stopping. How about that?'' Better yet, she made it without being 
knocked over by a clumsy if well-intentioned volunteer. These things 
happen in marathons, especially in crowded, chaotic streets like New 
York's. On a park road Sunday, a man with his back turned came dangerously 
close to wiping out all three men's leaders late in the race. Samuelson 
said she, too, narrowly avoided a collision with another young volunteer 
at about the 10-kilometer mark. ``His back was turned,'' she said. 
``I said, `Not this time.' '' He zigged. She zagged, unlike 10 years 
ago, when a zealous man dispensing water took Samuelson down in a 
frightening spill. She got up to finish third but three years later, 
in her last marathon here, there came another unfortunate development, 
extreme shortness of breath past the finish line. Whether it was exhaustion 
or panic or both, flashes of a tragically shortened motherhood scared 
her out of New York, until recent plans to run a couple of other less-daunting 
marathons fizzled. Suddenly, hesitatingly, Samuelson was making unannounced 
plans to try New York. ``I've never dropped out of a race but I didn't 
know if I could go the distance,'' she said. ``I wanted to get the 
qualifying out the way but I knew I was having trouble with cramping 
from my hip down. It was haunting me. I was damned if I did and damned 
if I didn't.'' You do not have to be 41, well past your athletic prime, 
to finish a marathon in distress, as evidenced Sunday by the women's 
world record holder, Tegla Loroupe. In a year when almost every sport 
seems to have been dominated by superbly conditioned athletes on the 
far side of the hill, Joan Benoit Samuelson ran pain-free and proud 
Sunday for 22 miles, and a few miles from the park, found herself 
10th. ``I was getting greedy there,'' she told Horovitz. ``Then I 
was humbled.'' She was talking about the cramps more than the competition. 
She still managed to beat every American woman except Libbie Hickman, 
who was sixth. ``These kids are barely 30,'' she said, suggesting 
that seasoning is all they may need. The unavoidable reality is that 
no American woman has since come close to what Samuelson did in Los 
Angeles, when she was Joan Benoit, when she took on the great Norwegians, 
Grete Waitz and Ingrid Kristiansen, and defeated both. That was a 
long time ago, not likely to happen again. But Sunday was a new day, 
time to prove you not have to be under 30 to make a splash, to make 
enough news to phone home with. Samuelson's daughter, 11-year-old 
Abby, was first to hear that her mother had accomplished her goal, 
then Andrew, who is 8. She told them her place and time, the way they 
had reported their soccer scores to her on Saturday night. She pressed 
the cellular phone to her ear, and told her children she would catch 
an evening plane to Boston, and would be home later that night. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>