<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981101.0187 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The telecommunications industry is expressing curiosity and skepticism 
about a little-known San Diego start-up company that says it is ready 
to market a technology that significantly increases the amount of 
data that can be sent over fiber optic cables. The company, Silk Road 
Inc., plans a demonstration of the technology in New York on Tuesday 
in which it will transmit 144 uncompressed television signals over 
100 kilometers, or 62 miles, of cable using a single laser beam. In 
publicizing the demonstration, Silk Road said that such ``bandwidth,'' 
the term used to express a system's data-carrying capacity, far surpassed 
the capability of today's commercial fiber optic networks. While that 
is true, a number of telecommunications-industry experts expressed 
doubt about the company's ability to quickly transform a controlled 
demonstration into a viable commercial product. Cable capacity under 
laboratory conditions, they noted, is not the same as bandwidth in 
real-world networks. ``We get a large number of contacts from ambitious 
companies with supposedly fantastic solutions,'' said Ted Darcie, 
head of AT&AMP;T Laboratories' optical network research group. ``The 
real questions are not demonstrating a high-performance link in the 
lab, but getting it commercialized to the extent it's reliable and 
compatible.'' Silk Road said it planned to introduce commercial products 
in the first quarter of 1999. The bandwidth to be demonstrated on 
Tuesday will be about 93 billion bits of information _ the equivalent 
of 77,500 copies of ``Moby Dick'' _ in one second, the company said. 
Several experts said that even if the technology works as promised, 
it would not significantly outstrip development progress reported 
by current industry leaders of fiber optic network equipment like 
Lucent Technologies and Ciena. But Silk Road executives said their 
engineers had achieved even better results in the company's laboratory, 
transmitting up to 200 gigabits a second over a range of 200 miles. 
A gigabit is a billion bits of data. A key feature that differentiates 
Silk Road's technology from that of competitors, the company said, 
is its ability to send that volume of data over long distances without 
having to either repeat or amplify the signal along the way. Silk 
Road executives also said it was possible to gain even more impressive 
bandwidth improvements using a new technology for carrying information 
by laser light, which they refer to as ``refractive synchronization'' 
communication. The company received a patent on the technology last 
month and has applied for other patents. If true, the enormous bandwidth 
it is promising would represent a significant advance in the ability 
of fiber optic networks to carry data like digital voice and video 
signals and the packets of information that make up the Internet. 
The technology is also well suited to increasing the channel capacity 
of cable television systems, as well as to delivering the extra bandwidth 
needed for digital television, Silk Road executives said. Telecommunications-industry 
researchers and executives expressed skepticism that a company and 
technology they had never heard of could deliver such remarkable performance 
to a world where the appetite for bandwidth keeps growing. ``I wait 
with anticipation and excitement for such a technology to prove itself 
in the commercial market,'' Darcie of AT&AMP;T Laboratories said. 
He added that although the performance Silk Road plans to demonstrate 
is impressive, it is about on par with the most advanced results in 
top research laboratories. Earlier this year, an NTT researcher in 
Japan demonstrated the ability to transmit 640 gigabits a second over 
a distance of 60 kilometers, or 37.2 miles, using a single beam of 
laser light. Lucent executives said they were now working to deploy 
a fiber optic networking technology for AT&AMP;T known as dense wave 
division multiplexing, which they said would carry 400 gigabits a 
second over fiber optic cables. That approach, which has been pioneered 
by companies like Ciena and Northern Telecom in addition to Lucent, 
uses a number of separate laser beams tuned to different frequencies 
_ colors in this case _ to expand bandwidth. In the face of industry 
skepticism, Silk Road executives defended their technology on Friday 
as ``hard-core optical physics.'' ``Einstein would have put his stamp 
of approval on everything we've done,'' said Robert Freeman, Silk 
Road's vice president for operations. The company's technology, Freeman 
said, embeds information on a single laser beam by using a device 
known as an electro-optical modulator. He expressed doubt that claims 
on behalf of dense-wave technology would be matched by installed performance. 
Silk Road has discussed its technology with a number of telecommunications 
carriers, he said, but was not ready to announce products or identify 
customers. The company was founded by James Palmer, a chemist the 
company identifies as the former chief optical scientist for the Strategic 
Defense Initiative, or ``Star Wars.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>