<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981101.0091 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In a protest by Internet users that is gaining popularity in Europe, 
thousands of people and hundreds of World Wide Web site operators 
waged a one-day ``boycott'' Sunday over high telephone and Internet 
access charges against Germany's dominant telephone company. Though 
the protest posed no financial threat to the company, Deutsche Telekom, 
the protesters nevertheless generated a torrent of publicity that 
has generally put the company in an unpopular light. In what might 
or might not have been a coincidence, Deutsche Telekom announced last 
week that it would soon introduce new price cuts for Internet users 
and ordinary phone service. The protest could signal a new trend in 
Europe, where many telephone companies charge by the minute for both 
local telephone calls and Internet access. Online consumers in Spain 
staged a similar protest in September against Telefonica. Rather than 
ignore the complaints, the company opened talks with Internet user 
groups and agreed to cut several key rates. Swiss groups are trying 
to organize a protest as well. In both Germany and Spain, boycott 
organizers urged Internet users to stay off line for one day. Companies 
and people that maintain sites on the Web have been urged to shut 
down their normal offerings and put up ``strike'' banners in their 
place. At issue in Germany are the Deutsche Telekom fees for Internet 
access and for local calls to its access site. German customers pay 
$1.10 to $2.90 an hour for local telephone service on top of Internet 
access fees that run about $2 an hour. Heavy Internet users can easily 
run up telephone bills exceeding $100 a month. By contrast, American 
customers usually pay a flat monthly rate of less than $25 for local 
phone calls and can obtain basic Internet access for about $20 a month. 
It was not clear how many people had participated in the boycott Sunday, 
but support for the idea spread with astonishing speed after it was 
first proposed five weeks ago by Thomas von Treichel, a 20-year-old 
college student. ``A company cannot survive economically if it places 
itself against the customers,'' said von Treichel, who is studying 
computer systems and has been running his campaign from the basement 
of his parents' house in Karben, a suburb of Frankfurt. Von Treichel 
heads up a small Internet club called Dark Breed. Sending out e-mail 
messages proposing the protest in late September, he quickly attracted 
support from thousands of people across Germany and from several companies. 
His most active supporter is Serico Internet Services, a Berlin company 
that provides Internet access and has complained that high telephone 
charges are keeping customers away. By Friday, von Treichel and his 
colleagues said they had received 12,000 messages of support from 
individuals, and hundreds of organizations had pledged to shut down 
their home pages on Sunday. One of the most active promoters has been 
a prominent German publisher of computer magazines, Heinz Heise GmbH. 
Spiegel Online, the Internet site operated by the weekly news magazine 
Der Spiegel, is not participating in the strike but has publicly expressed 
its ``sympathy'' for it. German newspapers, television and radio shows 
also have reported heavily on the campaign. Internet use is growing 
rapidly across Europe, but surveys indicate that that the growth in 
countries like Germany, with comparatively high telephone rates, is 
slower than the growth in the United States. About 9 percent of Germans 
use the Internet frequently, compared with 20 percent to 30 percent 
of Americans. In Finland, which has had local telephone competition 
for several years and local rates are lower, more than 30 percent 
of the population uses the Internet. Hans Ehnert, a spokesman for 
Deutsche Telekom, said the company's prices were in line with those 
in many other countries and that they would continue to decline. But 
he acknowledged that local telephone prices were considerably higher 
than the flat rates available in the United States. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>