<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981101.0260 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Peter Griffin, who had such a winning way with numbers that he unlocked 
the mathematics of blackjack and became a cult figure to a generation 
of casino card counters, died on Oct. 18 at a hospital near his home 
in Sacramento, Calif. Griffin, who wrote the authoritative ``Theory 
of Blackjack,'' was 61 and had taught algebra and a good deal else 
as a professor of mathematics at the California State University there. 
Friends said the cause was prostate cancer. To say that Griffin was 
a consummate mathematician would hardly do justice to a man who led 
a life of such meticulous precision that fellow faculty members could 
set their watches by the times he got his mail, arrived at his office 
or started home on his bicycle, as he did even when he lived 13 miles 
from campus. A creature of calculated habit, he not only jumped rope 
at the same time every day but always with the same rope, one he had 
found on the street years before. Griffin, a native of New Jersey, 
grew up in Williamsport, Pa., Chicago and Portland, Ore., graduated 
from Portland State University and received a master's from the University 
of California at Davis. Since one of his grandfathers had been a prominent 
mathematician at Reed College, and his father was an actuary who ended 
up running an insurance company, the source of Griffin's mathematical 
aptitude was obvious. It is a tribute to Griffin's standing as a mathematical 
giant of blackjack, or 21, as the game is also known, that his book 
exploring and explaining the probabilities of every conceivable situation 
in the game was not published until 1979, 17 years after Dr. Edward 
Thorp's ``Beat the Dealer'' had presumably exhausted the subject, 
codifying the basic strategy and establishing that players could gain 
an actual statistical edge over the house by keeping track of cards 
as they were played and betting big when the remaining deck was rich 
in 10s and face cards. Griffin did not even play blackjack until January 
1970, when, to gain practical experience for a proposed course on 
gambling mathematics, he paid a visit to Nevada and promptly got his 
clock cleaned. Like Thorp, who had had a similar experience in 1956, 
Griffin vowed revenge on the casinos. Thorp's book had created a gambling 
revolution, selling more than 700,000 copies and transforming blackjack 
from a sleepy diversion for dice players' wives into a high-roller's 
favorite that now typically accounts for nearly half of casino table-game 
revenues. Griffin's book extending and illuminating Thorp's findings 
had a more specialized appeal, selling fewer than 50,000 copies, and 
transforming mainly himself. The depth of his mathematical analysis, 
the clarity with which he provided step-by-step explanations of complex 
calculations, and the book's humor delighted card sharks and mathematicians 
alike, making Griffin a highly popular figure among blackjack aficionados 
and opening up new vistas for him as a well-traveled visiting expert 
at casinos and gambling conferences around the world. A sequel of 
sorts, ``Extra Stuff: Gambling Ramblings,'' was published in 1991 
by Huntington Press, which is issuing the sixth edition of ``The Theory 
of Blackjack'' next month. A man of self-deprecating humor, Griffin 
could deftly steer virtually any conversation to mathematics but never 
lorded it over those who found it difficult to understand why, say, 
in any random group of 35 people the odds are overwhelming that at 
least two will have the same birthday. Even accomplished card counters 
tended to gasp when Griffin demonstrated his own card-counting skills, 
keeping six separate running tallies in his head rather than the single 
high-low counts that most card counters can handle. For all that, 
he found blackjack too boring to play for long stretches, as profitable 
card counting requires, and was resigned to never making a fortune 
at it. But then the man whose idea of an author's photograph was to 
pose sitting on an elephant, had little need of a fortune to keep 
his spirits up. If all else failed, there would always be another 
math problem to keep him chuckling. Griffin is survived by his wife, 
Lydia; and a brother, Alan, and a sister, Barbara Dann, both of Salem, 
Ore. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>