<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981101.0137 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Three years after the assassination of Yitzhak Rabin, Israel held 
its first nationwide memorial for the former prime minister on Sunday, 
signaling a concerted effort to transform him from a partisan hero 
into a figure of consensus _ a national symbol of peace. Schoolchildren 
wore white as they do on Holocaust Remembrance Day. Flags flew at 
half-staff. Radio stations played mournful music. On order from the 
Education Ministry, which is controlled by the right-wing National 
Religious Party, all schools taught Rabin's biography as the history 
lesson of the day. And politicians of all stripes gathered by his 
grave in the military cemetery at Mount Herzl in Jerusalem, broadening 
the mourning that has been the domain only of centrists and leftists 
_ the advocates of peace with the Palestinians _ until this year. 
Still, as Israelis vented their feelings in discussion groups around 
the country, it seemed clear that the trauma of the assassination 
remains at least partly undigested and unresolved as is the fate of 
the peace accord that Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu signed. Even 
on Sunday, the conflict was expressed not only in lofty debates about 
the importance of the act of remembering in Jewish history but, right 
at Rabin's graveside, in partisanship and petty political wrangling. 
``Our society has grown neither more tolerant, nor less violent or 
more politically mature as a result of the infamous, cataclysmic murder 
and everything that took place in its aftermath,'' David Weinberg, 
a spokesman for the university where Rabin's assassin studied, wrote 
in The Jerusalem Post on Sunday. When Netanyahu laid a wreath on Rabin's 
grave, he was heckled by left-wing protesters, who shouted, ``Inciter, 
inciter of murder!'' until they were dragged away by secret service 
agents. They were referring to Netanyahu's anti-government language 
in the months preceding the assassination, which some Israelis, particularly 
Rabin's widow, blame for fueling the angry climate that inspired the 
assassin, a young religious Jew named Yigal Amir. In one more sign 
that Israel is still trying to fix precise legal blame for the assassination, 
the attorney general indicated late last week that he is going to 
move this week to prosecute a former general security services agent, 
Avishai Raviv, who may have known of Amir's intentions, for failing 
to prevent Rabin's murder. The Rabin memorial began Saturday night, 
when about 200,000 Israelis gathered in Tel Aviv at the square where 
he was killed on Nov. 4, 1995. Holding candles, they waved banners 
contending that Rabin's peace efforts had been vindicated by Netanyahu's 
signing of the accord in Washington. ``He was murdered but he was 
right,'' Shimon Peres, the former prime minister who served as foreign 
minister under Rabin, shouted to cheers. But Netanyahu walked a fine 
line between honoring the slain leader and distancing himself from 
what many in the nation see as Rabin's most significant accomplishment. 
Tsahi Hanegbi, the justice minister and a member of the prime minister's 
Likud Party, sniped at him for failing to credit _ much less to mention 
_ Rabin in the signing ceremony at the White House. Netanyahu retorted 
by reiterating that he disdained the interim peace agreement negotiated 
by the former prime minister in Oslo. ``We are honoring it due to 
international obligations, while reducing its damages,'' he said. 
As he stepped closer to carrying out the peace accord, which is due 
to take effect Monday, Netanyahu moved Sunday to assuage his former 
right-wing allies, now his critics, by taking what could be considered 
unilateral acts in violation of the accord's spirit. He approved a 
200-apartment addition to the West Bank Jewish settlement of Kiryat 
Arba, outside Hebron, in response to the killing of one of its residents 
last week. And his government tolerated, at least for the night, a 
trailer park encampment of Jewish settlers that took over a hillside 
north of Ramallah Sunday morning. Later in the day, at a special session 
of Parliament to remember Rabin, Netanyahu _ who failed to shake the 
hand of Rabin's widow at the cemetery Sunday _ sounded a more conciliatory 
note toward his fellow Israelis. ``I pray and wish that we can reach 
out to one another and put out together the flame of hatred,'' he 
said, ``without bleaching out the differences of opinion between us 
because peace is made first with brothers.'' In a clear rebuke to 
Netanyahu, Leah Rabin, Rabin's widow, chose Amnon Lipkin-Shahak, the 
former army chief of staff, to deliver the graveside address at Mount 
Herzl on Sunday. Lipkin-Shahak has yet to throw his hat into the political 
ring, but he is considered to be one of the few potential candidates 
for prime minister who could beat Netanyahu. In what amounted to Lipkin-Shahak's 
first national political address, many saw a subtle gibe at Netanyahu. 
``We apologize for not understanding what could happen in the midst 
of us,'' he said, as if addressing Rabin. ``We apologize that there 
are those among us who will not ask forgiveness.'' Leah Rabin considers 
herself ``a living memorial for Yitzhak,'' as she said in a newspaper 
interview in the daily Haaretz over the weekend. There is a considerable 
effort, almost an industry, as well, devoted to keeping alive his 
memory. Cars throughout the country are plastered with bumper stickers 
reading ``Shalom, chaver,'' or ``Good-bye, friend,'' the words that 
President Clinton spoke at Rabin's funeral. Statuettes of Rabin sell 
for about $180, minus shipping and handling. The Rabin Institute has 
recreated his study, complete with trophies and ashtray, which opened 
Sunday for two weeks at the Labor Party headquarters in Tel Aviv. 
The Education Ministry gathered hundreds of the country's high school 
leaders, from religious scouts to kibbutzniks, at the Jerusalem Theater 
Sunday for a televised memorial service and to vent their feelings 
about Rabin's death. ``I think we kids have gotten over it too fast,'' 
said Dorit Benzion, 17, of Rishon Letzion. ``There's this one day 
of the year to remind us, but nobody learns the lesson. You see it 
in the everyday violence, in the relations between kids. I think they 
need to give us classes in democracy and tolerance, starting in kindergarten.'' 
Many said they heard in the criticism that has been directed at Netanyahu 
for signing the peace agreement an echo of the hatred that had been 
aimed at Rabin. At one of the many discussion arenas, a tent near 
the cemetery, a moderate Orthodox rabbi who supports the peace effort, 
Yehuda Amital, said he did not feel that Israeli society had learned 
any lesson from the assassination. ``You know, the second assassination 
is easier than the first,'' he said. ``There is even a higher chance 
that it will happen again because from a psychological point of view, 
it has already been done.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>