<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981101.0074 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
October ended with tricks for some agencies and treats for others, 
as advertisers made decisions on accounts with total billings estimated 
at $210 million to $230 million. Two changes involved units of Leo 
Burnett Co. in Chicago. Hoechst Marion Roussel added Burnett to its 
agency roster by naming the Leo Burnett USA unit to handle advertising 
aimed at consumers for Allegra, a prescription antihistamine. Billings 
were estimated at $45 million to $50 million. That assignment for 
Allegra, which is locked in a fierce battle with the Claritin allergy 
drug brand marketed by Schering-Plough Corp., had been handled since 
1995 by Medicus International in New York, a health care agency owned 
by MacManus Group. Medicus will continue handling advertising for 
Allegra aimed at medical professionals, with billings estimated at 
$10 million to $15 million. Julie Gladman, a spokeswoman for Hoechst 
Marion, a unit of Hoechst AG in Kansas City, Mo., described the change 
as ``a business decision we felt was in the best interest of the brand.'' 
The decision came after an informal review, she added, in which the 
other participants were not disclosed. Burnett, which has been working 
to build up its list of health care accounts, has also landed assignments 
from Eli Lilly &AMP; Co. and Searle &AMP; Co. And Sara Lee Corp. selected 
the Starcom Media Services unit of Burnett to handle consolidated 
media buying on its account, with billings estimated at $100 million. 
Creative and media planning assignments for the various Sara Lee brands 
continue unchanged. The Sara Lee decision came after a review that 
included Starcom and four agencies in New York: Mediacom, part of 
Grey Advertising; Optimum Media, part of Omnicom Group, and the team 
of Ammirati Puris Lintas and Western International Media, both owned 
by Interpublic Group of Cos. Burnett has been on a winning streak 
lately after losing several large, important assignments in 1996. 
Other recent gains include accounts from Coca-Cola Co., Fila Holdings 
SpA, H.J. Heinz Co. and Procter &AMP; Gamble Co. And two marketers 
named Minneapolis shops to handle their accounts. The first was Starbucks 
Coffee Co. in Seattle, which selected the Minneapolis agency Fallon 
McElligott for its account, with billings estimated at $5 million 
to $10 million. The previous agency, the BBDO West unit of Omnicom 
in Los Angeles, had handled the account for 13 months; BBDO West and 
Starbucks parted ways in October. The Starbucks switch came without 
a review. The change had been expected since advertising trade publications 
reported that Starbucks would leave BBDO West so the account could 
follow David Lubars, creative director, who joined Fallon McElligott 
from BBDO West in April. The second was Alberto-Culver Co. in Melrose 
Park, Ill., which named the Minneapolis agency Campbell Mithun Esty 
to handle creative responsibilities for its St. Ives Swiss Formula 
Hair and Skin Care lines. Billings were estimated at $15 million to 
$20 million. Campbell Mithun, which is majority-owned by Interpublic, 
was awarded the assignment without a review. It is the first creative 
agency for the St. Ives lines since Alberto-Culver acquired the maker 
of those brands, St. Ives Laboratories, in February 1996. The media 
portion of the account is handled by Carat North America in New York, 
part of Aegis Group PLC. Two account shifts, with combined billings 
estimated at $15 million, involved Citron Haligman Bedecarre in San 
Francisco. The Good Guys Inc., a chain of consumer electronics and 
computer stores based in Brisbane, Calif., consolidated its account 
at Citron Haligman, which had previously handled only the creative 
duties. Citron Haligman was given the media portion of the account, 
which had been handled for five years by Publicis &AMP; Hal Riney 
in San Francisco, part of Publicis SA. And Pocket Science Inc. in 
Santa Clara, Calif., chose Citron Haligman to introduce Pocket Mail, 
a portable e-mail message service. The naming of Citron Haligman as 
the first agency of record came after a review in which the other 
participants were not disclosed. Another change came as Canandaigua 
Wine Co. in Canandaigua, N.Y., selected Partners &AMP; Shevack in 
New York to handle advertising for its new Arbor Mist line of wine 
products, which had been introduced with a campaign by Trone Advertising 
in Greensboro, N.C. Billings were estimated at $6 million to $10 million. 
Partners &AMP; Shevack, owned by Wolf Group, was awarded the assignment 
without a review; a sibling shop, Wolf/Rochester, handles other Canandaigua 
brands like Dunnewood and Estate Cellars. Trone continues on the Canandaigua 
roster, handling such brands as Paul Masson wines and brandy, Cook's 
champagne and Wild Irish Rose. Insure Now Direct in Valley Forge, 
Pa., an insurance company that sells directly to consumers, named 
Doner Direct in Baltimore, part of W.B. Doner &AMP; Co., as the first 
agency to handle its account. Billings were estimated at $10 million. 
That decision also came without a review. Insure Now Direct is owned 
by Peoples Benefit Life and Health Insurance. Grand Bay Hotels and 
Resorts in Phoenix, a division of Patriot American Hospitality Inc., 
named Tausche Henderson Drake in Atlanta as the first agency to handle 
its account. Billings were estimated at $5 million to $10 million. 
Tausche Henderson, which had long been the agency for Ritz-Carlton 
hotels, was awarded the account after a four-month review that also 
included two agencies in New York: Grace &AMP; Rothschild and Weiss 
Stagliano Partners. Shiseido Inc. in New York, the American unit of 
the Japanese cosmetics giant Shiseido, named Number 17 in New York 
to handle advertising for its 5S line of cosmetic and skin care products, 
with billings estimated at $5 million. The 5S account had been handled 
for 18 months by Badger Worldwide in New York; that agency and Shiseido 
parted ways in August. Number 17 was awarded the account after a review 
in which the other participants were not disclosed. The assignment 
will focus on marketing and creative campaigns related to the flagship 
store in the SoHo neighborhood of Manhattan. A campaign is expected 
to begin early this month. And Michael Foods Inc., a diversified food 
processor and distributor in Minneapolis, named Clarity Coverdale 
Fury in Minneapolis to handle advertising for its food service division, 
which had been handled by Carmichael Lynch in Minneapolis, an Interpublic 
agency. Billings were estimated at $2 million. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>