<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981226.0736 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For the first time in Germany, a museum has organized a retrospective 
of the controversial work of Leni Riefenstahl, filmmaker, photographer 
and Nazi-era propagandist. The show has brought record numbers of 
visitors to the Film Museum, which was crowded on a recent weekday 
with people of all ages checking out the stages of Riefenstahl's life 
and career: Her early obsession with mountain climbing. Her fascination 
with Adolf Hitler's charisma. Her artistic innovations and quest for 
visual perfection, which reached a high point with the Nazi masterpiece, 
``Triumph of the Will,'' renowned and despised as the best propaganda 
film ever made. Riefenstahl was a pariah after the war but regained 
respect with her photographs of the African Nuba tribe. Now 96, she 
remains under scrutiny for her past. Was she a fascist or a visionary, 
an artist ignorant of politics, as she claims, or a knowing aide to 
the terror of the Third Reich? Fifty years after the war, enough time 
has passed for a comprehensive exhibition that lets Germans decide 
for themselves. Other German exhibits have showcased Riefenstahl's 
work, mostly alongside other Nazi propaganda or art from the Nazi 
period. A private art gallery in Hamburg last year mounted a show 
of her Nuba photos without reference to her work for Hitler, drawing 
protests from Jewish groups that the gallery was glorifying a Third 
Reich criminal. So far, the show at the Film Museum in Potsdam, a 
city on the outskirts of Berlin, has been protest free _ apparently 
because of its bald presentation of Riefenstahl's Nazi films in context 
with her entire career. Some observers see the exhibit as part of 
a discussion going on in Germany about how the nation can be ``normal,'' 
conscious and reflective of its fascist past without feeling defined 
by guilt. Centered mostly on plans for a national Holocaust memorial, 
the discussion got louder with the recent election of Chancellor Gerhard 
Schroeder, the first leader too young to be burdened with memories 
of World War II. ``It has become normal to deal with the Nazi period 
the way historians do _ neither pointing to the guilt nor making it 
a perverse, sensationalized attraction,'' says Bernhard Schulz, cultural 
editor of the daily Berlin newspaper Tagespiegel. Organizers of the 
Film Museum show say it gives older Germans a chance to consider Riefenstahl 
anew while at the same time introducing her to younger generations 
that might know her name but not her work. The rarely seen ``Triumph 
of the Will,'' for example, is one of four Riefenstahl films being 
shown from start to finish on televisions at the beginning of the 
exhibit. Her idealized depiction of the 1934 Nazi party rally at Nuremberg 
_ with its tremendous goose-stepping parades and round-cheeked children 
giving flowers to Hitler _ is banned in Germany unless presented with 
facts of the Holocaust. The museum offers one of the first public 
viewings of a film until now seen almost exclusively in postwar Germany 
in university classrooms or excerpted in documentaries. Show coordinator 
Ines Walk says she was looking for ways to explore the relationship 
between art and politics when she started planning the Riefenstahl 
exhibit two years ago. She also was thinking of the year 2000 and 
how Riefenstahl's extraordinary life reflects the passing century. 
Riefenstahl was a dancer _ with swooping, Isadora Duncan-like moves 
_ when she saw one of Arnold Fanck's silent films set in the mountains. 
She presented herself to him as his new star, and he accepted, as 
much for her high-cheekboned beauty as her daredevil spirit. She rock 
climbed barefoot for the camera and was buried in an avalanche for 
the death scene in the 1926 film ``Mountain of Destiny.'' Soon, she 
was making her own films, fairy tales celebrating Germany's Alpine 
mystique in which she was star, screenwriter and director. She heard 
Hitler speak for the first time in 1932 and wrote to him _ again, 
offering her talents to a powerful, inspirational man. She believed, 
almost until the end, that he was helping the country. As the Fuehrer's 
filmmaker, she was the only woman to help shape the rise of the Third 
Reich. And yet she insists, against all plausibility, that she knew 
nothing about the Holocaust while it was happening. This has always 
been her claim: She was an artist not a Nazi. She made ``Triumph of 
the Will'' only because Hitler asked her; she tried to resist, but 
how could she? She also made ``Olympia,'' about the 1936 Berlin Olympic 
games, a gorgeous meditation on muscle and movement suggesting the 
athletic master race of Hitler's fantasies. It also presented the 
Nazis to the world as peaceful and tolerant. Riefenstahl says she 
regrets those films, largely because they made her life miserable. 
She never made another film after the war, turning instead to still 
photography in Africa and under the sea, taking up scuba diving at 
age 72. The Allies and eventually Germany cleared her as a Nazi, yet 
she is widely held responsible for helping Hitler seduce the German 
public with her hypnotic films. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>