<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981226.0759 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Fearing an impending rebel assault on Sierra Leone's capital, angry 
residents surged through the streets and burned alive at least two 
men accused of being rebel spies. The rebel Revolutionary United Front, 
meanwhile, reported Saturday that it had killed 60 Nigerian soldiers 
from a West African intervention force while capturing the town of 
Makeni, 60 miles (96 kms) east of the capital, Freetown. Fighting 
has intensified in recent weeks in the West African nation, settled 
two centuries ago by freed slaves from the United States, Britain 
and Jamaica. It has a population of 4.7 million. The rebels, who controlled 
Freetown after a bloody May 1997 coup, are seeking revenge for their 
ouster from the capital in February by the Nigerian-led intervention 
force which returned President Ahmed Tejan Kabbah to power. Rebel 
commander Sam Bockarie said Saturday his forces dragged the bodies 
of the dead Nigerian soldiers through the streets of Makeni with an 
armored car ``as an example to everyone.'' But Kabbah's government, 
which has been waging war against the rebels, denied that Makeni had 
been captured and said the intervention force, known as ECOMOG, continued 
to fight for the town. Government troops remained firmly in control 
of the country, the Information Ministry said in a statement. The 
government bolstered Freetown's defenses Saturday by trucking in Kamajors, 
traditional militiamen from rural villages. It also flew in soldiers 
from Nigeria and Ghana to reinforce ECOMOG troops. At a downtown square 
in the capital, a mob singled out two young men accused of being rebels 
in civilian disguise. The men were severely beaten before some in 
the crowd thrust gasoline-filled tires around their necks and set 
them on fire. Their charred remains were carried away by police, who 
did not attempt to stop the killings. The Kamajor militiamen, members 
of a secret society of hunters and traditional fighters, wore leather 
tunics and carried rusty guns and machetes in the bustling city streets, 
setting up checkpoints and carrying out random searches of pedestrians 
and drivers. Together with ECOMOG, the militia has been given defense 
duties by Sierra Leone's government, which dissolved the country's 
rebellious military earlier this year. Remnants of that military and 
their rebel allies have over the past week launched lightning attacks 
against loyalist forces throughout the country. The rebels are widely 
believed to have killed, maimed and raped thousands of villagers. 
Refugees fleeing the fighting have flooded into Freetown and rebels 
have threatened to attack the capital unless the government releases 
their imprisoned leader, Foday Sankoh, who is awaiting an appeal of 
a death sentence handed down for treason. On Saturday, Bockarie, one 
of the rebels' top commanders, demanded that Kabbah resign or face 
a rebel assault on Freetown before New Year. ``Failure of Kabbah to 
resign, and we will start bombarding Freetown and will not stop until 
victory is won,'' Bockarie told The Associated Press. That was a change 
from a day earlier when Bockarie demanded only talks and Sankoh's 
release. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>