<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981226.0380 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Fleeing fighting in northern Kosovo, Kosovo's newest refugees congregated 
in a regional ethnic Albanian guerrilla stronghold on Saturday, crowding 
into houses by the dozens to escape bitterly cold weather. Most of 
the hundreds of refugees in the area west of Podujevo made their way 
to Lapastica, a village still held by the Kosovo Liberation Army after 
a two-day crackdown by Serb police and Yugoslav army units. A Serb 
farmer was killed west of Podujevo by the guerrillas on Saturday, 
said members of the Organization of Security and Cooperation team 
monitoring Kosovo developments. Albanian sources reported a police 
attack in the same region. Otherwise, the province was reported calm 
in the wake of two days of fierce fighting in the Podujevo area that 
threatened to unravel an already shaky de-facto truce reached Oct. 
12. Several villages were in the region were destroyed, and abandoned 
by inhabitants who often fled on foot as they sought shelter elsewhere 
in temperatures that plummeted to - 20 C. ( - 4 F) overnight. In a 
typical scene in Lapastica, one room of 20 square meters (yards) sheltered 
more than 60 refugees. ``It's a shame that we have to beg for food 
and beds,'' said one of the refugees, who asked for anonymity. The 
farmer was killed in his home in Obranca village, some 30 kilometers 
(about 20 miles) north of the province's capital Pristina, by the 
ethnic Albanian Kosovo Liberation army, the rebel force that controls 
much of the area, the government-run Media Center said. The Kosovo 
information Center, close to ethnic Albanian pro-independence leaders, 
said that shortly before noon, Serb police approached the Obranca 
village and opened fire on nearby KLA positions. The reports came 
after Serb and Yugoslav forces launched an offensive in the region 
on Thursday, reportedly killing at least nine people. The crackdown 
posed the gravest threat yet to the Oct. 12 agreement that halted 
months of violence between Serbs and guerrillas trying to gain Kosovo's 
independence. William Walker, head of an international force monitoring 
the Kosovo situation, said the newest fighting had led to the ``tensest 
period since the agreement was signed.'' The United States, France 
and the European Union have warned both sides not to continue the 
violence. Russian Foreign Minister Igor Ivanov on Friday cautioned 
the West against using force to halt the latest violence. In October, 
NATO threatened airstrikes against the Serbs as punishment for their 
crackdown begun last February, in which hundreds died and some 300,000 
were forced to flee their homes. The NATO attacks were put on hold 
after a cease-fire was reached and Milosevic pulled out some of his 
forces. In Belgrade, meanwhile, Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic 
consolidated his support among the military by appointing loyalists 
to senior positions and promoting others who did his bidding in Kosovo 
during a prolonged anti-guerrilla campaign that preceded the Oct. 
12 agreement. The daily Politika said Lt.-Gen. Spasoje Smiljanic was 
appointed commander of the air force, a position that had been vacated 
in October when the former air force chief was deposed. Milosevic 
also promoted seven generals, including three who were involved in 
the Yugoslav army campaign against Kosovo's separatist Albanian guerillas 
this year. A commander of the army corps in provincial capital Pristina 
was moved up to head a regional section of the Yugoslav army, while 
a former chief of special forces in Kosovo was made his aide. Another 
loyalist was appointed new commander in the region of Pristina, Kosovo's 
capital. Milosevic also relieved three high-ranking army officers 
of their duties but it was not immediately clear whether they were 
purged for suspected disloyalty. Last month's ouster of the former 
army chief, Gen. Momcilo Perisic, was a result of his opposition both 
to the neo-communist party run by Milosevic's wife, Mirjana Markovic, 
and of Milosevic's hard-line stand on Kosovo. There had also been 
growing rumors in Belgrade that the ruling couple feared a coup attempt 
by Perisic and the secret police chief, the second most powerful man 
in Yugoslavia, whom Milosevic dismissed earlier in November. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>