<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981226.0038 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As the Clinton administration finishes drawing up its tax and spending 
proposals for the next fiscal year, it is confronting the perplexing 
but painful reality that despite mounting federal budget surpluses 
there is little money for new programs, and some areas could face 
cuts. Given the strict spending caps enacted at a time when the deficit 
seemed to be a permanent fixture, administration officials are reaching 
deep into their bag of budget tricks to find ways to pay for the programs 
that President Clinton wants to propose when he sets out his priorities 
to Congress next month. Administration officials said they would have 
enough money available in their budget plan to show that Clinton can 
still push an activist agenda despite his impeachment and pending 
Senate trial. Clinton is expected to propose some domestic programs 
that went nowhere in Congress this year, like tax breaks for child 
care expenses, school construction and anti-pollution efforts, as 
well as to come up with some new initiatives like assistance for disabled 
people returning to work. But he is also committed to providing more 
money for the Pentagon, and has already announced his support for 
an increase in pay and pensions for the military. Clinton has told 
members of Congress that it will be all but impossible to deal with 
all the issues facing the country, from providing more military spending 
to dealing with Medicare's looming troubles to meeting Democratic 
priorities for domestic programs, unless there is agreement to use 
some of the surplus, a step that Clinton continues to vow he will 
not even consider until the nation settles on a plan to shore up Social 
Security. ``Staying with the policy of reserving the surplus until 
we've fixed Social Security has left us with a tight budget, but balancing 
fiscal discipline with efforts to pass new investments in education 
and other priorities has in one form or another been the balancing 
act the president has succeeded in pulling off throughout his tenure,'' 
said Gene Sperling, the White House economic adviser. In the meantime, 
the administration is assembling a budget for the year starting next 
Oct. 1 that does not rely on the surplus, but stays in balance by 
offsetting the cost of new programs with cuts in others and by creating 
new pots of money, at least on paper. Administration officials declined 
to divulge any details, but people with whom they have consulted said 
the ideas under consideration included finding ways to squeeze more 
money out of tobacco companies and cigarette sales, and closing a 
variety of corporate tax loopholes. Republicans, too, are chafing 
under the budget rules. Stymied by the administration in their efforts 
to get a big tax cut this year, Republicans are regrouping so they 
can try again. One plan being considered by Senate Republicans calls 
for a tax cut to be financed out of budget surpluses over the next 
decade, but in a way intended to deflect criticism from Democrats 
that it would endanger Social Security. Under the plan, the government 
would continue to set aside the portion of the surplus generated by 
the payroll taxes that finance Social Security. Excess Social Security 
taxes accounted for all of last year's $70 billion surplus, and are 
expected to account for nearly all of the surplus for the next several 
years. But with new, albeit tentative, analyses showing that the non-Social 
Security portion of the surplus could grow more rapidly than anticipated, 
Republicans are optimistic that they can pay for a big tax cut and 
help pay for needed spending increases without being accused of endangering 
the future of the retirement system. The immediate problem for the 
coming ear centers on the spending caps set out in the budget law. 
The caps, which have grown increasingly tight in the last few years, 
effectively require a freeze in spending on discretionary programs 
for the budget year that will start next Oct. 1 _ meaning a cut in 
many cases once inflation is taken into account. The tightness of 
the caps was a jolt even to members of Clinton's Cabinet, who in recent 
months proposed programs costing tens of billions of dollars more 
than the administration has to work with. ``Coming into this year's 
budget there were two forces at work that make it a difficult year, 
and not just for us,'' said Jacob Lew, director of the White House's 
Office of Management and Budget. ``The caps are essentially frozen, 
and the tightness is increasing from year to year. ``The second is 
that expectations are high, because of the surplus and because of 
the very success we had in the negotiations in September and October,'' 
Lew said, referring to the last-minute agreement by Republicans during 
this year's budget negotiations to finance some of Clinton's priorities, 
especially in education. As a result, many of Clinton's plans this 
year will be limited or scaled back. On Wednesday, he unveiled his 
plan to provide more money next year for assistance to the homeless. 
Under the plan, he will ask for federal spending of $1.125 billion 
for the year starting next Oct. 1, up from $975 million this year. 
But a year ago he was pushing for a bigger increase, to $1.15 billion. 
The outlook for domestic programs is particularly clouded by a change 
in the budget rules that takes effect in the coming year. The change 
removes a ``fire wall'' between the money available for domestic programs 
and the money available for military programs, essentially allowing 
one area to be raided to finance the other. Republicans are pressing 
hard for a substantial increase in Pentagon spending next year, adjusted 
for inflation, to begin offsetting years of declines. The White House 
has already scaled back a request from the Pentagon but seems likely 
to approve a multibillion-dollar increase for next year, and will 
no doubt have to negotiate a larger figure with Congress before the 
budget process ends. ``The long and short of it is that the discretionary 
caps, even if we kept defense at levels we had been projecting, would 
be incredibly tight,'' said Thomas Kahn, staff director and chief 
counsel for Democrats on the House Budget Committee. By increasing 
military spending, he said, ``it's going to take a huge whack out 
of nondefense discretionary, and shows even more clearly how difficult 
it's going to be to live within the caps.'' Members of both parties 
say the spending caps remain a valuable source of fiscal discipline 
for Washington and a source of considerable reassurance to Wall Street, 
which remains wary of the federal government's penchant for living 
beyond its means. But while the caps are almost certain to remain 
in place, both parties are likely to search for ways around them, 
as they did in the negotiations that concluded the current year's 
budget, when Congress was racing to leave town for the midterm elections. 
Congress and the administration agreed to spend $20 billion outside 
the caps by designating a wide range of programs as ``emergencies,'' 
including aid to farmers and efforts to deal with the computer software 
problems associated with the year 2000. To the degree that those programs 
continue to be financed next year, they would come at least partly 
under the spending caps, reducing money available elsewhere. Similarly, 
Congress and the administration agreed to finance $4.6 billion in 
this year's education spending out of next year's budget, reducing 
available money for next year by that amount. ``An unusually large 
share of the money has already been spoken for by the get-out-of-town 
antics indulged in during September,'' said Martha Phillips, executive 
director of the Concord Coalition, a fiscal watchdog group. ``I don't 
know whether I'm more concerned that they will face up to the problem 
and say we can't live within these limits anymore so let's increase 
them, or that they won't face up to it and let the spending ooze out 
through a lot of budget games.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>