<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981226.0066 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Out of the depths of the AIDS epidemic sweeping Africa, an ugly truth 
is emerging: Some condom makers have been dumping their substandard 
wares here and Africans have been risking their lives on brittle, 
leaky or ill-fitting condoms. The problem has been particularly bad 
here in South Africa, where, until last August, government officials 
were using a procurement system that almost invited manufacturers 
to ship their castoffs here. There is no question that a scarcity 
of condoms and the refusal of many men to use them are to blame for 
far more of Africa's 23 million HIV infections than faulty condoms 
are. And experts say most condoms are perfectly good and that the 
influx of bad ones may finally have been stemmed. But the deviousness 
or sloppiness of some manufacturers and the failure of inspectors 
to catch them have contributed to the disease's spread. As a result, 
couples who do practice safe sex have been left helpless. Elizabeth 
Chidonza, an AIDS-education worker in Cape Town, said she has twice 
had condoms break during sex. Her boyfriend is not infected with the 
AIDS virus, but she is. She is both afraid of infecting him and afraid 
he would beat her if she did. In the West, condoms are not necessarily 
thought of as life-saving medical devices. Here, however, infection 
with the human immunodeficiency virus, which causes AIDS, is rampant, 
and virtually everyone infected will die of it because almost no one 
in Africa can afford thousands of dollars for AIDS ``cocktails'' that 
enable people to live with the disease. Condoms also prevent the spread 
of venereal diseases and urinary tract infections, which can produce 
sores that speed HIV transmission. Hundreds of millions of condoms 
are handed out free on this continent each year, paid for _ and tested 
_ by international aid agencies. Even now, though, more than 4 million 
Kenzo brand condoms from Polo Latex Co. of Calcutta are on their way 
back to India. They were not tested before distribution, and complaints 
from Cape Town prostitutes flooded in to SWEAT, the Sex Workers Education 
and Advocacy Task Force, a community aid agency, which had handed 
thousands out free. When they were checked, the results were shocking: 
As many as 48 out of 200 in some test batches broke. ``Some of them 
had sand inside the foil packets,'' said Andrew Crichton, a national 
Health Department consultant. ``How do you even do that? You practically 
have to have a guy inside the factory throwing dirt into the machine. 
The cartons had water marks and were disintegrating. They looked like 
they'd been around the world twice.'' Thiru Moopen, assistant director 
of Inbeco, a Pretoria company that imported the condoms, said her 
``fingers were burnt'' in the deal. Polo Latex ``claimed its factory 
was sabotaged,'' she said, but it agreed to replace the goods. A consignment 
of Twin Lotus condoms from China is also being recalled, and there 
have been problems with other brands. There has been no worldwide 
study of faulty condoms, said Bunmi Makinwa, a distribution expert 
for UNAIDS in Geneva, but anecdotal reports crop up. There have been 
occasional problems in Zimbabwe, Cameroon, Rwanda, Zambia and Malawi. 
In 1993 in Zimbabwe, 24 million condoms made in Malaysia by Dongkuk 
Techo Rubber and paid for by the British government failed tests. 
Fortunately, the results came in before any were distributed, but 
fearing they would be stolen and end up on the black market, Zimbabwe 
burned them. In a country where 25 percent of adults are now infected, 
it took 18 months and $157,000 to replace them, even though Durex, 
a London-based company making a high-quality, slightly more expensive 
brand, sent ``emergency shipments.'' Dongkuk later said its goods 
were rejected only because the standards were raised after they were 
made. A British Embassy AIDS educator denied that, calling it ``an 
excuse,'' but acknowledged that Dongkuk now sells condoms elsewhere 
without problems. The incident was so embarrassing _ British aid officials 
were ``nearly court-martialed'' by Parliament, one expert joked _ 
that the British aid agencies adopted far stricter testing rules, 
which are now used in the many English-speaking countries for which 
they buy condoms. Condoms are made all over the world, but most factories 
are in India, Malaysia, Thailand and China, where latex rubber and 
cheap labor are available. Dennis Blairman, a British condom-quality 
consultant, has toured dozens of factories. ``The industry is a jungle,'' 
he said. ``Some makers have very science-based companies with excellent 
laboratories, and others are awful, staggering along with broken-down 
machinery. Latex goes in one end, something comes out at the other, 
and the buyer doesn't know the difference.'' As a result, he said, 
``I don't think there's a plot to dump substandard goods on Africa, 
but I'm sure there are individuals planning to dump their bad merchandise 
anywhere they can get away with it.'' Paradoxically, South Africa 
became a dumping ground because it was rich enough to buy its own 
condoms. Its procurement officers used an ineffective test regimen: 
Inspectors would visit a factory once a year, test samples chosen 
by the factory and give it the South African Bureau of Standards seal. 
Spurred by the Kenzo incident, the country met with a group of consultants 
last August and then changed its regimen ``literally within two weeks,'' 
said Margaret Usher, a World Health Organization condom expert. Unfortunately, 
it had been importing condoms for at least seven years, during which 
the epidemic here grew from insignificance to 1,500 new infections 
a day, the fastest rate in the world. South Africa has other problems. 
KwaZulu-Natal, the province worst hit by HIV, ran out of condoms earlier 
this year because a local Health Department official simply forgot 
to order more; a cry for help went out to the country's other eight 
provinces, which responded by shipping truckloads of expired condoms. 
A study of the distribution chain found boxes of condoms that had 
been left for months in overheated storerooms. Under the new standards, 
the same used by the British, American and other big aid agencies, 
the purchaser collects about 1,000 test samples at random, right at 
the factory, from each ``batch'' of 150,000 to 500,000. They are blown 
up with air or water until they burst, or partly filled with water, 
tied and rolled on a blotter to check for leaks. Only the batches 
that pass are shipped. Then, since condoms can also deteriorate while 
stacked in the sun or crossing the equator in freighters, more are 
tested on arrival. Testing can cost up to 10 percent of a contract. 
As an extra guarantee, manufacturers must post bonds, which often 
exceed their profit margins. Many factories can pass one South African-style 
inspection, experts said. But the toughest part of the business is 
consistency. World Health Organization condom specifications are 13 
pages long, and modern condoms must be far less porous than those 
of 20 years ago, because the size difference between a spermatozoon 
and the HIV virus ``is like a Mack truck versus a Morris Mini,'' Crichton 
said. Because latex is tree sap and as unstable as milk, a condom 
factory is more like an industrial cookie bakery than a bicycle factory, 
where manufacturing errors are obvious. Small, invisible problems 
can ruin whole batches. The latex is first vulcanized with sulfur 
and ammonia. Then molds are repeatedly dipped and dried. The chemicals 
are leached out, and the condoms are washed, tumble-dried and dusted 
with cornstarch. Each is electrically tested for invisible holes, 
visually inspected, then inflated by machine for a burst test. Then 
each is rolled and sealed into a foil or plastic envelope into which 
silicon lubricant is injected. Many things can go wrong: curdling 
latex, dust in the mix, chemistry errors. Poor leaching can leave 
a rotten egg smell. With too little lubricant, the condom can dry 
out; too much ruins the packet's seal. Even when condoms are well 
made, there are problems with promoting their use here. Because the 
danger of AIDS is so great, there have been few religious objections, 
even in Catholic countries. But there are other roadblocks. All over 
Africa, everyone from health officers to women's rights advocates 
to prostitutes complain that it is very difficult to get men to use 
condoms. Besides the usual complaints about sensitivity and lack of 
spontaneity, men argue that they are ``not part of African culture.'' 
``The men dictate what will be done, and the women have very little 
power to say no,'' said Dr. Neil Miller, an AIDS education expert 
with the British Embassy in Zimbabwe. And, because the vast majority 
of condoms here are handed out free, no choices of size are offered. 
The problem may sound silly, but condom distributors say it is not. 
Too-large condoms slip off, putting the user at risk of infection, 
while uncomfortably small ones discourage men from using them. In 
South Africa, for example, 95 percent of the 190 million condoms consumed 
each year are bought by the government. It only buys the standard 
53-millimeter-wide lubricated variety. But that does not fit everyone, 
and some suppliers have sloppy quality control. For example, youth 
counselors want the hard-to-find 47-millimeter ``adolescent size,'' 
Crichton said. Since a recent survey of 18,000 South African teen-agers 
indicated that 24 percent have sex before they are 14 years old, getting 
effective condoms to the young is crucial, he said. At the moment, 
the government has its hands full with purchasing and distribution 
problems and is barely considering these issues. Experts agree that 
condoms offer this impoverished continent the one slim hope it has 
of slowing the AIDS epidemic. ``But you need systems for buying them,'' 
Ms. Usher said. ``Most countries don't know much about these things, 
so they just go out and buy 6 million condoms thinking they're all 
the same. They're not.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>