<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981226.0060 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In a windowless room two stories below ground level, Lyudmila Zavlyanova 
sits in what could be a scene from the Cold War. People are hunched 
in front of computers in cramped cubicles, speaking to one another 
in hushed tones in Russian. But they are in New Jersey and this is 
an entirely different kind of global struggle: the code war. Mrs. 
Zavlyanova and about 40 other immigrants from the former Soviet Union 
are in the sub-basement of the Newark headquarters of Public Service 
Electric and Gas Co., New Jersey's largest utility. They are here 
not because they understand Russian but rather Cobol, a computer language 
that runs many of the United States' mainframe computers but is so 
old that relatively few American programmers know it. Mrs. Zavlyanova, 
a 27-year-old from New York, is one of tens of thousands of programmers 
throughout the world racing to head off the havoc that could ensue 
because many of the computers that underpin today's wired society 
do not understand that a year can begin with a number other than 19. 
She and her colleagues have spent the better part of this year painstakingly 
sifting through a program consisting of 7 million lines of code that, 
to the uninitiated, resembles gibberish. And that is just to fix one 
program. In all, Public Service has 728 programs with a total of 46 
million lines written in 27 programming languages. How well they are 
fixed or replaced could determine whether the lights and heat stay 
on in New Jersey come Jan. 1, 2000. That might seem far away. But 
the Y2K problem, as it is known in computer jargon, is already draining 
hundreds of billions of dollars from companies and governments struggling 
to tame what some call the millennium bug. The direst situations that 
are predicted _ financial chaos, societal strife, food shortages and 
persistent, widespread blackouts _ are highly improbable. But it is 
not hard to find reputable alarmists _ computer experts who say they 
will not fly or schedule surgery at the onset of the year 2000, or 
even an economist who predicts that the computer bug could set off 
a recession. The first wave of disruptions has already hit, with 40 
percent of the largest U.S. and European companies experiencing at 
least minor breakdowns because some software has already had to deal 
with dates in 2000 and beyond. Many retailers have had difficulty 
processing credit cards that expired in 2000 or later, for example. 
At BankBoston, some ATM cards were seized because cash machines responded 
as if the cards had expired in 1900. Another spate of disruptions 
could begin on the first day of 1999, because a host of other computer 
programs _ like those used to prepare budgets, schedule appointments 
and pay unemployment benefits _ deal with dates up to one year in 
the future. All the threat stems from the fact, by now well known, 
that computer programs frequently use two digits to represent years, 
like 98 for 1998. So when 1999 ends, computers might appear baffled 
about what comes next or might respond as if 00 means 1900 instead 
of 2000. Afflicted machines could crash or, just as dangerously, spew 
out erroneous data. With computers running everything from power grids 
to bank machines to air traffic control, the range of services that 
could be affected is vast. The problem has proved more intractable 
and expensive to fix than most experts had expected. The Gartner Group, 
a consulting firm, estimates that the Y2K problem will cost the world 
$1 trillion to $2 trillion, as much as $300 for every man, woman and 
child on the planet. ``It's the biggest business problem in human 
history,'' said Capers Jones, a software expert and year 2000 alarmist. 
Year 2000 activity swirls far beyond computer programmers like Mrs. 
Zavlyanova, sweeping up lawyers, insurance companies, government regulators 
and even many ordinary citizens. Other electronic equipment besides 
computers may also be vulnerable. So engineers everywhere are clambering 
over pipes, behind walls and into closets in a giant scavenger hunt 
for computer chips that control factories, oil platforms, aircraft, 
traffic lights and building-security systems. New York Hospital-Cornell 
Medical Center, for instance, is determining whether 16,000 medical 
devices _ electrocardiographs, infusion pumps, defibrillators and 
even beds _ will work correctly in the next century. The Y2K problem 
is also becoming a cultural phenomenon, appearing in comic strips 
and Hollywood screenplays. For those prone to believe that the apocalypse 
is coming with the start of the new millennium, the millennium bug 
looks like the means to the end, a digital echo of Noah's flood. For 
many more people the Y2K problem plays on a sense of unease that society 
is growing dependent on a lattice of technology that is now so far-reaching, 
interconnected and complex that no one completely understands it, 
not even the priesthood that writes its digital code. Many moves toward 
economic efficiency _ automation, just-in-time delivery of parts to 
factories, globalization _ have been aided by computers. Yet those 
same practices now make the economy more vulnerable to computer malfunctions. 
Several potential Y2K problems have been discovered during simulations. 
When Chrysler Corp. set the clocks on the electronic equipment at 
one of its factories ahead to 2000, for example, the security system 
locked all the doors. Such problems can be readily fixed, one at a 
time. The fear, though, is that the early days of 2000 could bring 
a huge flood of them. Many experts say there is simply too much software 
left to fix and too many microchips to check before the immovable 
deadline. Still, they say, there is time to reduce the impact by fixing 
what is possible and making contingency plans for failures that cannot 
be prevented. The school board in Albuquerque, N.M., recently voted 
to keep the city's public schools closed in the first week of January 
2000 to make sure that the district has time to repair unexpected 
breakdowns. Experts say caution is in order, but not panic. ``The 
level of disaster is still fundamentally our choice,'' Howard Rubin, 
an information technology consultant, said. Town Criers Escapist Movement 
Expects the Worst The year 2000 problem raises vexing questions for 
consumers. Most home appliances and cars should work fine, manufacturers 
say, though many people will have to test and fix personal computers. 
But a few people have gone even further. Nervous residents in more 
than 200 U.S. cities have formed community preparedness groups, advising 
neighbors and urging local officials to make contingency plans, like 
setting up emergency food banks, shelters and neighborhood-based power 
generation. Many groups passed out leaflets at shopping centers before 
Christmas with Y2K-inspired shopping suggestions, like first-aid kits, 
firewood and batteries. ``The best chance I would have would be to 
be in a community that is well prepared,'' said Jay Golter, 42, a 
financial analyst at a federal agency who went to a PTA meeting at 
his son's school in Springfield, Va., last January and invited the 
other parents to a strategy session on the Y2K problem. When the day 
came, no one showed up. But gradually concern took root, and the Northern 
Virginia Year 2000 Community Action Group now boasts more than 200 
members. In Boulder, Colo., where people who are worried about the 
year 2000 problem are organizing neighborhood by neighborhood, some 
70 residents of the 80304 zip code gathered in a school recently to 
listen to Kathy Garcia, a specialist in group dynamics. ``We are asking 
people to prepare for four months, enough to get you through the winter,'' 
Ms. Garcia said, detailing how her family spent $600 setting aside 
a supply of rice, beans and other staples. The group then discussed 
plans to ask grocers to stock foods that would be needed in a crisis. 
They fretted about how to ask neighbors, without seeming intrusive, 
about special medical needs, so hospitals could be asked to prepare. 
Then they broke into pairs to practice approaching strangers to discuss 
the Y2K problem. Efforts are under way to foster more cooperation 
nationally among the community groups, which are already loosely linked 
through the Cassandra Project, a group in Louisville, Colo., that 
operates a widely used Web site dedicated to Y2K concerns. Some alarmists 
scoff at the notion that such organizing will stave off the societal 
breakdown they see coming from large-scale computer failures. So in 
a throwback to the bomb-shelter mania of decades past, they are moving 
to rural areas, drilling wells, setting up generators and even buying 
guns to fend off the hordes they fear will come from the broken cities 
in search of food. Entrepreneurs are catering to the survivalists, 
selling everything from seeds to wooden ``survival domes,'' or even 
trying to develop entire communities. God's Wilderness, in Finland, 
Minn., bills itself as a relocation site for Christians, offering 
land complete with cabin, well, pump, stove, greenhouse, shed and 
outhouse. David and Johanna Hecker, who own the site, say on their 
Web page that they knew nothing about Y2K worries until they tried 
to sell some land and got inquiries from people looking for a place 
to escape. But many experts say that preparations like stockpiling 
food and withdrawing savings are unnecessary and will only invite 
burglars and rats. In addition, business leaders and public officials 
have already begun to worry that such hoarding could produce the very 
chaos that some doomsayers had predicted from computer breakdowns. 
The American Red Cross, for instance, recently suggested that people 
fill the gas tanks of their cars just before Jan. 1, 2000. But the 
gasoline distribution network may not be able to handle such demand, 
as was proved by the 1979 oil crisis when millions of Americans waited 
in lines, drove up prices and in some cases got into fights in the 
mistaken belief that oil imports were drying up. Bankers are especially 
worried about possible major withdrawals. The Federal Reserve Board 
has already said it will set aside an extra $50 billion of currency 
reserves at the end of 1999. ``When we get down to 1999, the retail 
public is going to panic and want cash, and we better have it for 
them,'' said David Iacino, head of the year 2000 program at BankBoston. 
Penny Wise How a Money-Saver Became So Costly The millennium bug is 
not really a bug at all, in the sense of a coding error. Using two 
digits to represent the year was considered a clever way in the 1950s 
and 1960s to save expensive computer memory. Leon Kappelman, co-chairman 
of the year 2000 working group for the Society for Information Management, 
estimates that use of two-digit years in a program written in the 
1960s would have saved more than $1 million per billion bytes of data 
stored over the following 30 years. Those savings would more than 
offset the cost of fixing the code now to handle the change to 2000. 
But through force of habit, programmers continued to use two-digit 
years well into the 1990s, even as data-storage costs dropped to one-ten-thousandth 
of their 1960s level. Denver's $4.3 billion international airport, 
styled as the airport of the future when it opened only three years 
ago, is spending millions to ensure that its safety and flight information 
systems are free of Y2K bugs. From the start, some programmers foresaw 
problems in 2000, but the danger seemed theoretical. Computer technology 
was changing so rapidly it was assumed that programs with two-digit 
years would be retired long before 2000. Instead, it was the programmers, 
not the programs, who retired first. Even when companies realized 
the problem, they procrastinated about fixing it. Data-processing 
managers, constantly swamped by demands for new programs, did not 
dare propose devoting resources to a problem that would not hit for 
many years. Some assumed that a quick fix would be invented as the 
deadline neared. The information-processing department at Bank of 
America awarded a plaque in the late 1980s to the first manager with 
a program that encountered a year 2000 problem. But the bank did not 
start fixing its code until 1996. Now, even those who saw the trouble 
coming are finding how deep-rooted two-digit coding is. Ronald Asala, 
director of technology services at Zurich American Insurance Group 
in Schaumburg, Ill., remembers ordering programmers who were writing 
claims-processing software in 1986 and 1987 to use four-digit years. 
``I would have sworn on a stack of Bibles that the system was Y2K-compliant,'' 
Asala said. But a recent test found 18 two-digit functions, two of 
which would have stopped the program cold. The Code War A Battle Fought 
Line by Line If writing a new program is software's equivalent of 
carpentry, Y2K work is more like asbestos removal. It is a job as 
tedious as replacing all the light bulbs in Las Vegas but not as easy, 
because much of the software was written years ago by programmers 
who have quit or retired. The repair project undertaken by Public 
Service Electric and Gas is a case in point. Mrs. Zavlyanova works 
for Keane Inc., a contractor for the utility. Because programmers 
are in short supply, Keane offered $1,000 bonuses to employees who 
recruited their friends, and word quickly spread through the Soviet 
immigrant community. These programmers are fixing the software that 
keeps track of bills and other data related to the utility's 2 million 
electricity customers. An error in any one of the 7 million lines 
of this program could cause problems in billing and service. Mrs. 
Zavlyanova and her colleagues are the final backstop in a search through 
every line of code for places that contain two-digit years. Sometimes 
such work is straightforward because programmers refer to dates using 
abbreviations like YR or DT. But in other cases the designations are 
quirkier and not obvious, like the names of movie characters or the 
programmer's acquaintances. One day this summer, Mrs. Zavlyanova was 
inspecting a tiny 523-line segment. A special computer program had 
already quickly scanned all 523 lines, picking out 18 with numbers 
that could be dates. One of those lines contained the name of a 25-digit 
serial number. Suspicious, Mrs. Zavlyanova zeroed in on this segment 
and there it was: a millennium bug! Six of the digits in the serial 
number referred to a date: two for the month, two for the day and 
only two for the year. Now the question was how to repair it. The 
utility wanted to expand the serial number to 27 digits, adding two 
digits to represent the year. But such an expansion was not as easy 
as it sounded, because it would throw off the position of the other 
numbers. A number that was in position 15, which might have stood 
for, say, a customer's geographic location, would move to position 
17, which the program might react to as if it refers to the meter 
reader's route number. So expanding the serial number could require 
changes to many other lines in the program. Before she undertook this 
task, however, Mrs. Zavlyanova checked and found that another programmer 
who had encountered the serial number in another part of the program 
had already expanded it. But that programmer apparently made an error, 
so more work would be needed. ``Y2K work isn't as easy as a lot of 
people think,'' said Mrs. Zavlyanova, who has on her desk a certificate 
praising her as a top performer. ``There are all kinds of complications 
that come up.'' PSE&AMP;G is not fixing all its software. About 125 
programs are being replaced by new software that is free of Y2K problems. 
One program is being scrapped because the company cannot find any 
programmers who know the language in which it was written. Another 
25 percent to 30 percent of the programs are being retired because 
the company found that no one was using them anymore. ``There's stuff 
that would print out downstairs and it would go to someone and that 
person would be gone,'' said Vincent Scatuccio Jr., who is in charge 
of software repair. One of the few silver linings of the Y2K problem, 
Scatuccio noted, is the chance to clear the cobwebs from a company's 
data-processing operations. To save time, PSE&AMP;G is not expanding 
years to four digits in most programs, but is instead using a technique 
called windowing. Years are left as two digits but the computer is 
instructed to interpret 00 to 49 as being 2000 to 2049, and 50 to 
99 as 1950 to 1999. Of course, if the program is still in use in 2050, 
it will have to be fixed again. As for crucial software that helps 
balance electricity supply and demand, the utility is saving millions 
of dollars by not fixing it at all, because the company plans to buy 
new software eventually. Until then, it is simply setting the clock 
back so that the program will function as if it is 1972 instead of 
2000; the dates in 1972 fall on the same days of the week as in 2000. 
The bottom line, however, is this: Despite these shortcuts, despite 
budgeting $91.6 million for Y2K work and despite starting its cleanup 
more than two years ago _ earlier than most utilities _ PSE&AMP;G 
will not finish on time. So, like many companies, it is resorting 
to triage, fixing the most important programs first and worrying about 
minor ones later. Double Checking `Trust Nothing, Test Everything' 
On a recent Sunday, when most of the executives and tellers of AmSouth 
Bank in Birmingham, Ala., were relaxing with their families, computer 
specialists from the bank gathered in a run-down former auditorium 
they called the ``war room'' and traveled through time. They set the 
date on a multistate network of computers ahead to the year 2000 and 
put the powerful machines through their paces, crunching fake loan 
applications and money transfers. In another room, bank employees 
repeatedly inserted and withdrew colorful play money from automated 
teller machines, watching the balances on their receipts rise and 
fall. The elaborate process was part of a test to make sure AmSouth 
bank's computers will work in 2000. Experts say that even after software 
is fixed, it should be tested, because some dates might have been 
missed. In addition, the correction of one problem often introduces 
another. The Internal Revenue Service mistakenly sent default notices 
to 1,000 taxpayers because of an error made in fixing the millennium 
bug. Year 2000 consultants say that testing could take up more than 
half of a Y2K budget. Yet many companies, pressed for time, are skimping 
on testing. ``You've got to take a `trust nothing, test everything' 
attitude,'' said Asala of Zurich American, chastened by his encounter 
with the faulty Zurich code he had assumed was clean. That warning 
extends to software from outside vendors, who can never fully test 
their products for all the ways they are used by customers. ``We have 
found 10 major Y2K problems with applications vendors told us they 
had tested and found compliant,'' Asala said, adding that Zurich American's 
problem programs included software from giants like IBM and Computer 
Associates, companies that Asala credits with doing a good job on 
Y2K problems. Smart testing requires cooperation between business 
partners because computers routinely interact with other machines 
outside the company, but it is not always possible. Bell Atlantic, 
whose wires carry billions of dollars in financial transactions, said 
it had more banks wanting to test with it than it could accommodate. 
There is a human toll too. Because computers are usually in use during 
the day, testing often must be done at odd hours, which is why the 
computer specialists at AmSouth Bank did their work at night and over 
a weekend for five days in October, with workers subsisting on snacks 
and pizza. Diane Lambert, a systems manager, said she considered herself 
lucky if she could say yes when her 14-year-old daughter called asking, 
``Mama, will you be home before midnight tonight?'' Jan. 1, 2000, 
was not the only date tested. One day the computers were made to believe 
it was Jan. 3, the first business day of 2000. Another time it was 
Feb. 29, a leap day. Then it was March 31, 2000, the day the books 
would close for the first quarter. While programmers worked in the 
war room, technicians in Chicago were busy executing mock money transfers 
to AmSouth's big clients. Employees at AmSouth's phone service center 
in Pensacola, Fla., at a check-processing office in Atlanta and at 
a branch in a Birmingham suburb were all participating. The far-flung 
electronic menagerie was also linked to a computer center in North 
Bergen, N.J., that is usually rented to companies whose own computers 
are disabled by a natural disaster. Comdisco, the owner of this disaster 
recovery site, has found a sideline in leasing such sites for Y2K 
testing. AmSouth's test went well. The only glitch found was one that 
would have prevented AmSouth from signing up new bank-by-phone customers 
on Feb. 29, 2000. Sara Simon, the technician who had originally installed 
the program, identified the error within two hours. It was quickly 
corrected, setting off a round of cheers. But no testing program can 
cover all the possibilities. ``That's why I call it the year 2000 
lottery,'' said Donald Estes, a testing expert in Lexington, Mass. 
``Some will do a lot and still get hit. Some won't do enough and luck 
out.'' The Hidden Problem At the Mercy of Microchips If the year 2000 
cleanup involved fixing only business software it would be hard enough. 
But the potential for Y2K problems also lurks in the tiny computers 
that have permeated all corners of modern life. The flow of chemicals 
in a refinery, the injection of fuel into automobile engines, even 
the flushing of some toilets is controlled electronically. Sometimes 
the controller is a single chip, like one in a factory that merely 
opens or closes a valve based on readings from a temperature sensor. 
In other cases, an entire computer with more complex software is used. 
Experts say that only a small percentage of such systems _ called 
embedded systems because the computer or chip is embedded in some 
other piece of equipment _ will have date problems. But with billions 
of such chips in use, even a small percentage is enough to scare Y2K 
experts. British Petroleum's giant Grangemouth refinery complex identified 
2,132 embedded systems and found that 15 would fail in a way that 
would shut down operations if they were not fixed, said Ian Jenson, 
the project manager. The embedded-chip dimension of the Y2K problem 
surprised many companies. International Paper Co. doubled its estimate 
of its year 2000 repair costs to $135 million, largely because it 
belatedly identified vulnerable electronic controls in its mills. 
The investigations have turned up some good news. Despite popular 
fears about airplanes falling from the sky, for instance, Boeing Co. 
has concluded that there are only three embedded Y2K defects in its 
aircraft, all easily dealt with and related to navigation data. But 
medical equipment remains a major area of concern. The Veterans Health 
Administration found a $150,000 machine used in radiation therapy 
for cancer that could theoretically calculate wrong dosages after 
2000. The machine uses the date to calculate the age of the patient 
and the strength of the radiation, which decays over time. In the 
1980s, several patients were killed because of software errors in 
a different radiation machine. At New York Hospital, Louis Wetstein, 
a 31-year-old biomedical engineer, is trying to determine the status 
of the hospital's 16,000 medical devices, about 2,500 of which contain 
microprocessors. Robots and electronic machines perform tests on vials 
of patients' blood without human intervention. Infusion pumps deliver 
medication with a precision beyond human capability. Even the beds 
contain microprocessors, which adjust the bed's position and weigh 
the patient. To test an electrocardiograph machine, Wetstein and colleagues 
first hooked it up to another electronic device that simulates a heartbeat. 
Then they set the electrocardiograph's internal clock to 23:58 on 
31-DEC-99 and waited two minutes. The machine continued into 2000 
without missing a beat, printing the squiggly lines of an electrocardiogram 
on a strip of paper and recording 00 as the year. A four-digit year 
would be ideal, but this was not bad. Then the clock was set back 
again to just before midnight for a second test. But this time the 
machine was shut off. When it was turned back on two minutes later, 
the printout still read 23:59. The machine was stuck in the last century. 
The date on the printout made no sense at all _ 03-MAR-A6, with A6 
being an error code. Nevertheless, the machine was still able to record 
heart rhythms, because it did not need to know the date to do that. 
Wetstein said he had found similar record-keeping problems with some 
defibrillators and ventilators, but had never found a problem that 
would cause the equipment to stop functioning. ``Medical equipment 
is not designed to stop working,'' Wetstein said. ``It is designed 
to keep working. The failure is not to shut down.'' Still, incorrect 
date-stamping could pose legal problems or contribute to incorrect 
diagnoses. At New York Hospital, electrocardiograms are stored in 
a computer so doctors can log on from their homes or offices. But 
if the dates were wrong, doctors might conceivably not be able to 
find the EKG or might look at the wrong one. Moreover, some experts 
say, even if a machine does not need to have the date to perform its 
job, it might be built with off-the-shelf components that do keep 
track of the date and might shut themselves off if they cannot handle 
the transition to 2000. So to be safe, some companies are checking 
everything, and there is disagreement on the risks. ``I would have 
surgery at midnight,'' Wetstein said confidently, referring to the 
start of 2000. But the head of the hospital's overall Y2K effort, 
Susan Auman, whose background is in data processing, was more cautious, 
saying: ``I wouldn't schedule surgery. I wouldn't fly.'' Enter the 
Lawyers Efforts Stymied by Fear of Lawsuits One reason to test everything 
is to avoid being sued. The Y2K problem has attracted armies of lawyers, 
who have done more than anything else to elevate it from a concern 
of programmers to one of top management. The lawyers are needed to 
deal with regulators like the Nuclear Regulatory Commission and the 
Securities and Exchange Commission, which are requiring companies 
to prepare Y2K plans and to disclose their progress. In other cases, 
top management is worried about being sued if computer malfunctions 
disrupt business enough to make the stock plummet or hurt a customer. 
The year 2000 problem has led some law firms to set up specialized 
Y2K practices. ``It's the bug that finally gives lawyers the opportunity 
to rule the world,'' Evelyn Ashley, an Atlanta lawyer, said at one 
of the several Y2K panels at this year's American Bar Association 
meeting in Toronto. Some 30 lawsuits have been filed already, mainly 
focusing on whether software companies like Intuit and Symantec are 
obligated to provide free upgrades to programs that cannot handle 
the date change. Other questions being raised in court include whether 
insurance policies will cover damage caused by the year 2000 problem. 
But if legal fears have pushed companies to take the Y2K situation 
more seriously, they have also made it harder to solve the problem, 
because companies are afraid to disclose information about problems 
they have. The lawyers' defensive instincts are generating volleys 
of letters from companies to their suppliers, asking whether the suppliers 
will be ready for 2000. Sometimes the letters come with a threat to 
cut the supplier off if it is not moving fast enough. The initial 
mailing from a group set up by five big automakers surveyed 39,000 
auto-parts manufacturers, because an entire assembly line could be 
idled if even one crucial part were not delivered. The airline industry 
has hired a consulting firm to survey the air traffic control, fuel 
supply, luggage handling and other systems at all 550 airports in 
the United States. ``Everyone is sending letters to everyone,'' Iacino 
of BankBoston said. ``We're like ants in an anthill. We're all stepping 
on one another.'' But the same lawyers who advise customers to query 
their suppliers are advising the suppliers not to answer the queries, 
or to answer them only vaguely. That is because statements about a 
company's readiness can be used against it in court. The legal gridlock 
has caused alarm. ``We've got to get this litigation monkey off our 
back so we can do our job,'' said Philip Rock, who is supervising 
Y2K work at the Bell Atlantic operations center in Framingham, Mass. 
Several medical groups and members of Congress have publicly rebuked 
makers of medical devices for not disclosing information about potential 
problems. Responding to concerns, Congress hastily enacted a law in 
October to shield companies from lawsuits based on wrong information 
they provide, as long as the disclosure is neither reckless nor fraudulent. 
But lawyers are advising that the law's protections are limited, which 
has discouraged companies from dropping their guard. The Y2K Economy 
New Strategies and New Jobs Lawyers are only part of a whole new niche 
in the economy created by vast spending on the Y2K problem. So many 
companies offer fix-it services or software that stock indices have 
been created to track them. Programmer shortages, though not as great 
as was initially feared, have pushed salaries of Cobol experts to 
$75 an hour in some cities. To retain its best programmers, Bank of 
America is offering bonuses of up to $75,000, half not payable until 
May 2000. Some of the work has been shifted to India and other countries 
where programmers are cheaper. Retired or laid-off Cobol programmers 
are getting second chances. Randall Bart, 41, of Torrance, Calif., 
who specializes in Unisys mainframe software, could not get another 
programming job after being laid off in 1988. ``I had dead-end experience,'' 
Bart said. He worked as a poker dealer, among other odd jobs. But 
this year, he found work as a programmer again, fixing millennium 
bugs on the Unisys computer of a pen maker. ``Come 2001, I'll still 
have experience that people don't want,'' he said. ``But at least 
I'll have made some money by then.'' Investors are already moving 
away from some companies seen as vulnerable to year 2000 problems. 
The stock of Executive Risk Insurance of Hartford, Conn., dropped 
sharply in July after Moody's, the credit-rating agency, said the 
company could face huge claims from clients that experience business 
breakdowns in 2000. On a broader scale, Global 2000, an international 
committee of major banks, is planning to issue a report card on the 
readiness of different countries in February, a move that politicians 
fear could cause capital flight from lagging nations. The millennium 
bug is also helping reshape corporate strategies. Corestates Financial 
Corp. of Philadelphia said the escalating cost of technology, including 
year 2000 repair, was one reason it agreed to be acquired this year 
by First Union Corp. of Charlotte, N.C. Some 18,000 Massachusetts 
Medicaid patients were recently forced out of the Tufts Health Plan 
because Tufts decided it could not reprogram its computers to handle 
changes in Medicaid while also fixing Y2K problems. ``It was a very 
difficult decision for us because serving the Medicaid population 
is part of our mission,'' said Richard Shoup, Tufts' chief information 
officer. ``But this is about business survival.'' Jan. 1, 2000 Ready 
or Not, Deadline Nears As midnight approaches on Dec. 31, 1999, some 
people will be happily participating in the greatest New Year's celebration 
of the last 1,000 years. Others will be bracing for disaster. But 
the final accounting will not necessarily come quickly. Indeed, Gartner 
Group projects that less than 10 percent of the disruptions will strike 
in the first two weeks of 2000. Edward Yardeni, the chief economist 
for Deutsche Bank Securities in New York who built a strong following 
on Wall Street by correctly forecasting the stock-market boom of the 
1990s, has said that there is a 70 percent probability that the millennium 
bug will cause a worldwide recession equivalent to the one that followed 
the 1973 oil shock. Enough computers will fail, Yardeni argues, that 
economies will not be able to maintain their current level of output. 
Many other economists, however, think the economic impact will be 
more transient, like that of a hurricane. The clashing prognosticators 
agree that, like the weather phenomenon El Nino, Y2K will be blamed 
for some problems in which it has no role. But also like El Nino, 
Y2K problems are certain to cause real disruptions. Many companies 
and government agencies are simply too far behind to finish in time. 
And some that seem to be on schedule will fall behind, because software 
projects are notorious for missing deadlines. Some big companies are 
confident that they will be ready. ``I'll probably be here that night 
because they'll probably want me here, but I'll be here yawning,'' 
said Rock of Bell Atlantic. Robert Green, Y2K manager for Public Service 
Electric and Gas, had a similarly calm forecast. ``Hopefully on December 
31, 1999,'' he said, ``the only ball dropping will be at Times Square.'' 
Cap Gemini, the consulting firm, found in a survey of 1,680 multinational 
companies that spending on the year 2000 problem had doubled in the 
six months ending in October, a positive sign. Still, the U.S. companies 
had spent only 61 percent and Europeans 48 percent of their year 2000 
budgets, meaning that a huge chunk of work still lies ahead. As of 
the end of the third quarter, Chevron Corp. had spent only $40 million 
of its projected $200 million to $300 million. And companies are finding 
the problem more costly than they thought. Merrill Lynch &AMP; Co. 
raised its budget in the last six months by $100 million, to $400 
million. The estimated cost to fix the federal government systems 
has almost tripled, to $6.4 billion from $2.3 billion in March 1997, 
with numerous agencies, including the Defense Department, rated by 
congressional overseers as hopelessly behind schedule. Even if the 
big companies are ready in time and the federal government catches 
up, surveys have shown that many small businesses, as well as federal, 
state and local government agencies, are way behind. So are many foreign 
countries. A minister in Jamaica said it would take that Caribbean 
nation until 2004 to be ready for the year 2000. Economic crises are 
diverting attention in Russia and Asia, while European companies must 
grapple not only with Y2K problems but also with the reprogramming 
needed for the new currency, the euro. Peter de Jager, the Canadian 
consultant who is perhaps the best-known year 2000 Paul Revere, now 
predicts that the world will probably muddle through without the catastrophe 
he once foresaw. It might not be a glorious goal, but many Y2K experts 
would be delighted if it were attained. After all, the world is now 
so dependent on computers that there is no going back. ``We cannot 
go back, because the infrastructure that undergirded our entire society 
25 years ago has been dismantled,'' Sen. Robert Bennett, R-Utah, who 
is chairman of the special committee on the year 2000 problem, said 
this summer. ``The skills are gone, the people are gone, the equipment 
is gone. Like it or not, we have no choice in this situation but to 
plow forward and, one way or the other, make it work.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>