<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981226.0108 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Amid the roiling confusion over how the impeachment drama in the Senate 
will end, there is for some in the capital a consoling certainty: 
Sen. Robert C. Byrd of West Virginia will be at hand to press the 
Senate to act with an eye to upholding its dignity before history. 
With 40 years in the Senate (which entitles him to be only second 
in seniority to Sen. Strom Thurmond with 44 years), Byrd has come 
to be accorded a peculiar bifurcated form of respect from his colleagues: 
while his influence on everyday issues has waned greatly, his views 
on history and constitutional protocols are immensely respected. His 
pronouncements on Senatorial procedure and prerogatives during the 
impeachment debate may well be treated like decrees. Yet not everybody 
is delighted that Byrd may be a force in the coming debate. Many in 
the White House, for example, are concerned that Byrd will be more 
a guardian of the Senate as an institution than of his own Democratic 
Party. The fear is not unfounded. In one incident, Sen. Mitch McConnell 
of Kentucky, as partisan a Republican as exists in the Senate, said 
last week that he would be guided by Byrd's counsel, especially over 
procedures as the drama unfolds. ``I think we need to follow the Constitution,'' 
McConnell told one interviewer. ``I've said I'm going to take my cues 
from Senator Byrd; I think he's the expert.'' Another incident occurred 
in October, when the White House sought to forestall the House vote 
to authorize an impeachment inquiry by trying to get 34 Democratic 
senators to sign a petition that they would never vote to convict 
President Clinton. Byrd took to the Senate floor and warned the White 
House to end its lobbying. ``Don't tamper with this jury,'' he said. 
To his own colleagues, Byrd said: ``We may have to sit as jurors. 
Don't let it be said that we allowed ourselves to be tampered with.'' 
Stunned White House officials quickly backpedaled, fearful of offending 
Byrd. More recently, Byrd offered another version of his ``butt out,'' 
this time to former Presidents Gerald R. Ford, a Republican, and Jimmy 
Carter, a Democrat. In a joint Op-Ed article in The New York Times, 
they urged a solution in which Clinton would be censured after a partial 
acknowledgment of lying under oath. In a statement released on Monday, 
Byrd reinforced his reputation for guarding the Senate's prerogatives, 
saying that no one outside the Senate should be involved in brokering 
any deals. ``For the good of our nation, there must be no `deal' involving 
the White House or any entity beyond the current membership of the 
U.S. Senate,'' he said in his statement. It was meant, his aides said, 
as a message to the former presidents, and anyone else who might try 
to get involved, including former Sens. Bob Dole of Kansas, a Republican, 
or George J. Mitchell of Maine, a Democrat, both of whom have been 
mentioned as possible brokers. But to those who thought Byrd's sense 
of etiquette meant that he would insist on a trial, his statement 
also opened the door to a censure resolution, as long as it germinated 
solely in the Senate. In fact, Byrd talked last week with Senator 
Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Democrat of New York, according to a Senate 
aide. Moynihan has indicated that he favors censure. Byrd has had 
a reverential approach to the Senate throughout his career, steeping 
himself in its traditions, mastering its rules and writing a detailed 
two-volume history of it. ``After 200 years,'' he wrote at the end 
of the study, the Senate ``is still the anchor of the Republic, the 
morning and evening star in the American constitutional constellation.'' 
His inflexible view of the Senate's traditions and procedures led 
him to wage a successful fight to bar laptop computers from the floor 
last year. He is evidently more comfortable with the ornamental spittoons 
on the Senate floor, relics of another era, than laptops. Byrd is 
also a man who is deeply serious about the art of political oratory 
as practiced in its pre-television manner. He has, for example, developed 
a series of highly individualized hand gestures that are exquisitely 
coordinated with his language. Those in the Senate visitors' gallery 
who come upon Byrd holding forth are able to walk away without the 
disappointment of most tourists who discover that the world's greatest 
debating society, as the Senate has been billed, can be a bit of a 
bore. For some regulars in Congress, though, Byrd's long-winded style 
can be tedious. In his orations, Byrd is as likely as not to be discussing 
some obscure aspect of Greek history or to invoke a little-known Roman 
philosopher-politician to support his view on some contemporary budget 
issue. In a speech to colleagues last month in the Old Senate Chamber, 
given at the request of Sen. Trent Lott of Mississippi, the Republican 
leader, Byrd quoted Cicero: ``To be ignorant of what happened before 
you were born is to remain always a child.'' With great enthusiasm, 
he then recounted many of the Senate's most colorful characters (``Here 
the dashing Texas senator, Sam Houston, sat at his desk whittling 
hearts for ladies in the gallery''). But he concluded by lamenting 
how many in the modern Congress afford the presidency a more exalted 
role than they do their own branch of government. For all his stature, 
Byrd, who has said that he expects to run for re-election in 2000 
at age 83, has no significant legislative legacy to match his long 
tenure. He has said, for example, that he is proudest of defeating 
several efforts to enact a balanced-budget amendment to the Constitution. 
Yet in his home state, West Virginia, there are plenty of monuments 
to his time in Congress and especially to his status as a former chairman 
of, and still the senior Democrat on, the Appropriations Committee. 
It is, for example, difficult to drive through the state without using 
either the Robert C. Byrd Freeway, the Robert C. Byrd Expressway, 
the Robert C. Byrd Highway or, near Charleston, the Robert C. Byrd 
Lane. There are dozens of other public buildings and other structures 
throughout the state bearing his name. A new library at the College 
of West Virginia in Beckley _ the Robert C. Byrd Education and Resource 
Center _ is filled with computers that have as their screen-savers 
pictures of a smiling Byrd. A cheerful bust of him in bronze sits 
at the entrance. Byrd had persuaded Congress to provide $5 million 
to the private college to build the center as a ``pilot project.'' 
Robert Carlyle Byrd was born in North Carolina in 1917 as Cornelius 
Calvin Sale Jr. His father gave him up before his first birthday after 
his mother died of scarlet fever. He was renamed by the aunt and uncle 
who adopted him and took him to West Virginia's coal fields. The family 
moved around the state by wagon, living for a time in Wolf Creek Hollow 
in Mercer County, ``a few miles from the hard road,'' as he once recalled 
in an interview. He took up the fiddle and learned to play most of 
the traditional tunes of the mountains, both mournful and joyous. 
(In 1982 he abruptly hung up the fiddle forever after his nephew was 
killed in an auto accident.) He began his working life as a butcher 
in company stores in West Virginia's coal towns but yearned for a 
political career. Aided by his oratorical skills and his fiddling, 
he was elected to the state Legislature in 1946. In 1952 he was elected 
to the U.S. House and six years later to the Senate. Asked what he 
is doing to prepare himself for the debate and possible trial of Clinton, 
Byrd said this week through a spokeswoman that he expected to immerse 
himself in various historical tracts, ``different authorities on England 
and the American colonies and the American states, prior to the constitutional 
convention,'' and other articles about what became of the United States 
in the next two centuries. ``This is a very serious constitutional 
matter,'' he said in a statement this week. ``It requires serious 
reflection, careful research and sober judgment, not legal shenanigans, 
partisan rhetoric and shooting from the hip.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>