<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981226.0198 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Just when it appeared that the Rangers were about to duplicate their 
pre-Christmas frustrations against the Carolina Hurricanes at sold 
out Greensboro Coliseum on Saturday night, Petr Nedved scored when 
he broke between two defenders on a breakaway. It was one of many 
goals the Rangers hope the center will score this year, and Nedved's 
goal early in the second period pushed open the floodgates. The Rangers 
(12-14-7) scored five more times over the next nine and a half minutes, 
as they rolled to a 6-3 victory over the Hurricanes in front 11,059 
fans. The second period, in which the Rangers went from a 1-0 deficit 
to a 6-1 lead, was an elixir for a team that had lost its last three 
games, including Wednesday's 1-0 decision to Carolina at Madison Square 
Garden. Rangers Coach John Muckler shuffled his lines for Saturday 
night's game. Nedved, moved to a line with wingers Mike Knuble and 
Niklas Sundstrom, had two goals and two assists in the second period. 
Adam Graves also scored twice. One player had his first goal of the 
year and another had his first two assists. The organization's record 
for goals in a period, eight in a 1971 game, still stands, but it 
was threatened. They scored six goals on eight shots, converting three 
times against the starter Arturs Irbe and three times against Trevor 
Kidd. The Rangers matched the six goals they scored in the second 
period of an 8-3 victory over the Pittsburgh Penguins on Nov. 16, 
1997, and this time it only took the Rangers 10 minutes to do the 
damage. Kevin Stevens put the Rangers ahead at 6:38, slipping a backhand 
shot inside the left post after Nedved prevented the puck from leaving 
the offensive zone and slid it to the left wing in front of the Hurricanes' 
net. It was 3-1 just 55 seconds later when Nedved, while backskating 
toward the right-wing boards, deftly lifted the puck over Irbe's left 
shoulder. It was Nedved's seventh goal since joining the Rangers in 
a Nov. 25 trade that sent Aleksei Kovalev to Pittsburgh. Kidd replaced 
Irbe, Carolina's third goalie change this season, and had barely finished 
strapping on his pads before Graves took a centering pass from Sean 
Pronger and flipped it over the sprawling goalie at 9:00. The assist 
was Pronger's first point in eight games, but it wasn't even his last 
of the second period. After Peter Popovic's slap shot made it 5-1 
at 10:03, Pronger assisted on goal No. 6. Marc Savard dug the puck 
out of the corner and dropped it to Graves, who one-timed his 15th 
goal of the year from the left-wing circle. It was the first time 
the Southeast Division-leading Hurricanes (16-14-5) had given up six 
goals in a game, let alone one period, this season. Four of Carolina's 
top defensemen had been scratched with various injuries. And two others, 
Adam Burt and Curtis Leschyshyn, played sparingly tonight while nursing 
minor injuries. That left the Hurricanes with Marek Malik in the starting 
lineup. Malik had been out of the NHL for two seasons.It also forced 
the Hurricanes to play the youngsters Mike Rucinski and Steve Halko 
a great deal. Carolina, which scored Wednesday's only goal early in 
the third period, jumped in front by 1-0 eight minutes in tonight 
on Sami Kapanen's first goal in almost a month. Kapanen skated into 
the slot and received a backhand pass from Ray Sheppard to the left 
of the net. On his way through, the Finnish Olympian slid the puck 
past goalie Mike Richter to the stick side. For Kapanen, it was his 
eighth goal of the season, and first since Nov. 28 against the Islanders. 
He had been an offensive nonfactor of late, going without a point 
in the Hurricanes' last five games. The first period ended with the 
Rangers having been getting outshot by 7-2. Of course, after the fireworks 
in the middle period, the opening 20 minutes could be long forgotten 
by the Rangers. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>