<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981226.0026 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The earliest confirmed case of infection with HIV-1, the virus that 
causes most AIDS cases around the world, is in a blood sample taken 
from an African man in 1959, in what was then the Belgian Congo. Earlier 
this year, DNA analysts at the Aaron Diamond AIDS Research Center 
in New York, comparing that sample with others and calculating mutation 
rates, estimated that the killer virus came into existence sometime 
in the late 1940s or early 1950s. If that's the case, what happened? 
Where did it go? How could the virus, which is now threatening to 
kill a quarter of some African countries, have gone virtually unnoticed 
for 20 years _ and then emerged in America, decimating gay men and 
hemophiliacs in the 1980s and starting on a ruthless march of conquest 
around the world? Was it a failure of medical detection? Racist indifference 
to Africa by the West? Something in the rapidly mutating virus itself? 
The short answer is: No one knows for sure. But there are pretty good 
theories. The history of the epidemic is a jigsaw puzzle of helpful 
and unhelpful facts, disproven former ``facts'' and a lot of notions, 
both scientific and paranoid. Each new fact sweeps big chunks of the 
puzzle onto the floor. Making matters worse, it's probably the most 
geopolitically touchy disease since porphyria drove England's 18th-century 
kings mad. It makes the bubonic plague look politically correct. Everyone 
hates rats and fleas, but AIDS can't be discussed without talking 
about matters at the core of human nature, desire or habit: sex, blood, 
homosexuality, heroin-shooting, walking skeletons, brain viruses, 
even monkey-eating. The most paranoid theory _ that the disease was 
created in a U.S. Army germ warfare lab built in Maryland in 1977 
_ was exposed as KGB propaganda first published in 1985. This latest 
DNA analysis, performed last February, demonstrates that the disease 
long predates the lab. Many scientists have long thought that the 
HIV virus came from African monkeys. Several varieties of SIV (simian 
immunodeficiency virus) have existed harmlessly, probably for thousands 
of years, in green monkeys, mangabeys and baboons, but not in Asian 
or South American monkeys. Monkeys are eaten in the central African 
rain forest, and raw monkey brain is said to be a delicacy in parts 
of Zaire, just as it is in Hong Kong. The assumption is that the virus 
jumped to humans who had eaten or butchered monkeys, or had been bitten 
by monkeys. That could have happened any time _ or many times _ in 
the last 10,000 years. It probably happened at least three times, 
because HIV-2, the weaker strain prevalent in Guinea-Bissau, is closely 
related to the SIV in local mangabeys. The same is true for HIV-O, 
a rare strain found in Cameroon. Neither is genetically close to HIV-1, 
the virulent strain that has been killing people from central Africa 
to San Francisco to Bangkok. But HIV-1 didn't necessarily jump to 
humans as a killer. Some scientists believe a weak early form was 
caught by European colonists as early as 1900, and one scientist blames 
it for an outbreak of PCP pneumonia, which is associated with AIDS, 
in Danzig, Germany, in 1939. Others are skeptical. Somewhere, probably 
west of Lake Victoria, and sometime, possibly in the 1940s, HIV-1 
mutated inside a human host into an attacker of T-cells and rapid 
destroyer of immune systems. It must have spread very slowly at first, 
in rural areas. It certainly was not killing large numbers of Africans. 
``If the disease had been widespread in the 1950s and 1960s, there 
were enough experienced clinicians in Africa to have noticed something 
like that going on,'' said Dr. Anne Buve, an epidemiologist with the 
Institute for Tropical Medicine in Antwerp, Belgium. Some time in 
the 1960s or 1970s, said Dr. Peter Piot, a former researcher in Zaire 
who is now the executive director of UNAIDS in Geneva, the virus probably 
moved out of Zaire's rural areas to the cities, and then spread from 
the continent. It may have gone to Haiti with the French-speaking 
Haitians who filled up Zaire's civil service after the Belgians fled 
in 1960. It may have gone straight to America, perhaps with the Peace 
Corps. It may have gone to Cuba with soldiers returning from northern 
Angola. In any case, it ultimately came to public attention because 
it somehow got into a population vastly different from central Africa's. 
The gay communities in San Francisco and New York were small and insular. 
Anal sex and promiscuity sped the virus through them. Gay Americans 
were also well educated, well served by doctors and well organized 
in a civil rights struggle. When mysterious deaths began to hit, they 
noticed immediately and shouted loudly. Within five years of the late 
1970s, when fears focused on rumors of ``gay cancer,'' the disease 
had a name and its virus had been found. Books and TV movies followed. 
Meanwhile, in Africa, AIDS was making steady progress, but with less 
public attention. As early as 1981, doctors in Paris and Brussels 
diagnosed it among wealthy Zaireans treated in Europe. By 1983, doctors 
from the Institute for Tropical Medicine and the Centers for Disease 
Control were hunting it in Africa. As Mirko Grmek's ``History of AIDS'' 
(Princeton University Press, 1990) describes a 1985 conference on 
African AIDS, only a few cases had been confirmed in Africa. ``Belgian 
and French physicians attending the meeting insisted a true epidemic 
was under way,'' Grmek wrote. ``The representatives of affected countries 
took offense and insisted on denying the problem.'' Another quirk: 
most of the first hard-hit countries were Francophone, to which the 
British and U.S. press pay less attention. Slowly, more facts turned 
up. A Danish surgeon who died in 1977, apparently of AIDS, had worked 
in rural Zaire from 1972 to 1975. An increase in Kaposi's sarcoma 
dating to mid-century was recalled. More aggressive Kaposi's hit Zambia 
and Uganda in 1982. When researchers traveled through remote western 
Uganda in 1985 to study ``slim disease,'' which appeared in the early 
1980s, they brought new AIDS-test kits, and all 29 ``slim'' victims 
proved HIV-positive. A 1987 study by Piot of 454 blood samples frozen 
after a 1976 Ebola virus outbreak in Zaire found five HIV-positive 
ones. AIDS migrated out along truck routes, hitting hardest in border 
towns where truckers wait for days to clear customs. It was also still 
mutating; _ there are now 10 subgroups of HIV-1, all fatal. Now a 
new question is stumping scientists: Why is AIDS hitting eastern and 
southern Africa so much harder than it did the area where it originated? 
Among pregnant women visiting clinics in Kinshasa, the capital of 
Congo, and nearby Yaounde, Cameroon, infection rates reached a plateau 
that was below 10 percent. But in eastern and southern African cities 
from Kampala, Uganda, to Richard's Bay, South Africa, they have hit 
30 percent and are still rising. No one knows why. The virus may have 
mutated. Southern Africans may have less resistant genes. There may 
be something in sexual habits, venereal disease rates, circumcision 
practices. Figuring out exactly where it all started, some scientists 
say, is less important. ``People have become pretty pragmatic,'' Buve 
said. ``They are asking, `Do we need to know? Let's rather look at 
the future.' '' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>