<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981226.0097 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The life of every seriously ill child is shrouded somewhat in mystery. 
A clinic visit will reveal symptoms: a runny nose, congested breathing, 
deteriorating weight. But it is hard to determine in a half-hour visit 
what other details about a child's life might be contributing to obvious 
health problems. The larger stories behind children's illnesses, and 
clues about how to treat them, can often be found away from the doctor's 
office, in the homes where the children live. For this reason, Dr. 
Alex Okun, an associate professor of clinical pediatrics at the Albert 
Einstein College of Medicine and Montefiore Medical Center in the 
Bronx, makes house calls part of his weekly routine. Only in the home 
will he learn, for instance, that despite denials from the family, 
a child with chronic asthma lives with a chronic smoker, or plays 
with a neighbor's cats. In the home, he can find clues to why a child 
is neglecting his medicines. And he can quietly watch, over a period 
of visits, how a child's illness is used as a pawn in a tattered romantic 
relationship. House calling is a practice so antiquated, particularly 
when managed care rules the economics of health care, that it seems 
almost quaint. But Okun says that home visits are crucial to the care 
of his largely poor patients in the Bronx, many of whom have serious 
illnesses. Those who come to his clinic in the Morris Park section 
of the Bronx with extreme medical needs are offered home visits. Few 
decline. ``If you just work with people who come to your office, you 
miss out on a lot of the people who are in on the discussions of how 
care is given at home,'' Okun said. ``The decisions there are never 
as black and white as when a computer comes back and says, `Give ampicillin.''' 
There was the child with a complicated autoimmunity disorder who appeared 
not to be absorbing his medications. Okun suspected that he actually 
was not taking them. This was confirmed by the little piles of pills 
the doctor found near a stack of baseball cards in the boy's room. 
The pills were kept in a plastic box with a.m. and p.m. inscriptions, 
but the boy did not like the container because it was the same kind 
used by his grandmother, who has AIDS. By visiting the apartment, 
Okun also discovered that the boy's mother worked nights and was not 
around to remind him to take his medicine. The solution: a new container 
for the pills and a sports watch that beeped when it was time to take 
them. ``Six months later,'' Okun said, ``all his levels were almost 
perfect.'' Okun, 41, discovered the value of house calls in 1986, 
his first year out of medical school, when he worked in rural Kentucky 
and visited patients' homes, accompanied by practical nurses. He said 
he learned then that the person who holds power in a family often 
never sets foot in the doctor's office. ``Sometimes, the person who 
was totally overlooked, like the granddaddy or something, was completely 
in charge,'' he said. He now frequently takes medical residents with 
him as part of their training. More critical and long-term care takes 
place in the home now than it did a decade ago. For people with limited 
resources and means, a case manager of sorts, like Okun, who sees 
patients in what amounts to a hospital within a home, may be the only 
thing that holds the fragile arrangement together. Even though insurance 
companies typically do not reimburse doctors for house calls, the 
home visits have proved so effective that they will be a major component 
of care at Montefiore's hospital for children, which is scheduled 
to open in 2001. ``A few decades ago, house calls were the norm,'' 
said Dr. Irwin Redlener, director of community pediatrics at Montefiore. 
``The purpose of house calls was to give medical care to patients 
who couldn't get to you. Now, it is to observe conditions in the home 
and use that information in deciding treatment.'' On a recent Friday 
afternoon, Okun's first stop was a public housing project in the northern 
Bronx, where Bridget Walker and George Curtis are raising two daughters, 
Jeanne, 12, and Geneva, who is almost 7. The older girl has serious 
respiratory problems and is hooked up to a ventilator at night. Both 
girls are also obese, which for Geneva has meant an early onset of 
puberty that Okun is hoping to arrest. Okun's impressions are usually 
formed over months, and even years, of visits to his patients' homes, 
but clues to these girls' problems can be seen even on one afternoon. 
There is the matter of Geneva, a bright and animated child who constantly 
interrupts conversations, answers questions directed at her shy older 
sister, and generally tries to keep all the attention in the room 
focused on her, by, for example, pounding on an electric keyboard 
as the doctor examines Jeanne. Then, there are the material artifacts 
of their challenges: large oxygen tanks that make a small apartment 
seem even tighter, files containing a paper trail of battles with 
insurance companies and six-packs of heavily sugared soda that should 
not be consumed by a 6-year-old who weighs 165 pounds. Okun cannot 
force a family to diet, but seeing their nutritional habits helps 
him to open the doors of discussion. ``When doctors tell you you need 
to lose weight or take your medicines on schedule from behind their 
desks in the office, it usually sounds like criticism,'' he said. 
``If they come to your home to talk about it, it shows that they care.'' 
The next stop was at another housing project, this time in the South 
Bronx, where a little boy with advanced infant Lou Gehrig's disease 
lives with his mother, his half brother and his father. The goal of 
these home visits, in addition to monitoring the condition of the 
boy, Magno Morales _ who goes by the name Noel _ is to decide ultimately 
how he will live out his short life. Noel, who is almost 3 years old, 
is tethered to a respirator, which sits in a little basket behind 
his wheelchair and is connected to him through his throat. The situation 
in the home seems almost as complicated as it is painful. Francisca 
Suazo, the boy's mother, a home health-care attendant, is clearly 
drained; Dorrette Allen, a practical nurse, stays with Noel for most 
of each day. Ms. Suazo seems to hang back when Okun visits, ceding 
a certain amount of authority to Ms. Allen, who appears the most knowledgeable 
about the boy, his routines and his needs. Noel's father has barely 
said three sentences to Okun in the two years the doctor has been 
visiting there. ``As part of the discussion to try home ventilation,'' 
Okun said, ``it was important to me to stress to Noel's parents that 
they could go back on the decision to sustain his life mechanically 
if, after a while, they thought it caused him too much pain and suffering 
for too little perceived benefit. I don't see that as the situation 
now, and neither do they, but such a time could come.'' By visiting 
Noel and his family at home, Okun said, he hopes to see when such 
a time begins to approach. If he saw the boy only at his office, he 
might miss the early, subtle signs of stress. Sometimes, a home visit 
reveals that conditions are better than expected. The following Friday, 
Okun made his first visit to Carol Barnes and her 6{-month-old baby, 
Keonna, who was born prematurely and needs oxygen full time until 
her lungs can work on their own. Because Ms. Barnes has a bad back 
injury from moving patients around as a health-care worker at Bellevue 
Hospital Center, she has a hard time moving around oxygen tanks and 
other equipment, and is hoping for a little help. Tired or not, she 
keeps her home in perfect order. The nursery is immaculate. The kitchen 
table is set as if guests were on their way. Oxygen tanks are neatly 
hidden behind a couch. Medicines are put out of the way. On the way 
out, Dr. Adriana Matiz, an intern who usually cares for Keonna, expressed 
amazement. ``I have so much insight now,'' she said. ``I thought she 
would have medical supplies all over the apartment and that she was 
living in chaos.'' Okun agreed. ``The fact that she is very organized,'' 
he said, ``makes me conclude that she could be given a lot more responsibilities 
for the baby's complex care.'' Ms. Barnes said later that the home 
visit helped her to better show Keonna's problems to the doctors. 
She said that when she takes Keonna to the doctor's office, ``she 
just sits there, smiling. Most of the things she does that worry me, 
she does at home. So it was good for me to have them see her in her 
environment.'' The last stop is back at Noel's house. He has been 
having trouble breathing. His mother is upset. She wanted to go to 
Honduras to visit family, and Medicaid, as expected, had refused to 
pay for a full-time nurse while she was away. She stays in the kitchen, 
stirring pots and in obvious distress, while Ms. Allen, the nurse, 
talks to Okun about Noel's progress. Then Noel's father walks in. 
He nods in the general direction of Okun and retreats to the kitchen, 
greeting Ms. Suazo with a slight nudge. What is it here? Is there 
a clue? How is their relationship weathering this enormously stressful 
situation, and where does Noel fit between them? Okun is not sure. 
He tries to converse in Spanish with Morales, who gives one-word responses. 
``It's the first time he has talked to me in two and a half years,'' 
Okun says. It is one moment, one small secret slowly untangling before 
him. Perhaps, in time, more will be revealed. For now, Okun gives 
Noel a kiss on the head and is on his way. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>