<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981226.0016 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In sports, 1998 was a scrapbook of snapshots, with baseball demanding 
its own montage in what many devotees considered the most monumental 
season ever: Mark McGwire and Sammy Sosa hitting home runs, a record 
70 for the St. Louis Cardinals' first baseman and 66 for the Chicago 
Cubs right fielder. The Yankees, best described by Manager Joe Torre 
as a ``team team,'' enjoying their World Series sweep and a record 
125 victories. The right-hander Kevin Brown raising the roof of the 
free-agent market by signing a seven-year, $105 million contract with 
the Los Angeles Dodgers. Many other snapshots deserved to be enlarged: 
John Elway whirling through the air in running for a first down as 
the Denver Broncos finally won the Super Bowl, the first American 
Football Conference team to do it in 14 years. Michael Jordan stealing 
the ball from Utah's Karl Malone, then hitting the winning shot to 
assure the Chicago Bulls their sixth National Basketball Association 
championship. The United States Olympic female hockey players celebrating 
their gold-medal victory at the XVIII Winter Games in Nagano, Japan. 
The Jets, in only their second season with Bill Parcells as coach, 
attaining the altitude of first place in the AFC East division for 
the first time since the 1970 realignment. The Giants, with a 5-8 
record, wrecking the Broncos' bid for an undefeated season on Kent 
Graham's last-minute 43-yard touchdown pass to wide receiver Amani 
Toomer. Mark O'Meara raising his arms in triumph on the final green 
after his winning putt fell, in both the Masters and the British Open. 
Fireworks exploding on the Champs-Elysees in Paris after France's 
soccer team stunned favored Brazil in the World Cup final. Scotty 
Bowman skating with his Detroit Red Wings to hoist the Stanley Cup, 
his eighth as a National Hockey League coach, as Vladimir Konstantinov, 
severely injured in a limousine accident following the Wings' cup 
victory a year earlier, rolls onto the ice in a wheelchair. Jana Novotna, 
at Wimbledon, and Lindsay Davenport, at the United States Open, each 
winning her first major tennis title. Ricky Williams, the Heisman 
Trophy running back at Texas, galloping to Division I-A career records 
for rushing yards and all-purpose yards. Chamique Holdsclaw leading 
the University of Tennessee to its third consecutive women's national 
college basketball title. Awesome Again, in the Breeders' Cup Classic, 
preventing Skip Away from becoming thoroughbred racing's career money 
winner. Tara Lipinski, 15, soaring and spinning as the youngest figure-skating 
gold-medal winner in Olympic history. Casey Martin, with a rare circulatory 
ailment in his right leg, obtaining a Federal court order allowing 
him to ride in a golf cart between shots on the Nike Tour. Jeff Gordon 
roaring to another stock-car championship and Dale Earnhardt, in his 
20th start, finally winning his first Daytona 500. Se Ri Pak, a 20-year-old 
rookie from South Korea, attaining a rare golf double: the United 
States Women's Open and the Ladies Professional Golfers Association 
Championship. Mike Tyson pleading for a Nevada boxer's license and 
getting it, 16 months after biting Evander Holyfield's ears. Nykesha 
Sales, with her torn Achilles' tendon in a cast, banking in an uncontested 
layup for the UConn women's basketball scoring record, as arranged 
by her coach, Geno Auriemma, and the opposing coach, at the start 
of a game with Villanova. But some snapshots were smudged: The International 
Olympic Committee's investigation of alleged corruption in the choice 
of Salt Lake City as the site of the 2002 Winter Games, as well as 
alleged vote-buying in the choice of other recent Olympic cities, 
including Atlanta for the 1996 Summer Games. The indictment of four 
former Northwestern University football players on perjury charges 
related to betting on their own games, after two former Northwestern 
basketball players and two gamblers were sentenced to prison terms 
for trying to fix three Northwestern basketball games in 1995. The 
Olympic gymnast Dominique Moceanu's court order of protection from 
her father, Dumitru Moceanu. The Tour de France's expulsion of Festina, 
the world's top cycling team, after its coach supplied illegal performance-enhancing 
drugs to his riders; the investigation of other teams by French authorities. 
The deaths, within 33 days, of three college wrestlers while trying 
to lose weight. The paralysis of the Chinese gymnast Sang Lan in a 
fall during a Goodwill Games warm-up. And the National Basketball 
Association club owners' lockout of players that threatened to cancel 
the current season and the playoffs unless a labor agreement is reached 
by Jan. 7. For Baseball, Home Runs and Hugs In baseball's best single 
snapshot, Mark McGwire hit his 62d homer, touched all the bases (after 
initially missing first base) and touched all the hearts. He hugged 
his 10-year-old son, Matthew. With another hug, he lifted Sammy Sosa, 
who had 58 homers at the time and had hurried in from right field 
to congratulate him. Then he greeted the family of the late Roger 
Maris, whose 61 homers in 1961 broke Babe Ruth's record of 60 in 1927. 
Sosa was voted the National League's most valuable player for carrying 
the Cubs into the playoffs with a wild-card victory over the San Francisco 
Giants. McGwire stirred a debate over his use of androstenedione, 
a testosterone-boosting hormone allowed by baseball but outlawed in 
pro football and the Olympics. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>