<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981226.0001 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The driver of the bus that crashed here Thursday morning on its way 
to Atlantic City said he was trying to avoid what looked like a patch 
of ice when he lost control of the vehicle and it plunged down an 
embankment, killing eight people and injuring 15, investigators said 
Friday. Standing in front of the wreckage of the bus at a garage near 
the crash site, officials from the National Transportation Safety 
Board and the New Jersey State Police said they would begin a full 
investigation on Monday of what they called one of the worst highway 
accidents in memory. ``We will completely reconstruct this incident,'' 
said George W. Black Jr., a member of the safety board. The inquiry 
could take six months or more, he said. Lt. Daniel Cosgrove of the 
state police said investigators had interviewed the bus driver, Valentin 
Viner, 52, for several hours on Thursday. He said Viner, a Russian 
immigrant who spoke to them through an interpreter, said he had been 
changing lanes to get around a ``shiny'' spot on the road ahead. They 
said he touched his brakes to move behind another car, and the bus 
suddenly spun around and off the road. Cosgrove and Black would not 
say how fast Viner told the authorities he was traveling when the 
bus, which was carrying 22 passengers from Brooklyn, slid off the 
road at mile marker 123.8, rolling at least once and throwing some 
people through the windows. Another bus driver, who was following 
about a quarter-mile behind, Lamar Jenkins, said that Viner's bus 
was moving faster than the speed limit of 65 miles per hour. The authorities 
said only that Viner's account of the crash was consistent with witnesses' 
reports. A passenger who survived the crash, Murray Hollander, interviewed 
by telephone from his hospital bed, described Viner as a habitual 
tailgater who used a radar detector to avoid speed traps and who had 
narrowly escaped a crash two months ago in Staten Island, when his 
bus spun out of control. Hollander, 72, who remained in critical condition 
Friday at Memorial Medical Center in South Amboy, said he visited 
Atlantic City three or four times a week and frequently rode on Viner's 
bus. He and other passengers liked Viner because he drove fast, Hollander 
said, shortening the trip of two-and-a-half to three hours. ``People 
on the bus always say, `Let's get there in a hurry,' '' he said. Hollander 
said he was riding on Viner's bus two months ago when it spun out 
of control on a highway in Staten Island, approaching the Verrazano 
Bridge on its way back from Atlantic City. The bus did not hit anything 
and was able to resume the trip, Hollander said. Viner, who was treated 
at Memorial Medical Center for several broken bones and released on 
Thursday, could not be reached for comment Friday. Cosgrove said that 
investigators would examine Viner's driving history, including reports 
of any such incidents. According to the New York State Department 
of Motor Vehicles, Viner's license has been suspended twice, most 
recently in March after convictions for speeding and failing to stop 
for a school bus. His license was reinstated in June after he took 
a retraining course. Black said the agency had taken an interest in 
the crash both because of the number of injuries and because it is 
studying intercity and school bus crashes nationwide. The study is 
focusing on the ``crashworthiness'' of buses and on such ``human factors'' 
as drivers' sleep patterns and work schedules. ``When we find out 
where the passengers were seated, we'll try to match their injuries 
to the bus, and find out what caused them to be injured or ejected,'' 
Black said. One complication in that effort is that there were no 
seat belts for passengers, so they could have been walking around 
inside the bus when the accident happened, Black said. Federal guidelines 
do not require passenger seat belts in buses, he said _ another subject 
that the safety board is examining. Black said that the owner of Viner's 
bus, Bruins Transportation, of 300 Liberty Ave. Brooklyn, had last 
been examined by the Federal Office of Motor Carrier Safety on June 
21, 1996, and classified as well above average. ``There was no suggestion 
of any endemic difficulties with the carrier,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>