<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981226.0068 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Next month, Television City and the Fashion Cafe, two theme restaurants 
at Rockefeller Center whose owners once dreamed of branches in major 
cities around the world, will close. On Broadway at 49th Street, work 
stopped nearly a year ago on David Copperfield's Magic Underground, 
a theme restaurant that was supposed to combine magic, merchandise 
and good food. The owners have spent nearly $30 million, but it may 
never open. The Official All Star Cafe in Times Square has quietly 
been offered for sale, along with the nine other cafes in the chain. 
And several troubled restaurants in its parent chain, Planet Hollywood, 
are on the block. Theme restaurants, which exploded across the urban 
skyline three or four years ago with promises of untold profits from 
a slickly packaged blend of eating, shopping and entertainment, are 
collapsing. Even former Wall Street favorites like Hard Rock Cafe, 
Planet Hollywood and Rainforest Cafe have seen sales tumble as diners 
go elsewhere. Industry analysts and restaurant consultants cite various 
reasons. Though the restaurants' themes ranged from movie or TV memories 
to sports stars, supermodels and tropical rain forests, the food was 
often dismissed as terrible. The elaborate decor _ rock-and-roll collectibles, 
racing cars, animatronic jungle habitats _ was impressive but distracting, 
and the novelty soon wore thin. Rapid expansion into smaller cities 
like Indianapolis undercut the cachet of flagship restaurants in London 
and New York. Landlords, who once welcomed theme restaurants, have 
turned their backs. ``The life cycle of theme restaurants has been 
a lot shorter than anyone expected,'' said Ron Paul, president of 
Technomic Inc., a restaurant consulting firm based in Chicago. ``Even 
in New York, where there's a huge tourist population, the novelty's 
gone. It turns out that the consumer had a lot more entertainment 
alternatives.'' The trend is not confined to New York. The Fashion 
Cafe in London went into receivership in October. Planet Hollywood 
closed its movie-theme restaurants in Aspen, Colo., and Jakarta, Indonesia, 
and scratched plans to open an All Star Cafe in Chicago. Copperfield's 
Magic Underground scrapped plans to open restaurants in Chicago and 
Las Vegas, though it still hopes to open one in Orlando, Fla. Many 
other themes never got beyond the first press release. Restaurant 
analysts and real estate executives say the concept is not necessarily 
dead. They expect Hard Rock, the largest and oldest theme chain, to 
survive and even prosper, because it has done the best job of focusing 
on food and decor. Planet Hollywood is working on a plan to reorganize 
as a leaner company, jettison All Star Cafe and pull out of its tailspin. 
And newcomers like ESPN Zone and Wrestlemania Cafe, with their tie-ins 
to television, may catch on. But the carnage has been enormous in 
an industry where the number of theme restaurant chains jumped from 
6 to more than 30 in six years, and revenues rose to more than $2 
billion today from an estimated $300 million in 1992. Dive!, a theme 
chain backed by Steven Spielberg and based on claustrophobic submarine 
spaces and submarine sandwiches, has not gone beyond Los Angeles and 
Las Vegas. Billboard Live, featuring live music from Billboard magazine 
charts, died in Los Angeles. Vegas, which blended food and high-kicking 
chorus girls, announced its debut at a news conference in Times Square 
in September 1996 and promptly disappeared. Three never got beyond 
the hype stage: RKO Pictures, which was to combine food and old movies; 
Marvel Mania, which was based on Marvel comic book heroes, and Chefs 
of the World, a theme chain that would celebrate famous chefs. ``The 
industry's going to constrict dramatically and somewhat violently, 
either through bankruptcy or restaurant closings,'' said James Berk, 
president and chief executive of Hard Rock Cafe International, which 
operates 98 restaurants as well as hotels, concert venues and a record 
company. ``There will be no additional worldwide theme restaurant 
chains.'' Instead, he said, ``what will be left will be either good 
restaurants'' or some single-site themes called ``one-off'' operations 
_ restaurants located just outside major tourist attractions that 
depend on the tourist stream for survival. The present economic situation 
is a far cry from the mid-1990s. Robert Earl, the impresario who had 
helped Hard Rock expand well beyond its London roots, started Planet 
Hollywood in 1992 with actors Bruce Willis, Demi Moore and Arnold 
Schwarzenegger, adding 10 to 20 restaurants a year before going public 
in 1996. At about that time, restaurateurs suddenly saw theme restaurants 
as a bonanza. Food and beverage operations generated the 10 percent 
profit typical of any successful restaurant, but the high-priced merchandise 
_ T-shirts, sweatshirts, leather jackets _ accounted for as much as 
45 percent of the total revenues and as much as 70 percent of profit 
margins. In Manhattan, eager developers created what was practically 
a theme-restaurant district. The Jekyll &AMP; Hyde Club, the Motown 
Cafe and the Harley-Davidson Cafe followed Hard Rock and Planet Hollywood 
onto 57th Street and Avenue of the Americas. Comedy Nation, the Fashion 
Cafe and Television City also opened outlets in the area. In the first 
nine months of 1998, Planet Hollywood lost $15.7 million, compared 
with a profit of $52.1 million during the same period last year. Sales 
dropped 20 percent in the third quarter of this year at restaurants 
open for more than 18 months, continuing a two-year trend. Finally, 
shares of Planet Hollywood have plunged to less than $3 today from 
a high of $32.13 in 1996. Rainforest Cafe expects sales to drop by 
as much as 18 percent this year at the six restaurants that have been 
open for more than 18 months. At Hard Rock, sales were down about 
10.1 percent in the first nine months of this year, while overall 
revenue and operating profits rose more than 2 percent. Much of the 
decline came from a drop in sales of Hard Rock T-shirts and caps, 
Berk said, not because tourists and local residents were ignoring 
the restaurants. Two years ago, Berk said, the company realized that 
it had to cut prices and improve the food, while periodically changing 
the decor, to keep customers interested. ``People came to see the 
stars; there weren't any,'' said Robert Futterman, a retail real-estate 
broker based in New York who has been to most theme restaurants. ``They 
came to eat the food, and it was terrible. What do you need more than 
one T-shirt for? The thrill is gone.'' At Planet Hollywood, Earl is 
betting that the public has not lost its taste for theme restaurants. 
In January, the company is scheduled to unveil a revitalization program 
called Planet 2000, which is linked to the opening of the Planet Hollywood 
Hotel in Times Square. The company has laid off more than 70 people 
worldwide and has struggled with its lenders. Earl said the company 
would introduce new menus, prices, logos and designs for the restaurants 
and additional movie stars. ``I think it's fixable,'' he said. ``After 
the narrower concepts close, people will come back to Hard Rock and 
Planet Hollywood. There is some carnage, and I think there's more 
coming. You'll end up with the survival of the stronger ones.'' Some 
Planet Hollywood investors and real estate executives said Planet 
Hollywood was planning to dismantle the All Star chain. They said 
Planet Hollywood was quietly trying to sell the restaurants, or to 
find a partner, like Wrestlemania Cafe, that would create a new chain. 
Disney's ESPN Zone, with its electronic games, constantly changing 
array of sports stars and broadcasts for cable television, is doing 
well in Baltimore and is set to open in Times Square next year. Many 
analysts and real estate brokers expect it to knock what life remains 
out of All Star Cafe. Glen Tullman, vice chairman of the company running 
Copperfield's Magic Underground, said he expected to complete a new 
round of fund-raising for the project in Times Square, but analysts 
and restaurateurs say it will be almost impossible for the owners 
to make money after having spent nearly $30 million on a single site. 
David Liederman, the founder of Television City, a theme restaurant 
he opened in 1996 at Rockefeller Center and hoped to bring to other 
cities, holds out little hope for most theme restaurant chains. He 
said the time and money it took to develop an elaborate theme forced 
him to charge prices that many people were unwilling to pay. Next 
month, Liederman said, he will convert Television City into Chez Louis, 
a restaurant specializing in roast chicken cooked over wood fires, 
and focus on doing a few things well. ``I'm leading the de-theming 
pack,'' Liederman said. ``I think there's going to be a massive exodus 
out of this business.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>