<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981226.0088 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Beans are for sale in big metal buckets, and the potatoes are coming 
in. But in a camp for the displaced near here, there are still children 
whose bellies swell with hunger from under filthy T-shirts. Francois 
Higiro, 23, pointed his machete toward the banana trees where his 
brother was killed this year by invaders who swarmed in, as they often 
do, across the Congo border a few miles away. Here in Rwanda's turbulent 
northwest, there is evidence everywhere of the unfinished business 
of the attempt in 1994 to kill every Tutsi in the country. Here too 
is the best place to see why Rwanda is fighting so furiously in Congo, 
why Rwanda helped spur a rebellion there in August that has now widened 
into a war involving at least six outside nations. Rwanda is the smallest 
of those, but it has the biggest emotional stake in Congo, and negotiators 
in Africa and beyond acknowledge that Rwanda must feel safe from threats 
on its border if there is to be peace in the region. It was in Rwanda 
that the ethnic conflicts between the Tutsi minority and the Hutu 
majority exploded into a Hutu-directed genocide that killed more than 
half a million people in 1994. Many of the killers fled across the 
border into Congo. From there, these Hutu forces have been carrying 
out raids into Rwanda in a campaign to overthrow its government, which 
is now led by Tutsis. It was Rwanda's desire to stop these raids that 
led the government to back the rebellion of Laurent Kabila, who won 
power last year. But Kabila proved less pliant than the Rwandans liked, 
and as the attacks from the Hutu militia increased, they accused him 
of losing control of the borders. Rwanda then helped to sponsor a 
new rebellion _ this time against Kabila _ which began in August. 
Now, the United Nations asserts in a new report, Kabila has enlisted 
some of the former soldiers and Hutu militiamen conducting the raids 
on Rwanda to fight against the new rebellion. ``This is a profoundly 
shocking state of affairs,'' the United Nations said, accusing Congo 
of giving these forces a ``form of legitimacy'' because they are fighting 
along with Kabila's other allies, Zimbabwe, Angola, Namibia and Chad. 
As Philip Gourevitch, an authority on the 1994 genocide, put it, ``You 
cannot underestimate the real and psychological significance of the 
fact that the army and militia of the Rwandan genocide _ supposedly 
being pursued by a United Nations tribunal _ are being fielded as 
the legitimate army of Kabila's government.'' Gourevitch's book on 
the subject, ``We Wish to Inform You That Tomorrow We Will Be Killed 
With Our Families,'' was published this year by Farrar Straus and 
Giroux. ``It is hard to imagine any country on earth in Rwanda's shoes 
not feeling called upon to fight this war,'' he added. Kabila has 
refused to negotiate with the rebels, casting the fight as an invasion 
by Rwanda and Uganda. That interpretation has found support in Congo 
_ where the rebellion is unpopular with many people _ as well as among 
many other African states disturbed to watch Rwanda and Uganda try 
to overthrow their neighbor's government for the second time. But 
Rwandan officials point to the continuing problems in the northwest 
as proof of why they need to fight in Congo until its borders are 
secure. Over the last two years, aid agencies, diplomats and rights 
officials estimate, perhaps 5,000 people have been killed in attacks 
by Hutu militias and, in some cases, by Rwandan soldiers in retaliation. 
The violence has been centered in two provinces in the northwest, 
Gisenyi and Ruhengeri, on the border with Congo, an area of rich volcanic 
soil that in peace grows an abundance of beans, corn, cassava and 
potatoes. Now the two areas are swelling, with roughly 600,000 people 
displaced in the turmoil, four times the number of eight months ago. 
Most are living in fetid camps, where they are being fed by the World 
Food Program, which doubled its distribution in November. A blue appointment 
book on the desk of Ramadhan Barengayabo, the local district commissioner, 
tells the complex story of one of those camps, Busasamana, where about 
54,000 people, mostly Hutu, live a few miles from Congo's border. 
The first attack came in December 1997, when a band of perhaps 1,500 
Hutu militia swarmed the area around the camp, killing five people 
and releasing 103 prisoners, 67 of them suspects in the genocide. 
Most of the people living in the area are Hutu; the attack was not 
directed against them but against the local government, run by Tutsis. 
(Barengayabo said he was a target, but he happened to be out of town. 
His house servant was one of those killed.) After the attack, all 
but 2,500 of the 62,000 people then in the area fled, many to live 
in the forest with the raiders, saying they feared violence from the 
Rwandan Army. The refugees also believed the raiders, who are known 
as the interahamwe, when they promised a revolution to restore Hutu 
rule. ``They used to lie to the population that God sent the interahamwe 
to help the Hutu in Rwanda,'' said Clement Nsengiyumva, a 38-year-old 
Hutu engineer who lives in the camp. But slowly food began running 
out. The Tutsi-controlled government, far from collapsing, began encouraging 
Hutus to abandon the militia in return for food, shelter and protection. 
Several critics of the Rwandan government have begun to wonder if 
in fact the resettlement program has the added effect of allowing 
soldiers to keep a tighter control of the Hutu in the region. Certainly 
the Hutu militia branded those who returned as collaborators and, 
rather than killing only Tutsis, turned their violence onto some fellow 
Hutus. On May 26, after about 6,000 Hutus had returned to Busasamana, 
the militia attacked, killing 86 people and wounding 136, according 
to the district commissioner's blue book. There were other attacks. 
Higiro, who is Hutu, said his 26-year-old brother was a victim of 
the violence, his guilt assumed because he tried to run away. ``It 
was only interahamwe killing other Hutu because they didn't want to 
go with them,'' Barengayabo said. The effort to settle the rebellion 
in Congo has become bogged down, as the Rwandans and Ugandans, who 
have their own border problems, refuse to withdraw until their security 
is guaranteed. Kabila, who refuses to talk to the rebels, says there 
can be no peace until Rwanda and Uganda withdraw. There have been 
a number of proposals to break the stalemate before the war in Congo 
escalates to sustained fighting between the outside combatants. U.N. 
Secretary General Kofi Annan has suggested a peacekeeping force along 
the border. The recent U.N. report recommended disarming and demobilizing 
the militia, even as it noted that this would be an ``expensive, difficult 
and risky operation.'' It will be hard, though, to persuade Rwanda 
to take anything less than a continued direct role along its borders. 
Since it sent its soldiers to Congo, local officials and aid workers 
say, life has become quieter in Gisenyi and Ruhengeri, even though 
aid officials say the need for food remains severe. In Busasamana 
the population is nearly back to its original number. On a shelf in 
Barengayabo's office sit 12 potatoes with neat labels, one specimen 
for each variety grown in the region. The war in Congo started nearly 
five months ago. Potatoes take three months to grow. ``This is our 
first harvest,'' he said. ``It's very nice. You can see for yourself.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>