<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981226.0031 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With each astonishing signing by a high-revenue club this off season, 
the lament has grown louder: the day the 1999 season begins half, 
if not more than half, the teams will not have a chance to win a spot 
in next October's playoffs. Gene Orza wonders when that fact of major 
league life has not existed. ``When was it not true?'' asked the players 
association's No. 2 official. Even a cursory check supports Orza's 
point. Baseball history has been filled with teams that didn't have 
a chance from the opening pitch. In a 35-year period from 1934 through 
1968, the franchise now known as the Oakland Athletics finished in 
the second division, the lower half of the league standings, 33 times. 
The Washington Senators (later the Minnesota Twins) finished in the 
second division 24 times in a 28-year period from 1934 through 1961. 
In the first 59 years of the franchise now known as the Baltimore 
Orioles, the team finished in the second division 47 times. It finished 
first once, as the St. Louis Browns in 1944. The Chicago Cubs played 
for 20 successive seasons, 1947 through 1966, without emerging from 
the second division. The Philadelphia Phillies wound up in the lower 
half of the standings 45 times in the 56 seasons from 1918 through 
1973. At the other end of the spectrum, the Yankees won 22 pennants 
in 29 years, from 1936 through 1964, and 29 pennants in 44 seasons, 
from 1921 through 1964. In a shorter period, a 10-year stretch from 
1947 through 1956, the Brooklyn Dodgers finished first six times. 
The St. Louis Cardinals won nine pennants and finished in the first 
division nine other times in the 21-season stretch from 1926 through 
1946. In each of the next three years they finished second. The Yankees' 
dominance prompted their opponents to vote for the implementation 
of the draft of amateur players, beginning in 1966, but these days 
nonplaying baseball people view the predraft times as the good old 
days. Salaries in those times were not an issue. The players association, 
not unexpectedly, views recent developments differently from Major 
League Baseball officials, owners and general managers. As long ago 
as 1976, Bowie Kuhn, then the commissioner, decried the advent of 
free agency, warning that it would wreck competitive balance. The 
fact that no team repeated as World Series champion from 1978 until 
1993 presumably did not alter Kuhn's thinking. Four commissioners 
later, the people on the management side of the competitive fence 
say growing payroll disparity is wrecking competitive balance. Bud 
Selig, the current commissioner, has made the issue his No. 1 priority. 
But the players' representatives become uncomfortable when owners 
start mentioning competitive balance. ``Competitive balance does not 
deserve to be uttered with a view toward what it really means,'' Orza 
said. ``Competitive balance is a code for restraining payroll levels. 
That's what it means historically. They've been using that term for 
the last 20 years. They don't mean competitive balance.'' Officials 
and owners point to the 1998 experience to support what they say they 
mean. None of the 17 teams with payrolls under $48 million reached 
the playoffs. Only two of those teams, St. Louis and Toronto, had 
winning records. Of the 13 teams above that payroll plateau, only 
Baltimore had a losing record. And they see the trend becoming more 
severe. ``Not only are payrolls going up, but they're also going down,'' 
Sandy Alderson, Major League Baseball's vice president for baseball 
operations, warned last month. ``We lose sight of the fact that there 
are some clubs that are giving up.'' The Minnesota Twins last week 
became a case for Alderson's point. Proclaiming they could not compete 
in the current economy, the Twins said they would slash their payroll 
from a season-ending $24.5 million to a figure between $10 million 
and $15 million. The Montreal Expos had last season's lowest payroll, 
$8,317,500. Orza said no one should be surprised that payroll disparity 
exists. ``Who bought into a system that says New York and Los Angeles 
shouldn't spend more than Montreal?'' he asked. ``This notion that 
the goal of baseball should be to create a balance by which all the 
teams, no matter what their population base, what fan support they 
have, however well marketed and run they are, should have an equal 
chance to win the World Series isn't realistic. It's just the way 
it is. There always will be disparities.'' When owners buy teams, 
he added, they understand the rules. ``They don't say at owners meetings, 
`Because I have only 400,000 people available for local TV and you 
have 7 million, I'm going to want your money,''' Orza said. ``They 
say, `Let me in and I'll compete with you and beat your brains out.' 
Then when they don't win, they say: `It's not because I run a bad 
franchise or made mistakes; it's the other guy has an unfair edge 
over me because I'm in Montreal and they're in New York.''' The owners 
will continue to lament payroll disparity, but they obviously should 
not expect a sympathetic ear from the players association. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>