<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981226.0002 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The three firefighters were crawling on their hands and knees, using 
shovels and a rake to clear away three feet of debris that would soon 
yield the scorched bodies of a mother and her 12-year-old son. Then 
one of them said it: ``Merry Christmas.'' It was Thursday morning 
at about 8:30 a.m., eight hours before the sun would set on Christmas 
Eve, and the three men _ all volunteers from this borough of 38,000 
_ were in the neighboring town of Perth Amboy, crouched in the remains 
of a third-floor apartment that had been gutted by a predawn fire, 
a fire that several building residents had survived only by jumping 
to safety. As he was helping gather up his company's hoses, Jim Aleski, 
23, who had never before seen a body burned in a fire, figured his 
day had gotten about as bad as it was going to get. But then the fire 
truck radio crackled with word of an overturned bus on the Garden 
State Parkway here in Sayreville, about seven miles south, and soon 
Aleski and four other members of his company were speeding to the 
scene, so quickly that they left their hoses behind. They would spend 
the next six hours on that frozen roadside, assisting in the removal 
of eight more bodies and in the treatment of more than a dozen others, 
all still alive but many critically injured. ``It was,'' Aleski recalled 
Friday, on Christmas morning, ``just a typical day in the life of 
a volunteer firefighter.'' Even Aleski knew that wasn't really true. 
For no official here in central New Jersey could ever recall two such 
disasters occurring only hours apart and within such close proximity. 
And perhaps the only common denominator threading the two together 
were the five members of Melrose Hose Company No. 1 out of Sayreville 
who responded to both. Even in the best of times, serving as a volunteer 
firefighter is no job for the faint-hearted. In Sayreville, each prospective 
volunteer must devote 120 hours to training over a two-year period, 
and then spend the equivalent of more than a week each year thereafter 
on refresher courses. Then there are the alarms, which seem to come 
invariably in the middle of the night and are heralded by the ear-shattering 
blare of an air-raid siren. For the three dozen volunteers in Aleski's 
company _ one of four serving this borough of 16 square miles, all 
of which dispatched trucks to the bus accident _ that siren has gone 
off nearly 400 times this year alone. And every time it does blow, 
it's invariably on a holiday or someone's birthday. ``Not only our 
birthdays, because that you can live with,'' said Tony Jacowski, 40, 
a 17-year veteran of the department, who was driving a second truck 
from Company No. 1 to Perth Amboy Thursday when he was rerouted to 
the bus accident. ``It's our kids' birthdays. And our wives'.'' On 
Thursday, at least, Company No. 1 got to salvage part of the day: 
the five men who responded to Perth Amboy _ and the 11 others who 
joined them later that day on the Garden State _ were home by early 
evening. But though they were present in body, many conceded that 
they were miles away in spirit. As he sat in church at 5:30 on Christmas 
Eve, breathing a sigh of relief that he had made it in time to hear 
his 7-year-old daughter sing in the choir, Antonio D'Arpa realized 
that his fingers still smelled of smoke. ``It brought me back to that 
apartment, and that family,'' said D'Arpa, 37, who works full time 
as a packer in an industrial supply company. As he spoke to a visitor 
in a police department conference room Friday morning, D'Arpa doodled, 
apparently mindlessly, on a pad of white legal paper. Asked a moment 
later to describe how he and Aleski had helped unearth the bodies 
burned in the fire, D'Arpa suddenly spun the pad around to reveal 
the clearly drawn forms of a mother huddled close to her son, with 
the son's foot sticking up. ``It was kind of like this,'' he said. 
For those three firefighters, and a fourth, Sean Farrell, a 24-year-old 
Rutgers student, the day had actually begun just after midnight on 
Wednesday, when they were summoned by their captain, Dan Martin, to 
sleep at the firehouse. With snow beginning to fall, the captain's 
action was a precautionary one, so that if a call came in, they would 
not have to contend with slick roads to get to their truck. He and 
his men had been sleeping only a few hours when the call came in at 
about 6 a.m., summoning them to Perth Amboy to assist companies from 
other nearby communities. As it turned out, they were not the only 
emergency volunteers getting such an early start. George Gawron, 35, 
a sanitation worker here, and John Scanlon, 34, who works for the 
Middlesex County Roads Department, spent Wednesday night and Thursday 
morning plowing the three inches or so of snow that fell overnight. 
And they were still plowing at about 10:40 a.m. Thursday when Gawron, 
the president of Company 1, and Scanlon, a volunteer emergency medical 
technician, were alerted by their pagers of the bus accident. By the 
time Scanlon, an expert in extrication who had helped pry open the 
bus and cut away some seats, and Gawron, who removed the last two 
bodies, got to sleep Christmas Eve, they had been awake nearly 40 
hours. For Jacowski, the driver of one of the company trucks, the 
image that he focused on as he finally tried to go to sleep that night 
was of a man who refused attention for his broken right arm as he 
paced outside the bus. At his feet was his wife's covered body. ``He 
kept saying, `Take care of mama,' '' Jacowski said, though the man 
knew his wife was gone. Yet in the midst of such horror, there was 
the occasional ray of light. Martin and Jacowski said that when they 
threaded through the victims and reached the bus, which was rolled 
on its side, they were stunned to discover a woman inside with no 
protective gear, calmly counseling and tending to the injured. She 
told them that she had been a driver who had been passing by, a tourist 
from California with some emergency training who had been among the 
first on the scene and had somehow navigated the shards of broken 
glass and metal. After perhaps four hours inside, the woman slipped 
through the back of the bus after it had been cut open. As she did, 
Martin and Jacowski went around to meet her. But she was nowhere to 
be found. They never even learned her name. ``If she reads this,'' 
Jacowski said, ``we'd like to thank her.'' Thursday was a day for 
the firefighters to pay tribute to, and make amends to, their families 
as well. D'Arpa, whose daughter sang so beautifully in the choir, 
gave her a Furby Friday morning; he gave his son, age 2, a Hot Wheels 
fire truck. The boy played with it, uninterrupted, for the better 
part of an hour, his father said, beaming. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>