<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981226.0075 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When, as now seems likely, Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist opens 
the impeachment trial of President Clinton early next year, there 
will be no time devoted to jury selection. Nor will the jury be impartial. 
The fate of Clinton's presidency will be in the hands of the 100 famously 
independent egos of the Senate, men and women who will be weighing 
everything from the facts to public impatience with the Lewinsky story 
to the pull of party and faction to their own dealings with Clinton. 
``This is a unique process, of course,'' said Sen. Joseph Lieberman, 
D-Conn., who favors censure of the president instead of removal. ``There's 
a natural tendency to want to think of it in legal terms, but it's 
also political, which is the way the framers intended it.'' If the 
House was an angry pit of partisanship throughout the impeachment 
debate, the Senate is smaller, clubbier and usually more moderate. 
It was designed by the founders to be less subject to the passions 
of the moment. Senators have six-year terms, and each senator has 
enormous power to bring proceedings, if not to a standstill, then 
to a snail's pace. ``The power of a senator to just throw sand in 
the gears is incredible,'' said Sen. Tom Harkin, D-Iowa. ``In the 
House, one person can't do it. Maybe in some odd way that tends to 
make senators a little bit more cautious.'' The first sign of the 
moderation can be found in the fact that Sen. Trent Lott of Mississippi 
, the majority leader, and Tom Daschle of South Dakota, the minority 
leader, have been consulting regularly across party lines in recent 
weeks. ``They are talking a lot,'' Lieberman said. ``Both understand 
this is a test for the Senate.'' Still, achieving some kind of consensus 
on a way to avoid a lengthy, embarrassing trial _ a censure resolution, 
perhaps, or a brief trial that skips the evidence and moves directly 
to legal arguments on whether the offenses charged by the House warrant 
removal _ may prove difficult. The White House fears that as many 
as 20 of the 55 Republicans will want to push for a full trial. Some 
Democrats want Clinton to fight for a full acquittal instead of a 
censure agreement. And any censure measure that is worked out would 
have to be tough enough to attract Republican votes, while not driving 
away Democrats. ``I'm encouraged by the discussions,'' said one Democratic 
senator who has been searching for a solution. ``But this could blow 
up easily.'' Under the rules, a majority of the Senate can vote at 
any time to suspend a trial. And Democrats hope that the pragmatists 
and moderates on the Republican side of the aisle can eventually give 
them the extra 6 votes they need on top of their 45 to bring proceedings 
to an end. They will be looking toward Northeastern Republicans who 
work with Democrats on issues ranging from the environment to health 
care to campaign finance _ people like John Chaffee of Rhode Island, 
James Jeffords of Vermont, and Susan Collins and Olympia Snowe of 
Maine. Jeffords said in an interview, ``We should start the trial.'' 
But he expressed hopes that a censure agreement could be achieved. 
Other allies might be John McCain of Arizona, who is often a maverick, 
and Fred Thompson of Tennessee. Though such Republicans could help 
stop a trial, Democrats say they also need a conservative Republican 
with a following among Senate colleagues to negotiate a censure. An 
important factor in how this all plays out is the role Lott chooses 
for himself. Those who have talked to him say that he is eager to 
clear the way for his party to showcase an agenda ranging from tax 
cuts to education to Social Security policy. But his anger at Clinton 
burst into the open the week before last when he questioned the timing 
of air strikes in Iraq, and his power base remains the Senate conservatives. 
A large part of his original appeal among the Republicans who selected 
him as their leader is that he came from the House and had a sympathy 
for the conservatives that Newt Gingrich had shepherded into power. 
Lott's No. 2 in command is Don Nickles of Oklahoma, who is also a 
fierce conservative. ``The $64,000 question is,'' one Democrat said 
privately, ``will Trent Lott be able to resist the forces of the right?'' 
If he does not, another Republican could step forward to work with 
Democrats for a resolution short of removal. Sen. Robert Torricelli, 
D-N.J., virtually tried to nominate Republicans he hoped would take 
on the role when he spoke last week about the ``quiet giants'' of 
the Senate and named three Republicans, Ted Stevens of Alaska, John 
Warner of Virginia, and McCain. Sen. Orrin Hatch, R-Utah, was criticized 
by his colleagues earlier this year for looking too much like he was 
trying to help Clinton. Some think Sen. Slade Gorton of Washington 
might intervene. Thad Cochran of Mississippi has not ruled out censure. 
Even some of the Senate's strongest conservatives calculate that they 
would rather see the president censured than simply acquitted, says 
a Republican aide close to the social conservative movement. Most 
lawmakers apparently think the Senate, with 55 Republicans, will never 
be able to reach the 67 votes necessary to remove the president from 
office. ``I wouldn't support censure to replace the trial process 
or in any way impede us from moving to a trial,'' said Sen. Wayne 
Allard, R-Colo. ``But once you've had the trial, then afterward I 
could possibly support censure.'' For now, the Democratic Party appears 
unified against Clinton's removal from office. Passions have cooled 
since August, when the president first confessed to an ``inappropriate 
relationship'' with Monica Lewinsky, after seven months of denials. 
Lieberman, a longtime ally in the ``New Democrat'' movement, called 
the president's conduct ``disgraceful'' and ``immoral.'' Sen. Daniel 
Patrick Moynihan, D-N.Y., often at odds with Clinton over policy, 
also criticized his behavior. But both men are now supporting censure. 
Sen. Robert Byrd, an 81-year-old Democrat from West Virginia and the 
unofficial historian of the Senate, is another unpredictable personality 
fiercely jealous of the prerogatives of the Senate. He has already 
sent a sharp warning to the White House that any censure measure that 
is worked out should not involve ``any entity beyond the current membership 
of the U.S. Senate.'' But Byrd is indeed speaking with Senate colleagues 
about the wisest course of action. But he has also surprised Republicans 
who had predicted that he would be a strict constitutionalist and 
insist the Senate have a trial. Last week, he left the door open to 
the possibility that there could be ``some other solution.'' On the 
other hand, there are Democrats who think there should not be a censure 
deal _ or at least not unless Clinton first defeats the two articles 
of impeachment in Senate votes. Harkin said he had been telling the 
president's aides: ``You guys have got to get a grip here. Quit pushing 
for censure. You don't want to be the only president in history to 
be impeached and have it hang over your head the rest of your life. 
You want to be exonerated.'' (Andrew Johnson, the one other president 
to be impeached, was spared conviction by the Senate.) For all the 
maneuvering, senators have been become cautious about predicting events 
in the aftermath of the House's vote for impeachment, once considered 
unlikely. ``When this trial starts, anything can happen,'' Sen. Arlen 
Specter, R-Pa., said last week. ``I think that already we've seen 
so many turns and twists in the road, and I think we're going to see 
a lot more.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>