<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981226.0101 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
If ever subdivided homesites were judged to have an attractive bouquet, 
it would probably be here in the rolling hill country east of San 
Francisco, where instead of laying sod, developers have enhanced the 
appeal of their lots by planting row after row of zinfandel, merlot 
and chardonnay. Attempting to capitalize on the affinity many people 
have these days for vineyard living, two companies have created what 
they call ``vineyard estates.'' At decidedly champagne prices, buyers 
get a place to build a mansion and nearly 15 acres of land planted 
by the developers with mature grape vines. The total site is usually 
about 20 acres. There have been 10 buyers so far, some of whom had 
never harvested a grape before in their lives. Their inexperience 
is not necessarily much of an obstacle to having a productive vineyard 
since the property comes with the option of having contractors prune, 
pick and buy the grapes. Each home buyer can raise about 94 tons of 
grapes a year, which would produce about 73,000 bottles of wine. Among 
vineyard estate owners is Heidi De Mayo, a money manager, who, with 
her husband, Frank, an orthopedic surgeon, is building a Tuscan-style 
farmhouse on a hilltop that overlooks their vines and the oak-covered 
mountains across the valley. They moved here from Brewster, N.Y., 
a New York City suburb. ``We've always loved wine and I guess we are 
just fascinated with the vineyard lifestyle,'' Ms. De Mayo said the 
other day on one of her home's half-finished balconies. ``It's a really 
nice feeling out here.'' Ms. De Mayo does not expect to prune or weed 
her vines, though she has helped pick the grapes. She contracted with 
other wineries to do the work and to buy the harvest so that she can 
focus more on hosting dinner parties and appreciating the view of 
her vineyard out the window. But next year, the De Mayos plan on making 
about 300 bottles of their own wine, expecting to use the equipment 
of a local winery, for the sheer pleasure of it. They have not chosen 
a name for the label, though Ms. De Mayo said that she wants ``something 
Italian-sounding'' to go with the style of her house. She said she 
would probably have to spend at least $700 for a wine barrel, but 
that it was possible that the winery would make the wine at no cost 
to her if it buys her grape production. Their home is in the Crane 
Ridge development, a subdivision of 10 lots that sold out two years 
ago for about $800,000 each and are now being built up with a handful 
of custom homes. Parcels are about 20 acres and include a dirt driveway, 
space for a house and irrigated vines that are already producing grapes. 
Crane Ridge was created by Wente Brothers, the largest vineyard in 
this historic wine-producing community of 67,000, situated 50 miles 
east of San Francisco. It is believed to be the first development 
of its kind in the state, according to wine industry experts. Previously, 
small vineyards had almost always been sold independently in places 
like the Napa Valley, the grape growing region northeast of San Francisco. 
But at Crane Ridge, the marketing was more akin to tract homes in 
that multiple properties were developed from scratch and delivered 
ready for construction. Owners must design and build their homes and 
from the looks of three houses under construction, the overall style 
is Mediterranean and palatial. Phil Wente, executive vice president 
for Wente Brothers, said that the project had been initiated in an 
effort to maximize the sales price for grazing land that it owned. 
The potential for losing money was limited to the cost of putting 
in the driveways. ``It's fairly low risk for us because the only downside 
if there were no buyers was that we would have a bigger vineyard, 
which we could have used for ourselves,'' Wente said. His company's 
interest in the project was increased by statistics showing that small 
vineyards were popular. Wente said that nearly 40 percent of California's 
were on 20 acres or less. In marketing the project, Wente Brothers 
stressed the obvious _ the romance of living in the country and the 
vineyard ambiance. The company also used the Poppy Hills golf course 
across the road as a selling point. In the end, the most effective 
lure was probably the unusual business package that came with buying 
a property at Crane Ridge. In an effort to alleviate the fears some 
owners had about becoming novice farmers, Wente Brothers offered to 
manage their vineyards at a charge to each owner of nearly $40,000 
a year and buy their grapes. Most of the owners accepted. A few chose 
to sell part of their crops to other vineyards. ``Most of the people 
ask for a complete turnkey operation,'' Wente said. ``They just sit 
on the porch with a cigar.'' However, there is no guarantee that selling 
vineyard estates will be easy. Some home mortgage companies are reluctant 
to lend to buyers because they did not generally make farm loans. 
And, as in any real estate transaction, there were disagreements over 
what the land alone cost. It took 18 months and a price reduction 
of a few hundred thousand dollars before Crane Ridge sold its first 
parcel in 1994. The rest of the lots sold by 1996. Buyers have been 
spending upward of $750,000 to build houses, which range in size from 
3,800 to 7,000 square feet. ``There is not a wide market,'' said Joy 
Bowman, manager of broker relations at Ruby Hill. ``No one wants to 
be first, but I think that will change soon.'' On the other hand, 
owning a vineyard estate has certain advantages apart from the spectacular 
views. Among them is an annual income that at today's wine-grape prices 
approaches $100,000 after expenses at Crane Ridge, which nearly covers 
the average annual mortgage for owners there, according to Wente. 
There are also tax deductions that owners can claim by designating 
their vineyard a business. While owning a vineyard is not a tax shelter, 
the value of the land can be depreciated over 10 years and, since 
it is agricultural land, the state allows a small reduction in property 
taxes. Some of the buyers at Crane Ridge have no immediate plans to 
build a home and instead treat the vineyards purely as an investment. 
Vineyards have grown in value in recent years to up to $75,000 an 
acre in the most desired spots with the highest quality grapes, stoked 
by the popularity of vineyard living among the affluent and a 5 percent 
annual increase in wine consumption in the nation over the last few 
years. Generally speaking, owners at Crane Ridge say they are happy 
with their estates. Some had shopped for small vineyards in the Napa 
Valley, but found that the land was more expensive, the roads were 
congested, and that the idea of being novice farmers on their own 
was a bit daunting. Rhonda Wood, an airline pilot, who bought a lot 
with her husband, Michael, the chief financial officer for an air-conditioning 
manufacturer, said that they had always dreamed of retiring in wine 
country. But she said that opportunity came sooner than expected after 
they toured Crane Ridge. It was close enough to work that they could 
keep their jobs, said Ms. Wood, who had never owned a grape vine before 
in her life. And, if need be, they could ask for advice about their 
grapes from their neighbors or Wente Brothers. ``Anytime we need something 
we just run down the road and talk to someone,'' Ms. Wood said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>