<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981226.0123 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For six years, Muslims who work in midtown Manhattan have squeezed 
into the stuffy, low-ceilinged basement of an office building on West 
44th Street to pray. The congregation has grown so large that the 
main lunch-hour prayer on Fridays finds taxi drivers and street vendors, 
office workers and messengers, crammed together with barely enough 
room to exhale _ all to the unwelcome counterpoint of clanging heat 
pipes. But this modest assembly has a big dream: a building of its 
own with space to breathe and grow. And despite their humble circumstances, 
the 800 or so regular worshipers, most of them recent immigrants, 
are closing in on their goal. After five years of donating a few dollars 
here, a few dollars there _ boosted by the occasional emotional pledge 
of an entire week's paycheck _ the congregation has raised nearly 
$1 million toward the down payment on a $3.3 million, five-story building 
at 154 E. 55th Street, which it wants to convert into one of the city's 
most spacious Muslim prayer halls. ``If everybody puts, like, $5 or 
$10, it would help,'' said Ibrahim Bah, a Senegalese immigrant who 
was rushing after prayer on a recent Friday to get back to his work 
of selling shirts from a small table on the street. ``I think we must 
make it.'' With the advent of Ramadan, a month of daylight fasting 
for Muslims, the mosque leaders are hoping for a surge in donations. 
Giving to charities and to the poor is an obligation for Muslims during 
the holy month, when Islam teaches that any good deed will be multiplied 
in the eyes of God. ``We are giving money because this is the duty 
for Muslims,'' said Mohammed Alam, an immigrant from India who said 
he works as a technician for Federal Express. ``Sometimes we have 
so many people here to pray we go out in the street, in the cold and 
the rain. We simply need more space.'' Many of the worshipers are 
struggling themselves. Arriving for one recent Friday prayer session 
at the nondescript office building at 120 W. 44th St., they dragged 
their folded-up vending tables straight from their coveted sidewalk 
spots. Nearly all were immigrants from Africa, Arab countries, India 
or Pakistan. Most wore coats that were threadbare or too thin for 
the cold weather. There were no designer brands in the piles of shoes 
that the men, in accordance with the rules of Islam, removed before 
praying and left in the corners of the basement prayer hall. The modest 
but flourishing mosque, created by and for Muslims working nearby, 
is only the latest manifestation of a timeworn New York City pattern. 
One of the first impulses of many immigrant groups has long been to 
build their own houses of worship, first near their homes and then 
in the congested urban neighborhoods where they find work. When the 
garment trade moved out of Lower Manhattan in the early 1930s, for 
example, Jewish workers built a new Garment Center Synagogue, which 
still operates at 205 W. 40th Street, to accompany them uptown. The 
Seamen's Church Institute, which operated first as a floating chapel 
in the mid-1800s and then out of a large church building on South 
Street, still serves an international congregation of mariners in 
a new facility on Water Street. As the number of immigrants to the 
United States from Muslim countries has risen in the past decade, 
so has the number of mosques in the New York City area, which now 
counts about 400 scattered throughout residential neighborhoods in 
the five boroughs and Long Island. Tucked among the office towers 
of Manhattan are about 10 mosques, most operating out of rented quarters 
and serving overflow crowds of workers from the surrounding neighborhoods 
at the noon prayer on Fridays, the one time during the week when Muslims 
are obligated to worship as a congregation. The first Manhattan mosque 
was opened 45 years ago at 1 Riverside Drive. Like those opened in 
the following 20 years to serve Muslim immigrants, it was built with 
help from foreign governments and their diplomats. Those mosques tended 
to be moored to specific immigrant groups _ a Turkish mosque, an Albanian 
mosque, an Egyptian mosque. In more recent years, as the U.S. Muslim 
population has grown more diverse and more settled, the congregations 
of most city mosques have become more mixed and more intent on relying 
on their own resources. ``We are modest people _ a real mix from all 
over the world, just like Manhattan,'' said Mohammed Ali Abdelaal, 
the midtown congregation's director. ``When I realized some years 
ago how many people are interested, I thought to myself that if every 
one of us brings $1,000, we could soon have $1 million.'' Abdelaal 
immigrated to New York from Egypt 25 years ago. The imam, or prayer 
leader, came from Egypt just last year. The worshipers represent nearly 
every continent, with some working in white-collar professional jobs 
and others scraping by as sidewalk vendors. The collection for a new 
mosque has been under way for about five years, and in September, 
Abdelaal and other trustees of the Islamic Society of Mid-Manhattan 
felt confident enough of their fund-raising capacity to sign a contract 
to buy the building. Two-thirds of the cost, or $2.2 million, will 
be provided by United Bank of Kuwait in what the bank general manager, 
Abdelkader Thomas, described as a ``lease-to-own'' arrangement that 
is consistent with the Islamic prohibition on charging interest on 
debts. The rest must come from the congregation, which is still short 
about $100,000 and faces a scheduled closing on the sale in early 
January. If the money is not raised from donors, mosque officials 
said they would go back to the bank for additional financing. ``There 
are a number of appeals going out,'' said Thomas, an American-born 
convert to Islam who is also a member of the board of trustees of 
the congregation. The congregation grew from a few people who began 
praying together 10 years ago in a room provided by a friendly manager 
at the Roosevelt Hotel, on East 45th Street, to the normal Friday 
contingent of 800 to 1,000 people who crowd into the West 44th Street 
basement and spill out onto the street. Abdelaal said annual rent 
increases have made the basement too expensive, more than $7,000 a 
month. With a full five floors at the building it plans to buy, he 
said, the congregation hopes to open a school and earn income from 
a street-level restaurant. All that would be a big change from present 
conditions. The handful of women who pray on Fridays squeeze between 
filing cabinets and a desk in the imam's makeshift office. Piled cardboard 
boxes separate them from the men, who pray shoulder to shoulder under 
bare light bulbs hanging from a low mildewed ceiling. A few floor 
fans provide the only air circulation. Moving, as a result, is on 
everyone's mind. ``Don't forget,'' called out Ahmad Dovidar, the imam, 
as he sent the worshipers back to their day jobs after prayer recently. 
``Pray to move very soon to our new place.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>