<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981226.0036 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
U.S. troops in the Persian Gulf are vaccinated against deadly germs. 
So are FBI agents who are probing a growing number of biological incidents. 
So are some White House officials. Protections against living weapons 
are new to the military and security of the United States, and they 
raise troubling questions. Is this prudence or paranoia? Should everyone 
be vaccinated? How real is the threat? Aren't deadly germs nearly 
impossible for attackers to use without hurting themselves? Isn't 
this threat just another bogeyman, like so many before? Germ weapons, 
though around for centuries, have played no significant role in modern 
warfare and terrorism. Skeptics point to this history and say that 
biological strikes of any consequence are unlikely. But officials 
in Washington from President Clinton on down are taking the issue 
very seriously, with thousands of people and billions of dollars in 
motion to address the germ threat. ``Eventually, this is going to 
hurt us,'' said Robert Blitzer, who recently left the FBI after directing 
its section on domestic terrorism. ``There's no question in my mind.'' 
Moreover, a yearlong inquiry by The New York Times revealed trends 
that suggest the era of germ tranquility may indeed be ending: _ Uprooted 
weapon scientists from Iraq, Russia and South Africa are hunting for 
new jobs and spreading germ secrets. _ Radical states with reputations 
for supporting terror, such as Iran and Libya, are seeking germ weapons. 
_ Terrorists, including Osama bin Laden, are increasingly interested 
in pestilential germs. Some boast openly of being able to kill foes 
with deadly plagues. Today, officials in Washington stress that they 
know of no imminent danger, even while acknowledging the limitations 
of intelligence. Most agree that the threat, while low, is growing. 
The defenses that Washington is quietly erecting, officials say, are 
akin to the insurance that homeowners take out against floods and 
earthquakes. The odds may be small, this argument goes, but precautions 
are warranted since conditions are changing and damage could be great. 
R. James Woolsey, director of Central Intelligence from 1993 to 1995, 
is among the former officials who are worried. Germ terrorism, he 
said in an interview, is ``the single most dangerous threat to our 
national security in the foreseeable future.'' Germ weapons can be 
hard to make and use, contrary to myth and claim. It took the United 
States decades to master the art before renouncing such arms in 1969. 
In the early 1990s, Aum Shinrikyo, a Japanese cult, launched at least 
nine germ attacks in Tokyo that were meant to kill millions. But the 
strikes produced no known injuries or deaths. Dangerous to the attacker 
as well as the attacked if successful, germ weapons are considered 
most practical when used far from the aggressor's homeland; intervening 
land and sea establish what amounts to a quarantine. The main appeal 
of such weapons is that they are incredibly cheap compared to chemical 
and atomic arms. Yet pound for pound, germ weapons rival nuclear ones 
for maiming and killing, and some biological agents are considered 
superior in that regard; in theory they can annihilate many millions 
of people. Clearly, they surpass their nuclear kin as an instrument 
of fright and disruption: Once sown, infections can spread unpredictably, 
since they are alive. Experts especially worry about smallpox, which 
is highly contagious and seen as particularly dangerous since few 
people are now immunized against its ravages. ``To say the threat 
is low is not to minimize its potential,'' said Neil Gallagher, assistant 
director for national security at the FBI. Today, the secrets of germ 
warfare are increasingly up for grabs as weapon scientists from countries 
that made biological arsenals hunt for new jobs. The nomads are from 
Iraq (starting in 1991 after Persian Gulf war), Russia (starting in 
1992 after the Soviet collapse) and South Africa (starting in 1994 
as apartheid fell apart). Russia alone has many thousands of former 
germ warriors increasingly cold, poor and hungry. Legitimate science 
also heightens the risk. The global war against infectious disease 
has produced more than 1,500 germ banks that tend to trade freely 
in deadly microbes. Future strides could make matters even worse. 
Experts agree that research into the genetic foundations of life, 
an approach that promises to cure many diseases, might, in evil hands, 
one day produce weapons that work against only certain races or ethnic 
groups. ``It's difficult but not impossible,'' said Dr. Joshua Lederberg, 
a Nobel laureate in biology who advises Washington on germ warfare. 
More unsettling, he added, is that traditional killers seem to be 
a growing danger right now; he called them ``a monster in the back 
yard.'' Today, at least 17 nations are suspected of having or trying 
to acquire germ weapons. Perhaps they want to deter foes. The wild 
card is that some (Cuba, Iran, Iraq, Libya, North Korea, Syria) are 
also considered architects of terrorism. Libya worked hard to join 
the germ club. In 1994, it sought to hire scientists fleeing South 
Africa's crumbling program, including its head, Dr. Wouter Basson. 
That move, officials say, was foiled by diplomatic pressure from Washington 
and London. However, Libya may have succeeded in hiring (or perhaps 
hiding and employing for Baghdad) Dr. Amir Medidi, a top scientist 
of Iraq's germ effort, U.N. inspectors revealed. Terrorists themselves 
seem increasingly drawn to germ weapons. Osama bin Laden, the renegade 
Saudi millionaire known for his bitter hatred of America, is investigating 
them, U.S. officials say. Whether his work has resulted in secret 
laboratories or usable arms, no one in Washington seems to know or 
is willing to say. Nasser Asad al-Tamimi, an Islamic radical, has 
been vocal. Early this year Al-Balad, a Jordanian newspaper, quoted 
him as saying that ``jihad'' had at last discovered how to win the 
holy war _ lethal germs. Disturbingly, growing interest abroad is 
shared by domestic radicals and militia groups at home. Catalogs catering 
to them carry ads for such books as ``Guide to Germ Warfare.'' Larry 
Wayne Harris, an Ohioan with a history of hate-group affiliations, 
was arrested in 1995 for having bought plague bacteria from a germ 
bank under false pretenses. A registered microbiologist, he now says 
the microbes were strictly for defensive purposes. ``There are groups 
all over the world after this kind of stuff,'' Harris said, his blue 
eyes icy. ``You're not going to stop germ warfare. The only thing 
to do is defend yourself.'' Intelligence experts say knowing the truth 
is hard. Spies and satellites are only marginally helpful for ferreting 
out biological gear as small as kitchen cookware that is easy to hide 
and whose purpose can be peaceful (unlike the nuclear arms, bombers, 
ships, missiles and factories that dominated the Cold War). Even hundreds 
of arms inspectors in Iraq, who probed that nation for seven years, 
ended up with as many questions as answers. Moreover, the attention 
focused on germ warfare has already helped give rise to germ hoaxes, 
and experts worry that serious concern might give way to complacency. 
This year, the FBI is fighting a wave of false anthrax threats in 
letters mailed to abortion clinics. Federal officials note that Ramzi 
Ahmed Yousef, mastermind of the 1993 New York World Trade Center blast, 
which killed six people and injured more than 1,000, claimed that 
his goal was to have one tower fall into the other and kill a quarter 
million people _ more than died in the atomic bombing of Hiroshima. 
A top former official disclosed that Yousef, when arrested in 1995, 
was found to have been studying not only chemical but biological weapons. 
John Gannon, chairman of the National Intelligence Council of the 
CIA, last month told a Stanford University meeting that the danger 
of germ and chemical devastation is rising. He warned that terrorists 
and foes with such weapons are growing in number and that the increasingly 
lethal agents they are developing ``have the potential to cause massive 
casualties.'' Federal officials are struggling to tighten commerce 
in germs both at home and abroad. President Clinton himself recently 
raised the issue at Camp David with Brazilian President Fernando Henrique 
Cardoso, who has begun a program to restrict germ sales. In Russia, 
Washington is expanding cooperative programs meant to keep former 
germ warriors in place doing peaceful research. In NATO, Washington 
is arguing that the Atlantic alliance should take the lead in a global 
fight to stop terrorists from getting or using germ weaponry. . Meanwhile, 
the U.S. military is vaccinating all troops against anthrax, which 
causes high fevers and death, and has begun a $322 million program 
to build stockpiles of 18 other vaccines, including one against smallpox. 
Recently, Congress approved $51 million to start building domestic 
stockpiles of medicines and antibiotics, especially for police, fire 
and health workers. Physical security at key federal buildings is 
being enhanced to foil terrorists who might try to spread deadly germs 
and chemicals through the air. The steps include ventilation improvements 
so a gentle breeze blows outward whenever a door or window is opened. 
In theory, this so-called positive pressure will automatically sweep 
away dangerous agents. Across the country, federal officials are holding 
seminars in the nation's top 120 cities to train emergency personnel. 
More broadly, intelligence agencies are struggling to monitor terrorists 
more closely. The FBI's nightmare is talented loners, who are difficult 
to track. The Pentagon is weighing whether to ask the president to 
authorize appointment of a military commander who could plan and direct 
operations to defend the continental United States in the event of 
germ chaos, a step beyond the civil defenses of the early Cold War. 
No such commander's post now exists. ``Within minutes of an event, 
people are going to turn to us,'' Deputy Defense Secretary John Hamre 
told a meeting of military officials in explaining the need for homeland 
defense. ``It could get crazy very fast.'' To date, there has been 
little public debate over the risks and benefits of such actions, 
partly because the many responses to the germ threat have been both 
quiet, to avoid frightening Americans, and piecemeal. But that may 
change as echoes of bomb shelters start to reverberate and as Washington 
scans the horizon to better judge the danger in the years and decades 
ahead. Tension is sure to rise between the need for protection and 
``rights to privacy, something that we hold very dear,'' Defense Secretary 
William Cohen recently told the Council on Foreign Relations. That 
kind of friction, he added, will force ``unpleasant choices'' in the 
near future. ``We haven't really faced up to it yet.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>