<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981226.0095 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Maj. Rick Coveno of the Air Force saw his comrades fall, one by one. 
Not to enemy fire. To civilian hire. During a recent assignment developing 
a military satellite program, all five of the other midlevel officers 
working with him chose to take jobs in private industry rather than 
their next Air Force posting, Coveno said. Father to three young children, 
with a fourth on the way, he has resisted such lures so far, despite 
overtures from job recruiters, or headhunters, and a sharp awareness 
of the additional money he could be earning. But lately, he said, 
``For me and my family, we've been weighing both sides very heavily. 
I've even put out some resumes, even though I love my work right now 
in the Air Force and we're not poor by any means.'' It is just such 
swayable young officers that Defense Secretary William Cohen seemed 
to have in his sights when he announced last week that he was requesting 
the biggest raise in basic military pay in a generation, with particular 
salary carrots for midlevel officers like Coveno. For the old rule 
_ that a strong economy enables a strong military _ has twisted in 
the current gale of prosperity. An economy this strong, with unemployment 
this low, becomes an impediment to the military's efforts to recruit 
and retain soldiers. In Cohen's words, ``It's very hard to compete 
against a robust economy such as we have.'' And it seems particularly 
hard to compete in places like Massachusetts, where unemployment hovers 
above 3 percent. That is especially true at places like Hanscom Air 
Force Base here, headquarters for the Air Force's electronics development 
programs, whose highly trained staff works a short ride from Boston's 
thriving high-technology companies. Capt. Chris Ruefer, a contracting 
specialist here, has seen friends ``leaving with dollar signs in their 
eyes.'' Capt. David Peeler Jr. has watched colleagues, fellow experts 
in cost analysis, calculate to the last digit their current compensation 
and the comparative advantages of civilian salaries and quality of 
life, and decide to go. And Capt. Joe Allegretti, a public affairs 
officer, recalled the rumblings among top-trained pilots in the overseas 
air squadron to which he was recently assigned: ``People were really 
considering getting out,'' in part simply because Vietnam War-era 
pilots still in the military were getting on in years, he said, but 
also because ``the economy's good, so there's more flying getting 
done.'' Among a handful interviewed here, most said they had received 
letters from job recruiters. Missile launch officers may not get many 
nibbles, but a financial specialist like Peeler, whose skills are 
especially transferable to an accounting or consulting firm, get them 
``constantly,'' he said. ``And the job offers are out there.'' The 
headhunters seem, they said, to be looking for midlevel officers like 
them _ old enough to have gained valuable skills and often master's 
degrees during their service, young enough to have long working lives 
ahead of them and not so close to retirement that they would be fools 
to leave now. The departure of many young officers, several pointed 
out, is part of the usual planned-for attrition of military personnel 
in a pyramid structure. Not everyone is supposed to rise to general. 
But in part, they said with certainty, the sizzling heat of the economy 
is at work. The military must seek a tricky balance, noted Maj. John 
Driessnack, another financial specialist. ``We need to stay close 
enough to the economy that it doesn't really inhibit those who want 
to serve their country,'' he said. ``You don't want someone in the 
military because that's the best offer they got. That's not the person 
I want flying the fighter or in charge of nuclear missiles. They need 
to have a higher calling. On the other hand, they should enjoy some 
of the benefits of the society they're protecting. Where that balance 
is, who knows?'' One thing is certain, however, several officers said: 
The balance has definitely been off lately, and the promised pay raise 
will help redress that. ``Quite honestly, I don't believe the military 
should get the same amount you could get on the outside because it 
is service,'' said Coveno, a program manager whose salary along with 
benefits, like a housing allowance, is in the $60,000 range. ``But 
you can't have such a big spread that you're losing all your best 
people, and I do see that, mostly in younger captains. A lot of the 
sharpest folks that can get the money on the outside take it.'' The 
raises proposed last week would be as large as 9.9 percent for midcareer 
officers like Coveno; President Clinton has already said he intends 
to raise salaries by 4.4 percent for all 1.4 million military personnel 
beginning in January 2000. The proposed raises will not, however, 
change a basic aspect of the pay system that several officers mentioned 
as a glaring difference from civilian life: Officers receive 40 or 
50 percent of their base pay if they retire after 20 years, but they 
do not have 401k plans, they have no hold on accumulating equity, 
they see none of the joy of compound interest. Whereas, Driessnack 
said, ``If you go to work for Andersen Consulting or Arthur Andersen 
or Coopers and Lybrand, at the 20-year point you'd be a partner and 
a millionaire.'' Another remaining source of discontent, one that 
commanders say they are working on, is the heavy demands of military 
life, demands that seem to have got only heavier in this putatively 
mellower post-Cold War world. The armed forces have shrunk, but the 
missions and temporary-duty stints in places like Iraq and Saudi Arabia 
have multiplied for the soldiers remaining. And with growing children 
and working spouses, it becomes harder and harder to accept the perpetual 
transfers to new bases. Ruefer says he sees many colleagues leaving 
not for the money but to have more of a life. ``You see guys working 
in a business environment,'' he said. ``And they have all these degrees, 
and they're going away all the time, and when they're not deployed 
they're working millions of hours and they go, `Gee, my buddies from 
college are earning from 35 to 50 percent more than me, depending 
on the job, and they don't go away from their families for 120 days 
a year.''' When officers are facing their third or fourth or fifth 
rotation in the desert, Peeler said, they are likely to say, ``It's 
Christmas; I just really don't want to spend Christmas away again. 
I've got three job offers. And they walk in and they sign their name 
and go, `No, thank you,' and they give their six-month notice.'' Another 
particular attraction of the civilian work world, some officers said, 
was the ability of top achievers _ a category that Air Force officers 
tend to be convinced includes them _ to rise meteorically, in job 
title and salary, in a way that the carefully staggered military system 
of promotion does not allow. One of Peeler's friends who recently 
left for private industry took something of a pay cut, he said, but 
if the friend did as well as in the military, ``he will move up faster 
and by the time I'm a major, he'll make twice what I make.'' Despite 
all this griping, a visitor to Hanscom is not left with any kind of 
impression that there will soon be a sign posted asking the last one 
to leave to turn out the lights. Virtually all the officers interviewed 
said they enjoyed their colleagues and their work, in particular the 
ability to manage important projects worth hundreds of millions of 
dollars, and intended to stay in the service through retirement. They 
had also, however, clearly been thinking and jawing quite a bit about 
boom-time inequity. ``It's nice to see the leadership recognizing 
what's been talked about for a couple of years at our level,'' Peeler 
said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>