<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981226.0172 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Saturday's doubleheader at Madison Square Garden presented a chance 
for two often-overlooked local teams to grab center stage. When the 
day was over, Hofstra had humbly recorded its biggest victory in years, 
and Iona had slipped further into a season of mounting frustration. 
Hofstra (6-4) acted as though it had accomplished the ordinary in 
demolishing Georgia Tech, 61-42, in the first game of the ECAC Holiday 
Tournament. In the second game, Iona's puzzling start continued with 
a 67-61 loss to Pennsylvania, which gave the Gaels (4-6) as many losses 
as they had last season. In Hofstra's victory, point guard Craig Claxton 
simply held the ball as time ran out, and the Flying Dutchmen shook 
hands with each other and then with the Yellow Jackets (8-3) as both 
teams filed to the locker rooms. No bear hugs, no jumps for joy. Business 
as usual. ``We've been on the road so much, we said we would treat 
this as a home game,'' Hofstra Coach Jay Wright said. ``Since it was 
a home game, we expected to win.'' Wright even put up a sign that 
displayed the word ``attitude'' in the Flying Dutchmen's locker room 
at the Garden, just as it is in their gym in Hempstead, N.Y. Every 
Hofstra player slapped it on the way out before harassing Tech into 
25 turnovers and 34.6 percent shooting (18 of 52). A search through 
the record book revealed that no Hofstra victory had come close in 
significance since the 1976-77 season, when the Dutchmen defeated 
Virginia and later stunned Temple in the tournament of the East Coast 
Conference, which is now defunct. Hofstra, of the glamour-challenged 
America East Conference, had lost 18 straight to Atlantic Coast Conference 
opponents. ``One of the reasons I came to Hofstra was to knock off 
one of these teams,'' said Claxton, who had a quiet 8 points and 3 
assists and vomited twice on the Garden floor in the fourth quarter 
after he was elbowed in the midsection. Swingman Norman Richardson 
poured in 23 points for Hofstra, sinking 4 of 6 three-point attempts. 
Richardson said he took 500 shots a day during the summer. Against 
Tech, three mattered the most. After the Yellow Jackets had cut Hofstra's 
29-17 halftime lead to 31-24 early in the second half, Richardson 
killed the momentum with a jump shot from the perimeter. When the 
Yellow Jackets scored two straight times down the floor to trail by 
41-33 with 7 minutes 54 seconds to go, Richardson sailed in a 3-pointer 
to beat the shot clock, then swished another 3-pointer the next time 
downcourt to give Hofstra the breathing room it needed to seal the 
upset. ``Yeah, this is probably the biggest win,'' said a blase Richardson, 
who was supported by 10 points each from forward Roberto Gittens and 
guard Jason Hernandez. ``We weren't playing as tough as they were,'' 
said Tech's 6-foot-11-inch center, Alvin Jones (12 points), who, along 
with the 7-foot power forward Jason Collier (7 points), was troubled 
by Hofstra's energy and darting hands. The Flying Dutchmen had 14 
steals to offset a substantial height disadvantage. They also limited 
Tech's Tony Akins to 10 points and 2 assists. Tech followed a 41-point 
loss to then-No. 3 Kentucky with a stunning 66-64 victory over No. 
7 North Carolina last Tuesday. Now this. ``Sometimes you try to figure 
things out like that and it drives you crazy,'' Tech Coach Bobby Cremins 
said. Iona Coach Jeff Ruland has some things to figure out, too. ``We're 
a work in progress,'' said Ruland, who is in his first season with 
a team that went 27-6 and reached the National Collegiate Athletic 
Association tournament last season. ``My guys competed today, and 
that's all we can ask for. We still held them to 35 percent shooting, 
and that's usually good enough.'' Pennsylvania (3-2) and Iona exchanged 
the lead nine times in the second half before Pennsylvania went ahead 
for good on two free throws by Matt Langel that made the score 58-57 
with 4:05 left. The Quakers' Jed Ryan (19 points) added a 3-pointer 
before Iona's Tariq Kirksay scored two of his game-high 20 points 
to close the gap to 61-59 with 1:35 to go. The Gaels came as close 
as 63-61 on a 12-foot jumper by Dyree Wilson (8 points), but the Quakers 
hit 6 of 6 free throws in the final minute to secure the victory and 
a date Sunday with Hofstra in the championship. The Gaels played the 
last 4:23 without their best player, center Kashif Hameed (12 points). 
After picking up a fourth foul, Hameed needlessly reached over the 
back of Geoff Owens on the ensuing inbounds pass to earn his fifth. 
Penn shot poorly from the field but had just 11 turnovers to Iona's 
17 and made 15 of 20 foul shots. Iona made 5 of 9. ``They wouldn't 
beat themselves,'' Hameed said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>