<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981226.0200 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the third period Saturday night, probably more times than goalie 
Wade Flaherty cares to remember, the puck dribbled just wide of the 
Islanders' goal, bounced off of the post or was stopped by someone 
else. It is always interesting when Flaherty is tending the Islanders' 
goal. Saturday night, the backup playing in place of the injured Tommy 
Salo brought fans at Nassau Coliseum to the edge of their seats as 
he helped blow a 2-0 lead and the Islanders tried their best to give 
away the game. But Flaherty, who made 25 stops, was saved by two goals 
in the third period, giving the Islanders an unlikely 4-2 victory 
over the Bruins. The third Islanders goal was scored by rookie Mike 
Watt, who tallied his fifth of the season at 9 minutes 50 seconds 
of the third period to restore the Islanders' lead, 3-2. And then 
Claude Lapointe sealed the victory with a short-handed, breakaway 
goal at 14:51. Zigmund Palffy got his first goal of the season in 
the first period, giving the Islanders a 1-0 lead at 6:57. After sneaking 
behind the Bruins' defense, Palffy tapped in a crisp, cross-ice pass 
from defenseman Zdeno Chara. Referee Richard Trottier asked for the 
goal to be reviewed, but after an anxious two minutes the video replay 
judge decided that the puck entered the crease before Palffy's skate. 
After his eight-month layoff, everyone thought Palffy would need at 
least two weeks before he got up to National Hockey League speed. 
That has not been the case. After just two games and not even a full 
week of practice, Palffy has a goal and two assists. In his season 
debut last Tuesday against the Blues, he assisted on two goals. And 
Palffy doesn't just help the Islanders on the scoreboard. He helps 
at the turnstile, too. Saturday night, in Palffy's second game back, 
the Islanders played before another big crowd _ 15,174. Palffy's debut 
drew 16,297, a sellout. Palffy arrived just as several of his teammates 
had gone down, or were about to go down, with injuries. On the Islanders' 
West Coast swing last week, the team had injuries to several key players, 
including goalie Tommy Salo (broken finger), defenseman Bryan Berard 
(strained groin), enforcer Gino Odjick (strained abdomen) and Sergei 
Nemchinov (hip). None of them are expected to be back anytime soon. 
For Ted Donato and Ken Belanger, who were swapped in a one-for-one 
deal, Saturday night's game was the first against their former teams. 
Donato, who has four goals and seven assists since the trade, was 
relatively quite. Belanger, on his first shift, slammed the Islanders 
defenseman David Harlock into the back boards, touching off a skirmish 
behind the net. Belanger's exuberance, however, cost his team later 
in the period. He was in the penalty box for obstruction when Trevor 
Linden scored to stretch the Islanders' lead to 2-0. Planting himself 
in front of the Bruins' goal, Linden redirected Mariusz Czerkawski's 
shot from the point. But the Islanders, who never seem at ease when 
they have the lead, managed to squander the cushion. Boston scored 
two straight goals, the first by the rookie center Chris Taylor at 
8:35 of the second period, the second by Dmitri Kristich at 12:15 
of the third period. Of all of the injuries the Islanders are coping 
with, the injury to Salo has hurt them the most. Saturday night, Flaherty, 
who made 25 saves, struggled at times. He didn't look good on either 
of the goals. Taylor tapped in a rebound that Flaherty bobbled and 
Kristich scored from an almost impossible angle, shooting the puck 
from the side boards, even with the goal line. His shot bounced in 
off of Flaherty, who was scrambling back into position. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>