<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981226.0167 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It looked like a team that had clinched everything _ the playoffs, 
home field advantage, team and individual honors _ a team that had 
everything going for it on the road against a team whose season blew 
up long ago. It looked like the Minnesota Vikings, down by 13-8 at 
halftime against the Tennessee Oilers, needed a collective jolt, something 
to spark the day, something to make this matchup more intense. More 
urgent. The Vikings found it in the third quarter. That is their quarter. 
The Vikings took the opening kickoff in the third quarter and kicked 
the Oilers. They drove 76 yards in nine plays and Randall Cunningham 
finished it by tossing a 5-yard scoring pass to rookie Randy Moss. 
Cunningham-to-Moss earned the 2-point conversion, too, and the Vikings 
were set, as they went on to a 26-16 victory before 41,121 fans at 
Dudley Field here at Vanderbilt University. Minnesota toppled Tennessee 
by 15-3 in the third quarter, and those points helped the Vikings 
score the most points in a season in National Football League history 
(556). Those points gave Minnesota a 139-58 scoring advantage in third-quarter 
play this season. Minnesota earned a 15-1 regular season record; only 
the 1984 San Francisco 49ers and the 1985 Chicago Bears have reached 
15-1 in league history; both went on to win the Super Bowl. ``We can 
score on special teams, on defense and on offense,'' said Dennis Green, 
the Vikings head coach. ``The scoring record we earned today is a 
team record. We made enough plays in the second half and Randall Cunningham 
played a solid game. The offense came around, but we always have a 
fast-starting defense. We have a team that plays together. That makes 
me most proud.'' It was the eighth victory in a row for the Vikings, 
who are now set for the National Football Conference playoffs, with 
a bye next weekend. The NFC road to the Super Bowl must now go through 
Minnesota. Beware. ``I really believe that our talent level is not 
that much different from that team,'' said Oilers rookie cornerback 
Samari Rolle, whose team has been stuck at 8-8 for three consecutive 
seasons. ``The difference may be in part talent, but it is just as 
much in confidence. That is a very confident group. You can tell by 
the way they talk before they play. They just believe. They'll probably 
win it all.'' The Vikings have already earned history. In this game 
alone, three major league records were set. _ Minnesota scored 556 
points this season, breaking the league record of 541 set by the Washington 
Redskins in 1983. _ Kicker Gary Anderson scored 10 points Saturday 
to give him 164 for the season. He surpassed Washington's Mike Moseley 
(161 in 1983) as the highest scoring kicker for a single season. Anderson 
also completed a perfect season in field goals (35 of 35) and in extra 
points (59 of 59). His final field goal stretched his NFL record of 
consecutive field goals to 40 over two seasons. _ Moss and Cris Carter, 
the Vikings receivers, who each scored touchdown catches today, set 
a new record for most touchdowns by a receiving duo (28 _ Moss with 
17 and Carter with 11). ``It was an exciting ballgame against the 
elite in the National Football League,'' said Oilers Coach Jeff Fisher. 
He watched as the Oilers played their last game here at Vanderbilt 
and their last as the Oilers. Next year Tennessee will move into a 
new stadium in the heart of downtown Nashville and will play as the 
Tennessee Titans. ``We showed we could play with them for awhile,'' 
Fisher said. The Vikings' good play, however, lasts longer than awhile, 
thanks to the third quarter. Tennessee actually gained more yards 
in the game (354 to 338) but the Oilers hurt themselves in third-down 
conversions (2 of 9 for 22 percent) and in penalties (13 for 105 yards). 
Cunningham was 23 of 35 for 235 passing yards with two touchdowns 
and one interception. ``A 15-1 record is awesome and Dennis Green 
did an absolutely great job of coaching,'' Cunningham said. ``It is 
amazing. We struggled to put 26 points on the board; we have high 
expectations of ourselves. We appreciate times like this when we only 
score 26 points.'' Only 26 points? Yes, in their previous four games, 
the Vikings had scored 46 points on Dallas, 48 on Chicago, 38 on Baltimore 
and 50 on Jacksonville, respectively. ``We played like we were capable 
of playing and we knew it was going to be a tough week with Christmas 
and traveling and all of those things,'' Carter said. ``I think we 
handled it really well. The 15-1 record does not matter now. We have 
home field in the playoffs and we are 0-0 now. But we are excited 
about what we can do.'' It was the Denver Broncos who started the 
season with all eyes on them. Now the Vikings in the regular season 
have caught and passed Denver in record and in notoriety. The postseason 
awaits. As the final seconds ticked away Saturday and as Minnesota 
secured its spot among the playoff elite, Vikings owner Red McCombs, 
his wife, Charlene, and their family stood just outside the south 
end zone and savored the special moment. The Vikings ownership has 
gone from one of instability to stability in the McCombs' first year 
of ownership. That stability at the top has trickled down to the team. 
``I have found here a team that is a team in every sense of the word,'' 
said Jimmy Hitchcock, a cornerback who this season joined Minnesota 
from New England. ``Every single day, we are a team. It is a beautiful 
atmosphere. I thank the McCombs family for coming into our lives. 
We lost one game this season, by 3 points at Tampa Bay. We were 3 
points from having a perfect season. But we can still be perfect by 
winning the Super Bowl. That is the perfect goal.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>