<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981226.0051 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Bruno Peyron's sailing successes have made him a national figure in 
France, a country that likes its sport with a large helping of adventure. 
When he became the first winner of the Jules Verne Trophy in April 
1993, circumnavigating the globe with his weather-beaten crew in the 
catamaran Commodore-Explorer in just a few hours less than 80 days, 
the French found Peyron's mixture of dark, handsome Breton looks and 
socio-ecological sensibility irresistible. Now Peyron is working the 
phones and the angles in an attempt to make sure an even grander, 
madder dash will begin on Dec. 31, 2000. It will be called, quite 
simply, ``The Race.'' And while it is far from clear that it will 
be the success that Peyron imagines, his is an ambitious and straightforward 
concept: a non-stop race around the world open to crews of any nationality 
and boats of any design, which must first pass muster over shorter 
qualifying distances. The Race will be the Whitbread not broken up 
into legs, and with an extra hull or two on each boat. It will be 
the French solo round-the-world race, the Vendee Globe, with a lot 
more hands on deck and a lot more speed. But what the 43-year-old 
Peyron, a self-described idealist, really wants is for The Race to 
be something more than a race. He wants it to be a quest; a salt-sprayed, 
digital-video-relayed ode to the human spirit, and a more internationally 
resonant version of what he experienced when he won the Jules Verne 
Trophy. ``When we came back into the port where there were 50,000 
or 60,000 people waiting, we did not hear lots of shouting or screaming; 
it was more of a murmur,'' Peyron said. ``It was rather calm, rather 
surprising. I've been across plenty of finish lines in races, and 
usually there are the hurrahs and the bravos. But this time, there 
were more `thank yous' than bravos. Later, I kept asking myself why, 
and the answer I came up with is that the Jules Verne was not just 
sport. It was a human adventure and it was simple to understand for 
everyone, not just those who follow sailing. And to be honest, that 
was the sort of recipe I felt the desire to duplicate. ``I have the 
impression that there is a desire out there for a grand opera, a great 
human adventure in which sport will have a role to play, but not the 
only role.'' Peyron concedes that the wired world is experiencing 
something of an adventure glut, with glory-hungry, sponsor-backed 
intrepids of all shapes and nationalities rowing, swimming, sailing 
or skiing across oceans, Antarctic ice fields and other natural and 
preferably telegenic obstacles. It is a niche-filling scramble that 
is a by-product of an active, technologically empowered population 
and an increasingly accessible planet. ``When it gets to the point 
where we're doing these things with both eyes patched or our arms 
tied behind our backs, it doesn't mean anything at all,'' Peyron said. 
``We've seen some excesses, but I think the important thing, if you 
have any power or influence or credibility, is to try to have a positive 
influence on this drift. When I had the idea for The Race, I told 
myself that this trend, at least in sailing, was definitely going 
to continue whether it was intelligent or constructive or not. So 
the best thing was to push to the limit and control that limit so 
it has a certain ethical integrity and a real value.'' The son of 
an oil tanker captain who was often at sea for months at a time, Peyron 
and his two younger brothers and two younger sisters began sailing 
during their father's vacations. ``In the merchant marine, you don't 
have great financial means,'' Peyron said. ``My father had big boats 
at work and small boats at home. We started out with one that was 
5.5 meters.'' None of the three sons would join the family business, 
but all three would feel the pull of the ocean. Bruno and Loick would 
become world-class racers with a particular affinity for multi-hulls. 
Stephane, the youngest, would windsurf across the Atlantic and now 
is the host a nature program on the French channel Canal Plus, which 
requires him to travel even more widely than his brothers. One might 
assume the Peyrons' parents were instrumental in encouraging all this 
wanderlust. According to Bruno, one would be wrong. ``We come from 
a French generation whose parents were more concerned with studies 
and social status; it was doctor, lawyer, whatever,'' he said. ``We 
had no encouragement to follow the path we followed. In fact, we were 
all encouraged to leave the house at 18 because we had not followed 
the classic path. I left first, then Loick, then Stephane. The idea 
was that if you make an unconventional choice, you have to assume 
the consequences of that choice. I think that helped all of us later.'' 
The Peyron brothers attempted unsuccessfully to pool their talents 
and resources in 1990, when they started but did not finish a mutual 
bid to compete for the Jules Verne Trophy. Bruno ended up going it 
alone, and it appears there will be only one Peyron in The Race, as 
well. The surprise is that it will be Loick, not Bruno, although Bruno 
and his crew established a new trans-Pacific record on Explorer in 
August, covering the distance from Yokohama, Japan, to San Francisco 
in 14 days 17 hours 22 minutes 50 seconds. ``When I thought this up, 
I was racing in it,'' Peyron said, with a chuckle. ``But as the planning 
progressed, it became rather clear that you can't wear both hats at 
the same time. If I had to choose between having the best boat and 
having The Race be a success, the choice would be easy. My place is 
not necessarily on the water.'' He may still change his mind, but 
for now Peyron is more interested in marketing than manning sails; 
more interested in announcing a third corporate sponsor and finalizing 
Barcelona as the starting line (the finish line remains less certain). 
For the moment, there are 10 official challengers, including Loick 
and the Whitbread veterans Ross Field and Grant Dalton of New Zealand 
and Lawrie Smith of Britain. The American tycoon Steve Fossett, whose 
trans-Pacific record Bruno Peyron broke and whose latest attempt to 
circumnavigate the world in a balloon ended halfway, in the Pacific 
off Hawaii, on Friday, has also expressed an interest, as have nearly 
70 other groups. Most of them, Peyron knows, lack the financial or 
tactical means to qualify. When those who do race in The Race finally 
finish sometime in March 2001, Peyron hopes that the crowd that greets 
them does not simply shout out its congratulations. He wants murmurs; 
communion. ``I can imagine this giant catamaran 37 meters long with 
15 aboard coming into port,'' he said. ``The guys' faces will look 
like all of ours do after moments like this: ugly but pretty. They 
are coming from another world. They have seen something different, 
and it can be seen in their eyes that they have not just finished 
a tennis match.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>