<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981226.0041 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Picture Giants Coach Jim Fassel rising in his Philadelphia hotel room 
Sunday morning, fumbling frantically for the television remote control. 
``Give me the Weather Channel,'' Fassel sputters. ``Got to know how 
cold it is in Cincinnati. Show me the national map. No, no, not another 
dew-point reading.'' Picture Giants linebacker Jessie Armstead rising 
in another part of the same hotel, kneeling at the foot of his bed. 
``I'm not going to pray for a San Diego victory,'' Armstead says. 
``But could somebody up there clip Jake Plummer's wings today?'' Picture 
Giants quarterback Kent Graham still in a deep slumber in his hotel 
room. The Giants play at Philadelphia's Veterans Stadium at 4:15 Sunday 
afternoon. The way Graham figures it, the Giants can beat the Eagles 
in their sleep. In a most curious turn of events, the Giants will 
wake Sunday morning with blurry playoff chances but with a very specific 
blueprint for getting there _ even if it is a scenario that would 
require an amazing confluence of events. But sometime after 8 p.m., 
the Giants will either be giddily on their way to the Super Bowl tournament 
or driving home from the City of Brotherly Love as beaten as a slaughterhouse 
steer hanging in the path of a Rocky Balboa training run. There are 
three games Sunday that matter to the Giants, making for anywhere 
from three to seven hours of climatic end-of-the-season drama. Here 
is a summary for the 7-8 Giants to make the playoffs: _ Beginning 
at 1 p.m., the Giants need the Cincinnati Bengals (3-12) to embark 
on an upset of the Tampa Bay Buccaneers (7-8). _ At 4:15 p.m. in Arizona, 
the visiting San Diego Chargers (5-10) must launch a defensive assault 
on the home Cardinals (8-7). The Chargers have the top-rated defense 
in the National Football League, but the Cards have Plummer, the scariest 
185-pound guy playing football in the universe. _ The Giants must 
defeat the Eagles (3-12) or spoil the whole nutty package. By most 
estimations, the Giants' chief ally in the Bengals-Buccaneers would 
be a cold day. The Buccaneers have never won a game played in temperatures 
below 40 degrees. There have been 16 unsuccessful attempts. Or one 
whole regular season. If the Bucs come out at Riverfront Stadium and 
see their breath, it is six more weeks without the playoffs. The weather 
forecast for the Cincinnati area calls for temperatures in the low 
30s. Memo to the Buccaneers: check for small white patches of exposed 
skin. That's frostbite. Against the Cardinals, the key to beating 
Plummer is never asking him to make a comeback. Perhaps the best plan 
is to fall behind and root for a forfeit. Working in the Giants' favor 
is more than three-quarters of a century of Cardinals franchise futility. 
Since 1920, the Cardinals have won exactly one playoff game. That 
was in 1947. Apparently the Cards have never adjusted to face masks. 
In Philadelphia, beating the Eagles would not seem like asking too 
much except that the Giants have had some of their most demoralizing, 
vexing defeats at Veterans Stadium. George Washington crossed the 
Delaware a few miles north of the Vet 222 years and two days ago. 
If he had brought a few Giants with him, his boat would have sunk. 
Adding to the Philly intrigue is Eagles Coach Ray Rhodes, who has 
pulled a reverse Rocky, throwing in the towel because he is trailing 
on all the judges' cards going into the final round. This can't be 
helping to motivate the Eagles, but there is always the Vet crowd 
factor. The most ornery and dissatisfied collection of ticket-holders 
this side of the obstructed view seats at ``The Blue Room,'' they 
always have the cunning to menace the home side into playing better, 
or the menace to con the visitors into playing worse. Either way, 
the Giants' long day's journey into the football unknown might not 
end until well after 7:30. After Tampa Bay quarterback Trent Dilfer 
_ shivering uncontrollably _ fumbles five times, and after the Giants 
crush the Eagles because Rhodes fires himself at halftime and goes 
home, the Giants could be assembled in a locker room watching the 
end of the Chargers-Cardinals game on television. Picture Fassel waving 
his arms frantically at the television, trying to distract the Cardinals, 
who trail by 2 points, as they line up for the game-winning field 
goal. Picture Armstead on his knees. ``I'm not praying for the Cardinals 
to lose,'' he says. ``But can't somebody move the goal posts 20 yards 
to the right just after the kick is made?'' Picture Graham in the 
corner of the room with his eyes closed. It appears he is sleeping. 
Actually, Graham is dreaming big. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>