<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981226.0085 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For most of the last decade, Gen. Anthony Zinni, a square-jawed, square-shouldered 
Marine, has been in the middle of some of the nation's least traditional 
military campaigns. He shuttled aid to the former Soviet Union and 
established a Kurdish haven in northern Iraq. He led American troops 
into a starving Somalia in 1992, and after that mission turned to 
disaster, brought the last of the U.N. troops out in 1995. The Pentagon, 
which spent hard, cold decades preparing to battle a nuclear superpower, 
calls these missions ``operations other than war.'' As far as Zinni 
is concerned, they are the future of war. ``I think what we learned 
after the Cold War is that we have strange missions _ not only missions 
that have been nontraditional, like peacekeeping and humanitarian 
relief, but these sorts of limited missions like we just saw,'' he 
said in an interview aboard a C-17 flying from Kuwait to this desert 
outpost south of Riyadh on a holiday visit to the troops. The ``limited 
mission,'' of course, was the four days of air and missile strikes 
that Zinni directed against Iraq this month. It was a campaign intended 
to damage President Saddam Hussein's military, but to stop well short 
of the knockout blow that President Clinton's critics say should be 
the real objective. With the strikes over and American policy toward 
Iraq lurching into a new period of uncertainty, a far more daunting 
task now falls to Zinni, who as commander of the U.S. Central Command 
oversees all American forces from Sudan to Pakistan. He has to keep 
the military pressure on Iraq while shoring up the fragile support 
of Arab allies still wary of American motives. He must maintain the 
morale of 20,000 American troops while drawing up plans for new strikes 
that officials at the highest levels in the Pentagon believe are inevitable. 
``It is more difficult to deal with Saddam directly,'' Zinni said, 
referring to an attack that would set out to overthrow the Iraqi government. 
``It would be politically difficult. It would be difficult in the 
region. And it could create more instability to declare an all-out 
war, let's say, and go to Baghdad.'' Instead, he cited the long American 
standoffs with Cuba and North Korea. ``There are places in the world 
that for regional stability, you have to use some sort of containment,'' 
he said. ``A lot of people don't like that word because it doesn't 
give them the immediate gratification of a resolution. And when the 
resolution is a change of regime, then it gets more frustrating. ``The 
key here is patience.'' Zinni's is the job made famous during the 
Persian Gulf war by H. Norman Schwarzkopf, who commanded the multinational 
coalition that routed Iraq's army and liberated Kuwait in 1991. It 
is, arguably, a harder job now. Desert Storm, as the 1991 operation 
was known, had the benefit of a clear enemy and a clear objective: 
reversing the brutal occupation of one country by another. Nearly 
eight years later, the effort to keep Saddam from regaining the military 
power he had has evolved into a difficult and, Zinni conceded, unsatisfying 
strategy of containment. ``We have to look at this not as a U.S.-Iraq 
problem,'' he said, ``but as a regional problem.'' While the political 
reality ``puts some limitations'' on American actions, he added, ``I 
think within those constraints and given the objectives of regional 
stability and staying with the international community, we are reducing 
his ability to threaten.'' Anthony Charles Zinni, 55, grew up the 
youngest of four children of Italian immigrants in Conshohocken, Pa., 
a blue-collar town near Philadelphia. His father, after only eight 
years in the United States, joined the American Expeditionary Forces, 
which fought in France during World War I. Zinni has been involved 
in the Marine Corps since his first day of college at Villanova University 
in 1961, when he encountered a Marine recruiter and signed up to spend 
his summers training as a platoon leader. He left Villanova in 1965 
with a degree in economics and a commission as a lieutenant. Two years 
later he was in Vietnam, serving as an adviser to the South Vietnamese 
marine corps. He spent 11 months with his South Vietnamese counterparts, 
not just fighting alongside them but living with them, learning their 
language and immersing himself in their culture. He described showing 
up at an American base with a Vietnamese platoon during the Tet offensive 
and, sick and underweight from months in the jungles, being suspected 
of being a subversive. ``I think I saw the war from a different perspective,'' 
he said. ``It kind of shaped me in terms of the impact of the culture 
you're involved in, the environment you're involved in, and how important 
that is in making decisions on military operations.'' When he took 
over Central Command, with headquarters at MacDill Air Force Base 
in Tampa, Fla., in August 1997, Zinni again immersed himself in a 
foreign culture, reading up on Arab and Islamic history and learning 
some Arabic. It has, he said, made him more sensitive to Arab values. 
He once dismissed calls to assassinate Saddam by noting that such 
a cavalier attitude sounds like anti-Arab prejudice in the region 
since no one in the United States today openly calls for the assassinations 
of other publicly named nemeses, like Slobodan Milosevic, Fidel Castro 
or Kim Jung Il of North Korea. ``You'd better understand the environment, 
the culture, because what may make sense to you may not make sense 
on the ground and may actually be counterproductive,'' he said. Zinni 
rose through the officer ranks after a second tour in Vietnam, during 
which he was badly wounded when his company attacked a North Vietnamese 
headquarters in the Queson Mountains. In 1974 he was assigned to Marine 
Corps headquarters, his first and only assignment there; he has relatively 
little experience in the political ways of Washington, compared with 
other four-star commanders. He gained a reputation as an outspoken 
officer willing to break with conventional doctrine. And while he 
was not involved in some of the nation's largest military operations 
since Vietnam _ the invasion of Panama in 1989 and the Persian Gulf 
war in 1991 _ he made a name for himself in peacekeeping and humanitarian 
efforts. He oversaw the effort to feed and protect the Kurds in northern 
Iraq after Saddam cracked down on them after his defeat in 1991. This 
left Zinni with a profound impression of Saddam's methods. ``I went 
into Kurdish villages that were gassed,'' he said last year. ``I went 
into villages where no stone stood upon stone.'' In Somalia in 1992, 
he served as director of operations for the American-led relief effort, 
where he tried to open channels of communication with the faction 
leaders, including Mohammed Farrah Aidid, whose attempted arrest later 
led to the deaths of 18 American soldiers. By 1993 he was the special 
assistant to Robert Oakley, the administration's special envoy to 
a mission that was spiraling out of control. He was commanding general 
of the 1st Marine Expeditionary Force when he returned to Somalia 
to pull out the last peacekeepers. He was the first American commander 
to arm his troops with novel weapons he had seen at the Marine Combat 
Development Command in Quantico, Va., including sponges and gooey 
foams that would hinder people but not kill them. His experiences 
in Somalia convinced him that the military's doctrine did not address 
the particularities of peacekeeping or humanitarian missions. So he 
wrote a list of aphorisms, called ``20 Lessons Learned,'' many of 
which, he said, applied to the strikes against Iraq. ``Don't lose 
the initiative/momentum,'' reads one. ``Don't make enemies; if you 
do, don't treat them gently,'' goes another. Above all, ``Line up 
military tasks with political objectives.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>