<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981226.0078 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Clinton will soon propose a $25 million initiative to combat 
the spread of infectious diseases, including virulent new strains 
of microbes that resist treatment by antibiotics and other drugs, 
administration officials said Saturday. Public health officials have 
become alarmed about the emergence of such ``superbugs'' and more 
generally about the increasing incidence of infectious diseases once 
thought to be under control. The extra money will be included in the 
budget request that Clinton sends to Congress early next year, administration 
officials said. It represents a 31 percent increase in the federal 
program to address emerging infectious diseases. Dr. Jeffrey Koplan, 
the new director of the Federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
said the additional money would be used to investigate outbreaks of 
infectious diseases, to upgrade the laboratories of state and local 
health departments, to develop new diagnostic tests and to educate 
doctors and patients about the dangers from excessive use of antibiotics. 
In addition, federal officials want to improve communications with 
city and county health departments. In a recent test, the Centers 
for Disease Control found that it was unable to contact nearly half 
of the local public health departments within 24 hours. ``Over several 
decades,'' Koplan said, ``the capabilities of state and local health 
departments have waned. They don't have the resources to do what they 
can and need to do. Many county health departments don't have computers, 
don't have e-mail or Internet capabilities. They report serious diseases 
on paper in the mail to state health departments and to CDC.'' Such 
delays make it more difficult for federal officials to track the spread 
of disease, identify the causes and take action, Koplan said in an 
interview. By analyzing the genetic characteristics of certain bacteria, 
scientists can sometimes identify a common source, as they did recently 
with an outbreak of food poisoning from Listeria that killed four 
people and sickened 40. Scientists can send the ``genetic fingerprints'' 
for such bacteria by Internet to the Centers for Disease Control in 
Atlanta. Laboratory technicians there can compare the genetic data 
from different parts of the country, reaching conclusions with fewer 
cases than in the past. But, Koplan said, ``the whole system is only 
as strong as its weakest link, which unfortunately is often the county 
health departments.'' The government also wants to beef up its network 
of doctors, hospitals and laboratories that report cases of infectious 
disease, so that outbreaks will be detected more rapidly. Some of 
the new money would be used to investigate the growing threat posed 
by germs that are resistant to antibiotics. Sens. Edward M. Kennedy, 
D-Mass., and Bill Frist, R-Tenn., expressed concern about the problem 
at a recent symposium on Capitol Hill. Overuse of antibiotics in the 
United States and around the world, fueled by patients who demand 
antibiotics for every bout of the sniffles, has caused microbes to 
adapt to these drugs, creating ``superbugs'' that resist the usual 
methods of treatment. Drug-resistant strains of tuberculosis, gonorrhea 
and pneumococcal infections _ the most frequent cause of middle-ear 
infections in children and pneumonia in the elderly _ have become 
common in recent years. If Congress approves the president's budget 
request, the Public Health Service would conduct a national education 
campaign to encourage more judicious use of antibiotics. ``Many people 
with a fever and cough assume that antibiotics won't do any harm, 
but that's not true,'' Koplan said. ``They can do harm. They promote 
the emergence of drug-resistant bacteria. Moreover, many infections 
are viral. Antibiotics are of no value in treating them.'' Sixty million 
unnecessary prescriptions are written every year for childhood viral 
infections that do not respond to antibiotics, and drug-resistant 
bacteria cause a million ear infections a year, many of them in children, 
officials said. The Centers for Disease Control wants to develop new 
diagnostic tests so doctors will know immediately whether a patient's 
illness is caused by bacteria or viruses, or by some new strain of 
microorganism. Officials said they also wanted to investigate the 
use and possible misuse of antibiotics in home health care, a booming 
sector of the health care industry that is certain to grow as the 
population ages. Officials want to know whether antibiotics have been 
misused by patients receiving care at home and whether they too are 
being attacked by drug-resistant bacteria. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>