<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981226.0072 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Handwritten signs hang from the ceiling in the simple shack where 
Chico Mendes lived and died. ``These were the clothes he wore the 
day he was killed,'' says one sign, swaying over a pair of shorts 
and a checkered shirt that his widow, Ilzamar, has laid out on their 
bed. ``In the hall, I held my children and Ilzamar in my arms,'' said 
another. ``I fell here. I realized that I didn't belong to this world 
any more.'' In his life, Francisco ``Chico'' Mendes, the outspoken 
defender of rubber tappers and the Amazon rain forest, cut a larger 
figure around the globe than he did around the corner. In his final 
days, he told his family and friends about unrelenting death threats 
from local ranchers. Despite his international contacts, he knew that 
police officials in his home state of Acre would do little to protect 
him. His murder at the age of 44, 10 years ago this month, brought 
even more international attention to his cause. Now, Mendes' Workers' 
Party has won control of City Hall and of the governor's palace in 
the state capital. Both of the senators who represent the state in 
the nation's capital are from the Workers' Party, and millions of 
acres of rain forest have been reserved for the rubber tappers and 
nut gatherers whom Chico Mendes defended. ``Ten years after his death, 
Chico Mendes has come to power,'' said Antonio Alves, a local journalist 
who followed his career. The genius of Chico Mendes, say those he 
left behind, was his decision to reach out to the environmental movement 
abroad for support for his rural labor movement. While land reform 
remains a violent battle between ranchers and rural workers, the environmental 
ideals advanced by Mendes have become common currency, at least rhetorically, 
among government officials. And the reserves he envisioned to extract 
products from the land without destroying it now exist for other products, 
from hearts of palm to timber. Still, all is not well. The lives of 
the tappers are as wretched as ever, with the price of rubber and 
other commodities dragged down by the deep recession in Asia, to a 
lower point than when Mendes was buried. His widow, Ilzamar Gadelha 
Mendes, now 34, is in open warfare with his party, and the two sides 
hurl bitter accusations about exploiting, and betraying, Mendes' name. 
The men in jail for his murder remain bitter and blame the rubber 
tapper for inviting his own death. On Jan. 1, the new political leaders 
of Xapuri and Acre will be sworn into office. Many of them had stood 
together with Mendes when he organized his famous ``empates,'' or 
stalemates, of rubber tappers _ who formed human walls in the jungle 
to block the tractors, chain saws and fires of deforestation. ``Everything 
that's going on, it's all happening in his spirit,'' said Francisco 
Ramalho de Souza, who holds Mendes' old job as president of the Rural 
Workers Union of Xapuri. Sen. Marina Silva, the daughter of a rubber 
tapper, said the centrist parties have been discredited with assertions 
of corruption and mismanagement. The Workers' Party had been building 
a political base in Acre for more than two decades, but it appears 
to have come in from the political margins only after Mendes' killing. 
With the death of Mendes, his story turned into a legend. Swarms of 
foreign writers and filmmakers descended on Xapuri to chronicle his 
fate and that of the rubber tappers. Some of the tappers came here 
at the turn of the century and others during World War II, to supply 
a U.S. war effort deprived of Malaysian rubber. The tappers hike through 
the forest, slitting rubber tree trunks and fixing small rubber buckets 
to collect the dripping latex. The governor-elect, Jorge Viana, and 
the new mayor of Xapuri, Julio Barbosa Aquinor, have not issued concrete 
plans, but they said they would build their administrations around 
the needs of the tappers, a first for the region. Unlike ranchers, 
for example, tappers have never had access to government credit and 
other forms of assistance, they said. Rubber tapping generally provides 
income of less than half the minimum wage of about $104 a month. The 
only future for the workers, the new leaders contend, lies in broadening 
the range of products gathered by these workers and building markets 
for fruits and other products that can be found only in the rain forest. 
The new leaders are inheriting a state with $13 million in debt, a 
34 percent illiteracy rate _ the highest in the country _ and 20 percent 
unemployment, said Viana, who worked on Mendes' unsuccessful campaign 
for state assemblyman in 1982. The governor-elect said he preferred 
not to dwell on the problems, and he does not doubt the wisdom of 
Mendes' ideas despite the desperation of forest dwellers today. The 
problem, he said, is not their way of life. Rather, he said, it is 
the lack of government programs to make their forest economy viable. 
``We don't want to use adversity as a reason for doing nothing,'' 
said Silva. ``It just means we have to work that much harder.'' Mendes' 
widow was notably absent from memorial services this month marking 
the 10th anniversary of his death. Though she never had an active 
role in her husband's political activism, the Workers' Party had called 
on her to lead the Chico Mendes Foundation. But Mendes' political 
heirs soon parted company with her, bickering over leadership of the 
foundation and the use of royalties and other proceeds from the activist's 
death. She joined forces with the party in power at the time of her 
husband's death, and she now says that her husband's crusade was little 
more than a pipe dream. ``It was not realistic at all,'' she said, 
and blamed environmental laws for preventing tappers from cutting 
down trees to grow rice, beans and other subsistence crops to supplement 
their incomes. ``Even though there is an extractive reserve named 
for Chico,'' she said, ``what's the point of having a reserve if the 
tappers have to abandon it to struggle as peddlers in the city?'' 
Some 1,400 miles away, at a prison in Brasilia, the anniversary only 
deepened the bitterness of the father and son jailed for killing Mendes, 
and their families. Darci Alves admits to having killed Mendes, but 
he denies that his father, Darli, 62, had anything to do with it. 
At the time, environmentalists insisted that other local ranchers 
paid the family to kill Mendes. Darci Alves contends that he received 
such pressure over Mendes' complaints that he could not stand it, 
leading to the killing. ``You want to know if I regret it?'' Darci 
Alves said. ``Perhaps not.'' Despite his denial that he was involved 
in the crime, Darli Alves, too, blames Mendes for fueling the confrontation. 
``If he would have accepted peace, I would have called for it,'' Darli 
Alves said. ``If he would have accepted it, everything would have 
been fine.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>