<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981226.0020 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Long after Americans stopped husbanding gasoline and keeping the speedometer 
at 55, policy-makers here clung to a national maximum speed limit, 
arguing that it saved lives. But that limit, an artifact of the 1973-74 
Arab oil embargo that was very unpopular after the price of gasoline 
dropped, was eliminated three years ago. Every state except Hawaii 
has since raised its highway speed limit in what has become an unofficial 
test of the long-held belief that speed kills. Three years into the 
test, the answer is still unclear. The number of deaths from motor 
vehicle accidents is about the same; 41,967 in 1997, 41,907 in 1996 
and 41,798 in 1995. When expressed as the number of deaths per million 
miles driven, the death rate is actually down slightly. The data offer 
a Rohrshach test that is open to interpretation. A recent opinion 
article in The Wall Street Journal by a journalist and muscle-car 
enthusiast, Eric Peters, suggested that federal officials liked the 
55 mph limit because it gave the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration 
power over the states. Roads, Peters supposed, were safer at faster 
speeds because a higher limit reduced variations in speeds. But several 
traffic safety experts said they knew of no data that would support 
Peters' argument. In fact, there is a dearth of data on how posted 
limits affect speeds. These are only a few of the uncertainties of 
federal traffic-safety statistics. For example, some statistics measure 
the deaths on roads posted at 55 or 60 mph against those posted at 
65 or higher. Others measure whether the overall number of miles of 
road posted at 65 is growing and whether the overall number of miles 
posted at 55 or 60 is declining. The agency does not keep track of 
casualty figures for a single stretch of road when its limit rose 
to 70 from 55. Texas tried to keep track of a single stretch of road, 
starting in January 1996, when highway speeds reverted to a daytime 
70 mph and 60 at night. A study produced by the Texas Transportation 
Institute, a state agency, found that by March 1997 there were 9 percent 
more crashes on rural, multi-lane undivided highways; 33 percent more 
on rural, two-lane state highways and U.S.-numbered routes. But the 
report failed to find a significant increase in fatalities on these 
and most Interstate highways. The finding runs counter to the predictions 
of most traffic engineers, who say crashes at higher speeds are likely 
to be more severe. The study's researchers said the sample size might 
be too small to capture an increase in deaths, which are less common 
than accidents that involve non-fatal injuries. The NHTSA told Congress 
in a report in February that states that increased their limits in 
1996 recorded about 350 more Interstate fatalities than before, a 
jump of about 9 percent. The agency said the increase in fatalities 
was smaller than the estimated change after 1987, when Congress enabled 
states to raise the limit on rural Interstates to 65 from 55. ``We 
would have done even better in terms of the overall numbers had the 
speed-limit increases not been as pervasive,'' said Philip Recht, 
deputy administrator of the NHTSA, referring to the reduction in fatalities. 
``The simple fact that the total number of fatalities remained the 
same or even dipped in any year does not tell you what the impact 
of the speed limit increases is.'' In fact, the deadliest roads _ 
rural two-lane blacktops with sharp curves and no shoulders _ were 
not affected by the end of the national speed limit, in many cases. 
Another data point, which could yield a variety of interpretations, 
comes from Canada. Speed limits there, which are set by the individual 
provinces, are essentially unchanged, although vehicle registrations 
and drivers have approximately doubled in 20 years, according to Derek 
Sweet, director of road safety at Transport Canada, a government agency. 
But deaths declined by about half, he said. Last year they were 3,064, 
down from 3,082 in 1996 and 3,347 in 1995. ``It's a complex business,'' 
Sweet said. ``It's really difficult to attribute it to any single 
element, with the exception of seat-belt wearing.'' Transport Canada 
sponsored a study that said ``it cannot be decisively concluded that 
changing the posted speed limit will result in a change in collisions.'' 
In this country, experts say drunken driving is declining, more cars 
have air bags and the use of seat belts is rising, although it still 
lags Canada's level. George Black, a member of the National Transportation 
Safety Board, added another reason for fewer deaths: an increase in 
the number of ambulances with advanced life-support systems. Twenty 
years ago, when Black was a highway safety official in Georgia, he 
said, ``they put you in a former hearse driven by a person who liked 
to drive fast; he took you to the hospital and hung around waiting 
to see if you died or not.'' But changes in the limits can have unexpected 
effects, he said. In 1974, when the 55 mph limit started, Georgia 
took some roads that were posted for 60 miles an hour in daytime and 
50 at night, and converted them to 55 at all times. Most fatal accidents 
happen at night, he said, and raising the night-time limit to 55 should 
have produced more deaths, but it led to fewer. The reason may not 
have been the limit at all, he said, but related changes. ``During 
this period of time, gas lines were out, gas prices were up and sometimes 
you had a choice of whether you're going to buy gas or buy a case 
of beer and stay home.'' Another question is enforcement. A vigorously 
enforced 65-mile limit could cut speeds more than an indifferently 
enforced 55-mile limit, experts say. In New Jersey, which in May became 
the 48th state to raise the speed limit, the penalty for exceeding 
the 65-mile limit by 5 miles an hour is $154 _ if you are caught. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>