<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981226.0197 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Dominik Hasek's goaltending was more vintage than Martin Brodeur's 
Saturday night in the first clash of the season between the National 
Hockey League's best goaltenders of the decade. Hasek denied each 
of the 34 attempts by the Devils and led the Buffalo Sabres to a 2-0 
victory before a sellout crowd of 19,040 at Continental Arena. The 
shutout was Hasek's second in a row, his seventh of the season and 
the 40th of his career. It extended his streak without allowing a 
goal to 163 minutes 35 seconds. Hasek is the only goalie in the league 
who has started every game this season. He is admired by every goaltender 
in the league, and Saturday night he once again demonstrated why. 
His goaltending bordered on brilliance, even though a number of his 
saves were unorthodox. Brodeur (22 saves) allowed only one goal, to 
Miroslav Satan. Satan also scored the second goal, but it came with 
an empty net with 50 seconds left because Brodeur was pulled for an 
extra attacker. It was Brodeur's first loss in his last 10 games. 
The two teams gave a sample of what is to come in their later games, 
perhaps deep into the spring. There were plenty of passing combinations 
in all zones, with 43 shots taken in the first two periods. It took 
a brilliant move by Satan to produce a goal. Taking a pass from Michal 
Grosek out of Buffalo's zone, Satan skated down the right flank, cut 
into the middle and waited for Brodeur to commit before beating him 
with a rising shot for his 11th of the season with 4:26 left before 
the second intermission. Brodeur had denied Erik Rasmussen moments 
before Satan's goal, and was lucky five minutes earlier when three 
Sabres went in on him without a Devils defenseman in sight. The play 
was created when Scott Niedermayer failed to clear the puck at his 
blue line, but Jason Woolley's shot sailed wide left. Brodeur had 
17 saves in the first two periods, when the Devils had the territorial 
advantage and took 25 shots against Hasek. The majority of the Devils' 
attempts were good shots, but Hasek was equal to the task. His best 
saves came in the second period when he stopped a Jason Arnott shot 
early and stymied Petr Sykora moments before Satan's goal. Arnott, 
on a setup by Patrik Elias, went head on with Hasek, but Hasek sprawled 
to his right to deny him from point-blank range. His denial of Sykora 
came while he was on his back, but, somehow, he managed to keep his 
shutout intact as Sykora skated in with authority from right to left. 
Players from both teams viewed this game as a measuring stick. Both 
attempted to establish their game from the outset, and since both 
teams were equally effective, physical force came into play. Three 
first-period fights cost the Devils more because they lost Lyle Odelein 
to a game misconduct after his second fight against Matthew Barnaby. 
Odelein was ejected from the game because his jersey was not tied 
down according to league rules. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>