<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981226.0110 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Alfred Peter Wolf, a nuclear and organic chemist whose work at the 
junction of chemistry and medicine helped create some of today's most 
sophisticated diagnostic tools, died Dec. 17 at John T. Mather Hospital 
in Port Jefferson, N.Y. He was 75 and lived in nearby Setauket. He 
suffered a lengthy illness, according to Brookhaven National Laboratory, 
where he was a senior chemist. He retired as chairman of the chemistry 
department in 1987 but continued his laboratory work until earlier 
this year. Through nearly five decades, Wolf, who was a member of 
the National Academy of Sciences, advanced the field of organic radiochemistry, 
radiopharmacology and nuclear medicine. He made his mark particularly 
in the development of positron emission tomography, PET for short, 
which is used to observe the inner workings of the brain and heart. 
PET scans explore deep crevices to spot chemical processes responsible 
for neurological diseases and can be used, for example, to reveal 
which part of the brain is most active in performing certain tasks. 
Much of his research was performed at Brookhaven, an arm of the federal 
Department of Energy. ``Al's work laid the foundation for many of 
the nuclear medicine and medical imaging procedures performed in the 
world today, which help save thousands of lives each year and expand 
our knowledge of our brains and our bodies,'' said a Brookhaven colleague, 
Joanna Fowler. Wolf founded and led one of Brookhaven's largest interdisciplinary 
collaborations, which remains a vital program. To set it up in the 
1970s he called on experts from the fields of physics, computer science, 
mathematics, medicine, physiology and biochemistry. His group scored 
its big breakthrough in 1973 with discoveries that led to a procedure 
now widely applied to measure such vital signs as glucose metabolism. 
In 1976, group members developed a form of sugar _ fluorodioxyglucose 
_ that researchers and doctors use to perform PET scans to determine 
brain function and diagnose cancer and heart disease. His group also 
developed a radiotracer, which, when injected into the body, acts 
as a chemical beacon whose signals are picked up by imaging equipment 
to track brain activity or the movement of a drug through the body. 
Wolf was born in Manhattan and earned B.A., M.A. and Ph.D. degrees 
in chemistry at Columbia University. He joined the Brookhaven staff 
in 1951, and became a senior chemist in 1957 and department chief 
in 1982. He also served as a research professor in the department 
of psychiatry at New York University, and was affiliated with other 
schools and institutions in the United States, Austria, Germany, Italy 
and Sweden. Wolf is survived by a son, Roger O., of Los Angeles, and 
two granddaughters. His wife, Elizabeth Gross Wolf, died last year; 
the couple had been married 51 years. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>