<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981226.0073 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For four long years, President Alexander G. Lukashenko has pursued 
an unlikely obsession: to raise tiny Belarus from the shards of the 
sundered Soviet Union and remake it into a model socialist state. 
Lately, it seems he has succeeded all too well. The fruits of Lukashenko's 
labors are evident daily outside the aptly named Golden Egg, a downtown 
shop in this city of 1.7 million, where nearly 100 people lined up 
in foot-stamping cold on a recent December morning. Their objective 
was to get inside the store and buy the allotted maximum of 20 eggs 
each. Most had been waiting for three hours, since the store opened 
at 8 a.m. ``I can't feel my feet,'' a fur-swaddled woman said. ``This 
is Lukashenko's fault.'' She refused to give her name. ``The further 
away this is published, the better,'' she said. In more ways than 
one _ the food rationing, the lines, the ever-shrinking ruble, the 
undercurrent of fear _ Minsk in 1998 resembles Moscow in 1988, a few 
months before the last model communist state began to crumble. For 
Lukashenko, that rare head of state who openly longs for a Soviet 
restoration, such problems could not have come at a worse time. Belarus' 
socialism dovetails with a larger ambition Lukashenko harbors: a merger 
of Belarus with Russia, thus beginning a rebuilding of the old Soviet 
empire. It also would enable him to seek the new nation's presidency, 
a plum he recently insisted is the farthest thing from his mind. On 
Christmas Day, Lukashenko and President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia 
took a first step toward the altar, proposing to begin next year to 
unify the two nations' economies under a single currency. That would 
be hard enough, given that Russia has been heading in the opposite 
direction, turning itself into a capitalist state. It would be harder 
still if Belarus' stumbling economy grinds to a complete halt, saddling 
Moscow with the cost of maintaining another 10 million impoverished 
people. Lukashenko, a charismatic dictator with a hand-picked Parliament 
and a pliant citizenry, appears concerned enough about the future 
to begin shoring up his position. He announced new plans this month 
to muzzle his few political opponents and charged an emergency council 
with restoring staples like eggs and milk to stores. He also has persuaded 
the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund to withhold judgment 
on Belarus _ they had all but renounced any notion of lending more 
money to the government earlier this year _ by promising economic 
reforms. By Western standards, there is a lot to reform. Lukashenko, 
who ran a collective farm before entering politics, calls his brand 
of economic policy ``market socialism.'' The government owns or controls 
much of industry and agriculture, but also allows private enterprises 
to exist. In theory, at least, the government side of the economy 
competes in the world market as well as with domestic rivals. In practice, 
Lukashenko has followed a straightforward fiscal policy: he prints 
money when the nation runs short, and caps prices when he thinks they 
are too high. The result is inflation and shortages. ``Everything's 
controlled from the top,'' said Stanislav Bahgdankevich, who quit 
as head of Belarus' national bank in 1995 and now heads an opposition 
party. ``The private sector is dictated what to produce, and what 
price to sell it at. It's a Bolshevik forced economy.'' The average 
citizen's monthly income has slumped since July from $70 to about 
$40. And that depends on how one measures income: at last count, there 
were five separate exchange rates for the Belarusian ruble, ranging 
from 91,000 to more than 350,000 per dollar. At the latter rate _ 
the one the rest of the world uses to buy and sell rubles _ a Belarusian 
millionaire is currently worth about $3. Belarus' Gosplan-style network 
of price controls has fostered a black market in food, to farmers' 
ruination. The country's artificially low prices force farmers to 
sell their crops at a loss, while entrepreneurs snap up the food and 
smuggle it to Ukraine or Russia, where it is resold for a healthy 
profit across the border. It is now illegal to export food without 
a permit. In fact, Belarus' problem is not so much that food is not 
available _ privately run markets have abundant supplies of many staples 
_ as that Belarusians cannot afford it. In Minsk's jam-packed public 
market, state-owned meat vendors this month offered strips of gristly, 
bone-ridden beef for 170,000 rubles (somewhere between 40 cents and 
$2, depending on the exchange rate), the price dictated by the state. 
Directly across the aisle, private vendors were selling thick, lean 
steaks for 450,000 rubles. The state-run markets receive their food 
from collective farms, many of which lose money and consequently produce 
poor-quality goods in low quantities. Private vendors raised their 
own produce and meat or bought it from private wholesalers. Even 170,000 
rubles was too much for one elderly woman, who refused to give her 
name but said as she walked away that she lived on a pension of only 
1.5 million rubles a month, about $5 to $15. ``It's the rulers,'' 
she said, ``not only Lukashenko. There are just too many of them. 
Don't they see what's going on? The fish rots from the head.'' Industry 
is in no better shape. Westerners buy little, in part because Belarus 
factories are so hobbled by economic controls that they spend little 
money to modernize and are no longer competitive. Nor has Belarus 
tried much to sell to the West. The country's biggest trading partner 
by far, Russia, is now too hard-pressed itself to buy many of the 
nation's televisions and tractors. Yet factories continue producing. 
By some estimates, many warehouses are stuffed with six months' supply 
of goods. Some private ventures, like a Ford Motor Co. tractor plant 
in Minsk, have simply shut down most operations for the duration. 
Amid this, Lukashenko declared as recently as September that the economy 
was in ``optimal'' condition, and said last week that the country's 
gross domestic product will leap an astounding 8 percent this year. 
Desperate as that might sound, virtually nobody is writing Lukashenko 
off. Even opposition leaders here allow that he remains popular, especially 
in rural areas. And he has managed to virtually extinguish serious 
opposition while allowing enough critical politicians and newspapers 
to operate so that he can deflect accusations by human rights critics. 
``Not a single journalist in our country at present has been arrested,'' 
Vladimir N. Konoplyov, deputy chairman of Belarus' Parliament and 
a friend of the president since boyhood. ``And as to human rights, 
what can I say? When I meet voters, I always ask the crowd, `Tell 
me, who feels any pressure or deprivation of rights?' Nobody ever 
answers.'' The monitoring group Human Rights Watch says there may 
be a reason for the reticence: last July it issued a thick report 
accusing Lukashenko of ``violations of a broad spectrum of basic civil 
and political rights.'' Demonstrators are sometimes permitted, but 
frequently harassed, arrested and occasionally severely beaten. Some 
30 opposition newspapers are published, but their presence is limited 
to a few copies at state-owned newsstands, and their editors are often 
hauled in for official warnings. Their combined circulation, journalists 
insist, is less than that of the leading state-controlled newspaper 
in Minsk. One leading critical paper, Svoboda, was abruptly closed 
in January. Two reporters for Russian media were arrested last year. 
Similarly, five opposition political parties operate in Belarus, but 
their leading figures often discover suddenly that they are jobless 
and unable to find work, and many members are jailed, albeit usually 
for short periods, on various charges. Lukashenko wrote a new constitution 
and installed a mostly hand-picked Parliament in 1996 after winning 
a referendum on the changes that international observers say was fraudulent. 
This month, Lukashenko sent legislation to the Parliament that would 
ban from public office anyone who has been found guilty of even civil 
offenses. ``If I'm involved in opposition activity, my family could 
starve,'' said Stanislav Suskevich, the first president of post-Soviet 
Belarus. ``Already in Belarus, I can't work.'' If Lukashenko's popularity 
rests in part on the absence of serious opposition, he also has undeniably 
played smart politics. He has attributed most of the nation's economic 
plight to the Russian breakdown and to the incompetence of aides, 
some of whom are periodically dismissed to demonstrate his frustration. 
When advisers recently tried to generate revenue by raising the price 
of vodka by 75 percent, Lukashenko berated them on national television, 
then ordered the salaries of all workers raised by an amount sufficient 
to buy a few bottles of vodka monthly. Such impulsive acts are part 
of Lukashenko's personality. He once blockaded Masherov Prospekt, 
an eight-lane downtown artery, so he could practice Rollerblading. 
He has barred the use of Belarusian, the country's long-suppressed 
native tongue, in newspapers and classrooms. He blamed the poor performance 
of a Belarusian athlete in the last winter Olympics on a Western conspiracy. 
They are the trademarks of a leader who is accustomed to getting what 
he seeks. But Belarus will be hard pressed to keep giving. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>