<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981226.0013 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In a media-driven age when image so often defines power, Chief Justice 
William Rehnquist is an anomaly: a powerful man whose public image 
is so fuzzy he can walk the halls and grounds of the Supreme Court, 
where he has served for 27 years, without attracting a tourist's second 
glance. There are many imponderables about the impeachment trial scheduled 
to start in the Senate in early January, but at least one predictable 
result: If the trial of President Clinton indeed goes forward as something 
more than a brief formality on the way to a negotiated resolution, 
if it becomes the century's final televised sensation, Rehnquist will 
emerge from the hide-in-plain-sight existence of a Supreme Court justice 
into the glare of the public spotlight. It is a fascinating prospect, 
not only because this 74-year-old amateur historian has written a 
book about two famous Senate impeachment trials. ``Grand Inquests'' 
(William Morrow, 1992), about the trials of Supreme Court Justice 
Samuel Chase in 1805 and President Andrew Johnson in 1868 _ both of 
which ended in acquittals _ is belatedly in demand from people scanning 
for clues to how the chief justice would conduct the trial of the 
president. The book, largely anecdotal in approach, contains no such 
clues, although it does display a decided skepticism about politically 
driven impeachment, a category that indisputably fits both those 19th-century 
episodes. Beyond the coincidental fact of the chief justice as impeachment 
specialist, or the novel fact of the chief justice on display in every 
living room, is the intriguing prospect of watching a man accustomed 
to being very much in charge of a very controllable environment navigate 
in a realm where normal expectations don't apply. When Rehnquist announces, 
as he often does when the red light at the lawyers' podium comes on, 
``Counsel, your time has expired,'' the lawyer stops speaking, sometimes 
in mid-syllable, and sits down. The chief justice, presiding over 
an impeachment trial, can be overruled on any point, trivial or profound, 
by a vote of 51 senators. While the Constitution gives the Senate 
``the sole power to try all impeachments,'' the trial is an odd amalgam 
of law and politics that would feel distinctly unfamiliar to any federal 
judge. The 100 jurors, far from being a disinterested panel subject 
to challenge for connections to parties in the case, have in many 
instances broken bread with the defendant; some are his allies and 
other have made their disapproval clear. The Federal Rules of Evidence, 
under which much of the material the House considered during its impeachment 
debate would be excluded as hearsay, do not apply. The standard of 
proof _ ``beyond a reasonable doubt'' in any real criminal trial _ 
is not specified. The chief justice may rule on questions of evidence 
and procedure, but at the end of the day a majority of the Senate 
has the final word. If the trial itself is a curiosity, so is the 
role the Constitution gives the chief justice. It is not really judicial 
at all. The chief justice serves as presiding officer of the Senate, 
a surrogate for the vice president, who presides over any non-presidential 
impeachment trial but would have a conflict of interest when the president 
is on trial. There is no expectation that a vice president is even 
a lawyer, let alone a judge. Yet because the language of law permeates 
the proceeding, it may be impossible to separate William Rehnquist 
the chief justice from William Rehnquist the surrogate presiding officer. 
In any event, this is a man accustomed to command, and it is hard 
to imagine him in the role of potted plant if the Senate overrides 
a procedural ruling that he thinks is necessary or important for consistency 
or regularity. Chief Justice Salmon P. Chase, who presided over the 
only other presidential impeachment trial, that of Andrew Johnson, 
threatened more than once to walk out if the Senate did not accept 
an evidentiary ruling, and the Senate blinked; the trial could not 
go on without him. Another question is which William Rehnquist will 
be on display. There is a segment of the public that will forever 
see him as a one-dimensional, law-and-order Nixonian (he served as 
an assistant attorney general before his Supreme Court appointment 
by President Richard Nixon in 1971) who embodies many of their concerns 
about the direction of the court. He is a polarizing figure who drew 
33 negative votes in the Senate after a testy confirmation hearing 
in 1986, when President Ronald Reagan elevated him from associate 
justice to chief justice. Since then Rehnquist has not so much modulated 
his conservative views as he has stood fast while the entire spectrum, 
political as well as judicial, shifted to the right. It is not easy 
to portray him as an extremist when Clinton signed a habeas corpus 
bill in 1996 that adopted Rehnquist's long-held position in favor 
of reducing state prisoners' access to federal court. Although in 
the courtroom, Rehnquist can often appear the stern task master, he 
has a dry wit and avid outside interests ranging from poker to art 
(he absented himself from one of Reagan's State of the Union speeches 
because it conflicted with a painting class he was taking) to Gilbert 
and Sullivan operettas. A few years ago, he remodeled his basic black 
robe, adding four gold stripes on each sleeve to copy the Lord Chancellor's 
costume in a local production of ``Iolanthe.'' In addition to three 
published books of history, he is the author of an unpublished mystery 
novel. If his presence is indeed required in the Capitol, a few hundred 
yards across First Street from the Supreme Court building, it is a 
near certainty that the work of the court will go on with little disruption. 
The chief justice is a fast writer and highly efficient manager of 
his time and others'. Not one to agonize over hard decisions, he takes 
the view that a second or third try rarely adds much of value to the 
initial assessment of a question or a case. The justices' weekly closed-door 
conferences, to discuss new and pending cases, move along with dispatch, 
with conversation cut quite short and details and disagreements left 
to be expressed later in writing. Three years ago, when the chief 
justice had back surgery and missed a conference, the job of presiding 
fell to John Paul Stevens, the senior associate justice. It was the 
first time in recent memory that the conference lasted through lunch. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>