<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981226.0136 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In October, New Jersey's fourth-largest health maintenance organization 
collapsed, threatening the medical coverage of nearly 200,000 people 
and leaving hospitals and doctors holding the bag for nearly $120 
million in unpaid claims. The collapse was the first of its kind in 
New Jersey, and it has been attributed to a number of factors _ from 
poor management to increased competition to inadequate financing. 
But state officials and financial experts say it could have been avoided 
if the state had been able to examine the books of the company that 
bought the right to run the HMO's health centers and physicians' network. 
Yet the state's inability to examine the purchaser's finances was 
its own fault, a result of regulations that did not keep up with the 
rapid changes in managed care. The HMO itself, HIP Health Plan of 
New Jersey, also failed to check the background of the company, so 
it did not know that the company was already having serious financial 
and management problems in another HMO deal. The subsequent financial 
mess has exposed what some experts view as the most urgent problem 
now facing HMOs across the United States _ that many have too little 
funding to survive in an increasingly competitive business. HIP Health 
Plan of New Jersey, with premiums of more than $300 million a year, 
is now licking its wounds and scrambling, under state supervision, 
to try to pay something to health providers and hold onto its members. 
Its former partner, Pinnacle Health Enterprises, is in bankruptcy 
liquidation proceedings, and one of its top executives committed suicide 
as the deal was unraveling this fall. Pinnacle's parent company, PHP 
Healthcare Inc., has been driven into Chapter 11 bankruptcy reorganization. 
Last week, PHP's stock stood at 11 cents, down from a high this year 
of as much as $17. The turmoil also has caused financial strains at 
HIP's larger New York affiliate, which had tried to help the New Jersey 
operation stay afloat. The bitter tale of the dealings between HIP-NJ 
and its hoped-for savior started 18 months ago, when the New Jersey 
plan was looking at a deficit of $10.1 million that was not getting 
any smaller. So it went to the state with a proposal: It would sell 
its system of health centers and its physicians' network to a private 
company, which would then manage them for a hefty annual fee. But 
when the state examined HIP's proposal, it realized that it had no 
authority to directly review the finances of a what is called a ``third-party 
administrator,'' a company that provides services for an HMO, because 
third-party providers are not covered under the state's licensing 
laws. Arun Kumar, director of a Standard &AMP; Poor's unit that analyzes 
health industry companies, said that until recently the regulation 
of HMOs focused on quality of care rather than finances. ``All over 
the country, the solvency guidelines are a joke and we have found 
that one-third of the HMO companies do not have adequate capital,'' 
Kumar said. ``It's like treating managed care as if it had the same 
risk characteristics as selling Coca-Cola.'' In an interview, the 
two state commissioners now supervising HIP, Jaynee LaVecchia of the 
Department of Banking and Insurance and Len Fishman of the Department 
of Health and Senior Services, said they had looked at Pinnacle's 
public filings but could not compel the company to disclose more information. 
They said they relied on HIP's diligence in checking out its proposed 
partner. Officials of HIP said privately that they had relied on the 
consultant that had identified PHP, based in Reston, Va., as a likely 
partner, and ``assumed'' that it had checked out the company better 
than it did. State officials also said they approved the deal partly 
because they had no reason to turn it down. They wanted to protect 
HIP, which was in deep financial trouble and needed the $72.6 million 
that PHP would pay for its health centers and doctors' network. `A 
Giant Siren Should Have Gone Off' Once state regulators realized that 
Pinnacle was acquiring most of HIP's assets, they sought to compel 
Pinnacle and PHP to put up a large reserve of cash to ensure continued 
care for HIP members. But Pinnacle and PHP refused, since they were 
not directly subject to state regulation. ``A giant siren should have 
gone off at this point telling us that PHP didn't have the resources 
that we thought they had,'' said one HIP official. So the state imposed 
more stringent reserve and accounting requirements on the only company 
it did regulate, HIP, even though this just increased its financial 
stress. Elie Radinsky, a director in corporate ratings for Standard 
&AMP; Poor's, said that if HIP had examined PHP more closely, the 
deal might have turned out differently. For PHP, ``this was biting 
off a lot,'' he said. ``Basically HIP transferred its entire risk 
for a statewide program to a third party,'' Radinsky said. ``And from 
a regulatory point of view you need to know the financial strength 
of the insurer who is responsible for the bills as well as that of 
the third party.'' HIP of Greater New York began in New York in 1947 
as a system of clinics providing affordable health care to city employees. 
It came to New Jersey in 1980 at the invitation of state officials 
who asked it to save a failing health plan. After putting that one 
on a firm footing, HIP expanded into much of New Jersey by the mid-1990s. 
At that time, managed care companies were flooding into the state 
offering premiums that undercut HIP's. The newcomers also were giving 
members more choices among doctors. So HIP began to move away from 
clinic-based care toward its own network of doctors in private practices. 
According to state filings, HIP's enrollments rose from about 170,000 
in 1994 to about 205,000 in 1996, but then dipped to 194,000 by 1998. 
In addition, according to studies by Wasserstein Perella &AMP; Co., 
a Wall Street investment firm, HIP-NJ was not run efficiently. From 
1995 to 1997, the company went from spending 96 cents of every dollar 
collected in premiums on medical services to spending $1.02, while 
the average managed care company was spending 85 cents. HIP held on 
with $40 million in loans from its New York City affiliate. In desperation, 
HIP hired Wasserstein Perella to attract suitors. The proposal from 
PHP was the only one that seemed to fit the bill. ``The state was 
relying on the fact that we were using Wasserstein Perella, a national 
firm, to do this search,'' said one HIP official who insisted on anonymity. 
``And we were interested in whether PHP worked, more so than in the 
company's history. We thought Wasserstein had checked all of that. 
Maybe we were naive.'' Management companies like PHP had found a niche 
by promising to squeeze savings out of HMOs. PHP began in 1975 by 
contracting with the Army and other government entities. In 1992, 
its revenues were beginning to decline. It wanted to expand in the 
private sector, and the deal with HIP-NJ seemed just the ticket. Inside 
PHP the sense of expectancy was great. ``This was more than $300 million 
a year in business, and they had never taken on anything this big 
before,'' said a former executive there who spoke on the condition 
of anonymity. ``PHP was enthusiastic about this because they thought 
if it went well it would mean access to the New York HIP market.'' 
PHP Venture Fails Just Two States Away But at the same time, the company 
was reeling from a similar foray. In 1996, PHP had joined with a group 
of hospitals in Fairfield County, Conn., to form Connecticut Health 
Enterprises. It was to be a physician and hospital organization offering 
one-stop medical service contracts in exchange for a large percentage 
of insurance premiums. It eventually signed up 12 insurers. Barely 
a year into the arrangement, PHP's Connecticut subsidiary and its 
partners, including St. Vincent's Health Center in Bridgeport, were 
at each other's throats. By November 1997, within days of the commencement 
of the PHP/HIP-NJ partnership, the Connecticut arrangement was falling 
apart. A lawsuit filed in federal court last January by PHP's partners 
accused the company's Connecticut subsidiary of failing to ``to take 
appropriate remedial action, precipitating a financial crisis at CHE.'' 
The lawsuit was settled out of court, with a condition that PHP leave 
the state. As HIP officials in New Jersey were closing the deal with 
Pinnacle in the autumn of 1997, they did not know anything about these 
problems two states away. What PHP did tell financial analysts was 
that it didn't want to come into New Jersey with ``slash and burn'' 
management that would frighten doctors and hospitals away. The new 
Pinnacle operation would lose money for the time being, they said, 
but they planned to ride out this period through concessions that 
required HIP to shoulder as much as $28 million of the costs in the 
first year of the contract. At the same time, the shadow of financial 
problems at other managed care companies, like Oxford, had prevented 
PHP from financing the HIP deal by issuing stock. After PHP arranged 
a bank loan, it sought to raise money by issuing convertible notes 
that promised purchasers that, should the price of company stock decline, 
the noteholders could increase their shares of company stock proportionally. 
What the company did not expect was a ruling from the Securities and 
Exchange Commission in January that required PHP to restate its 1995 
earnings to reflect a $4 million loss. The price of the stock, which 
was already dropping, began plummeting. PHP used the money it had 
raised to cushion its first year to buy back stock and stabilize the 
price. ``This created a liquidity issue and the company had little 
margin for error,'' said Radinsky. Meanwhile, HIP was becoming nervous. 
Its enrollments were not growing, its costs were not going down and 
PHP officials were clamming up. HIP officials became more uneasy when 
they found out that PHP's president, Jack Mazur, and two partners 
in another business had settled a civil fraud lawsuit in the mid-1980s 
for $5.5 million. The HIP officials only found out about this when 
they logged into an Internet chat room discussing PHP's problems late 
last July. And for their part, Pinnacle officials said that they were 
submitting plans for cutbacks which either HIP was contesting or state 
officials were not acting on. The state finally began to take notice 
as HIP's quarterly reports showed that its deficits were growing while 
Pinnacle was failing to pay claims. 400 Pink Slips in `September Massacre' 
In early September, frantic to wring immediate savings from the New 
Jersey operation, Pinnacle sent out pink slips to 400 employees at 
the medical centers. This move set off alarms with the regulators, 
who were concerned about such a large cut. Angry state officials summoned 
HIP and PHP executives to a meeting over what they were calling the 
``September massacre.'' At the meeting, Fishman said his agency maintained 
that Pinnacle and its parent should have informed the state before 
the layoffs. Fishman recalled the response from Mazur and Pinnacle's 
lawyers. ``They did what lawyers often do,'' he said. ``They argued 
that they didn't have to inform us, but in the alternative they should 
have.'' Kenneth Weixel, who was then PHP's executive vice president 
but recently succeeded Mazur as its president, described that meeting 
as being ``like government trying to tell a doctor that he didn't 
have enough receptionists.'' He added, ``We just don't think that 
we had to ask their approval to lay off receptionists.'' The layoffs, 
which included doctors and nurses in addition to receptionists, were 
drastically scaled back at the state's insistence. Four days later, 
using a 1-year-old law meant to toughen state regulation of HMOs, 
regulators placed the Pinnacle/HIP combine under ``administrative 
supervision.'' It was also the beginning of a closer relationship 
between state regulators and HIP executives. On Oct. 27, the state 
regulators announced that they would get a judge to put HIP-NJ into 
``rehabilitation.'' This would allow them to take over the plan's 
operations, seize control of the health centers and cancel Pinnacle's 
contract. It also was on that day, local authorities say, that Pinnacle's 
top executive, Dr. Paul Frankel, killed himself by taking handfuls 
of pills along with a bottle of red wine. His brother, Kenneth Frankel, 
laid the blame partly on the stress of the business failure. ``Maybe 
it was the first time that Paul wasn't 100 percent successful,'' Kenneth 
Frankel said. Eventually PHP wound up in Chapter 11 reorganization 
while Pinnacle filed for Chapter 7 liquidation. And as state regulators 
try to fashion a partial payment plan acceptable to health providers 
that are owed money by HIP/Pinnacle and try to persuade the providers 
to continue to treat HIP members, they are analyzing what went wrong. 
Anthony Wright, program director for Citizens Action, a New Jersey 
public interest group, said that, in light of how extensive its role 
was, PHP should have been required to take over HIP's license as an 
insurer and be subjected to greater financial scrutiny and reserve 
requirements. Already the National Association of Insurance Commissioners 
has come up with new guidelines that recommend sharp increases in 
the claims reserve requirements for health maintenance organizations 
nationwide _ a move that will require greater funding for most HMOs. 
``It is highly likely that most states will adopt these by the year 
2000, which will change the situation for the better,'' Kumar of Standard 
&AMP; Poors said. At the direction of Gov. Christie Whitman, Ms. LaVecchia 
of the Department of Banking and Insurance said that she would seek 
legislative approval of the creation of an HMO ``guaranty fund,'' 
financed by contributions from the state's 23 managed care insurers, 
to ensure continued coverage for the members of any plan that goes 
bankrupt. But Paul Langevin, president of the Association of Health 
Plans of New Jersey, is opposed to the idea, saying that well-run 
companies would have to finance such a fund _ and bail out the bad 
operators _ by raising premiums for their members. ``So this isn't 
about protecting consumers,'' he said. ``It's about paying the old 
bills for doctors and hospitals. Why should the public have to pick 
up those costs?'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>