<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981226.0027 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
What a year. No space for a wordy introduction. Just look at the places 
a wandering columnist visited in 1998: PASADENA, CALIF., Jan. 1. After 
growing up in chilly New York and listening to the Rose Bowl on the 
radio, I finally get to cover one. Even get caught in traffic from 
the parade. After the glorious sun goes down, Michigan holds off Washington 
State for an eventual share of the unofficial national title. PHILADELPHIA, 
Jan. 10. Michelle Kwan performs the skate of her life, winning the 
national title over Tara Lipinski. VANCOUVER, BRITISH COLUMBIA, Jan. 
18. European skill players abound as the National Hockey League holds 
its All-Star Game, preparing for the Winter Games next month. NAGANO, 
JAPAN, Feb. 7. People attend opening ceremonies bareheaded, wearing 
light jackets, in hazy sunshine. Japan and the International Olympic 
Committee have defied Mother Nature by holding Winter Games closer 
to the Equator than ever before. NAGANO, JAPAN, Feb. 13. Ross Rebagliati 
of Canada gets to keep his gold medal for snowboarding after admitting 
he may indeed have inhaled marijuana _ but only secondary smoke months 
earlier at a party. NAGANO, JAPAN, Feb. 13. It is no disgrace for 
the United States to lose to Sweden in the opener of the first mostly 
professional men's hockey tournament in Olympic history. What will 
be a disgrace are the trashed dorms and grim silence from the Americans. 
American women will win their gold, and behave maturely. HAKUBA, JAPAN, 
Feb. 14. On a dismal, rainy day straight out of ``Akira Kurosawa's 
Dreams,'' two Norwegians in red suits materialize from the mist, as 
Thomas Alsgaard passes medal king Bjorn Dahlie in the stretch in the 
15-kilometer cross-country race. NAGANO, JAPAN, Feb. 20. Tara Lipinski 
made an adult decision at 15: She would live in the athletes' village, 
she would march in the opening parade, she would have a blast. Tonight 
she skates exuberantly, winning the gold medal over a serene but tentative 
Michelle Kwan. NAGANO, JAPAN, Feb. 20. Taka Fukushima, the Buddhist 
priest at the historic Zenkoji temple, suggests tearing down the expensive 
buildings now that the Winter Games are over. The games are a modified 
success because of soupy weather and a sense that the Winter Games 
have grown too big. TOKYO, Feb. 23. The bullet train whisks us south 
from Almost Heaven, West Nagano, into the big city, in spring weather. 
My old neighbors from Long Island, the Usuzakas, take me for an exquisite 
dinner and good talk, and I make a pledge to come back soon. QUEENS, 
N.Y., March 31. Baseball tempts Mother Nature by opening earlier than 
ever before, but the temperature is 87 degrees for the Mets' opener. 
Is this an omen that baseball will luck out this season? OAKLAND, 
CALIF., April 5. The Yankees finally win after losing their first 
three. Back home in Knee-Jerk City, the tabloids are already picking 
Joe Torre's successor. BRONX, N.Y., April 14. No game today because 
a beam fell in empty Yankee Stadium yesterday. Reports of a beefy 
perpetrator in blue blazer and gray slacks are unconfirmed. LOUISVILLE, 
KY., May 2. Marginalized by lotteries and the gerontological makeup 
of its fan base, racing derives much of its vestigial buzz from Derby 
Day. Real Quiet bursts to the front and Bob Baffert shouts his nickname, 
``The Fish! The Fish!'' BRONX, N.Y., May 17. David Wells pitches the 
second perfect game ever by a Yankee. By some weird circumstance, 
Wells and Don Larsen both went to Point Loma High in San Diego. ``He'll 
think about it every day of his life, just like I do,'' Larsen predicts 
from Idaho. QUEENS, N.Y., May 23. Even millionaire free agents can 
suffer shock. His eyes baffled, Mike Piazza arrives at Shea Stadium, 
joining his third club in two weeks. ST.-JEAN D'ARDIERES, FRANCE, 
June 5. In the vineyards, the Beaujolais grapes are growing, but here 
in the rented chateau, there is nothing but sour whine as the American 
soccer team arrives for the World Cup. PARIS, June 6. Wearing a black 
tennis outfit to honor her father, who died on May 14, Monica Seles 
runs out of gas after a gallant run, losing to Arantxa Sanchez Vicario 
in the French final. PARIS, June 15. Germany performs a professional 
mugging in the first minutes, and commits a 2-0 massacre of the United 
States in the Americans' World Cup opener. LYONS, FRANCE, June 21. 
Affluent Iranian exiles wear T-shirts taunting the current government, 
then gleefully celebrate a 2-1 victory over the United States. NANTES, 
FRANCE, June 25. The United States is put out of its misery, 1-0, 
by powerful Yugoslavia. AIX-EN-PROVENCE, FRANCE, July 3. With a total 
sense of impending doom, I sit in front of a cafe television and watch 
my Italians play 120 scoreless minutes with France. Then the Italians 
lose the shootout, as always. CASSIS, FRANCE, July 5. My wife and 
I climb over rugged hills to go swimming in a calenque, a fjord-like 
inlet on the Mediterranean. What a country. BONNIEUX, FRANCE, July 
6. On a hilltop in the Vaucluse, the waiter suggests the Cavaillon 
melon wine, a local seasonal treat, unavailable in stores. What a 
country. MARSEILLE, FRANCE, July 7. Under a full moon, Taffarel of 
Brazil wins the goalkeeper lottery in the semifinal shootout over 
the Netherlands. ST.-DENIS, FRANCE, July 12. Clogging the streets, 
people chant ``Zee-dan! Zee-dan!'' in honor of Zinedine Zidane, of 
Algerian ancestry, who scored two headers as a polyglot French team 
stunned Brazil in the final, 3-0. REDMOND, WASH., Aug. 16. A friendly 
official at the Professional Golfers' Association Championship hands 
me a badge to walk inside the ropes, my first close exposure to top 
golf. I am amazed at the power and accuracy of Vijay Singh and Steve 
Stricker on the narrow fairways, as Singh wins the tournament. ST. 
LOUIS, Sept. 8. Lovefest alongside the Mississippi. Mark McGwire hits 
his 62d homer and the fans cheer and Sammy Sosa runs in from right 
field to congratulate him and McGwire acknowledges the family of the 
late Roger Maris. QUEENS, N.Y., Sept. 13. Lindsay Davenport and Patrick 
Rafter are the singles champs at the United States Open, but the double-decker 
luxury boxes produce empty seats and sedate guests, the feeling of 
a high-tech morgue. HOUSTON, Sept. 27. As the dejected Cubs trudge 
into the clubhouse, they hear the San Francisco Giants have also let 
one get away. The Cubs will win a playoff tomorrow in Chicago, and 
Sosa will finish with 66 homers to McGwire's 70, with the charming, 
bilingual Sosa ultimately winning the most valuable player award. 
ARLINGTON, TEX., Oct. 2. A brutal rainstorm lasts 3 hours 16 minutes, 
but cannot deter the Yanks' sweep of the Rangers. BRONX, N.Y., Oct. 
8. Chuck Knoblauch makes a gross mental error as the Yanks lose, but 
Orlando Hernandez _ El Duque _ will bail out the Yanks in Cleveland 
four nights later. SAN DIEGO, Oct. 21. The Yanks sweep the Padres 
in the World Series, to finish with 125 victories for the year, and 
consideration as one of the best teams of all time. NEW YORK, NOVEMBER 
AND DECEMBER. Thanks to the greedy and the inept, the National Basketball 
Association disappears, giving me time and space to search for a bit 
of dignity and hope in sport. I hope the uplifting two months carry 
over into a happy new year for all. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>