<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981226.0150 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
One township official called the women who helped organize the Coalition 
to Save Hopewell Valley ``hysterical housewives.'' Another township 
board member branded them a ``feminist menace.'' But the women who 
first began asking tough questions a year ago about Merrill Lynch's 
plans to build a corporate office park here can soon expect new civility 
at township committee meetings. Two coalition members have been elected 
to the committee and will be sworn in on Jan. 4. In this once sleepy 
farming community near Princeton and in other fast-growing spots across 
the region, the rapid pace of development is remaking local politics. 
It is also causing concern among developers and local officials who 
were able to announce plans with little debate only a few years ago. 
Planning board hearings that were poorly attended are now often packed 
with residents complaining about the building boom threatening their 
way of life. Even some residents who once welcomed new development 
to bolster their local tax rolls are arguing that it is driving their 
taxes up, not down, because of increased demands on local services. 
In Hopewell, the debate over Merrill Lynch's proposal and the township's 
plans to expand sewer service by building an eight-mile sewer line 
from Trenton drew hundreds of residents. ``We are talking about the 
future of our town, our whole quality of life,'' said Marylou Ferrara, 
43, a member of the coalition in Hopewell who won election to the 
township committee last month in her first bid for elective office. 
``We are one of the last rural towns in New Jersey, and we are willing 
to drive 20 minutes to buy a gallon of milk. But we are not willing 
to sit in traffic to get it.'' Janine Bauer, executive director of 
the Tri-State Transportation Campaign, an advocacy group based in 
New York City, said she believes there has been a growing awareness, 
particularly among suburban mothers, about the effect of land-use 
decisions on matters as varied as traffic, classroom size and water 
quality. ``People are beginning to connect the dots,'' Ms. Bauer said. 
``What used to be considered `not in my back yard' stuff has been 
transformed into preserving our communities by preserving our open 
space.'' Harry Ferguson, a vice president at Merrill Lynch who is 
overseeing the project in Hopewell, said there had been little public 
concern when the company built an office complex in nearby Plainsboro 
during the 1980s. ``But they were not experiencing some of the suburban 
sprawl problems then,'' Ferguson said. ``Now there are a lot more 
questions. There is a lot more work that you need to do to prove to 
a community that the development you are bringing is truly a win-win.'' 
The debate over suburban sprawl is also bubbling up as a state and 
even national political issue. In November, a half-dozen states voted 
on ballot initiatives that would preserve open space. National environmental 
groups, like the Sierra Club, have made anti-sprawl campaigns a top 
priority. Vice President Al Gore has spoken several times about the 
importance of ``smart growth'' initiatives. In New Jersey, Gov. Christie 
Whitman has tapped into voter concern about the vanishing landscape, 
making open-space preservation a top priority of her second term. 
She pushed for $1 billion in borrowing to set aside half the state's 
2 million remaining acres of open space during the next 10 years. 
Voters overwhelmingly approved the measure in November. Dozens of 
new local organizations like the Coalition to Save Hopewell Valley 
have popped up in the last couple of years, signaling what environmentalists 
say is a new movement against unchecked development. In Hopewell, 
almost 900 acres of open fields on Scotch Road near Interstate 95 
had been zoned for industrial/commercial use for years. But there 
was little public concern until Merrill Lynch announced plans last 
year to build a complex of 3.5 million square feet of office space, 
retail outlets and possibly a hotel on 450 acres on the east side 
of Scotch Road. Just last week, Merrill Lynch officials acknowledged 
that they had also purchased 440 acres of open fields from various 
farmers and landowners for possible development on the west side of 
the road. While the prospect of a huge office park worries residents, 
they expressed even more concern about the township's plans to expand 
the sewer line from Trenton. Critics say the plans, which would expand 
sewer capacity beyond what Merrill Lynch and the number of present 
homeowners need, would encourage too much commercial and residential 
development. Hopewell Township rejected a proposal to install a sewer 
system more than 20 years ago, preferring to retain its dependency 
on individual septic systems. As a result, it has maintained much 
of its rural character. ``Sewers are everything,'' said Leslie Kramer, 
39, who led the effort to create the coalition once she learned about 
Merrill Lynch's plans. ``When the sewers come in, development will 
follow. There is no going back.'' Ms. Kramer said she helped organize 
the coalition to focus attention on the effect of the Merrill Lynch 
project and the sewer line. After she was quoted in the local newspaper, 
other residents who shared her concerns called to offer help. Most 
of the callers were women like herself with young children. ``It is 
really not a women's issue; it is a mom's issue,'' said Peggy Snyder, 
39, the mother of three small children who also helped organize the 
coalition. ``I really don't have time for this. But we are talking 
about the quality of life and the quality of our children's' lives. 
That is what we are fighting for.'' The coalition's organizers pored 
over zoning maps and sewer plans, becoming experts on land-use law 
and issuing bonds for sewers. They spoke up at planning board and 
township committee meetings. The five-member township committee did 
scale back the original sewer proposal, but not far enough for the 
coalition, prompting members to try to make their case at the ballot 
box. The coalition decided to support Jon Edwards, a Democrat who 
shared many of its views but had lost a previous race for the township 
committee. In the primary, some coalition members wrote in the name 
of Ms. Ferrara for the Democratic Party nomination. When both she 
and Edwards won nominations, they decided to run jointly in the general 
election against the incumbent Republicans, even though she had been 
a registered Republican all her life. They won handily. ``I had never 
considered running for political office before, not even student body 
president,'' Ms. Ferrara said. ``But this was an opportunity to bring 
change.'' Now, as she and Edwards prepare to take on their new roles, 
they hope to chart a different course for the township because there 
is likely to be a majority on the five-member committee sympathetic 
to the coalition's concerns. Kathy Bird Maurice, a Republican, has 
served on the township committee for two years and has already aligned 
herself with them on most development issues. Merrill Lynch plans 
to break ground on its office complex in the spring, and a lawsuit 
is pending over the proposed sewer line from Trenton. For now, John 
Hart, a Republican member of the township committee and Hopewell's 
mayor, said he was taking a wait-and-see approach toward the two new 
officials. ``They want to come in with guns ablazing,'' said Hart, 
45, a farmer who has lived in Hopewell all his life. ``I am going 
to sit back and watch. It is easy to criticize when you are out front. 
When you get behind the podium, they will see that it is sometimes 
different and you can't always do what you want to do.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>