<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981226.0043 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The International Time Capsule Society has a few things it would like 
you to know about your contribution to this millennium's posterity. 
While Americans have long held a canine enthusiasm for burying objects 
of value for later discovery, they lack a sense of ``stewardship,'' 
according to one of the society's founders, Knute Berger. Of the tens 
of thousands of time capsules already buried across the United States, 
most will be lost, destroyed or otherwise prevented from passing on 
their legacy, Berger said. One rule is not to tell too many people 
_ or too few, for that matter. In Westport, Fla., for example, the 
first headmaster of an elementary school buried a commemorative capsule 
in 1947 and left a note specifying its content and the year of its 
intended disinterment, 1997. But the headmaster neglected to denote 
its location. In Wilkinsburg, Pa., a church capsule was carefully 
concealed from vandals and remains concealed from everyone else, too, 
after a century. People have been known to uncover one container while 
trying to bury another. A box meant to commemorate the 1960 opening 
of a general store in Walnut Creek, Calif., was planted in a four-foot 
concrete pedestal with a brass plaque announcing both its contents 
(prognostications of the future by town citizens) and its opening 
(November 2000). Last July the entire structure was removed by vandals 
with sledgehammers. Time capsules must be interred with an eye to 
the distant future, of course. Local scholars attended the 1995 excavation 
of a century-old capsule in New Zealand with interest because it held 
historical papers. But all they found was muddy water and a button. 
On the other hand, even the rocket scientists at the Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology remain at a loss as to how to disinter a capsule 
buried on campus in 1889 that somehow wound up beneath their cyclotron 
(which was constructed in the 1930s). It's also dangerous to trust 
in the wisdom of future generations. In Orlando, the opening of a 
hundred-year-old courthouse cornerstone was so eagerly anticipated 
this year that the city planned to raze the building and replace it 
with a museum in which the contents of the capsule could be exhibited. 
When the courthouse was demolished, though, the smallish copper box 
in the cornerstone was apparently dumped in a landfill along with 
the rest of the debris. At least now there's expert advice at the 
time capsule society at Oglethorpe University in Atlanta, which houses 
the enormous ``Crypt of Civilization.'' Its creator, Thornwell Jacobs, 
considered 1940 as a midpoint in recorded history, so the crypt was 
built then and will be opened in 8113. The society will register anyone's 
capsule by location, date and contents. The Westinghouse Time Capsule 
from the 1939 World's Fair in Flushing Meadows, N.Y., officially introduced 
the concept of a time capsule. The actual term was coined by a publicist 
for Westinghouse Electric (another possibility was ``Time Bomb''). 
The torpedo-shaped cylinder measures some 7 feet in length and 8 inches 
in diameter. Among the contents are microfilm (of newspapers and books, 
including ``Gone With the Wind''), newsreels (including Howard Hughes' 
Spruce Goose and a Miami fashion show), examples of the day's technology 
(including coal and asbestos, the ``miracle fabric'') and representations 
of daily life (photographs of a poker game and a 1938 baseball rule 
book). They are all loaded by weight and fragility and fashionably 
topped by a Lilly Dache hat. (An updated version was planted after 
the 1965 World's Fair: Time Capsule II was buried exactly 10 feet 
north of the original and contains such wonders as a transistor radio, 
a Polaroid camera and a bikini.) Its creators, who planned its excavation 
for the year 6939, distributed 3,650 copies of a ``Book of Record'' 
to sites around the world, from the Library of Congress (which apparently 
can't seem to locate its two copies) to the Great Monastery Library 
in Tibet. The book aspires to preserve the English language with pronunciation 
charts, diagrams and an updated Rosetta Stone, as well as messages 
to the future from Albert Einstein and Thomas Mann, among others. 
They protected the capsule with layers of waterproof batting and built 
a 50-foot-deep ``Immortal Well'' to contain it. The book's prologue 
refers humbly enough to the site of the capsule's placement: ``New 
York will certainly be an attractive place for archaeologists 5,000 
years from now, as are the sites of ancient Athens, Rome and Troy 
in our own time.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>