<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981226.0090 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Rarely has a new Congress had its future shaped so firmly by its predecessor. 
With only a few days left of its old life, the 105th Congress seems 
to have frozen the early agenda and tone of the 106th. Impeachment 
is the main, if not quite the only, reason. The weakness and instability 
of congressional leadership is the other. The Republican Congress 
passed hardly any significant legislation in 1998. And its preference 
for investigations of the president left the public unhappy enough 
that Republicans lost seats in the House. Now, with 223 seats, they 
have the thinnest majority since 1953. Any time the Republicans lose 
a net of six votes, the Democrats can defeat them. Really skillful, 
experienced leadership might overcome those numbers. Since Election 
Day, the Republicans have lost two speakers, Newt Gingrich and Bob 
Livingston. And in neither case did they consider anyone else in the 
elected leadership, let alone the mutually distrustful Texans who 
have held the No. 2 and 3 jobs since 1994, Dick Armey and Tom DeLay. 
Dennis Hastert of Illinois may yet emerge as more than Gingrich's 
health operative and DeLay's deputy, but there is no compelling evidence 
of his leadership skills yet. Over in the Senate, Trent Lott has had 
two and a half years as majority leader, and his footprints are faint. 
He is not really an ideologue himself, but he has to worry about ideologues' 
dominance of his caucus. And it will be a while before his political 
blunder of criticizing the bombing of Iraq and then saying he had 
not really meant it is forgotten. It is not as dramatic as voting 
for impeachment and then saying, ``Oh, never mind,'' as some House 
Republicans did the week before last, but it is close. Nor did the 
House really liberate itself from impeachment just by sending the 
matter to the Senate. The bitterness between the two parties is at 
peak levels, and while the country may not regard DeLay with the scorn 
it came to feel for Gingrich, Democrats think of him as an ultrapartisan 
hack, and they regard him, not Hastert or Armey, as the real boss 
of the House Republicans. And the House has trapped the Senate, setting 
its agenda by referring two articles of impeachment demanding that 
President Clinton be tried, convicted and removed. This is not a welcome 
task, like highway bills or an opportunity to share credit for tax 
cuts. Most senators would rather not have a fully fought-out trial 
with Monica Lewinsky as a star witness. They have lots of reasons. 
Some actually have bills they would rather be working on. Others find 
the subject simply disgusting. Many think the charges are faulty. 
Most think there is no prospect of getting the 67 votes for conviction. 
And none like the idea of abiding by the Senate rule requiring them 
to sit silently through the proceedings, a spectacle the former majority 
leader Howard Baker recently called ``mind-boggling.'' But getting 
together on a way to squeeze this issue back into the toothpaste tube 
may prove beyond Lott, whose thinking on the matter is unknown. Most 
people who want censure want the president to admit he lied, and he 
says he will not. Some senators want to see a trial go to a verdict, 
to embarrass even if they cannot expel the president. Senate traditionalists 
want to make sure the rules are carefully obeyed, although the rules 
are 130 years old. And senators instinctively bristle at advice from 
the outside, whether it is DeLay urging conviction or former presidents 
and former senators calling for censure. Some resolution may come 
quickly, though the Senate is not known for speed. But if it does 
not, the standard of disagreeability could approach the House level. 
Of course, politicians of both parties are eager to show that government 
can work, that they can do important things for the nation even in 
the current atmosphere. Fix Social Security for starters. Still, the 
105th Congress has made what seemed last summer to be an enormous 
task for the 106th Congress into a monumental one, both through the 
distraction and anger of impeachment and the removal of first Gingrich 
and then Livingston from the scene. But if Congress does nothing for 
months, not too much serious law-making will probably be lost. First 
sessions of Congress tend not to be very productive anyhow. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>