<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981226.0042 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Newly fallen snow greeted my sons and me when we reached the White 
Mountains on our drive north from the Massachusetts seacoast the day 
after Thanksgiving. We were on our annual deer-hunting trip, bound 
for this remote, uninhabited 26,800-acre township in northeastern 
New Hampshire. Owned by Dartmouth College, the Grant has a few camps 
and log cabins scattered along the Dead and Swift Diamond Rivers, 
which may be used by Dartmouth alumni, students, faculty, staff and 
their families and friends. Deer are not numerous in this rugged mountainous 
country, but my sons Steve and Jeff, and I and the friends who join 
us aren't too concerned about that. We are also in quest of tales 
of yesteryear, told at night after the day's hunt is done, and we 
want to see wood smoke rising from a cabin in a clearing, hardwood 
hillsides and spruce swamps, tracks of deer, moose, bobcats, coyotes, 
fishers and martens leading up steep ravines, ruffed grouse hurtling 
aloft from hemlocks and ravens soaring above granite cliffs. We rejoiced 
at the snow not only because it would facilitate tracking and seeing 
our quarry, but also because it fit in with our feelings of how the 
Grant should look in late November. Joining up with four friends in 
Errol, N.H. _ Henry Sanders of Hancock, N.H.; his brother Richard 
of Peterborough, N.H.; David Taylor of Littleton, N.H., and Roger 
Adams of Mansfield, Conn. _ we drove to Merrill Brook cabin in the 
Grant after checking in at the Gate Camp, where we learned that only 
13 deer had been taken from the Grant, down a half dozen or so from 
the previous year's total on that date. Merrill Brook cabin has gas 
lights, gas stove and gas refrigerator, a wood-burning stove, a shed 
that is amply stocked with split, dry logs, a two-seater outhouse 
and a splendid collection of pots and pans. In mild weather, a hose 
that runs to a pool a few hundred yards up the brook provides a gravity-fed 
source of water to the kitchen sink. The hose was buried under about 
four inches of snow when we arrived, and the water in it had frozen, 
so we went to the brook with buckets. After we stowed our gear and 
food in the cabin, there were only a few hours of daylight left, so 
we decided to hunt close by. Fanning out along the north-south logging 
road that runs through the Grant along the Dead Diamond River, we 
moved up the steep slopes of Halfmoon Mountain east of the cabin. 
I encountered the tracks of two deer early on, but they had been made 
the night before and it wasn't until I was 500 feet higher that I 
found fresh tracks. They headed almost straight up the mountain and 
it was too late to try to catch up to their maker, so I circled back 
down toward the cabin and got there ahead of the others, lit the lamps, 
stoked the wood fire and had the spaghetti sauce for that evening's 
meal prepared before anyone joined me. The others had similar experiences, 
finding old tracks early on, but seeing no animals. Jeff came in after 
dark, having decided to try to make the water line operative. Over 
the years he has always regarded the cabin's ice-clogged line as a 
personal challenge. He was successful, and we had running water in 
the kitchen sink the remainder of our stay. All of us went west the 
following day, across the footbridge over the Dead Diamond River, 
just below Monahan's Bathtub, that leads to Stoddard cabin and Round 
and Black Mountains. Having thought about it for the past few years, 
I elected to poke north along the west side of the Dead Diamond upstream 
of the bridge, an area that gets minimal hunting pressure because 
easy access is only from the bridge or from another bridge several 
miles upstream at Hellgate. I found fresh tracks of deer moving north 
and south along the river's edge early on. At 9 o'clock I heard two 
distant shots, but believed, correctly it turned out, that they were 
too far away to have been fired by one of our group. Shortly before 
noon, while standing on the edge of a grassy opening, the river only 
100 yards away, I saw my first deer, partially obscured and standing 
under the wide-spreading branches of a spruce. ``Perfect,'' I thought. 
``I will shoot it, drag it to the river, get a canoe from the Gate 
Camp, put in at Monahan's Bathtub, paddle up to the deer with one 
of the lads this evening, take it aboard and bring it back down to 
where we can load it in our vehicle.'' That was not to be. Observed 
through my rifle's scope, the deer had no horns, and only bucks were 
legal game. As I watched the doe move away into a clump of alders, 
a shot rang out from less than a mile away. None followed. I looked 
at my watch. It was nearly 1 o'clock. Being optimistic, I chose to 
think that one of our group had made a clean kill rather than a clean 
miss. Three hours and one more doe sighting later, I met my companions 
at the bridge and learned that Jeff had tried to shoot the head off 
a ruffed grouse with his deer rifle and had missed. ``Better to miss 
the head than ruin the meat with a body shot,'' he said. Two of the 
others had seen deer. David had a doe walk to within 30 feet of him. 
Steve had spotted two deer in thick cover about 130 yards away. His 
low-power rifle scope showed him no horns. When he switched to binoculars 
he discovered that one was a little forkhorn buck, but it drifted 
out of sight even as he was raising his rifle. At the close of the 
next and final day of hunting, Jeff's shot at the grouse was the only 
one the group had fired. That night, the wood stove pouring out its 
seductive warmth beside me and vodka in hand, I said to the others 
that although I was delighted with the copious draughts of comradeship 
and North Country ambiance I had quaffed, I would have experienced 
even greater fulfillment if at least one deer was hanging in the dooryard. 
My companions protested that such thoughts should not be allowed to 
tarnish enjoyment of the quest, and by midnight their merriment had 
overwhelmed my reservations. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>