<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981123.1830.0810 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Tonight we'll take "A closer look" at assisted suicide. As a debate, 
it was bound to come up again after last night. On last night's program, 
millions saw Dr. Jack Kevorkian give a terminally ill patient who 
said he wanted to die, a series of injections to end the man's life. 
This was a way to try to advance the case of euthanasia. Once again, 
he laid down a challenge to prosecutors in Michigan. Today, here's 
ABC's Jim Williams. The videotape was Jack Kevorkian's boldest challenge 
yet to authorities. On it, the retired pathologist is giving a lethal 
injection to 52-year-old thomas youk, who had Lou Gehrig's disease. 
The county prosecutor today said he must view the entire tape before 
deciding whether to charge Kevorkian but he believes the doctor committed 
a Homicide. After viewing the edited portions of the video last night 
it appeared a Homicide was committed in violation of the laws of Michigan. 
Kevorkian has a history of provoking authorities. He claims to have 
helped 120 people kill themselves, in some cases showing them how 
to use a suicide machine he created. He has been acquitted three times 
of assisted suicide charges and a fourth case ended in a mistrial. 
But the death of Thomas youk was the first time Kevorkian himself 
killed a Patient. Onaltelevisi has provoked an outcry. At least six 
CBS affiliates, all owned by one company, refused to air the segment. 
I just felt it was too graphic to see somebody die on air. In a written 
statement, the network said, "CBS believes this program performed 
a public service. However, CBS respects the rights of local broadcasters 
to determine what is appropriate for their communities." Kevorkian's 
attorney says his client hopes this latest case will challenge michigan's 
newly enacted law that makes assisted suicide a felony. It's not about 
publicity. It's about getting the issue discussed and getting the 
issue out into the open. Kevorkian says authorities must charge him 
with killing Thomas youk. If not, he says, they must agree that what 
he did was no crime. Jim Williams, ABC News, Oakland county, Michigan. 
Well, Dr. Kevorkian certainly got our attention again. He's also raised 
the stakes. What we saw on television wasn't just doctor-assisted 
suicide. He took a life with his own hands. Actually, it's something 
that's been happening quietly in America for some time. Here's ABC's 
John McKenzie. Increasingly, doctors acknowledge that physician-assisted 
suicide is not uncommon. Physicians can withhold care, not put people 
on ventilators. They can take patients of the ventilators or take 
them off dialysis. This year, the New England journal of medicine 
published a survey of nearly 2,000 physicians who treat terminal illness. 
The survey found -- more than 3% of the doctors had written at least 
one prescription to help a patient commit suicide. And nearly 5% of 
the doctors, said they themselves had administered a Lethal injection. 
Oregon is the only state that gally sanctions doctor-assisted suicide. 
The law, which took effect a year ago, allows doctors to prescribe 
drugs that would end the life of someone terminally ill. It requires 
that two physicians certify that the patient is unlikely to live more 
than six months. Recent state data show ten qualified patients in 
oregoned thegs, eighveuaed em to commit suicide. Ironically, since 
the debate gan on doctor-assisted suicide caused a Dramatic improvement 
in care for the terminally ill. The wholestem lldtodoet end-olife 
care And then there is Holland. As many as 50% of doctor there's say 
they have ended the life of a Terminally ill patient. But not always 
with the patient's consent. A government study revealed a chilling 
statistic -- in more than 1,000 cases, doctors have ended a patient's 
life, without the patient's consent. One report says the rules on 
euthanasia in Holland are so frequently disregarded that people there 
are advised to carry a living will, asking doctors specifically not 
to kill them. John McKenzie, ABC News, New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>