<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981123.0262 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Boris Yeltsin was rushed to hospital with pneumonia and a high temperature, 
officials said Monday, in the third health crisis for the Russian 
president in recent weeks. The 67-year-old president has rarely been 
seen in public recently, raising new concerns about his ability to 
handle his responsibilities at a time when the Russian economy is 
in crisis. The Kremlin said Yeltsin was hospitalized in the government's 
Central Clinical Hospital on Sunday with a temperature of 38.9 C (102 
F). Yeltsin was being treated with antibiotics, but officials declined 
to give any details. In a sign that the president's condition was 
not critical, Yeltsin met Monday in the hospital with visiting Chinese 
President Jiang Zemin. Pictures released by the Kremlin showed the 
two leaders sharing a joke as they sat in chairs in a reception room, 
surrounded by aides. Yeltsin, casually dressed in a sweater, did not 
look particularly ill. A Kremlin spokesman, who declined to be named, 
said after the meeting that Yeltsin was ``working,'' but gave no further 
details. A briefing by Yeltsin spokesman Dmitry Yakushkin on the president's 
health, which was announced Monday morning for later in the day, was 
later canceled without explanation. Yeltsin was taken ill in October 
during a state visit to central Asia with what was described as a 
respiratory ailment. He was taken ill again in late October with what 
doctors described as high blood pressure and exhaustion. If Yeltsin 
is incapacitated, power could be turned over temporarily to Prime 
Minister Yevgeny Primakov, a top Kremlin aide was quoted as saying 
by the Interfax News Service. The premier Viktor Chernomyrdin briefly 
assumed presidential powers in 1996 when Yeltsin underwent heart surgery. 
``It may happen at any moment, that the premier may take over presidential 
duties for at least three months,'' said Natalia Savyolova, a spokeswoman 
to Oleg Sysuyev, Yeltsin's first deputy chief of staff, according 
to the report. Under the Russian Constitution, a prime minister takes 
over for three months if the president dies or can't fulfill his duties 
due to serious illness. Savyolova added, however, that her remarks 
were unrelated to the president's latest illness. Primakov said on 
Monday the government was working as normal and he was not assuming 
any extra powers, Interfax said. Yeltsin's health problems have forced 
him to cancel several foreign visits this fall, but he continues to 
receive foreign leaders in Moscow. Last week Yeltsin called off a 
trip to India. Yeltsin and Jiang agreed on a statement on border demarcation 
and discussed bilateral cooperation and international issues, the 
Kremlin said. The main outcome of the meeting was the ``similarity 
of approaches on virtually all international issues and identity of 
positions concerning the prospects of building up close, confident 
relations between Russia and China, aimed at strategic interaction 
in the 21st century,'' Yeltsin's foreign affairs aide Sergei Prikhodko 
said, according to the Interfax. Yeltsin has insisted repeatedly that 
he will serve out his term, which ends in the year 2000. But opposition 
leaders and a growing number of centrist politicians have questioned 
if Yeltsin can fulfill his duties and there has been growing speculation 
about early elections. ``We wish Mr. Yeltsin recovery,'' Communist 
leader Gennady Zyuganov said in unusually mild remarks at a news conference 
Monday. ``But his illness is incurable _ he's an irresponsible person 
who is unable to govern the country, and everyone knows that.'' Zyuganov 
said that in his opinion early elections are inevitable. The Communist-dominated 
lower house of parliament, the State Duma, had been trying to devise 
legislation to force Yeltsin to submit to a medical exam to determine 
whether he was capable of serving. But the efforts failed earlier 
this month. The Kremlin has provided little information on the president's 
health in recent weeks, releasing tightly-edited TV footage and photos 
of Yeltsin, in which he has been seen briefly talking with ministers 
and government aides. But Yeltsin had meetings last week with visiting 
German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder and appeared to be in reasonable 
condition. Yeltsin's wife, Naina, said recently that the president 
is struggling with the very cold weather that has hit Moscow in recent 
weeks, but that he was capable of handling his duties. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>