<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981123.0516 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Japanese finance officials began talks Monday with the Philippine 
government on its request for dlrs 7.9 billion to finance projects 
aimed at helping the Philippines recover from the regional currency 
crisis. The financing is being sought from the dlrs 30 billion Miyazawa 
fund, pledged by Japan as part of a broad relief effort to revive 
East Asia's ailing economies. Finance Secretary Edgardo Espiritu said 
he is optimistic the Philippine request will be granted, and noted 
that the Japanese officials are eager to quickly process the requests 
for financing. The Philippines has presented the Japanese delegation, 
headed by Ministry of Finance Deputy Director General Kyoto Ido, with 
a ``wish list'' of 33 projects, which include agricultural and low-cost 
housing projects. The proposal also includes co-financing power, environmental 
and banking sector reform projects with the Asian Development Bank 
and the World Bank. Some are earmarked for immediate assistance, while 
others involve longer-term financing. But a Philippine finance official 
said concern has been raised by the Japanese officials that the Philippines' 
relatively sound economy may not warrant the level of financing being 
sought, given the dire financial straits of other countries in the 
region. The official said he expects Japan to announce within the 
next two weeks exactly how the Philippines will benefit from the Miyazawa 
fund. He acknowledged that perhaps not all the 33 projects will be 
approved. Espiritu said part of the Japanese funding will be used 
to support the government's planned bond issues for next year. The 
Philippine government plans to raise some dlrs 1.5 billion on the 
international capital market in early 1999 in yen-, dollar- and euro-denominated 
bonds. The launch is scheduled to start in January with the yen- and 
dollar-denominated bonds, each totaling dlrs 500 million. The euro 
bond, denominated in the single European currency, is expected to 
be launched about a month later. The government wants to source a 
large portion of its financing requirements abroad rather than risk 
pressuring domestic interest rates by borrowing domestically. Financing 
from the Miyazawa fund will be routed through Japan's Export-Import 
Bank and the country's Overseas Economic Cooperation Fund. The Philippines 
hopes the Exim Bank will purchase up to half of the yen-bond issue, 
with the balance placed with private investors but fully guaranteed 
by Exim. The Philippines is also seeking dlrs 500 million from the 
Miyazawa fund to supplement the central bank's so-called export dollar 
fund facility, which provides dollar funds to certain exporters at 
favorable interest rates. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>