<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981123.1135 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Iraq accused the chief U.N. weapons inspector Monday of fabricating 
a new crisis over its weapons programs by demanding documents that 
were destroyed, irrelevant or already in the possession of the United 
Nations. Deputy Foreign Minister Riyadh al-Qaisi said Richard Butler's 
request for the weapons-related documents takes Iraq back to ``square 
one'' in its effort to end crippling sanctions imposed by the U.N. 
Security Council after it invaded Kuwait in 1990. ``Why is it that 
now Mr. Butler is requesting all over again the same requests that 
were made in the past?'' al-Qaisi asked. ``All we have we gave, all 
we don't have, we stated we don't have.'' His comments were the latest 
in a dispute that has raised again the specter of an attack on Iraq. 
Also Monday, Iraqi opposition groups gathered in London to find ways 
to unite their ranks. The meeting came a day after assailants reportedly 
lobbed two hand grenades at Iraqi President Saddam Hussein's deputy 
as he got out of his car to attend a religious festival in southern 
Iraq. Izzat Ibrahim, Saddam's deputy on the powerful Revolutionary 
Command Council, escaped the attack without injury, according to the 
report. Several bodyguards and bystanders were, however, wounded, 
it added. Riven by ethnic, religious and political differences, the 
dissidents have long posed little threat to the government. But the 
United States has turned to them in recent months with promises of 
political and financial support in hopes of overthrowing Saddam. Iraq 
reversed its two-week ban on the work of U.N. weapons inspectors on 
Nov. 14 when faced with what appeared to be imminent air strikes by 
U.S. and British forces stationed in the Gulf. U.S. Defense Secretary 
William Cohen renewed the threat Monday, saying the United States 
has ``in place in the gulf enough capability to carry out any military 
options the president might decide would be required.'' The inspectors 
returned last week. With the cooperation of the Iraqi government, 
they have since made daily visits to sites suspected of helping build 
weapons of mass destruction. In letters last week, Butler asked for 
12 kinds of documents as well as information on Iraq's biological 
weapons program, the field in which U.N. inspectors say they have 
the most questions. Iraq has balked at the request, calling it an 
attempt to reignite a crisis. ``What do we see? No light at the end 
of the tunnel. What we see is the light of a locomotive coming head 
on at Iraq,'' al-Qaisi said at a news conference. Inspectors must 
certify that Iraq has eliminated its nuclear, chemical and biological 
weapons, long-range missiles and the programs to build them before 
the Security Council can lift the sanctions, which have caused widespread 
malnutrition, hunger and poverty in the once-prosperous Arab country. 
The U.N. inspections themselves constitute the most ambitious disarmament 
program since the Allied victory in World War II. Al-Qaisi insisted 
that since inspections began in 1991, Iraq has provided all the documents 
inspectors need. Others that Butler requested were destroyed, he said. 
Some, like personal diaries, are irrelevant, and one on chemical weapons 
can be viewed in the presence of Prakash Shah, a special U.N. envoy 
in Baghdad. ``Mr. Butler is requesting access to all the archives 
of the Iraqi state. He seems to think that it is he who decides what 
is a relevant archive and what is an irrelevant archive,'' he said. 
At U.N. headquarters in New York on Monday, Iraq's U.N. ambassador, 
Nizar Hamdoon, delivered an 18-page, single-spaced letter from Deputy 
Prime Minister Tariq Aziz explaining Iraq's position in technical 
detail about why the document requests from the U.N. Special Commission 
chief were unfounded. The inspectors repeatedly have accused Iraq 
of trying to mislead weapons teams. They checked nine sites Monday, 
including a surprise visit to a cigarette and tobacco company in Baghdad 
that is not under long-term surveillance, the Iraqi News Agency reported. 
Earlier Monday, Shah returned to Baghdad, saying only that he would 
hold talks with Iraqi officials. In the latest round of tension with 
the United Nations, Iraq has focused its ire on Butler himself, and 
Iraq's official media on Monday called the dispute personal, not political. 
Al-Thawra, the newspaper of the ruling party, said Butler viewed Iraq's 
decision to resume inspections ``as a personal victory, which he believes 
will enable him to take revenge.'' Another newspaper, Babil, warned 
that the United States may attack Iraq within the coming three weeks. 
In the streets, at least, the renewed prospect of a military strike 
seemed to generate little anxiety. ``The Iraqi people are becoming 
accustomed to such things, and they don't have any fear of it,'' said 
Salem Fadil, a 35-year-old vendor selling soap in Baghdad's bustling 
Shorja market. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>