<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981123.0832 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A U.N. envoy returned Monday to Baghdad as Iraq unleashed a new volley 
of criticism at the chief U.N. weapons inspector and his demand for 
more arms-related documents. The papers sought by Richard Butler, 
chairman of the U.N. Special Commission, are spurring a new confrontation 
between the government of Saddam Hussein and UNSCOM, which is overseeing 
the destruction of Iraq's most dangerous weapons. On Sunday, two leading 
Iraq officials derided Butler's request as a move to justify a U.S. 
military strike on Iraq, saying the government already had turned 
over all relevant documents. U.N. envoy Prakash Shah came to Baghdad 
from Bahrain on Monday. He refused to comment about the controversy, 
saying only that he expected to meet with Iraqi officials. Iraqi Deputy 
Foreign Minister Riyadh al-Qaisi said the latest crisis between Baghdad 
and the United Nations had been ``concocted'' by Butler, adding that 
Iraq sent a letter to the U.N. Security Council on Monday explaining 
its position. Al-Qaisi said Butler's request came as Baghdad was hoping 
that a U.N. review of progress toward weapons destruction would lead 
to an easing of economic sanctions imposed by the world body after 
Iraq's 1990 invasion of Kuwait. He said the United Nations had requested 
documents about issues that Iraq and UNSCOM had already settled. ``At 
the present time, with the legitimate expectation for a comprehensive 
review to take place, Butler comes ... as if no work at all has been 
settled,'' al-Qaisi said. State-run Iraqi newspapers insisted Monday 
that Butler asked for more paperwork because he has a grudge against 
Iraq. ``Butler has personal motives to create a new crisis,'' the 
daily Al-Thawra newspaper of the ruling Baath Party said in a front-page 
editorial. ``He has explained Iraq's decision to let the inspectors 
resume their activities ... as a personal victory, which he believes 
will enable him to take revenge on Iraq.'' Iraq had asked for Butler's 
dismissal from UNSCOM as one of its demands for allowing weapons inspectors 
to return to work. But it reversed its ban on the inspectors' work 
Nov. 14 when faced with airstrikes by U.S. and British forces. The 
arms inspectors returned last week and have been making daily visits 
to potential weapons sites with the cooperation of the Iraqi government. 
The inspectors must certify that Iraq has eliminated its weapons of 
mass destruction before the Security Council will lift the sanctions. 
Iraq insists it has already gotten rid of all proscribed weaponry. 
Butler's weekend demand for new documents again raises the possibility 
of American military strikes against Iraq because U.S. President Bill 
Clinton has demanded full cooperation with the weapons inspectors. 
In Washington, U.S. Defense Secretary William Cohen said Monday the 
military option remains open if Iraq fails to comply fully with the 
inspectors' demands. ``We have in place in the gulf enough capability 
to carry out any military options the president might decide would 
be required,'' Cohen told reporters. David Leavy, a spokesman for 
the U.S. National Security Council, said the refusal to hand over 
documents was an ``insufficient'' response to Butler's request but 
said no final conclusion had been drawn. Leavy, who is traveling with 
Clinton, made his remarks in South Korea. Iraq's deputy prime minister, 
Tariq Aziz, said Sunday that Butler's demands were either intended 
to provoke an attack or to put off a promised Security Council review 
of Iraq's cooperation in arms destruction. The government hopes the 
review will lead to easing the sanctions. Aziz said some of the documents 
requested no longer exist, and Foreign Minister Mohammed Saeed al-Sahhaf 
said Iraq already has given inspectors all relevant documents _ more 
than 2 million pages. He said Butler was leading ``a savage campaign 
... of disinformation'' to make it seem as if Iraq was not cooperating. 
Asked if he thought the dispute over documents could provoke more 
threats, al-Sahhaf said that U.N. resolutions don't ``say that if 
you do not hand over a document that three cruise missiles will hit 
your country.'' ``This is ridiculous,'' he said. ``So whatever party 
is threatening that, he will bear the responsibility for that.'' Iraqi 
officials have said they are prepared to let the inspectors see relevant 
portions of one requested document: a log of chemical weapons used 
during the 1980-1988 Iran-Iraq war. But they said some of the document 
concerned Iraq's national security and could not be shown to inspectors. 
In London, Britain organized a meeting today of 16 Iraqi opposition 
groups. Afterward, British Foreign Office Minister Derek Fatchett 
said Britain supports a campaign to have Saddam and his top leaders 
indicted for crimes against humanity. The opposition groups were scheduled 
to meet Tuesday with U.S. Assistant Secretary of State Martin Indyk. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>