<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981123.0554 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Indonesia's ex-President Suharto could be placed under house arrest 
if he attempts to interfere with a new corruption inquiry against 
him, a news report said. The official Antara news agency quoted Attorney 
General Muhammad Ghalib as saying it was possible the former autocrat 
could be banned from traveling abroad while the investigation proceeds. 
On the weekend, Suharto's successor and former protege, President 
B.J. Habibie, announced he would appoint a commission of inquiry to 
investigate Suharto's wealth. ``If Suharto complicates the investigation, 
saying that it is too difficult for him to take part, then the commission 
could propose whether or not Suharto be placed under house arrest 
or banned from leaving the country,'' Antara quoted Ghalib as saying. 
Ghalib headed an earlier investigation into graft allegations against 
Suharto. However, his efforts were denounced as a whitewash after 
he failed to identify any wrongdoing by the ex-head of state. Ghalib 
said the proposed commission would be independent. The membership 
and terms of reference of the new inquiry have not been announced. 
Some senior members of the ruling Golkar Party, which helped keep 
Suharto in power for 32 years, have backed calls for him to be put 
under house arrest. ``The purpose is ... if (Suharto) is needed he 
can be easily reached,'' Akbar Tanjung, Habibie's state secretary 
and Golkar Party chairman, was quoted as saying by the newspaper Indonesian 
Observer. Student protesters have called for Suharto to be put on 
trial for corruption and human rights abuses during his rule. About 
30 protesters marched through an exclusive suburb Monday, but were 
blocked by hundreds of troops from approaching the house where Suharto 
lives as a virtual recluse. The soldiers stopped them at a park adjacent 
to the U.S. ambassador's home. The protest was much smaller than other 
demonstrations in recent days during which students called for Suharto 
to be hanged. Suharto, 77, was forced to quit the presidency in May 
after a wave of protests and riots, in which 1,200 people were killed. 
Opponents allege he amassed a fortune and used his power to enrich 
his six children and a clique of cronies. Suharto has said he is innocent. 
On Sunday, former Australian Prime Minister Paul Keating, who visited 
Suharto last week, said the former leader was ready to face any charges 
laid against him. Meanwhile, one of Suharto's sons was interrogated 
by the attorney general's office over corruption allegations Monday. 
Hutomo ``Tommy'' Mandala Putra was questioned as part of an investigation 
against Beddu Amang, a former chief of a state-run food distribution 
organization, the newspaper Suara Pembaruan reported. It quoted Anton 
Sujata, a government lawyer, as saying that Tommy earlier had been 
banned from leaving the country. The newspaper Terbit reported that 
investigators were examining a deal under which Beddu's organization, 
known as Bulog, allegedly sold state land to one of Tommy's companies 
at a cheap price. Terbit said the company built a department store 
on the land. It said the state allegedly lost dlrs 16 million on the 
transaction. Tommy made no comment. Two other Suharto sons, Bambang 
and Sigit, also have been questioned over a series of recent bank 
collapses. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>