<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981123.0266 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The politically charged corruption trial of ousted Deputy Prime Minister 
Anwar Ibrahim resumed Monday amid a national outcry against foreigners 
accused of supporting him. The Malaysian government had recessed Anwar's 
trial so it would not interfere with last week's Asia-Pacific Economic 
Cooperation summit of 21 Pacific Rim leaders. The weeklong pause, 
however, only intensified the global spotlight focused on the Southeast 
Asian country and the government's treatment of the former No. 2 leader. 
U.S. Vice President Al Gore, sitting in for President Bill Clinton 
at the APEC summit, expressed support for Anwar's anti-government 
reform movement. Gore's words _ in which he praised ``the brave people 
of Malaysia'' for their reform movement _ only served to enrage the 
government and spark a nationwide outpouring of support for Prime 
Minister Mahathir Mohamad. Anwar was arrested Sept. 20, two weeks 
after his firing by Mahathir sparked massive anti-government protests. 
The current trial involves four counts of corruption. Anwar will be 
tried on another corruption count, as well as five counts of sexual 
misconduct, at a later date. The 51-year-old sacked deputy denies 
the charges, calling them part of a political vendetta orchestrated 
by his former mentor, Mahathir. On Monday, the defense finished cross-examining 
the seventh witness, Mazlan Mohamad Din. The assistant commissioner 
of police testified that he was instructed to force two key witnesses 
to retract allegations of sexual misconduct against Anwar. An eighth 
witness, a police clerk, later told the court that she helped to type 
a retraction letter written by one of the witnesses. After recess, 
Zulkifli Mohamad, one of the police officers who arrested the two 
people, said they resisted arrest for more than four hours before 
police finally broke down the door to the house they were hiding in. 
The hearing resumes Tuesday with testimony from the prosecution's 
10th witness. There appeared to be an effort Monday to keep Anwar 
at a greater distance from the public. His dock was pushed closer 
to his lawyers, making it more difficult for him to communicate with 
his family and the media. Riot police once again surrounded the red-brick 
courthouse in downtown Kuala Lumpur. On Saturday night, police arrested 
at least four Anwar supporters, including opposition leader Tian Chua, 
a human rights activist who heads an opposition coalition founded 
after Anwar's arrest. Anwar's case sparked international outrage when 
he appeared in court with a black eye and body bruises. Anwar said 
he was blindfolded by police and beaten until unconscious while in 
jail. During the APEC summit, top-ranking officials from Australia, 
Canada and the United States, as well as Philippine President Joseph 
Estrada, angered the government by meeting privately with Anwar's 
wife, Azizah Ismail, to express concern over her husband's case. The 
government has accused Gore of meddling in its domestic affairs by 
expressing support for the political reform movement started by Anwar. 
U.S. Ambassador John Malott was summoned to the Foreign Ministry on 
Monday. ``We reiterated Malaysia's position that Gore's speech was 
an incitement of lawlessness and not simply a call of democracy as 
claimed,'' John Tenewi Nuek, undersecretary for the Americas, told 
the national news agency Bernama. Gore's remarks have triggered a 
nationalistic fervor. A hot line was hooked up over the weekend for 
callers to register anti-U.S. sentiments. An effigy of Gore was burned 
at a gathering of several hundred people carrying anti-American placards 
in the northern state of Perlis on Sunday. Radio blurbs urge people 
to pick up their free Malaysian mini-flags at Malay-owned companies. 
Many cars and taxis have placed the flags on their hoods. Mahathir 
appeared buoyed by the show of support. ``They voiced their stand 
because they were disappointed and humiliated by (Gore's) disrespectful 
remarks,'' Mahathir told reporters Sunday. ``I'm impressed by their 
stand as this is the real strength of the country.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>