<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981123.2100.2464 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
From "dateline NBC" tonight, the dangers of keeping secrets. It's 
not easy working for a powerful boss. Just ask Betty Currie, who has 
watched her entire life turn upside down because of what she may have 
seen or known about the president's activities with Monica Lewinsky. 
Even last week, as part of the impeachment hearings, independent counsel 
kenneth Starr laid out his case that the president had repeatedly 
lied and gotten his secretary to lie for him. But if Betty Currie 
did lie to protect her boss, she wouldn't be the first secretary to 
do nor the first to pay a price. Here's "dateline NBC's" Keith Morrison. 
I thought if the president signed it and if the -- if the attorney 
signed it, I wasn't going to question the documents, even though I 
did have doubts. Something very disturbing is happening to the people 
who keep the boss' deepest secrets. And it wasn't until I was sitting 
in an F.B.I. office -- She is a secretary about to learn a frightening 
truth. -- And they pulled the papers out of a file and threw them 
at me, and said, "Do you know what you were signing when you signed 
these documents?" That's how Pam Peterson found out that in America 
today, secretaries don't always get to keep those secrets anymore. 
The committee will come to order. It's been building for a long time, 
of course. Way back in 1973, the loyal Rosemary Woods was called on 
the carpet to answer for that 18-minute gap in Richard Nixon's audiotape. 
But if she knew what she erased, she wasn't saying. Do you remember 
fawn hall, Oliver north's secretary during the Iran-contra scandal? 
I believe in colonel north around I know there must have been a good 
reason why he was asking me to do that. And I did as I was told. Including 
liberal use of a shredder and carrying sensitive papers out of the 
building in her underwear. Now it's President William Jefferson Clinton's 
secretary, Betty Currie, who ended up having to answer before a grand 
jury. She is our generation. We did what we were told in those days. 
But now things have changed. These five women have had 107 years among 
them working as professional secretaries, gatekeepers, and secret 
keepers for powerful men and women. Each has worked for several bosses, 
everything from C.E.O.'s of fortune 500 companies to hard-driving 
attorneys to aggressive entrepreneurs. They told us how they had to 
make decisions that changed their lives and changed what they've come 
to believe is acceptable behavior. Sometimes their bosses made inappropriate 
requests. I was asked to fly to Las Vegas and be someone's date for 
the evening. Sometimes their bosses were boorish. I had a boss who 
looked me in my face and told me, Betty, you are here to type. Don't 
think. And I said -- Even though you're running -- I was running his 
office. The man was a total incompetent. I had someone who screamed 
and swore at me and threw things at me. There are times when that 
person feels that you're almost their property. They've been asked 
to know things they know they saw. Just pushed open the door and there's 
this person on the floor. What are you going to say after that? They 
come to you and say, you didn't see anything, did you? No, I didn't. 
Well, you know what you saw. Nobody had any clothes and there was 
perspiration all over the place. But you didn't see anything. No, 
I didn't. And they even say they've been expected to break the law 
for their bosses. I was a notary public and I was asked to forge a 
signature and then notarize that. We've all done it. That's just like 
being asked to notarize blank documents. Notarize blank documents? 
Notarize blank documents. How does it happen? How did these women 
get drawn into these awful predicaments? We go through some of these 
horrible situations and we get caught in them before we even know 
we're in the middle of them. Barbara says it's particularly hard if 
you have a good relationship with the boss, like Betty Currie had 
with President Clinton. It goes over time, over time, over time. Then 
things starts to go wrong. They've been good to me. This is a good 
person. I know them. They've been good to my. let it go. They would 
never do anything to help me. That's what Pam Peterson felt until 
she was forced to testify about her boss a land developer. They asked 
me about his personal financial statements that I used to send to 
lenders under my own signature because I had a fancy title. I'd say 
here's my boss' financial statement, and I'd sign my name and my title. 
This attorney told me that my boss' defense was that I was sending 
those documents out without his knowledge or without his permission. 
Betrayed you. yes. In the end, to save himself, he betrayed me. I 
had a great deal of respect for my boss. I trusted him. And I really 
never thought he would do anything to harm me or hurt me. So, by the 
time I finally got to the F.B.I. office, I was ready to tell all. 
In the past, say these secretaries, people in their profession would 
sometimes face an awful decision -- turn down these little larcenies 
and lose your job. But not so much anymore, according to author nan 
demars. She's working a secretarial manifesto for the 1990's. It's 
called "you want me to do what?" Clinton's zipper has helped my book, 
because people are focusing on the delim mas that office assistants 
get involved in. The number one lesson is clear -- secretaries are 
accountable. And she says just like Betty Currie they need help to 
know how and where to draw the line. I think the book really would 
have helped Betty three years ago. You sent her a book. And a letter 
of advice. She explained one of her central ideas, the ethical priority 
compass. I pointed out the three points. Number one, take care of 
yourself. Number two, take care of your company. I put in your case, 
the United States government. And number three, take care of your 
boss, in your case, President Clinton. I'm sure the president would 
want you to do the same. She never thought it would actually reach 
Betty Currie. Within two weeks, I got a very nice letter from her, 
personal letter on White House stationery thanking me for the kind 
words of advice to her. She reflects the struggle that office assistants 
are having today of the old-fashioned "secretary" to the new, really 
Progressive office assistant, someone who realizes and recognizes 
that they must be accountable for their own actions. What could Betty 
Currie have done to make things turn out differently? It might have 
changed the course of history because what she could have said to 
him is I'm very uncomfortable doing these kinds of things if for you 
because I might be held accountable for them at some point or some 
reporter might ask me about it, and I'm going to have to tell the 
truth. She likes the word "uncomfortable." Do you feel for Betty Currie? 
I feel terrible. I don't think there is any office assistant right 
out there today in the business world who would not have tremendous 
empathy for Betty Currie. I certainly do. I think the biggest lesson 
for all office assistants out there or anybody in the workplace, really, 
is they have to recognize they must be accountable for what they do 
because they could be Betty Currie. That report was from Keith Morrison. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>