<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981123.2100.0771 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Just over an hour ago, President Clinton made his return to Washington 
after a five-day tour of Asia. Marine one landed on the south lawn 
of the White House, concluding the last leg of the president's trip 
from across the pacific. His final stop early this morning was a U.S. 
territory of qualm, where he honored the thousands of American sole 
where jers killed during the 1944 retaking of Guam after occupation 
by Japan. With the president back in town, he'll face impeachment 
impeachment inquiry. Today testimony was taken from Daniel Gecker, 
a lawyer for Kathleen Willey, the woman who claims the president made 
an unwanted sexual advance upon her. Bobby Scott is a member of the 
Judiciary committee. He joins us this evening from Washington. And 
representative George Gekas is a republican from Pennsylvania. He 
is also on the committee. He joins us from Harrisburg. Thanks for 
being here. Congressman Gekas, Bob Livingston has said he wants the 
timetable, the vote out before the year is out. Do you think a timetable 
is wise at this point? The end of the year has been the target for 
both sides in this, albeit the republicans wanted no set deadline, 
while the democrats insisted on an X deadline. So, everyone is moving 
towards the end of the year for the completion of the process. Congressman 
Scott, it looks as if there are not enough votes for impeachment. 
What punishment, then, could the president face at the end of the 
year? Well, I think that question is premature. You ask what punishment 
there ought to be. We haven't even decided what the charges are. We 
have 11 charges suggetsed to us by Kenneth Starr, and some of them 
I think everyone has agreed, some of them are too flimsy to pursue. 
We haven't decided what the charges are yet. But the fact that the 
president has admitted wrongdoing isn't enough to go ahead and start 
considering a punishment for him in Well, we're in the middle of an 
impeachment inquiry. We have taken no evidence at all on any of the 
11 counts. So, I mean, we don't know whether the allegations are true 
or if they're true, what we ought to do because there has been no 
process. We are no closer to resolving the question of shall the president 
be impeached than we were the first day we got the charges. Some of 
the allegations are not worth pursuing. We ought to narrow the focus 
to those that are worth pursuing, if any. If we listen to constitutional 
scholars, none of these are impeachable offenses, but let's assume 
that some might be. We haven't narrowed the focus to go forward on 
them. And we've received no testimony on any of the 11 charges. I'm 
sorry. Go ahead. I was going to say the testimony is already frozen 
into the record through the affidavits, the grand jury testimony, 
and all the materials that we have at hand on record. The only thing 
that is left now is to review the 81 questions submitted to the president 
to see how much factual information can further be frozen into the 
record. And if the not, that might even gauge us into a request for 
more witnesses and more hearings. That's correct. However, all of 
this can still be done by the end of the year. If it should not be, 
then we must face the music and recognize that it goes into the next 
session. But it is unlikely. Well, I think if you're going to call 
uncross-examined rumor and innuendo, which is what we have in the 
17 boxes of material, if you're going to consider that evidence when 
there's been no cross-examination and if you're going to consider 
the prosecutor sitting up, testifying, when prosecutors routinely 
begin their presentations by saying what I say and what the defense 
counsel says is not evidence, if you're going to count that as evidence 
that we should go forward on, that's shocking. But, Bobby, the best 
evidence of what has happened here in this case is that which has 
been uttered by Monica Lewinsky. The 81 questions posed to the president 
will go a long way to determining the cross-examination that you're 
talking about. Congressman Gekas, the associated press is reporting 
today that the president will likely not admit perjury in those 81 
questions on the questionnaire. What does that do to further the debate? 
Then we have to decide if the Lewinsky testimony standing alone, along 
with the cross-examination of the president in the grand jury and 
in the depositions, with that evidence in front of us, then we can 
determine whether there is sufficient evidence from which a jury, 
like the Senate, could dedeuce that perjury has been committed. What 
cross-examination? He was there answering questions put to him by 
the prosecution. He hasn't had an opportunity to present his case. 
But that -- We have not had any opportunity for evidence to be taken 
in this case. But his case is the 81 questions and the opportunity, 
as we have made clear and we made it clear through the Ken Starr day, 
that the president can come and spend hours with us if he wants to 
bring exculpatory testimony to the table. Congressman Scott, would 
you want the president called before the committee? Pardon me? Congressman 
Scott, would you want that? I think it would be helpful if we had 
a logical process. First of all, there are allegations before us that 
are not worthy of consideration. Mr. Gekas indicated that he is not 
interested in pursuing the allegation that the president ought to 
be impeached because he invoked executive privilege. And I think most 
of us can agree on. That we ought to take off the table some of these 
frivolous allegations that everybody on the committee can agree are 
not worth pursuing. That doesn't answer the question of whether the 
president should come and testify. We have opened our process in a 
way to make certain that the president knows he can come to testify. 
Testify on what, George? Testify on what? Pardon me? What allegations 
are before us that are worth pursuing? On the questions that have 
been posed by the testimony of Monica Lewinsky. What about the allegations 
we are pursuing? Perjury -- Your republican colleagues -- Gentlemen, 
you're both talking at the same time. Weould continue this debate 
forever, so I'm going to cut you both off forever. Thanks for joining 
us. That's all the time we have. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>