<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981123.2100.0223 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The 60 minutes report on Dr. Kevorkian has rekindled much debate on 
assisted suicide. Joining us this evening is George annas. He is the 
chairman of the health and law department of Boston University school 
of public health. He joins us this evening from Boston. And Derek 
humphry, if author of six books on the subject of euthanasia, his 
latest titled "freedom to die: people, politics, and the right-to-die 
movement." He joins us from his home in Eugene, Oregon. Thanks for 
joining us. We'll begin with annas. The videotaped lethal injection, 
was that murder? Well, suicide, you kill yourself, with homicide, 
you kill someone else. This was a case of homicide. Dr. Kevorkian 
killed this gentleman. Derek humphry, would you disagree with that? 
Well, he undoubtedly killed him, but I think he was right to do so. 
I thought it was a dig fi any -- dignified and decent death. Murder 
and homicide words are inappropriate in this case. I support Kevorkian 
and what he did entirely, except I would prefer to see it legal with 
guidelines and safeguards. George annas, what is your greatest objection 
to a case like this when the patient appears to want to end his life? 
Well, consent has never been a defense to murder, and it can't be. 
If the patient wants to end his life, the patient can end his life. 
This patient obviously did not want to end his life. He wanted someone 
else to end his life. There's no real argument why we want to go in 
this direction. The U.S. Supreme Court 9-0 last year said we have 
a right to refuse any medical treatment, a right to any drug you need 
to stay out of suffering. No right to physician assisted suicide. 
But some patients don't have the ability to actually give themselves 
an injection that would end their life. They have to rely on someone 
else to do it for them. That's not true. Any patient can refuse tube 
feeding and can die that way. All we're talking about is easy ways 
out. And there's a giant movement to make it easier to die in this 
country, easier to kill yourself or have someone else killed. I think 
that's going the absolute wrong way in a country where the health 
care system is out of control and unsystematic to say the biggest 
problem in medicine today is there's not enough suicide and homicide. 
Derek humphry's been shaking his head while you've been saying that. 
Well, why should we have to starve to death -- starve people to death? 
That's not humane. What you saw last night a quiet injection into 
the wrist, I think it was, and the man faded and died. Why should 
we have to starve them and use terminal sedation? Let's be honest 
about this. You're the one who's not being honest. This is homicide. 
Why do you want to call it something else I can understand. For him 
it would make no difference whether he got injecked or shot in the 
head after he got the drug that put him to sleep. What difference 
does it make to him whether he's suffocated, shot in the head, strangled, 
or hanged? If we're talking about methods, this is idiot tick. George 
annas, let him answer the question. Derek humphry? This was a dignified 
and decent death. Shooting and hanging are just not acceptable in 
a decent society or to this man or his family. And his family totally 
supported what Dr. Kevorkian did. It's killing. It shouldn't be accepted. 
His family talked about things like we were at the end of our rope, 
and this should be a private affair. A private affair on "60 minutes"? 
Derek humphry, many years ago, your wife died of bone cancer. Is it 
a private affair? Prefer raably, it's a private affair, but Kevorkian 
is out to shock society into thinking about it and caring about it. 
And he uses shock tactics to make his argument. Otherwise, people 
just deny the existence of this problem. Well, isn't that sensationalizing 
the issue, then, Mr. humphry and not really pushing forward a debait? 
I think he has pushed forward the debate tremendously. All of America 
is talking about it today and probably will be tomorrow. It's pushed 
the debate out into the open. And we need to come clean on this matter 
and talk about it, think about it, and pass sensible laws so that 
it's done privately and decently and legally. George annas -- And 
doesn't need to be on, the V. George annas, do you see laws changing 
because of Jack Kevorkian and because of this case? I hope he goes 
to jail and -- You don't think it's likely a jury will be sympathetic 
to him? Maybe to his victim, but not to himself. He himself says he's 
doing it because he wants to provoke people, provoke a Response. What 
happens, then, George, in this debate? Well, I don't think this debate 
is ever going to be about killing people. The debate is how you take 
decent care of dying patients. And I think we've done a horrible job 
with that in the United States. Doctors are getting better, though, 
better hospice care. The debate has to be there. Derek humphry, what 
do you think happens with this debate? Well, obviously, we must do 
the best in pain management, palliative care, comfort care are in 
favor of that. There should be has little euthanasia and as litted 
assisted suicide as possible. But there will always be such case where 
is a person is in such distress and their quality of life is gone 
they will ask for assistance in death. But let's be honest and change 
the rules and have something there, not let it be in Dr. Kevorkian's 
hands. We're going to leave it there. I thank you both for joining 
us this evening. Thank you. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>