<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981123.2100.1810 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There are reports tonight of a new conflict over weapons inspections 
in iraq, just one week after United Nations workers returned to work, 
Iraq is refusing to turn over documents requested. Instead, they produced 
an 18-page letter saying the documents were unavailable or irrelevant. 
Jamie Rubin likened the excuses to the old standby, the dog ate my 
home work. But he says the United States is reserving judgment on 
the refusal until richard Butler examines the letter. While it appears 
Iraq may be less than compliant with their week-old agreement, many 
people are wondering if we should have acted with military force then 
or now. Joining us is John McCain. He sits the armed services committee. 
And senator Frank Lautenberg. He silts on the select intelligence 
committee. Gentlemen, thank you for joining us. Senator Lautenberg, 
just over a week ago we heard the president announcing on national 
television that Iraq is capitulating. Today it sounds like that was 
not much of a capitation. Is Saddam Hussein getting away with it? 
It seems to me he is kind of teasing us along and trying to destroy 
our credibility as he resists serious inspection. And I think the 
president used good judgment. One doesn't want to start a shooting 
opportunity if it's unnecessary. There will be casualties. Everyone 
recognizes that. But I think sooner or later we're going to have to 
decide whether the threat from Saddam Hussein is serious. I believe 
that it is. I just came back from the mideast. I was in Israel, Jordan, 
and the surrounding areas. And they're worried, and rightfully so. 
And as a member of the intelligence committee, there are serious threats 
there. And sooner or later, we're going to have to get rid of the 
threats or totally back down and embarrass ourselves. Senator McCain, 
would you say good judgment, or was that a missed opportunity last 
week? I think the president set the conditions for a military operation, 
and that was a pledge of full cooperation on the part of Saddam Hussein. 
And then Saddam Hussein made that pledge, so I don't think he could 
have commenced the attack. But the fact is that the situation and 
scenario in which we find ourselves with one of reacting reash than 
acting. Six months ago, when we placed the conduct of American foreign 
policy in the hands of the secretary general of the U.N., I and many 
others said, look, we will revisit this problem again. Now we find 
Saddam Hussein jerking our chain again. And the president, instead 
of acting, as he said he would a few days ago, has said, well, let's 
not get too excited about this. What we need to do is the next time 
Saddam Hussein is in violation -- and even now if we find out for 
sure he is -- we must act militarily. And the next time he doesn't 
allow us to inspect an installation, that installation is taken out. 
And the United States dictates the action rather than this Con tant 
up-and-down yo-yoing, which has cost billions of dollars and by the 
way is a terrible strain on the men and women in the military and 
the equipment, which we can't afford anymore. Frank Lautenberg, some 
people have said the documents are not enough to go to war for. Does 
that mean the documents aren't that crucial? What is enough to go 
to war for? The documents are only a telltale as to what's happening. 
Are there weapons of mass destruction, biological, chemical? I know 
and I believe that there is no doubt about the fact that Hussein has 
the capacity with even the most rudimentary missile equipment to reach 
fairly good distances. And that seems to be lengthening almost every 
month as they get information from Russia, I believe, or Russian companies 
from north creia. And they can strike, Israel can strike, other friends 
of ours. And pretty soon they'll be able to reach western Europe with 
their missiles. We have to get on with it. The documents are only 
a simp Tom of Hussein's lying and twitting the noses of the free world 
while he carries on his nasty business. Senator McCain -- Soledad, 
just a few days ago, the president said Saddam Hussein has committed 
to be in full and complete compliance and fully cooperate. That was 
the conditions. He said he would. Clearly, now he's not. The question 
is now is the United States going to accept less than what he just 
committed himself to? And frankly, I'm disappointed that we should 
go back to the security council. It's no longer an issue for them. 
It's an issue of American credibility and whether we intend to really 
bring saddam Hussein to some kind of accountability or continue to 
be at the end of this chain he keeps jerking. So, it sounds like you're 
pointing to big holes in American policy over iraq. It's been an embarrassment. 
Don't think the north koreaens don't pay attention. We've already 
got serious problems with north Korea and will have terrible problems 
in the spring in Kosovo. Is America's policy an embarrassment, senator 
Lautenberg? Well, I don't see it because it is mixed with judgment, 
whether or not you're going to take out the facilities and -- How 
can you have a foreign policy that states you want to overthrow Saddam 
hussein and at the same time you're hoping to contain him? Well, these 
are totally different tactics. One is to bring down the entire government, 
which would satisfy me, certainly, because if he's out of office, 
we have a better chance, I hope, to deal with the next generation 
of leadership. But the fact of the matter is that before you take 
the action that is called for with air strikes, you have to remember 
that there are going to be a number of civilians that will perish 
as a result of that, and even though he's the one that puts these 
people up as decoys, we still have a Responsibility. We should do 
what we have Toto take out this system of his. What's the line that 
has to be crossed if it's not documents? I frankly think the line 
has been crossed. This last incident is a source of embarrassment, 
but embarrassment should never force us to strike. What should force 
us to strike is whether or not we can get rid of these things. And 
I think that the time has passed. And the next time that a strike 
is contemplated, I think we ought to go with it Senator McCain, how 
does the strategy have to change? I think we have to mount this operation 
which the president mentioned in his speech to eventually overthrow 
Saddam Hussein, and we should never underestimate how difficult that 
will be and how much involvement that may require on part of the United 
States. But in the meantime, we expect him to comply completely in 
every way, which he just committed to doing. I think he may have made 
a mistake here. I thought he'd wait a few months until we have to 
withdraw our forces because we can't keep the force there is indefinitely. 
But we'll have to see. It's not clear what the administration is willing 
to do. It's a serious credibility problem already. Thank you both 
for joining us this evening. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>