<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981123.1830.0801 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
NBC news "in depth" tonight -- testing the limits of the law and morality. 
Once again, Dr. Jack Kevorkian has put himself at the center of a 
Controversy over the right to die. The Michigan physician has been 
licensed to practice medicine for 45 years. Since 1990, he claims 
to have taken part in more than 120 assisted suicides. Now, in full 
view of a national television audience, Kevorkian has carried out 
what he calls a mercy killing. But was it murder? NBC's Pete Williams 
begins tonight's "in depth" reporting. Michigan authorities today 
say they're investigating what they call an apparent homicide case 
involving Dr. Kevorkian and the videotaped death televised last night 
of Tom youk, a once vigorous man who suffered from a terminal muscle 
disease. It appeared a homicide was committed in violation of the 
laws of the state of Michigan. However, a charging decision will not 
be made until the videotapes are viewed in their entirety. Kevorkian 
says he did it to challenge the new law against assisted suicide in 
his home state of Michigan, but this case seems different from the 
100 or so suicides Kevorkian has already assisted, where he left the 
patient in control to push the button and start a flow of lethal drugs. 
This time, Kevorkian himself says he injected the drugs directly into 
the patient, recorded the process, and gave the videotape to CBS news 
"60 minutes." Kevorkian said he wanted to shift the public debate 
away from assisted suicide to euthanasia, or mercy killing. His lawyer 
says some patients need it. In an enlightened society, we shouldn't 
allow individuals to suffer. We shouldn't allow them to have to suffer 
simply because some parts of society, the vocal minority of society, 
is saying that this is inappropriate. But among some advocates for 
the nation's terminally ill, kevorkian's latest case has produced 
strong criticism. In Oregon, supporters of that state's assisted suicide 
law say they oppose doctors directly administering the lethal dose. 
The patient needs to be in control. If the physician is in control, 
then it's open to abuse and you don't have that very important safeguard 
of patient choice and patient control. But many experts in medical 
ethics say there's really no difference, that both are wrong for doctors 
to do, and that by taping the death, Kevorkian complicates the question. 
His technique is simply to avoid serious questions and to simply sensationalize 
all issues, and this is another example of that. No doubt Dr. Kevorkian 
wanted to prompt a public debate. But most of it so far has focused 
more on the showing of a man's death on television, rather than the 
ethics of mercy killing. Pete Williams, NBC news, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>