<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981123.0066 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As the Judiciary Committee hearing wore on into the night last Thursday, 
Kenneth Starr came to resemble not so much a congressional witness 
as a defendant in the dock. It was a display of how much President 
Clinton's supporters have succeeded in turning the issue before the 
nation from the impeachability of the president to the behavior of 
Starr, the independent counsel. When David Kendall, the president's 
lawyer, questioned him near the end of the hearing, Starr was goaded 
into shedding his Mr. Rogers-goes-to-Congress-to-explain-things manner. 
Instead, he was briefly reduced to indignant denials. And, although 
Kendall is the president's defense lawyer, he did not spend a moment 
of his allotted hour defending the president. There was really only 
The Case Against Starr. The main arguments about the behavior and 
approach of Starr and his associates concern how they have treated 
witnesses, notably Monica Lewinsky, and whether they leaked confidential 
grand jury proceedings. Critics have also raised other issues, including 
whether Starr was involved improperly in Paula Corbin Jones' sexual 
harassment lawsuit against the president. In their effort to portray 
Starr as vindictive and unprofessional, Democrats have hinted darkly 
that Starr broke some rule or violated some law. But the rules that 
govern prosecutorial conduct are, for the most part, vaguely worded 
exhortations and proscriptions in bar association manuals and Justice 
Department guidelines. Professor Charles Wolfram of the Cornell Law 
School, an authority in legal ethics, said the rules about prosecutorial 
misconduct are inherently vague and have been intentionally left that 
way by the courts. ``Courts continually say that it is not the behavior 
of the prosecutor that should be put on trial unless there's something 
really extraordinary that happens,'' he said. Moreover, he said, ``you 
never get a sharp definition of what these vaguely orded guidelines 
mean.'' The charges against Starr have been lobbed in the highly specialized 
and partisan context of an impeachment proceeding, an atmosphere with 
the subtlety of, say, Monday Night Football. In such a proceeding, 
Wolfram said, the nuances of Starr's behavior matter far less than 
broad impressions about whether he is fair. ``He can't just be another 
prosecutor playing fast and loose with the rules,'' he said. In the 
battle for perceptions, Starr suffered a blow Friday when Samuel Dash 
abruptly resigned as his ethics adviser. The presence of Dash, who 
was counsel to the Senate Watergate committee in 1973, lent an air 
of rectitude to Starr's operation. Dash praised Starr's overall conduct, 
but said that he had overstepped his bounds by becoming an advocate 
for impeachment. But just as everyday prosecutors are rarely punished 
for wrongdoing, Starr and his deputies are largely immune from penalty 
even if some of the charges against them prove true. As an independent 
counsel, he is chiefly the judge of his own behavior, although he 
could be fired for misconduct by Attorney General Janet Reno. She 
has shown little interest so far in complaints from the White House 
about Starr. The area in which the guidelines are the most explicit 
and the issue that may pose the greatest threat to Starr is the allegation 
that his office improperly leaked grand jury information. The Federal 
Rules of Criminal Procedure flatly prohibit prosecutors from disclosing 
grand jury matters. In September, Judge Norma Holloway Johnson ruled 
that 24 news accounts about the investigation of President Clinton 
appear to show that prosecutors in Starr's office discussed grand 
jury matters with reporters. The judge described the articles and 
broadcasts as ``serious and repetitive'' evidence that Starr and his 
staff may have violated the law. As a result, Starr now has to prove 
that his office was not responsible for any of those 24 news accounts. 
The issue produced the liveliest moments in the Starr-Kendall confrontation 
Thursday night. Kendall read from some of the news accounts, noting 
that they included phrases like, ``sources in Starr's office tell 
us,'' ``sources near Starr,'' and ``prosecutors suggest.'' He then 
asked, ``Does the media make up these quotes, Mr. Starr?'' Starr replied, 
``I'm not here to accuse the media of anything,'' adding that the 
matter was under litigation and it was unfair to raise it publicly. 
Kendall countered, ``Mr. Starr, in fact, there has been no case remotely 
similar to this in terms of the massive leaking from the prosecutor's 
office, and I think we know that.'' Starr replied: ``I totally disagree 
with that. That's an accusation and it's an unfair accusation. I completely 
reject it.'' If Judge Johnson were to find that Starr or his deputies 
improperly disclosed grand jury materials, they could face sanctions. 
The Judge could formally censure anyone in Starr's office found to 
have violated the law, a significant blow to a legal career. Starr 
also defended himself against charges that Ms. Lewinsky was mistreated 
when his prosecutors first confronted her in a suburban Virginia hotel 
last January. She told a grand jury she was threatened, detained and 
discouraged from calling her lawyer or her mother. ``You're 24, you're 
smart,'' she said a prosecutor told her. ``You're old enough. You 
don't need to call your mommy.'' However heavy-handed those comments 
might have been, the issue that might run afoul of ethics guidelines 
is whether the prosecutors tried to engage her as a witness after 
she asked to speak to her lawyer. Under Rule 4.2 the American Bar 
Association Model Rules of Professional Conduct, lawyers, including 
prosecutors, may not talk directly to someone who might be involved 
in litigation or an investigation if they know that person is represented 
by a lawyer. A separate bar association manual on criminal matters 
makes it even clearer that prosecutors should step aside immediately 
when they learn someone they are interviewing is represented by a 
lawyer. ``What happened there was very improper,'' said Professor 
Geoffrey Hazard of the University of Pennsylvania Law School. The 
issue was so basic, he said, that even people whose only information 
comes from television shows know that prosecutors are not supposed 
to talk to subjects of an investigation once it's clear they have 
a lawyer. But Professor Bob Tuttle of the George Washington University 
Law School said the situation is far from clear and that Starr may 
not be bound by those guidelines. The manual for prosecutors is only 
advisory, he said, and the Justice Department has long resisted efforts 
to make the model code apply to its prosecutors. Congress has approved 
legislation requiring the Justice Department to adhere to the model 
code, he said, but it takes effect late next year. Although Starr 
is independent from the Justice Department, the law authorizing his 
appointment provides that he must adhere to department guidelines 
whenever possible. But Starr made clear that he believed the guidelines 
were not an issue because Ms. Lewinsky's perception that she was being 
threatened was inaccurate, and because she had been free to leave 
the hotel at any time. ``We used traditional law enforcement techniques,'' 
he said in response to charges that the prosecutors threatened Ms. 
Lewinsky with 27 years in jail and her mother's imprisonment. In fact, 
such threats are common in the hard-edged world of modern prosecutors. 
And he said his prosecutors did not have to allow Ms. Lewinsky to 
contact her lawyer because he represented her in a civil matter, the 
Paula Jones case, not a criminal matter. On only one point did Starr 
give some ground. He conceded that his agents may have gone too far 
if, as alleged, they went to the school of a 16-year-old in Arkansas 
to serve a subpoena on him. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>