<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981123.0065 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With thousands of new tools and techniques introduced into medicine 
each year, doctors face constant pressure to stay abreast of technology. 
And savvy patients shop around for those who will perform the latest 
procedures advertised in newspapers or discussed at dinner parties. 
But what most patients don't know as they're wheeled into the operating 
room is how skilled their doctors are with the new equipment. The 
physicians using it, sometimes for the first time, may have taken 
only a three-hour course or watched a video or chatted with the manufacturer's 
sales representative. Or they may lack any training, which was the 
case last year when two doctors at New York's Beth Israel Medical 
Center operated on a 30-year-old woman to remove fibroid tumors from 
her uterus. The woman, Lisa Smart, died of cardiac arrest. Last week 
her husband, Anderson, asked that criminal charges be filed against 
her doctors, Robert Klinger and Marc Sklar, and David Myers, a salesman 
for Johnson &AMP; Johnson, which manufactured the equipment involved. 
A New York state Health Department report said that Myers operated 
the equipment, and the New York state Education Department, which 
licenses doctors, found evidence that his activities amounted to practicing 
medicine without a license. The Education Department has recommended 
that Myers be prosecuted. The case has prompted many hospitals around 
the country to examine their policies on continuing education for 
doctors. But it is not the first time mastery of new medical technology 
has been questioned. In the early 1990s seven patients in New York 
died and 151 were injured during gall bladder surgery because their 
doctors were inadequately trained in using a laparoscope. One doctor 
had received no formal instruction; others one- or two-day seminars. 
Since then, the Education Department and the American Medical Association 
have each developed guidelines recommending that doctors take courses 
on new equipment and procedures and that they demonstrate proficiency 
under the supervision of more experienced doctors before they operate 
alone. The guidelines, however, are not legal requirements. Hospitals 
and surgical clinic set their own standards. Dr. Randolph Smoak, chairman 
of the AMA board, said the rules of most organizations are not as 
strict as the association's. Other doctors agreed. ``I suspect that 
if you're practicing in a remote area in a small department, it could 
be difficult to keep up with new technology and establish standards,'' 
said Dr. Frederic Frigoletto, chairman of obstetrics at Massachusetts 
General Hospital. The problem is not restricted to remote places, 
said an orthopedic surgeon at a New York hospital who asked not to 
be identified. ``I'm not sure that teaching hospitals necessarily 
have a better reputation for physician training than clinics or community 
hospitals,'' he said. ``Unfortunately, there are probably doctors 
who do cases that are beyond their capability and expertise. And there 
are probably doctors who rely on sales reps more than they should 
for training.'' Perhaps the most startling detail from the Beth Israel 
incident is that a salesman was in the operating room. In fact, salesmen 
attend operations routinely, usually at the request of doctors using 
new devices. ``It's an accepted and acceptable practice to have service 
reps there to provide information when there's new equipment,'' said 
Susan Waltman, senior vice president and general counsel for the Greater 
New York Hospital Association; she compared the presence of a sales 
representative in surgery to that of a computer technician in the 
office. The representatives receive thorough training in the equipment 
they sell, she said, often by doctors. Every hospital has a different 
policy on what the salesman can do, she said. ``Typically, the individual 
must be outside the surgical field and not touching the patient,'' 
she said, but the salesman might be allowed to operate the equipment. 
``More than once I've seen a salesman say, `Doctor, I wouldn't start 
the machine that high,''' said Dr. Martin Weisberg, clinical associate 
professor of obstetrics and gynecology at Thomas Jefferson University 
in Philadelphia. ``The salesman might say that it's not safe to go 
above 50, or that it's OK to go to 60.'' Smoak, a surgeon, said he 
has seen representatives instruct surgeons on inserting pacemakers. 
``Occasionally, if we're having a little trouble getting a pacemaker 
to maintain its position, a salesman may suggest something that's 
worked elsewhere,'' he said. But doctors do not tell patients when 
a salesman will be present during their surgery. The New York state 
Health Department wants to change that. ``Obviously, this is an infringement 
of privacy,'' said Frances Tarlton, a department spokeswoman. The 
department will soon send a statement to hospitals directing them 
to inform patients if a salesman is present, as well as which procedure 
will be done and by which health professional. ``I think it's important 
for surgeons to discuss these things with patients so that they can 
accept or reject the procedure,'' Smoak said. If doctors are not forthcoming, 
he urges patients to keep asking questions. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>