<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981123.0402 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As NATO defines the new strategy it will unveil on its 50th anniversary 
next year, Germany's new government of Social Democrats and Greens 
has irked the United States by tentatively suggesting that NATO should 
renounce the possible first use of nuclear weapons. The German position 
is no surprise. It was part of the coalition agreement reached last 
month by the government, a clear concession to the environmentalist 
Greens. The accord said the coalition would press for ``the renunciation 
of the first use of atomic weapons.'' But it was unclear to American 
officials at the time whether Gerhard Schroeder, the Social Democrat 
who is the new chancellor, had accepted the phrase as an empty concession 
to the Greens or would in fact move to question one of the central 
tenets of NATO doctrine. The United States is firmly opposed to any 
change in the doctrine allowing first use of nuclear weapons, arguing 
that it proved an effective deterrent during the Cold War and remains 
one today against new threats like chemical weapons. Secretary of 
Defense William Cohen brushed aside the German idea during a news 
conference Monday at the Pentagon. He said the alliance's policy on 
using nuclear weapons _ an extension of U.S. policy _ was ``sound 
doctrine'' that had been reaffirmed after the Cold War. The United 
States has always reserved the right to start a nuclear war, arguing 
that the threat of nuclear strikes helps deter attacks, both conventional 
and strategic. ``It is an integral part of our strategic concept,'' 
Cohen said, ``and we think it should remain exactly as it is.'' Officials 
close to the alliance said Schroeder raised the issue in a meeting 
with NATO Secretary-General Javier Solana in Berlin two weeks ago. 
He did so in a highly tentative manner, asking what response Germany's 
allies would give if the new government pursued the renunciation of 
the first-strike option. Joschka Fischer, the foreign minister and 
a member of the Green Party, returned to the question in an interview 
in this week's issue of the magazine Der Spiegel. Asked about the 
first use of nuclear weapons, he said that he had raised the matter 
with Solana and that ``we will have to discuss these matters because 
we see things differently.'' Stefan Steinlein, a spokesman for Fischer, 
said Monday that the foreign minister favored a discussion on the 
role of nuclear weapons, but one undertaken ``in a framework of solidarity.'' 
In any event, he said, Germany would under no circumstances isolate 
itself in NATO. With the United States, Britain and France all firmly 
opposing any shift in the approach to the use of nuclear weapons and 
with unanimity required for any change, Germany's new position will 
not alter NATO doctrine. But members are concerned that if Germany 
presses the issue, a divisive debate could be ignited that touches 
on the heart of the trans-Atlantic bond. ``We have 200 nuclear weapons 
systems in Germany, Britain, Italy, the Netherlands and Belgium,'' 
a NATO diplomat said. ``They are a powerful deterrent, and their credibility 
would be undone without the first-strike option. They are also the 
basis of our link with America, and we must be careful to avoid any 
risk of decoupling.'' If Germany formally suggests a review of the 
first-strike doctrine at NATO, it would be likely to gain some support 
from Denmark, Canada and Greece. The United States is keen to avoid 
such a discussion on basic doctrine when much work remains to be done 
on other aspects of the ``new strategic concept'' that is due to be 
announced at a 50th-anniversary NATO summit meeting in Washington 
in April. The conference will try to lay out NATO's new roles in peacekeeping, 
countering the spread of weapons, and defending against chemical weapons, 
among other issues. Rudolf Scharping, the German defense minister 
and a Social Democrat, was scheduled to meet with Cohen and Secretary 
of State Madeleine Albright in Washington Monday and Tuesday. He is 
certain to be forcefully reminded of Schroeder's pledge to President 
Clinton that his government would maintain ``continuity'' in foreign 
and security policy. ``Such continuity is particularly important on 
the fundamental tenets of alliance nuclear policy,'' an American official 
said. Scharping, apparently distancing himself from Fischer, said 
on his arrival in Washington: ``I do not think there will be a problem 
between Germany and the United States on first nuclear strikes. One 
cannot consider this issue only from the German point of view.'' Whether 
or not Germany swiftly drops the issue of first use of nuclear weapons, 
its emergence reflects tensions between the Social Democrats and Greens 
and the hastiness with which the government program was put together. 
Karsten Voigt, a Social Democratic Party security expert, said that 
in negotiations before the formation of the government, his party's 
position was that the pursuit of a renunciation of a first nuclear 
strike should not be in the program. ``But in the general haste, we 
caved into the Greens, and now it is an unfortunate piece of baggage 
that has become part of the government's commitments,'' he said. Ludger 
Vollmar, a Green Party member who was particularly adamant about the 
issue, is now a junior minister under Fischer. Although the Greens 
have moved a long way from their initial pacifism, strong anti-militarist 
currents persist in the party. Fischer, a pragmatist, cannot ignore 
them. NATO officials said they hoped that some of the German concerns 
would be assuaged by opening discussions on faster and steeper moves 
toward nuclear disarmament. ``Beyond that, we are confident that the 
Social Democrats will rein in the Greens and insure that this matter 
is not aggressively pursued,'' one said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>