<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981123.0475 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Glee shoved gloom aside Monday in the nation's stock markets as two 
of the main gauges surpassed their summer peaks and reached new highs. 
Investors who stayed with stocks through the downturn in the fall 
now have outsized gains for the year, even by standards set in this 
bull market's last few years. The Dow Jones industrial average, which 
set a record Monday, is up 18.54 percent for the year, while the Standard 
&AMP; Poor's 500-stock index, also a record-setter Monday, has risen 
22.44 percent. Although the technology-heavy Nasdaq composite index 
did not hit a record Monday, it has beaten the other gauges for the 
year, up 25.92 percent. Still, the recent rally has not lifted all 
issues. Small stocks, while back from the depths, are still underperforming 
their larger brethren. The Russell 2000 index of smaller-company issues 
closed at 398.15, up 28 percent from its low in October. But it is 
still 14 percent below its July peak. Monday, the Dow rose 214.72 
points, or 2.34 percent, to 9,374.27. The Nasdaq index jumped 2.55 
percent, to 1,977.42, up 49.21 points. The S&AMP;P 500 rose 2.12 percent, 
or 24.66 points, to 1,188.21. This performance represents nothing 
short of a U-turn in investor sentiment. Euphoria is back for stocks, 
but confidence has also returned to the junk bond arena, fueling a 
recovery in those securities from a moribund state two months ago. 
``We've gone through a classic market cycle in a matter of weeks instead 
of the months or even years that it used to take,'' said John Manley, 
equity strategist at Salomon Smith Barney. Although concerns remain, 
such as a continuing deterioration in corporate earnings, an Asia 
mired in overcapacity, uncertainty about Japan's recovery plan and 
Latin America on the edge, Manley said investors were focusing on 
something rosy farther down the road. Optimism has also checked into 
corporate board rooms, as evidenced by Monday's spate of merger announcements. 
Nine deals were announced or under negotiation Monday for a total 
of $40.4 billion, reflecting a belief among many chief executives 
that a recession is unlikely next year. Merger experts also found 
it bullish that the companies doing the deals spanned a range of industries. 
That most of the deals were done using stock as the acquisition currency 
indicates how crucial the recent rally has been to deal-makers. Because 
consumer confidence is inextricably linked to the stock market's performance, 
the recent run-up in stocks should bolster consumer confidence figures, 
which will be released Tuesday. These numbers had been falling in 
recent months along with stocks. The stock market's impressive rally 
is vindication for Abby Joseph Cohen, the market strategist at Goldman, 
Sachs &AMP; Co., who stayed positive on stocks throughout the downturn. 
Ms. Cohen never bought the doomsayers' view, what she called FUDD 
_ for fear, uncertainty, doubt and despair. Instead, she held fast 
to her view that turmoil in world markets was unlikely to cause a 
recession in the United States. Ms. Cohen looked particularly prescient 
Monday: Her prediction on the Dow Jones industrial average for the 
end of the year was about 9,300. But while investors who own mutual 
funds that mimic the stock indexes are enjoying big gains, many others 
are probably feeling left behind. That is because the surge that shows 
up in the market indexes is, once again, not showing up across the 
board, with many stocks still well off their peaks. Indeed, the broad 
market is only beginning to claw its way back. According to Salomon 
Smith Barney, at the starting point of this market surge, on Oct. 
8, the average Nasdaq stock was down 54.1 percent and the average 
S&AMP;P 500 stock had declined 32.1 percent from their 52-week highs. 
As of Friday, the most recent data available, the average Nasdaq stock 
was down 40.1 percent and the average S&AMP;P 500 stock was down 19.2 
percent. Similarly, while the revival of mergers and acquisitions 
is an indicator of optimism, the activity is still far below the levels 
reached earlier this year. Monday's $40.4 billion in deals brings 
the pace this month to $70 billion. That is up from the low of $51 
billion in September, according to Securities Data Corp., but nowhere 
near the spring's levels of $210 billion a month. Initial public offerings 
are showing life, too. But a couple of spectacular one-day gainers 
hide the fact that many recent offerings are still hurting. So far 
in 1998, the average initial offering has inched up only one-tenth 
of a percent. But separating technology offerings from nontechnology 
ones exposes a chasm in performance. According to Securities Data, 
the average technology offering is up 15.2 percent this year, while 
the average nontechnology offering is down 8 percent. As for the volume 
of deals, investment bankers have raised $9.4 billion in 29 initial 
offerings since Sept. 1, but three deals _ Conoco, Fox Entertainment 
and Swisscom _ account for 80 percent of the money raised. But Monday's 
move clearly gave investors something to be thankful for this week. 
Analysts pointed to several factors driving stock prices. The single 
biggest driver is the rapid rise in the nation's money supply. The 
figure for M-2 _ the broadest money supply measure that includes checking 
accounts, savings accounts, money market funds and other assets _ 
has grown at an annual rate of 9.3 percent in the last three months. 
This is the biggest rise since 1987, and much of this money is flooding 
into stocks. Another factor propelling equity prices is the large 
number of investors who are buying back shares to cut their losses 
on open short positions, or bets that stock prices would decline. 
A short position is created when an investor borrows shares and then 
sells them. If the share price falls, the investor can profit by buying 
shares at a lower price to replace the borrowed ones. Conversely, 
if the shares rise in price, the short-seller faces a loss. Uncovered 
short sales, or those with open positions, are those shares that have 
been borrowed and sold but not yet covered by repurchase. Those investors 
who thought stocks were headed for a fall are now scrambling to limit 
their losses caused by the big move up. As Christine Callies, investment 
strategist at Credit Suisse First Boston, points out, short positions 
at the New York Stock Exchange dropped 5.4 percent for the month ended 
Nov. 13. That is the largest decline in more than a year and indicates 
that pessimistic traders are having second thoughts. It has not hurt, 
of course, that the Federal Reserve has cut interest rates three times 
since late September. The benchmark 30-year Treasury bond is yielding 
5.25 percent, an unappealing rate for investors accustomed to double-digit 
gains. It seems that more and more investors feel there is nowhere 
else to put their money except in stocks or higher-yielding junk bonds. 
Some investors also say there are more interest rate cuts to come, 
although the Fed has signaled it would prefer to hold off on further 
reductions. Jason Trennert, vice president at International Strategy 
and Investment in New York, says that continuing weakness in gold 
and commodity prices is predicting further easing by the Fed. ``Most 
likely monetary policy around the world is too tight,'' he said. ``We're 
of the opinion that the Fed left the door open for more easings.'' 
Lower interest rates are a tonic for both stocks and bonds. As a result, 
few strategists are willing to say this market's run is over. ``Fear 
and greed are both contagious,'' Manley said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>