<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981123.0470 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial on Tuesday, Nov. 24: Attorney 
General Janet Reno's resistance to the obvious need for an independent 
counsel on the Clinton administration's campaign fund-raising scandals 
is about to be put to a series of tests. On Tuesday, Reno is to rule 
on whether to ask for the appointment of a counsel to investigate 
Vice President Gore's fund-raising calls. Soon she must also decide 
on Harold Ickes' alleged misstatements about his own campaign role 
and whether the Democrats illegally used their ``soft money'' war 
chest. The public is weary after months of impeachment talk, but that 
weariness cannot be an excuse for shortchanging the rule of law. Since 
fall 1996 it has been obvious that Reno had a legal obligation to 
appoint an independent counsel who lacked her built-in conflict of 
interest when it came to investigating the reckless fund-raising practices 
involving her boss and other highly placed administration figures. 
The impeachment process took the heat off Reno. But not before warnings 
from Louis Freeh, director of the FBI, and Charles La Bella, her hand-picked 
campaign-finance prosecutor, forced her to order preliminary inquiries 
into several aspects of the 1996 campaign. Although her subordinates 
shamed her into action, Reno slowed things down by cutting the inquiries 
into slivers _ like Gore's phone calls _ and by ignoring such big-picture 
questions as a possible Chinese government conspiracy to funnel money 
to the White House re-election effort. Reno argued erroneously that 
the law required her to move in this fragmented way. In fact, the 
Independent Counsel Act's discretionary clause gives her authority 
to appoint a counsel who can explore all aspects of the most corrupt 
fund-raising year since Watergate. We urge the attorney general to 
authorize a consolidated investigation that looks at all the campaign 
issues, including the possibility of Asian contributions in exchange 
for favors to China or businesses in the region. The subject here 
is not sex and lies, but corruption of the very essentials of government. 
The initial word about Reno's attitude is anything but encouraging. 
According to reports by David Johnston of The Times, the attorney 
general may opt for the narrowest of possible rulings involving the 
most benign interpretations of the activities of Gore and others. 
That would be a dodge to turn attention from potentially momentous 
violations of the Federal Election Campaign Act. For example, President 
Clinton's videotaped remarks to contributors suggest that his campaign 
knowingly circumvented contribution and spending limits by using unregulated 
soft money for ``issue ads'' that were really disguised campaign ads. 
Reno, of course, knows that Freeh and La Bella both believe that an 
independent prosecutor was needed to look into these charges. Moreover, 
an audit subpoenaed by the Justice Department from the Federal Election 
Commission apparently finds that the ads violated the law. Honest 
people can disagree about whether Clinton's lying under oath is an 
impeachable offense. But there can be no disagreement that the law 
requires Reno to step aside and allow an independent investigation. 
Inaction will deliver another blow to the public's faith. It could 
also tempt Congress to add campaign finance to the impeachment inquiry 
or to undertake hearings on a matter that, under law, belongs to an 
independent counsel. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>