<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981123.0399 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Callers to the message line of the Federal Express pilots union just 
last Thursday were reassured that the pilots had Fedex on the run. 
``We are pulling together to fight for our families and our careers,'' 
Byron Cobb, the union's vice president, said in the message. ``The 
plan is working.'' But later that same day at an emotional meeting 
at the union's cramped headquarters in Memphis, Tenn., senior pilot 
after senior pilot stood up and pleaded with union leaders to call 
off a threatened holiday strike. Pilots were worried that the company 
would do what Fred Smith, Federal Express' founder and chairman had 
threatened: keep shipments going without them by spending tens of 
millions of dollars to contract out flights and deliveries. ``These 
were people who knew Fred Smith, and said he was serious,'' said Bob 
Clement, a union spokesman. Within hours, the fledgling union, which 
represents 3,500 pilots at Fedex, raised the white flag, agreeing 
to suspend its strike threat in exchange for the company's pledge 
to resume negotiations. Federal Express' stunning victory stands in 
stark contrast to the experience of other passenger and cargo airlines, 
where pilots have maximum leverage over management _ and are not reluctant 
to use it. This summer, pilots at Northwest Airlines shut the carrier 
down for 15 days. Earlier this year, the pilots at Fedex's archrival, 
United Parcel Service, which was still recovering from last year's 
strike by Teamsters, received the richest contract in the industry. 
The fact that Federal Express, which Smith conceived in a 1965 Yale 
undergraduate term paper and which has since grown into the world's 
largest express freight company, managed to succeed where other companies 
have failed is a result of a seductive corporate culture, a weak and 
inexperienced union and the skillful use of a classic divide-and-conquer 
strategy that isolated the union leadership and aroused the fears 
of its members. Whether vanquishing the pilots is ultimately a Pyrrhic 
victory is another question. If Fedex, which has no other unions, 
presses this current advantage too hard, it may be left with bitter 
and resentful pilots at a time when some other Federal Express employees 
are beginning to warm to efforts by unions to organize them. The talks 
with the pilots, which resumed Monday, are expected to result in a 
tentative agreement quickly. But the company has made it clear that 
the cost of the planes and trucks that have already been leased means 
that it will be forced to offer the pilots less than the proposal 
they rejected last month. Unions have never been very popular with 
Smith, who is now chairman of Fedex's parent, FDX Corp. He successfully 
fended off several efforts by the Teamsters and others to organize 
workers in the company's early years. His philosophy has been that 
if employees are treated well, they will provide superior service 
to customers _ and they will have no need to turn to organized labor. 
(Smith declined requests to be interviewed.) Today, even part-time 
hourly workers who sort the 1.5 million packages that whip by nightly 
on high-speed conveyor belts at the giant hub in Memphis receive comprehensive 
health insurance, tuition reimbursement and other benefits. Many of 
the workers are students or have other full-time jobs but ``work the 
sort'' from 11 p.m. to 3 a.m. expressly for the benefits. The company 
has also made a point of promoting from within. An impressive number 
of its managers _ including many at the highest levels _ started their 
careers at Federal Express as hourly workers and remain fiercely loyal 
to the company and its signature purple color. ``I've got purple blood,'' 
declared Brenda Saulsberry, 42, a mother of three, who has worked 
at Fedex for 10 years, most recently in customer service. She spoke 
while attending an employee rally last week to support Federal Express 
in its showdown with the pilots. At the rally _ which was heavily 
supported, if not entirely orchestrated, by the company _ thousands 
of Fedex workers took to the streets in Memphis waving placards and 
singing the company anthem. (``We carry dreams and plans to a hundred 
lands. We're the best way to ship it everywhere.'') The crowd was 
so enthusiastic that it erupted into wild applause after a Filipino 
employee delivered a statement of support in Tagalog from workers 
at Federal Express' hub in Subic Bay. ``Did you even understand what 
I said?'' she asked before reading a translation. But as the company 
has tried to squeeze more productivity out of its workers in recent 
years, many employees, especially those outside Memphis, where Fedex 
is the largest employer, have started to bridle. ``We have actually 
been losing ground for the last eight or 10 years,'' said Dan Proffitt, 
a tractor-trailer driver in Indianapolis who has worked for Federal 
Express for 23 years and is now an organizer for the International 
Brotherhood of Teamsters. It was the pilots, in fact, who helped establish 
the Fedex culture. In the company's early days, they pitched in to 
load the planes as well as fly them. Smith, a former Marine aviator 
who flew missions in Vietnam, was known to hang out in the crew lounge. 
In recent years, such camaraderie waned as the pilots complained about 
heavy work schedules and pay that lagged behind those of pilots at 
unionized companies. While Federal Express pilots earn on average 
between $130,000 and $142,000 a year, they have not had a substantial 
wage increase in more than 10 years and have fallen behind their peers 
at several other airlines. And without union representation, the pilots 
were not entitled under federal law to the same retirement benefits 
enjoyed by their counterparts. Still, the pilots might have had a 
contract earlier if their ranks had not been so divided. After the 
Air Line Pilots Association narrowly won the right to represent them 
in 1993, pilots rejected the contract the union had negotiated. Many 
felt that the union, which has contracts at 50 airlines, was too strident. 
Then in March, pilots voted down a second tentative agreement negotiated 
by the Fedex Pilots Association, a more moderate in-house union, which 
replaced ALPA in 1996, because the pact did not deliver enough. By 
this summer, widespread discontent had united the pilots against the 
company. In particular, there was a growing sense that the company 
had been taking advantage of the years of protracted contract negotiations 
by unilaterally changing the pilots' work rules. ``Instead of working 
14 days a month, you were working 16 days a month for the same pay,'' 
said David Slatinsky, an Airbus A300 captain who began flying for 
the company in 1974. Cynthia Berwyn, who has been flying for Federal 
Express for 13 years, most recently as a DC-10 captain, said she became 
alarmed in 1996, when the company sent her a letter telling her that 
the time she spent on pregnancy leave the year before was being deducted 
from her length of service at the company, an important determinant 
of pay. After she complained that she did not have the time deducted 
following her two previous pregnancies, she was told that those leaves 
would be deducted retroactively. ``This is the issue that made me 
realize that we needed a set of rules that would be applied fairly,'' 
she said. And whatever lingering doubts some pilots had about supporting 
the union were erased in June after the company introduced a new computer 
system to generate their complex flight schedules. The new software 
sought to schedule the company's 326 jets as efficiently as possible. 
But it sent many pilots on grueling trips across dozens of time zones 
with only minimum rest between flights. Fedex acknowledged that there 
were problems but insisted that they had been corrected. Still, the 
pilots no longer trusted the company. More than 95 percent were now 
members of the union, compared with 62 percent just a year earlier. 
When contract negotiations began in July, the pilots asked for a large 
wage increase on top of a one-time payment to make up for the raises 
they had not received since 1993, increased retirement benefits, and 
a series of new work rules. The talks dragged into the fall, and the 
union threatened to strike during the peak holiday season. The results 
of the strike authorization vote were scheduled to be announced on 
Dec. 3. On Oct. 30, the company gave the pilots what it said was its 
final offer and set a midnight deadline. The union said it needed 
more time. The next day, Federal Express withdrew from negotiations 
and began leasing planes and trucks and assuring customers that it 
would continue to serve them even if the pilots struck. Whether Fedex 
could have operated without its pilots will never be known. But then 
the company was never planning to operate without pilots: Its strike 
contingency plan was based in part on the assumption that many pilots 
would cross the picket line. ``I can't tell you how many, but I know 
there is a large number of Federal Express pilots committed to providing 
service to our customers should there be a strike action by our union,'' 
Theodore Weise, Fedex's president and chief executive, said in an 
interview last week. No one understood the divisions among the pilots 
better than Federal Express executives, as they sought to prevent 
the union leaders from getting the more than two-thirds vote they 
needed to call a strike. The pilots were told in letters from Weise 
that the company would move forward with or without them. And last 
week's raucous employee rally showed many pilots that unlike UPS, 
where most of the workers are unionized, they could expect little 
support from Fedex's 140,000 employees. The union leaders themselves 
did little to help their cause. They were short on experience and 
had little support from the national labor movement. Federal officials 
who dealt with the Fedex union said they were surprised by its lack 
of knowledge of the Railway Labor Act, the arcane law that governs 
union activities in the airline industry. And a Wall Street analyst 
who met with union leaders earlier this month and insisted on anonymity 
said he was shocked when they told him that they had a war chest of 
only $2 million. ``That is like playing poker and showing the other 
guy your hand,'' he said. In the end, the pilots surrendered after 
the company leaked word to them on Thursday that it was preparing 
to lay off 500 pilots this week and to announce that it had leased 
more airplanes to be flown by outside pilots. ``Knowing that Smith 
is an unconventional individual in the way he responds to things,'' 
said Cobb, the union vice president, sugarcoating the defeat, ``we 
had to do something unconventional to get his attention.'' Cobb insisted 
that the union has not lost its leverage, because it has agreed only 
to delay any potential strike for at least 60 days. But a walkout 
hardly seems likely, because package volume drops precipitously after 
the holidays, making it easier for the company to weather a strike. 
And while the rank and file could vote down an agreement _ indeed 
many pilots lashed out at union leaders at a meeting on Sunday in 
Memphis _ that is also unlikely because it now appears that any contract 
would be better than no contract at all. Like other workers at Federal 
Express, the pilots are once again placing their faith in Smith's 
benevolence. ``He really will show his true colors to the world,'' 
Cobb said, referring to the new contract negotiations. ``It's the 
greatest opportunity for him to do the right thing.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>