<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981123.0277 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The patient was running late; he was due at work in 20 minutes and 
didn't have time to chat, but he did need the doctor's help with a 
couple of quick problems. First on his list was an annoying burning 
and discharge after urination that he worried meant he had picked 
up a sexually transmitted infection from an incautious sexual encounter 
over the weekend. And second, he needed refills on all his regular 
medications: the three he took for AIDS, his vitamins, and the testosterone 
and Viagra he took to normalize his sexual functioning. By itself, 
none of his requests would have given the doctor much pause. Together, 
they packed a wallop. Were the patient's symptoms evidence that he 
was not using condoms during sexual activities _ activities that were 
enabled by the doctor's prescriptions, and were putting others at 
risk of HIV infection? What were the doctor's responsibilities in 
this situation? It was one of those moments that medical school seldom 
prepares doctors for, but that caring for people with HIV infection 
is increasingly providing. As AIDS changes from an inevitably fatal 
condition to one people can live with for years, patients are struggling 
to readjust _ and doctors are, too. The fast-paced tragedy and heroics 
of dealing with catastrophic illness are fading from their workdays, 
which are filling instead with the less dramatic but often far more 
difficult tasks of helping patients with a chronic but treatable illness 
craft normal lives. And integrating sexual activity into those lives 
is probably the most complex job of all, for patients and doctors 
alike. HIV infection can affect sexual and reproductive health in 
a variety of ways. Depression can limit sexual drive in both men and 
women; irregular menstruation is common in women, while in men, blood 
testosterone levels may fall to levels far below normal, causing fatigue, 
weight loss and an inability to function sexually that may persist 
even on the powerful new AIDS drugs. ``Sexual dysfunction is very 
prevalent in HIV-infected people,'' said Dr. Ellie Schoenbaum, director 
of AIDS research at Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx. ``All 
through the epidemic we've found that patients haven't had the active 
sex lives or rapid partner turnover we first expected.'' In the early 
1990s a series of studies showed that replacing testosterone in men 
with HIV infection ``transformed them,'' said Dr. Judith Rabkin, a 
professor of clinical psychology at Columbia University's College 
of Physicians and Surgeons who worked on some of the earliest studies. 
Men gained muscle mass and energy and shook off depression, and their 
sexual desire and performance became more normal. ``Testosterone is 
an extremely popular and effective treatment,'' she said, one that 
is increasingly accepted by doctors for HIV-infected men and is being 
studied for women with HIV as well. Important in her studies, Dr. 
Rabkin said, was the discovery that improving men's sexual functioning 
with testosterone unquestionably increased the likelihood that they 
would use condoms. ``Before taking testosterone, a lot of men didn't 
use condoms because they were afraid they would lose the erection,'' 
Dr. Rabkin said. ``That wasn't the case afterward. So giving it to 
people can actually be a positive public-health move.'' While Viagra 
is too new to have been studied extensively in HIV-infected men, it 
is also used by doctors to help patients with HIV function more normally. 
Against these straightforward medical facts, the behavioral facts 
are plain, too. Despite the ``safe sex'' and ``use condoms'' mantras 
that permeate AIDS counseling, in sexual matters, people with HIV 
find it as difficult as anyone else to speak frankly to partners and 
to use condoms. In a study published in February in the Archives of 
Internal Medicine, Dr. Michael Stein of Rhode Island Hospital in Providence 
found that 40 percent of the sexually active HIV-infected people he 
surveyed had not told all their recent sexual partners of their infection. 
More than half of them also did not use condoms regularly. ``Our hope 
is that as survival increases and optimism about the disease increases, 
there will be more truthful talk about sex among infected people and 
their partners,'' Stein said. Who should initiate these conversations? 
Is it the infected person's responsibility to tell, or the partner's 
responsibility to ask? Both, said Dr. Ronald Bayer, a professor of 
public health at Columbia University who has written extensively on 
the topic of sexual ethics in HIV infection. Medical ethicists increasingly 
endorse a responsibility on the part of the infected person to protect 
uninfected partners, as well as a responsibility on the part of partners 
to protect themselves, he said. But the sexual ethics of AIDS _ complicated 
enough when only the participants are involved _ become even more 
of a tangle when a third party hovers in the background, influencing 
the course of events with a prescription pad. On the one hand, the 
doctor's primary allegiance is traditionally to the health and well-being 
of his or her own patient. Still, experts in medical ethics acknowledge 
the obligation to protect other people who may be injured by the patient. 
In recent years, the courts have emphasized this obligation, finding 
doctors liable for failing to warn others of potential harm at the 
hands of their violent patients or of patients with communicable diseases. 
When a doctor is treating a patient known or suspected of being sexually 
reckless, the doctor may well choose to withhold medications that 
enable sexual activity, until the patient demonstrates more responsible 
behavior, said Nancy Dubler, a lawyer and ethicist who heads the division 
of bioethics at Montefiore Hospital and the Albert Einstein College 
of Medicine in the Bronx. But even this simple decision can be a terrible 
mistake if a patient who occasionally neglects to use condoms becomes 
completely unable or unwilling to use them as a result. When the patient 
who was late for work wanted his prescriptions, the doctor's next 
two patients were jittering in the waiting room. But a physician in 
this situation ``has the absolute obligation to deliver a set of educational 
and moral warnings and information with the medication,'' Ms. Dubler 
said, and must tell the patient that his right to a normal and enjoyable 
sex life is balanced by ``extraordinary obligations'' to be candid 
with sexual partners and avoid putting them at risk. ``Look,'' the 
doctor said. ``I know you're in a hurry, but I can't refill these 
medications until we have a discussion about why you forgot the condoms 
last weekend, and why we have to make sure it won't happen again.'' 
And that is what they did. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>