<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981123.0490 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The executive director of the union representing 120,000 New York 
City municipal workers acknowledged Monday that there was vote fraud 
in the 1996 ratification of his union's contract, which included an 
unpopular two-year wage freeze. Stanley Hill, head of District Council 
37, announced that two of his top assistants, including one who ran 
the union day to day, were resigning. Union officials said the two 
had admitted carrying out fraud in the vote for a five-year contract. 
Hill's admission came four days after it was revealed that prosecutors 
were investigating allegations of vote fraud, tainting what was widely 
considered as Mayor Rudolph Guiliani's most important labor relations 
victory. The two-year pay freeze helped Giuliani balance the city's 
budget. And Giuliani used the District Council 37 contract, which 
covers social workers, engineers, data processors, clerks and dozens 
of other categories, as a lever to pressure firefighters, sanitation 
workers and other unionized workers to accept similar two-year pay 
freezes. Hill said he knew nothing about the fraud allegations until 
Friday, when The New York Times reported that the Manhattan district 
attorney was investigating claims by a union official that thousands 
of fraudulent votes were stuffed into ballot boxes in a clerical workers' 
local during the 1996 vote. The officials who resigned are Martin 
Lubin, the union's associate director, and Mark Shaplo, Lubin's top 
assistant. Hill had worked with both men for nearly three decades. 
Neither man could be reached for comment. Hill acknowledged that his 
union was in ``crisis,'' but said he would not give in to calls to 
resign. The leaders of the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association and 
several other unions seized on Hill's admission to demand that Giuliani 
renegotiate their contracts. But it appeared unlikely that the fraud 
would invalidate the district council's contract, which called for 
a pay freeze and no layoffs for the first two years and a 13 percent 
pay increase over the last three years. Samuel Estreicher, a labor 
law expert at New York University School of Law, said: ``The common 
law is that if the bargaining agent has the authority to sign a contract 
on behalf of the union employees, they're bound by it. It's a problem 
because the employees were apparently manipulated here, and it has 
an impact on other unions. It's a terrible situation.'' The fraud 
allegations are part of a wide-ranging investigation by Manhattan 
District Attorney Robert Morgenthau into the council and its 56 locals. 
The inquiry covers allegations of embezzlement, falsifying records, 
flying girlfriends to meetings and taking kickbacks from caterers, 
travel agencies, law firms and insurance companies. The investigation 
produced its first charges last week when the head of a highway workers' 
local pleaded guilty to committing embezzlement and vote fraud in 
his own local. Lawyers knowledgeable about the investigation say the 
official, Joseph DeCanio, was the first person to provide prosecutors 
with specific evidence of fraud in the 1996 vote. Hill said that when 
the allegations became public on Friday he questioned Lubin and Shaplo, 
and they admitted they had known about the fraud. On Saturday he consulted 
with the president of the District Council's union's national parent 
union, the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, 
and then he demanded the resignations of the two men. In February 
1996, on the very day that Hill announced the contract had been ratified, 
the presidents of two of the largest locals in District Council 37 
asserted that the contract had been ratified through fraud. But until 
DeCanio came forward, there were no specific allegations to buttress 
those suspicions. In the clerical local that DeCanio identified as 
the center of the fraud, the official tally showed 10,002 votes for 
ratification and 2,265 against. Overall, the council's official count 
was 19,513 votes for ratification and 14,438 against, but without 
the clerical workers' vote the contract would have been defeated by 
more than 2,500 votes. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>