<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981123.0280 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In 1946, two Chicago psychoanalysts, Drs. Franz Alexander and Thomas 
French, observed that while some of their patients required years 
of therapy, others got better after much briefer treatment, sometimes 
even ``as the result of a few consultations.'' The therapist's task, 
the analysts asserted in ``Psychoanalytic Therapy,'' should be to 
provide ``flexible'' and ``efficient'' treatment, ``adjusted to the 
individual nature of the great variety of neurotic patients.'' The 
idea that therapy could be brief was radical in an era when psychoanalysis 
was ascendant and long-term therapy the norm, and the Chicago analysts' 
work was sharply criticized. Fifty years and a health-care revolution 
later, short-term psychotherapy _ defined as therapy intended to last 
anywhere from one session to 15 or 20 sessions _ has become the rule. 
The vast majority of Americans receive mental health care under insurance 
plans that closely monitor the course of treatment, set limits on 
the length of therapy and require authorization for further visits 
at frequent intervals. People who spend years in psychotherapy pay 
almost all the costs themselves, and Woody Allen jokes are a relic 
from a time when ``managed care'' was still just a gleam in a cost-control 
expert's eye. As a measure of how much has changed, the bible of psychotherapy 
research, ``The Handbook of Psychotherapy and Behavior Change,'' will 
omit its customary chapter on brief therapy in its 2001 edition ``because 
almost all therapy is brief therapy now,'' said the book's editor, 
Dr. Michael Lambert. Yet the question of how much therapy is enough 
in different cases remains elusive, bedeviling a field that is struggling 
to justify every 50-minute hour spent by a therapist in the consulting 
room. There is a growing consensus that some patients need longer 
treatment _ and that they do not always receive it. But scientific 
knowledge lags far behind the fervor of policy makers. ``The type 
of outcome data that would enable us to use psychotherapy with the 
precision and certainty with which a physician operates to remove 
tonsils or gallstones simply does not exist,'' Dr. Carol Shaw Austad, 
a psychologist at Central Connecticut State University, wrote in ``Is 
Long-Term Psychotherapy Unethical?'' (Jossey-Bass, 1993). And the 
issue of treatment duration remains a volatile one, guaranteed to 
stir debate in any gathering of clinicians, managed-care representatives 
and employers who pay the bill for their employees' mental health 
coverage. In response to this dearth of knowledge, researchers around 
the country are beginning to examine psychotherapy in a much more 
systematic way than ever before. They are exploring, in carefully 
designed studies, what the appropriate ``dose'' of psychotherapy might 
be for different groups of patients, and tracking the progression 
_ rarely a linear one _ that patients make as they improve. Perhaps 
most important, investigators are moving outside the laboratory, trying 
to study effectiveness and length of treatment in real-world settings, 
a major focus of the National Institute of Mental Health's research 
program. And while most studies of therapy have been short-term, scientists 
are now trying to follow patients for longer periods. Meanwhile, in 
outpatient clinics and private offices, clinicians are developing 
their own innovations, finding new ways to provide continuing care 
by challenging traditional assumptions about the timing and frequency 
of sessions. The notion that therapy should be brief does not stem 
just from the desire to control costs and prevent the abuse of benefits. 
Insurers began placing limits on psychotherapy in the 1980's, when 
employers complained about surging mental health costs, and analyses 
indicated that a minority of insured employees were using a majority 
of psychotherapy services. But studies dating from the 1960's and 
1970's demonstrate that short-term treatments of many different schools 
are effective for a variety of emotional ills, particularly those 
that are clearly defined, like phobias and some other anxiety disorders, 
stress-related conditions, grief reactions, marital difficulties, 
sexual dysfunctions and some forms of depression. Indeed, Freud was 
the first brief therapist: He treated the composer Gustav Mahler for 
impotence while the two men took a few walks together, and he conducted 
a spontaneous single-session analysis of an 18-year-old woman on a 
mountain trail. In addition, national surveys have consistently shown 
that if attendance record is a true indicator, most Americans choose 
brief treatment, even when longer therapy is available. A 1987 survey, 
for example, found that of the 3 percent of the population that sought 
psychotherapy, about a third (33.9 percent) stopped going after the 
first or second visit. Another third (37 percent) dropped out after 
3 to 10 visits. Inspired by such statistics and building upon the 
work of brief-therapy pioneers of past decades, like James Mann, Peter 
Sifneos, Habib Davenloo, Bernard Bloom and others, therapists have 
developed an abundance of short-term techniques. These methods, some 
mainstream, some best described as ``alternative,'' share certain 
characteristics: They are goal oriented and clearly focused, they 
take advantage of the continuing benefits of therapy even after the 
sessions stop, and they play to a patient's strengths. In addition, 
most play down the influence of unconscious motivation. Managed care 
companies, for their part, routinely cite the effectiveness of brief 
treatments and the preferences of patients in justifying their focus 
on short-term therapy. Yet, as researchers are discovering, people 
recover from mental disorders at different rates, and their progress 
does not always conform to the time limits enforced by insurers, or 
the prepackaged therapies offered by some practitioners. Patients 
with more severe conditions, for example, get better more slowly. 
Some illnesses, like depression, are recurrent. And even patients 
who need only a few sessions of therapy now may in the future want 
and benefit from further treatment. Dr. Ellen Frank, a professor of 
psychiatry at the University of Pittsburgh's Western Psychiatric Institute, 
observed: ``There's been a kind of dogmatism about short-term treatments 
_ this is a 12-week treatment, or this is a 16-week treatment. For 
some patients, fewer sessions are adequate. But there are others who, 
if we're going to take things seriously, we may be talking about weekly 
therapy ad infinitum.'' Dr. Frank's own research on depression is 
a case in point. Two methods of brief therapy, cognitive behavioral 
therapy and interpersonal therapy, have been shown in large clinical 
trials to be effective _ both alone and in combination with antidepressant 
drugs _ in treating depressed patients. But people who suffer from 
one episode of depression are prone to relapse after months or years. 
Dr. Frank and her colleagues studied 138 depressed patients over a 
three-year period. All the patients in the study recovered from their 
initial episode of depression through a combination of drugs and interpersonal 
therapy. Patients who received no further treatment were more likely 
to relapse, while patients who received interpersonal therapy monthly 
or who continued taking medication were more likely to be protected 
against further illness. Even patients with much milder problems, 
clinicians are finding, may benefit from a longer-term relationship 
with a therapist, even if they come in for a session every few months, 
or for a few weeks every few years. Dr. Simon Budman, president of 
Innovative Training Systems and an assistant professor of psychiatry 
at Harvard Medical School, says he often sees patients over a period 
of years, but intermittently, dealing with different problems as they 
come up in the patient's life. In this model, much of the ``work'' 
done by the patient takes place outside of the consulting room, as 
the therapist adopts a role more like that played by the family doctor: 
a constant and reassuring figure who can inspire progress at critical 
times. ``The perspective that everybody can be treated in five sessions 
or less doesn't take into account the ways that people change,'' Dr. 
Budman said. ``There is a way to be humane and thoughtful and helpful 
to people, but at the same time consider the issue of cost, in terms 
of dollars, human suffering and people's time.'' Researchers have 
known for some time that the quality of the relationship between therapist 
and patient, the so-called working alliance, is one of the best indicators 
of therapy's success, but they are also beginning to discover other 
predictors of outcome. Patients who get better in therapy, for example, 
are usually those who show improvement within the first few sessions. 
And more severely disturbed patients are likely to have worse outcomes. 
More difficult is establishing exactly how much psychotherapy is required 
by different types of patients for them to get well. But a growing 
number of studies indicate that many patients take longer to recover 
than the length of time provided by the typical insurance plan. In 
a study of 45 patients seen at a university clinic, for example, Dr. 
Lambert, the editor of the psychotherapy handbook, and his colleagues 
at Brigham Young University found that after eight sessions of therapy, 
only 22 percent of patients had made a significant recovery; after 
16 sessions, 50 percent had become better, and it took 26 sessions 
for 75 percent of the patients to meet the criteria for a successful 
outcome. In a new study, as yet unpublished, Dr. Lambert has elaborated 
these findings, showing that of 75 outpatients, those who exhibited 
a ``higher level of distress'' took on average eight more sessions 
to reach recovery than patients with lower levels of distress. The 
results, Dr. Lambert says, suggest that to provide adequate treatment, 
insurance plans should cover at least 20 sessions of psychotherapy. 
``If I were an employer with a tightly limited plan, I'd feel like 
I was only serving half my employees, and it's the half who are least 
in need of help,'' Dr. Lambert said. ``I'm not serving the people 
with the toughest problems.'' In reviewing 30 years of studies involving 
more than 2,400 patients, Dr. Kenneth Howard, a psychologist at Northwestern 
University, was the first to establish this type of ``dose-response'' 
curve, giving scientists a means of charting therapy's action the 
way pharmacologists track the efficacy of drugs. Dr. Howard's numbers 
differ slightly from Dr. Lambert's: He found, for example, that after 
eight sessions, 50 percent of patients showed measurable improvement. 
But he also found that patients with diagnoses of conditions like 
depression or anxiety took 20 sessions to respond to therapy. And 
patients with more severe problems, like borderline personality disorder, 
often required a full year of therapy before they showed improvement. 
Some managed-care companies, aware that it is in their long-term interest 
to insure that patients get what they need, have become active participants 
in this type of outcome research. ``We've been selling the idea of 
quality, and the customers _ employers, the government, whoever _ 
are saying `Fine. Show us.''' said Dr. Jeb Brown, director of the 
Center for Clinical Informatics, a firm in Salt Lake City that is 
a consultant to the managed care industry. Other companies, plagued 
by debt and eager to curtail losses, evince little interest. Mental 
health experts predict that the ire of practitioners and the complaints 
of patients will, in the next few years, nudge the treatment pendulum, 
now lodged firmly in the ``less is more'' position, back into a more 
moderate zone. Whether that shift brings the field closer to the goal 
of matching treatment to patient depends on how much researchers are 
able to learn, and on the collective decision about what is worth 
paying for. ``We are a very cost-conscious society,'' said Dr. Hans 
Strupp, Distinguished Professor of Psychology emeritus at Vanderbilt 
University, ``and we are a society in a hurry. We can do certain things 
in a limited amount of time. But with others, we shouldn't fool ourselves.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>