<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981123.0275 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
AIDS virus infections worldwide have risen 10 percent over the past 
year, showing a disturbing lack of progress in prevention, the U.N. 
AIDS Program in Geneva said in a report issued Monday. The document, 
released as part of World AIDS Day on Dec. 1, also reported that the 
spread is largest among young people and more women are becoming infected. 
Overall, the number of people infected with HIV, the AIDS virus, rose 
by 5.8 million, to 33.4 million from 27.6 million. All but 5 percent 
of the infections occurred in Asia, Africa and Eastern Europe. Half 
of the new infections _ nearly 3 million _ were among those 15 to 
24, the age when most people become sexually active. Because it is 
also a time when they are at their peak productive and reproductive 
years, AIDS is causing economic devastation in many countries. The 
number of children orphaned by AIDS is also rising dramatically. ``This 
is gloomy news,'' said Dr. Peter Piot, the head of the U.N. AIDS Program. 
Women are reaching an unwelcome equality with men in HIV infections, 
the UNAIDS report said. Women now account for 43 percent of all HIV 
infected people over 15 years, a rise of 2 percent over the preceding 
year. ``There are no indications that this trend will reverse,'' Piot 
said. One in ten new infections among people under 15 years resulted 
from infection in utero, at birth, or through breastfeeding. HIV runs 
rampant in Africa, the report also noted. Namibia and Swaziland have 
been added to the list of countries where from 20 percent to 26 percent 
of people 15 to 39 are infected. They join Botswana and Zimbabwe as 
the countries with the highest infection rates. Despite the staggering 
rates, many people in those countries refuse to discuss AIDS or say 
someone died of it. ``The silence needs to be broken,'' Piot said. 
HIV trends in India, where 930 million people live, are also alarming. 
Only two years ago, HIV was thought to be concentrated in urban sex 
workers and their clients, Piot said in an interview. Now in five 
Indian states, more than 1 percent of pregnant women in urban areas 
are infected. Similarly, rural areas, where 73 percent of Indians 
live, were thought to be spared from HIV. Now in some areas, HIV has 
become common in villages and cities. A random survey of households 
in the Indian state of Tamil Nadu with 25 million people indicates 
that 500,000 are infected. Infection rates are 2.1 percent in rural 
areas compared with 0.7 percent in cities. The rates are expected 
to soar because 10 percent of the population had gonorrhea, syphilis 
and other sexually transmitted diseases, which increase the risk of 
HIV infection. Many women who have sex only with their husbands are 
at high risk of becoming infected. In one study, of 400 women attending 
a clinic for sexually transmitted diseases in the city of Pune, 93 
percent were married and 91 percent said they never had sex with anyone 
but their husbands. During 1998, the United States and western Europe 
recorded little progress in reducing the number of new HIV infections, 
and while the disease is not out of control in these areas, it has 
not been stopped, the United Nations said.``The epidemic has not been 
overcome anywhere,'' Piot said. World AIDS Day will focus on ways 
to harness the power of youth to prevent HIV infections. The United 
Nations report said that young people were more likely to practice 
abstinence or safer sex than adults if they had the information and 
skills to do so. In Senegal, 40 percent of women under 25 and 65 percent 
of men used condoms with non-regular partners in 1997, compared with 
less than 5 percent for both sexes at the start of the decade due 
largely to educational programs. In western Europe, 60 percent of 
young people now use condoms the first time they ever have sex, up 
from 10 percent since the early 1990s. Nevertheless, in the United 
States 3 million adolescents a year contract a sexually transmitted 
disease, a clear indicator of unsafe sex that also increases the risk 
of transmitting HIV. Since 1981, when AIDS was first recognized, 47 
million people have become infected and 14 million have died. Of these, 
2.5 million will have occurred in 1998. AIDS now kills more people 
worldwide than any other infection, ahead of malaria, which caused 
1 million deaths. Tuberculosis is third. Because tuberculosis is common 
among HIV infected people, and accounts for 30 percent of all AIDS 
deaths, stronger programs are needed to combat tuberculosis and AIDS, 
the United Nations said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>