<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981123.0412 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Glee shoved gloom aside Monday in the nation's stock markets as the 
main gauges surpassed their summer peaks and reached new highs. Investors 
who had clung to stocks by their fingernails through the dark days 
of early fall now have outsized gains for the year, even by standards 
set in this bull market's last few years. The Dow Jones industrial 
average is up 18.54 percent for the year, while the Standard &AMP; 
Poor's 500-stock index has risen 22.44 percent. The technology-heavy 
Nasdaq has beaten them all, up 25.92 percent for the year. Still, 
the recent rally has not lifted all boats. Small stocks, while back 
from the depths, are still underperforming their larger brethren. 
The Russell 2000 index of smaller-company issues closed at 398.15, 
up 28 percent from its low in October. But it is still 14 percent 
below its July peak. Monday, the Dow rose 214.72 points, or 2.34 percent, 
to 9,374.27. The Nasdaq index jumped 2.55 percent, to 1,977.42, up 
49.21 points. The S&AMP;P 500 rose 2.12 percent, or 24.66 points, 
to 1,188.21, a record. This performance represents nothing short of 
a screeching U-turn in investor sentiment. Euphoria is back with a 
vengeance in stocks, but confidence has also returned to the junk 
bond arena, fueling a recovery in those securities from a moribund 
state two months ago. ``We've gone through a classic market cycle 
in a matter of weeks instead of the months or even years that it used 
to take,'' said John Manley, equity strategist at Salomon Smith Barney. 
``We've witnessed the world's first virtual recession, followed by 
the world's first virtual recovery, and now we're seeing the world's 
first virtual expansion.'' Although concerns remain, such as a continuing 
deterioration in corporate earnings, an Asia mired in overcapacity, 
uncertainty about Japan's recovery plan and Latin America on the edge, 
Manley said investors were focusing on something rosy farther down 
the road. Optimism has also checked into corporate board rooms, as 
evidenced by Monday's spate of merger announcements. Nine deals were 
announced, intended or rumored Monday for a total of $40.4 billion, 
reflecting a belief among many chief executives that a recession is 
unlikely next year. Merger experts also found it bullish that the 
companies doing the deals spanned a range of industries. That most 
of the deals were done using stock as the acquisition currency indicates 
how crucial the recent rally has been to deal-makers. Since the stock 
market's performance is inextricably linked to consumer confidence, 
its recent run should bolster consumer confidence figures, which will 
be released Tuesday. These numbers had been falling in recent months 
along with stocks. The stock market's impressive rally is vindication 
for Abby Joseph Cohen, the market strategist at Goldman, Sachs &AMP; 
Co., who stayed positive on stocks throughout the downturn. Ms. Cohen 
never bought the doomsayers' view, what she called FUDD _ for fear, 
uncertainty, doubt and despair. Instead, she held fast to her view 
that turmoil in world markets was unlikely to cause a recession in 
the United States. Ms. Cohen looked particularly prescient Monday: 
Her prediction on the Dow Jones industrial average for the end of 
the year was about 9,300. But while investors who own index funds 
are jumping for joy, many others are probably feeling left behind. 
That is because the surge that shows up in the market indexes is, 
once again, not showing up across the board. While shares of big-name 
companies like IBM, Merck and Home Depot are at their all-time highs, 
many stocks are still well off their peaks. Indeed, the broad market 
is only beginning to claw its way back. According to Salomon Smith 
Barney, when the market bottomed out on Oct. 8, the average Nasdaq 
stock was down 54.1 percent and the average S&AMP;P 500 stock had 
declined 32.1 percent from their 52-week highs. As of Nov. 20, the 
most recent data available, the average Nasdaq stock was down 40.1 
percent and the average S&AMP;P 500 stock was down 19.2 percent. Similarly, 
while the revival of mergers and acquisitions is an indicator of optimism, 
the activity is still far below the levels reached earlier this year. 
Monday's $40.4 billion in announced deals brings the pace this month 
to roughly $70 billion. That is up from the low of $51 billion in 
September, according to Securities Data Corp., but nowhere near the 
spring's levels of $210 billion a month. Initial public offerings 
are showing life, too. But a couple of spectacular one-day gainers 
hide the fact that many recent offerings are still hurting. So far 
in 1998, the average initial offering has inched up only one-tenth 
of a percent. But separating technology offerings from nontechnology 
offerings exposes a chasm in performance. According to Securities 
Data, the average technology offering is up 15.2 percent this year, 
while the average nontechnology offering is down 8 percent. As for 
the volume of deals, investment bankers have raised $9.4 billion in 
29 initial offerings since Sept. 1, but three deals _ Conoco, Fox 
Entertainment and Swisscom _ account for 80 percent of the money raised. 
But Monday's move clearly gave investors something to be thankful 
for this week. Analysts pointed to several factors driving stock prices. 
The single biggest driver is the rapid rise in the nation's money 
supply. The figure for M-2 _ the broadest money supply measure that 
includes checking accounts, savings accounts, money market funds and 
other assets _ has grown at an annual rate of 9.3 percent in the last 
three months. This is the biggest rise since 1987, and much of this 
money is flooding into stocks. Another factor propelling equity prices 
is the large number of investors who are buying back shares to cover 
open short positions they had taken on in recent months. A short position 
is created when an investor borrows shares and then sells them. If 
the share price falls, the investor can profit by buying shares at 
a lower price to replace the borrowed ones. Conversely, if the shares 
rise in price, the short-seller faces a loss. Uncovered short sales, 
or those with open positions, are those shares that have been borrowed 
and sold but not yet covered by repurchase. Those investors who thought 
share prices were headed for a fall are now scrambling to cut their 
losses caused by the big move up. As Christine Callies, investment 
strategist at Credit Suisse First Boston, points out, short positions 
at the New York Stock Exchange dropped 5.4 percent for the month ended 
Nov. 13. That is the largest decline in more than a year and indicates 
that pessimistic investors are having second thoughts. It has not 
hurt, of course, that the Federal Reserve has cut interest rates three 
times since late September. The benchmark 30-year Treasury bond is 
yielding 5.25 percent, an unappealing rate for investors accustomed 
to double-digit gains. It seems that more and more investors feel 
there is nowhere else to put their money except in stocks or higher-yielding 
junk bonds. Some investors also say there are more interest rate cuts 
to come. Jason Trennert, vice president at International Strategy 
and Investment in New York, says that continuing weakness in gold 
and commodity prices is predicting further easing by the Fed. ``Most 
likely monetary policy around the world is too tight,'' he said. ``We're 
of the opinion that the Fed left the door open for more easings.'' 
Lower interest rates are a tonic for both stocks and bonds. As a result, 
few strategists are willing to say this market's run is over. ``Fear 
and greed are both contagious,'' Manley said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>