<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981123.0331 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
I am nominally Scottish. I also, nominally, like to fish. This should 
make me a perfect candidate for trout fishing in the mountains of 
eastern Zimbabwe, which are called the Scottish Highlands of Africa. 
But let's examine these claims. I have tramped the real Highlands, 
even stomping up Glen Coe, where the Campbells slaughtered the MacDonalds 
in 1692. It was cold and wet, my boots leaked, and I liked it. My 
ancestors, on the other hand, are from a wee island called Barra. 
They were pirates by trade. I thought they were the benign sort that 
scoured shipwrecks like the ones in that old Hayley Mills movie ``The 
Moonspinners,'' but a Scottish friend set me straight. No, the McNeils 
attacked ships and performed rapine and pillage along the Irish coast. 
They _ we _ finally got out of the game in 1600, when a bounty hunter 
enticed the chief, Roderic the Turbulent, aboard his boat by promising 
him a taste of plundered sherry, got him drunk, locked him below decks 
and sailed him to Edinburgh to stand trial. My father visited Barra 
once, in the 1960s. The airport was the beach at low tide, nearly 
everyone was named Donald McNeil, and several seemed a tad under the 
genetic weather from generations of island intermarriages, he said. 
So much for that. Now _ am I a fisherman? Well, as 12-year-old Californians, 
a friend and I used to slip off with his dad's surf-casting gear after 
sand sharks in the Bolinas Lagoon. He hooked them; I waded out barefoot 
to clock them with a softball bat so we could land them. Huck Finn 
I'm not. I did once go fly-fishing in real Orvis style as the guest 
of an older cousin on the lovely trout stream of a Connecticut fishing 
club. I caught nothing, but I thoroughly enjoyed decorating the low-hanging 
tree branches with my cousin's magnificently colored flies and swearing 
as those crystal-clear waters poured into the top of my waders. So, 
sort of a Scot, sort of a fisherman. Now, as to Zimbabwe: Its highlands 
are the Nyanga Mountains, ``nyanga'' (pronounced nee-YAHN-guh, but 
running the first two syllables together), meaning a witch doctor, 
or his horn trumpet. They are so beautiful that Cecil Rhodes, the 
diamond magnate turned empire builder (Rhodesia became Zimbabwe in 
1980) fell in love with them and, naturally, bought them. His former 
homestead is now Nyanga National Park, where the weather is usually 
20 degrees cooler than in the capital, Harare. I asked an acquaintance, 
Robert Marsden, if he would like to go. I had thought Robert was Scottish, 
since I saw him get married in a kilt _ usually a dead giveaway. It 
turns out he did it to please his bride, Mandy McGilp. It is through 
Mandy that I had learned just how serious an angler he is. They took 
their honeymoon in a fleabag hotel on an island off Mozambique, and 
when Mandy went to write ``Honeymoon!'' on their family calendar, 
she discovered that Robert had written ``Fishing!'' We were not heading 
out at the most felicitous moment. Early November is the end of the 
hot, dry season, and I didn't know if there would be water left in 
the streams, nor how warm it would be _ trout begin to die at 73 degrees, 
Robert told me. Our timing was inauspicious in other ways. The Zimbabwe 
dollar has fallen from 11 cents to less than 3 cents against the United 
States dollar in two years. Most blame President Robert Mugabe, who 
was a liberation hero when elected in 1980, but has let his government 
deteriorate. On the Friday morning we were to leave, the tabloid headline 
on my Johannesburg doorstep screamed ``Troops in Zim on Full Alert'' 
above a picture of a burned-out bus. Harare, where we were to fly 
in, had had protests over the doubling of bus fares. I started to 
cancel everything, but then called a friend who edits a newspaper 
there. ``That riot was Wednesday,'' he said. ``Early Wednesday. It's 
been perfectly quiet since then.'' Reasonably reassured, we went ahead. 
In fact, Harare was calm _ and 95 degrees _ when we started our three-hour 
drive to the Nyangas. The scenery started out flat, punctuated by 
the fascinating balancing rocks for which the country is so well known 
that they appear on its currency. We stopped at Halfway House, a thatch-roofed 
compound built in the middle of nowhere in 1891. There, one can enjoy 
a banana split or fresh raspberries on the lawn. Or pet the zebras 
and elands eating cabbage in a tiny zoo. Or browse the antiques shop, 
which sells the cast-off touches of the English style that once ruled 
the country: silver tea services and mahogany camp tables. For $20, 
I bought a thankfully rare 1966 book, ``White Africans Are Also People,'' 
a tome by conservatives arguing that ``independence given to people 
not yet ready for self-government has resulted in chaos.'' The saleswoman, 
who was black, smirked slightly at me. There is generally less racial 
tension in Zimbabwe than in South Africa. It's only about 1 percent 
white, and one often meets black Zimbabweans in hotels, restaurants 
and private clubs, which is not the case in South Africa, where local 
blacks are often priced out. At the same time, those 100,000 whites 
dominate Zimbabwe's economy, and South Africans make fun of the way 
many of them openly pine for the old days. They're nicknamed Whenwes, 
as in ``When we ran Rhodesia. ...'' After Halfway House, the road 
slowly climbed into an African version of the Highlands _ craggy peaks 
dotted with umbrella thorn trees. We stopped to take pictures and 
accidentally flushed a tiny duiker antelope from cover. We were later 
to see baboons, gnus and a scrofulous-looking luncheon party of vultures 
shouldering each other aside for the best bits of a cow that had been 
hit by a car. You don't see that in Scotland much. Africa is generally 
a continent without kitsch, but we saw tiny indications that the locals 
were playing along with this Highlands fling _ there was an estate 
named Bonny Doon, of course, and one sign advertising trout fishing 
``in our loch.'' Our destination was what my Lonely Planet guidebook 
had called ``the lovely Troutbeck Inn.'' It was built in 1950 by a 
Maj. Robert McIlwaine, who missed the hills of his native Ireland 
(OK, close) and did his best to imitate them, building dams to create 
five lakes and planting forests of pines. His long, low hotel was 
built into a grass-covered hillside above two lakes. We got in at 
dusk. The front hall's log fire beneath a portrait of the late major 
with his fly rod has been burning continuously since 1950, no matter 
what the weather or state of the liberation wars. ``If it goes out,'' 
the receptionist said, ``someone gets fired.'' We made our way past 
a cozy bar decorated with framed flies, then down green-and-white 
halls hung with fox-hunting prints and stuffed trout _ the biggest 
a 6-pound-8-ounce rainbow. Our comfortable rooms had big double beds, 
big satellite televisions and big glass doors opening onto the lawn-bowling 
green and the lake. Each veranda had two chairs and a boot-scraper 
for clearing the mud from one's insteps. Under a sky speckled with 
shooting stars and faint satellites, we walked to the lake, which 
Robert pronounced perfect. It was punctuated with thin wood jetties 
that, he explained, gave one the height to cast far out and keep the 
backcast from tangling in the reeds. A few small, worn rowboats lined 
the bank. We went in to dinner. The fixed-price menu had a vegetarian 
choice and two meat dishes. I thought the hotel could use a new chef 
less devoted to old-fashioned British bland, but he may know his audience. 
My roast beef, for example, came with a nice miniature Yorkshire pudding, 
but was cooked nearly gray and the horseradish sauce didn't bite. 
(Looking back, this was to prove an omen.) The service was gracious 
and well-meaning, but confused. The headwaiter kept taking us to an 
oddly shaped rear table, the only one set for three, until we asked 
if he could let us take one for four near the window, since the room 
was empty. He panicked briefly, then had five waiters reset a used 
table instead of just shifting one of the Reserved signs. When we 
asked for South African wine _ I only drink Zimbabwean Mukuyu Red 
in emergencies _ there was another fire drill. That page had been 
removed from the wine list because the currency had fallen so fast 
that imports were outrageously cheap. But after three requests, a 
waiter went to the bar and brought back a tray of bottles, which sent 
the guests who had by now filled the room into a flurry of waving 
him over. The poor guy had no idea what the prices were, but it hardly 
mattered. Excellent South African wines rarely cost more than $15. 
The next morning, we hit the jetties at 5. It was already light, and 
we resolved to start at 4:30 the next day. But most of the other guests 
were there for a golf tournament (another touch of Scotland), so we 
were alone, and it was gorgeous. In dawn's glow, a few fish mouths 
and a lot of frog mouths dappled the otherwise flat surface, and the 
only sounds were those of dabchicks and redknobbed coots. The coot 
defies description; its knobs and white face make it look like a bug-eyed 
grasshopper in a baseball cap. The dabchick, Africa's smallest waterfowl, 
looks like a fairy godmother experiment gone wrong: a mouse changed 
into a duck. It flashes across the water squeaking like a panicked 
rodent, while the coot's call sounds like a baby sneezing into a harmonica. 
At moments, it got riotous. Our competitors were a martial eagle on 
a tree stump and a gray heron in the reeds, but they didn't have any 
more luck than we did. The hotel's fish warden, Shamiso Musenguri, 
saw me struggling to cast, put down his clipboard and showed me how 
to float out line and then flick it overhand. Robert later said it 
was a roll cast. ``It's easy, but it messes up the water,'' he said. 
The ideal is to keep your fly airborne while paying out 40 feet of 
line, and then lay it on the water as gently as a butterfly alighting 
on a rose. Some of my early attempts were more like Refrigerator Perry 
alighting on a swimming pool. I did get one strike, and saw it jump 
_ a rainbow that I guessed to be about 40 pounds of fighting demon. 
Robert said it was probably just shy of two pounds. In any case, it 
got away, so we'll never know who was right. Robert is the kind of 
serious fisherman who guts his first catch immediately to see what 
it likes to eat, and then checks his flybox to see if he has anything 
resembling it. With the day free, we drove to World View, which offered 
stunning mountain vistas and a Scottish-style stone viewing tower. 
The nearby Nyanga Park used to be Rhodes Inyanga Park. There is a 
populist move afoot to dig up the Colossus' grave in the Matopo Hills 
and throw his bones into a river. But Mugabe has said it will not 
be disturbed because ``Rhodes still pays his taxes'' _ that is, the 
site is a tourist attraction that draws in hard currency. We fished 
again that evening, competing for good spots with tired golfers. Not 
a nibble, and a misty cold front blew up the valley. At 4:30 the next 
morning, we felt like fools for rising earlier. ``Real Scottish weather,'' 
Robert said cheerfully as we shivered, a cold drizzle running down 
our necks and the wind blowing our lines into the bushes so that I 
spent three minutes untangling for every one spent casting. That day 
we explored the national park, visiting lakes and 500-year-old hilltop 
stone forts. Foolishly, we had left the rods behind, because in one 
clear stream, we found some pools with trout so eager that they mouthed 
tiny pebbles we threw in. A fishing license in the park costs only 
$1.25, and a comfortable chalet that sleeps five rents for $11 a night. 
We also toured the Mare Dam Trout Research Center, where the government 
breeds fish, including strange blue and gold albinos. That afternoon, 
done in by two days of 4 a.m. wake-up calls, I fell asleep. By the 
time I got to the water, Robert was standing on a small sandbar looking 
pleased with himself. ``You missed all the action,'' he said. He had 
two nice rainbows. I kept trying, but no luck. As dark fell, I walked 
along the dam wall. Just below was a small hatchery where one could 
hook fish practically out of a bathtub for $1.40 each. I was tempted, 
but I have my pride. After all, this is supposed to be a Zen art, 
one whose aim is perfection, not dinner. After another dinner _ at 
which I learned I like store-bought trout better because it tastes 
less like lake bottom _ we resolved to sleep in if the weather stayed 
Caledonian. It did, so we lagged until 6:30. Almost immediately, Robert 
caught another, even bigger trout. I congratulated him through clenched 
teeth. He let it go, graciously saying it was about the same size 
as the one that got away from me. --- Driving is the easiest way to 
reach the Nyangas. Avis and Budget have outlets at the Harare airport 
and downtown. Zimbabwe's roads are good but there are lots of speed 
traps and lots of loose cows. If you hit either, be ready to pay on 
the spot. The Troutbeck Inn, Private Bag 2000, Nyanga, Zimbabwe, has 
70 rooms, all facing the lake. Besides fishing, it offers golf, tennis, 
sailing, mountain biking, swimming, horseback riding, lawn bowling 
and volleyball. Rods can be rented for about $1.50 a day (at the rate 
of 37 Zimbabwe dollars to the United States dollar). Room rates, which 
include breakfast, are $63 a person in doubles, $101 for singles. 
Phone (263) 298-305 or (263) 298-880, fax (263) 298-474. It may be 
easier to make reservations through the Zimbawe Sun hotels office 
in Johannesburg, (27-11) 886-2130, fax (27-11) 886-3432. Rainbow Nyanga 
Lodge, Private Bag 2056, Nyanga, Zimbabwe, Cecil Rhodes' old summer 
house inside Nyanga National Park (some signs still call it the Rhodes 
Nyanga Hotel), is set in a pretty, flower-filled garden and near the 
park's trout-stocked lakes. Modest compared to his estates in South 
Africa, the 24-room hotel has a museum of local history and some of 
his furniture in the former stables, including his very narrow, bed. 
Rooms cost $84, with breakfast, single or double. Two suites are $110 
a night. Park activities include fishing and walks (the park has various 
antelope species, but no big predators, elephants or crocodiles). 
The park is full of fascinating ruins of the now-vanished Nyana people 
_ circular stone forts atop hills, deep stone-lined pits that date 
from the 1500s. Golf or horse riding can be arranged. The hotel's 
phone number is (263) 298-376, fax (263) 268-477, but reservations 
should be made through Rainbow Tourism in Harare, (263-4) 733-775 
through -779. Nyanga National Park Chalets are comfortable, basic 
lodgings with electricity and hot water, wood stoves and barbecue 
pits. They are next to several very pretty lakes in the park and fishing 
is encouraged. A chalet sleeping three rents for $6 a night, one that 
sleeps six $11. There is no restaurant, so you need to bring your 
own food or go to the Rainbow Lodge to eat. Reservations: (263) 298-274, 
fax (263) 298-778. Park admission is $2.70. Fishing licenses are $1.10 
or $1.60 a day (four or five fish limit depending on the lake). Rods 
can be rented for $1.35 a day. Fishing is legal year-round, but some 
lakes close periodically. The best months are June to August, and 
October to early November. Late November and December can be very 
rainy. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>