<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981123.0346 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The European Union voted Monday to lift its 32-month-old worldwide 
ban on Britain's beef exports, saying that the country had finally 
put sufficient measures in place to halt the spread of ``mad cow disease.'' 
Prime Minister Tony Blair hailed the decision as ``genuinely good 
news for farmers and British agriculture,'' although the first resumed 
exports are not expected to leave Britain's shores until March because 
of final safety inspections and other required steps. And it will 
be years, if ever, before the British cattlemen reclaim their lost 
markets. Jeremy Davies, a founder of the Great Beef Campaign, a group 
formed to lobby specifically to lift the ban and that numbers Blair 
among its signatories, said Monday's action in Brussels nevertheless 
would be ``a great psychological boost for farmers.'' ``It will signal 
things are beginning to turn for them,'' he said. The ban was imposed 
in March, 1996, after evidence emerged of a possible link between 
mad cow disease, known formally as bovine spongiform encephalopathy, 
and the fatal degenerative Creutzfeldt-Jakob brain disease that affects 
humans. The plan the European Union farm ministers approved Monday 
will end export restrictions on deboned beef from cattle ages 6 to 
30 months. The animals would have to have been born after August, 
1996, when a potentially contaminated cattle feed from animal remains, 
the suspected cause of the outbreak of the disease, was removed from 
farms and feed mills. Thirty people have died of the disease, farm 
and livestock businesses have gone bankrupt and political reputations 
have suffered in the dispute over the European ban on British beef, 
which led to increasing antagonism between Britain and its European 
allies. In 1996, the prime minister, John Major, briefly insisted 
on a policy of noncooperation with Europe over its failure to remove 
the ban. And his agriculture minister, Douglas Hogg, refused the summons 
of the European Parliament in Strasbourg to discuss the issue. In 
Britain, the problem deepened the Major government's reputation for 
drift while in Europe it played on longtime continental resentment 
of Britain as aloof and arrogant. It seemed an improbable symbol of 
Britain's weakness in an emboldened Europe since red meat is such 
a symbol of nationhood that the British were once lampooned in France 
as ``les rosbifs.'' Monday only Germany refused to back an end of 
the ban, with Austria, France, Luxembourg and Spain abstaining. Nine 
countries joined Britain in approving the move. Over the nearly three 
years of the crisis, the worse in European agriculture since the creation 
of the union, more than 2.6 million head of cattle were slaughtered 
in Britain in an effort to overcome consumer fears about mad cow disease, 
and new rigorous hygiene procedures were installed, particularly in 
slaughterhouses. Methods of keeping track of meat from the birth of 
calves until their slaughter _ in effect providing each animal a passport 
_ have been put in place. European Union veterinary chiefs gave the 
system their approval earlier this month. That led Frans Fischler, 
Europe's agriculture commissioner, whose agency imposed the original 
ban, to say before Monday's meeting, ``We have the backing from scientists.'' 
Britain's agriculture minister, Nick Brown, said, ``We have done what 
we were asked to do and can justify Britain's position on the basis 
of science and technical implementation.'' Brown said Britain had 
agreed to one further cull _ the slaughter of 4,000 offspring born 
after Aug. 1, 1996, to mothers infected with the virulent disease. 
The final step, considered a formality after Monday's vote, is for 
a team of European Union inspectors to come to Britain to certify 
that all the safety standards are in place. Brown said he hoped that 
would take place within two months. The cost to the British taxpayers 
to shore up failing businesses and recompense farmers and slaughterhouses 
is expected to reach $6 billion by the year 2000. The latest figures 
show that the incidence of mad cow disease now stands at 1,799 cases 
in the United Kingdom so far this year compared with a peak of 36,682 
cases in all of 1993. The volume of beef consumption at home has returned 
to levels existing before 1996. The difficulty of regaining consumer 
confidence and recapturing lost markets is evident from the experience 
of Northern Ireland, which succeeded in having the ban on its exports 
removed in June. Meat companies there report sluggish activity, with 
exports reaching only one sixth of their pre-ban levels. Northern 
Ireland was entitled to an early easing of European restrictions because, 
as a security measure against cross border raids and poaching, the 
province put into effect years ago a computer-based tracking system 
for its herds that is now being installed throughout Britain to meet 
the European demands. Once the ban is formally lifted, Britain's Meat 
and Livestock Commission will send tens of thousands of promotional 
leaflets in major European languages to importers, caterers and other 
customers to try to persuade them to restock their shelves with British 
beef. Phil Saunders, the government-based group's spokesman, said 
the mission would be to ``bring everyone back up to date with the 
news on British beef.'' A National Farmers Union spokesman said, ``After 
almost three years we are well aware that people have had to find 
their supplies of beef from elsewhere. The job ahead is to get them 
to start buying British beef again.'' At 10 Downing Street, Blair 
said, ``It is a piece of genuinely good news for farmers and British 
agriculture, which has suffered hugely as a result of BSE. ``Getting 
beef sales back to where they were will take time and further effort, 
and the government will now work to insure that we can implement the 
scheme as quickly as possible and rebuild confidence in British beef.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>