<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981123.0410 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The name Max Mara doesn't resonate with American women the way Giorgio 
Armani's does, but the Max Mara company outsells Armani around the 
world. At last count, it was $906 million to $846 million annually. 
Why? Because the clothes offer timely fashion in luxury fabrics at 
less than astronomical prices. Still less known is Marina Rinaldi, 
Max Mara's plus-size division, but by bringing youthful styling to 
a category that was once dowdy and matronly, it has gone far to change 
the way women who wear large sizes dress. Max Mara offers Italian-made 
clothing in silk, cashmere, alpaca, leather and other fine fabrics, 
the same caliber of materials found in designer clothing but at lower 
prices. If a woman wants a cashmere blazer, say, she can find one 
with a Max Mara label for less than $1,000, as opposed to at least 
$2,000 for one with a designer name attached to it. While the company 
is known for its classics, it also hops on trends like the leather 
skirts and jackets and the mirror appliques in its spring 1999 collection. 
Marina Rinaldi also uses cashmere, silk and leather, generally in 
sophisticated colors like gray, camel and black, in clothes with simple 
slenderizing lines. Some of its new customers remember when large-size 
clothing meant pastel polyester pants suits and tentlike dresses with 
flounces. Marina Rinaldi was in the vanguard of companies that brought 
fashion to the category. ``Max Mara is not cutting edge, but classic 
fashionable clothing in beautiful fabrics,'' said Lynne Ronan, a senior 
vice president and general merchandise manager of Saks Fifth Avenue, 
which has an in-store Max Mara boutique and sells the Marina Rinaldi 
collection in its plus-size department, Salon Z. Marina Rinaldi's 
prices range from $250 for a skirt to $5,000 for a mink-trimmed coat. 
Sizes are 10 to 22. ``The plus-size customer wants to look exactly 
like everybody else,'' Ms. Ronan said. ``We work with a lot of manufacturers 
to put more fashion into the clothes. Marina Rinaldi is an important 
resource for us. It's a high-quality product, beautifully made, and 
it has the right fit.'' For many years, fit was a prime concern in 
the plus-size category, one that the Max Mara company recognized early 
on. ``We started making large sizes in 1979,'' Luigi Maramotti, the 
co-managing director of Max Mara, said on a recent trip to New York. 
``What we did was what everybody else was doing: stretch from regular 
sizes. But that is totally wrong.'' Sizing patterns upward in the 
usual way results in overly broad shoulders and long sleeves, low 
waistlines and baggy crotches in pants. But women who wear size 16 
or 18 aren't necessarily taller than a size 8. Mode, the magazine 
for plus-size women, estimates that 62 percent of American women wear 
size 12 or larger. (Not all those women can afford Marina Rinaldi 
or comparable prices and still have a hard time finding fashionable 
clothes.) So Max Mara set up an independent company devoted to perfecting 
pattern-making and called it Marina Rinaldi, after Maramotti's great-great-grandmother, 
who owned a dress shop. There are now 170 Marina Rinaldi company-owned 
boutiques in Europe, Asia and the Middle East, as well as in-store 
boutiques in Bloomingdale's, Saks and Bergdorf Goodman. The label 
represents about 20 percent of Max Mara's business. Max Mara has ambitious 
plans to make both the Max Mara and Marina Rinaldi lines important 
players in the United States, as they already are in many countries 
around the world with 700 company-owned stores. The big push started 
in 1994, with the opening of a Max Mara boutique on 68th Street and 
Madison Avenue. That was followed by 14 more stores around the country, 
by the doubling in size this fall of the Manhattan store, the opening 
of a Marina Rinaldi store on Madison Avenue last month and the arrival 
this month of Max Mara and Marina Rinaldi boutiques on Rodeo Drive 
in Beverly Hills. A party in Los Angeles on Dec. 3 will celebrate 
the opening of the two boutiques. A dinner will follow a private screening 
of a restored version of the 1948 film ``Joan of Arc'' starring Ingrid 
Bergman. The co-chairwomen of the event are Jodie Foster, Isabella 
Rossellini and Winona Ryder. Richard Avedon photographed the current 
Max Mara advertising campaign, which features the model Maggie Rizer 
with a Joan of Arc hairdo. Marina Rinaldi's ads, with the slogan ``Style 
is not a size . . . it's an attitude,'' has a whimsical quality, with 
a healthy-looking model making gravity-defying leaps. The ads run 
in fashion magazines and on billboards and bus shelters. All this 
is in aid of a company that has never set the fashion world on fire 
yet managed to attract customers like Ms. Rossellini, Minnie Driver 
and C.Z. Guest. Marina Rinaldi is the first plus-size line to be carried 
by Bergdorf's, said Joseph Boitano, the store's executive vice president 
and general merchandise manager. ``We'd always done some large sizes, 
but mostly on a special-order basis,'' he said. ``We knew we had a 
customer who wore large sizes and could buy other things here, but 
not ready-to-wear. So we went into the market knowing that anything 
we bought had to be on a par with the quality of the rest of the store. 
Marina Rinaldi is at that level.'' For spring, Bergdorf's will add 
the new Rebecca Moses large-size line as a complement to Marina Rinaldi, 
he said. The Marina Rinaldi stores at 800 Madison Ave. (between 67th 
and 68th Streets) and at 319 Rodeo Drive in Beverly Hills are the 
first in this country, and will be watched closely by the parent company, 
Maramotti said, to determine whether more will follow. The line has 
already found fans in Rosie O'Donnell, Roseanne Barr (who dropped 
$10,000 in one visit to Madison Avenue), Star Jones and Camryn Manheim. 
Max Mara, which started in Italy in 1951 as one of the first fashion 
houses to offer ready-made clothes to Italian women, was founded by 
Maramotti's father, Achille. It is still family-owned, with Luigi's 
brother, Ignazio, sharing the title of managing director and their 
sister, Ludovica, chairwoman of one of the family's six manufacturing 
firms. All the clothing is made in company-owned factories, three 
of which are in Reggio Emilia, where the company is based. Max Mara 
is now the largest ready-to-wear company in Italy, producing 20 collections. 
Among them are Sportmax, younger and more fashion-forward than Max 
Mara; Weekend, which is casual, and Pianoforte, the evening-wear division. 
Prices range from $450 to $650 for jackets, $800 to $2,000 for coats. 
Unlike other old-line houses looking to glamorize their images and 
increase sales by hiring high-profile designers, Max Mara depends 
on an anonymous design team headed by Laura Lusuardi. Maramotti says 
his company is more interested in quality than fashion, yet Max Mara 
regularly presents its namesake collection and Sportmax on the runways 
in Milan during the semiannual show seasons. The lines are reviewed 
as seriously as those of Armani, Versace and Gucci, though not with 
the same superlatives. Yet the company's sales in this country have 
increased 500 percent since 1994, and with more boutiques set to open, 
the Maramottis' hopes are high that the company's profile will also 
keep growing. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>