<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981123.0230 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A team of physicists has found evidence that a new kind of atomic 
jigsaw puzzle, in which identical puzzle pieces are allowed to overlap 
each other to form complex structures, may explain why a peculiar 
class of compounds exists in defiance of long established geometric 
rules. Their demonstration, reported this month in the journal Nature, 
strengthens a theory about how atoms arrange themselves in an enigmatic 
type of substances called ``quasicrystals,'' discovered in 1982. Then, 
many scientists were skeptical that quasicrystals could exist, and 
even today, although the skeptics have been refuted, some uncertainties 
remain about the mathematics underlying quasicrystals. But a new theoretical 
framework for quasicrystals promises to simplify matters. Most solid 
matter can be roughly classified as either ``glassy,'' in which atoms 
are jumbled together without any order, or crystalline, in which atoms 
arrayed in lattices form regularly repeating patterns. A typical crystal 
is the cubic lattice of table salt, in which atoms of sodium and chlorine 
alternate with each other in a kind of three-dimensional chess board. 
For the past 150 years, rules based on well-known geometric relationships 
have sufficed to explain the forms and behavior of crystals. One such 
rule has to do with symmetries of rotation. For example, if a crystal 
is rotated in an X-ray beam and the X-rays scattered by its atomic 
structure create exactly the same pattern with each half turn of the 
crystal, the crystal is said to exhibit ``two-fold symmetry.'' A repetition 
of the pattern every third of a turn implies that the crystal has 
``three-fold symmetry,'' and so on. But one of the symmetries forbidden 
by classical crystalography is five-fold symmetry. The reason is related 
to the fact that regular pentagons _ ``tiles'' with five equilateral 
sides _ cannot be fitted together to neatly cover a table top without 
leaving gaps. The same objection applies to the three-dimensional 
analogue of the pentagon: the regular icosahedron, a geometric object 
with 20 identical faces, each one an equilateral triangle. Icosahedrons 
cannot be packed together to fill a solid space leaving no gaps. Despite 
the old rule forbidding five-fold symmetry, Dr. Daniel S. Schechtman, 
an Israeli electron microscopist working in the United States at the 
National Bureau of Standards (now the National Institute of Standards 
and Technology), discovered the impossible; he found clear evidence 
of five-fold symmetry in a substance that was neither as disordered 
as a glass nor as neatly periodic in structure as a crystal. At the 
time in 1982, he and other scientists at the standards bureau were 
experimenting for the Defense Department with alloys of aluminum, 
manganese and other metals, hoping to develop a vary hard aluminum 
alloy. Schechtman's discovery seemed so unlikely that it took him 
and his colleagues nearly three years to verify their findings to 
a point at which they felt confident enough to announce them. Since 
then, more than 100 quasicrystals have been made and identified in 
laboratories, mostly alloys of aluminum. They have not proved to be 
especially useful, but they continue to inspire the same fascination 
of mathematicians and crystalographers that Rubik's Cube induced in 
puzzle fans after its invention in 1975. About the time of Schechtman's 
discovery, two mathematical physicists at the University of Pennsylvania, 
Dr. Paul J. Steinhardt and Dr. Dov Levine, hit upon a possible structure 
for a substance in which atoms are arranged in non-periodic patterns. 
Their system borrowed from a mathematical game that had been invented 
by Dr. Roger Penrose, an Oxford University physicist and cosmologist. 
In 1974, Penrose devised various pairs of complementary ``tiles'' 
_ parallelograms that can be laid on a flat surface with their edges 
joined. Such tiles can be fitted together (using rules stipulated 
by Penrose) to completely cover any flat surface, leaving no gaps 
between tiles. The patterns thus formed have endless variations and 
do not repeat themselves in any periodic way. The best known of Penrose's 
tiling sets consists of two types of rhombus, both with edges of the 
same length. One, a ``fat rhombus,'' has interior angles of 108 and 
72 degrees, while the other figure in the pair, a ``skinny rhombus,'' 
has interior angles of 144 and 36 degrees. Penrose tilings based on 
matched pairs of tiles like these are interesting not only to mathematicians 
but to commercial enterprises. A group of entrepreneurs produced a 
decorative wall covering consisting of Penrose tiles, and last year, 
Penrose brought a suit against a paper company to constrain it from 
embossing its toilet paper with a copy of one of his tiling patterns. 
Steinhardt noticed the possibility of building a three-dimensional 
structure analogous to a smooth, gapless surface covered with two-dimensional 
Penrose tiles. The equivalent of the Penrose fat and skinny rhombuses 
was a pair of complementary rhomboids that could be fitted together 
to completely fill a three-dimensional volume without leaving gaps. 
Moreover, such a structure was found to produce icosahedral arrays 
scattered through it at irregular intervals, and thus a possible explanation 
for five-fold symmetry was found. But since then, another and simpler 
explanation has been discovered. In the new version, complementary 
pairs of rhomboids are replaced by stacks of 10-sided arrays of atoms. 
These arrays are identical decagons that ordinarily cannot be fitted 
together to cover a surface without gaps. But using some new rules 
based on the chemical and physical relationships of atoms, the decagons 
can be allowed to overlap. Neighboring decagons must be allowed, however, 
to share some atoms with each other. In a development reported this 
month, Steinhardt, now a professor of mathematics at Princeton University, 
and his collaborators in Korea and Japan said they believed they detected 
experimental proof that the stacked decagon theory was the best explanation 
for the structure of quasicrystals. The new theory, which was partly 
suggested in 1991 by Dr. Sergei E. Burkov, a mathematician at the 
Landau Institute of Theoretical Physics in Moscow, is based on the 
joining-together of single units with the same shape rather than pairs 
of units with different shapes like the original Penrose tiles. Steinhardt's 
group believes it has experimentally validated and improved on Burkov's 
theoretical scheme by producing electron-microscope images of a real 
quasicrystal, an aluminum-nickel-cobalt alloy. The predictions of 
the overlapping decagon theory closely match electron-microscope images 
of the atoms in a real quasicrystal. The simplicity of the system, 
Steinhardt said, accounts for the apparent ease with which atoms find 
their proper places in the structure when the metal alloy is properly 
prepared. This conclusion emerged from investigations in Japan at 
Tohoku University and the National Research Institute for Metals of 
a quasicrystalline alloy of aluminum, nickel and cobalt. Its formula 
is Al72 Ni20 Co8. The idea of a decagon cell as a basic unit in quasicrystals 
was proposed in 1996 by Dr. Petra Gummelt, a German mathematician 
at Arndt University, Greifswald, Germany. She suggested (without fully 
proving) that pairs of Penrose tiles could be replaced by single overlapping 
decagons to explain the structures of quasicrystals. But to make this 
work, Steinhardt said in an interview, it was necessary to replace 
the mathematical Penrose matching rules with new rules based on the 
interrelationships of real atoms in a quasicrystal. Viewed in this 
light, Steinhardt and his Korean colleague, Dr. Hyeong-Chai Jeong, 
reported in their Nature paper, the theoretical structure of Al72 
Ni20 Co8 turned out to closely match reality. This may not be the 
end of the quasicrystal puzzle or the debates it ignites, however. 
In a comment on Steinhardt's Nature paper, Dr. Knut W. Urban of the 
Helmholtz Research Center, Julich, Germany, wrote that the new model 
explaining quasicrystals must be tested further. But the theory makes 
``it worthwhile revising current models to incorporate this new view 
of quasicrystal formation.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>