<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981123.0424 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A week after threatening rapid and unannounced military action if 
Iraq failed to cooperate fully with arms inspectors, the Clinton administration 
has adopted a more cautious policy. Administration officials, in public 
and private comments Monday, signaled a shift in policy from one of 
hair-trigger confrontation to a more patient approach that will gauge 
Iraq's sincerity over the next several weeks on the basis of several 
factors, from handing over secret documents to allowing access to 
sensitive military sites and inspecting off-limit sites. If President 
Saddam Hussein proves intransigent despite renewed pledges of cooperation 
_ as has been his pattern over the past seven years _ the United States 
will be in a much stronger position to take military action, and will 
have broader support to do so, officials said Monday. After the last 
confrontation, the United States reserved the right to strike Iraq 
without warning if Hussein failed to comply with U.N. demands. Defense 
Secretary William Cohen said at the time that Washington expected 
to know ``within a short period of time, as to whether he is going 
to fully comply.'' He added, ``I think everyone understands that this 
is the last go-around.'' But Monday Cohen indicated that the spat 
over documents was not likely to put American bombers back in the 
air. ``It is up to Iraq to fully cooperate,'' he told reporters at 
the Pentagon. ``A failure to do so certainly leaves open the option 
of whether or not the president would order a military option in the 
future.'' A senior administration official, speaking on the condition 
of anonymity, said that the United States and Britain were waiting 
to see how far Hussein will try to go to avoid full compliance. ``It's 
a tactical diplomatic game to make sure our responses and our public 
and substantive posture are all orchestrated toward keeping them on 
the defensive,'' the senior official said. ``And they're likely to 
shoot themselves in the foot again. That's certainly been the pattern.'' 
American officials seem to be replaying a strategy they believe worked 
in the most recent crisis, when the United States waited as Iraq became 
increasingly defiant, eventually ending cooperation with all inspections. 
By that point, Hussein was isolated from traditional supporters in 
many Arab nations and nations like Russia and France, which repeatedly 
defended Iraq and opposed military action. But over the past several 
days, the U.N. team has become ensnared in a dispute with Baghdad 
over a set of documents that inspectors believe might provide a road 
map to a part of Iraq's weapons program. While the Iraqis contend 
that many of the documents no longer exist, the inspectors insist 
that they do, or had until recently, because they had seen them or 
heard about them from Iraqi officials. As an incentive for Iraqi compliance, 
American officials repeated that full compliance could permit the 
United Nations to conduct the review of international sanctions that 
Iraq is insisting on. ``It's very important for them to cooperate 
with Unscom and provide the documents that are necessary,'' Secretary 
of State Madeleine Albright said Monday, referring to the U.N. special 
commission that conducts the inspections. ``We believe that they need 
to provide the documents to allow inspection, before this comprehensive 
review can go forward.'' When asked how much time Baghdad would be 
given to comply, Albright said, ``It's not matter of a deadlines, 
it's a matter of coming forward with what's necessary to show that 
they're cooperating.'' Albright's comments came after a brief meeting 
with Rep. Bob Livingston, R-La., who will become speaker of the House 
early next year. Clinton aborted a military strike in mid-November 
just minutes before bombers and warships were to drop scores of bombs 
and missiles on Iraq. The president said that Iraq's capitulation 
to longstanding U.N. requirements for inspections caused him to stay 
his hand. State Department spokesman James Rubin said ``the dog ate 
my homework'' was not an acceptable excuse from the Iraqis. Rubin 
said Richard Butler, chairman of the commission conducting the inspections, 
was ``in the best position to know whether particular documents are 
available.'' He said the U.N. inspections' commission, not the United 
States, would establish the level of Iraqi cooperation. ``To the extent 
that the judgments are made and understood to be professional technical 
judgments,'' Rubin said, ``it is more likely that we will get international 
support for a firm posture towards Iraq.'' If Iraq continues to play 
cat and mouse with inspectors, it will have made the case for military 
action to force compliance, a State Department official said. The 
Pentagon announced Monday that the aircraft carrier Enterprise and 
its escort ships arrived in the Persian Gulf Monday, replacing the 
carrier Eisenhower and its battle group, which are returning to the 
United States. American and British warplanes remain on alert at air 
bases throughout the region. But Cohen added that Iraq would be given 
time to resolve the dispute over the documents and to demonstrate 
its willingness to comply with other aspects of the inspection regime, 
including access to suspected production sites and to individuals 
thought to be involved in developing prohibited weapons. ``I think 
we have to continue to see the insistence on the production of those 
documents and a clarification of, if documents were destroyed, who 
destroyed them, under what circumstances, when, where, et cetera,'' 
Cohen said. ``And I think a lot of questions have to be asked and 
answered before there can be any resolution as to whether or not they 
are, quote, `cooperating.''' Officials said that the administration 
will closely watch the Iraqi response to a series of surprise inspections 
with began Monday at nine sites in Iraq. Washington also is waiting 
to see how Baghdad responds to demands to see sites that Iraq has 
declared off-limits to monitors. Statements from top American officials 
suggest that the United States will wait weeks before coming to a 
conclusion about Iraqi compliance with the inspection program and 
deciding whether military action is warranted or useful. ``You've 
got to give Unscom some time to test Iraq to see if its cooperation 
is genuine or not,'' a senior administration official said. ``They've 
gotten inspectors back in, inspection program back up and running, 
done a few small inspections.'' He added: ``We're willing to let this 
process work through for some time. It's the way to conclude whether 
Iraq is or is not sincere.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>