<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981123.0295 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It was during the ``Ugg-a-Wugg'' Indian number that the little girl 
in the rainbow-colored cardigan turned and flashed me the A-OK sign. 
I might have been quick to suspect her as an audience plant by the 
``Peter Pan'' public relations people. Except that she was my own 
daughter. Lizzie and her school chum and theater buddy, Elizabeth, 
were my companions for a clear-eyed critical assessment of the latest 
incarnation of this melodious 1954 bedtime story, which opened Monday 
night at the Marquis Theater, with the former Olympic gymnast Cathy 
Rigby, in a reprise of her 1990 Broadway appearance, in the title 
role. It's no exaggeration to say that the show won a ringing endorsement 
from my pink-ribbon panel of experts. Their contentment was unequivocal 
_ in a theater, 6-year-olds tend to be enthralled or asleep _ although 
overall, Lizzie and Elizabeth liked the talkier scenes and the mushier 
songs the least. In descending order, their favorite moments of the 
production came when: 1) Peter flew; 2) Wendy flew; 3) Michael and 
John flew; 4) Tinker Bell was saved by their clapping, and 5) the 
crocodile ate Captain Hook. Their one real regret: Nana, the Darling 
family sheep dog, never became airborne. My pleasure was observing 
their pleasure. For a parent, there are few experiences more exhilarating. 
And, of course, it took me back 100 years or so, to the first time 
I saw ``Peter Pan'' _ it was that grainy television version, starring 
Mary Martin _ and how wowed I was not by a boy who could fly but by 
one who had to have his shadow sewn back on. This is not to imply 
that this new road-show production, presented by, among others, Ms. 
Rigby's own entertainment company, offers only vicarious enjoyment 
for adults: Paul Schoeffler, for instance, is in excellent voice as 
the dastardly Hook; Dana Solimando's Tiger Lily is agile and athletic, 
and Ms. Rigby's aerial exhibition is as taut as the Blue Angels' sky-high 
figure-eights. In fact, despite a few cruder aspects, like the overamplification 
that gives some scenes and songs the dead-air sound of a stadium public-address 
system and a scruffy scenic design that looks as if it were cannibalized 
from old Disneyland rides, this ``Peter Pan'' is more than passing 
fair, and better still if you have the privilege of seeing it through 
children's eyes. Yes, the company of little theatergoers will undoubtedly 
put you in a more forgiving mood. But thanks to the dandy score by 
Carolyn Leigh and Moose Charlap (with assists from Jule Styne, Betty 
Comden and Adolph Green), as well as the efficient staging by Glenn 
Casale and muscular choreography by Patti Colombo (a remodeling of 
Jerome Robbins' original work), this seemingly indestructible show 
is a far more enjoyable, child-friendly holiday spectacle than, say, 
Madison Square Garden's grandiose ``Christmas Carol.'' It should be 
plain by now that those seeking an elegant entertainment after dinner 
at Le Cirque 2000 should find another box office. This ``Peter Pan'' 
ideally follows pizza at John's or precedes a birthday party at Serendipity. 
Hordes of parents and grandparents apparently had something like this 
in mind on Saturday afternoon, when the Marquis was the place to be 
seen for the Playskool set. (Memo to the concessions department: Three 
words _ Nana Beanie Babies.) Throughout the 2 hour 40 minute show, 
the wails of toddlers in the intermittent throes of agony or ecstasy 
competed with the warbling actors. A silent minority the tiny ticketholders 
were not. They were struck dumb, however, any time the convincingly 
tomboyish Ms. Rigby _ looking in her blond mop like a cross between 
David Cassidy and Rick Schroeder _ was lifted by cable and dive-bombed 
as if she were a one-woman fighter squadron. These are the best moments 
that the production has to offer. That's because the ageless Ms. Rigby 
remains more stuntwoman than star, and only truly captivating in midair. 
Back on terra firma, her voice is strong and pleasing, if a little 
ragged on the high notes, and oh dear, I could swear her crowing in 
``I Gotta Crow'' was pre-recorded. The acting skills are perky but 
only passable. Effecting a generic British accent, she lacks the ebullient 
presence of predecessors in the role like Martin and Sandy Duncan. 
But the performance pays off when it counts. Her most successful number 
is the goosebump-raiser ``I'm Flying,'' which is also her most physical. 
Any time this ``Peter Pan'' exerts itself, it makes a strong case. 
The second-tier song, ``Ugg-a-Wugg,'' is transformed here by Ms. Colombo 
into a first-rate show-stopper, with Indians and Lost Boys forming 
a ``Stomp''-style percussion section. Keeping things kinetic and comfortable 
for children is the goal of the production, which like the original 
offers two intermissions, one only 45 minutes into the show. It also 
excises, for the benefit of younger viewers, a plot-slowing Neverland 
number sung by Hook and a Peter disguised as a mysterious lady. As 
with Ms. Rigby, the other performers are paler shadows of the indelible 
originals, at least as captured on the video of the television version. 
But in virtually all cases, this is not a significant distraction. 
Schoeffler does his best Cyril Ritchard impression as both Darling 
and Hook, and his singing voice is vastly better than Ritchard's, 
as made wonderfully clear in ``Hook's Waltz.'' The Darling children, 
played by Elisa Sagardia, Chase Kniffen and Drake English, are endearing; 
the 7-year-old English, in particular, has the gift of unaffected 
adorableness. The Lost Boys, on the other hand, are pretty much a 
lost cause. They are way too old for boys and one in particular looks 
as if he's in need of a shave. Lizzie and Elizabeth, sated by the 
acrobatics and bagsful of gummy worms, were not bothered by such trifles. 
Their perspective on the proceedings was defiantly macro, and they 
made me happy to share their enchantment. Even better, they left the 
theater desperate to know when they might see a show again. I'll wager 
they would be appalled by any nit-picking. And as both of them are 
learning to read, I'm sure I'll hear about it sooner rather than later. 
PRODUCTION NOTES PETER PAN Or, the Boy Who Wouldn't Grow Up A musical 
production of the play by Sir James Barrie; lyrics by Carolyn Leigh; 
music by Moose Charlap; additional lyrics by Betty Comden and Adolph 
Green; additional music by Jule Styne; directed by Glenn Casale; choreography 
by Patti Colombo; musical direction and vocal arrangements by Craig 
Barna; sets by John Iacovelli; costumes by Shigeru Yaji; lighting 
by Martin Aronstein; sound by Francois Bergeron; flying illusion by 
ZFX; wigs by Robert Cybula; associate choreographer, John Charron. 
Presented by McCoy Rigby Entertainment, the Nederlander Organization 
and La Mirada Theater for the Performing Arts, in association with 
Albert Nocciolino, Larry Payton and J. Lynn Singleton. At the Marquis 
Theater, 1535 Broadway, at 45th Street. WITH: Cathy Rigby (Peter Pan), 
Barbara McCulloh (Mrs. Darling), Elisa Sagardia (Wendy Darling), Chase 
Kniffen (John Darling), Drake English (Michael Darling), Dana Solimando 
(Tiger Lily and Liza), Paul Schoeffler ( Darling and Captain Hook) 
and Michael Nostrand ( Smee). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>