<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981123.0298 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
On the surface, it may not appear that soccer players and newspaper 
columnists have much in common. Soccer players are well-conditioned 
athletes who can run around for hours without getting tired, whereas 
newspaper columnists tend to be avocado-shaped slugs who get winded 
swiping spare change from the coffee fund. However, I read something 
in the paper the other day that made me think that soccer players 
and newspaper columnists may have more in common than I realized. 
A study by the American Academy of Neurology reveals that pro soccer 
players suffer from impaired memory, planning and recognition skills 
as a result of ``heading'' the ball and slamming into other players. 
The decline in mental abilities is much the same as that suffered 
by newspaper columnists after years of banging their heads against 
the wall and being slammed by readers and editors. According to my 
research, columnists lose 10 percent of their mental acuity for every 
year they practice their craft. Since I have been doing this for 12 
or 14 years (I can't remember which), that means that my mental abilities 
are on par with those of a soccer ball, and not a very well-inflated 
one at that. Fortunately, neither soccer players nor newspaper columnists 
need to be the sharpest tools in the shed in order to do their jobs. 
Indeed, one might argue that limited brain power is a job requirement 
for both occupations. If you ask 100 children what they want to be 
when they grow up, you will get a variety of responses. Some will 
want to be baseball players; some rock stars; some nameless, faceless 
drones in a bloated, unnecessary federal bureaucracy .... But few, 
if any, I venture, will say that they want to make a living by using 
their foreheads to deflect a heavy, leather ball whistling at them 
at 100 mph. Nor, for that matter, will you find many kids pining for 
a job where you sit for long, lonely years in a cramped, dusty cubicle 
downwind of the newsroom refrigerator trying to come up with new ways 
to make fun of Canadian tourists. While it is easy to understand how 
heading a soccer ball might knock a few screws loose, the gradual 
mental deterioration of a newspaper columnist occurs for less obvious 
reasons. Phone calls and letters certainly play an important role. 
Shortly after I came to work this morning, I received a phone call 
from a self-described ``sex therapist'' who suggested I write a column 
promoting the employment of vestal virgins in the White House. Centuries 
ago, according to the caller, kings, generals and any other male authority 
figures who thought they could get away with it deflowered vestal 
virgins on a regular basis as a way of gaining strength, improving 
their stamina and possibly getting drafted by the NBA. If, the caller 
went on, we consider Monica Lewinsky a vestal virgin (are you seeing 
the reasons for the mental deterioration now?), then perhaps we should 
look at Clinton's Oval Office rendezvous as an act of patriotism rather 
than simply the goat-like ruttings of a grown man suffering from a 
bad case of arrested development. Before that had time to sink in, 
I opened a letter from AllHerb.com, a ``comprehensive online wellness 
destination,'' advertising a new line of natural herbal aphrodisiacs 
aimed specifically at Republicans so that they can reclaim a little 
of that ``devil-may-care'' attitude that has worked so well for President 
Clinton. Soccer players don't know how lucky they are. (David Grimes 
is a columnist for the Sarasota (Fla.) Herald-Tribune.) 
</TEXT>
</DOC>