<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981123.0290 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The American educational system, while perhaps less rigorous than 
in the rest of the industrialized world, has long prided itself on 
its access and reach, producing far more high school graduates than 
elsewhere. Now a major new international study shows that school completion 
rates in other industrialized countries have surpassed those of the 
United States. The report, released Monday by the Organization for 
Economic Cooperation and Development, a group based in Paris and comprised 
of 29 of the richest countries, suggests that the changing picture 
is less a matter of American backsliding than of substantial recent 
progress by other nations in educating the next generation. For example, 
in 1990, American ``educational expectancy,'' or the average number 
of years a 5-year-old will be enrolled in school or college, was the 
world's highest, at 16.3. In 1996, the latest year for which data 
are available, the American score was 16.8 but 11 other countries, 
including Canada, Spain and Finland, had surpassed that number. In 
addition, the report found that the United States devoted a smaller 
percentage of its national income to teacher salaries than other countries. 
In university education, the United States still remains on top, but 
a similar pattern in high school graduation rates is emerging. ``Entry 
rates to college education in the U.S. are still the highest in the 
OECD but that is likely to change soon,'' said Andreas Schleicher, 
principal administrator at the OECD and one of the study's authors. 
``While enrollments in the United States remained relatively stable 
between 1990 and 1996, they increased by more than 25 percent in 16 
OECD countries.'' He added that the United States also has one of 
the highest university dropout rates in the industrialized world _ 
37 percent. The 432-page report, called ``Education at a Glance: OECD 
Indicators 1998,'' is the fifth such study issued by the organization 
since 1991, when it started examining educational trends in member 
countries. Schleicher said that over the last three years the report 
has been the OECD's best-selling publication. Given the keen and growing 
interest in education as the key to prosperity, he said, there was 
every reason to expect the current volume to continue to sell well. 
He said member states had placed enormous emphasis on improving access 
to education, bringing them in line with and surpassing American achievements. 
The shifting balance and consequent American concerns raised by the 
report are likely to fall on fertile ground here since the quality 
of American education has been the focus of growing attention and 
debate for 10 to 15 years. ``I think we should be quite alarmed by 
this,'' said Gerald Graff, professor of English and education at the 
University of Chicago, who is writing a book on what he considers 
the dangerous gap between the thinking classes in America and the 
rest of the society. ``We've never fully committed ourselves to the 
democratic idea of education. There is a kind of silent bargain between 
schools and many of its students that says, `We'll leave you alone 
if you just sit there and don't bother us.' '' Earlier this year, 
the results of a mathematics and science test of 12th graders in many 
countries showed the United States to be among the least knowledgeable. 
Earlier tests showed the lowest 25 percent of 8th graders in Japan 
and South Korea to outperform the average American student. Education 
is widely viewed as having been the top concern of voters in the elections 
for state and federal office held earlier this month with candidates 
of both major parties vowing increased spending on teacher training 
and school improvement. The issue first gained high profile in 1983 
with publication of an alarming report on American education entitled 
``A Nation at Risk'' which said that if a foreign power had imposed 
such a low level of education on the United States, it would rightfully 
have been perceived as having engaged in an act of war. In the years 
since, numerous efforts have sprung up, from alternatives to public 
education like charter schools and voucher plans, to projects to improve 
teacher quality, widely perceived as the system's Achilles heel. Some 
states are now testing student teachers more rigorously and offering 
signing bonuses and plans to forgive student loans to encourage better 
candidates to enter the profession. Moreover, many states are instituting 
tests at various stages in school to make sure students are not graduating 
without basic skills and knowledge. The OECD report shows that Americans 
between the ages of 55 and 64, who graduated high school some 40 years 
ago, have a graduation rate of 77 percent, the highest in the OECD. 
Among those aged 24 to 34, who graduated about a decade ago, the United 
States slipped to eighth. Today's graduation rates, with the United 
States at 72 percent, place it second to last in the 29-nation group, 
with only Mexico lower. It seems unlikely that the shift reflects 
higher standards for graduation in the United States over those of 
other countries since comparisons of adult literacy rates in the study 
show Americans to be among the industrialized world's least literate 
populations. According to the report, the United States' expenditure 
per pupil is still among the highest in the group at all levels of 
education. It particularly stands out in the way it has brought the 
private sector into college and university education, leading the 
way in a growing international trend, according to Schleicher. ``Across 
the OECD, students in both public and private colleges are being asked 
to pay more for their education,'' he said. ``Unlike in the United 
States, however, this spending has, in many countries, supplemented 
rather than displaced public spending on education.'' But if the United 
States spends a great deal on education in absolute terms, its expenditure 
is about average when examined as a percentage of gross domestic product. 
Moreover, teacher pay viewed through the same lens shows the United 
States to be among the lowest, with demands on teacher time in class 
among the highest. An experienced high school teacher in the United 
States earns 1.2 times the gross domestic product per capita. Among 
the 29 OECD member states, only the Czech Republic, Hungary and Norway 
pay their high school teachers less when measured as a percentage 
of their GDP's. In Germany, Ireland, South Korea and Switzerland, 
among others, teachers earn twice or more of the GDP per capita. Moreover, 
the average teacher salary in the United States is significantly below 
that of other university graduates; in many other countries, like 
Australia, France and Britain, it is above it. However, the amount 
of time a typical middle school teacher in the United States spends 
in front of a classroom per year is 964 hours, among the highest in 
the OECD, the report says. The report adds that Americans can not 
comfort themselves by thinking that theirs is a society of social 
mobility and second chances. It finds that children whose parents 
completed college are more than three times as likely to become college 
graduates themselves than children whose parents did not complete 
high school. Moreover, the achievement gap between the children of 
the well-off, well-educated and those without such family backgrounds 
is above the average for the OECD. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>