<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981123.0472 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The College Board, sponsor of the SAT, the nation's leading college 
entrance exam, has found in a comprehensive new study that test preparation 
courses, a multi-million-dollar industry, fail to produce anything 
other than minimal score increases. The study was immediately and 
vigorously attacked by spokesmen for the two leading tesing companies, 
Kaplan Educational Centers and Princeton Review. They said they had 
clear data showing their courses produce significant increases on 
an exam that, given the growing competitiveness of college admissions, 
produces terror in the hearts of high school students. The College 
Board study of some 4,200 students who took the SAT in 1995-96 found 
that the roughly 12 percent who took out-of-school coaching courses 
raised their scores an average 19 to 38 points more than those who 
were uncoached in the verbal and math sections combined, a small gain. 
The maximum combined score is 1,600. The rise was bigger in math _ 
an average of 19 points _ than in the verbal test, where it averaged 
nine points. And the study found that Kaplan and Princeton Review's 
coaching both pushed scores up a little more, up to 19 points on verbal 
and 38 points on math. But most score changes fell within the test's 
standard error of measurement, which is about 30 points up or down 
on each section, the study found. ``For every coached student who 
went up 100 points or more, three either had no increase or their 
scores went down,'' said Wayne Camara, executive director of research 
at the College Board. ``The major unique feature of this study is 
that not only have we looked at gains of coached but also of non-coached 
students. Coaching firms don't do that.'' Kaplan Educational Centers, 
the New York City-based firm that, with Princeton Review, dominates 
the multi-million-dollar test coaching industry, says that the average 
Kaplan score increase is 120 points from the PSAT to the SAT, and 
that 28 percent of Kaplan students surveyed improved scores by at 
least 170 points. Princeton Review advertises a typical increase of 
140 points. In both cases, the companies say they have used outside 
firms to survey their students on scores before and after testing. 
``The largest percentage of our students who come to us do it through 
word of mouth, and we work with 30,000 students a year,'' said Kevin 
McMullin, spokesman for Princeton Review. ``We must be doing something 
right. I would also point out that the College Board markets its own 
SAT preparation books and materials. If scores can't be improved by 
preparation, why sell the materials?'' Kaplan and Princeton have long 
been locked in a public relations battle with the College Board over 
the effectiveness of coaching and, in recent years, over shares of 
the test preparation book industry. For the College Board, it is important 
that the SAT and the numerous other entrance exams it sponsors be 
seen as objective measures of a student's academic skills. If coaching 
could significantly improve scores, those who can afford high-priced 
coaching courses would have an unfair advantage and the value of the 
tests will be diminished. The issue has taken on an added charge in 
the past couple years as race-conscious admissions practices at universities 
have come under attack both legally and politically. Minority students, 
who tend to score lower on the SAT, have been admitted over whites 
with higher scores to add racial diversity to campuses. With such 
practices under attack, the role of the SAT has come under increasing 
scrutiny, with some minority-rights advocates urging colleges to reduce 
their reliance on it. The College Board says it publishes preparatory 
material for the SAT because familiarization with the test, its pattern 
and pace, improves scores. But commercial coaching, it argues, has 
minimal value. The report, being issued Tuesday, was written by Donald 
Powers, a research scientist at the Educational Testing Service in 
Princeton, N.J., which the College Board hires to administer the SAT, 
and Donald Rock, an educational consultant. It was subject to peer 
review, meaning that researchers who were not told its authors' names 
examined it for scientific validity. It will be published in the Journal 
of Educational Measurement. Betsy Jane Becker, an educational statistician 
at Michigan State University who has read the manuscript and has examined 
and written about coaching studies, said she considered it to be perhaps 
the finest piece of coaching research yet published. ``It is thoughtful, 
it uses statistical methods to very good advantage and left nearly 
no stone unturned,'' she said. The new study is the first to query 
students seeking coaching about themselves and compare it with those 
who did not go to coaching institutes. Those who seek coaching, it 
found, included more Asian-Americans, came from better-educated and 
higher-earning families, had slightly better grades in school, higher 
ambitions and had taken more rigorous courses in school than those 
who had not been coached. Moreover, both the coached and uncoached 
populations reported doing a fair amount of individual preparation 
either through taking sample tests or by using materials provided 
by the College Board or one of the coaching companies to prepare for 
the SAT. Nonetheless, those who used coaching courses tended to have 
done more such preparations. ``These are fuzzy lines,'' Powers, the 
principal author of the study acknowledged. ``But if you ask people 
why they pay for coaching, it is to increase their scores by substantial 
amounts. We are saying that that is unlikely to work.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>