<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981123.0063 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Looking for a role model for your career? How about Jesse Ventura, 
the menacing wrestler turned blustery radio host turned straight-talking 
Minnesota governor-elect? Ventura's election this month may have seemed 
simply a golden moment in political eccentricity. But if you wade 
through the bulging bookshelf of tomes on the changing nature of careers 
in America, Ventura looks like something else as well _ a poster boy 
for the new post-downsizing, information-age ethos of creative reinvention 
that various deep thinkers trumpet as the new norm in the American 
workplace. In fact, there are striking changes in the economy, psychology 
and demography of the country that make Ventura's unlikely path _ 
and the lure of inspired amateurism _ particularly illustrative. But 
how new the ethos of reinvention is, whether it is a trend to be welcomed 
or feared and how committed Americans are to it are all questions 
worth pondering. As if taken from books with titles like, ``Career 
Intelligence: the 12 New Rules for Work and Life Success,'' Ventura's 
career seems crafted from the jargon of the career counseling class: 
He sees his career as a lattice, not a ladder. He communicates in 
persuasive yet unconventional ways. He thinks about roles, not jobs, 
cultivates a broad network and keeps on learning. At 47, he probably 
has several zigs and zags left. ``He found a way to take his own authentic 
self and use it to reposition himself as a politician,'' said Barbara 
Moses, head of BBM Human Resource Consultants of Toronto and the author 
of ``Career Intelligence'' (Berrett-Koehler, 1998). ``I think of careers 
in terms of Legos. You might have a space station, but a kid takes 
the space vehicle and uses it at the zoo and then it becomes an ambulance 
that takes people to the hospital. The pieces are reconfigured, but 
their essential properties have not mutated. More and more, we do 
the same thing in our careers.'' F. Scott Fitzgerald once mused that, 
``There are no second acts in American lives.'' It may be one of the 
least persuasive aphorisms ever to get wide currency. Americans have 
always had second acts. They have been immigrants beginning anew. 
They have left behind families and scrawled ``Gone to Texas'' on the 
walls of their houses. Second and third marriages are routine. And 
even in the most conventional lives, retirees leave familiar worlds 
behind for the Florida sun. What is new is that so many Americans 
are now having third and fourth acts, they are having them later in 
life and several trends may be making them unavoidable. First is the 
aging of the population, the dominant demographic trend as 76 million 
baby boomers continue to age into vital, restless seniors. In 1900, 
life expectancy in the United States was 49. Today it is 76. People 
who reach age 55 can expect to live into their 80s, meaning most will 
either be working longer or anticipating a retirement more dynamic 
and challenging than models from the recent past. Second is the wave 
of layoffs and restructurings of the early 1990s. A study by James 
Medoff, a Harvard economist, found that workers between the ages of 
35 and 54 were 55 percent more likely to be jobless during the 1990s 
because of a layoff or job loss than in the 1970s. The cuts at the 
nation's biggest companies obliterated for many the expectation of 
lifelong employment with a single employer, and made restructuring 
and career insecurity a permanent part of the landscape. At the same 
time, the restructurings that kicked some middle managers into the 
cold helped stoke a boom in the stock market that has left unprecedented 
numbers of workers and managers able to cash out and pick up new jobs 
or lives. Social expectations have changed too. Workers today seem 
to be groping for more personal fulfillment than earlier generations 
did. The increasing pace of technological change, the vogue for less 
rigid corporate structures and perhaps even millennial ferment are 
encouraging the shift toward multiple acts. And in a mass-media environment, 
it can help to be a former wrestler campaigning against two dull suits. 
``We're jaded,'' said Ms. Moses. ``How do you get someone's attention 
when they're tired and distracted? If you're new and fresh, they don't 
go yawn yawn, blah blah and turn the page.'' In some ways, all those 
factors are creating the golden age of personal reinvention. Entertainers 
like Sonny Bono and athletes like Jim Bunning and Steve Largent go 
to Congress or, like Bill Bradley, go to Congress and then go on to 
something else. John Glenn goes from astronaut to senator to astronaut 
(a greenhorn the second time around because of advances in space-flight 
technology). Internet gossip hound Matt Drudge irks journalists by 
serving up news as well as innuendo in cyberspace. The great entrepreneurial 
successes are Steve Jobs in his garage or Bill Gates dropping out 
of Harvard to start Microsoft. Even when it comes to health, a lot 
of people, some motivated by rising costs, seem to prefer newcomers 
to medicine over old-line professionals. A recent study in the Journal 
of the American Medical Association reported on the astounding growth 
of alternative medicine in the United States, with 83 million people 
using some form of alternative medicine, up 47 percent over 1990. 
A search of recent news articles turns up a chorus of reinvention 
_ the artist turned psychotherapist, the accountant turned winemaker, 
the 76-year-old, first-time film director. To some, the message is 
that the traditional career path is kaput. ``The old rules have fallen 
apart,'' said Marti Smye, author of ``Is It Too Late to Run Away and 
Join the Circus? A Guide for Your Second Life'' (Macmillan, 1998). 
``You talk to senior team members at top companies and they're all 
thinking the same thing: What am I going to do with my next life?'' 
Of course, new paradigms usually have to coexist with old ones. Ventura 
probably won only because his two rivals split the rest of the vote. 
The fact is that in politics, as in many other fields, the game is 
still rigged in favor of the traditional careerists and insiders over 
the amateurs and outsiders. And for every risk taker nimbly skipping 
from career rock to career rock, there are nervous middle managers 
hanging on. Ventura perhaps represents the glass-half-full aspect 
of the new careerism. In a new book, ``Boomernomics'' (Ballantine, 
1998), William Sterling and Stephen Wells posit a future of 10 more 
economic boom years and then a debacle as boomers try to sell investments 
at the same time and Social Security and Medicare stagger under the 
weight of too many aging boomers. ``People are going to have to reinvent 
themselves at later stages in life than were ever imaginable in the 
past,'' said Sterling, an investment strategist with Credit Suisse 
Asset Management. ``We're going to be asking more and more people 
in their 50s and even their 60s to make employer and even career changes 
at a period in the past when they were thinking about which retirement 
community to choose. You get into the old-dogs-and-new-tricks issue.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>