<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981123.0455 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Several of Attorney General Janet Reno's close aides advised her Monday 
in a private meeting at the Justice Department that federal law required 
her to seek an independent counsel to investigate Vice President Al 
Gore's political fund-raising efforts, law-enforcement officials said. 
But other advisers at the meeting disputed that interpretation of 
the law. Reno, who must, according to the time constraints of the 
independent counsel law, decide the issue by Tuesday, is still considered 
likely to reject such an appointment, the officials said. That decision 
would spare Gore further scrutiny at a critical phase of his attempt 
to solidify his presidential credentials. Reno has remained taciturn. 
At the conclusion of Monday's meeting, she informed her aides that 
she was unprepared to declare whether she had decided to refer the 
allegations about Gore's case to an outside prosecutor, the officials 
said. The debate, said one official, was ``spirited.'' At issue in 
Gore's case is whether the independent counsel law permits Reno to 
close an inquiry when there are relevant facts in dispute _ in this 
case conflicting witness accounts of senior campaign officials who, 
along with Gore, attended a Nov. 21, 1995, White House fund-raising 
meeting. Some participants of the meeting recalled discussing how 
the funds raised by Gore would be divided for direct and indirect 
campaign efforts; others said that was not discussed, and a few could 
not recall the meeting's specifics, law enforcement officials said. 
In light of the conflicting accounts, the split among her top aides 
reflects a longstanding legal debate within the Justice Department 
about how to interpret a key provision of the independent counsel 
statute. One side said the law clearly dictates seeking an independent 
counsel when contradictory evidence cannot be resolved. The other 
side is arguing that Reno is not obligated to seek an independent 
counsel because the case, partly based on whether the money Gore raised 
was used legally, is so technical that a prosecutor would be unlikely 
to obtain an indictment. Reno's decision in the Gore case represents 
the first of three important independent counsel decisions that she 
must make in the next two weeks. After Gore, she must decide next 
week whether to seek an appointment in the case of Harold Ickes, the 
former White House deputy chief of staff. In December, Reno must decide 
whether to seek an outside counsel to investigate whether President 
Clinton and his aides broke the law when they set up a multimillion-dollar 
advertising campaign financed by the Democratic National Committee. 
Federal rules limit such ad campaigns to generic party ads, but Federal 
Election Commission auditors have said the ads directly supported 
the Clinton-Gore campaign. Reno, who has referred allegations against 
six Clinton administration officials to independent prosecutors, has 
never allowed an outside counsel to review any issue directly related 
to how the Democrats financed the 1996 campaign, although she has 
considered the issue on several occasions. In part, officials said 
they believed that Reno's unwillingness to open the Democrats to the 
potentially sweeping scrutiny of an independent prosecutor stems from 
a view within the Justice Department that the loosely written campaign 
finance laws offer little traction for prosecutors attempting to seek 
evidence of criminal conduct. Nevertheless, Republicans in Congress 
have repeatedly attacked Reno, accusing her of blatantly using her 
office as a political shield for the White House, protecting not only 
Clinton, but the Democratic Party. She opened the inquiries into Gore, 
Ickes and Clinton only after Charles La Bella wrote her a memo recommending 
an independent counsel. La Bella's memo came after FBI Director Louis 
Freeh had reached a similar conclusion. Within the Justice Department, 
officials said Reno's narrow view of the law _in the campaign finance 
context _ is based on a different perception that some independent 
counsels have misused the offices. Reno has been said by some aides 
to have expressed concern about the conduct of more than one independent 
counsel. She has disapproved of some tactics, like when prosecutors 
unfairly expose low-level witnesses to the expense and embarrassment 
of criminal inquiries that seemed to continue and expand long after 
departmental prosecutors would have dropped them. Although Reno has 
been careful to avoid voicing her complaints in public, some of her 
aides have criticized the conduct of Kenneth Starr, the Whitewater 
prosecutor, and Donald Smaltz, the prosecutor who has investigated 
Mike Espy, the former agriculture secretary. In Gore's case, Reno 
opened a 90-day independent counsel inquiry in September after a memorandum 
surfaced with an aide's handwritten notes that seemed to shed new 
light on Gore's role. The aide's notes suggested that Gore could have 
known much more about the regulatory limits on his political fund-raising 
than the vice president had acknowledged. Gore has said that he did 
not realize that some of the large contributions he solicited in phone 
calls from his White House office would be divided into different 
Democratic Party accounts. But the memo, in which Gore was to said 
to have remarked ``count me in'' on making fund-raising phone calls, 
suggested that he could have known that the money he raised would 
be split between hard and soft money accounts. Soft money contributions 
are unregulated, but can only be used for limited purposes to finance 
general party activities like registration drives. But hard money 
is regulated and subject to limits, and was spent directly on Clinton-Gore 
re-election efforts. The seemingly technical question of whether Gore 
knew the distinction between hard money and soft money is significant 
because Reno has said that any solicitations for the Clinton re-election 
effort _ that is, solicitation of hard money _ by the president or 
the vice president, could have been illegal. She reasoned that under 
election laws, Clinton and Gore were prohibited, as federal officials, 
from soliciting funds on government property. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>