<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981123.0488 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Calling its count of machine and paper ballots in the race for attorney 
general virtually complete, the state Board of Elections said Monday 
that Eliot Spitzer remained in the lead, with 21,191 more votes than 
Dennis Vacco, the Republican incumbent. The board said the only votes 
left to count statewide were recorded on fewer than 1,000 paper ballots 
from Erie County. Last week, Spitzer, the Democratic challenger, declared 
victory and began putting together a transition team. But Vacco's 
campaign aides have raised allegations of widespread irregularities 
in the balloting in New York City and have gone to court to force 
further investigation. The two campaigns met in state Supreme Courtin 
Manhattan again Monday, where lawyers for Vacco's campaign said more 
than 1,000 ballots might have been cast in the names of voters who 
had died before the Nov. 3 election. In court last week, the lawyers 
said they had discovered a 37,000-vote discrepancy in New York City. 
They acknowledged Monday that that allegation could not be substantiated. 
Justice Thomas Keegan allowed the Vacco campaign to spend a few more 
days looking through voting records to clarify the claims of voting 
irregularities. He asked a representative of the Board of Elections 
to return to court on Monday with results of the voting machine tally 
and asked the Vacco campaign to report its findings then. Nevertheless, 
the judge told officials of both campaigns, if Spitzer's lead remains 
``at or about 20,000, it would appear that this election would be 
over.'' The board's updated tally does not include nearly 22,000 paper 
ballots that have been set aside because of objections by one or both 
of the campaigns. The Vacco campaign has asked that the ballots remain 
unopened until it completes its scrutiny of the results from the voting 
machines used in New York City. But Spitzer's campaign wants the ballots 
to be opened and counted. Because the Republican and Democratic Parties 
had expected a close race for the U.S. Senate seat held by Alfonse 
D'Amato, a Republican, they agreed several months ago that any paper 
ballot in any race that either side contested would be set aside. 
Under the agreement, the state Supreme Court would review them and 
rule on their validity. Spitzer's lawyers and campaign officials denounced 
the Vacco campaign's request for additional time. ``We're seeing a 
big smoke screen,'' said Martin Connor, the state Senate minority 
leader and a lawyer for the Spitzer campaign. ``The Republican State 
Committee is trying to make up excuses for why they did so poorly 
this year.'' Connor insisted that there was no reason for the challenged 
ballots to remain unopened and uncounted. ``They are ultimately going 
to be counted and they are going to increase Eliot Spitzer's margin,'' 
he told reporters after his court appearance. Indeed, Thomas Spargo, 
Vacco's campaign lawyer, acknowledged that the disputed ballots would 
probably raise Spitzer's total count. More than 12,000 paper ballots 
cast by voters in New York City, where Spitzer won the voting-machine 
count by more than 3-1, were challenged. The remaining challenged 
votes, nearly 9,000, were cast elsewhere in the state. But many of 
those ballots were cast in Democratic strongholds in other urban areas. 
Spargo said the Vacco campaign conducted a computer search that matched 
the names of more than 1,000 people who voted Nov. 3 with names that 
appeared in records of the Social Security Administration indicating 
that death benefits had been paid to their survivors. ``We want the 
opportunity to go into the books and to determine whether or not the 
votes that have been cast in this election have been properly and 
legitimately cast,'' Spargo said. ``It's very close. But you need 
the time and access to go in and check and double-check the records.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>