<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981123.0317 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The jetliner of the future will be a double-deck behemoth flying 500 
to 800 people in three classes of service, or the same old same old, 
perhaps with bigger fuel tanks to fly farther nonstop, say New York 
to Singapore. Airbus Industrie and the Boeing Co., the only makers 
of jumbo jets, have offered those two very different visions of the 
future. Boeing announced in January 1997 that it would not invest 
$7 billion to develop a bigger version of the 747, citing a lack of 
demand for any plane bigger than the popular 416-seat version it now 
sells. But Airbus, the European company, hopes to announce a year 
from now that it will build double-deck versions of its biggest plane, 
the four-engine A-340. Airbus calls the proposed plane the A-3-XX, 
with five models seating 481 to 656 passengers. Commercial flights 
of the plane could begin in 2004, Airbus said. A superjumbo jetliner 
would push down costs, meaning lower fares for customers and bigger 
profits for airlines, said Mary Anne Greczyn, an Airbus spokeswoman. 
The A-3-XX would have 10-across seating (3-4-3) for coach on the main 
deck, but only nine across (3-3-3) on the upper deck, she said, allowing 
for slightly wider seats. First class, which would be downstairs, 
and business class, upstairs, would each be six across. The plane 
would feature wider aisles than those in 747s, with a wide, almost 
grand, front staircase and a modest, curving staircase at the tail. 
``Airbus appears to be quite serious about building this plane,'' 
said Joe Hopkins, a spokesman for United Airlines. ``We are of the 
school that a larger airplane with seating for 700 to 800 could make 
sense in the right circumstances because we have very strong hubs 
and we could consolidate traffic. But a lot depends on cost.'' Virgin 
Atlantic, the quirky British carrier, is among the airlines most interested 
in a superjumbo. ``We are looking at the Airbus 3-XX on our most popular 
routes given that frequency is an issue,'' said Gareth Edmondson-Jones, 
a Virgin spokesman. ``Between the U.S. and U.K. you just can't add 
frequency at the moment because slots at Heathrow and Gatwick are 
locked up and that makes a much bigger plane attractive.'' But he 
also said that if increased competition is allowed at London's airports, 
it would diminish Virgin's interest in superjumbo craft. British Airways 
also believes it could fill a superjumbo, but only on routes between 
the biggest cities, said John Lampl, a spokesman. Thai Airlines and 
Malaysia Airlines have also said they want a superjumbo, but the weakness 
of Southeast Asian economies casts doubt on demand on their routes, 
for now. Superjumbos can be built using existing technology, said 
Ilan Kroo, who teaches aircraft design at Stanford University and 
has been a consultant to Boeing. ``Our analyses suggest you can make 
airplanes reasonably efficient up to 1,000 passengers or so,'' Kroo 
said. ``The problems are much more practical, such as how you get 
all of those people out in the required time in an emergency and how 
you build an airplane that is not so tall that it requires unreasonable 
slides in an emergency situation.'' Airlines would also have to spend 
money to build new jetways to get people on and off quickly, or else 
lose some cost savings as planes spend more hours on the ground. Airbus' 
proposed 656-seat version would carry a list price of $245 million, 
which is about $373,000 a seat. That's 12 percent less a seat than 
its current one-deck jumbo, the A-340-600, which is scheduled to begin 
flying in 2002. A bigger plane also means many more passengers with 
the same number of pilots, reducing operating costs. Boeing's analysis 
that the world does not need a superjumbo jet, or at least not for 
nearly two more decades, rests heavily on a belief that governments 
will continue easing regulation of airlines. ``In tightly regulated 
markets,'' Boeing said this fall, in its latest forecast on global 
demand for commercial planes, ``airlines have little incentive to 
look beyond the option of employing larger airplanes. In competitive 
markets, airlines consistently choose to add flights.'' Over the next 
10 years, Boeing projects, airlines around the world will be flying 
60 percent more passengers, with nearly all of the increase coming 
from the addition of flights. But some smaller planes will be replaced 
with existing larger models. For example, 50-seat regional jets are 
already replacing 19- to 34-seat turboprops on flights to smaller 
cities. For airports operating at capacity, Boeing suggests adding 
flights at slow times of the day _ for example, late-afternoon departures 
from the West Coast to the East. But persuading customers to take 
these flights, which would land in Boston and Philadelphia between 
midnight and 4 a.m., could be difficult. Airbus says that strategy 
will not work because people want nonstop service at convenient times. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>