<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981123.0388 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In an anti-corruption crackdown ordered by Mexico City's new police 
chief, detectives arrested 44 city officers Monday on charges that 
included murder, rape, extortion and abuse of authority. Mexico City's 
attorney general, Samuel del Villar, called the roundup ``an unprecedented 
effort to impose the rule of law.'' Arrest warrants for some of the 
officers had been issued as long as six years ago but had never been 
served. A week ago, Police Chief Alejandro Gertz Manero, a former 
university rector who took office in August, announced that violent 
crime is soaring because mafia leaders are defying attempts to end 
police corruption. So on Friday, he ordered about 215 city police 
officers whose names appeared on lists of arrest warrants compiled 
in Mexico City and three neighboring states to report Monday morning 
to several police precincts and a downtown police training academy. 
More than 100 officers who showed up were detained by scores of city 
detectives, many wearing masks. But only 44 of them were later identified 
positively as men whose names were included on the arrest warrants, 
Del Villar said. Some of those summoned failed to appear, he said, 
and others were able to prove that although they may share similar 
or identical names with those sought for crimes, they were not the 
wanted individuals. Del Villar did not give details of the charges. 
Most of the officers who were arrested belong to the city's Auxiliary 
and Banking Police, two government-controlled agencies with a total 
of 59,000 uniformed officers whose services are rented out to banks, 
corporations and wealthy individuals. The officers stand sentry outside 
office buildings or serve as bodyguards. In addition, Mexico City 
has 35,000 traffic and beat officers, known as preventive police and 
3,700 plainclothes detectives, known as judicial police; none of those 
officers were arrested Monday. Both Del Villar and Gertz work for 
Mayor Cuauhtemoc Cardenas, who is expected to run for president in 
2000 representing the leftist party he formed in 1988. The success 
he and his aides show over the next months in curbing violent crime 
is likely to be a major factor in the campaign. Cardenas' presidential 
opponents will include candidates from President Ernesto Zedillo's 
Institutional Revolutionary Party, known as the PRI, and from the 
pro-business National Action Party. If Monday's action was dramatic, 
it did little to reduce the enormous number of Mexican police who 
are wanted for crimes but remain at large, authorities acknowledged. 
Thousands of officers in federal, state and municipal police agencies 
are still wanted in connection with serious crimes, at least on paper. 
Many of those who have have not been arrested are protected by corrupt 
superiors. And others avoid arrest because chaos in the country's 
judiciary and police systems prevents authorities from matching the 
names of corrupt officers with the warrants for their arrest. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>