<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981123.0072 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For well over half a century, the political contours of the Zionist 
movement and Israel have been defined by a division between those 
who are prepared to share the biblical Jewish homeland with the Arabs, 
and those who claim it all. At Israel's founding in 1948, the Labor 
Zionist leadership, which went on to govern Israel in its first three 
decades of independence, accepted a pragmatic partition of what had 
been British Palestine into independent Jewish and Arab states. The 
opposition Revisionist Zionists, who evolved into today's Likud party, 
sought ``Eretz Yisrael Ha-Shlema'' _ Greater Israel, or literally, 
the Whole Land of Israel. Through all the years that followed, that 
basic divergence in outlook continued to define the difference between 
Labor and Likud, the two principal movements in Israeli politics. 
Even after the Camp David accords of 1978, the Oslo accords of 1993, 
and the withdrawal of Israeli troops from most of Hebron last year, 
it was still possible to think that a Likud government might halt 
or reverse the process of turning over West Bank land to Arab control. 
But last week, Israel's parliament went through the last formal act 
of closing that historical political divide. At the instigation of 
Likud's most important leaders, it approved the latest Israeli-Palestinian 
accord by a large majority that crossed party lines, and sanctioned 
a handover of territory that will leave the Palestinians in full or 
partial control of 40 percent of the West Bank. In effect, the vote 
took the dream of a Greater Israel out of the political mainstream 
and relegated it to the margins of Israeli politics. The death knell 
of Greater Israel was barely audible during a raucous late-night vote 
boycotted by several Cabinet members from the Likud. It was left to 
Foreign Minister Ariel Sharon, long a champion of Jewish settlement 
in the West Bank and a vocal opponent of territorial compromise, to 
acknowledge the enormous shift that had occurred in his political 
camp. ``I don't know of another nation that would have given up areas 
linked to its historical heritage,'' Sharon declared, ``but we in 
the government had to decide whether we want to make a real and honest 
effort to reach arrangements that may bring peace between us and our 
neighbors. The government's response was yes.'' The triumph of pragmatism 
blurred traditional distinctions. Likud, despite defections, had joined 
Labor in accepting the inevitability of territorial compromise, and 
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu worked to get the agreement passed 
in de facto alliance with the opposition. ``Approval of the agreement, 
which transfers significant areas to the Palestinian Authority, has 
historic value because it will be carried out by a government of the 
right,' the newspaper Haaretz commented in an editorial. ``It will 
be difficult in the future to go back to a policy of Greater Israel.'' 
This was, of course, anathema to hard-core followers of Vladimir Jabotinsky, 
the founder of the Revisionist movement, who in 1937 declared that 
partition would be ``the death of humanitarian Zionism'' because it 
would leave no room for millions of Jewish immigrants fleeing persecution, 
and would make a Jewish state indefensible. ``The Likud party is virtually 
nonexistent,'' lamented Yitzhak Shamir, a former prime minister who 
was a leader of the Irgun, a Revisionist underground during the British 
Mandate in Palestine. ``Nothing is left of what was our backbone: 
the principle that the Land of Israel is indivisible.'' Revolutionary 
as it may seem, Likud's abandonment of its maximalist vision has in 
fact been evolving for years. The seed was sown in 1977, when Menachem 
Begin of Likud brought his party to power for the first time in a 
stunning election victory over Labor. A decade before, in the 1967 
war, Israeli troops had in effect undone the partition accepted in 
1948 by overrunning the West Bank and Gaza Strip. Ever since, Begin 
had preached undying loyalty to what he called Judea and Samaria (the 
West Bank lands) and promoted Jewish settlement there. But he did 
not annex the West Bank and Gaza to Israel after he took office, reflecting 
a recognition that absorbing the Palestinians could turn Israel it 
into a binational state instead of a Jewish one. After Egyptian President 
Anwar Sadat visited Israel in 1977, Begin proposed autonomy for the 
Palestinians, suggesting that the question of ultimate sovereignty 
over the occupied territories be set aside. The plan lacked a territorial 
dimension, offering the Palestinians administration of their own affairs 
under Israeli rule, but it signaled an early readiness to acknowledge 
competing claims to the same land. In the 1978 Camp David accords 
with Egypt, Begin took a further step, agreeing to negotiate a transitional 
period of Palestinian self-government in the West Bank and Gaza Strip 
and a final agreement on those areas with Egypt, Jordan and Palestinian 
representatives. Yet Begin continued to encourage Jewish settlement 
in the occupied territories in an effort to block any possibility 
of a Palestinian state. Shamir, who succeeded Begin, sat face-to-face 
with Palestinian representatives from the territories at the 1991 
Middle East peace talks in Madrid, even as they consulted more or 
less openly with leaders of the Palestine Liberation Organization. 
Netanyahu, in turn, committed himself during his election campaign 
to honor the 1993 Oslo accord on Palestinian self-rule signed by the 
previous Labor government, effectively assenting to a withdrawal in 
the West Bank. He then signed on to the process himself in the 1997 
Hebron agreement, which set the terms for a pullout from most of the 
city and for further Israeli withdrawals in the West Bank. ``Policy 
is a combination of vision and reality, and we have come to terms 
with reality,'' said Dan Meridor, a Likud lawmaker who was a close 
aide to Begin and served in Netanyahu's Cabinet. ``The new line of 
the Likud is that we are going for a compromise, but let's fight for 
every inch we can.'' ``It's not a black or white picture any more,'' 
Meridor added. ``The question now isn't whether to compromise or not, 
but what sort of compromise, how big or how small. We're more like 
America, where the issue is who is more hawkish or dovish.'' As ideological 
differences over the price of peace fade, conventional labels of right 
and left could grow increasingly irrelevant, giving way to new political 
alignments. Disputes between secular and religious Israelis, gaps 
between rich and poor and tensions between Sephardic and Ashkenazic 
Jews have already emerged as defining issues for powerful political 
constituencies. ``The political map no longer reflects the real divisions 
in Israeli society,'' Meridor said. Avishai Margalit, a prominent 
Israeli political philosopher, said that after the latest accord, 
the public seemed to be shifting its attention from peacemaking to 
more mundane matters that impact directly on the quality of daily 
life, such as health services, economic opportunity and local politics. 
``I call it the era of post peace, as if peace has already been achieved,'' 
Margalit said. ``The public perception is that the ideological debate 
has been decided, the Likud has accepted compromise, and now it's 
just up to the lawyers to hammer out the percentages. We've already 
bought the apartment.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>