<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981123.0302 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When a major character in a series is placed in mortal danger, the 
question is not ``Will he die?'' but ``How will he escape?'' But when 
Jimmy Smits decided to leave ``N.Y.P.D. Blue'' after five episodes 
this season, the show took full advantage of the freedom his departure 
offered. Smits' character, Detective Bobby Simone, has quickly faded 
from a heart infection and at the end of last week's episode was about 
to receive a transplant. The plot has energized the series with the 
kind of unpredictability usually limited to films. One way or another, 
Tuesday night's 90-minute installment is Bobby's last. And though 
many viewers will watch because of the suspense about his fate, there 
are other reasons Bobby's final story has been so poignant. This season 
``N.Y.P.D. Blue'' has been as good as ever (and it has been among 
the best on the air, though last season was slack). Bobby's decline 
has added a tone of sadness and anxiety rare in a weekly series, and 
the show has come through with a new emotional depth and stylishness. 
As Bobby has drifted in and out of consciousness in the past weeks, 
dream scenes have been used sparingly and to great effect. In one 
recurring dream he has seen Patsy (Brad Sullivan), now dead, a father 
figure from Bobby's youth who inspired his hobby of raising pigeons 
(one of the quirky details that have filled out his character). Last 
week Patsy sent Bobby back to the world of the living. Tuesday night's 
dreams seem especially true and haunting. The episode ignores any 
major crimes to focus on the characters' private lives. It would ruin 
the suspense to reveal too much about Bobby, though it gives away 
nothing to say there is a battle between two doctors who have appeared 
before: Bobby's arrogant surgeon, Dr. Swan (Jack Blessing), and the 
young Dr. Carrera (David Barrera). Some peculiar, ambiguous conversations 
make it hard to judge which, if either, is the good doctor. And there 
is a compelling, unrelated subplot about Andy Sipowicz (Dennis Franz) 
and his ex-wife, Katie, played with powerful understatement by Debra 
Monk. After the death of their grown son, Katie has started to drink, 
which echoes Andy's own former drinking days and makes him feel guiltily 
responsible for having left her. The plot adds great resonance to 
the sadness that has imbued the series all season. In the past weeks, 
Andy's response to Bobby's decline has been anger as well as grief, 
which has called for Franz to explode too many times, with some scenery-chomping 
that is as much the writers' fault as the actor's. Tuesday night Franz 
shows Andy more in control of his explosive emotions, and the effect 
on viewers is likely to be even more wrenching ``N.Y.P.D. Blue'' has 
always violated truisms about television heroes. Here, they are complex 
and imperfect. They may drink or rough up suspects or display unconscious 
racial bias (and that's just Andy). Bobby was the judicious center 
around which so many others got to spin out of control. And though 
his level-headed approach offered Smits few opportunities for stormy 
acting, it is a huge and subtle accomplishment to have made Bobby 
so richly believable. And let's not ignore the hunk factor. Take an 
informal poll of women: he was the reason they watched, and they always 
thought Bobby could do better than Diane Russell (Kim Delaney), the 
neurotic colleague he married. Whether Bobby loses his life or recovers 
and moves on to a new career that takes him out of town (airline pilot? 
professional pigeon raiser?) the tone of the series is bound to change 
when Rick Schroeder arrives next week as Andy's green new partner. 
And when tonight's episode ends, it will be time for a couple of reality 
checks. Presumably Smits still has an agent and some healthy career 
prospects. And thank goodness for reruns. PRODUCTION NOTES N.Y.P.D. 
BLUE ABC, Tuesday night at 9:30 (ABC) Story by Steven Bochco, David 
Milch and Bill Clark and teleplay by Nicholas Wootton. Directed by 
Paris Barclay. Steven Bochco, David Milch and Mark Tinker, series 
executive producers; Michael M. Robin, series co-executive producer. 
A production of Steven Bochco Productions. WITH: Jimmy Smits (Detective 
Bobby Simone), Dennis Franz (Detective Andy Sipowicz), James McDaniel 
(Lieut. Arthur Fancy), Nicholas Turturro (Detective James Martinez), 
Sharon Lawrence (Assistant District Attorney Sylvia Costas), Gordon 
Clapp (Detective Greg Medavoy), Kim Delaney (Detective Diane Russell), 
Lola Glaudini (Dolores Mayo) and Debra Monk (Katie Sipowicz). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>