<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981123.2000.2345 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
American author Ambrose Bierce defined insurance as "an ingenious 
modern game of chance in which the player is permitted to enjoy the 
comfortable conviction that he is beating the man who keeps the table." 
Alas, the man who keeps the table has been stacking the deck lately, 
pulling out such cards as global warming, El Nino and Hurricane Mitch. 
The result is that the players, in this case local and national governments, 
are finding it hard to purchase insurance for vulnerable areas. A 
map compiled by the huge German reinsurance company Munich Rhea has 
heightened concerns. Drawing on data gathered from around the globe, 
the map pinpoints areas where climate changes are expected to hit 
the hardest. From London, The World's Stephen Beard has our story. 
The disaster map tells an alarming story. The escalating effect of 
El Nino, tidal changes in the Pacific and of global warming could 
wreak havoc over the next decade. Richard Washington, a climatologist 
at Oxford University, says the map shows that a wide swath of countries 
could be hit by rising sea levels, tropical storms and drought. Countries 
like Indonesia, Australia, South Africa, Kenya, Tanzania and then 
large parts of Brazil. It covers so much of the world that it's quite 
difficult to list all the countries. The map shows where violent wind 
storms, torrential rain and flooding are most likely. Small islands 
in the Caribbean and the Pacific could be swamped. The Maldives in 
the Indian Ocean could disappear altogether. And, says Richard Washington, 
parts of the industrialized world could also be at risk. One of the 
prime areas might be the Southeastern seaboard of the United States 
which, over the last 20 years, has seen far fewer tropical cyclones 
than the norm. And that's allowed development to occur along that 
coastline where there shouldn't really have been development. And 
if there are major storms along that coastline in years to come, damage 
is just going to be inconceivably high. Ladies and gentlemen, information 
received from the owners of the Ocean Liberty confirms wreckage located 
in the search area... At Lloyd's of London, one of the biggest insurers 
in the world, underwriters have been battered over recent years by 
multibillion dollar claims resulting from natural disasters. Hurricane 
Andrew in 1992 cost Lloyd's and others more than $17 billion. Not 
surprisingly the insurers are growing increasingly nervous about climatic 
change. Already, says Andrew Dugalenski of Commercial Union, some 
countries have found it hard to get coverage. In the Caribbean, we 
saw examples after a spate of hurricanes around the turn of the decade 
where it became almost impossible to insure some private properties 
and hotels. And I could see that kind of picture extending into some 
other areas. Armed with the disaster map, insurers could start shunning 
large parts of southern Asia, the whole of the Caribbean and the Southeastern 
seaboard of the U.S. Individuals, companies and even governments in 
those regions might find it impossible to buy even basic insurance 
protection. Not everyone, however, believes that the disaster map 
is an accurate guide to what is likely to happen to the world's climate. 
There's a cold pool of air pushing in from Scandinavia. Now, this 
is going to cause a problem when the warmer air coming off the Atlantic 
meets... This is the London office of a flourishing consulting company 
called Weather Action. It produces long-range weather forecasts for 
its commercial clients. The boss, Pierce Corbin, an astrophysicist 
by training, says his team doesn't accept the dire predictions contained 
in the disaster map. We think it is fundamentally incorrect. There 
may be some more disasters coming. But we think if there are any, 
this is a gross overstatement of what is likely to happen. Corbin 
and his colleagues believe that man-made pollution is not heating 
up the atmosphere significantly or changing the climate to any extent. 
The key factor behind changing weather patterns, he says, is the sun. 
He claims it's sunspot activity that matters, and on that basis, we 
should all be able to relax. Signs are present that this solar cycle 
we're in won't reach the sunspot numbers that previous ones have done. 
And our statistics show that that means, you know, over time scales 
of a couple of decades that world temperatures will fall. Certainly, 
we would say that that idea of continuous rise is completely -- in 
temperatures is completely over the top. Corbin's forecast is a comforting 
one, but many other climatologists say the disaster map looks more 
credible. They're calling for a United Nations initiative to set up 
a global insurance superfund so that every country can be covered 
in case the worst fears are realized. For The World, this is Stephen 
Beard in London. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>