<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981123.2000.0695 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The United States expressed outrage today over the murder of a Russian 
parliamentarian. Galina Starovoitova was gunned down at her home in 
St. Petersburg Friday. Russia's prime minister, incensed by the murder, 
today vowed to crack down on crime and eradicate extremism and corruption. 
Starovoitova's killing and yesterday's hospitalization of President 
Boris Yeltsin for pneumonia have raised questions about Russia's future 
and about U.S. policy toward its former enemy. The World's Jeb Sharpe 
reports. No one seems to doubt that Galina Starovoitova's murder was 
politically motivated. Her close associate, former Russian prime minister, 
Yegor Gaidar, says it's hard to overestimate her importance to the 
democratic reform movement in Russia. She was one of the strongest 
opponents of radical nationalism and the Communists in Russia. If 
you will reread in Russia the radical nationalistic press, you will 
see Galina in practically all the leads of those who should be punished 
because they disagree with the radical nationalists. If Starovoitova 
symbolized Russia's attempts at democratic reform, her murder may 
well symbolize its descent into lawless chaos. Steven Cohen, a professor 
of Russian studies and history at New York University, believes most 
Americans don't understand the depth of Russia's crisis. Economically, 
the country has gone through a six-year depression that is longer, 
deeper and more destructive than the depression the United States 
suffered in the 1930s. Politically, Russia has an exceedingly unstable 
political system built by and around one very ill political leader, 
the president Boris Yeltsin country. And therefore, we're witnessing 
something probably unprecedented in modern history -- such a crisis 
in such a country. Cohen believes United States policy in Russia has 
failed miserably by assuming the huge post-Communist country could 
be transformed exclusively through free-market reforms into a kind 
of replica of the United States. The United States intruded very deeply 
into the internal politics of Russia in a way that the United States 
does not intrude into the internal politics, say, of Canada or France 
or Germany or Great Britain, where we would be resented for doing 
so. We intruded in the sense that we actively campaigned with our 
money, visits of our officials for one faction of the political spectrum 
-- that associated with Boris Yeltsin. Cohen now favors pumping billions 
of dollars into Russia, but without what he calls "dictats and ultimatums." 
But other Russia experts believe there is very little the United States 
can do at this particular juncture until Russia itself comes up with 
a coherent anti-crisis strategy. I can't see really the world outside 
of Russia can influence Russia in any positive way. Now other than 
trying to maintain certain standards. Anders Usland is with the Carnegie 
Endowment for International Peace. For example, a political murder, 
as the murder of Galina Starovoitova now, is an awful thing, and the 
world should be upset. And it's truly weird that the mayor of St. 
Petersburg has, to my knowledge, not said a word about how outrageous 
this is. But to try to influence Russia positively by any kind of 
economic assistance when the economic policy is tilted wrong is impossible. 
Russia is not prepared to listen to any economic advice. Other Russia 
experts agree there is little the West can do right now. Michael McFall 
of Stanford University believes the sooner Yeltsin retires, the better. 
Right now, you're sort of in a holding pattern where nobody wants 
to take decisive decisions because they're all waiting for the transitionary 
moment. If before I thought it was, you know, that might create some 
windows of opportunity for Prime Minister Primakov to do something, 
I'm now convinced that it's the opposite -- that it has led to this 
more sort of muddling through. And Russia really can't afford to continue 
to muddle through. McFall and others advocate patience and a long-term 
strategy. But it gets harder and harder to think long-term when Russia 
continues to slide downwards day by day. For The World, I'm Jeb Sharpe. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>