<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981123.2000.2019 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is The World, a co-production of the BBC World Service, PRI and 
WGBH in Boston. I'm Lisa Mullins. It's a big day for big tobacco. 
Five cigarette makers today are signing a $206 billion settlement 
with attorneys general from 46 states. The states will drop their 
claims for health care reimbursements in return for the money, which 
the tobacco companies will pay out over 25 years. North of the border 
in British Columbia, they're dealing with the same issue in a similar 
fashion. The Canadian province has filed a lawsuit to recover medical 
costs from tobacco companies. With us now is Elliott Meyers, who's 
an attorney acting on behalf of the British Columbian government. 
Could you tell us, first of all, Attorney Meyers, how is the British 
Columbian lawsuit different from the court settlement by 46 American 
states? Well, it's certainly modeled on the lawsuits that have been 
brought in the United States. The allegations are pretty well the 
same as what most of the states have alleged -- such as deceit. We've 
added a couple of actions that are more appropriate to Canada, such 
as failure to warn. The companies are the same. They are all part 
of the same multinational groups, although they have different operating 
entities within Canada. But as I said, more or less, it's the same 
allegations that were made in the United States. So then do you feel 
as though it's the case where since some of the tobacco companies 
are owned by U.S. companies -- some of the companies that you're suing 
-- do you believe that the United States deal set some kind of a precedent 
for the action that you're taking in Canada? Well, we hope so. Right 
now, we're just in the stage of having launched our lawsuit. So we're 
certainly not at the negotiation strategy. But certainly one would 
be the model for the other. As you say, you're just launching it at 
this point, and I know that the health minister in British Columbia, 
Penny Pretty, has just gotten back from a tour of Canada, trying to 
win support for the action from other provinces. Has she had any luck? 
To what extent are other provinces joining you in the suit? Oh, I 
think it's too early to say. Again, our action is only two weeks old, 
and Minister Pretty was just visiting the other provinces last week. 
So it's a bit early to give you the final word on that. The tobacco 
lobby, as you know, is extraordinarily powerful or has been in the 
past in the United States. Is it the same situation in Canada that 
you would face a significant opposition possibly from the tobacco 
industry there? Oh, definitely. We've already seen that. The tobacco 
industry has, their lobby group has set up an office in Vancouver, 
and they did that really solely in response to the government's tobacco, 
our anti-smoking initiative. And they've been taking out full-page 
ads in both the national papers and the local papers here criticizing 
the government's actions. Do you think that that kind of pressure 
might be one of the reasons that at least as of this point no other 
provinces have joined British Columbia in the suit? Well, it may be 
part of it. I don't know if I can speculate on that, or it may simply 
be a wait-and-see attitude to see how far we get to see whether the 
other provinces will join in. It may be that the settlement that you've 
seen just today in the USA may encourage them to come onboard. Is 
your aim in the suit to achieve a settlement pretty much like the 
one here? In other words, is your primary goal to get simply as much 
money as possible from the industry? Our goal is to get compensation 
for the health care costs. But we also have smoking reduction goals 
as well, just as you have had in the States, document disclosure goals 
as well. Is it the kind of case where the government of British Columbia 
feels as though it's sufficiently taking what might be considered 
a two-pronged approached here, and that is the case where there are 
-- certainly, there's a demand for cigarettes among many residents 
still in British Columbia and that perhaps the real goal here should 
be simply trying to get people to quit smoking instead of suing the 
tobacco companies. Well, in point of fact, this is just one prong 
of the government's anti-smoking strategy. At the same time it introduced 
legislation that requires the tobacco companies to pay a licensing 
fee to the government, which the government will, in turn, use to 
fund its anti-smoking strategies. It also passed an act that requires 
the tobacco companies to list the ingredients in tobacco and the byproducts 
of smoke. And the government has been very active in the schools and 
otherwise trying to promote their anti-smoking strategy and to encourage 
people not to smoke, not to take up smoking and, if they are smokers, 
to try and quit. Elliott Meyers, a lawyer working for the British 
Columbia government in its lawsuit against tobacco companies, speaking 
with us from Vancouver. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>