<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981123.2000.0407 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Meanwhile, in London, Britain organized a meeting today of 16 Iraqi 
opposition groups. The World's Mary Louise Kelly was there and filed 
this report. Uniting the Iraqi opposition means getting more than 
70 factions to cooperate. They range from Kurdish nationalists to 
Shiite Muslims to former ruling party officials. Most observers believe 
only four or five of the groups really matter, and even those are 
racked by splits and rivalries and, in most cases, a lack of support 
inside Iraq. I must admit that the opposition have become part of 
the problem rather than part of the solution. Lathe Kuba, a London-based 
opposition figure, says no amount of outside aid will help unless 
Iraqi dissident groups learn to work together. I think Iraqis must 
intensify their effort, first, to get their house in order. Iraqis 
rushing to the foreign office to meet or to the States without getting 
their house in order can never reach a conclusive result as far as 
Iraq is concerned. Today's get-together was supposed to be a chance 
to do just that -- to settle differences and unite against Saddam 
Hussein. But the representatives who gathered today say they remains 
skeptical of each other, perhaps with good reason, as it's suspected 
that Iraqi double agents have infiltrated many of the groups. Opposition 
leaders are also cynical about Western promises of support. On several 
occasions since the Gulf War in 1991, says Nabil Musawi of the London-based 
Iraqi National Congress, Washington encouraged rebellion against Baghdad 
and then failed to help. Once it makes a commitment, it shouldn't 
throw the potato when it gets too hot. This is what happened to us. 
We decided to take on Saddam's army in northern Iraq. We mobilized 
our people. We got the funding, and we had the blessing and support 
of the U.S. until the last minute. The night before we were launching 
our attack, we were contacted and told, "You're on your own." Musawi 
says the failed mobilization cost the Iraqi National Congress hundreds 
of thousands of dollars. But the greater cost was the blow to the 
group's credibility within Iraq. Musawi says such episodes foster 
cynicism among ordinary Iraqis. These people will taunt us. "Look 
what happens to you. You chose to deal with the West. This is how 
the West treats you. This is how America treats you." And then, the 
people will start to question the legitimacy of the political message 
that we give to them every day of the usefulness of dealing with the 
West. That's a major concern because the need to build support within 
Iraq is one of the few principles nearly all the opposition leaders 
agree on. Ken Pollack of the National Defense University in Washington, 
says it's the single biggest challenge facing Iraqi opposition groups. 
Right now, what the Iraqi opposition has to do is to find ways of 
making in-roads into Iraq and finding the folks inside Iraq who will 
lead an opposition internally against Saddam. The external opposition 
is important, but there is no way that they are going to be the ones 
to unseat Saddam. It has to come from inside the country. Creating 
that internal support is one of the major goals of the Iraq Liberation 
Act. Recently passed by Congress, it calls for Washington provide 
$97 million worth of military equipment and training to Iraqi dissidents. 
But Clinton administration officials haven't yet decided which group 
should get the money, and so the act itself is now contributing to 
divisions within the opposition. The Iraqi National Congress has been 
lobbying Senate and congressional leaders for the funding. Meanwhile, 
other leading groups, such as the Iraqi National Accord, argue that 
they are better placed to win support within the country. But Ken 
Pollack says no one group can do the job on its own. Putting all of 
your money on one horse or putting all of your eggs in one basket 
is simply not a prudent approach. The best course of action is to 
try as many different approaches as you possibly can. And so, for 
that reason, I think that you'll see the United States continue to 
support efforts both to topple Saddam by way of a coup and also by 
way of an insurgency. Opposition leaders emerged from today's meeting 
with a pledge to work together more closely in their fight for a democratic 
Iraq. The question remains, though, whether American and British officials 
will grow wary of investing too much time and resources into groups 
that often seem more intent on fighting each other than Saddam Hussein. 
For The World, I'm Mary Louise Kelly in London. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>