<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981123.2000.1258 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
You know the rules. You're in a crowded subway, a busy street or maybe 
an open marketplace. Button up that pocket, zip up your purse and 
keep your wits about you. Otherwise, you could fall prey to the 20th 
century version of the old quick-draw gunslinger -- the pickpocket. 
Bob Arnot knows all about pickpockets. He has studied them the world 
over and has shared his findings with the U.S. military, with foreign 
governments and with community groups. Well, you know, the first thing, 
Bob, that people are going to think about you when you're speaking 
about pickpocketing is that you're speaking from experience. yes. 
Are you... Have I been -- have it been a pickpocket, right? yes. I 
have never been a sort of pickpocket out there in the street. When 
I do my lectures on it, of course, we also demonstrate on how it's 
done. And people say, "How did he ever get so good at it?" My interest 
started as a journalist in the early '60s out in the Far East. And 
I kind of stumbled on youngsters were begging around churches, and 
very often they were set up doing a little bit of pickpocketing. And 
I found it absolutely weird that I saw the same pattern from country 
to country, and I started doing stories on that. And every year, we 
spend about three months out in the field tracking these people, sometimes 
filming them, doing documentaries and book projects and what have 
you on scams of this nature. And describe how they operate then. There 
are so many levels of it, you know. There are the breakfast thieves, 
and at the very top, they may concentrate only at the finest restaurants 
around the world where they target people who come to breakfast with 
their attache cases or computers. And they may go up for another glass 
of orange, and someone removes their computer and passes it on to 
a second guy who passes it on to a third guy, and there is distraction 
and they walk off with it. That's a smart, sophisticated way. A simple 
way is where someone in the street is walking towards you and steps 
on your foot, and he brushes down and tell you that he apologizes. 
And as he tags on the pants leg, brushing it off, his other hand goes 
for the hip pocket. What are some of the more imaginative techniques 
that you've witnessed? I would say a very common thing in Europe is 
what we call the pigeon poop squirters. What happens is someone comes 
up without you know it, and they have a little plastic container in 
their hand, and they squirt a little gooey stuff on your back. It 
certainly looks like pigeon poop, and they walk away from you. And 
then, 50 yards later, they come up, and they point at it and say, 
"Oh, look at what you've got. Can I help you?" And they have a small 
bottle of water in their hand, a little paper, and they try and brush 
it off. They take you to a small cafe. And while they're doing the 
cleaning process, they have an excuse to go for your pants pocket 
or your fanny pack or wherever it is. It's very, very common and very 
smartly done. I understand that in some places, these are actually 
family affairs -- this whole pickpocketing thing? In the pickpocket 
capital of the world, which is a very small part of -- in Italy, in 
Naples, Cartia Espanioli, it's a very popular destination for tourists, 
and it's very picturesque and beautiful, very narrow streets. What 
we find is that grandmothers have technical equipment -- sometimes 
beepers, sometimes cell phones. They see a tourist coming in. They 
sit in the windows. They call up their grandson, who whizzes by on 
a scooter, and they rip off your handbag from your shoulder if you 
happen to be very close to the curb. It actually nearly happened to 
us. I mean, they made an attempt to go for my Rolex watch. And they 
turned off the scooter from behind, and they kind of rolled up behind 
me. And one person pinned my arms to the side, and the other one went 
with his two fingers under my Rolex to break the pin. And immediately, 
I shouted, "Policia," at the top of my voice so to say, and my wife 
hit with an umbrella over the head, and they ran away, which were 
unusual. So then, give the listeners a little bit of help now. Maybe 
talk about the three top things to do to avoid being pickpocketed. 
Of course, it does happen all over the world. It's not that it's uniquely 
only to a few capitals, although there are some places where the percentage 
is higher. Where? Prague has a high pickpocketing incident rate. Saigon, 
for example, has a fairly high rate in the Far East, but hardly any 
other place. In Europe, I find that Barcelona and Rome would rate 
very, very high. There are certain areas around the Vatican where 
you have a high incidence. Police is trying hard to work at it. As 
far as being careful, having your money in your front pocket, in the 
pants pocket. They're usually looser and easier to go for. Hip pockets 
are better in terms that they are tight, particularly in jeans. And 
if there's a button, so much the better. And buy yourself one of those 
really cheap little bags that you hang inside your neck. There is 
practically no way a pickpocket can rip you off if you use that. The 
second thing is there is very seldom any reason today to carry a lot 
of cash. Various forms of credit cards, in my opinion, is a very smart 
idea anywhere you are in the world because you only pay something 
like 2 percent over the prevailing rate of the foreign exchange. The 
number three is general awareness, you know, raising your pace and 
your determination so that you look as someone who is really determined 
to go from point A to point B. Pickpockets do tend to read people, 
and they usually go for the people who appears to be the easier ones. 
Yeah, and then go out and have a good time. Exactly. Well, that's 
the main thing. Bob Arnot is a self-proclaimed professor of pickpocketry. 
Mr. Arnot, thank you very much once again. Thank you very much. This 
was really fun. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>