<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981123.2000.2996 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is The World. I'm Lisa Mullins. The movie that's currently packing 
them in from Manhattan to L.A. is two minutes and 10 seconds long. 
Actually, it's a trailer for a movie. You refer to the prophecy of 
the one who will bring balance to the force. You believe it's this 
boy? He can see things before they happen. So high is the anticipation 
for "Star Wars Episode I: The Phantom Menace" that all across America 
people are paying full admission just to see that preview. And when 
director George Lucas signed the deal this month to shoot the two 
other Star Wars prequels in Australia, the news shook up the entire 
Aussie film industry. We go to Sydney for that story reported by The 
World's Margaret Sternstein. George Lucas and the force will be with 
Sydney in June of the year 2000. Episode II of the "Star Wars" series 
starts shooting here then with an expected budget of $120 million 
U.S. It will be among the most expensive movies made in Australia. 
When Lucas announced the deal, he said local talent was the big attraction. 
I can go anywhere in the world and shoot, and we can use any warehouse 
for a studio. But at the same time, you're really going to some place 
where there's good talent. I don't think George Lucas coming here 
is going to get one more Australian film made. Mark Lamprell is an 
established writer on the Australian film scene. Americans come here 
with so much more money than we're able to dish out. You know, our 
little budgets are kind of sad and pathetic compared to what they're 
dealing with. They're literally, you know, maybe a 20th of the American 
budgets. So I think probably what will happen is that crews will end 
up expecting to be paid a lot more money because this is where the 
big guys are coming. Basically, we have six stages, five of them new, 
and they're configured as four film stages and two television stages. 
During an informal tour of the lot, publicist Ann Markey says Fox 
Studios Australia is the first major studio development outside North 
America for 20th Century Fox, which is part of Rupert Murdoch's entertainment 
empire. In addition to film and TV production facilities, Fox is also 
building an entertainment complex here that will be open to the public 
by the end of next year. Fox studio manager Rod Allen says it's wrong 
to blame rising local production costs on foreign producers at Fox. 
It's all part of a growing up process, Allen says, for the Australian 
industry. What the studio offers here is Australian filmmakers the 
opportunity to do something different. And I don't think that necessarily 
undermines the other part of the industry that make lower budget films. 
The studios in Australia will stay, and they will continue to make 
Australia a back lot for Los Angeles. That is tragic. Philip Adams 
is a leading player in the history of Australian film. He's among 
those who pioneered the industry's resurgence in the 1960s and '70s. 
It was a time that gave rise to a new wave of filmmakers, such as 
Peter Weir, Gillian Armstrong, George Miller and Jane Campion -- all 
of whom now work both in Australia and in the United States. It's 
fine for Australian filmmakers to go overseas, says Adams, but he 
insists Hollywood should not invade Australian shores. I mean, the 
Vatican doesn't have the outreach that Los Angeles has. It's bad enough 
that it has 95 percent of the market share here and throughout the 
world. But I'm much more concerned, much prouder of young filmmakers 
making idiosyncratic, quirky, original Australian films. For the price 
of "Star Wars," we can make 100 of them. Adams says "Radiance" is 
a good example of a low-budget film that works. First-time director 
Rachel Perkins tells the story of Aboriginal sisters who get together 
after a long time apart. The film was made on a budget of less than 
$1.5 million U.S., funded largely by government subsidies with some 
private investment. Such financing is typical of Australian film these 
days. Since the 1960s, the industry has been based on federal funding 
and tax incentives. But that source has been drying up over the past 
decade by some 25 percent. We just could not develop an industry without 
government support. Tom Jeffrey is president of the Screen Producers 
Association of Australia. Jeffrey says cutbacks in federal subsidies 
are hurting Australian filmmakers, many of whom were angry when Rupert 
Murdoch received government subsidies in his deal to set up Fox Studios 
in 1996. If Mr. Murdoch is getting considerable concessions, then 
the local filmmaker should get similar concessions. That's not likely 
to happen, according to the federally funded Australian Film Commission. 
Meanwhile, Fox Studios says its deal with the state government was 
fair. And communications manager Victoria Bachan says the often touted 
figure of $70 million Australian in government funds is inflated. 
It's about $33 million. I think that the thing is that you have to 
look at what governments do to attract industry and business, when 
the government have done incredibly well out of the deal. The "Babe" 
sequel is a big-budget movie made by Australians, but financed mostly 
with international money. Industry observers here predict such a funding 
scenario could take Australian film-making to the next stage. For 
The World, this is Margaret Sternstein in Sydney. Big butthead. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>