<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981123.2000.2694 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Today's geography quiz took us to a city called the melting pot of 
the East and West. It replaced Istanbul as Turkey's capital 75 years 
ago. The answer is the city of Ankara. And it's a place where you'll 
find plenty of European charm as well as plenty of American fast food 
in case you need a fix. But if you don't, one authentic culinary experience 
you can easily find in Ankara is pudding. We found one that is not 
a dessert, but it is dairy free and lightly seasoned with saffron. 
Cookbook author Paula Wolfert discovered the recipe for Anatolian 
rice pudding in her many travels. You know, in Turkey, there are even 
pudding houses because they have so many kinds of pudding. But I had 
never seen a rice pudding like this one. It was the lightest. And 
the reason -- it has hardly any rice in it. It's a wedding dish, and 
what is the most important thing to serve at a wedding in Anatolia? 
A rice pilaf. But would you really want to follow a rice pilaf with 
a rice pudding? Well, that's kind of interesting because this then 
is a very elusive dish. It's a rice pudding with very little rice. 
It calls for wheat berries, but there aren't any what berries in it. 
It's really just the starch, the juice from the wheat berries. Oh, 
it's the juice of the wheat berries. But that gives it its unctuous 
quality, heftiness. And using the wheat starch, those wheat juices 
are delicious. And that's what they make Turkish delight with. Oh, 
right. So you know the taste now. Right. It has that sort of wonderful 
earthy elusive wheat flavor, lovely coating of the tongue. And it 
also means that you don't need to use milk or cream, which is good 
for people who might have some kind of food sensitivities to them. 
Absolutely. You soak shelled wheat berries. It has to be shelled. 
So you just get the shelled wheat berries. You boil them, and they're 
very starchy. It takes about two hours, and then you squeeze -- you 
squeeze out the juices. Meanwhile you've boiled your rice. Then add 
sugar to taste. And it includes saffron and some sugar, whole almonds 
-- blanched, skinned and sliced. Also pistachio nuts, which are... 
Yeah, that's decorated on top. Now, as it cools, it gels because the 
wheat berries, the wheat berry juice gels, OK? It's not the starch 
from the rice. You can use any kind of rice for this. It gels. But 
if you put your finger on it before you're ready to serve it, it turns 
to liquid. Don't touch. You have to be very careful. Don't touch. 
Easy to make, but just be careful what you do after you make it. Oh, 
yeah. But these are beautiful dishes that would be lost. Just in the 
right place at the right time at that moment. And if our listeners 
would like the recipe for Anatolian rice pudding, also called Xerda, 
they can visit The World online at www.theworld.org. Again, www.theworld.org. 
Or they can write to us at WGBH, 125 Western Avenue, Boston, MA 02134. 
And we'll be happy to pass along Paula Wolfert's recipe. Paula Wolfert, 
author of "Mediterranean Grains and Greens." Nice to have you here. 
Thank you again. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>