<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981123.0500.2690 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Right now, nearly 30 million Americans are Hispanic, and advertising 
agencies that target Hispanic consumers are expanding. From our Los 
Angeles bureau, VOA's Mike O'Sullivan takes a look at this growing 
market of Spanish-speaking buyers. Hector Orsy of the Los Angeles 
advertising agency La Ahencia de Orsy notes that U.S. Hispanics comprise 
a $380 billion consumer market. His agency develops advertising campaigns 
for companies like American Honda and Allstate Insurance that hope 
to attract them. The executive says the advertising is placed in Spanish 
language media throughout the United States. There are two national 
television networks that deal in Spanish exclusively. There are 75 
TV stations, individual stations. There's over 400 radio stations, 
155 newspapers, and a little over 50 magazines. There is also outdoor 
advertising through roadside billboards and now, Spanish advertising 
on the Internet. Mr. Orsy says targeted advertising is essential for 
Hispanics, especially for recent immigrants whose cultures are distinctive. 
Hispanics are different from Anglos from some general market consumers 
in that, for example, their values are different. They find different 
things important, like the focus on family, for example; the focus 
on community; the focus on individual -- on individual responsibility 
versus institutional responsibility. Mr. Orsy explains that Hispanics 
like to be self-reliant and turn for help when they need it to neighbors 
and family members rather than public institutions. U.S. Hispanics 
are a diverse group, notes Anita Santiago, who heads an advertising 
agency in Santa Monica, California. They come from Mexico, Central 
America, Cuba and elsewhere, but though they speak with different 
accents, they are bound by a common language. Ms. Santiago believes 
most will retain their Spanish traditions in an English-speaking country. 
The truth of the matter is that Spanish will always be there. Spanish 
is our native tongue, and it's the language of comfort, the language 
of origin. And it's just -- it's not as simple as some people would 
have you believe that it's going to be -- it's going to go away. Well, 
it isn't. Good writing skills are essential in the advertising business 
and Hispanic firms must sometimes look overseas for workers whose 
Spanish is adequate for professional copyrighting. Some firms provide 
remedial courses for young Hispanic interns who have a dual cultural 
heritage but need to perfect their Spanish grammar. Throughout the 
United States, less than 3 percent of the managers and public relations 
and advertising firms are Hispanic, but the number is likely to grow. 
On the Los Angeles campus of the University of California, 20 percent 
of the student members of the American Advertising Federation are 
Hispanic, 25 percent are Hispanic at the University of Arizona, and 
37 percent at the University of Miami. As Hispanics increase in numbers 
in the general population, targeted Spanish-language advertising will 
also expand. Mike O'Sullivan, VOA News, Los Angeles. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>