<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981123.0500.2337 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The newly-elected House speaker says he's prepared to ask for a special 
session to vote on articles of impeachment of President Clinton by 
year's end if necessary. Rep. Bob Livingston spoke with NBC's Tim 
Russert after Thursday's testimony by independent counsel Kenneth 
Starr before the Judiciary Committee. Now we have to see whether or 
not the Judiciary Committee can weigh all the evidence that has been 
brought to them if in fact all the evidence has been brought to them. 
If it hasn't, and I have no way of knowing that, and I have not talked 
to Henry Hyde about the substance of the case -- if it hasn't been 
brought to them and they're still receiving stuff from the independent 
counsel, frankly, there's probably no hope that we can dispose of 
it this year. On the other hand, if they've received all the evidence, 
I would hope that they would weigh it, decide on what action to take, 
present their report for whatever action they wish to the Congress. 
If it requires a vote in the House of Representatives, I'd be prepared 
to ask Newt Ginrich as the current speaker of the house to call us 
in... a special session... ... a special session... ... this year? 
... this year, look at it. I wouldn't imagine that it would take a 
lot of debate. Most of the issues have been on the table for the last 
year. And consider 2 or 3 hours of debate, vote on the issue up or 
down and be done with it. If we vote articles of impeachment, that's 
simply like a charge. I'm a former prosecutor. It's like a prosecutor 
charging the defendant, in this case, the president of the United 
States. It would then go to the Senate. If we did not have the votes 
to sustain the charge, that would be it. Would you consider an alternative 
to impeachment if impeachment did not pass, Perhaps a vote on censure? 
That would be a matter to be considered by the Judiciary Committee 
in conjunction with the Rules Committee and the current leadership. 
I would think that that would certainly be a possibility, but I wouldn't 
prejudge that at this time. If in fact the House Judiciary Committee 
votes out an article of impeachment along party lines, and it's going 
to the House floor, as you suggest, but you know that there are not 
enough votes for it to pass the full House -- nearly a dozen Republicans 
have already said publicly they won't vote for articles of impeachment 
-- would you recommend bringing an article of impeachment to the House 
floor for a vote even though you didn't have the votes? Well, as you 
know, that's a very hypothetical question, and we don't know what 
the Judiciary Committee is going to do. But assuming that they did 
report out articles of impeachment and require the House to vote, 
this is the most heavy constitutional responsibility we as members 
of the House of Representatives have. We swore an oath to uphold the 
Constitution and to fulfill our responsibilities to our constituents. 
I think for us to shy away from that responsibility and try to avoid 
it would just be absolutely, incredibly wrong. Congressman Bob Livingston 
declined to say whether Congress would vote for impeachment against 
the president even if public opinion polls show the American people 
oppose removal of the president from office. He says that is a decision 
for each member of Congress to make. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>