<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981123.0500.0857 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It is Universal time on VOA News Now. As I mentioned earlier, Russia's 
President Boris Yeltzin has been taken to a Moscow hospital for treatment 
of what is said to be pneumonia. Joining us from the Moscow Bureau 
is correspondent Peter Heimline. Peter, good morning. Good morning, 
Paul. Is that accurate? Is it pneumonia, or what are doctors saying 
at this point? The doctors do say it's pneumonia. President Yeltzin 
has a fever about 38.9 degrees Celsius; that's 102 degrees Fahrenheit. 
And the doctors have put him on a series of antibiotics, but they're 
not saying too much more than that. Peter, I take it that he has some 
schedules that he is going to continue today, including meeting the 
Chinese delegation there. What's the implication... That's something... 
What's the implication of this? Is he trying to say that he's not 
that ill? Yes, I think that's exactly right. Mr. Yeltzin has had health 
problems and there've been a lot of calls for his resignation. He 
has an interest in showing that he is fit to govern because if the 
-- if he is shown as too ill to maintain the reins of power, then 
a new election could be called. The constitution is unclear, but it's 
important to Mr. Yeltzin that he appear to be in control. So he did 
meet the Chinese leader Xan Zi Man in his hospital room this morning. 
It was about a 40-minute meeting. There is little information about 
it so far, but a Kremlin spokesman did confirm that the meeting did 
take place. Well, Peter, under the Russian constitution, there is 
no vice president and Ugeni Primokov seems to have been in control. 
Might it be a case that he would retain control until new elections, 
or if they deem that President Yeltzin is incapacitated then they 
would call new elections? How would that work? It is correct that 
Mr. Primokov would probably maintain control. According to the constitution, 
the prime minister takes control for a period of 3 months in which 
a new elections must be called. The constitution, which was adopted 
in 1993, gives the president very strong powers, but it does not give 
any precise reason why a president should or must resign, and it contains 
no procedures to determine whether he's incapable of carrying out 
his duties for health reasons. So, yes, Mr. Primokov, who is de facto 
running the country at the moment, would continue to do so for the 
next 3 months if Mr. Yeltzin dies or is deemed to be incapacitated. 
Now the opposition, Mr. Yeltzin, of course, has not been a healthy 
man over the past several years. And this surely is to give his critics 
another reason to call for his resignation. Are you hearing anything 
from the opposition? Certainly, the Communist leader Ganadis Uganov 
has been repeatedly calling for Mr. Yeltzin to step down, and there 
have been moves in the Duma, the lower house of parliament, to pass 
the legislation that would call for a health test, health examination. 
And if he would fail that, new elections would be called. But such 
legislation would have a difficult time passing, and Mr. Yeltzin would 
have to sign it, so the chances of that happening are very slim. In 
the meantime, though, yes, many people are calling for resignation. 
Others, though, are choosing to lay off a little bit and wait and 
more or less be patient with Mr. Yeltzin. Peter Heimline, thank you 
very much for joining us this Monday. You're welcome, Paul. All right, 
and we wish President Yeltzin all the best in his efforts to fight 
off this pneumonia. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>