<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981123.1600.0347 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
I'm Tony Riggs bringing you VOA News Now from Washington. Ceremonies 
will be held tomorrow in Gaza to mark the opening of a Palestinian 
international airport. From Jerusalem, VOA's David Gollust reports 
the airport opening is an important symbol from Yassir Arafat's Palestinian 
Authority which is taking on more and more of the trappings of statehood. 
Construction of the Palestinian airport at Dhaghanya in the Gaza Strip 
was completed many months ago, but it had lain dormant as Israel and 
the Palestinians bickered over operational details including security 
and flight controls. The way was finally cleared for the opening by 
last month's U.S.-brokered Wye River Agreement which was approved 
by the Israeli Parliament last week. An Egyptian airliner carrying 
a delegation of officials from Cairo is to be the first plane to arrive 
at the airport to be followed during the day by inaugural special 
flights from several Arab and west European countries. Regular commercial 
service is not expected to begin for another few weeks. Palestinian 
leader Yassir Arafat will use the airport for the first time on Wednesday 
when he leaves for France and talks with President Jacques Chiroq. 
Mr. Arafat had previously been entering and leaving Gaza by helicopter 
from Egypt. The opening will not only make air travel more convenient 
for Palestinians, but it is of high symbolic and political importance. 
Mark Hiller, a Middle East policy analyst at Tel-Aviv University, 
told VOA that while the Palestinian Authority is technically not a 
sovereign government, it is increasingly acting like one. Well, it's 
a kind of an unfolding picture of a state emerging incrementally even 
before there's any kind of conscious political decision made. And 
this is, I mean, you know, things like flags and national anthems 
and this sort of thing, passports, school curricula, paramilitary 
forces all just gradually unfolding. And the airport is another kind 
of manifestation of that. I think what makes it qualitatively different 
and what explains the emphasis that the Palestinians have been placing 
on it for such a long time is that it gives them a direct link to 
the outside world. The question of Palestinian statehood is among 
the final status issues of the peace process which, under the Oslo 
Accords, are to be decided by next May, but will probably take much 
longer to negotiate. In the meantime, Israel will wield considerable 
authority at the new airport. Passengers and aircraft will be checked 
by both Palestinian and Israeli security officers, and at least for 
the time being, there will be Israelis in the control tower alongside 
Palestinians to help sort out traffic going to the nearby Ben Gurian 
airport outside Tel-Aviv. The national airlines of countries hostile 
to Israel, such as Syria, Iran, Iraq and Lybia, will not be allowed 
to operate at the Gaza airfield, but flights from countries such as 
Saudi Arabia, which do not have diplomatic relations with Israel, 
are being permitted. Citing security concerns, the Israeli government 
says its citizens will not be allowed to use the new airport but the 
decision will be reviewed in the coming months. Palestinian aviation 
officials say Israelis are welcome at Dhaghanya and will be safe there. 
David Gollust, VOA News, Jerusalem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>