<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981123.0500.0374 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Finance ministers from the European Union are scheduled to meet to 
discuss better coordination when a single currency is introduced in 
11 of the 15 countries on New Year's Day. VOA's Ron Pimstein reports 
from Brussels that finance ministers have already set out their economic 
agenda. Europe's most important economies -- France, Germany, Italy 
and Britain -- are all controlled by left-wing governments. Eleven 
Socialist and Social Democratic finance ministers met last night for 
dinner in advance of today's meeting of all 15 union finance ministers. 
They released their joint program titled The New European Way. The 
new way is to emphasize job creation and economic growth as the main 
objective instead of the previous concentration on fighting inflation. 
The document talks about fiscal discipline but calls for a necessary 
degree of fiscal flexibility in the case of economic downturns. Such 
talk gives heartburn to the European Central Bank that takes over 
monetary policy from national governments in the 11 countries introducing 
the Euro currency. German finance minister Oscar Lafontaine has called 
on the bank to lower interest rates to help growth and job creation. 
Bank officials are rejecting political pressure coming from the left 
wing. Speaking for the Socialist ministers, Austria's finance minister, 
Rudolph Edlinger, says through an interpreter the document is intended 
to guide the majority of the governments that are run by Socialists. 
Paper is not a paper that sets out directives, but it is a paper that 
sets out Social Democratic positions which will be introduced in the 
member countries in the practical policy-making, depending on how 
strong Social Democrats are represented in their respective government. 
Britain's Chancellor, the X Checker, Gordon Brown, took part in the 
left wing meeting but will not be in a morning meeting that involves 
only the countries introducing the Euro. The document calls for close 
economic coordination between the 11 countries introducing the new 
currency on New Year's Day, and those like Britain, Greece, Denmark 
and Sweden that will not. The European Central Bank is Frankfurt is 
supposed to set interest rates and currency exchange rates for the 
11 countries introducing the Euro. The bank's director, Wim Duesenberg, 
hopes to stay independent of the pressure coming from the majority 
of the Euro 11 that are now run by left-wing governments. Ron Pimstein, 
VOA News, Brussels. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>