<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981123.1600.1336 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The mountain land of Khuala Boundary in western North Carolina is 
the ancestral home of the Cherokee native Indians. Approximately 12,000 
Cherokee of the Eastern Band live there today, supported largely by 
a tourist-based industry. But as VOA's Roseanne Skirbel discovered 
in a visit to the town of Cherokee, the museum of the Cherokee Indian 
is also a good place to learn how North America's first inhabitants 
lived, endured and survived. The museum of the Cherokee Indian takes 
you on a spiritual journey that starts with creation. Seated in front 
of the simulated smoking fire, you are greeted by a video story teller, 
an elder from the tribe, who tells how the world came to be. He tells 
of how way back in the beginning of time, all the animals lived above 
the sky arch in the upper world, and how, when it got crowded, the 
animals sent out the tiny water beetle to find another land. The courageous 
beetle emerged from the soft mud to a land we call earth. Then a big 
buzzard was sent to make the land ready for the animals, and when 
it reached Cherokee country, it got tired. Where the buzzard's wings 
touched ground, valleys appeared, and where its wings lifted up, mountains 
formed. In what looks like a small closet, museum director Ken Blankenship 
shows off the technology that takes the museum-goer through forests, 
across streams and into the lives and rituals of the Cherokee people. 
We're probably taking it to a new level. We're probably on the cutting 
edge of mixing entertainment and education, and I think that's the 
way museums are going to have to go if they're going to compete for 
the audience that's out there today. The Museum of the Cherokee Indian 
made the decision to renovate several years ago and closed for about 
6 months this year to install the new multi-media exhibition. Funded 
by grants from the National Park Service, corporations and the Eastern 
Band of the Cherokee Nation, the museum reopened this spring. Through 
murals and artifacts, video images and audio sound tracks, we begin 
to learn in a more personal way how the Cherokees survived. When the 
Europeans came to our land, they brought many changes including one 
we could not even see: disease. As sickness spread across the land, 
our mountains made by the great buzzard kept us apart from the worst 
of what was happening. Even so, we lost over half our people to these 
diseases. dead to the smallpox. But disease was not the only indignity 
the Cherokees suffered. The exhibition documents what is known as 
the Trail of Tears when in the 1830s, the U.S. Government forced people 
from their ancestral homes and marched them to reservations in Oklahoma. 
We learn that some escaped by hiding in the hills which is why the 
Cherokee Nation today is divided between Oklahoma and North Carolina. 
This tragic period of Native American history is shown in one exhibit 
with a U.S. soldier holding a baby as he herds the family from their 
house at dinner time, a house filled with material riches. These were 
not poor, nomadic people. They lived in villages and towns that covered 
most of eight states. When the soldiers came to our house, my father 
wanted to fight but my mother told him that they would kill him, and 
so we surrendered. My mother begged them to let her go back and get 
some bedding, so they let her go back and she and had to leave behind 
all the rest of our possessions. Eight of my brothers and sisters 
and two or three widow women and children roamed with us. My mother 
and father walked all the way. There was much sickness and a great 
many little children died of whooping cough. These are documented 
stories, stories that museum director Ken Blankenship says have sparked 
the curiosity of people from all over the world. The museum has welcomed 
88,000 visitors since it reopened in June. Ken Blankenship says what 
gives him an even greater sense of pride is the museum's acceptance 
among the Cherokee. Their attendance has been greater since the museum 
reopened than in the last 5 years combined. All of the comments we're 
getting from most people is either thank you or you've done a good 
job for us, or they're really proud of it. The museum has become a 
cultural hub for the Cherokee community. It publishes the oldest academic 
journal devoted to one Native American group, runs an on-going schedule 
of demonstrations by Cherokee artisans, and puts together programs 
for civic and school groups. Ken Blankenship says preservation of 
Cherokee heritage can only lead to a greater appreciation of their 
contribution to the fabric of American life. I'm Roseanne Skirbel. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>