<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981123.1600.0828 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Asia, according to health experts, is the epicenter of an epidemic 
of tuberculosis. The AIDS virus and the Asian financial crisis are 
both contributing to the spread of TB. A conference on lung disease 
focusing on tuberculosis opened in Bangkok Monday. VOA's Gary Thomas 
has this report. At a congress organized by the World Health Organization, 
experts said tuberculosis is skyrocketing in Asia. They said 4.5 million 
of the 8 million newly-reported annual cases of tuberculosis are concentrated 
in six Asian nations: China, India, Pakistan, Indonesia, Bengladesh 
and the Phillippines. Richard Baumgardner, senior manager of the W.H.O. 
Tuberculosis Program, said external factors are complicating the TB 
problem. Already, TB is out of control in Asia. But factors such as 
HIV, multi-drug resistant TB and the current financial crisis in this 
region are increasing the complexity and the costs of this epidemic. 
AIDS weakens the immune system making people with AIDS more susceptible 
to getting TB, but getting AIDS involves engaging in high-risk behavior 
like unprotected sex or intravenous drug use with contaminated needles. 
TB is spread through ordinary contact; thus, as Mr. Baumgardner said, 
TB will spread more widely than the HIV virus. HIV and TB are a deadly 
pair. HIV is already causing tuberculosis to spiral out of control 
in parts of Africa. This coepidemic will spread now across Asia and 
will exact a terrible cost. Dr. Donald Hennerson, a professor of medicine 
at the University of Alberta in Canada, said thousands of people die 
every day from a disease that should not be fatal. What I realize 
is that during the time we have this press conference, the number 
of patients who will die of tuberculosis in this hour is equivalent 
to a crash of a Boeing 747 jumbo jet. So every hour, we have a Boeing 
747 crash. I think that's quite dramatic. The pity is that it doesn't 
have to crash. We've already shown that it's not necessary. As Dr. 
Hennerson points out, TB is in fact curable usually through a regimen 
of drugs although, as Mr. Baumgardner points out, some strains are 
appearing that are resistant to the usual anti-TB treatments. Some 
1,500 experts from 90 countries are attending the Bangkok meeting. 
Several key participants, including the W.H.O. and the World Bank, 
are proposing a Stop TB initiative. The organizers hope to draw up 
a global plan to control TB, set up an international facility to ensure 
people get access to low-cost tuberculosis drugs, and agree on coordinated 
approaches to the prevention and care of TB. Gary Thomas, VOA News, 
Bangkok. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>