<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981123.0500.1362 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
You know, at work, at play and even at home, we often have to act 
different roles, and to better prepare for these roles more and more 
people today are taking acting classes. For instance, here in the 
Washington area, there are dozens of theater courses for adults that 
are held at universities, community centers, churches or at theater 
studios. Salinas Ahulk reports that some of the people attending these 
acting classes want to become professional actors, but most have no 
intention at all of giving up their day jobs. You put an application 
for our school to drive a bus. Could you tell me why you'd like to 
be a school bus driver here? You know, I've driven a plane, a ship. 
You've driven a plane? Yeah, I've driven a plane. At the Maryland 
Academy of Dramatic Arts, students are improvising a job interview 
scene. In a small studio that looks more like a storage room than 
a stage, these students are learning theatrical skills such as auditioning 
techniques, monologue delivery and body movement. But they're also 
learning marketing skills, anything from introducing a new product 
on the market to radio and television advertising to sales demonstrations. 
Ralph Tabakin, director and founder of the Maryland Academy of Dramatic 
Arts, says in every profession you need to be able to act. : When 
you're going to work, create an image that you're going to meet with 
a group of people, create the image that you are one of them so you 
can speak to them. Do not play yourself. It doesn't matter what your 
business is; always play or portray the customer, the client, the 
supervisor. 400 years ago, William Shakespeare wrote the famous line 
all the world's a stage and all the men and women merely players. 
Many Americans today agree with that. Mary Mitchell Donahue, who teaches 
acting at Georgetown University in Washington, says many professionals 
come to her classes. Sometimes it's a matter of a writer of some sort 
wanting to delve into the characters and be able to portray more realistic 
characters in their writing. They're really not interested in performing 
at all. Very often, I get people in very -- various kinds of businesses: 
a lot of lawyers or people in other administrative or management positions; 
people who, because of their career, they need to make public speaking 
presentations. They need to talk in front of juries. They need to 
sometimes, you know, do other kinds of presentations, sales presentations, 
in front of large groups of people. And they become very nervous. 
They get what we call in acting terms stage fright, that fear just 
before a performance of getting up in front of large numbers of people. 
Washington in known as a city of lawyers, so in almost every acting 
class there are at least two or three of them. In acting, I've discovered 
a method by which I'm able to develop an emotional side of the communication 
process. Someday I'm going to get me an easy case, an open-and-shut 
case. I've got a friend up in Chicago, big lawyer; lord, how the money 
rolls in. You know why? He never takes a case unless it's a sure thing, 
like a jockey who won't go into a race unless he can ride the favorite. 
Roy Prosser, a lawyer from Virginia, reciting his home assignment 
at the Shakespeare Theater studios. He says lawyers can certainly 
use acting skills in the courtroom, but he finds them useful even 
though he's not a trial lawyer. Actors have to have many skills, but 
voice is one of their most important assets, so every acting course 
contains at least some form of voice training. Humming is a frequently-used 
voice exercise that creates vibrations throughout the nasal cavity 
and clears all the air passages. It also releases vocal energy and 
loosens the facial and other muscles used in speaking. Other exercises 
include stretching and relaxing all the other body muscles. In many 
acting courses, people spend hours on the floor just learning to relax 
and breathe. Body movement exercises can help to release the voice 
to its full potential. Let's do the who are you? Send it across the 
room. Who are you? Who are you? Acting classes help some people overcome 
their shyness and gain more self-confidence. They help some people 
improve their accent, or they just satisfy a craving for the spotlight. 
It has made me more comfortable standing and speaking in front of 
a group. It's made me more aware of how I speak, how I stand, my body 
language; just my overall comfort level. Professionally, I'm an accountant. 
I'm an accounting manager at a construction company, and I just needed 
a different flow from, you know, just the everyday numbers that I 
see every day there. My wife thinks I'm more sexy, and that's improvisation.. 
I just like it; it's a hoke. Do you know why they threw the boot at 
you? There wasn't anybody to... 
</TEXT>
</DOC>