<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981123.1600.2688 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is VOA News Now coming to you from the Voice of America in Washington. 
Many American Indian children grow up away from the reservations in 
cities where their elders fear they may lose their past. But in Wisconsin, 
a special school for Indians is building a tribal awareness in part 
by using the Internet. Reporter Analise Hensel takes us to Milwaukee's 
Indian Community School. Some of the students in this fourth-grade 
class at Milwaukee's Indian Community School are finding it difficult 
to stay focused on their math problems. This is the last class period 
of the day and the sunshine of a warm fall afternoon pours through 
classroom windows. But when school is out, many students who had been 
scrambling to grab their books and run to the playground stop in their 
tracks when a teacher's assistant turns on the classroom's 36-inch 
computer monitor and pulls up a web page featuring Native music. Computers 
have become important teaching tools at this kindergarten through 
eighth grade school because there's a wealth of information online 
about hundreds of Native nations. Eighth-grader Tracey Zarniak has 
discovered countless websites that describe tribal art, treaties and 
languages. This afternoon, she exchanges search tips with her friend 
Crystal Thompson. It's the music web page. You can also go to the 
www.sixnations.com. It takes a while to load, though. Tracey, who 
is a Jibowaye, pulls up information about the reservation that her 
family comes from. It's in Wisconsin, several hundred miles north 
of Milwaukee. Crystal, meanwhile, wants to learn more about the history 
and identity of the myriad clans from which the Oneida people hail. 
She searches for a minute or so before finding what she is looking 
for. Experts say it's important for Native American children to be 
exposed to such information because traditional classroom materials 
often leave out the perspective and experiences of Native Americans. 
Michael Wilson, a board member at the Indian Community School, says 
that makes students feel that their culture is not important, and 
it can make teaching it that much more difficult. The myth of Thanksgiving, 
the myth of John Smith, the myth of George Washington. Every one of 
these people did just terrible things to Indian people. And so how 
do you talk about those histories to little kids without hurting them 
too? The Indian Community School's mission is to provide a well-rounded 
education while nurturing students' connection to their native nations. 
All of the students and much of the staff are of Native American descent. 
The private school is tuition-free and funded through a financial 
arrangement with the nearby tribal bingo hall. School officials feel 
so strongly that computers strengthen their curriculum that they spent 
a half million dollars on upgrades and wiring. But board member Michael 
Wilson says he never wants students to view computers as a replacement 
for other ways of learning about their culture. It is one tool that 
they can find information from their home reservations because there 
are no reservations in Milwaukee. They can find laws and history. 
They can possibly hook up electronically with people there. But in 
fact, it's never a replacement for real culture which is always at 
home, which is always in the communities. Teachers at the Indian Community 
School plan to eventually put their Native-centered curriculum and 
lesson plans onto the web for other schools to adopt in their classrooms. 
I'm Analise Hensel in Milwaukee. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>