<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981123.1600.2147 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
I'm Tony Riggs, and this is VOA News Now. International Aid workers 
are increasingly coming under attack around the world. As they attempt 
to distribute humanitarian supplies, more and more workers are being 
threatened, shot at, kidnapped and even killed, and yet, they continue 
to volunteer for this difficult and risky work. Aid work, a dangerous 
calling, is the subject of today's Dateline. Here's VOA's Pamela Taylor. 
In one day alone last week, at least eight Aid workers around the 
world died violently including six members of a peace delegation in 
the Democratic Republic of Congo, one Aid worker in Angola, and another 
helping hurricane victims in Honduras. It's difficult to get a total 
figure on the number of humanitarian workers who've lost their lives 
in the line of duty, but every Aid organization reports an increase 
in such fatalities. Mindful of the increased risks, non-governmentals, 
or NGOs, are taking precautions to help guarantee their employees' 
safety. One example is the provision in the October cease-fire which 
ended the fighting in Yugoslavia's Kosovo province. The agreement 
provides for an international ground force to ensure that supplies 
get through and that Aid workers are not imperiled. Last week, an 
Aid worker was shot in the leg by unknown attackers while going to 
help refugees from neighboring Kosovo who'd taken refuge in Albania. 
British nurse Sally Becker has since been released from the hospital. 
It was not her first encounter with guns. During the war in Bosnia-Herzogovina, 
Sally Becker was called the angel of Mostar for her ability to get 
past Serb checkpoints to bring relief to a city totally cut off from 
the outside world. This past August, she was arrested and detained 
for 15 days by Serb paramilitary troops in Kosovo. Ms. Becker admits 
she broke the law by entering Yugoslavia illegally, crossing the mountain 
from Albania at night, but she says her mission is to help children 
and the Serbs had denied her visa request. Sally Becker describes 
what happened when she tried to help several families get back over 
the mountain to safety. On 6 o'clock in the evening when the sun was 
high in the sky still, we stopped at the edge of the forest and suddenly, 
we were surrounded by Serb forces, and they started firing with machine 
guns. They started throwing mortars at us. And there was a helicopter 
gunship overhead and dogs around the forest. And 12 of the 15 fled 
in terror back into the forest, but I saw that a woman and her 13-month-old 
baby, who needed a stomach operation, and her 12-year-old daughter 
were beneath a tree. And so, I just sort of climbed on top of them 
to shelter them with my body, and we stayed like that for an hour 
with the baby screaming momma, momma in terror, mortars falling and 
pieces of bark from the tree dropping on us where bullets were hitting 
the tree. It -- the sound was dreadful it was so loud, and the baby 
screaming as well, and it's sounds I'll never forget. I have nightmares 
about it, that sound, the baby screaming momma. Anyway, I just thought 
they'd be slaughtered so I stood up and I walked out of the forest 
with my hands in the air shouting please stop shooting. And there 
was a voice from the top of the hill and I followed the direction 
of the voice to the top of the hill. And there were soldiers there, 
and they called for the woman and the two children to come up the 
hill, which they did, and then they had told the others to come out, 
we promise we won't shoot. There was one man who spoke English. So 
I called and called, and nobody came out, and suddenly one of the 
soldiers put his gun to my head and said tell them if they don't come 
out now, we'll shoot you. So I said well, you'll have to shoot me 
then because that's it, because then I didn't trust them not to shoot. 
And he fired a burst over my head as if to prove that he'd shoot me, 
and I just put my hands on my hips. He know that I was past caring, 
and I just said well, you'll have to shoot me because I won't call 
any more. Sally Becker was eventually released and the Kosovo families 
she tried to rescue eventually found their way to safety, and the 
British Aid worker returned to Albania this month to help them again. 
Ms. Becker says she's determined to find a way to get the sick and 
malnourished children to England and the United States. Those who 
work for the Paris-based international group Doctors Without Borders 
are also often called on to put their lives at risk. One young Doctors 
Without Borders nurse is missing and believed killed in a helicopter 
crash in a remote section of hurricane-devastated Honduras. Another 
Doctors Without Borders worker, Damon Rosenzweig is just back from 
troubled southern Sudan. Before that, he was in Afghanistan at a turbulent 
moment in recent history. There was a non-specific threat against 
an NGO -- head of mission of an NGO working somewhere in Afghanistan. 
It was basically a murder threat. And our country management office 
took it very seriously and informed us that we should all prepare 
to evacuate all of Doctors Without Borders staff that was working 
in the entire country. We flew out on a U.N. plane, and en route to 
Pakistan, we actually saw the explosions of the Cruise missiles landing. 
We weren't aware of what it was at the time. Oh, my God, this was 
the attack on Afghanistan that we all heard about at the time. You 
actually saw it? Right, it was -- we could see it from our -- from 
the airplane windows. We thought, because it was being reflected off 
of cloud cover, we thought that it was just peculiarly colored lightning. 
Despite those dangers and despite the potential, you might've come 
to harm there, you went from there to Sudan, is that correct? Yes, 
it is. I took a posting, the other project coordinator position, in 
-- very much in the bush in south Sudan. And how risky was it there 
for an Aid worker? Well, there are four security levels, one being 
the lowest, meaning there's basically no security risk, and four being 
the highest, meaning that you're actually being shot at individually. 
We were always at security level 2, which meant that it is a war zone 
and there are people walking around with guns. Your work, the work 
that you do, is important as it is. It certainly does appear to be 
getting more and more dangerous, and yet, people like you, even after 
you've been to a dangerous place such as Afghanistan, what is it that 
keeps you going into these risky places? Well, danger is where you 
find it, in some respects. Not every situation in a war zone is a 
particularly dangerous situation. In Afghanistan, for instance, when 
I first arrived, we were 40 kilometers away from the front lines, 
but we had no sense because the normal everyday life is going on of 
all the people in the city. We had no particular sense of really living 
in a war zone. The same thing -- the same thing is true in south Sudan, 
and the work is extremely rewarding. You see results immediately. 
But what happens when you get back, let's say, and you look back and 
you say my God, do you sometimes ask yourself do I want to do this 
again? When I ask myself that question, I find a great deal of comfort 
in the system that Doctors Without Borders has set up. For instance, 
in south Sudan we had plans for evacuation over land, plans for evacuation 
by air which would be driven by particular types of threats coming 
from other areas. But to some people, it almost looks, to outsiders, 
as if you have a kind of calling for this kind of work. Would you 
describe it that way? Well, I came into international public health 
with very much a sense of a calling. I may be, in some respects, a 
risk-taker but in other respects, I'm not interested in losing my 
life. Living conditions are very harsh. You live in tents. You eat 
tent food constantly. You work very hard in very harsh environmental 
conditions. Tremendous amount of excitement, absolutely. It is a succession 
of the best jobs in the world. Not everyone's cup of tea, but thank 
goodness there are people like you. Thank you so much for talking 
to us today. Oh, thank you, ma'am. Damon Rosenzweig, a project coordinator 
with Doctors Without Borders, is from New Orleans, Louisiana. Aid 
work, a dangerous calling, was the subject of today's Dateline. I'm 
Pamela Taylor. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>