<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981123.1600.3209 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The newest craze in American sports is the PSL. The initials stand 
for personal seat license. Team owners have found that fans who want 
the best seat in the house are often willing to pay for it, shelling 
out hundreds, even thousands, of dollars simply to reserve their spot 
in the stands. Although the value of a PSL may fluctuate often depending 
on how well the team is playing that season, overall the idea has 
been a profitable one for many professional football, baseball and 
hockey teams helping increase revenue and sometimes covering part 
of the cost of building new stadiums and arenas. Well, now some U.S. 
colleges, and even high schools, are looking at PSLs as a way to raise 
money for their sports programs. From Ravena, Ohio, Vincent Duffy 
tells us about one school's effort at this kind of alternative financing. 
Ohio football fans who missed a chance to pay $1,500 for a great seat 
to see the Cleveland Browns now have an other option. They can pay 
$1,500 for two great seats to see the Ravena Ravens. Who are the Ravena 
Ravens? Well, the Ravens are Ravena's high school football team in 
a working-class city outside of Akron. And they need a new stadium. 
The old wooden stadium with chipped blue paint on the roof over the 
bleachers is no longer safe. Ravena has wanted a new stadium since 
the mid-'70s and superintendent Philip Warner says the district decided 
to raise money with PSLs because it may be easier than getting public 
funds. I think school districts kind of got into this routine that 
the only way we can generate additional money is going back to the 
taxpayers. Taxpayers are making it very clear that they're not interested 
in paying any more taxes, that their taxes are already high enough. 
The new 8,000-seat stadium will be part of a $4 million sports complex. 
Ravena hopes to use private money for the whole thing including $1 
million raised through personal seat licenses. Buyers get their names 
engraved on the seats, preferred parking and first dibs on season 
tickets. Ravena is possibly the first school district in the country 
to offer PSLs, but fans at tonight's game only paid $5 and the reaction 
to buying seat licenses is mixed. I think it's a neat idea, a good 
way to pay for the stadium without having to pass a levy, and I just 
appreciate them coming up with a unique way to pay for the stadium. 
If we were going to give that kind of money to the school, I think 
that that money would benefit more students at an academic level than 
it would in a sports level. It's a new idea for high school, not for 
professionals but it might have its warrants. I mean, it's not like 
they're forcing anybody to get it. I'm sure there'll be plenty of 
seats available when they're done selling those. Well, I've already 
paid dearly for the last 25 years, and I don't plan on paying for 
a seat to watch my own children to play. Akron Beacon general sports 
columnist Terry Plutow, who's highly critical of PSLs, says at the 
pro level, they just line owner's pockets. He has a different opinion 
about PSLs for high schools. It's a high school thing. We know this 
money isn't going into the pocket of some owner who could up and move 
the team. It's not going to the pocket of some player so they can 
buy their fourth Mercedes. I mean, it's going to help build the facility 
for the kids. Plutow says if communities won't pass bond levies for 
sports, private funding may be the only way to go. And in Ravena, 
every item in the sports complex is available for sponsorship. In 
fact, the new stadium doesn't even have a name yet in case a large 
donor wants it named after them. At Ravena's last game in the old 
season, boosters sold the PSLs at a table next to the concession stand. 
About 50 have been sold, and Superintendent Warner says other high 
schools are watching closely to see if PSLs may be the answer to their 
future stadium needs. I'm Vincent Duffy in Ravena, Ohio. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>