<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981123.0500.0550 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Many western visitors to Iran often say they were struck by how much 
the society there is changing, especially in the 18 months since President 
Mohammed Katame was elected by a 2 to 1 margin. Visitors see a greater 
openness in politics and a change in relations between men and women 
after nearly two decades of strict adherence to Islamic law. One place 
to meet and talk to people is in Tehran's city parks where people 
gather to relax. Correspondent Scott Bob visited one of these parks 
one recent evening and filed this report. It is dusk and the evening 
shade has settled over the lush park in downtown Tehran. Men in jackets 
enjoy the cool autumn air, strolling arm in arm by the fountain. Women 
dressed in the traditional black cloak and head covering also walk 
together. Down the side path, couples sit together talking quietly. 
They maintain the correct public posture, however, that is no hand-holding 
and no embracing. At the fountain in the center of the park, four 
young people are sitting on a park bench at the edge of the plaza. 
At one end of the bench, two men in their early 20's sit side by side, 
while at the other end of the bench sit two young women of about the 
same age. The men are nattily dressed in slacks and sport coats. The 
women wear black scarves and cloaks from underneath which peek sneakers 
and blue jeans. One of the women comments on the changes she believes 
are needed in Iranian society. More freedom and more. When you say 
freedom, what freedom would you like to see especially? Freedom for 
the young. The woman says she is sitting in public with her friend 
but that she is very scared of the police. Observers note a new generation 
is growing up that does not remember the Iranian revolution and the 
nationalistic fervor that accompanied it. Many in this group, they 
say, want to feel a part of the global youth movement that has its 
own heros and is setting its own trends. This new generation has begun 
to vote and is largely credited with a landslide victory of reformist 
president Mohammed Katame in elections last year. Iranian youth say 
the social restrictions are particularly frustrating for unmarried 
people. They say there are few public places where they can meet and, 
as a result, social gatherings are usually restricted to private homes. 
Near the edge of the park, two young women are playing badminton together. 
On an adjacent court, several young men are playing at basketball. 
They appear to ignore each other. Nearby, a couple in their early 
40's sit together. The woman points out that a few years ago, the 
two girls playing badminton might have been taken away by the revolutionary 
guards for violating public morality laws. Through a translator, the 
man said that the atmosphere in Iran is more open now and it feels 
a lot better. But, he says, he does not feel society is ready for 
too much freedom. I don't feel like any other youngsters that they 
expect to have more open air and more open space. I feel that if you 
just take out the OFF-MIKE) of the damned, the river will run and 
things should be step by step in order to achieve a better situation. 
The woman, his companion, says relationships between men and women 
right now are chaotic and a big issue. All youngsters and most, majority 
of our people think of the subject very in a purpose. They don't think 
very deeply. This is our weakness. This is a weakness for Iranians. 
Her companion disagrees saying nationalist sentiment does not allow 
him such criticism. . Further down the path, another couple sits almost 
facing each other on the edge of the bench. How are relations between 
men and ladies now in Iran? Is it more difficult? Is it easier, better? 
Yes. It needs a lot of improvement but still not -- not very good. 
Political observers say Iranian leaders are concerned about pressure 
building up within Iranian society. They say an outlet is needed for 
this pressure; hence, the lessening of some restrictions on public 
comportment between members of the opposite sex. Observers say, however, 
many conservatives do not like the new openness and security forces 
still occasionally arrest women caught wearing makeup or fingernail 
polish. They note that conservative leaders still wield considerable 
power in the legislative and judicial branches of government. As a 
result, they say, the reform movement is still fragile and it is not 
certain how much social change will be allowed. Scott Bob, VOA News, 
Tehran. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>