<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981123.0500.1878 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After a whirlwind trip to east Asia with talks with Japanese and South 
Korean leaders, President Clinton is heading back to Washington. He 
arrives here late Monday. But now, he is on the Pacific island of 
Guam where he will spend the next few hours. VOA's White House correspondent 
Deborah Tate reports. Mr. Clinton came here promising that Washington 
would be more receptive to the voices of the people of this island. 
Although residents of Guam are U.S. citizens, they cannot vote for 
president, and they are represented in Congress by one non-voting 
delegate in the House of Representatives. The president vowed he would 
return more land controlled by the U.S. military back to local authorities. 
It is a key issue on this island, home to Anderson Air Force Base. 
In 1994, Mr. Clinton signed legislation returning more than 3,000 
hectares of land to Guam. He said he is seeking the return of another 
7,000. But the president noted that the downsizing of the U.S. military 
presence has taken a toll on the island economy. The situation, he 
said, is made even more painful by the impact of Asia's financial 
crisis. In the last year, the economic tides that once broadened prosperity 
all across the Pacific have blown cold winds into the economies of 
Japan and Korea. They have been felt all the way to Guam and Hawaii. 
He vowed Washington would do more to assist the Guamanian economy 
by helping create commercial operations on former military land and 
by making it easier for island products to enter the mainland. Earlier, 
Mr. Clinton met with leaders of Pacific island nations including Palao 
and the Marshall Islands. He also paid his respects at a World War 
II memorial commemorating the thousands of Americans who died here 
in World War II. Guam was seized by Japan a day after its attack on 
Pearl Harbor. It was retaken by the United States in July 1944 after 
a bloody battle in which thousands of U.S. troops and tens of thousands 
of Japanese troops were killed. Mr. Clinton's visit is the first by 
a president since Ronald Regan came here in 1986. Thousands turned 
out to welcome Mr. Clinton with cheers and applause. It was a reception 
he clearly savored before he boarded Air Force One to return to Washington 
where congressional impeachment hearings against him are underway 
in the sex and cover-up scandal involving former intern Monica Lewinsky. 
Deborah Tate, VOA News, Guam. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>