<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981016.1830.1126 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We're going to Mark a very significance versery this evening. It is 
20 years ago that kkkjjj of Poland became the Pope. For centuries, 
three religions believing in a single God have fought John Paul the 
II is now the longest serving Pope in this century. He has been astonishingly 
active. He has met with 766 world leaders. He has visited 117 countries. 
He has traveled 695,000 miles. In Mexico city, 1979, his papal mass 
attracted 5 million people. He has spoken 16,000 times to more than 
100 million people. John Paul has been enormously successful mobilizing 
the faithful to influence and even overturn dictators in many corners 
of the world, nowhere more so than in his native Poland. Many people 
do believe he inspired the final assault on communism throughout the 
Soviet block. Today, a commemorative mass in St. Pete ersz square 
with 25,000 people. They asked that they pray for him, that he will 
be able to lead the world's 1 billion Roman Catholics into the new 
millennium. As the century ends, the Pope is already planning for 
a challenge. He wants to be the peacemaker in the Middle East. ABC's 
Bill Blakemore tonight on the Pope's ambitions. For centuries, three 
religions believing in a single God have fought bloody battles in 
Jerusalem. Now, this frail figure is determined to step into the middle 
of it. Though advancing Parkinson's disease makes any movement difficult, 
John Paul is pushing to go to Jerusalem in the year 2000. The hope 
that the three monotheistic faiths, Judaism, Christianity and Islam, 
will not only co-exist, but co-exist in peace, I think that might 
be his crowning legacy to us. His first step is expected to be to 
Baghdad in 1999. Vatican diplomats have already surveyed the desert 
where he'll pray at the home of the Biblical Abraham. He then wants 
to meet in the holy land in 2000 with Palestinian and Israeli leaders 
who have repeatedly invited him there. To walk where religious politics 
have so often meant violence would be classic John Paul, highly dramatic 
on purpose. As you get closer to the year 2000, I think he's even 
more convinced that maybe something should be done to just shock the 
world. Aides say he aims to inject his Christian voice into what has 
been mostly a Jewish-Muslim debate. The Pope is of the view that there 
are no insoluble problems in history. There are severe problems in 
history but no insoluble problems. That made sense back when the vibrant 
young Pope took communist Poland by storm. But for this shuffling 
figure? Perhaps the sense of this frail old man trying to carry out 
a dream might make things possible that were not possible for the 
powerful Pope. That dream is keeping him busy in other ways as well. 
He's trying to get his church to apologize by the year 2000 for its 
past sins, including those against Jews and Muslims. Then, insisting 
on the dignity of every person regardless of religion, the Pope will 
take on the challenge of the Middle East. Bill Blakemore, ABC News. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>