<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981016.2100.1794 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
From "dateline NBC" tonight. Part two of an investigation into the 
black market selling of stolen airline tickets. If you fly, you know 
you have to go through security, present a photo I.D. these days. 
International travel, that's where passports come into play. How can 
it be so easy for some people to use fake airline tickets, stolen 
airline tickets? With hidden cameras "Dateline" find some answers 
to those questions. Here again NBC news correspondent Chris Hansen. 
From this street corner, the F.B.I. sat and watched as this man sold 
stolen airline tickets from his restaurant in southern California. 
How do we know about this undercover investigation? Former Miami dade 
detective was right in the middle of it. So you watched this happen? 
yes. And the F.B.I. was with you? yes. The F.B.I. recorded the deal 
on audiotape. Haggets even began to prepare search warrants. Then 
surprisingly nothing happened. Absolutely nothing. No indictment, 
no arrest, no prosecution. That's why a frustrated former P who's 
now consulting for A.R.C. is now speaking out. It got put on the shelf. 
But would the man still be brazen enough still be selling airline 
tickets? We went undercover to find out. But first we needed an entree 
because the man wouldn't just sell to anyone. We found a woman who 
had worked with him in the past. We told her we needed cheap tickets. 
We got her to call him at the restaurant to set up the deal. What 
a deal it was. For just $6 hundred we could fly first class to Rio 
degentleman Mario. We olded four tickets. We had bought tickets through 
the airlines it could cost six times as much. The man sent this confirmation 
in Spanish. Translated it says everything's ready an asks where to 
send the paella. That's a Spanish dish. But remember we weren't looking 
for a meal. Three days later and after several phone calls. Morcillo 
showed up in our hotel room. He said he wanted to meet us first. After 
a few minutes he promised to come by with our tickets. At 10:00 A.M. 
morcillo knocked on our day with four tickets. He counts out the cash. 
$2,400. The value print order the tickets is nearly $16,000. Near 
once did he mention the tickets were stolen. As it turns out, the 
actual tickets morcillo sold us came from a travel agency in Springfield, 
Illinois. The burglary is well-known to the F.B.I. 29,000 tickets 
were stolen, the largest theft of its kind ever. But if we can document 
this as we did, why can't the F.B.I. document it? Why can't they bring 
the case to prosecution? They can, anytime they want. So the case 
is there. So the question remains -- why wouldn't the F.B.I. arrest 
Tony morcillo? We wanted an answer but the agent declined our request 
for an on-camera interview saying that the case remains under investigation. 
And this is not the first time that questions have been raised about 
the F.B.I.'s handling of the case. Early this year on the -- during 
congressional hearings on the issue, the agency was accused of foot-dragging. 
I'll take that criticism with a smile and continue wit the investigation. 
Later, the F.B.I.'s Los Angeles office sent this letter to the director 
of the Miami metro dade police department, calling the detective's 
comments inaccurate and unfair. The F.B.I. didn't pursue morcillo 
after overhearing a discussion between him and a partner that "they 
were no longer in possession of tickets or printing equipment for 
the tickets." And the agency said its office was inlved in the surveillance 
of other extremely violent criminals and terrorists. In the meantime 
another 114 travel agent haves been burglarized. 183,000 stolen tickets 
entered the black market. Nothing in place to stop these people from 
using stolen tickets. It's in place. They're not using them. A system 
in place that could check for stolen tickets? That's right, there 
at the check-in counter in the computers of every major airline. Here's 
how it works. Airline tickets have an 11-digit control number on the 
bottom. When a ticket is stolen an a warning issued, the number is 
entered into a data bank and made available to all the airlines. Type 
in the number and seconds later the answer pops out. They pay for 
the database so this E can check for stolen tickets. They train their 
ticket agents how to check. Why wouldn't they check? The answers we've 
gotten from them it's a time commitment of the extra 10 or 15 seconds 
per passenger would cklog the lines and become a real customer service 
problem. But "Dateline" found this industry memo saying it wouldn't 
even take 1 5 seconds, just three seconds. How about a mileage number? 
No, I don't. Would you like to enroll? Time it out. Three, six, 10 
seconds for this airline employee to pitch the frequent flier program. 
More time than it would take her to track a stolen ticket. So this 
crime could be essentially halted across the board tomorrow. It could 
be slowed down considerably tomorrow. By them checking the numbers. 
And if necessity did check, they'd find some forgeries that are incredibly 
obvious. Just a quick glance can tell you that this number's been 
changed. It's so bad that you can't tell what the number is. It's 
either a three or a five. Yet American airlines accepted these. They're 
obvious forgeries, absolutely. Stolen tickets with inflated fares. 
This one for nearly $17,000. Even destinations that are misspelled. 
Tokyo spelled tokio. How could somebody at an airline ticket countier 
not pick up on this? When you question them, though -- I've even asked 
gate agents. They don't want to disgruntle a first class or business 
class passenger. If the ticket says Tokyo spelled that way -- They 
just assume the agent made an error. More spellings and other lessons 
when we come back. What happens when "Dateline" dries to use the stolen 
tickets. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>