<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981016.2100.0198 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With us here tonight with their thoughts on the latest legal developments. 
Doug kmiec, constitutional legal counsel to former President Ronald 
Reagan, now a visiti professor at Pepperdine law school. And Richard 
Davis former sistant prosecutor in the Watergate investigation, current 
will I in private actice in New York. Mr. Demeck, a I'll ask both 
of you. What is the significance legally? What's on the line settling 
this Paula Jones case if you're looking at it from the White House's 
point of view? It is the most important thing the president can do 
because the seriousness of the president's allegations take on even 
greater seriousness when his perjury or his influence of other witnesses 
or obstruction of justice have harmed the very ctim that brought a 
cause of action against him. He manages to settle the lawsuit with 
Paula Jones, much of the momentum toward impeachment may well be reduced. 
And Mr. Dave sniss If you start out with the oposition that it would 
be unusual even if you could prove it to prosecute somebody for obstruction 
of perjury in a civil case and then say a civil case that's dismissed 
and then a civil case that's dismissed and settled, if the plaintiff 
satisfied with the settlement, it really becomes a very weak obstruction 
case, perjury case in any courtroom and I think in the peach context 
as well. Mr. Davis, let's take it om a much more basic point of view, 
a man on the street point of view. Why not get this thing out of there? 
Why have this on top of everything else the president has been forced 
to deal with? I think that's that very -- it would be an important 
thing. An appeal if it's not settled. The appeal's going to be argued. 
's not certain that the court won't return it to the district court. 
I think the country would like to get all of this behind it. The first 
step would be to get D of this case. Mr. kmiec, let's talk about the 
aspect of this story that a T of people have been luctant to talk 
about. That is we've now seen videotape of the president of the United 
States saying, yes, certain things lapped with a young woman in a 
room just off the oval office. Suddenly the allegations of Paula Jones 
once shunned have taken on a new light. Exactly. In fact the allegations 
of Paula Jones are very much parallel to the story told by nica Lewinsky. 
O low-level young women taken advantage of by the highest ranking 
government employee in eir organization, and one of them refused -- 
walked away, Paula Jones. And her allegation is that she suffered 
nothing more than a hostile environment and degradation. And Lewinsky 
accepted. Of course her story is she got gifts and job offers. I think 
one of the reasons the esident is interested in settling is because 
this appeal really does have merit at this point, once in fact you 
recognize that there's a lie at's been told, a false affidavit, and 
that the Supreme Court has decided cases that make this sexual harassment 
case more probable. Mr. Davis, another very actical question. Where 
does money like this come from as we've said before on this broadcast, 
the first mily's equity is limited to O pieces of property. One of 
them is a mustang, the other is an Oldsmobile cutlass, both in storage 
in Arkansas. That's it. They don't own a home. It's widely believed 
they'll be taken care of when they leave office by some of their friends 
out near Pepperdine law school or not far from there. But where does 
money like this come from? There is some insurance that has been covering 
some of these legal fees that could be used to pay a settlement. En 
Mr. hirschfeld, this rather unusual fellow from here New York, tops 
it up with his million dollars to make the deal viable from the Jones' 
perspective. Mr. kmiec, a legal process estion for you. Perhaps you 
can explain a word all Americans are going to know by heart in about 
two weeks. What is or what are stipulations? Stipulations are nothing 
more than the terms of settlement. The conditions by which the rties 
are willing to agree D over which there's no dispute. I should set 
the backdrop by way of going to you Mr. Davis. Right now in the house, 
before they go any further they have to agree to a bedrock, boiler-plate 
setup of here is what we don't dispute. This can be like a U.A.W. 
negotiation, can it not? It can be very complex. Words are going to 
take on in E political context -- everybody's going to look at what 
their subtle meanings are. Trying to get actual stipulations will 
be very difficult beyond certain basic things. If this impeachment 
goes forward, there'll be very little in the way of stiplages as to 
important facts and a lot of hard fighting. Mr. Davis, for those Americans 
who want to go away, visit a foreign nation and only come back to 
their home country when this chase is over, what date certain would 
you give them? There is no date certain. I think that all of us are 
hoping that this doesn't go to the next Congress and it's over at 
the latest sometime this year. But the way the process works it could 
go on endlessly. That would be troubling for the country and certainly 
not something that the people want. Mr. kmiec who is fortunate to 
have a job in Malibu, ready, what date do you tell people? I agree 
with Mr. Davis. I think this is going to wrap up by the end of the 
year. A lot depends on how well the Judiciary committee does engage 
those stipulations and narrow the issues. But I think they're well 
on their way. Gentlemen, thank you very much for joining us this Friday 
night. Appreciate it. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>