<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981016.2100.2357 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As we saw in part one of tonight's "Dateline" NBC segment, stolen 
airline tickets are easily aslailable on the black market. But how 
easy is it to turn one around and use it to fly the answer now in 
the conclusion of "Dateline's" investigation. Here again correspondent 
Chris Hansen. "Dateline" bought four stolen round trip tickets to 
Brazil. We wanted to know if we could actually fly. The reservation 
was booked on vasp airlines, which specializes in flying to Brazil. 
We took our ticket to the counter and ask to change our date of travel. 
The agent checked our ticket, booked our reservation and issued us 
a brand-new and now perfectly legitimate ticket. There's one thing 
I have to tell you. On this ticket here, we bought this ticket from 
a man who the police say is selling stolen airline tickets. After 
our explanation she called over her manager. He admitted a mistake 
was made. If anyone had checked the computer they would have discovered 
the ticket was black-listed stolen from a travel agency in Illinois, 
the largest burglary so far. So we would have been able to get on 
the plane. yes. With our new ticket we could now fly on any airline, 
or cash it for a profit of more than $13,000. The Bill if we had flown 
would have gone straight to the travel agent. No one defect -- defected 
that these were stolen tickets. Does that indicate there's maybe a 
loophole in some of the airlines? There are some tickets that get 
through the threat, a very, very small percentage. Are we hope about 
that? No, of coue not. But Collins says because of the constant crush 
of customers at the airports it may be I evitable. If you are handling 
the number of tickets we handle. You wouldn't have time to police 
every single detail on the ticket. Which airline accepts the most 
stolen tickets? All the major domestic carriers chose not to provide 
"Dateline" with that information. They declined our request for an 
on-camera interview. We know it happens but it is not the normal way 
of doing business in our industry. If you're Joe consumer you don't 
do business in a hotel room. What about the man month sold us the 
tickets? Chris Hansen, "Dateline" NBC. We caught up with him at his 
restaurant. Can I show you something on this? Yeah. That's you? Yeah. 
Airline tickets? You're taking money? Yeah. Morcillo said he didn't 
speak English so his own waiter agreed to translate. He claims a customer 
gave him the ticket. But remember we made our deal with him personally. 
We traced those tickets and they were stolen from a travel agent in 
Illinois. You're not saying that's not you, are you? I mean that's 
you. He had nothing more to say. What's the real danger here? The 
potential for danger is just you can't even guess the potential because 
there's so many people traveling aunled assumed names. You don't know 
what their agenda is. So who are these people? Thousands of them flying 
all over the United States and coming here from around the world, 
from places like Pakistan, Nairobi, Iraq, Iran, Columbia, Brazil, 
just to name a few. George Hudson has no idea who's flying on his 
stolen tickets. But in at least one case "Dateline" does. He's an 
international businessman based in Virginia who sells millions of 
dollars in appliances to the Middle East traveling much of the time 
on stolen tickets. That's not all -- he's admitted to police using 
88 stolen tickets on British airways, united airlines, air fans, U.S. 
air and other airlines without getting caught. I love bringing my 
family up here. But the nightmare came when we got burgled and hurt 
very badly. So the dream that I'll never forget turned into a nightmare 
that I'll never forget. Hudson's staggering bills are now closing 
in on $3 million, and it could go higher. Fewer than 10% of his stolen 
tickets have been used. Hudson says he's willing to take his share 
of the blame. But he's mystified that the F.B.I. and the airlines 
haven't done the same. I vacillate between being very, very sad and 
being very, very angry. And occasionally not giving a zam. But then 
when I think about my son and my grandson I get extra sad, very, very 
sad. The other person who's very, very hurt is my wife. Just days 
after he spoke to us, George Hudson sold his building. 31 years and 
three generations in the travel business finished. That report from 
"Dateline" NBC correspondent Chris Hansen. A few postscripts here. 
We should tell you the businessman caught with the stolen tickets 
has agreed to pay restitution. His plea agreement refers to repaying 
the airlines but not the travel agents. As you saw one of those has 
been shuttered already. We're told the businessman did tell police 
where he got the stolen tickets in this case. The search turned up 
another $75,000 worth. In another interesting turn the F.B.I. has 
taken over the case. "Dateline" will continue to follow it and track 
it. We will air the followup. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>