<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981016.0159 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Recently, I learned about the insect-human connection, specifically 
how people can mentally encourage giant Madagascar hissing cockroaches 
to clamber all over their bodies by thinking welcoming thoughts. I 
speculate that some people may not want giant Madagascar hissing cockroaches, 
or any other kind of cockroach for that matter, waltzing all over 
their bodies, which could explain why welcoming cockroach-related 
thoughts are so rare and easily shoved aside by thoughts of heavy 
construction boots, flame-throwers and cans of Raid the size of grain 
silos. This, it turns out, is just another example of how ``arthropod 
insensitive'' I have become and reminds me, once again, that I should 
not scoff at new ideas simply because they come from someone who may 
have had his or her umbilical cord wrapped a little too tightly around 
his or her neck prior to birth. But my thinking on the whole subject 
of insect/human lovey-doviness has changed dramatically in the past 
few days, and without inhaling so much as a whiff of Black Flag. I 
am speaking specifically of the Fire Ant Festival held recently in 
Marshall, Texas. Marshall, located about 150 miles east of Dallas, 
has been staging the Fire Ant Festival for 16 years and organizers 
this year expected close to 40,000 people to attend. The highlight 
of the festival is, without a doubt, the Fire Ant Calling Contest, 
in which contestants squeak, howl or screech their best approximation 
of a fire-ant feeding call, alarm call and _ my personal favorite 
_ mating call. The winner gets $150, said special events coordinator 
Phyllis Prince, enough to buy dinner and a movie, assuming your fire-ant 
date doesn't have particularly expensive tastes. Although I have not 
read anything that indicates fire ants have a feeding, alarm or mating 
call _ or at least any we can hear _ I think the good folks of Marshall 
are to be congratulated for attempting to communicate with fire ants 
in a way that does not involve boiling water or Amdro. (Amdro, by 
the way, is the official sponsor of the Fire Ant Festival, a fact 
that may shock some, but is probably no more odd than Exxon sponsoring 
a PBS special on sea birds.) But there is more to the Fire Ant Festival 
than verbally arousing nests of stinging insects into paroxysms of 
love. (Bill Clinton, sadly, has refused an invitation to be the festival's 
grand marshal.) There is also the fire ant roundup, in which contestants 
gather up as many fire ants as they can in a milk jug. The contents 
of the jug are weighed and the winner receives a cash prize and, one 
hopes, a free ride to the emergency room. Then, of course, there is 
the obligatory chili cook-off (this is Texas, after all), all recipes 
for which are expected to contain one or more fire ants. (No attempt 
has been made to reproduce the sound a fire ant makes when it hits 
the hot chili, but I'm guessing that some of the earlier works of 
Joe Cocker wouldn't be far off.) Prince was understandably stingy 
on the details, but she did hint that the Marshall, Texas, Fire Ant 
Festival may soon be something more than an annual gathering of beer-fueled 
loonies cooing at ant hills or racing around in the hot sun with a 
milk jug in one hand and a bowl of toxic chili in the other to see 
who can be the first to succumb to anaphylactic shock. That's right, 
diazanon breath, we're talking TV deal. Or at least a pilot. Or something. 
But it's big, that's for sure. Personally, I would favor a children's 
show where a giant fire ant devours Barney the Dinosaur, but that's 
probably another example of my misguided thinking. (David Grimes is 
a columnist for the Sarasota (Fla.) Herald-Tribune.) 
</TEXT>
</DOC>