<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981016.0249 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Japanese Parliament completed passage of a plan Friday that commits 
$517 billion worth of taxpayer funds to rescue the nation's teetering 
banking system in an attempt to get money flowing through a crippled 
economy. Passage of the rescue legislation had been expected, but 
it was nonetheless welcomed as marking a conclusion to months of acrimonious 
bickering among politicians in Japan. The legislation had received 
worldwide attention as officials of other countries looked to Japan 
to help avert a global recession. Along with a second set of newly 
passed banking laws, the package is the biggest in a series of bailouts 
that the governing Liberal Democratic Party has assembled to stave 
off a collapse of Japanese financial institutions _ in a system weakened 
by hundreds of billions of dollars in bad debt. Nearly half the rescue 
money will be used to expand the capital base at the banks, which 
have grown reluctant to lend out of fear that they will not be repaid. 
A squeeze in credit, despite record-low interest rates, has deeply 
hurt many businesses and aggravated the worst postwar recession in 
Japan, the world's second-largest economy. The rest of the rescue 
funds will be used to guarantee deposits at financial institutions 
and to nationalize failed banks. The portfolios of those institutions 
will be restructured so that they may be sold to other stronger banks 
or simply shut down in an orderly way. Although Prime Minister Keizo 
Obuchi's approval ratings have sunk to between 20 percent and 30 percent, 
and a political alliance was hastily assembled to enact the banking 
rescue, the Liberal Democrats seem to have solidified some staying 
power because of the action. Yet, if the banking rescue symbolizes 
the government's new political will, it also reflects its limits. 
Even as politicians and lawmakers called the rescue package a success, 
many analysts highlighted its drawbacks. ``This was the first major 
legislative victory for one of the weakest parties in history,'' said 
Shigenori Okazaki, a political analyst at Warburg Dillon Read in Tokyo. 
``They want to bail out all the banks, big and small. But now they 
are in a paradox. The banks don't want to take the money.'' Indeed, 
the biggest challenge the government now faces is to get banks to 
take on the taxpayers' money. Banks worry that managers will be forced 
to resign and that the conditions for taking the money will be too 
stringent. So they are reluctant to accept bailouts, preferring to 
try to muddle along as they have been. ``In addition, bankers privately 
express concern over the intense wrangling with the government that 
will be necessary for the rescue to work. Many are skeptical that 
the scheme will pour sufficient cash into the pockets of corporations 
any time soon and bring about the economic recovery everyone wants. 
Thus, analysts say that while the bailout reduces the possibility 
of a collapse in the financial system, it is only a short-term solution 
and does not address the more protracted challenge of modernizing 
the banking system so that it can sustain itself. ``All they're doing 
is throwing paper on the fire,'' said Alicia Ogawa, banking analyst 
at Salomon Smith Barney in Tokyo. ``The days they have left to continue 
muddling through are limited. I can see the car is going to hit the 
wall. And I think that is good. It will force them to do something.'' 
Economists and politicians themselves say that it is still too early 
to determine whether Japan's misery is finally over and whether the 
economy will soon turn around. But at least, they say, there is a 
greater sense of urgency among the politicians that was absent just 
a few months ago. ``Time is short,'' said Yuji Tsushima, a member 
of the Parliament's lower house and a former Finance Ministry official. 
``That's why we have to do this.'' ``We have to do things that will 
persuade the world market that Japan's banking system is on the right 
track,'' he said. The capital bases of the banks have dwindled to 
precarious levels, so that they have little cushion to absorb losses 
expected to arise from loans that are going bad. Even the government 
has said that the economy will shrink by 1.8 percent in the year that 
ends March 31, 1999, and with bankruptcies soaring with the sinking 
economy, the amount of debt that goes bad when those companies crumble 
also soars. Bankers say that despite the record low interest rates 
_ a key overnight borrowing rate now stands at one-quarter of a percent 
_ they do not want to expand their lending at this time because many 
companies are facing financial difficulties. If they lend money, the 
banks say, they would just be throwing good money after bad. The Liberal 
Democrats are hoping that with a large injection of capital, the banks 
would be more inclined to take risks and lend to companies throughout 
the country. The Democratic Party, the main opposition group, had 
demanded that the government order the banks to take public money, 
for the sake of the entire financial system, but that demand was not 
incorporated into the new law. Yet, party and government officials 
have already begun raising the pressure on the top executives of the 
banks, in the hopes that infusions of money could begin within the 
next couple of months. ``Banks are supposed to take action voluntarily,'' 
Obuchi told a news conference Friday. ``I really hope that they understand 
the purpose of the laws and behave appropriately.'' In a sign of the 
potential problems ahead, Masaru Hayami, the governor of the Bank 
of Japan, the nation's central bank, on Thursday warned once again 
that the core capital base at the banks was too small, suggesting 
that the potential loan losses at some large banks may exceed the 
amount of their core capital. Based on data from the internal findings 
of the Bank of Japan, if Japanese banks were as a whole to set aside 
profits to account for so-called ``good'' loans that are expected 
to go bad within three years, then the amount of their core capital 
could fall by at least half. So it is not surprising that Hayami called 
upon the banks to apply for public funds to boost their capital adequacy. 
The funds would be injected through the purchase of newly issued common 
or preferred shares. To nationalize failing banks, the government 
will set up a new ministerial committee to manage bank failures and 
to help draft plans to deal with financial turmoil. The Long-Term 
Credit Bank, one of the nation's largest and weakest banks, is expected 
to be temporarily nationalized under the rescue plan. The bank could 
apply to be put under state control as early as next week. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>