<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981016.0236 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Has the stock market bear lumbered back into its cave? That is the 
way it looked this week as stocks roared following the Federal Reserve 
Board's surprise rate cut on Thursday. The Dow Jones industrial average 
ended the week up 6.5 percent at 8,416.76. One reason investors seem 
to have high hopes for stocks is that they have already suffered a 
major mauling in their portfolios. With the average New York Stock 
Exchange stock down 37.1 percent from its peak and the average Nasdaq 
stock down 50.5 percent, investors can be forgiven for hoping the 
worst is over now. Only trouble is, while the Dow and the Standard 
&AMP; Poor's 500-stock index are down about 10 percent and 11 percent, 
respectively, from their July highs, they remain high on an earnings-valuation 
basis. For example, the S&AMP;P carries a price-to-earnings ratio 
of more than 25. Stocks also look rich over all when judged against 
the size of the national economy. At the market's peak earlier this 
year, the value of publicly traded stocks totaled some $11.7 trillion, 
more than 1.3 times the nation's gross domestic product. Recently, 
equities were valued at around 1.1 times GDP Typically, according 
to Kenneth C. Grainger, an independent market strategist in New York 
and Montreal, stocks are valued at a discount to GDP, ranging between 
35 percent and 82 percent of output. When equities exceed those levels, 
red flags fly. At the end of 1989, for instance, as Japanese stocks 
neared 39,000, the Nikkei index of 225 stocks was valued at about 
1.3 times Japan's GDP. An economy that is slowing, as is the case 
here, cannot sustain those kinds of valuations for stocks. Still, 
the uneven quality to the now three-month downturn in stocks remains 
a puzzle. While investors who own small-capitalization stocks have 
been hammered, those who are in S&AMP;P index funds are sitting relatively 
pretty, up about 9 percent on the year. What does this inequity in 
returns mean for the future of the overall market? Some investors 
have been hoping the blood bath in individual stocks has been so bad 
that the big-capitalization stock indexes will not suffer a bigger 
drop from their peaks than they have already seen. Those still holding 
beaten-down stocks also wonder how they will fare if the indexes do 
take a dive. Surely these stocks are so far down, investors hope, 
that they could not decline further? Unfortunately, history does not 
bear out either theory. John L. Manley Jr., equity strategist at Salomon 
Smith Barney, went back to 1969 and examined how individual stocks 
and indexes performed in downturns. What did he find? Sharp declines 
by a large number of stocks do not preclude bear markets. Rather, 
they have inevitably preceded them. For example, in May 1969 a bear 
market began that took the S&AMP;P 500 down 29.7 percent. But in the 
12 months before that overall drop, the average stock fell 18.6 percent. 
Manley's research also found that even when a stock is down precipitously 
while overall indexes remain aloft, the stock can fall further when 
the indexes get clipped. ``In four of the five cases studied,'' he 
reported, ``the bad stocks before a bear market were the bad stocks 
during the bear market.'' What does all this mean for equity investors 
today? While Manley believes that the Fed's rate cut will support 
the market for awhile, the key to any significant uptrend in stocks 
will be good news coming out of Asia and Latin America. ``Until they 
appear to be bottoming, which we don't have yet, as good as the rate 
cut is, it's still an ephemeral solution,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>