<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981016.0248 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The theory behind the current Middle East meetings at the Wye Plantation 
is that if you lock feuding leaders together in a pretty spot, chase 
away the press, strip off their pinstripes or military tunics and 
put the U.S. president between them, they will surely see the light. 
The technique carries the built-in bonus of supplying an instant historic 
label _ ``the Camp David Agreement,'' ``the Dayton Accords,'' ``the 
Wye Agreement'' _ around which all involved can garner the glory and 
TV time such events generate. It worked at Camp David for the Israeli-Egyptian 
peace agreement and in Dayton, Ohio, for the Bosnia deal, so why should 
it not work, went the logic, for the seemingly superficial disputes 
over territory and security that have kept the Oslo process between 
Israel and the Palestinians from moving forward for 19 months? One 
possible reason was the same one that created the freeze in the first 
place, the total lack of mutual trust between the government of Prime 
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and the Palestinian Authority of Yasser 
Arafat. It is too early to tell whether being locked up together for 
a few days has made Netanyahu and Arafat chummier, but it clearly 
made them, or at least their aides, suspicious of what was going on 
behind the police patrols. So despite the finest efforts of the Clinton 
administration, the old hostilities briefly breached the plantation 
fence on Friday. Under the ground rules of the summit conference, 
only the Americans were to brief the press, which was corralled several 
miles from the conference center on the modern campus of Chesapeake 
College. From the outset, suspicious Israelis and Palestinians sent 
their own monitors to see what James Rubin, the State Department spokesman, 
was saying. When Rubin finished Friday morning's briefing, he saw 
to his astonishment that both Netanyahu's spokesman, Aviv Bushinsky, 
and Arafat's spokesman, Marwan Kanafani, were busily dispensing information 
to clutches of reporters. Rubin quickly snatched Bushinsky out of 
his clutch and in a stage whisper demanded an explanation. Bushinsky 
said Kanafani started briefing first. Rubin strode over to Kanafani. 
After a bit more shuttle diplomacy, he finally got the two together 
and compelled them to shake hands on a gentlemen's agreement that 
they would leak no more. ``What if someone breeches the deal?'' Bushinsky 
demanded. ``Then we'll talk to the leaders,'' Rubin declared. ``It's 
unnatural for either side to avoid discussions with the media on an 
issue of this paramount importance,'' Rubin later acknowledged, with 
an evident familiarity with the fierce leaking that is commonplace 
in the Israeli political arena. ``We recognize that. What we're trying 
to do is tamp it down so people won't waste valuable and scarce time 
being irritated over what the other said in the media, when so much 
has to be done.'' By common agreement, though now strictly off the 
record, the incident was a microcosm of the problems facing the summit 
meeting. Basically, Israel is being asked to cede another 13 percent 
of the West Bank in exchange for concrete Palestinian steps against 
terrorism, and some assurance that Arafat will put off proclaiming 
a Palestinian state on May 4, 1999, the day on which the Oslo process 
formally comes to an end. By all accounts, the 13 percent has been 
agreed to, but not much else. And the question, asked by virtually 
every Israeli commentator over the last week, is how can President 
Clinton and Secretary of State Madeleine Albright hope to overcome 
in 72 hours the accumulated antagonisms that have blocked a deal for 
19 months. One answer is politics, sometimes described as the art 
of the possible. If a political deal is in the interest of all concerned, 
the argument goes, it's possible. That has led to widespread speculation 
about what Clinton, Netanyahu, and Arafat have to lose and gain. For 
Clinton, there is clearly more to gain than lose. Whatever emerges 
from the meeting, whether a ``framework agreement'' or a ``declaration 
of principles'' or even just a ``joint statement,'' he will claim 
success, and both Netanyahu and Arafat will smile and agree. ``When 
an American President gambles,'' Orly Azoulai-Katz wrote in the newspaper 
Yediot Ahronot in Israel Friday, ``the entire administration is mobilized 
to improve the odds. Working teams prepare papers and production teams 
prepare the Rose Garden for the signing ceremony.'' ``Clinton may 
be a gambler,'' Azoulai-Katz added, ``but he makes the rules in his 
casino.'' Netanyahu has more of a risk. Public opinion polls taken 
by the newspaper Maariv showed that 82 percent of the Israelis want 
an agreement, and if he returns with one he would be deemed a hero. 
But he would also face sharp attacks from his right-wing core constituency, 
which is opposed to any ceding of land. If Netanyahu fails, he increases 
the chances of a crisis down the line, when the Palestinians proclaim 
a state, but his political situation will remain largely the same. 
The same Maariv poll that showed overwhelming support for a deal also 
showed that far fewer Israelis, 57 percent, support ceding 13 percent 
more land, and 52 percent believe the Wye talks will fail. Arafat 
is the one with the most to lose. If he agrees to the tough Israeli 
security conditions, he will face tough going among the Palestinians. 
If the talks fail, he will likely fall further in the esteem of his 
people. Arafat also has the least choice, and there are rumors that 
the Americans have promised him new aid if he comes through. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>