<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981016.0148 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Until the Federal Reserve Board cut interest rates again and Congress 
agreed to more than $90 billion in financing for the International 
Monetary Fund, the biggest development last week in the effort to 
stave off global recession seemed to be made in Japan. After numerous 
false starts, Tokyo announced a $500 billion plan to rescue ailing 
Japanese banks. Western officials, who have been pressing the Japanese 
to shore up their banking system, hoped it would help pull the Japanese 
economy out of recession. Those were the hopes. But as the details 
filter out, the plan appears to offer less rather than more. Elizabeth 
Allan, a portfolio manager at the Japan Fund for the last 11 years 
and a student of the country for more than a quarter-century, put 
it in perspective during a telephone conversation from Tokyo early 
Friday morning. Q. What role do you think Asia, and Japan in particular, 
played in the decision by the Fed chairman, Alan Greenspan, to cut 
rates? A. I think the reason he did it is because the Japanese stock 
market has reacted so weakly to the bank package. As of Thursday, 
the market was actually below where it was when the package was announced. 
Q. The bank program was billed as one that would reform Japanese banks, 
allowing the healthy to survive and the weak to fail. It doesn't do 
that, does it? A. This is a bailout, not reform. I think the system 
needs to be reformed, but the politicians have a different view. They 
much prefer a muddle-through approach rather than a dramatic one, 
and seem to have retreated from an approach which calls for a stringent 
inquiry into the health of the system. Q. Still, we're talking about 
half a trillion dollars. Won't that help? A. On a short-term basis, 
it does look as though the stimulus that is part of this announcement 
will have some positive impact on the economy, even though it will 
help most of the country's traditionally strong interest groups the 
most, like agriculture and real estate interests. Q. Consumers are 
seen as another troubled element in the economy. Have you seen evidence 
that demand is picking up? A. I have been here about a week on this 
trip, and one of the things I have been looking at is the retail sector. 
As I wandered around shops last weekend, there were mobs and mobs 
of people out, but not many were walking out of the stores with shopping 
bags. That tells me people are interested, but in terms of actual 
purchases it looks somewhat subdued. Q. What was the talk? A. One 
of my favorite sources to find out what folks are thinking is taxi 
drivers. I had one on Thursday who was utterly scornful of the bank 
package, saying that everyone involved in the package lied to the 
people. He also said that until there is confidence in the system, 
there will be no change, and that consumers are not so easily fooled. 
That is exactly the point. Until there is some way of knowing which 
banks are solvent, the whole economic infrastructure is suspect. Q. 
You are not exactly describing an economy on the mend. How do you 
invest the Japan Fund's money under such conditions? A. We have tried 
to maintain a balance between unexciting but attractively valued domestic 
names, and there are some, even in a weak economic environment. I 
have also been looking at Japanese pharmaceutical companies, which 
until recently had a fairly low profile on the international scene. 
Some of the larger-cap names are Takeda, Yamanouchi and Chugai. Q. 
A year ago, some people were saying Japanese stocks were cheap. They 
are even cheaper now. What sort of advice do you give to someone considering 
investing? A. It is important to be very selective investing in Japan 
at this point and has been for some time. But for those with a time 
horizon of five years or more, it is important to realize that at 
some point Japan, an important country with many strengths, will come 
out of this. Q. What sort of indicators suggesting a turn is coming 
are you looking for? A. The most important ones are a reduction in 
capacity in many areas, starting with the banking system. If they 
try to keep every bank alive then even the best ones will be hard 
pressed to make a profit. But it is not limited to banking. It is 
also true in a number of other sectors, from agriculture and retailing 
to manufacturing. Q. Will the rest of Asia remain sick until Japan 
gets well? A. Most people would say the rest of Asia can't rebound 
without Japan. A stronger Japan would be a positive. But Asia is going 
to need to think about planning for its short- and mid-term future 
without the help of a stronger Japan. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>