<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981016.0348 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
WASHINGTON _ NATO granted President Slobodan Milosevic of Yugoslavia 
a reprieve on Friday, extending by 10 days its deadline for him to 
withdraw military and police forces cracking down on ethnic Albanians 
in the province of Kosovo. In the face of abundant evidence that Milosevic 
has not yet kept his pledges to withdraw the forces, NATO's representatives 
in Brussels gave him until Oct. 27 to comply or face the threat of 
NATO military attacks. They said the reprieve bought time for international 
observers to arrive in Kosovo. They also said it would allow NATO 
to start surveillance flights. NATO had previously given Milosevic 
until Friday night to comply, after voting on Tuesday to authorize 
limited cruise-missile strikes against targets throughout Yugoslavia. 
NATO and Clinton administration officials maintained that the extension 
of the deadline did not reflect a weakening of the alliance's resolve 
to use force if Milosevic breaks the agreement brokered earlier this 
week. But diplomats who have returned to Kosovo said Friday that there 
was no decrease in the police or military units and that there were 
some skirmishes between those units, overwhelmingly Serb, and the 
Kosovar rebels, who are ethnic Albanians. And the diplomats said there 
were some instances when they were denied access to monitor any withdrawals. 
There were signs Friday that the number of observers to be sent in 
to deter fighting would be well below the 2,000 that Milosevic accepted. 
Those observers, once they are in place, could gravely complicate 
the ability to carry out any air strikes if Milosevic fails to meet 
all the demands. The first reconnaissance flights _ an unprecedented 
incursion by NATO into Yugoslav airspace _ are set to begin with a 
U.S. U-2 spy plane on Saturday. A senior administration official said 
Friday evening that the NATO allies, which approached the decision 
to use force with great apprehension only after nine months of fighting 
and massacres, had agreed that Milosevic needed more time to carry 
out the withdrawal of his forces. ``You can quarrel a day or two one 
way or the other, but the basic feeling was to give him a period of 
time in which he has no excuse not to comply fully and then have it 
be automatic that the authority to use force would be back,'' the 
official said. On Thursday, NATO's commander, Gen. Wesley Clark, presented 
Yugoslav officials with a three-page list detailing, for the first 
time, the number of military and police units that must pull out of 
Kosovo to satisfy NATO. The list identified _ by unit name and number 
_ 4,000 to 5,000 Yugoslav army troops and 3,000 to 4,000 interior 
police units that had poured into the province after the crackdown 
began. Those troops were only a fraction of those involved in the 
fighting, which, though ostensibly aimed at insurgents, killed hundreds 
of civilians and drove tens of thousands from their homes. Even if 
Milosevic withdraws the units on the list, the Yugoslav army would 
have more than 12,000 troops in Kosovo, while the interior police 
would have 6,000, according to U.S. intelligence reports. While the 
U.N. resolution calling on Milosevic to end his crackdown did not 
specify the exact number of troops to be withdrawn, the current level 
of Serb troops whom NATO will allow to remain in Kosovo falls far 
short of the Clinton administration's public statements calling for 
a significant draw down of police and military forces. It also appeared 
Friday that there would be far fewer international observers than 
first announced. Richard Holbrooke, the U.S. envoy who brokered the 
deal, had challenged Milosevic to accept 2,000 monitors from the Organization 
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, which represents 54 countries 
in Europe, as well as the United States and Canada. But Holbrooke 
concocted the number before anyone asked the OSCE, officials said. 
The organization, based in Vienna, is expected to request fewer monitors, 
with one estimate suggesting there would be no more than 800 observers. 
Ivo Daalder, a former adviser on the Balkans for the National Security 
Council who is now a scholar at the Brookings Institute in Washington, 
said the agreement with Milosevic left much unresolved, while the 
decision to extend the deadline eased pressure on him to comply. ``The 
fact that Milosevic hasn't complied _ and the deadline was extended 
_ shows the deadline isn't serious, that the deadline is no longer 
meaningful,'' Daalder said. NATO has readied more than 400 warplanes, 
including 260 U.S. jets. NATO and Pentagon officials said those aircraft 
would remain on alert through the new deadline _ ready to strike, 
they insisted, if needed. The aircraft carrier Dwight D. Eisenhower, 
along with several warships and submarines capable of firing cruise 
missiles, have also remained in the Adriatic Sea. ``That is not NATO 
blinking,'' the State Department's spokesman, James Rubin, said. However, 
it will not be possible for the alliance to keep those planes poised 
indefinitely. The NATO and administration officials pointed to signs 
that Milosevic was complying. Some intelligence reports suggested 
that a few Yugoslav army units had left the field, and journalists 
in the provincial capital, Pristina, reported seeing a convoy of Yugoslav 
armored vehicles, including tanks, leave the city. However, there 
was little indication that Milosevic had begun any significant withdrawals, 
and clear evidence that some forces had dug in for the winter. ``There 
is a lower visible presence of police and military,'' the senior administration 
official said. ``There are fewer roadblocks. There is more movement. 
The place where the compliance is least good is in the actual withdrawal.'' 
Officials at the Pentagon said the reconnaissance flights, which were 
still being organized Friday, would give NATO officials an absolute 
picture. The administration has trumpeted the flights as one of the 
most significant concessions by Milosevic. However, the agreement 
says NATO will give the Yugoslav forces a weekly schedule of flights, 
according to a copy of the agreement obtained by The New York Times 
from someone outside the government who is critical of the agreement. 
The agreement also calls for NATO and Yugoslav air force officials 
to operate together at liaison offices in the Yugoslav capital, Belgrade, 
and the NATO air base at Vicenza, Italy. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>