<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981016.0261 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Clinton administration has raised objections to Northwest Airlines' 
bid to buy a controlling stake in Continental Airlines and may file 
suit to block the deal as early as Monday, a person briefed on the 
government's plans said Friday. But representatives of Northwest, 
Continental and the investor group that holds the controlling stake 
in Continental plan to negotiate with lawyers from the Justice Department's 
antitrust division over the weekend and could reach a settlement. 
``It is hard to say when Monday dawns where this will be,'' said another 
person involved. A government lawsuit would threaten a deal that has 
been the major catalyst for the consolidation of the domestic airline 
industry since it was announced earlier this year, though Northwest 
and Continental could challenge the government in court. In January, 
Northwest beat rival Delta Air Lines and agreed to buy an equity stake 
representing 51 percent of Continental's voting stock from Air Partners, 
an investment group run by David Bonderman, for $300 million and 4.1 
million shares of Northwest stock. Northwest and Continental, the 
country's fourth- and fifth-largest carriers, plan to combine route 
networks in a strategic alliance while keeping their fleets, managements 
and employees separate _ an arrangement they call a ``virtual merger.'' 
The deal sent the other major domestic airlines scurrying for partners 
to expand their networks for fear of losing lucrative business passengers 
to the new Northwest-Continental alliance. In April, No. 1 United 
Airlines agreed to join forces with No. 3 Delta Air Lines, and American 
Airlines, the second-largest carrier, paired with No. 6 US Airways. 
The alliances inflamed fears that the major airlines have become too 
powerful, choking off competition from smaller carriers. Earlier this 
year, the Transportation Department proposed guidelines designed to 
prevent major carriers from preying on smaller, discount carriers. 
Several bills were introduced in Congress to promote more airline 
competition. Executives at Northwest and Continental believe the Justice 
Department's objections reflect the growing concerns at the Department 
of Transportation and in Congress. ``They are acutely conscious of 
what is going on in the industry and do not want to allow all-out 
consolidation, or maybe start a trend that would lead that way,'' 
said a third person following the talks. A spokeswoman for the Justice 
Department's antitrust division declined to comment Friday, as did 
spokesmen from Northwest, Continental and Air Partners. Meeting in 
Washington earlier this week, Justice Department lawyers told Northwest 
they were not comfortable with the carrier's proposal to buy a controlling 
stake in Continental. The Justice Department also raised objections 
about the strategic alliance, said several people briefed on the discussion. 
Northwest had already proposed placing the Continental shares in a 
voting trust controlled by independent Continental directors, though 
it would retain the right to vote the shares if there were a takeover 
bid. The trust would expire after six years, giving Northwest control. 
Representatives of the government, Northwest, Continental and Air 
Partners met again on Friday in an attempt to negotiate a solution 
that would allow the deal to go forward. ``It's in the home stretch 
here,'' said one person. ``There are some issues. They will either 
get worked out or they won't.'' Northwest believes it has a strong 
case because its routes have little overlap with Continental's. Moreover, 
the government may not want to wage another high-profile antitrust 
case at a time when its resources are already tied up in major cases 
against Microsoft Corp. and Visa and Mastercard. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>