<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981016.0338 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The 1998 Nobel Peace Prize was awarded Friday to John Hume and David 
Trimble, leaders of the largest Catholic and Protestant political 
parties in Northern Ireland, for their efforts to bring peace to the 
long-polarized British province. Hume, 61, the Catholic head of the 
Social Democratic and Labor Party, was cited by the Nobel Committee 
in Oslo for having been ``the clearest and most consistent of Northern 
Ireland's political leaders in his work for a peaceful solution.'' 
Trimble, 54, the Protestant leader of the Ulster Unionists, was honored 
for having demonstrated ``great political courage when, at a critical 
stage in the process, he advocated solutions which led to the peace 
agreement.'' A leader of a third prominent party, Gerry Adams of Sinn 
Fein, the political wing of the Irish Republican Army, was not named 
as a prize winner. Nor were several other figures mentioned as possibilities, 
including former Sen. George Mitchell, who led the talks, Prime Ministers 
Tony Blair of Britain and Bertie Ahern of Ireland, President Clinton, 
and Mo Mowlam, the British government's secretary for Northern Ireland. 
The accord, signed on April 10 and known as the Good Friday Agreement, 
has given the 1.7 million residents of Northern Ireland a respite 
from the sectarian violence that has claimed more than 3,200 lives 
in the last 30 years. It has also opened the possibility of lasting 
stability for the first time since the establishment of Northern Ireland 
with partition from Ireland in 1921. Forging concessions from fiercely 
antagonistic populations, the accord seeks to balance the Protestant 
majority's wish to remain part of Britain with Catholic desires to 
strengthen ties to the Irish Republic to the south. The committee, 
seeing in Northern Ireland's two warring groups a dispute with notable 
similarities to violent tribal confrontations elsewhere, expressed 
the hope that the accord would serve ``to inspire peaceful solutions 
to other religious, ethnic and national conflicts around the world.'' 
While it did not honor Adams, the committee said it wished to ``emphasize 
the importance of the positive contributions to the peace process 
made by other Northern Irish leaders.'' Asked if the prize givers 
had ``shied away'' from Adams because of his past association with 
violence, the chairman of the secretive five-man committee, Francis 
Sejersted, said: ``We don't shy away from anybody. We just try to 
pick the most worthy people.'' Adams, he said, was ``clearly one of 
those who has contributed significantly to the process so far.'' Adams 
was almost certainly on the list of 139 nominees because the chairman 
of the Norwegian Nobel Committee Friday implied strongly that it had 
considered him for the prize but decided to limit it to Hume and Trimble. 
The two men will share the prize money of $960,000. Nominations can 
be made by university professors, members of national legislatures, 
former Nobel laureates, members of the Nobel Committee and a number 
of other people considered qualified. The committee itself releases 
the number of nominations but does not identify the nominees or or 
even confirm a name. In 1994, the Nobel Committee included Yasser 
Arafat, the Palestinian leader, as a prize winner with the Israeli 
leaders Yitzhak Rabin and Shimon Peres. One committee member, Kaare 
Kristiansen, resigned in protest, calling Arafat ``a terrorist.'' 
Explaining why the committee selected the two men from the number 
of people associated with the Good Friday Agreement, Sejersted said, 
``There is one from the Catholic side and one from the Protestant 
side, so I do not fear that it is going to alienate any of the other 
parties in the process.'' Adams, in New York on a fund-raising trip 
for Sinn Fein, welcomed the Oslo announcement and particularly praised 
Hume, who is widely seen as having helped persuade the IRA to adopt 
a cease-fire and having eased Sinn Fein's entry into the talks. ``Indeed, 
there would be no peace process but for his courage and vision,'' 
Adams said, adding, `No one deserves this accolade more.'' He also 
said the prize imposed on everyone the responsibility to ``push ahead 
through the speedy implementation of the agreement.'' The immediate 
next steps are the creation in the new power-sharing Northern Ireland 
Assembly of a 10-member executive that will in effect be the new government 
of the province, and a cross-border body linking the North with the 
Irish Republic, one of the key attractions in the pact to the Catholic 
minority. Trimble, who is the first minister of the new legislature, 
faces pressure from dissidents in his quarrelsome party who insist 
that the IRA must start disarming before Sinn Fein can take up the 
positions in the Assembly that its vote total in June elections entitles 
it to. In the unforgiving politics of Northern Ireland, the Unionist 
dissidents and members of other Protestant parties who did not join 
in the peace talks attacked both Trimble and Hume Friday. Ian Paisley 
Jr., son of the head of the Democratic Unionist Party, called the 
Nobel Committee's decision a ``farce'' and said of the winners, ``These 
people have not delivered peace, and they are not peacemakers.'' Trimble 
said Friday that he was ``slightly uncomfortable'' with the award 
because so many other people had been involved beside him in reaching 
the settlement and much remained to be done to put it in place. ``We 
know that while we have the makings of peace, it is not wholly secure 
yet,'' he told the BBC from Denver, where he was on an 11-city North 
American mission to spur foreign investment in Ulster. ``I hope it 
does not turn out to be premature.'' Hume received word of the prize 
at his home in Londonderry and termed it ``an expression of the total 
endorsement of the work of very many people.'' He added: ``This isn't 
just an award to David Trimble and myself. It is an award to all the 
people in Northern Ireland.'' Friday was the second time the Nobel 
Peace Prize has gone to figures in the Northern Ireland conflict. 
Betty Williams and Mairead Corrigan, two Belfast women, won it in 
1976 for mobilizing Catholics and Protestants to stage rallies calling 
for an end to violence. They acted after three children of Miss Corrigan's 
sister were killed when they were struck by an IRA gunman's getaway 
car. There had been strong speculation that the committee would recognize 
the Ulster peace effort this year, and other names figured in the 
conjecture. There were the two prime ministers, Blair of Britain and 
Ahern of Ireland, who drove the faltering talks to a conclusion and 
stayed up all night with the negotiators as the deadline slipped from 
midnight April 9 into the next afternoon. And in addition to Mitchell 
and Ms. Mowlam, there was Clinton, who actively pressed the two sides 
to get together and made critical phone calls to negotiators at Blair's 
request in the final hours. In Washington Friday, Clinton said ``how 
very pleased'' he was, ``personally and as president, that the Nobel 
Prize Committee has rewarded the courage and the people of Northern 
Ireland by giving the Nobel Peace Prize to John Hume and to David 
Trimble.'' He added ``a special word of thanks'' to Mitchell, who 
issued a statement praising Hume and Trimble as ``fully deserving 
of this honor.'' Hume, nominated for the Peace Prize twice before, 
is widely credited with being the single most important and consistent 
influence for peace in Northern Ireland. For 30 years he has been 
speaking out against violence, as a member of a short-lived Northern 
Ireland assembly in the early 1970s and then as a member of the British 
Parliament and the European Parliament. He has made frequent trips 
to the United States to encourage investment in Ulster and to dissuade 
Irish-Americans from furnishing money for the IRA. Once a trainee 
priest and then a teacher, he became involved in politics when the 
Catholic civil rights movement started in 1968. He was a founder of 
his party in 1970 to represent ``nationalist'' sentiment. In Northern 
Ireland, a nationalist is someone wanting closer ties and even union 
with Ireland but, unlike republicans, unwilling to countenance bloodshed 
to reach the goal. On the Protestant side, the two counterpart words 
are ``unionist,'' like Trimble, and ``loyalist,'' the term for Protestant 
paramilitaries. Hume began the process that led to April's settlement 
five years ago, with a decision to meet secretly with Adams, an outcast 
among nationalists because of his identification with the IRA. Those 
talks led to a cease-fire in 1993 that prompted hopes for an end to 
the violence. Those hopes were dashed 17 months later when the IRA 
set off a bomb in the Canary Wharf financial district of London. Though 
he said he was devastated by the act, Hume pressed on, and his efforts 
produced a second cease-fire and brought Adams to the negotiating 
table. Trimble, by contrast, is a late-comer to accommodation with 
his opponents. A former law professor, he began his political life 
as an enemy of the party he now leads and an agitator against the 
last peace settlement, the Sunningdale Agreement, which died in 1974. 
As a member of the hard-line ``vanguard'' movement at that time, he 
said, ``I would personally draw the line at violence and terrorism, 
but if we are talking about a campaign that involves demonstrations 
and so on, then a certain amount of violence may be inescapable.'' 
In 1995, Trimble, already a member of the British Parliament, attracted 
much attention by leading Orange Order Protestant marchers at Drumcree 
Church into a police formation set up to block their path down an 
avenue in a Catholic neighborhood. When the parade successfully reached 
the Orange Lodge hall in downtown Portadown, he danced a jig of triumph 
with the Rev. Ian Paisley, the fulminating preacher-politician with 
a history of fire-breathing speeches condemning Catholic advances. 
The choice of Trimble for party leader over a more moderate official 
that same year was seen as a sign that the unionists were digging 
in their heels and selecting their most combatively conservative candidate. 
These days, Paisley, the reigning symbol of Protestant intransigence, 
calls Trimble a traitor to the unionist cause. What has brought Trimble 
into disrepute with some former allies and at the same time made him 
a credible candidate for a Nobel Peace Prize was his stance in the 
last year trying to persuade his party, whose slogan has always been 
``No Surrender,'' that the time had come for compromise. This fall 
he met with Adams, an unthinkable act for a unionist politician until 
now and one for which he was pilloried by dissidents in his party. 
He now travels the province with Seamus Mallon, the deputy speaker 
and a Catholic, by his side in an expression of cooperation. ``He 
has taken a political chance in identifying himself with the process,'' 
Sejersted, the Nobel Committee chairman, said Friday. The peace talks 
began in the summer of 1996, held in drab civil service buildings 
behind the stately Stormont building in Belfast where the new legislature 
created by the settlement is now meeting. The negotiations eventually 
drew the participation of eight of the 10 Northern Irish parties, 
with many of the men around the table convicted murderers and bombers 
who had emerged from prison with a commitment to peaceful resolution 
to what for nearly a century have been referred to wearily as ``the 
Troubles.'' The paramilitary groups had also made the tactical decision 
that violence would not secure their goals, a shared conviction that 
gave these talks a chance for success that past fitful attempts at 
settlement lacked. The peace talks moved in a desultory manner until 
Blair took office in May 1997 and highlighted the cause of peace in 
Northern Ireland as an early commitment. At his and Ahern's urging, 
the IRA declared a cease-fire in July, and by September Sinn Fein 
was permitted to join the talks. Blair also gave Trimble and Adams 
unprecedented access to 10 Downing Street, and the Ulster Protestants 
reported that they obtained from Clinton the most sympathetic hearing 
they had ever had from an American president, allaying their longtime 
suspicions of Washington's bias in favor of the Catholic minority. 
In a statement Friday from his Chequers retreat hailing the participants 
in the Northern Irish settlement, Blair said the lesson that Friday's 
awards taught was that ``political leaders have to get out of their 
political boxes they have been in for years and years and take risks 
for peace.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>