<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981016.0216 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
One school of technology investing hews to a simple strategy: Follow 
the leadership. The shares of so-called leadership companies may not 
look cheap by conventional measures, say price-to-earnings or price-to-book 
ratios. But because the leaders define standards the rest of the industry 
must follow, they will always command a disproportionate share of 
earnings and growth. Therefore the leaders will always bounce back 
from setbacks to deliver market-beating returns, or so the school 
teaches. The Intel Corp. is incontrovertibly a leadership company. 
Indeed it may be the leadership company of its generation. Intel invented 
the microprocessor and the dynamic random access memory chip and it 
continues to push the performance envelope today. It is also broadly 
acknowledged to be a superbly run company. Add to that the fact that 
the stock, which closed Friday at $83.75, has fallen 16.6 percent 
from last year's high of $100.50 on Aug. 20 and that its current P/E 
ratio of 24.1 is below that of of the overall market's, and it is 
easy to reach a conclusion. A technology investor has no choice but 
to own Intel, right? Maybe. But not everyone believes Intel is a compelling 
buy at the current price. Some point out that it is well above its 
52-week low of $65.65625, reached on June 3. And they are not at all 
sure this leadership thing is what it's cracked up to be. What makes 
the debate timely are the better-than-expected third-quarter earnings 
released last week. Bulls point to that report as a clear sign that 
personal computer makers have worked through a glut of inventory that 
depressed sales in the first half of the year. Intel had originally 
forecast that third-quarter revenues would be flat relative to the 
second quarter's, later amended that to a gain of 8 percent to 10 
percent and actually reported a 14 percent gain. Many analysts expect 
a robust fourth quarter, too. But the bears doubt that the current 
growth is sustainable. They say buyers no longer need to increase 
processing power on a regular basis and that Intel faces reinvigorated 
competition. As evidence of the strength of this argument, Intel's 
shares fell $1 the day after the earnings announcement. So far, even 
the bears are not placing great emphasis on an antitrust lawsuit filed 
against Intel in June by the Federal Trade Commission. For starters, 
Intel's hold on the desktop is not nearly so absolute as that of the 
Microsoft Corp. Still, it belongs on the list of worries for Intel. 
Count Mark Edelstone, an analyst with Morgan Stanley Dean Witter, 
among the Intel bulls. He has a strong buy recommendation on the stock 
and a target share price of $110. ``I don't think these results would 
indicate anything other than that Intel will remain a leadership stock,'' 
he said. Edelstone expects demand to be strong enough in the fourth 
quarter that Intel will enter 1999 with a backlog. Michael Murphy, 
editor of the California Technology Stock Letter, has been predicting 
that Intel might hit $120 by year-end. He expects money to flow from 
``old economy'' stocks like Gillette and Coca-Cola to ``new economy'' 
stocks like technology companies as it becomes apparent that only 
the Intels of the world can deliver double-digit sales and earnings 
growth in a recession. ``If we get the disconnect between old economy 
stocks and new economy stocks that we expect, Intel can sell for 30 
times 1999 earnings,'' Murphy said, giving it a price of $120 by his 
estimate. He said he presumed that in the event of a recession next 
year, companies would continue buying personal computers to drive 
up productivity and remain competitive. Companies did just that in 
the last recession, in the early '90s, driven by the need to move 
old mainframe-based applications to client-server systems.The spread 
of Microsoft's Windows 3.1 and the related Office suite of applications 
drove demand for more powerful processors. But the climate has changed. 
The big demand drivers are the Internet and electronic commerce, which 
are limited less by microprocessor power than by bandwidth. And on 
most of today's real world applications, there is little benefit in 
upgrading from a 166-megahertz Pentium to a 300-megahertz Pentium 
II. Windows 98 does not require more power than Windows 95. Drew Peck, 
an analyst with Cowen &AMP; Co., said he did not believe Intel will 
be the profit and growth machine it once was. ``For Intel to sustain 
this quarter's level of growth and profit requires a strong step up 
in PC demand,'' he said. ``That's a difficult bet to make.'' He rates 
Intel a ``trading buy,'' meaning it should be bought on dips and sold 
on pops. Of course, it is possible to admire Intel the company but 
not Intel the stock. ``This is undeniably one of the great business 
franchises in our economy,'' said Roger McNamee, a principal in Integral 
Partners, a fund specializing in technology stocks. But he said the 
diminished need for ever greater processing power, even more than 
greater competition, will lead to ever shorter product cycles and 
ever shorter periods in which Intel can charge a premium for its latest, 
fastest processors. ``I think its going to have lower highs and lower 
lows,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>