<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981016.0344 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A day after celebrating a much-delayed agreement on a final federal 
budget package, Congress did not have a budget bill in place to vote 
on and postponed Friday's planned action on the $500 billion deal 
until next week. With just 17 days until the midterm elections, most 
lawmakers fled the capital for their campaigns at home, with some 
of them grousing about excessive spending, numerous details still 
unresolved and much of the bill still unwritten. Some conservatives, 
mainly in the House, were upset with some of the bill's major provisions, 
like the use of part of the surplus for a $20 billion supplemental 
package for so-called emergencies like extra military spending and 
solving the Year 2000 computer problem, and with the absence of a 
tax cut. Congress cannot vote on the budget until the bill's final 
language is drafted, which no one has had time to do since top-level 
negotiators agreed Thursday afternoon on the broad outlines. The vote, 
which was expected Friday, was put off and, for the fifth time since 
the Oct. 1 start of the fiscal year, Congress had to arrange more 
temporary financing to keep the government running. Only a handful 
of top-level bargainers _ including House Speaker Newt Gingrich, Senate 
Majority Leader Trent Lott and White House chief of staff Erskine 
Bowles _ were in the room for the final deal. Excluded were the committee 
chairmen and the heads of the appropriation committees, who are now 
trying to write the precise language of the bill, which could run 
more than 3,000 pages. ``It was just a bunch of free-thinkers in the 
room,'' said one top congressional aide. The details that remained 
to be nailed down, and written, ranged from precisely how to spend 
$6 billion in aid to farmers to how to respond to people with an allergy 
to peanuts. Gingrich and other members from Georgia, a major peanut-producing 
state, are trying to block a Transportation Department regulation 
that would force airlines to create a ``peanut-free'' zone to protect 
passengers with allergies. The regulation would prevent peanuts from 
being served within three rows of such passengers on domestic flights. 
The issue has nothing to do with federal spending, but the spending 
bill is the last opportunity in this session of Congress for members 
to have their special provisions addressed. Tucked into the budget 
agreement is a measure that would restrict children's access to pornography 
on the Internet. The lag time before the bill is officially closed 
is making some conservatives nervous that more members will try to 
add provisions that will further expand a bill they already consider 
overly bloated, and that few will have time to read. And some worry 
that once the hometown pork that is stuffed into the bill is publicly 
revealed, voters could put pressure on their elected representatives 
not to support it. To stay within its spending limits for a balanced 
budget, Congress or the president can designate something an emergency 
without having to pay for it by cutting from other programs. That 
means, in effect, that they would be using money from this year's 
anticipated $70 billion surplus to pay for such so-called emergencies, 
which may or may not meet the definition of a one-time unforeseen 
disaster. Conservatives, who are concerned chiefly about busting the 
budget, questioned the agreement to use the surplus for the president's 
$10 billion for ``emergencies'' like dealing with the computer bug 
and the Republicans' $9 billion, much of it for military hardware. 
Nonetheless, virtually everyone on Capitol Hill expected the budget 
to pass _ eventually. Rep. Mark Souder, R-Ind., said: `Most of my 
friends, who are predominantly activist conservatives, are split about 
50-50. If tax cuts were your primary thing, then you're unhappy, but 
many conservatives have a mixed agenda. My position is, hold the nose 
and vote yes. We have no tax cuts and far too much spending that I 
oppose, but that's the nature of compromise. Every member has a little 
different focus.'' Souder said he liked the extra money for defense 
spending, and he liked the price supports for farmers. Hog farmers 
in his district, whose biggest customers were Japan and China, had 
been hit hard by the collapse of Asian markets. Several Republicans 
said the bill seemed skewed in favor of the Democrats. They cited 
two reasons: Clinton needed to curry favor with Democrats to shore 
up support if the House votes to impeach him, and Republican leaders 
feared that if they had stood up to Clinton, they might have forced 
a government shutdown and Republicans would be blamed. ``Clinton was 
buying votes,'' said Rep. David Hobson, R-Ohio. ``He was sucking up 
to the liberal Democrats so they would support him in impeachment.'' 
Rep. W.J. (Billy) Tauzin, R-La., said the leaders seemed motivated 
by a desire to avoid the political damage they incurred from the partial 
government shutdowns of 1995 and 1996. He also cited the president's 
need to placate the left by adding costly domestic programs. ``The 
combination of the lessons learned three years ago and the scandal 
on the president's side yielded the inevitable result, a budget that 
leans way to the left,'' Tauzin said. Still, he said he would probably 
support the bill. ``It won't be enthusiastically,'' he said. ``I think 
we would have gotten a tax cut, but for the scandal. If the president 
had not been caught up with the scandal, he probably would have followed 
the Dick Morris strategy and moved towards the center.'' Gingrich 
said he recognized that some conservatives were wary of the agreement. 
But he sought to reassure them that the package served their interests. 
He cited the increase in defense spending. And he noted that the Republicans 
had blocked several items, including needle-exchange programs in the 
District of Columbia, national education testing and U.S. contributions 
to a United Nations program that pays for family planning in China, 
which many in Congress object to because China has a policy of coercing 
abortions and forcing sterilization. Gingrich said the agreement was 
the best that could be achieved ``when you have a conservative Republican 
Congress and a liberal Democratic President.'' A few remained outright 
hostile to the bill, as much for the hasty way in which it was cobbled 
together as for what it contained. Rep. Joe Barton, R-Texas, said: 
`I'm voting no unless something revolutionary happens between now 
and Tuesday. I think it's the process that gives the president the 
ability to stonewall until the very end and then hold us for ransom. 
The Republican leadership in the House and Senate did a good job of 
limiting the highway robbery, but it's still gone too far beyond the 
spending caps.'' Also angry at the rushed endgame was Rep. Gene Taylor, 
D-Miss., who took to the House floor and said he could not support 
the final bill. ``I'm going to urge my colleagues to vote no,'' Taylor 
said. ``We have stayed here this long. We can stay a little bit longer. 
And I am going to encourage my colleagues to continue to vote no until 
we are given adequate time to study the measure that is brought before 
us, and then and only then should we be making a decision for over 
hundreds of billions of dollars worth of programs.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>