<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981016.0156 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
October 8, 1998, Thursday Late Edition - FinalSection: A Page: 18 
Column: 1 Desk: National Desk Length: 1266 words CHICAGO, Oct. 7 She 
says he is ''duplicitous,'' a ''wolf in sheep's clothing'' who has 
resorted to ''scuzzball'' campaign tactics in the past. He has described 
her as ''shrill,'' contending that she has ''nothing positive to say 
about her own record'' and saying her career has been ''obscured by 
numerous scandals and controversies.'' The United States Senate race 
between the incumbent Democrat, Carol Moseley-Braun, and State Senator 
Peter Fitzgerald, a conservative Republican, has become one of the 
most tensely watched campaigns in the country. And with less than 
a month to go, the candidates have dropped all pretense of keeping 
the gloves on. The latest poll, published last week in The Chicago 
Tribune, suggests that Ms. Moseley-Braun, elected in 1992 as a rising 
star, is in serious trouble. She lagged behind Mr. Fitzgerald by 10 
percentage points, with more voters saying they believed Mr. Fitzgerald 
was the more honest and trustworthy candidate. The poll, which had 
a margin of error of three percentage points, also suggested that 
she had lost considerable support among suburban women, one of the 
main groups that swept her into office six years ago in what became 
known as the '' Year of the Woman.'' Dogged by missteps and poor judgments 
in her personal and political life, Ms. Moseley-Braun, 51, who was 
catapulted from an obscure Cook County office to become the nation's 
first black female senator, has had trouble getting voters to focus 
on her legislative accomplishments. And she has been soundly outspent 
by Mr. Fitzgerald, a 37-year-old multimillionaire from the Chicago 
suburbs who inherited his family banking fortune and spent $7 million 
of his own money on the Republican primary alone. ''Have I not handled 
my own publicity and image making as well as I could have?'' Ms. Moseley-Braun 
(pronounced brawn) said in an interview. ''There's no question about 
that. Have I not handled the politics as well as I could have? No 
question. But I certainly have worked as hard as I can. I've got a 
great legislative record. And with all the things that have been thrown 
at me, none of them has stuck.'' Mr. Fitzgerald, considered so conservative 
that most Republican leaders supported his moderate opponent in the 
bitterly contested primary, has wasted no opportunity to try to make 
Ms. Moseley-Braun's problems stick and to deflect her characterization 
of him as an extremist by painting her as an ineffectual liberal. 
''Although her career has been somewhat obscured by numerous scandals 
and controversies, those who have noticed her voting record have noticed 
it is very extreme,'' Mr. Fitzgerald said in an interview. Across 
the board, these are tough times for Illinois Democrats. In the race 
to replace Gov. Jim Edgar, a Republican who is retiring, Glenn Poshard, 
a Democratic Congressman from downstate, trailed George Ryan, the 
Republican Secretary of State, by 22 percentage points in The Tribune's 
poll. Mr. Poshard has alienated liberal Democrats with his opposition 
to abortion rights and some gay rights issues, as well as his past 
votes against gun control and environmental measures. And he has tried 
without much success to tar Mr. Ryan with a scandal in which employees 
of the Secretary of State's office are accused of taking bribes in 
return for granting truck licenses, and using some of the bribe money 
to support Mr. Ryan and other candidates. Democrats running for other 
offices, even those in heavily Democratic Cook County, are running 
into trouble, too. This year, the state Legislature eliminated straight-party 
voting in Illinois, long considered a boon to Democrats. And although 
Democrats are hoping that the efforts of Congressional Republicans 
to impeach President Clinton may spur Democrats to the polls in a 
kind of backlash, so far the President's problems have not helped 
matters and could lower turnout among Democratic voters. (Mr. Poshard 
even stayed away from a Chicago fund-raiser on his behalf which Mr. 
Clinton attended). All of that is making things harder for Senator 
Moseley-Braun. ''I've always thought she was going to be in a tough 
race, even against Fitzgerald, but I didn't think it was going to 
be this tough,'' said Dawn Clark Netsch, a Democrat who ran for governor 
in 1994. The Senator had to press hard to get Mr. Fitzgerald to agree 
to a debate, which was held on Sunday. Afterward, she said she had 
not expected him to try to ''paint himself as a centrist'' and said, 
''I could have made him show his true colors better.'' Mr. Fitzgerald, 
for his part, said that the Senator sounded ''shrill'' in the debate 
and that she ''wasn't even able to understand what I was talking about 
when I was talking about Social Security.'' Democrats had hoped Mr. 
Fitzgerald would win the primary because they believed his conservative 
views would make him easier to defeat. Mr. Fitzgerald believes his 
wealth has allowed him to be more independent in his political views. 
He opposes abortion, even in cases of rape or incest, sponsored a 
bill signed into law by Mr. Edgar that bans same-sex marriages, and 
would screen homosexuals out of the military. He would use the Federal 
budget surplus to provide tax cuts, while Ms. Moseley-Braun would 
use it to shore up Social Security. Ms. Moseley-Braun, who sits on 
the Senate Finance Committee, has concentrated on cleaning up polluted 
industrial sites in cities, fixing decrepit school buildings, improving 
pension laws for women, and fighting for tax breaks on airline tickets 
and ethanol, issues important in Illinois. But she has also had to 
fend off accusations that she misused an inheritance instead of reimbursing 
Medicaid for her mother's care, ignored accusations of sexual harassment 
against her 1992 campaign manager and former fiance, Kgosie Matthews, 
and that she and Mr. Matthews had spent thousands of campaign dollars 
on personal travel, jewelry and stereo equipment. She was also sharply 
criticized by human rights groups and the State Department for a secret 
1996 trip to Nigeria in which she and Mr. Matthews met with Sani Abacha, 
the dictator who died this year. Although no investigation found any 
criminal wrongdoing and Ms. Moseley-Braun has acknowledged making 
mistakes in judgment, she has not been able to shake what she calls 
her ''negatives.'' A few weeks ago, when George Will raised these 
issues in his column, the Senator lost her temper, used a racial slur 
to portray herself as a victim of racism and compared Mr. Will to 
a member of the Ku Klux Klan, forcing her to apologize. ''She knows 
that she's in a dogfight. Most incumbents don't want to debate,'' 
said Paul Green, a professor of political science at Governors State 
University in Chicago. ''She wants the differences between her and 
Fitzgerald to be the cornerstone of the election.'' In the remaining 
weeks of the campaign, Ms. Moseley-Braun, a charismatic campaigner, 
said she would work hard to reach disaffected supporters. Her campaign 
has raised about $6 million (compared with the $10 million Mr. Fitzgerald 
has already spent) and has scheduled fund-raisers with Mayor Richard 
M. Daley of Chicago, Mr. Clinton and Hillary Rodham Clinton. ''I've 
worked myself already into bad health,'' said Ms. Moseley-Braun, who 
was treated last week for pneumonia at a Texas hospital after she 
became ill on a flight to Dallas. ''I'm doing everything I know how.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>