<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981016.0204 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Half a century ago, when a group of uneducated immigrant Jews scraped 
together enough money to buy a bankrupt medical and veterinary school 
in Waltham, Mass., west of Boston, they named it Brandeis University 
and set out to found the Harvard of the Jews. The plan was dismissed 
by many as pie in the sky. But it was a propitious moment. The Nazis 
had been defeated, Israel had been created, the civil rights era was 
in its infancy, higher education was on the brink of explosive growth 
and American Jews were still restricted in their access to many institutions. 
So when the new university _ named after Louis Brandeis, the first 
Jewish justice of the U.S. Supreme Court _ quickly became home to 
renowned intellectuals like Leonard Bernstein, Max Lerner and Herbert 
Marcuse, the plan seemed on track. In the intervening decades, however, 
something happened that Brandeis' founders did not foresee. The Jews' 
fervent drive for acceptance, prosperity and a role in shaping American 
culture succeeded so well _ partly through the Brandeis' efforts _ 
that Brandeis never became the Harvard of the Jews. Harvard became 
the Harvard of the Jews as did Yale, Columbia, the University of Pennsylvania 
and the rest of elite American colleges, where Jews, who make up 2{ 
percent of the U.S. population, typically make up 20 percent of students 
and faculty members. ``Jews are no longer trying to get into the American 
academic establishment,'' said Rabbi Arthur Hertzberg, a historian 
of American Jewry. ``They are the academic establishment. The problem 
Brandeis had come to solve has been solved.'' But solutions are sometimes 
only new problems in disguise. As Brandeis alumni and friends gathered 
this weekend to celebrate the 50th anniversary of their Jewish-sponsored, 
non-sectarian university _ the old handful of broken buildings linked 
by dirt paths now a groomed 235-acre campus _ they are struggling 
with the question of how to position their institution in its middle 
age. Other universities created to serve specific groups at certain 
historical moments, like black and women's colleges and even some 
small religious schools, are also struggling to reinvent themselves. 
In the case of Brandeis, as Israel has become secure, as the generation 
that suffered the Holocaust dies, as Jews continue to rise freely 
through the ranks of politics, industry and the media, Brandeis and 
American Jewry together face a challenge unprecedented in Jewish history: 
How to forge an identity divorced from persecution? ``What do you 
do when all the choices are yours,'' asked Gary Tobin, a Brandeis 
professor of Jewish studies, ``when you can't blame external forces, 
when there is no hostile environment to mold your ideology? ``Brandeis 
doesn't want to be thought of as reclusive, separate, disintegrated 
from American life. It has to find a balance. In the same way that 
a Jew has to decide what it means to be an assimilated Jew, Brandeis 
has to figure out what it means to be an assimilated university.'' 
Part of the chosen solution is through a conscious internationalism 
and emphasis on ethics that officials like Brandeis president Jehuda 
Reinharz believe can be illuminated by the Jewish tradition. So Friday, 
right after the Brandeis festivities began with a picnic lunch, the 
first event was a symposium on ``Human Rights: The Unfinished Agenda.'' 
Among the speakers was Shen Tong, a Brandeis graduate who was one 
of the organizers of the Tiananmen Square protest in Beijing in 1989. 
The university has also just opened a $13 million international center 
on the study of ethics and social justice. Last spring, German Chancellor 
Helmut Kohl was the commencement speaker and the Dalai Lama, the exiled 
spiritual leader of Tibet, was a campus guest. Paradoxically, such 
internationalism has been accompanied by an increased Jewish emphasis 
within. The neglected Jewish studies department has been rebuilt, 
the kosher food areas have been greatly improved and expanded and 
there are a couple hundred Orthodox Jews among the 3,000 undergraduates. 
There are also a small number of strictly Orthodox students who had, 
until recently, never considered Brandeis because it was seen as insufficiently 
Jewish. The diversity of Jewish life on campus might be expected to 
produce tensions, as it has in Israel. But one of Brandeis' goals 
is to find a way for different kinds of Jews to live together. Sabbath 
dinner under the auspices of Hillel, the foundation that promotes 
Jewish life on American campuses, is a good example. Every Friday 
night, several hundred young Jews celebrate together: Reform men with 
earrings sitting near black-coated Orthodox men and Conservative women 
in colorful yarmulkes. Such dinners, with their singing and high-minded 
discussions afterwards, suggest a role for the university in the debate 
over identity: as an advocate of Jewish pluralism. ``I think most 
of us agree that for Brandeis to flourish in the 1990s, it must give 
expression to its Jewish character,'' said Michael Sandel, a professor 
of government at Harvard who is a Brandeis graduate and board member. 
``There are many ways to do that but one is to serve as a forum for 
debate over competing visions for Jewish life.'' For non-Jews, the 
Jewish emphasis can be both intriguing and alienating. Sucheta Puranik, 
a junior from Wallingford, Conn., said it was fascinating to watch 
Jews, who are so used to being in the minority, feel in charge. But 
she said she joined the campus intercultural center to find others 
who feel a bit left out during Jewish holidays. Brandeis has trouble 
attracting African-Americans despite strenuous efforts to do so, including 
two programs that bring inner-city youths to campus. Blacks make up 
less than three percent of the student population. In its early years, 
Brandeis' goal was not Jewish pluralism but the purest assimilation. 
Again, Harvard and other elite universities founded by religious communities 
were the models. Until 1937, for example, all presidents of Brown 
University were Baptists, many of them ministers. Today Brown, like 
the others, is a center of secularism. So, the theory went, it would 
be for Brandeis, which is Jewish-sponsored but non-sectarian, unlike 
Yeshiva University, which requires students to take a heavy load of 
courses in Jewish studies. The Brandeis student body began overwhelmingly 
Jewish but quickly became more diverse, with 40 percent non-Jewish 
students. The faculty has long had a mix of backgrounds. Brandeis 
had become emblematic of major college trends. Not only had it served 
as a bohemian intellectual center in the 1950s but in the 1960s it 
became synonymous with the 1960s. Brandeis became the National Student 
Strike Information Center. In 1970 two Brandeis students were on the 
FBI's 10 Most Wanted List for taking part in an armed robbery that 
stemmed from their political beliefs. LSD-laced punch was served by 
half-naked students in the middle of campus. In the 1970s, when many 
Jews turned their attention and money toward Israel, Brandeis found 
itself without the resources or leadership of more established universities. 
This was partly because, unlike Vanderbilt, Duke, Rice or Vassar, 
Brandeis was not named for its chief donor but for its main inspiration. 
Brandeis depended upon, as it still does, what it calls its foster 
alumni _ American Jews _ for support. But as American Jews became 
fully integrated, they patronized other institutions; support for 
Brandeis waned and the quality of its students declined. Some of the 
university's supporters began to worry that Brandeis' frank Jewishness 
was a liability. In the late 1980s, when Evelyn Handler was president 
of Brandeis, a committee of students and trustees examined ways to 
reduce the university's Jewish character. Gustav Ranis, a professor 
of international economics at Yale and a member of Brandeis' first 
graduating class, led the committee, which actually bore the name 
``Dejudification.'' The idea was to attract more non-Jews, particularly 
Asians, and the committee decided a relaxation of Jewish dietary restrictions 
would help. ``We recommended that there be one place on campus where 
pork and shellfish could be consumed,'' Professor Ranis said. ``Evelyn 
Handler ran with it and announced it. There was a huge negative response 
in the American Jewish community. Jews who didn't themselves keep 
kosher wanted Brandeis to keep kosher.'' Its finances a mess, its 
reputation sullied, its mission muddied, Brandeis was the subject 
of major newspaper articles describing its identity crisis. The board 
urged Ms. Handler to resign. Salvation appeared in the guise of a 
physician. Dr. Samuel Thier, then president of the Institute of Medicine 
under the National Academy of Sciences, served as Brandeis president 
for three crucial, stabilizing years. Having served on the faculties 
of Yale, Penn and Harvard, Thier said he saw the quality of Brandeis 
and its faculty. ``Here was this place with spectacular scientists, 
really first class, yet they were feeling miserable,'' Thier recalled. 
``The institution was young but it was part of a tradition thousands 
of years old. To me, it looked like a recovery just waiting to happen.'' 
As Jonathan Sarna, a professor of American Jewish history at Brandeis, 
put it: ``Brandeis was like a guy named Mendelssohn trying to pretend 
that he's not Jewish. Once that came to an end, things improved quickly.'' 
Pork and shrimp were removed from the cafeteria. Dr. Reinharz, then 
a Zionist historian at Brandeis, was named provost. American Jews 
were told that Brandeis still thought of itself as Jewish and that 
its future depended on their support. No one grasped the importance 
of that support as clearly as Reinharz, who took over the presidency 
in 1994. Reinharz, 54, born in Palestine, now Israel, is fiercely 
devoted to Brandeis, where he earned his Ph.D. Traveling around the 
country, often accompanied by his wife, Shulamit, a Brandeis professor 
of sociology and women's studies, Reinharz has given a new face to 
the institution. He has also grasped the value of celebrity, attracting 
people like Ann Richards and Anita Hill to the campus as visiting 
lecturers and persuading former Labor Secretary Robert Reich to take 
a professorship. ``What I have done is really clearly define and articulate 
what we are all about,'' he said. ``Tempering our Jewish identity 
did not work. I have defined our mission very clearly and without 
embarrassment as having four pillars: Jewish sponsorship, total non-sectarianism, 
a commitment to social justice and excellence.'' It is on the pillar 
of excellence, that Brandeis sees its work most clearly in the future. 
Applications are brisk, and the use of merit scholarship has brought 
some first-class students to Brandeis. But the university still suffers 
from being a second choice for many of the brightest on campus. It 
has been frustrated at not being able to crack the top 25 list in 
the university rankings put out by such publications as U.S. News 
&AMP; World Report. But a recent book by Hugh David Graham and Nancy 
Diamond, ``The Rise of American Research Universities,'' (Johns Hopkins, 
1997) ranked schools based on faculty publications and citations. 
After controlling for institutional size, it ranked Brandeis ninth 
overall and first among a group of ``rising'' research universities. 
Eleven people on its faculty are members of the National Academy of 
Sciences and 27 belong to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, 
high numbers for a small institution. Yet by not veering far from 
a Jewish identity, Brandeis faces a potential problem in attracting 
the very best from all walks of life. Arthur Levine, president of 
Teachers College at Columbia University, said Brandeis, from which 
he graduated, must ``find a way to translate the values of religion 
without making it religious.'' ``Once Brandeis loses its Jewishness 
it becomes just another university and pushes away its donor base,'' 
Levine said. ``Moreover, Brandeis faces the same challenges as all 
research universities. For the first time since the days Brandeis 
was founded, universities are not a growth industry.'' This is the 
calculation that Reinharz has made: Money and mission rely on Brandeis' 
Jewish roots. ``I doubt that at any point we will just decide this 
is an excellent university and call it a day on the Jewish issue,'' 
Reinharz said. ``I see a very strong Jewish link throughout Brandeis' 
future. There will never be a day when we at Brandeis will say, `Now 
we know what we are about.' The process is the point and the process 
will always go on.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>