<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981016.0110 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Some worthy plants are victims of gardeners' prejudice, among them 
marigolds, because of their scent; goldenrod, because it resembles 
ragweed. and gladioluses, because they are so often the flower of 
choice at funerals. It is not the fault of gladioluses that their 
tall, spiky flowers are perfectly suited to those coffin-flanking 
arrangements. If delphiniums were cheaper in the florists' trade and 
available all year round, they might be favored for funerals, too. 
Eschewing delphiniums for that reason would be ludicrous, and that 
should stimulate some reflection on the unfair treatment of gladioluses. 
There are but two reasons not to grow gladioluses, neither very persuasive. 
The first is confusion over singular and plural. Some gardeners seem 
to prefer not to grow a plant that is a linguistic challenge, although 
I haven't heard of many stewing over how to form the plural of asparagus. 
One gladiolus is a gladiolus, also acceptably a gladiola. More than 
one are gladioluses or gladioli. If garden centers offered gladioluses 
under one of their old-fashioned monikers, such as corn flags or sword 
lilies, perhaps more of them would be grown. The simple solution is 
to call one a glad and two or more glads. It's a happy abbreviation. 
The second reason not to grow glads is that they have an inclination 
to incline, and sometimes even fall on their faces. It's a characteristic 
shared by many flowers grown for their stately, columnar appearance. 
Delphiniums do it, too. There are ways to counter the proclivity of 
glads to grow askew. Staking is an obvious solution. Growing them 
fairly close together in clumps, rather than in rows, also helps. 
They can be grown between bushy plants, like valerian or fall asters, 
which will give the gladioluses something to lean on. If grown against 
a wall or fence, glads can be kept upright with a single strand of 
twine running from one end of the planting to the other and put in 
place when the foliage is about two feet tall. Some other plants can 
be grown in front of the glads to hide the twine. Having dispensed 
with the two reasons not to grow glads, let us now consider the multitude 
of reasons to grow them. They are easily raised from corms that are 
inexpensive enough to buy every year, yet can be dug up and stored 
over winter if you want to go to the small trouble that that entails. 
They're striking in the garden _ hardly funereal, more like vividly 
colored exclamation points. They're also long-lasting as cut flowers, 
and they come in almost every imaginable color, including greens that 
are really green rather than lime-yellow. I like the darker colors, 
from the burgundy of Plum Tart to the watermelon red of Applause, 
interspersed with a few gleaming spikes of White Prosperity or peachy-salmon 
Peter Pears. Glads can be planted a few at a time from midspring to 
midsummer for a succession of bloom. Hummingbirds and bees like them. 
They haven't many insect enemies, except thrips and occasionally aphids. 
Aphids can be washed off with a hose. Not much can be done about thrips, 
which will cause the flowers to be streaked or not to open at all, 
but I've had trouble with thrips only twice in 25 years. Rich soil 
will produce the tallest plants and the most flower buds, but glads 
will bloom well in average soil. They aren't in the least tolerant 
of shade, however. The last group of glads I grew this year, next 
to a patch of sunflowers that blocked the afternoon sun, were spindly. 
Most glads grow from three to five feet tall _ the larger the corm, 
the taller the glad. There are dwarf varieties as well, which grow 
to only two feet and are hardy enough to stay in the ground all winter. 
These are G. byzantinus. Regular glads have such an intricate pedigree 
that they are not assigned to a species, although catalogs occasionally 
refer to them as G. hybridus. Winter-hardy glads have looser, less 
formal flower spikes with blotched petals, and the color range is 
limited to white and shades of pink. From Washington, D.C., south, 
regular glads might overwinter, too, with a light mulch, but they 
will bloom better if dug up and replanted in the spring. Since I'm 
not in an area where glads will overwinter, I dig them up about now, 
after frost has killed the foliage but before the ground freezes. 
After drying for a week or so, the dead foliage and the spent corm 
that produced this year's flower will snap off easily. What's left 
are new corms of various sizes. Any the size of a quarter or larger 
will produce flowers next year. Smaller ones, called cormels, can 
be planted in a nursery bed next spring and grown to blooming size, 
but that's a bit of work for something that costs as little as 20 
cents a corm, if purchased in quantity. Extra-large corms or fancier 
varieties may cost more, but glads are still far less expensive than 
tulips or lilies. Store the corms in a mesh bag someplace dark and 
cool but not freezing. If thrips were a problem, store the corms in 
a paper bag with a tablespoon of moth flakes. Alternatively, you could 
soak the corms next spring, before planting them, in a Lysol solution 
(one tablespoon to a gallon of water). That should do in the thrips, 
and should be the last discussion of death in connection with glads. 
THIS WEEK: DEADHEADING PROLONGS THE SEASON By PATRICIA JONAS c.1998 
N.Y. Times News Service Don't stop deadheading pansies, long-blooming 
perennials like fragrant cottage pinks (Dianthus x alwoodii) and indispensable 
fall bloomers like asters and the unfortunately named sneezeweeds. 
(Helenium Coppelia has masses of mahogany-red flowers that fade to 
burnt orange and are great for cutting.) Many plants will continue 
to thrive and bloom prolifically into late fall if regularly deadheaded 
to redirect the plant's energy from forming seed into forming flowers. 
Pull up spent annuals, but remember to leave some seed heads for winter 
interest. There is still a little time to transplant and divide perennials, 
but don't mulch until the ground is well frozen, usually not until 
the end of November in New York City. Wait until the foliage dies 
to dig up tender bulbs or tuberous plants. It's a good time to decide 
which of these tender tropical and semitropical plants are worth overwintering 
and find storage places where they won't freeze. After a killing frost, 
cannas may be cut back to 3 inches, dug up and cured in a dry spot 
for a day or two. They then need to be tucked into blankets of barely 
moist peat in covered boxes and kept from 40 to 50 degrees. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>