<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981016.0252 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
He is revered in the financial markets these days as omnipotent and 
omniscient, but Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve chairman, has 
not always gotten it right. In 1990, the American banking system was 
seizing up. Many institutions had been hit hard by losses on real 
estate loans, and regulators were demanding that they keep more capital 
on hand. As a result, banks became extremely reluctant to lend, and 
the resulting credit shortage helped push the economy into recession. 
Greenspan and his colleagues at the Fed largely missed the problem, 
cutting interest rates aggressively to stimulate more lending only 
after the economy began to contract. And as he confronts another credit 
shortage that could put the nation's long business expansion at risk, 
Greenspan is determined not to make the same mistake again, as evidenced 
by his unusual decision on Thursday to cut rates by a quarter percentage 
point between the central bank's regularly scheduled policy meetings. 
Economists now expect a series of further rate reductions this year 
and possibly into next year. ``Virtually the only blemish on Greenspan's 
record as chairman was in not acting forcefully enough to offset the 
1989-1990 credit crunch, which was the fundamental cause of the 1990 
recession,'' said G. David Orr, an economist at First Union Capital 
Markets. ``He will not want to be caught in that situation again.'' 
In acting assertively, Greenspan was trying to break a psychology 
within the markets that more bad news was almost inevitable and that 
the risks to investors and lenders were only growing. In doing so, 
however, he may have had to sidestep reluctance among some members 
of the Fed's policy-setting Federal Open Market Committee who remain 
concerned that lower rates could fuel inflation by stimulating an 
economy that by some measures, including a very low unemployment rate, 
is already running hard. The committee voted just over two weeks ago 
to cut its federal funds target rate on overnight lending between 
banks by a quarter point, to 5.25 percent, turning aside pressure 
from the financial markets and many economists for a half point cut. 
That Greenspan then cut rates on Thursday by another quarter point 
suggested to many analysts that the Fed chairman had wanted a half-point 
cut in the first place, but had not been willing at that time to force 
a showdown over the issue with committee members who still see a potential 
threat from inflation. Greenspan announced his decision after convening 
a conference call among the committee's members early Thursday afternoon. 
A spokeswoman for the Fed said no vote was taken and that Greenspan 
acted on his own authority, which is routinely granted to him by the 
committee but rarely used. Greenspan appears to have had widespread 
support within the Fed, since eight of the 12 regional Federal Reserve 
Banks requested that the central bank also reduce the discount rate 
on their short-term loans to commercial banks. Among the banks requesting 
the discount rate cut was the St. Louis Fed, whose president, William 
Poole, was among those most concerned earlier this year about the 
inflation risks. But analysts said Greenspan prefers to develop a 
consensus before acting. Determined opposition from even one or two 
members of the committee, such as Jerry Jordan, president of the Federal 
Reserve Bank of Cleveland, who has been concerned that growth in the 
money supply is signaling a possible upturn in inflation, would be 
enough to give Greenspan pause, they said. ``Greenspan has been wanting 
to cut interest rates earlier and faster, but the inflation hawks 
on the Federal Open Market Committee held him back,'' said Sung Won 
Sohn, an economist at Norwest Corp., a Minneapolis banking company. 
``At the September meeting Greenspan was able to convince the hawks 
that the global situation indeed is dangerous. But at that point the 
hawks were not willing to let Greenspan go more than a quarter of 
a point.'' Since then, Sohn said, there have been new indications 
that the economy is slowing and that inflation remains dormant. Friday, 
the Labor Department reported that the Consumer Price Index was unchanged 
last month, leaving the inflation rate for the last 12 months at just 
1.5 percent. Industrial production fell three-tenths of a percent 
in September, the Fed reported Friday. Earlier in the week the government 
had reported weakening retail sales and subdued price increases at 
the producer level. ``My belief is that Chairman Greenspan basically 
called the members and gave them the appearance of consulting,'' Sohn 
said. ``But it was clearly more of a formality, especially in light 
of the more negative economic numbers.'' In trying to avert a credit 
shortage, Greenspan is dealing with market psychology more than a 
mismatch between demand and supply in the economy. His decision to 
cut rates at an unexpected time may have been calculated to give a 
maximum boost to the markets, where fear about recession at home and 
a further meltdown in the world financial system has led investors 
and lenders to shy away from the merest whiff of risk. In the short 
run, at least, the rate cut succeeded on that score. The Dow Jones 
industrial average jumped a further 117.40 points Friday after a 330.58-point 
gain Thursday, and is nearly 12 percent higher than the low of 7,539.07 
reached Aug. 31. Broader market indicators such as the Standard &AMP; 
Poor's index and Nasdaq index also ended the week with strong gains. 
``Dr. Greenspan, ace psychologist, knew his clients needed some positive 
reinforcement,'' Orr said. But it is still too early to know whether 
interest-rate cuts will convince investors that high-grade corporate 
bonds are not so risky after all, or reassure banks that the business 
outlook is sufficiently bright that it is reasonable to provide new 
loans to customers. While the Fed has some tools, like the discount 
rate, that can directly help to encourage more lending by banks, it 
can only indirectly stimulate greater availability of capital in the 
financial markets, where most big companies turn for funding. In a 
report Friday, Robert DiClemente and David Hensley, economists at 
Salomon Smith Barney, said that ``new issuance of investment-grade 
corporate bonds remains sporadic and hesitant,'' with the volume, 
at $3.5 billion for the first half of October, far behind July's $19 
billion. The word from the bond markets, the economists said, is that 
the ``wounds will be slow to heal.'' Greenspan has several important 
factors working in his favor. The almost total lack of inflation gives 
him considerable room to push rates down farther in coming months. 
When adjusted for inflation, in fact, the Fed funds target rate is 
still relatively high _ about 3 percent. Because the federal government 
is running a budget surplus there will be no inflationary pressures 
from fiscal policy. Compared to 1990, Greenspan has also gotten off 
to a much faster start in dealing with the evolving problem, said 
Maury Harris, an economist at Paine Webber. By the time the Fed started 
easing rates in the summer of 1990, 43 percent of banks had already 
tightened lending standards on loans to small firms, compared with 
23 percent last month, Harris said. Loan growth had already slowed 
to 1.5 percent by the summer of 1990, while it was running at a 12.1 
percent annual rate in September. Investment grade bond issuance had 
fallen 63.1 percent by August 1990 compared to a year earlier; the 
decline from September 1997 to September 1998 was 6.1 percent. ``In 
1990 the bank credit crunch had become more serious than the current 
credit situation before the Fed started to let the investing public 
and American business leaders know that it was plugged into the problem 
and willing to ease,'' Harris said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>