<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981016.0302 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
They spent 40 years building a life that produced six children, a 
thriving business and the security for what was to be a carefree retirement. 
But David and Ann Lambert's plans crumbled when he suffered a stroke 
five years ago that left him partly paralyzed and unable to speak 
more than a few words. In time, the Lamberts, both 63, learned to 
adjust, thanks to good medical care, family support _ and a few of 
the wide array of new or updated health devices and gadgets for use 
in the home. A $3,400 motorized stairway lift, for instance, ``was 
the best money I ever spent,'' Mrs. Lambert said. The lift has restored 
a taste of independence to Lambert, who as an entrepreneur founded 
Lambert Glass Co. in Louisville, Ky. Indeed, as more people like the 
Lamberts _ especially graying baby boomers and their elderly parents 
_ face medical catastrophes, a growing and increasingly competitive 
business in home health care devices is taking shape to serve them. 
This industry's growth is not surprising considering the rapidly rising 
population of older Americans. The number of people over 85 has grown 
six times as fast as the overall population since 1960. The Census 
Bureau projects that by 2000, the percentage of elderly people in 
this age group will more than double, to 12 percent from 5.6 percent 
in 1960. There is thus a powerful need for items that ease discomfort, 
increase mobility and generally provide a sense of control for those 
struggling with the aches and ailments of aging. And with the government 
encouraging home health care to save money on institutional care, 
numerous companies are stepping into the fray. They include such big 
public companies as Invacare and Sunrise Medical Inc. as well as smaller, 
private manufacturers and dealers such as Rice Home Medical, New Abilities 
Systems Inc. and Gould's Discount Medical, a division of Mobilectrics 
Co. ``The demographics make it a growth area, and the shifting focus 
of health care makes it a growth area,'' said James Walsh, a spokesman 
for the VGM Group, a consortium of independent suppliers of health 
care products. ``Health care is moving out of the institution and 
into the home.'' As a result, companies that have the latest health 
aids and the best marketing see a chance for substantial increases 
in profits in a virtually recession-proof $3 billion industry. Carol 
Laumer, executive director of Rice Home Medical in Willmar, Minn., 
about 100 miles west of St. Paul, has seen her business more than 
double in the last decade. Now, she said, ``all of those folks in 
institutions in the past can stay in their own homes or in assisted 
living.'' A device sold by Rice Home Medical, for example, enables 
some cancer patients to administer chemotherapy to themselves at home 
or even while on vacation. Curtis Johnson, a retired construction 
worker, knew nothing about this device until he discovered 10 months 
ago that he needed one. Johnson, who is 71 and suffers from liver 
cancer, says his ambulatory infusion pump has allowed him to receive 
treatment while he fishes for ``anything that wants to bite.'' ``It 
doesn't stop me from doing anything,'' said Johnson, who lives in 
Granite Falls, Minn. Now, he simply goes to the hospital to get the 
pump needed to operate the device and deliver his treatment instead 
of spending hours there receiving it. ``You're in there 10 or 15 minutes 
and turn around and go home just like nothing ever happened.'' Other 
devices are less critical but hugely helpful in the home. People with 
limited dexterity can buy plastic finger loops that fasten to keys 
to help turn keys in doors. An E-Z Reacher, a long rod with a small 
suction cup attached to the end, enables people to pick up objects 
like soup cans and juice bottles without having to bend or stretch. 
Other items help people turn lights on and off, pull up their socks, 
thread a needle or turn pages of a book. There is even a gadget that 
allows people to smoke without gripping the cigarette, though it might 
be stretching matters to call that a health aid. This and many other 
products are made or distributed by a small Canadian company called 
Parsons ADL (for ``accessories for daily living'') Inc., which does 
a big part of its business over the Internet (www.parsonsadl.com). 
Many other items are more high technology, reflecting the race to 
modernize older products and to come out with new ones that appeal 
to disabled people, who are living more active lives than ever. Invacare, 
a leader in home medical equipment based in Elyria, Ohio, recently 
introduced a product that converts air to pure oxygen, eliminating 
the need for emphysema patients to have canisters refilled by a dealer. 
New Abilities, of Palo Alto, Calif., even makes a dental retainer 
that is actually a tongue-touch key pad that allows quadriplegics 
to operate household appliances, use a computer and maneuver a wheelchair. 
Many older people manage to avoid serious ailments, of course, and 
the bulk of baby boomers are still young and healthy. But in coming 
years the sheer size of this group _ nearly 78 million people _ is 
expected to create increased demand for eyeglasses, skin care creams, 
medical equipment, vitamins and other goods. Moreover, baby boomers' 
parents are well into old age, the time when medical needs are greatest. 
And largely because of managed care restrictions, people need home 
medical care longer as the average hospital stay has declined _ to 
6.2 days in 1996 from 7.1 in 1986, according to the American Hospital 
Association. Unfortunately, said Ken Gould, who runs Gould Discount 
Medical in Louisville, where the Lamberts bought their stairway lift, 
not enough people know about such products. So, he has started to 
advertise on television and has expanded his showroom to display more 
items. ``Every day there are new products coming out that are more 
and more helpful,'' Gould said. ``There are a lot of people out there 
laboring and not knowing what is available.'' To be sure, consumers 
will not necessarily rush to buy some of these items, but they clearly 
have more choices these days. And manufacturers and retailers of all 
sizes are stepping up efforts to increase consumer awareness. ``Our 
advertising support has gone from six figures to well into the seven-figure 
numbers in the last three years,'' said Louis Slangen, senior vice 
president for sales and marketing at Invacare. The company has also 
expanded into mass retail channels in the last three years, so shoppers 
can now buy its Aurora brand products, such as walkers and canes, 
at Wal-Mart and even supermarkets like Winn Dixie. The additional 
availability ``creates a great awareness level and, of course, it 
enlarges the market,'' Slangen said. ``I think what is most important 
for the industry is that people feel confident and comfortable in 
using the products.'' In the past, he added, many items ``did not 
look very attractive, the ergonomics was not very good, and many products 
you would need reconstruction in the house in order for them to go 
through the doors.'' Suppliers and analysts who follow the industry 
say that kind of inefficiency will no longer do. The market is growing 
by about 7 percent a year and will continue to do so for several decades, 
said Jeff Knightly, an analyst at CIBC Oppenheimer. So, even in this 
era of enormous growth, he said, only the low-cost providers and the 
most innovative and efficient companies will survive, in part because 
of new Medicare restrictions on patient reimbursement and the cutthroat 
bidding that goes on in managed care. Despite those threats to weaker 
competitors, the VGM Group, the suppliers' consortium, has seen the 
industry growth firsthand and says its members have prospered as demand 
has picked up. The group had 11 members when it was created in 1986 
as a way for smaller dealers to pool their resources to give them 
increased buying power and a louder lobbying voice. It has since grown 
to about 1,300 companies. Judy Stubbs is grateful that so many more 
companies are focusing on this market. Her 84-year-old mother, Muriel 
Abramson, who suffers from a cardiac condition, lives with Mrs. Stubbs 
and her husband in San Antonio and depends on the latest in lightweight 
wheelchairs and other devices. ``She would be in a nursing home if 
some of these things were not available,'' Mrs. Stubbs said. For such 
people, she said, functioning in a home without the aids ``would be 
extremely difficult if not impossible, because there is no way you 
can be with them every single second.'' Mrs. Stubbs, who is 46 and 
considers herself a typical baby boomer, added that an increasing 
number of her friends and relatives are caring for elderly relatives 
and have begun to think about their own futures. ``I think about when 
we age,'' Mrs. Stubbs said, ``and what's going to happen and where 
we are going to go and how we are going to function.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>