<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981016.0238 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As America awakened from a recession in 1991, the economy had a lot 
of work to do. A real estate collapse had left banks in terrible shape. 
Companies had stopped hiring. The federal budget deficit had once 
again started to swell. Incomes had stopped rising for most Americans. 
Wage inequality had become a national sore. Health insurance was protecting 
fewer people. Layoffs were spreading to white-collar workers. And 
as the preliminaries got under way for the 1992 presidential election, 
Republicans and Democrats alike promised rapid economic growth that 
would lift all boats and, in doing so, sweep away these problems. 
America got its expansion, all right _ one that has now lasted eight 
years and brought good times to many. But with the global financial 
crisis spawning talk of the next recession, much of what an expansion 
is supposed to achieve remains undone. For all the dazzling gains 
in the stock market, for all the money showered on Americans _ rich 
Americans in particular _ for as good as these times have felt, the 
report card on this expansion, if a child brought it home from school, 
would make a parent wince. Late in the expansion, in 1996, the economy 
surged, and it is just now simmering down. But despite the surge, 
economic growth measured over the entire cycle makes the expansion 
of the 1990s the weakest since World War II. Economies can expand 
rapidly only when workers produce significantly more in a given hour 
of work than they have in the past. And that did not happen in the 
'90s, any more than it had in the '80s. The result is painfully obvious 
in many households. While wealthier families enjoyed big gains, particularly 
from the booming stock market, most households find that their incomes, 
adjusted for inflation, are no higher today than they were in 1989, 
when the last expansion ended. Americans, for the most part, have 
been running in place for 25 years. And as economies around the world 
weaken, Americans are unlikely to gain ground soon. ``This has been 
a long and smooth and untroubled business-cycle upswing,'' said Robert 
Solow, a Nobel laureate in economics at the Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology. ``But it has not overcome the long-run sluggishness 
of the economy. That depends on deeper things, like technological 
progress and gains in efficiency. And finding the secret of those, 
despite all the advances in computer technology, is a job that certainly 
was not accomplished in the 1990s.'' The 1990s expansion, more than 
others in the recent past, has been market-driven, with government 
playing a lesser role. And some economists contend that the growth 
surge in 1996 and 1997 was evidence of the power of markets, when 
they are left alone. Yet even some conservative, market-oriented economists, 
like Robert Lucas, the Nobel laureate at the University of Chicago, 
argue that the performance of the '90s economy demonstrates that government 
action must complement market forces. ``We are living through a period 
of sustained economic growth without inflation, and the unemployment 
rate has come down to levels I never thought I would see again in 
the United States,'' Lucas said. ``But there are obviously plenty 
of problems. Poverty and income inequality are two. These are problems 
that cannot be addressed by the markets. They have to be addressed 
by specific government programs offering specific solutions.'' There 
have been gains, of course. The banks _ if suddenly squeamish about 
lending _ are certainly healthy again, thanks largely to government 
policies, particularly at the Federal Reserve, intended to help them 
rebuild. Hiring has come back, quite robustly, starting in 1993. The 
unemployment and inflation rates, in fact, have fallen farther than 
anyone anticipated, and that has helped to reduce the percentage of 
Americans living in poverty roughly to where it was when the last 
recession began, in the summer of 1990. A sharp decline in poverty 
among blacks helped to pull down the overall rate. ``Even for unskilled 
people coming off welfare, getting a job has been relatively easy,'' 
said David Ellwood, an economist at Harvard's Kennedy School of government. 
``What they have had to worry about is benefits and salary level.'' 
The stronger job market has encouraged education, making young people, 
in particular, more skilled and competitive, although the gains have 
been gradual. Thirty-five percent of all 18-to-24-year-olds are taking 
college courses, up from 30 percent in 1989. Another hallmark of the 
1990s has been capital spending. Companies have used their robust 
profits and their increasingly valuable stock to buy equipment, particularly 
computers, and to build factories, stores, malls, hotels and offices. 
All this has increased the nation's productive capacity _ so much 
so that corporate America is producing and offering for sale today 
much more than even avid consumers want to buy. That, along with a 
flood of inexpensive imports, has produced another feature of this 
expansion: buyers have been able to insist on discounts, thereby holding 
down inflation and increasing the purchasing power of a raise, even 
a small raise. Consumer spending has clearly grown. Indeed, as the 
federal budget deficit has turned into a surplus, private indebtedness, 
particularly for consumers, has risen to record levels, giving the 
economy the sort of boost that government deficits did in the 1980s. 
But that debt accumulation has come at a cost. By one estimate, 5 
percent of all the nation's households have filed for bankruptcy protection 
the last five years. If the economy goes into a downturn, is it safer 
to have the government running up debt, or the citizenry? After all, 
the government, in a pinch, can print money or borrow more to meet 
its obligations, while the citizenry is not nearly so flexible. If 
layoffs or shrinking stock portfolios or falling home prices were 
to leave consumers without the means to pay their loans, the defaults 
and bankruptcies could weigh at least as heavily on the economy as 
the shock from a collapsing hedge fund. While the job market is strong, 
layoffs are nevertheless running ahead of 1980s levels. Many jobs 
lack company-subsidized health insurance _ 18.3 percent of the nonelderly 
are without coverage, up from 16.1 percent in 1990. But the robust 
hiring and the declining unemployment rate had an unexpected payoff. 
Fearful of inflation, the Federal Reserve in the past had often cut 
off an expansion prematurely or watered it down by raising interest 
rates to discourage business activity. The signal for doing this was 
the unemployment rate. When it fell below 5.5 percent, the Fed worried 
that labor shortages would force employers to offer higher wages to 
get enough workers. Companies would then pay for the wage increases 
by raising their prices. And up would go the inflation rate. That 
dynamic, enshrined in economic theory, is clearly fallible. The unemployment 
rate is down to 4.6 percent, and the Consumer Price Index, instead 
of rising, has fallen below 2 percent. Clearly the old worries about 
low unemployment were not on the minds of Fed policy makers when they 
cut interest rates on Thursday, the second cut in 16 days. Staving 
off the recession that is spreading across the globe _ and quelling 
the panic that has begun to curtail lending, investment and spending 
_ seemed much more to the point. Summing up the new thinking, Janet 
Yellen, chairman of President Clinton's Council of Economic Advisers 
and a former Fed governor, said: ``As long as production facilities 
are not overly strained, which they aren't today, then it may be possible 
to have tighter labor markets than we used to think possible without 
pushing up the inflation rate.'' The most prosperous decade in American 
history, the 1960s, featured similarly low inflation and unemployment. 
Citing this comparison, more than a few experts have proclaimed a 
historic breakthrough in the 1990s. This expansion, they said, heralded 
a new era of great prosperity _ a victory for the American model of 
free-market capitalism in which income would be spread, in time, more 
evenly than it has been in recent years, and more generously. That 
is still a popular view in some quarters. ``This is the most extraordinary 
domestic economic expansion in modern history,'' said Jerry Jasinowski, 
president of the National Association of Manufacturers, ``in terms 
of economic growth, inflation, jobs and income, although the income 
may be less than the others.'' But for all the optimism, the new era 
has not arrived. The main measure of any economic expansion is economic 
growth, which is the rising value of all of the nation's production 
of cars, appliances, new homes, Broadway musicals, legal advice, long-distance 
telephone service and the like, added together. By that measure, the 
1990s have not measured up. The 1960s certainly did. Economic growth 
in that decade averaged 4.7 percent a year, almost double the performance 
in the 1990s. Indeed, for a century from the Gilded Age until 1973, 
the economy expanded at a 3 percent annual rate, or more, most of 
the time. And then, in the early 1970s, the United States tumbled 
into a rut of tepid economic growth, which still prevails. The pie, 
in effect, has grown more slowly than in the past, and the 1990s expansion 
has failed to break this pattern. The reason is productivity: whether 
workers are producing significantly more in a given hour on the job 
this year than they did last year. If so, and if that improvement 
is multiplied across the work force, then the economy as a whole expands 
more rapidly. The telephone operator who handles 100 calls an hour 
in a given year answers 103 the next year and 106 the next; the factory 
worker similarly stamps out more car hoods, and so on. Productivity 
typically expanded better than 2 percent a year before 1973. But in 
the current expansion, productivity growth has averaged only 1.3 percent 
a year, despite better performances in a few industries, up only slightly 
from the 1.1 percent average in the 1980s. ``The difference is not 
something you would want to make anything out of,'' said Edwin Dean, 
chief of the division that compiles productivity statistics at the 
Labor Department's Bureau of Labor Statistics. ``You are not positive 
the difference is real rather than a measurement error.'' Next month, 
the 1990s expansion becomes the second-longest since World War II, 
surpassing that of the 1980s. And early next year, if a recession 
does not intervene, the expansion will become the longest since the 
war, finally beating out, in longevity, the great 1960s expansion. 
But longevity is not enough. Despite the late burst of growth, the 
annual growth rate over the entire '90s business cycle _ from the 
end of the last expansion through this year's second quarter _ has 
averaged only 2.5 percent, the weakest performance since World War 
II. The significance of that figure is that without sufficient economic 
growth, household incomes cannot increase. And indeed, since 1973, 
the income gains in periods of expansion for the so-called median 
household (half of all households earn less, half earn more) have 
barely offset the losses during recessions. Adjusted for inflation, 
individual wages and household incomes typically fall in recessions 
and rebound in the expansions. But while the losses were small and 
the rebounds robust before 1973, the opposite pattern has prevailed 
since then, and net gains have been hard to detect. The 1990s cycle 
is clearly not an exception. After adjustment for inflation, the median 
household's annual income, $37,005 in 1997, is roughly where it was 
in 1989, the final year of the last expansion, the Census Bureau reported 
last month. What's more, the 1997 level was only $1,260 above 1973's 
income of $35,745. Many households in the 1960s added more to their 
incomes in a single year than their counterparts today have added 
in 25 years. And they did it with one wage earner, not two or three, 
working fewer hours than the average jobholder does today. Such changes 
hurt. Even in good times, the long working hours strain family life. 
If a recession should hit, layoffs and wage freezes could rattle families 
that have gone deeply into debt in the '90s to maintain their spending 
patterns. ``As the tide recedes, we are likely to find a lot of the 
old problems that we had before, only more so,'' said Robert Reich, 
the former labor secretary in the Clinton administration and now a 
professor at Brandeis University. A huge problem left unresolved as 
the expansion appears to wind down is a divisive inequality that has 
developed among income groups, a trend that took root in the 1980s 
and that the 1990s expansion has failed to interrupt. Pay for low-income 
workers, or people earning less than $7 an hour, has increased smartly 
in this recovery, pushed up partly by a higher minimum wage and the 
earned-income tax credit, which is, in effect, a federal wage subsidy. 
But the gains among high-end jobholders have been even greater, widening 
the inequality. And workers in the middle, earning $9.75 to $15.50 
an hour, lost ground, after adjusting their pay for inflation. For 
Lucas, the University of Chicago economist, economic growth is not 
capable of resolving such problems, even if the 1990s expansion manages 
to survive the global crisis, with help from the Federal Reserve or 
with some other economic stimulant. Government ingenuity is called 
for, he said, adding, ``You cannot ask too much from economic growth.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>