<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981016.0287 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
James Alderson maneuvered his 9-year-old Ford Tempo through the snow, 
parking beside the federal courthouse in Butte, Mont. Alderson, a 
small-town hospital accountant, left the heat on, telling his wife, 
Connie, to wait in the car. He was sure it would only take a moment 
to file his lawsuit on behalf of the United States, charging four 
giant hospital companies with fraud. For years before that January 
morning in 1993, Alderson stewed with the belief that the companies 
_ the huge Hospital Corp. of America and three of its corporate spinoffs 
_ had cheated the government with bogus expense claims. While working 
at a Montana hospital run by one of those companies, Alderson himself 
had been asked to create a second set of books recording different 
expenses than those reported to the government. He had refused, saying 
it was unethical. Then his world fell apart. Alderson was forced out 
of his job. No longer able to afford the comfortable life of his resort 
hometown of Whitefish, his family moved to a cramped apartment in 
rural Montana. Some college savings for his two teen-age children 
were eaten up. His career in hospital financial management seemed 
to be dwindling to a uncertain end. Yet, he could not let go of his 
anger at the hospital giants for actions he felt sure were illegal. 
So when a friend described the federal whistle-blower law that allows 
private citizens to file fraud actions on behalf of the United States, 
Alderson decided to act, drafting his own lawsuit against the companies 
and then making this drive to Butte to file it under seal in court. 
It was a battle so farfetched _ one man versus four huge corporations 
_ that Don Quixote's odds against the windmills seemed better. But, 
at least for now, Alderson has gotten the best of his windmills. The 
filing of his lawsuit _ known as a qui tam, or false claims, case 
_ was the flash point for an almost six-year legal battle, one that 
led to criminal and civil investigations that have rocked the entire 
hospital industry. Those efforts culminated this month with the unsealing 
of Alderson's lawsuit and the announcement by the government that 
it was joining him as a plaintiff against the Columbia/HCA Healthcare 
Corp. and the Quorum Health Group _ the corporate defendants that 
emerged from years of industry consolidation. Lost amid the tumult 
was the story of Alderson, now 52. Since the day he filed his lawsuit, 
he and his family have been silent about it, restricted from letting 
even friends or relatives know about Alderson's secret life working 
with law enforcement. For the first time, Alderson is telling his 
story. In a wide-ranging series of interviews, he described the events 
that led him to conclude that the hospital giants were engaged in 
fraud. And he spoke of the long road he followed from the day the 
suit was filed until the government publicly declared that it believed 
he was right. That means Alderson could share in as much as 25 percent 
of any recovery _ an amount that could easily reach into the millions. 
Alderson's unusual story was also pieced together through court and 
corporate records, as well as interviews with family members, business 
acquaintances, lawyers and friends _ most of whom marveled that this 
seemingly ordinary man could achieve such an extraordinary outcome. 
``Here, a discovery made by one man at a small rural hospital ultimately 
unraveled a nationwide, systemwide scheme,'' said Stephen Meagher, 
a former prosecutor who was eventually hired by Alderson to handle 
the case. ``It shows how one person can truly make a difference.'' 
The Early Days _ From the Start, Not Willing to Quit The 10-year-olds 
skied down the slope of the Montana mountain, weaving gracefully through 
the gates. Every child but one reached the bottom in a flash. But 
the last boy stopped when he missed a gate, slowly walked sideways 
up the slope back to it, and skied through. Again and again, he repeated 
the move, each time he missed a gate. Ten minutes later, when he finished 
that 1956 race, James Alderson was confronted by grumbling from impatient 
skiers. ``I didn't know you were supposed to quit,'' Alderson said 
recently. It was a trait that would play a role in his eventual journey 
into whistle-blowing. He worked throughout his teen-age years, and 
while attending Montana State University he decided to commit himself 
to accounting. Working for Arthur Andersen &AMP; Co. during college, 
he remembers being asked one day to bring an audit to a partner for 
signature. He watched, enthralled, as the partner brought out a fountain 
pen and a blotter with a big flourish. ``You just sensed that this 
ceremony meant that this was quality work,'' he said. ``It just meant 
to me that if I ever signed anything as an accountant, it had better 
be right. And whenever I did sign audit reports, I always flashed 
back to that first time.'' By the early 1970s, Alderson, married and 
with a new daughter, decided to move to a slower life in Whitefish, 
a ski town in Montana's northwest corner. He opened an accounting 
practice, and business built quickly. Soon, his clients included the 
local hospital, North Valley. By 1984, when the hospital needed a 
finance officer, Alderson was offered the job. For six years, he handled 
the hospital's affairs. But in 1990, Dale Jessup, the top administrator, 
moved on, and the hospital board decided to turn to a management company. 
Executives from Quorum, which had recently spun off from HCA, traveled 
to Whitefish to make a presentation. They described how their purchasing 
power could save the hospital huge sums on supplies. Moreover, they 
said, Quorum's financial experts would be able to obtain maximum reimbursement 
for hospital expenses filed with the government through what is known 
as the cost-reporting system. The board was impressed, and in the 
summer of 1990 Quorum was selected to run North Valley. It was a decision 
that would change Alderson's life. The Choice _ A New Administrator, 
A Troubling Question It was a late September afternoon in 1990, about 
two months after Quorum had assumed management of North Valley. Alderson 
was meeting with a consultant who helped prepare the hospital's government 
cost report when Clyde Eder, a Quorum administrator, stepped into 
the room. Eder asked the two men whether they usually prepared two 
cost reports. They were uncertain what he meant. ``I said, `No, we 
just prepare one cost report,''' the consultant, Jack Schisel, recalled 
in an interview. ``I thought he was talking about maybe preparing 
one for Medicaid and a different one for Medicare.'' But Eder meant 
something quite different. Quorum submitted aggressive cost reports 
to the government, claiming the largest possible number of expenses. 
But in case a later audit rejected those claims, the company also 
assembled a second set of more conservative reports for its internal 
use. Those reports estimated how much of the filed report could potentially 
be reversed; that amount of money was kept in reserve. Then, if the 
standard two-year period in which an audit could occur, the hospital 
could book the reserves as revenue. Alderson bristled at what he heard. 
``I told him I never did two tax returns for anyone when I was an 
accountant,'' he said, ``and I wasn't going to do two cost reports.'' 
Eder seemed bewildered by the response, but left without much further 
comment. The two Montana accountants looked at each other. ``Then 
I said to Jim, `Boy, that sounds a bit like fraud,''' Schisel said. 
``And Jim agreed.'' A spokeswoman for Quorum said Eder was unavailable. 
In a deposition, Eder said that he did not remember this specific 
encounter. But he acknowledged the existence of the reserve reports, 
which he called ``common in the industry.'' A few days after the encounter, 
Alderson was on a Quorum managers trip in Juneau, Alaska. During breakfast 
Sunday morning, he said, Eder told him that he was being dismissed. 
In a deposition, Eder denied dismissing Alderson, saying that he was 
offering advice on what he needed to do to keep his job. Regardless, 
Alderson returned to Montana a wrecked man. ``My sister and I picked 
him up from the airport, and he just looked distraught,'' said Justin 
Alderson, Alderson's son, who is now 22. ``He told us he had been 
fired, and I remember asking what we were going to do. His response 
was, `I don't know, but we'll figure something out.''' But Alderson 
could not find another job in Whitefish that paid enough; eventually, 
he took a financial position with a small hospital in the rural town 
of Dillon, Mont. He and his family hated it. But the more he thought 
about what had happened in Whitefish, the angrier he became. He was 
sure he had been forced out because of his refusal to keep two sets 
of records. Worse, he realized that Quorum used accounting handbooks 
of its former parent, HCA. If Quorum manipulated cost reports, he 
thought, HCA must as well. He filed a wrongful termination lawsuit 
and demanded copies of reserve reports and related records. The documents 
seemed to back up his worst fears. But the suggestions of wrongdoing 
during that case's depositions _ which have never before been made 
public _ outraged hospital lawyers. ``You're on a fishing expedition,'' 
James Heckathorn, a hospital lawyer, told him during a 1992 deposition. 
Heckathorn demanded to know what details Alderson had to ``make these 
serious allegations against North Valley Hospital that they're performing 
unlawful acts.'' About that time, Alderson phoned Jessup, the hospital's 
former administrator. ``He told me what Quorum was doing, and I told 
him it sounded fraudulent to me,'' Jessup said in a recent interview. 
``And I told him I had just heard about a case in California, called 
a qui tam case, which allowed an individual to file a fraud suit on 
behalf of the government.'' Alderson hung up the phone with new resolve. 
He had never heard of qui tam cases and knew little of the federal 
whistle-blower law. But he decided that he was going to learn whatever 
he could about it. The Lawsuit _ Bringing in Help From the Government 
In December 1992, Alderson sat at a desk in his home office, addressing 
an envelope to William Barr, then the attorney general of the United 
States. The draft of the lawsuit he had written was ready for review 
by the government. From his research at a law library in Missoula, 
about 175 miles away, Alderson knew he had to notify the government 
of his case before filing it, and he decided to go directly to the 
top. Once the envelope was ready, he headed down to post office and 
dropped it in the mail. To his family, it seemed almost absurd. ``I 
thought he was crazy,'' said Connie Alderson. ``The whole thing had 
just kind of consumed him.'' But by her husband's reading of the law, 
the government had 60 days to decide whether to join the lawsuit and 
then take over. The Aldersons figured the wait would not be hard. 
``I thought that asking for 60 days of your life wasn't any big deal,'' 
Mrs. Alderson said, adding, ``It's been a long 60 days since then.'' 
Days after it was sent, the draft complaint landed on the desk of 
Marie O'Connell, a lawyer in the Justice Department's civil division 
in Washington. She telephoned Alderson, telling him that the government 
could not begin investigating until he filed the complaint under seal 
and suggested that he do so at the federal courthouse in Butte. Alderson 
did, and then he sent Ms. O'Connell copies of the cost-report documents 
obtained in his wrongful-termination case. Ms. O'Connell had referred 
the matter to the inspector general in the Department of Health and 
Human Services. A federal investigation was under way. In March, with 
those 60 days almost up, Ms. O'Connell called again. There was a lot 
still to investigate, she said, and she hoped he would not oppose 
a government motion for an extension. ``Man, I said that sounds fine,'' 
Alderson recalled, ``because at least they didn't say `no.''' The 
investigation seemed to pick up speed in May, when Ms. O'Connell hooked 
Alderson into a conference call with an investigator from the inspector 
general's office. To Alderson, they seemed excited about the case 
and ready to act. Just days later, the government served Quorum with 
subpoenas seeking years of cost reports and reserve reports. As the 
documents came in, boxes of materials were sent to Alderson for review. 
His home was overrun with bankers' boxes stuffed with cost reports, 
each of which Alderson sat down and analyzed. ``I remember him coming 
home after work, sitting down at an old 386 computer, and just making 
spreadsheet after spreadsheet,'' said Justin Alderson. ``It was almost 
like his second full-time job.'' By August, investigators decided 
they needed to meet with Alderson; in turn, he decided he needed a 
cost report expert to help explain the case to the government. He 
hired Nicholas Bordeau, a former Medicare auditor who worked as an 
accountant. After Bordeau signed a confidentiality agreement, Alderson 
showed him the documents. To Bordeau, the records demonstrated a scheme 
to misrepresent expenses to the government to illegally increase reimbursement. 
``I couldn't believe what I was seeing,'' Bordeau said. ``I thought 
it was a Medicare auditor's worst nightmare. It was an organized system 
to take advantage of the Medicare system.'' In August, at Alderson's 
expense, the men flew to Washington to meet with investigators. Back 
home in Montana, Alderson's family told friends who asked that he 
had gone to visit his brother. The two men walked through security 
at the Justice Department and were whisked to a meeting room filled 
with investigators. Alderson made a presentation to the assembled 
group, explaining what he had learned. Afterward, the investigators 
questioned Bordeau about the arcane practices at issue. ``They were 
full of doubt,'' Bordeau said. ``They were saying it was too complex, 
that they doubted that it really happened. But I was so sure. I just 
kept hammering away at it.'' Soon after the meeting, Alderson decided 
he needed his own lawyer to push along the government lawyers. With 
his own money, he flew to Kansas City and hired a law firm, but one 
with little experience with qui tam cases. With the case slogging 
through the Justice Department, Justin Alderson bought a present to 
lift his father's spirits: a pen engraved with a family motto for 
tough competitions: ``Keep your head down.'' He told his father to 
use the pen only to sign the settlement papers when the case was eventually 
resolved. Alderson put the pen away, vowing not to touch it again 
until that day. The Lawyer _ New Life Breathed Into the Lawsuit Jim 
Alderson first saw Stephen Meagher's name late in 1995, in a news-clipping. 
The former federal prosecutor worked with the San Francisco office 
of Phillips &AMP; Cohen, a law firm that specialized in qui tam suits; 
he was quoted in an article about Medicare fraud. This, Alderson decided, 
was the lawyer he needed. By now, the investigation had stretched 
on almost three years. Every defendant but Quorum had been purchased 
by the burgeoning Columbia Healthcare Corp., and Alderson felt the 
government had missed an opportunity to strike a settlement before 
those deals were done. He flew to California to tell his story to 
Meagher and his colleagues. ``I have seen few plaintiffs as prepared, 
and as prepared to be relentless, as Alderson,'' Meagher said. ``He 
made a very persuasive case.'' Meagher took the case, which to Alderson 
seemed the best hope of salvaging his efforts. He had made many sacrifices 
by then. Attending a seemingly endless stream of government meetings, 
he had missed everything from some of his son's football games to 
being at his mother's side on the day she died. Visits to his daughter, 
Jennifer, at college became opportunities for research at the law 
library. Meagher set to work putting new life in the case. After conducting 
his own investigation, in the summer of 1996 he got in touch with 
Joseph Ford, an agent he knew with the Federal Bureau of Investigation 
in Florida. With information Meagher provided, the FBI began a criminal 
investigation of cost-reporting fraud by Columbia. Within two months, 
Meagher filed a new complaint in the case and later moved it to Florida. 
The precedents on cost-reporting fraud were particularly strong there, 
and, because of the elderly population, juries were more sympathetic 
to allegations of Medicare fraud. By 1997, the civil and criminal 
investigations were moving rapidly. In July, FBI agents raided Columbia 
hospitals in six states. Weeks later, three Columbia executives in 
Florida were indicted for cost-reporting fraud. Alderson, who by the 
beginning of this year had moved for a job with a group of Oregon 
hospitals, watched in awe what his efforts had wrought. His family 
began clipping news articles and taping television shows about the 
scandal. For the first time, cost-reporting fraud was the talk of 
the health care industry. Despite the developments, the government 
asked for more extensions in Alderson's qui tam lawsuit. Sixty days 
had become five years, and the family wondered if the seal on the 
case would ever be lifted. Finally, early this month, on Oct. 2, Alderson 
heard the news from Meagher: the government had officially joined 
the case. The lawsuit would be unsealed on Oct. 5. The Aldersons were 
scheduled to be with friends in Las Vegas, Nev., that day. Alderson 
woke at the motel there at 5:30 in the morning, and anxiously turned 
on the television to watch for news of the unsealing. Once the news 
broke, the Aldersons telephoned friends and family, explaining away 
the stories they had been forced to tell for years. Later, Alderson 
made the call that most worried him _ to a board member of one of 
the hospitals where he worked. He feared his new fame as a whistle-blower 
would ruin his chance to continue in the industry. But the board member 
put those concerns at ease. All Alderson's role in the case proved, 
the board member said, was that the hospitals had picked the right 
man to run their finances honestly. Today, Alderson and his family 
refuse to speculate on how much money they might share in if, as expected, 
there is a settlement in his long-fought case. But Alderson is confident 
of one thing: He expects that, sometime soon, he will fetch the gift 
pen from his son, and use it for the first and only time. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>