<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981016.2000.0374 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is "The World." I'm Tony Cahn. President Clinton is praising 
today's decision to award the Nobel Peace Prize to two of the main 
participants in the Northern Ireland peace process. Mr. Clinton, who 
played a key role in bringing the warring factions together, said 
John Hume and David Trimble showed courage in working for peace through 
negotiations. Whether the prize will spur the unfinished peace process 
forward or not, is impossible to say. In a moment, we'll hear cause 
for pessimism in that regard, but the reaction in Northern Ireland 
to today's Nobel announcement was almost completely upbeat, as we 
hear in this report from "The World's" Mary Louise Kelly. In the year 
that saw the historic Good Friday peace accord, few were surprised 
by the news from Oslo, Norway this morning that the world's most prestigious 
peace award has gone to the two leaders in the Northern Ireland peace 
process. John Hume was in his hometown dairy when he heard the news. 
Today's announcement from Norway by the Nobel Peace Committee to David 
Trimble and myself is a very clear and powerful statement of approval 
for the peace process and of the international goodwill that exists 
for us. The challenge to all of us now, as public representatives 
in Northern Ireland from all parties is to harness that international 
goodwill for the benefit of all our people, particularly our young 
people. And on the streets of Northern Ireland today, most people 
said they were delighted by the news. That's good news. -- for both 
parties. Much progress, a step forward, isn't it? There's a lot of 
people behind the scenes that would deserve a lot more than the people 
here, obviously, you know, in the public eye all the time. Two people 
couldn't have deserved it better. All right. That's wonderful, but 
isn't that when you write you a book or something? At least Bill Clinton 
didn't get it. Hume and Trimble followed different paths to the Nobel 
Prize. Hume has been at the forefront of Northern Irish politics since 
the civil rights movement of the 1960s. In the early `90s, he braved 
criticism at home and abroad for talking with Jerry Adams, leader 
of the Irish Republic Army's political wing Shin Fein. That was before 
the IRA had called a cease fire. Trimble, elected this summer as first 
minister of Northern Ireland, has also taken risks. He's faced fierce 
opposition from many hard-line Protestants for his support of the 
Good Friday peace deal. Today, one of Trimble's fellow party members 
expressed alarm over the award, saying it would distract attention 
from the work at hand. And true to form, hard-lined unionist leader 
Ian Paisley also refused to join the well-wishers. Well, I think it's 
a bit of a farce because we don't have peace. In fact, Mr. Hume is 
the advocate or that the IRA, who -- and -- murder. But that's a minority 
view in Northern Ireland and around the world today. Former U.S. Senator 
George Mitchell, who steered the negotiations that culminated in the 
Good Friday deal, hailed the selection by the Nobel Committee. I think 
it's a great choice. Without John Hume, there would not have been 
a peace process. Without David Trimble, there would not have been 
a peace agreement. They're fully deserving of this honor. I congratulate 
them and the people of goodwill, wherever they are, I wish them continued 
success, as they work for endurable peace in Northern Ireland. This 
isn't the first time the Nobel Peace Prize has gone to peace activists 
in Northern Ireland. In 1976, it was awarded to two women from Belfast: 
Betty Williams and Marade Corrigan. But their movement was soon racked 
by division, as they argued over the prize money. The Nobel Committee 
hopes that this time the award has a more positive and enduring impact. 
For "The World." I'm Mary Louise Kelly reporting. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>