<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981016.2000.0582 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Today's Nobel Peace Prize award to the two Northern Ireland political 
leaders has provoked some people into raising parallels with the much-delayed 
Middle East peace process. Four years ago, then Israeli Prime Minister 
Yitzak Rabin, Foreign Minister Shimon Perez and the Palestinian Leader 
Yassir Arafat won the peace prize for their role in the Oslo peace 
accords, signed in September 1993. But it's been hard going in the 
Mid East peace process ever since. Joining us now to discuss these 
issues is David Horowitz, editor of Israel's "Jerusalem Report." David, 
as we speak, Yassir Arafat and the current Israeli Prime Minister 
Benyamin Netanyahu are trying to agree on a peace deal at an estate 
in Maryland. To what extent was the Nobel Prize of fours years ago 
either helpful or hurtful in getting those two gentlemen there now? 
Well, it certainly wasn't helpful in any way that I can discern to 
the peace process. The danger with the award this time seems to me 
the danger that they faced four years ago and that's the award was 
given to people who were only beginning the process of peace, that 
they were nowhere near the end. And I think you have to say that that 
particular trio certainly failed. They didn't complete the process. 
It's not at all clear that Arafat and Mr. Netanyahu will complete 
the process and I don't think the peace - - the peace prize will do 
any good at all. Well, take us back a little bit at the time that 
they did receive the peace prize. Did it create a -- at least, at 
the time, a kind of bump of hope in confidence? Did it, in any way, 
momentarily accelerate the political process? No. Quite the reverse, 
actually. And part of that was really a function of timing. In October, 
`94 when the confirmation that it would be Arafat, Rabin, and Perez 
came through and there was a crisis, an Israeli solider had just been 
kidnapped, presumably by Hamas, Islamic extremists. In the end, they 
found the soldier and his captors somewhere in the West Bank in an 
area that was still controlled by Israel. There was an attempt to 
rescue the solider. One of the commandos was killed, the soldier himself 
was killed. Rabin, in the end, made clear that he didn't blame Arafat 
for what had gone wrong, but the Israeli right wing certainly did. 
And then a couple of months later, all the -- this trio trooped off 
to Oslo to get their award and the Israeli right, the critics of the 
peace process that Rabin and Arafat had began, were really describing 
it as a farce. How could you be giving a peace prize to these people 
who weren't bringing any security to Israel; it was all a terrible 
mistake. Are you suggesting also in the case of Northern Ireland, 
I know that's not your area of expertise, but to the extent that you 
are a British extraction, and it somehow must touch your heart in 
some way. Do you think that it's really too early also in that peace 
process to be talking about a Nobel Peace Prize for anybody involved 
in it, no matter how well intentioned they might be? Well, as you 
say, I'm thousands of miles away and, of course, every -- in England, 
but I'm based in the Middle East. I've been in the Middle East for 
a long time, so I wouldn't like to draw too many comparisons, but 
I would just highlight the similar risks, the risk that around the 
time that a prize is being given, which appears to represent some 
kind of culmination of a process, something goes wrong. And that really 
has the effect of embarrassing the recipients. But then again, David, 
isn't it perhaps diminishing the kind of courage that it takes to 
make peace at all to say that the Nobel Peace Prize should only be 
given to done deals and to things that are safely taken care of? But 
even to ask the question in that way is to make a tremendous assumption 
which we can't really make about peace processes and peace agreements. 
If it were as simple as to say, well, once the deal is done, of course, 
there's nothing more that needs encouragement or support, then so 
be it. But that isn't the case. Once the deal has been done, it needs 
the international community to rush to support it, to give the correct 
environment. All of that could be provided by a Nobel Peace Prize. 
At the end of the process, they finally reached the deal. Now that 
the international community come in and get the awards and the recognition 
and the investment and the support. I don't think it's too late at 
that stage. I think it's at that stage that the environment can be 
critical. David Horowitz, editor of "The Jerusalem Report," speaking 
with us from Israel. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>