<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981016.2000.3026 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The U.S. trade embargo against Cuba has gotten a bit looser during 
the past few years. And as a result, there's more native Cuban music 
to be listened to here in the states. A lot of it sounds familiar. 
As "The World's" Marco Worman tells us, that's because many of today's 
Cuban musicians are finding the old ways to their liking. Tourist 
wandering down to New Orleans eat up Dixie Land jazz with a spoon. 
Old jazz musicians and even young ones who keep tunes like "Basin 
Street Blues" alive thrive on that Nostalgia. The same longing for 
the old tunes has emerged for Cuban music. Jesus Alimani, the trumpeter 
and leader of Cubanismo says he and his bandmates have been baffled 
by their acclaim in the west. Well, with even the -- because who would 
believe that at the end of the century, we're going to be playing 
the -- the music that was created in the beginning. During the band's 
two tours of the United States this year, Americans flocked to dance 
and listen. But don't think that all Cuban music sounds like Cubanismo. 
It's really great music, but it's not particularly the music that 
the majority in Cuba listen to. Peter Watras writes about music for 
The New York Times. It's doesn't mean that it's not good music, either. 
Just that in Havana, especially, the public is really unforgiving 
about -- about falling out of date. And so, you have a pile of musicians 
who were working on -- have essentially forgotten there. I mean, just 
the same way that, you know, that happens here in the United States 
with pop music, too. But Cubanismo isn't wheeling out some lame cha, 
cha, cha that you might see Bugs Bunny dancing to in an old cartoon. 
The music is complex and, at times, digs deep in to Jesus Alimani's 
roots of Congolese animism. Alimani belongs to the Brotherhood of 
Abaqua, an African tradition that influences several of the numbers 
in Cubanismo's repertoire. Well, it's basically music that is more 
understandable for the Cubans because it's something that is a really 
strong part of our history, of our religion. And of course, it's something 
that has been really close to me because it's something that I've 
been watching since I was born, because all the -- where I used to 
live, we go to, like, three or four different brotherhoods. The response, 
obviously, is very positive because people can dance and can sing 
with us and so that's basically what we -- have in mind before we 
did the recording -- like, -- people dancing with this music. Tours 
of Israel, Turkey, Lebanon and the United States this year, alone, 
mean Jesus Alimani an the bad have made people dance. In fact, it's 
hard not to, when Cubanismo is playing. For "The World," this is Marco 
Worman. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>