<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981016.2000.1179 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is "The World." I'm Tony Cahn. Every Friday we chat with foreign 
correspondents based in Washington about how they're covering the 
news for their readers back home. This week, we had the pleasure of 
talking with Andre Sitav of the Russian Etar Task News Agency and 
Paulo Sotero of Bristad De Sao Paulo, a newspaper in Brazil. Thanks 
to a -- a budget agreement this week between Congress and the White 
House, the International Monetary Fund is going to be getting the 
nearly $18 billion in long-delayed funds that the Clinton Administration 
says are needed to help stave off a collapse of the world economy. 
So I'm wondering, let me ask you, first, Andre', what are you planning 
to say to your readers back home for your agency about this story? 
Basically, my headline would be, which translated in English, would 
be something that the decision of the Congress opens for Russia the 
door to receive additionally $1.7 billion. And, Paulo, how will you 
say it in Portuguese to your readers? . This time, the fund also needs 
us. Let me ask you both, as journalists, what is the kind of journalistic 
challenge that you face in reporting any story about the IMF? Is it 
persuading your editors that the IMF and its long- term effects is 
a story that is going to sell? I would probably say that the IMF and 
the World Bank are in the business that, until very recently, was 
completely alien to my country. You're talking about -- times? The 
first -- the first difficulty -- in trying to explain to people why 
the whole thing is important and why budgets and budgetary matters 
are important. As Chubais was credited with the role of one of the 
prominent Russian reformers, one remarks, -- another one of those 
first started talking about these things. A few years ago, people 
were laughing and saying we need sausages; we do not need your money 
matters. And now, even the Communists in parliament are talking in 
terms of money mass and in terms of microeconomic measures. Our challenge 
is to explain to the Brazilian people right now that this crisis is 
not bigger than Brazil. Brazil is the place where the international 
community will try to contain the crisis. But this crisis started 
outside of Brazil and it has ramifications that Brazil cannot control. 
What is very important for people in Brazil and outside Brazil to 
understand is that no matter how big the international community financial 
support to Brazil, no matter how big our effort to put our house in 
order, if private investment does not start to flow again to emerging 
markets, there will not be a resolution for this crisis. Andre', let 
me ask you and Paulo after him, not about an international story coming 
out of Washington, really, but more about a national story that's 
commanded an enormous amount of attention this week in the country 
and that's the murder, the -- the -- the brutal murder of a 21-year-old 
gay University of Wyoming student Matthew Sheppard -- the result, 
apparently, of a -- of a hate crime. Is this a -- a story in the United 
States that compels the interest and the concerns of Russian leaders 
in any way, Andre? I would say that, to the extent that the leadership 
is aware of this development, it does. But it's a big lesson for all 
of us and the lesson is tolerance. And I think it needed -- it will 
need a lot of education and a lot of -- unfortunately, the -- with 
stories like this happening back in Russia to -- to make people understand 
that sexual orientation is not a criteria to judge other people by. 
Will this be a story that you will be following, Paulo? Well, you 
know, we have a problem here, a shortage of people. I personally am 
the only correspondent in Washington. So I will not do that. Probably 
my paper will carry something from the news wires. Given the limitation 
of your resources and the fact that, really, you sometimes do have 
to find just one story, you can't cover that you think is significant 
for your readers about the U.S., what do you find yourselves responding 
to as the story you want to tell your readers about from the U.S. 
Paulo? I always try to highlight what's good -- about the United State, 
your creativity, your courage to face problems. But unfortunately, 
due to time constraints, I am normally doing what I don't like to 
do very much, is to focusing all the time on what specifically your 
government is doing that may be relevant to Brazil. Same with us. 
But we also try to find stories here in the American life that might 
teach a lesson to Russia, even if it's not significant at the moment, 
it might be very significant for the future and that is exactly why 
I thought this Wyoming story was important for my country. Andre Sitov 
of Russian Etar News, Baisharios Baiseba and Paulo Sotero of Estado 
de Sao Paulo, Montobrigato. It was a pleasure and a privilege. Bye-bye. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>