<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981024.0193 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Moscow's economic sickness has infected Russia's far-flung regions, 
more than half of which have defaulted on domestic loans, a newspaper 
said Saturday. Russia's securities market had boomed in recent years, 
but the country began suffering from Asia's economic troubles and 
admitted Aug. 17 that it couldn't pay off its treasury bill obligations. 
Investors fled and markets collapsed. Seventy-one of Russia's 89 regions 
had joined in the securities excitement, issuing 20 billion rubles 
(dlrs ....) in domestic bonds. Fifty regions have already missed payments 
on some or all of them, the English-language Moscow Times reported 
Saturday. Most of the bonds are held by Russian banks and brokerages. 
Many of the federal government's treasury bills, however, are held 
by foreign banks, which have been holding talks with Russian officials 
in London on restructuring the debt. Negotiations broke down this 
week but may resume next week. Russia's third-largest city, Nizhny 
Novgorod, may become the first entity to default on Eurobonds, according 
to rating agencies. While the city has met its obligations so far, 
it may not be able to meet its next payment of dlrs 4.4 million due 
in April, the Moscow Times said. Also Saturday, Prime Minister Yevgeny 
Primakov said his team would finalize its plan next week for tackling 
the country's two-month-old economic crisis, its worst since the 1991 
Soviet collapse. The program includes establishment of a State Bank 
for Reconstruction and Development to oversee the beleaguered banking 
sector, and calls for Russia's first complete inventory of its foreign 
debt, including that leftover from the Soviet Union, the daily Kommersant 
reported Saturday. The government has sent mixed signals about such 
a program for weeks, first setting a date for its release then saying 
it would not come up with an overall plan but concentrate instead 
on short-term measures. The International Monetary Fund is demanding 
to see the plan and proof it's being put to use before releasing the 
next tranche of a dlrs 22.6 billion bailout promised this summer. 
Among the IMF's demands are better tax collection. With that in mind, 
Moscow is preparing to introduce a sales tax by the start of the year, 
the daily Segodnya reported. The tax would likely be 5 percent, and 
would exclude items such as bread, milk and sugar. The government 
lowered import duties on meat, milk and other staples in an effort 
to prevent shortages this winter. Russia relies heavily on imports, 
which have fallen since the crisis and become more expensive as the 
ruble loses value. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>