<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981024.0168 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
They're calling it betrayal. Treason. A black day. Militant Jewish 
settlers are infuriated by the signing of a breakthrough land-for-peace 
Middle East accord in Washington, considering it a threat to their 
very existence. In response, they have vowed to fight its implementation 
and bring down the ruling colition of Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu. 
Initial settler reaction was muted by the Jewish Sabbath, which began 
at sundown Friday. But a show of anger, possibly including street 
protests, was expected after sundown Saturday. In Israel, the biblically 
mandated day of rest had already started by the time Netanyahu, Palestinian 
leader Yasser Arafat and President Clinton sat down together and signed 
the agreement reached during a marathon nine-day summit at a Maryland 
retreat. Most settlers who are observant Jews did not watch the White 
House ceremony on television Friday night, because they refrain from 
using machinery of any kind on the Sabbath. On the Palestinian side, 
reaction to the agreement was cautious but generally upbeat. The three 
Palestinian dailies splashed the signing of the agreement on their 
front pages Saturday with the headlines in big bold type. Editorials 
said that although many Palestinian goals remained unfulfilled, the 
agreement was a step toward peace. The leading daily Al-Quds, which 
generally reflects the thinking of Arafat's government, said the accord 
indicated the Netanyahu government was finally accepting the political 
reality of Palestinian aspirations, but added that implementation 
of the pact would be the big test. Some ordinary Palestinians, though, 
were more pessimistic. ``What is an agreement _ does it mean the settlement 
at the top of the mountain will go away? Or that the checkpoint will 
go away? I don't think so,'' said a 25-year-old worker named Mohammed 
as he walked down a street in the West Bank town of Nablus carrying 
loaves of bread. Among settlers, there was fear and anger even before 
the accord was inked. ``After they sign the agreement, they will continue 
with these bombs _ until they take all the land they will not leave 
us alone,'' said Shiran Shrur, a 14-year-old girl living at Maale 
Adumin, the West Bank's largest settlement. Hard-line settlers believe 
they can block the accord's implementation for months through a combination 
of political maneuvering and disruptive mass protests. Earlier this 
week, as an agreement drew near, the settlers staged road-blocking 
demonstrations, cutting off Palestinian traffic near areas that might 
come under Palestinian control. Under the agreement, Israel is to 
withdraw from 13 percent of the West Bank, a move that will isolate 
up to 15 settlements. The settlers are likely to respond by trying 
to expand and reinforce those communities. That sets the stage for 
likely clashes with Palestinians, who are already furious over what 
they see as continuous land grabs by the settlers. The key settler 
action is likely to come on the political front, as settlers try go 
bring down Netanyahu's government and force early elections. The withdrawal 
is supposed to occur over a span of 12 weeks, but Hanan Porat, a member 
of the National Religious Party and a legislator in Netanyahu's coalition, 
said last week it would be untenable for Netanyahu to implement a 
pullback during an election campaign. The first hurdle Netanyahu faces 
on his return will be to win Cabinet approval of the Wye River pact. 
Israeli media have said Netanyahu can expect support only from five 
of his 16 Cabinet ministers, with four opposed and seven undecided. 
Parliament approval will be easier to secure, with opposition parties 
saying they will back the agreement, thus canceling out the no votes 
from hard-line members of Netanyahu's coalition. However, this does 
not remove the threat to Netanyahu. The opposition says that while 
it will support a peace agreement, it will not back Netanyahu on domestic 
issues, like the budget. Defeat of the national budget is the same 
as a vote of no confidence here. Israeli media have quoted Netanyahu 
aides as saying the prime minister might call early elections if he 
believes he cannot get a withdrawal agreement passed in the Cabinet 
or in parliament. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>