<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981024.0833 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Two top NATO generals pressured Yugoslav leaders for further withdrawals 
from Kosovo Saturday, three days short of its deadline for President 
Slobodan Milosevic to meet Western demands. Gen. Wesley Clark, the 
alliance's supreme military commander in Europe, and German Gen. Klaus 
Naumann, chairman of the NATO military committee, met briefly with 
the Yugoslav president, before going into talks with Gen. Momcilo 
Perisic, the Yugoslav Army Chief of Staff. Both the alliance and the 
Yugoslav army remained tightlipped about the meetings, but a diplomatic 
source speaking on condition of anonymity said that NATO wanted to 
let the Yugoslavs know they must do more in withdrawing military and 
special police units from Kosovo. The alliance has set a Tuesday deadline 
for the withdrawals. In New York, the U.N. Security Council passed 
a resolution Saturday demanding that Yugoslavia abide by the accord 
and said action may be needed to ensure the safety of international 
monitors there. After nearly eight hours of rare Saturday consultations, 
a divided council adopted a resolution 13-0 to endorse the agreement 
to allow unarmed monitors to patrol Kosovo and NATO to verify from 
the air that fighting has stopped. China and Russia abstained from 
the vote. The Serbian-led Yugoslav government insists that it is abiding 
by terms of the Oct. 12 agreement to defuse the crisis caused by its 
crackdown on ethnic Albanian militants, who demand independence for 
the majority Albanian province. It blames the Albanians for the continued 
clashes. In a statement published Saturday in Kosovo's Albanian-language 
daily Koha Ditore, the rebels said they would take no ``offensive 
action'' against withdrawing government forces. ``But any movement 
towards villages or our positions will force us to self-defend ourselves,'' 
the rebels said. NATO likely will set up a base for its air surveillance 
mission over Kosovo near the Macedonian capital of Skopje, Macedonian 
defense minister Lazar Kitanoski said Friday. Western nations are 
just beginning to organize a 2,000-strong group of unarmed monitors 
to verify Yugoslavia's actions in Kosovo, so Tuesday's deadline is 
widely expected to be extended for a second time. No official action 
by NATO is expected until Monday. While most fighting in Kosovo halted 
in late September, there is sporadic gunfire and almost nightly shelling 
in different locations. Under the Oct. 12 agreement, Milosevic pledged 
to withdraw special police and army units sent to the province after 
he launched his crackdown on the KLA on Feb. 28. Hundreds of people 
have been killed and an estimated 300,000 driven from their homes. 
Milosevic also agreed to let refugees return home safely and enable 
international relief agencies to bring them aid. He also pledged to 
negotiate with ethnic Albanian leaders on the future of Kosovo, a 
province of the main Yugoslav republic Serbia. Early Saturday, five 
refugees from Prizren in southern Kosovo were seriously wounded when 
Yugoslav border guards opened fire on them while they were crossing 
into neighboring Albania, the Albanian Interior Ministry reported. 
The five _ two old men, two children and a woman _ were airlifted 
from the Albanian border village of Pogaj to Tirana Military Hospital, 
where they were in critical condition late Saturday, said Aratan Bizhga, 
Interior Ministry spokesman. Ethnic Albanians make up about 90 percent 
of the province's 2 million inhabitants, and most favor independence 
or self-rule. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>