<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981024.1830.1214 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The pace of campaigning picked up this weekend with Congress now in 
recess. Republicans, working to increase their majority in both houses 
had hoped the Lewinsky scandal would help. But even in some conservative 
districts, like North Carolina's second, it's not working out that 
way. Here's NBC's Gwen Ifill. Democratic congressman Bob Etheridge 
should be in trouble. It didn't take long for the president to become 
an election-year issue in his North Carolina district. Scandal after 
scandal. Day after day. And who stands with Bill Clinton even now? 
Liberal Bob Etheridge. This ad, for republican challenger Dan page, 
ran for a week in august, at the height of the president's troubles. 
Bill Clinton does not represent the people of the second congressional 
district, and they do not need another yes man for Bill Clinton. But 
instead of costing democrats their jobs, strategies like page's appear 
to be backfiring. He thought it was a big issue, I think, and certainly, 
originally it got him a lot of national attention. But at home, it 
didn't get him that bump out of it. Little more than a week from election 
day, Etheridge, a freshman who voted with congressional republicans 
in favor of an open-ended impeachment inquiry, is now comfortably 
ahead in polls and fund-raising. Confident enough to appear with the 
president at White House pep rallies. And happy to use the advantages 
of incumbency to show off at home. If Bill Clinton's problems were 
going to make a difference anywhere this election year, it would be 
in small southern towns like this. But on these main streets, Washington 
scandals seem very far away. Across the country, democrats are turning 
the tables on the impeachment debate. These ads are airing in Washington 
state. Haven't you had enough of Congress's obsession with investigation 
into impeachment? Rick white's vote on impeachment will drag us through 
months and months of more mud and politics. In North Carolina, the 
answer seems to be yes. The Lewinsky matter is kinda like distant 
thunder. It's not exactly raining on the parade right now. They don't 
like what Clinton did, but they'd like it to go away. Which puts republicans 
like Dan page in a tight spot. He had hoped Bill Clinton's problems 
would help him. But no one seems to want to talk White House scandal 
anymore. At least not until after election day. Gwen Ifill, NBC news, 
youngsville, North Carolina. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>