<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981024.1830.0759 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In "focus" this evening -- a warning for Internet surfers about how 
easy it is to get in over your head. NBC's Soledad O'Brien has our 
report. Barry wise is a cpa. He lives with his wife and two children 
in North Carolina. Two years ago he thought he had found a sure-fired 
investment. It was fortuna alliance, which on it's web site, billed 
itself as a "new paradigm for financial independence." The company's 
web site shows that under one plan a $250 monthly fee could return 
over $5,000 per month. I just took it for granted that, heck, if it's 
on the Internet it must be legitimate. Or it wouldn't be on the Internet. 
But a web site is no guarantee of legitimacy. In a civil lawsuit, 
the federal trade commission described fortuna alliance as an "illegal 
pyramid scheme," with "false and deceptive" advertising that used 
the Internet "to achieve a rapid growth on an international scale." 
Before a trial could be held, company officials settled, admitting 
no wrongdoing, but agreeing to give money back to investors who complained. 
A court later ruled they didn't and held augie delgado, the head of 
fortuna and other company executives in contempt. Delgado has disappeared 
and so have nearly $3 million. In the end, investors got back only 
60% of their money. The FTC says fortuna alliance was a classic pyramid 
scheme, an old Con, transferred to a new medium, the Internet, but 
some schemes depend on the internet to work. When monitors at AT&T 
noticed a Spike in calls to Moldova, a small republic in the former 
Soviet Union, investigators traced the calls to a couple of web sites 
run by a company called audiotex. The case landed on the desk of the 
FTC's Paul luehr. We went through the process and found that in essence 
they were hijacking people's modems through their web sites. How did 
it work? Investigators say, first, there was the bait -- free pornographic 
pictures which required special software to view. What consumers did 
not know, was that software turned off their speakers, disconnected 
them from their Internet service providers, then reconnected them 
to another Internet service provider in Moldova -- an expensive, long-distance 
call. The FTC says 38,000 people ran up charges totalling $2.7 million. 
Web site operators were supposed to get their money from the foreign 
telephone companies. The company, while admitting no wrongdoing, settled 
the case and agreed never to distribute the software again. We actually 
stopped a lot of the money in the pipeline before it ever reached 
the defendants, so in essence what we did was reverse the flow and 
give consumers their money back through credits on their telephone 
bills. The national consumers league tracks complaints of fraud on 
the internet. They've seen explosive growth. Two years ago when we 
set this up, we were seeing an average of -- noi we have more than 
11 complaints of fraudulent Internet sites every month. Most common 
complaints -- about online auctions places where buyers bid for items 
over the Internet. John okonowski shopped that way seven or eight 
times, with no problems. He uses online auctions because they're easy 
and he saves money. Being an engineer, I felt fairly comfortable dealing 
with the Internet. The bad experience came when he was the winning 
bidder on a $310, 8.4 gigabit hard drive. After the auction and after 
I had sent my cashiers check to pay for it, I never heard from him 
again. And I also never received my hard drive. After weeks of pursuing 
the seller, Craig hare of lake worth, florida, okonowski called U.S. 
postal inspectors and he complained to the fbi. He says investigators 
were reluctant to help. We got a response that if there was less than 
a half million dollars involved, then they weren't really interested. 
But Rob Ireland, and investigator at the federal trade commission, 
was interested. He'd heard other complaints about Craig hare. He used 
a slew of mail drops and aliases and Internet addresses that changed 
on almost a daily basis to evade prosecution. And the consumer was 
angered. On evidence from John okinowski and two dozen others, the 
FTC sued hare for fraud. He was banned for life from conducting business 
on the net and hare currently faces up to 15 years in prison and a 
$750,000 fine on criminal charges for some of these same transactions 
if convicted. Hare's dissatisfied customers, have gotten no money 
back. He's not being asked to make restitution on it, I don't feel 
very good about that. The lessons learned? I don't think I'm out of 
the ordinary from what could happen to anybody. Barry is out $2,000, 
he does not expect to see again. He's learned to trust less, never 
deal in cash, and research every offer on the web, knowing now that 
if it sounds to good to be true, it probably is. Soledad O'Brien, 
NBC news, Matthews, North Carolina. For more information on this story, 
including a list of the most common scams, visit Internet underground 
at our web site -- MSNBC.com. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>