<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981024.0129 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After Friday's extravaganza of oratory and hope, as the Israeli prime 
minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, and the Palestinian leader, Yasser Arafat, 
signed an interim peace accord that was 19 months in the squabbling, 
those who stand to lose most by the deal were quick to respond. The 
accord essentially transfers another 13 percent of the West Bank to 
full or partial Palestinian control, in return for specific Palestinian 
steps to crack down on terrorism and Islamic radical organizations 
like Hamas and Islamic Jihad. Jewish settlers living in the West Bank, 
first seized from Jordan in 1967, threatened widespread protests after 
blocking roads during the nine days of negotiations that were held 
on Maryland's eastern shore. In the Gaza Strip, the leader of Hamas, 
Sheik Ahmed Yassin, warned that the agreement ``cannot erase Hamas.'' 
And for Clinton, apparently, there was an element of contrition through 
good deeds in his intensive labors in search of peace. In a speech 
Friday night to black religious leaders, Clinton said he was honored 
to have held the summit talks. ``I felt that it was a part of my job 
as president, my mission as a Christian and my personal journey of 
atonement,'' he said. In his weekly radio address Saturday, Clinton 
again urged Palestinians and Israelis to be brave in the face of criticism, 
threat and even violence from those opposed to reconciliation. ``Keeping 
the peace process on track will require continued courage by Israelis 
and Palestinians in the months ahead,'' Clinton said. ``But this agreement 
shows what is possible when the will for peace is strong.'' And he 
vowed that ``America will continue to work for a just and lasting 
peace in this land that is holy for so many people throughout the 
world.'' Indeed, America will have to, most analysts agree, since 
the Palestinians and Israelis have become dependent on Washington 
to push them toward difficult choices. Friday's agreement was a completely 
American proposal, conceived and drafted by U.S. diplomats, a far 
cry from the spontaneous give and take that a final settlement will 
require. Reaction through the Arab world was predictably mixed, with 
praise from Jordan, whose ailing king was so important to the deal. 
In Syria, the official news media ridiculed it as a Palestinian surrender 
and an Israeli trap. Egypt, a frequent mediator in the Israeli-Arab 
conflict, was cautious in its approval. Tunisian papers said it remained 
to be seen whether Israel stuck to its side of the deal but the government 
of Oman, in what appeared to be the first official reaction in the 
region, welcomed the pact. Early reaction to the accord was positive 
on Capitol Hill. Sen. Dianne Feinstein, D-Calif., praised it as ``testament 
to the fact that seemingly intractable disputes can be resolved when 
the political will exists to do so.'' But Sen. Robert Torricelli, 
D.-N.J., echoed some of the Israeli right's concerns when he said: 
``Prime Minister Netanyahu sacrificed a tangible victory for an intangible 
promise of security by chairman Arafat.'' Still, however modest, the 
agreement restores life to the Middle East peace effort and opens 
the way for talks on a final resolution of the 50-year-old fight over 
whether the Palestinians will have a state. The deal snagged at the 
last minute over the fate of the spy Jonathan Jay Pollard, but Clinton 
was finally able to preside over a White House signing ceremony, joined 
as host by a visibly ailing King Hussein of Jordan. The agreement 
set a detailed timetable for the Israelis to withdraw from 13 percent 
more of the West Bank in three phases over 12 weeks once the agreement 
is ratified. That would bring to 40 percent the total territory that 
the Palestinians control fully or partly. In return, the accord outlined 
specific steps by the Palestinians to fight terrorism and formally 
amend their charter to expunge calls for Israel's destruction. In 
presenting the accord, Arafat and Netanyahu shook hands Friday. They 
spoke words of peace and determination, but they made no attempt to 
pretend that the accord meant they had achieved a friendship. Arafat 
vowed that the Palestinians would ``never leave the peace process'' 
and ``never go back to violence and confrontation.'' Netanyahu campaigned 
for office as an opponent of the Oslo accords, by which Israel and 
the Palestinians recognize each other's right to live in peace and 
commit themselves to negotiations on a final settlement. But this 
agreement, a senior U.S. official said Saturday, puts Netanyahu firmly 
in the camp of trading land for peace, ``a remarkable shift for a 
leader of Likud.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>