<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981024.0052 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Yasser Arafat has a tough crowd to please. After the interim peace 
accord was signed in Oslo in 1993, they took to the bustling streets 
here with olive branches, wrapping themselves in Palestinian flags, 
cheering and honking in what they believed would be a new era for 
Palestinians. Saturday morning, barely 12 hours after Arafat signed 
an agreement that promises the Palestinians what amounts to 40 percent 
of the West Bank, there were no parties here, no outbursts of pride, 
no euphoria. It was just traffic as usual in this busy, cosmopolitan 
town, daily commerce interrupted by heated conversations about hopes 
raised and hopes dashed. Few wanted to admit what many said they did 
feel _ a leap in the heart, a flash of faith _ because they did not 
want to end up dupes of a peace effort they no longer trust. ``Look, 
we can't believe,'' said Fatmeh Jwailes, a mother of 10, as she shopped 
for wall-to-wall carpeting, wearing traditional Islamic dress. ``Until 
I see with my own eyes that their promises are worth the ink they're 
written in, I don't want to get my hopes up.'' If carried out, the 
agreement could transform the nature of the Palestinian entity, making 
it larger and more autonomous. It would grant the Palestinians complete 
control over a sizable chunk of territory, much of it contiguous, 
and create safe-passage corridors between the West Bank and Gaza, 
linking the two axes of the Palestinian world here. It would create 
a Palestinian airport and an industrial zone in Gaza. But to Palestinians, 
from the elite strata of the intellectual class to the angry ranks 
of the refugee camps, the ``if'' is a big one, and implementation 
is the key. The agreement signed at the White House on Friday is mostly 
a reiteration of actions already promised, in the 1993 and 1995 accords 
in Oslo, and never undertaken. This agreement sets a precise timetable 
for Israeli troop withdrawal in exchange for specific Palestinian 
steps to eradicate terrorism. And, unlike the Oslo agreements, it 
is a trilateral one, with the Americans playing guarantor, policeman 
and financier, using promises of financial aid to both sides. These 
are distinctions, and they might make a huge difference, Palestinians 
say _ or they could crumble. ``The whole thing was like pulling teeth, 
so you hesitate to have confidence that there will be follow-up,'' 
said Hanan Ashrawi, a prominent Palestinian academic and member of 
the legislative council. ``Only the absolutely naive would be carried 
away with the spectacle of the signing.'' Egypt cautiously welcomed 
the accord, echoing on a state level what the Palestinians were saying 
on the street: not only that implementation is all, but that there 
are thorny issues yet to be resolved. As Foreign Minister Amr Moussa 
put it: ``The accord is one step on the right path toward restoring 
Palestinian land and negotiating fundamental issues, topped by Jerusalem 
and the Palestinian right to self-determination. The road is still 
long for a comprehensive peace.'' In a village outside Ramallah, Raafat 
Hamdan, 17, who works as a day laborer in Israel, watched the White 
House ceremony on satellite television with his extended family. They 
sipped sweet, hot tea and munched on green grapes, speechless until 
the papers were actually signed. Then, he said, there were some sniffles, 
and he himself became choked up to think that the whole world was 
watching what he believed was Palestinian history being made. ``I 
am young so I like to have hope,'' he said. ``Maybe with everyone 
watching them like hawks, the Israelis will behave. I think that if 
there are no suicide bomb attacks, they will, because they must be 
tired of the whole fight, too.'' After the signing of the Oslo accords 
in 1993, the Palestinians, particularly those in the Gaza Strip, experienced 
hardships they had not anticipated when they were dancing in the streets. 
Owing to a series of terrorist attacks, the Israelis imposed frequent 
border closings, denied many work permits and tightened security at 
checkpoints. Many Palestinians felt the lands they had been granted 
_ mostly the big cities _ were bubbles that they were trapped in. 
Frustration grew and settled in their bones, and it is not easy to 
dislodge. ``Forget about the larger peace,'' said Moussa Zubedi, 27, 
who is unemployed. ``Palestine is my homeland, and I want the right 
to go from one place to another without restrictions. So let them 
do just that, the safe-passage thing.'' At a busy intersection, a 
crowd gathered to debate, as vendors poured shots of Turkish coffee. 
An older man, Khalil Abi Hawa, chastised the younger ones for not 
having vision. ``This is a step toward getting freedom and then independence,'' 
he said. ``Even the details are astonishing; maybe you are too young 
to realize. Now we will get an airport, a Palestinian airport!'' He 
added, ``We will have borders, then a state. You guys must keep your 
eye on the prize.'' A taxi driver rolled his eyes at this. ``Where 
is freedom if you can't go to pray in Jerusalem?'' he asked. The young 
men criticized Arafat for making concessions. They said he should 
have demanded that more Palestinian prisoners be released, and that 
he should have refused to convene the Palestinian legislature to amend 
the covenant that calls for Israel's destruction _ an amendment that 
Arafat has long claimed was already made. And some wondered if the 
promised crackdown on terrorism would give the Palestinian Authority 
license to crack down on dissent. In Gaza, during the signing, the 
Palestinian Authority detained 11 journalists who had come to watch 
the ceremony with Sheik Ahmed Yassin, the spiritual leader of the 
fundamentalist Islamic Hamas movement. They were moved from his home, 
the authorities said, because Sheik Yassin's negative comments on 
the peace effort are ``against the Palestinian Authority policy.'' 
When the older man pointed out that President Clinton had promised 
to visit the Palestinian legislature, recognizing the institution 
in what could be perceived as a diplomatic act, the young men were 
outraged. ``He's coming on Israel's behalf, to make sure they change 
the covenant,'' Jalal Hassam, 30, a maintenance worker, said. ``And 
he's coming for himself, to distract attention from his problems with 
the Monica woman. We are the carpet that everyone treads on their 
way to somewhere else. Israel wants to use us to get trade with other 
Arab countries.'' Palestinian and Israeli political experts noted 
that Arafat emerged from the nine days at the Wye Plantation in Maryland 
with what looked like a closer relationship with the Americans. As 
the Israeli party packed bags, threatened walkouts and delayed the 
final signing ceremony, he took on the air of a dignified elder statesman, 
even an insider, which is striking for the head of an organization 
still labeled terrorist by the State Department. On the street, the 
Palestinians noticed, too. ``He doesn't look like a revolutionary 
anymore, despite the clothes,'' said Bilal Abedrobu, who is unemployed. 
``He looks like one of them. It makes you think that this is a peace 
between individuals and not between peoples.'' Standing underneath 
the dresses that hung outside his clothing store, Ahmad Alfar watched 
the heated debate with a half-smile and sad eyes. ``Why not be proud 
when you see the opportunity to get more land, to have our prisoners 
freed?'' he asked. ``We have been living in darkness, and this is 
a light that brings us back hope.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>