<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981024.0094 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
An odd thing happened last week: A former Communist became prime minister 
of Italy for the first time in history, yet the Italian lira didn't 
drop in value amid fears of left-wing economic policies. The seemingly 
benign reaction stems in part from the reality of Italian politics; 
the new government under Massimo D'Alema is a hodgepodge of people 
from across the political spectrum. But it was also a telling sign 
about the peculiar condition of Europe on the eve of its greatest 
experiment in the postwar era. Just 10 weeks before 11 European countries 
adopt the euro as a common currency Jan. 1, eventually replacing marks, 
francs and lira, Europe has suddenly become the world's bastion of 
economic safety. Far from being alarmed about the changes and uncertainties 
ahead, traders have seized upon European currencies _ including the 
lira _ as their preferred safe haven from the turmoil rocking Asia, 
Russia and now even the United States. European currencies have soared 
about 10 percent against the dollar since August. In principle, that 
is testimony to Europe's soundness. But in practice it is creating 
a baptism of fire for the euro and its overseer, the new European 
Central Bank. That became clear last week. The debate now raging across 
the continent is whether the euro will be a bit too credible and too 
strong, meaning that European goods will become too expensive for 
customers with other currencies. Precisely when the new central bank 
is most preoccupied with proving its political independence, politicians 
across Europe are badgering it for a weaker euro and lower interest 
rates to stimulate borrowing and investment. The chorus got substantially 
louder last week, after the European Commission reduced its prediction 
for economic growth next year from 3.2 to 2.6 percent. In Germany, 
where the Social Democrats defeated Chancellor Helmut Kohl in elections 
last month, the incoming chancellor, Gerhard Schroeder, and his finance 
minister stepped up calls for lower interest rates and even suggested 
a return to some form of fixed exchange rates in world markets. In 
France, Socialist Prime Minister Lionel Jospin, made similar calls. 
And at the European Commission, officials are talking about softening 
the tough fiscal requirements that it set to bring the economies of 
the 11 countries in line with each other and thus insure the euro's 
credibility. Europe's new central bankers are getting even more pressure 
from the United States. With the Federal Reserve cutting interest 
rates in a sign of its own anxiety about the economy, the European 
Central Bank is suddenly the odd man out as the world's most hawkish 
supporter of hard money. Underlying all this is a more basic question 
about Europe's condition. Even though economists have recently begun 
slashing growth projections for next year, most still predict that 
Europe under the euro _ thanks in part to trade efficiencies produced 
by the use of one currency rather than many _ will grow faster than 
the United States for the first time in many years. But as the rest 
of the world looks bleaker and bleaker, the question boils down to 
this: Is Europe an ``island of stability,'' as many European leaders 
have argued? Or is it just the last domino to fall in a worldwide 
slump? Naturally, there aren't many clear signs. But there are trends 
worth noting. Perhaps the most positive and least appreciated change 
is the dramatic improvement in the competitiveness of European manufacturing. 
Here in Germany, makers of cars and machinery have learned to produce 
far more with far fewer people. They have also redesigned their products, 
rethought the way they do business and cut innovative deals with labor 
unions to win more flexibility in the workplace. Other developments 
are less encouraging. With the exception of countries like the Netherlands, 
continental Europe continues to be weighed down by high taxes, costly 
social programs and very high labor costs. On top of that, there are 
clear signs of what might be called ``reform fatigue.'' Having endured 
years of budget cuts to satisfy fiscal requirements for the euro, 
voters have ushered in left-leaning governments inclined to shore 
up social programs. Schroeder, who campaigned as a ``new'' and vaguely 
pro-business Social Democrat, has infuriated German industry by charting 
a return to left-wing priorities. His new coalition, which includes 
the environmentalist Green Party for the first time, has pledged to 
reverse the few labor reforms Kohl succeeded in pushing through. More 
important, it has drafted a tax plan with little reduction in the 
overall tax burden _ which consumes about half of Germany's total 
output _ and shifts much of it to business. It has also given tacit 
support to big wage demands by Germany's giant metalworking union. 
The collapse of Italy's centrist government under Romano Prodi was 
an even more vivid sign of reform fatigue. Prodi lost his parliamentary 
majority after the Reformed Communist Party rebelled over his plans 
for a budget cut. The Communists tried the same thing last year, but 
they failed because Italians wanted to reduce their budget deficit 
enough to qualify for the euro. But all that changed last May, when 
Italy made the grade and the pressure for austerity eased. Given all 
that, why are the currency markets so sanguine? The answer is that 
politicians do not control the new central bank. And the bank's president, 
Wim Duisenberg of the Netherlands, is almost typecast for the role 
of the gruff banker who doesn't let politicians push him around. A 
big man with piercing blue eyes and a shock of white hair, Duisenberg 
has thus far refused to budge on his policies and has perfected a 
curmudgeonly scowl that projects wonderfully over television. ``The 
European Central Bank already has credibility in financial markets, 
and you can see that from what has been happening,'' said Bernhard 
Speyer, a senior economist at Deutsche Bank Research. But the task 
ahead is not easy: a bit too tough and Duisenberg could precipitate 
a real decline in Europe; a bit too easy and the euro's strength could 
be undermined for years. ``What we face in 8 to 10 weeks from now 
is a major regime shift, and in a situation like that there are always 
things that can go wrong,'' said Speyer. ``You don't want to take 
any chances.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>