<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981024.0090 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The immense railway terminal in this eastern German city, erected 
in the heady years before World War I and faithfully restored after 
the destruction of World War II, stands like a temple to modern transport 
and commerce. But store owners in narrow downtown lanes are praying 
that it will not mean the end of their trade. Last year marked the 
completion of a two-year, $230 million overhaul of Europe's largest 
rail terminus into Europe's largest shopping mall. Turning train stations 
into shopping centers is in vogue, and now in Leipzig 140 stores and 
a dozen or so restaurants line three levels of the station's 845-foot-long 
main concourse. So impressive is the finished product, with glass-enclosed 
elevators and escalators buzzing shoppers from one level to the next, 
that the head of France's national railways, Louis Gallois, said during 
a visit that it impressed him, ``like a church, like a cathedral.'' 
But such hyperbole is little edification for people like Eva-Maria 
Bachmann, who runs a quaint book shop in the 16th-century Old Town 
Hall, on Market Square, a 10-minute walk from the station. ``Essentially, 
the available buying power is not getting bigger,'' she said. ``Roll 
the dough ever thinner, and at some point it tears.'' What is more, 
she said, the new stores have benefited from federal laws that permit 
shops in train stations to stay open later and to open on Sundays 
for ``travelers' supplies,'' while ordinary stores must close. The 
state of Saxony, taking advantage of the government's indulgence toward 
the economically lagging eastern states, has chosen to interpret the 
law unusually generously in the case of the Leipzig station, which 
is under its jurisdiction. Such tensions are familiar to Americans 
who have often seen the arrival of a Wal-Mart cripple Main Street 
merchants. But in Leipzig, population 430,000, in the heart of eastern 
Germany, they assume a special quality. With the region's manufacturing 
wiped out by the transformation of old East Germany's economy, unemployment 
is 15 percent, said Angelika Rusch-Ziegner, a city government spokeswoman. 
That may be modest in eastern Germany, where some regions suffer double 
that level, but the only hope for creating new work in Leipzig lies 
``in the service industries, in banking, and above all in retail trade,'' 
said Ms. Rusch-Ziegner, who supported the station development. The 
terminal project is not the Leipzig area's first push into shopping 
malls. After the collapse of communism in 1989, efforts to restore 
the heart of the city were hampered by property disputes. Much downtown 
property in Leipzig, a major prewar publishing center, was owned by 
Jewish families who perished in the Holocaust, and tracing heirs has 
been time consuming. That and the low cost of farmland outside the 
city led large western German department store chains to throw up 
shopping centers in the suburbs. Indeed, the train station developers, 
led by the Deutsche Bank, Germany's largest bank, contend that they 
have reversed that trend by creating the first major shopping center 
downtown. They have created 800 new jobs, they say, and the rising 
tide of shoppers should help shopkeepers all across the city's center. 
``We view ourselves as a magnet for the downtown area,'' said Michael 
Mehnert, a spokesman for the developers. ``If the old city is strong, 
we're strong, too.'' WMF, a manufacturer of cutlery and household 
utensils, appears to agree. Despite two stores in Leipzig, it opened 
a third at the station. ``People not only browse, they buy, too,'' 
said Liane Zunft, the store manager. Certainly the train station has 
its magnetism. On an average day, 100,000 people pass through, including 
30,000 railway passengers. Annual sales in the stores are projected 
to be more than $5,000 per square yard, one-third more than in shopping 
centers on the edge of Leipzig. ``It's a success, and we wouldn't 
have thought it,'' said Inis Scheithauer, a shopper from the outskirts 
of Leipzig, as she sipped soda with her husband and son at Ovidio's, 
an ice cream parlor. When relatives visited recently from Hanover, 
in western Germany, the one thing they wanted to see was the train 
station. From the station, she often goes downtown for more shopping, 
she said. Rita Sparschuh, who follows retail trade at Leipzig's Chamber 
of Commerce, said inner-city retailers are now divided between those 
who believe that the train station attracts shoppers like Mrs. Scheithauer, 
who then go on to visit the downtown stores, and others, notably big 
inner-city department stores, who say they are hurting. The chamber 
is supporting a lawsuit, now pending before a court, to test the legality 
of the station's late closing hours as discriminatory. ``You simply 
cannot allow unfair conditions,'' she said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>