<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981024.0184 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Last April the Connecticut General Assembly voted to restructure the 
state's electric utilities, separating the generation of electricity 
from its distribution to the consumer. The measure requires United 
Illuminating Co. and Connecticut Light &AMP; Power Co. the state's 
only electric utilities other than those of a few municipalities, 
to sell off their generating plants by 2004. They will then become 
regulated monopolies in the business of distributing electricity to 
customers through their existing equipment. In July 2000, consumers 
will be able to choose their electric companies as they now choose 
telephone companies. Their bills will list the regulated charge per 
kilowatt hour from a company that they have selected, plus the unregulated 
charges for generation of power that will be competitive in the open 
market. By encouraging the construction of clean, new gas-fired power 
plants, Connecticut joins 17 other states that have enacted similar 
measures in an effort to reduce pollution and costs. So far, more 
than 50 proposals to build gas-fired power plants have been submitted 
in the New England region. In Connecticut 10 companies from California 
to Massachusetts have filed proposals to build plants in Killingly, 
Meriden, Milford, New Milford, Norwalk, Norwich, Oxford, Sherman, 
Southington, Sprague and Wallingford. Some towns have welcomed the 
proposals because of tax windfalls estimated at $2 million to $4 million 
a year. Other communities, where critics view the plants as polluting 
eyesores, may find them eliminated by a battery of regulatory agencies 
that will review the proposals. They include the Connecticut Siting 
Council, the Independent System Operator New England, a quasi-governmental 
agency known as ISO New England that administers the transmission 
of electricity throughout the region; the Connecticut Department of 
Environmental Protection; and local planning, zoning and conservation 
commissions. Bridgeport is the first municipality with a new natural 
gas-burning plant in limited operation at the United Illuminating 
site. Built by Duke Energy Power Services of Charlotte, N.C., it will 
reach its full 520-megawatt capacity next year. Two existing plants 
on the property will then be converted from coal to gas. Of two power 
plants proposed in Norwich by Stone &AMP; Webster Development Corp. 
of Boston and Williams Energy Group of Tulsa, Okla., Richard DesRoches, 
manager of the city's independent gas and electric systems, said, 
``We'll be happy to get the taxes and we might even buy some power 
from Stone &AMP; Webster, the front-runner.'' In New Milford, a citizens' 
group called Power Alert has been working against plans by Sempra 
Energy Resources of San Diego for a 19,000-square-foot, 500-megawatt 
plant on a 145-acre former gravel mine off Route 7 near Candlewood 
Mountain. Its twin smokestacks would be 213 feet high and 17 feet 
in diameter. The prospect of having such a structure thrust into an 
otherwise Arcadian landscape has unsettled some residents. ``We believe 
the stacks will protrude above the mountain and affect the views of 
all the residential properties along Candlewood Lake,'' said Liba 
Furhman, a former New Milford first selectman and chairman of Power 
Alert. ``We are in a zone designated as substandard for air quality 
by the Environmental Protection Agency. The valley has a microclimate 
in which pollutants are not dispersed. Just because gas-fired plants 
are cleaner than oil- or coal-fired plants doesn't mean that the Sempra 
plant will be clean. It will be emitting tons of nitrous oxide and 
particulate matters into the air.'' Sempra chose the New Milford acreage 
because ``from a gas and power perspective it has direct access,'' 
said Dwain Boettcher, vice president of business development for Sempra. 
The Iroquois gas pipeline traverses the site, which Sempra bought 
in bankruptcy court for $2 million, and it is 2,000 feet from an electric 
transmission line. ``We are hoping that once the people understand 
the benefits, they will support the project,'' said Boettcher. Tax 
revenues, he estimates, would be $38 million over 20 years. The $280 
million plant would be built on 20 acres, another 20 acres would be 
developed independently of Sempra as an industrial park, and use of 
the remaining 105 acres would be determined in concert with the town. 
Local employment prospects are minimal. Only 20 to 25 skilled people 
are required to run gas-fired power plants at salaries ranging from 
$40,000 to more than $100,000 a year. ``The revenues don't knock your 
socks off,'' said Kenneth Paul, editor of The Litchfield County Times, 
a weekly newspaper that has published numerous editorials in opposition 
to the project. On Oct. 9, it also took the unusual step of running 
a full page listing the reasons to oppose the project as an eyesore, 
polluter, potential source of fires, and threat to residential property 
values. As the largest municipality in the state, covering 64.8 square 
miles, New Milford is also one of the fastest growing. A $65-million 
school building project now in the works is one of many things that 
the mayor, Arthur Peitler, said the town needs to finance. He noted 
that ``for the last few years we have been facing selective brownouts 
caused by shutdowns at the Millstone nuclear facilities.'' ``Do we 
need 12 new facilities?'' he asked rhetorically. ``Probably not, but 
I think Connecticut needs more energy than it has now.'' In an effort 
to make an independent evaluation of emissions that Sempra contends 
will cause only a fraction of a percent change in the atmosphere, 
the mayor has promised to have a $20,000 environmental-impact study 
done. Ms. Furhman lives on the New Milford-Sherman border, near a 
site in Sherman where Tractebel Power, a Belgian company with U.S. 
headquarters in Houston, proposed a 700-megawatt plant. When the 289-acre 
farm it planned to buy was sold to 890 Realty Co. in New Fairfield, 
``Tractebel withdrew,'' said Donna Tuck, first selectman of Sherman. 
``They knew of the one in New Milford and felt that more plants were 
coming on line than were needed.'' But Tractebel has not withdrawn 
its application to ISO New England, and Peter Brown, a Tractebel lawyer 
in New Hampshire, would not say whether the company is negotiating 
with 890 Realty or seeking other sites in Sherman. In Southington, 
a bedroom community for Hartford, Waterbury and Meriden, a handful 
of the 40,000 residents have expressed concern about how the air quality 
would be affected by a 720-megawatt plant proposed on 75 industrially 
zoned acres by AES Enterprises of Newton, Mass. A public hearing on 
the proposal is scheduled for Nov. 5. The Connecticut Siting Council 
makes the final decision on accepting a plant, determining the effect 
of each proposal on the environment, transmission capacity, fuel and 
water supply, demographics and projections of growth, said Joel Rinebold, 
executive director of the council. If townspeople object to a decision, 
he said, ``there is no reason why they can't seek court remedies after 
coming to us.'' Approval or rejection of proposals for plants in Milford 
and Meriden could be forthcoming in November and January, respectively. 
Both proposals were made by Power Development Co. of Boston in partnership 
with El Paso Energy Corp. of Houston. They have optioned 28 acres 
for a 540-megawatt plant in Milford and an 821-acre tract spanning 
the border between Meriden and Berlin for a 540-megawatt plant on 
30 of 321 acres that lie in Meriden. The remaining land, said Kenneth 
Roberts Sr., chief operating officer for the Boston company, ``would 
buffer the plant from surrounding neighborhoods and be dedicated to 
conservation in both towns.'' Berlin's 500 acres are required for 
an easement to the Iroquois pipeline and the hookup for power transmission, 
both located there. Bonnie Therrien, town manager of Berlin, noted 
that there were concerns about the 3 million gallons of water that 
the plant will need daily. ``Berlin is on wells, and there isn't enough 
water in the aquifers to draw that much,'' she said, ``and Meriden 
applied for water that New Britain controls from Hart's Pond, but 
it was allocated to Southington.'' Mayor Joseph Marinan of Meriden 
said, ``The town fully supports the project and fears that the water 
problem could scuttle it.'' Next month Citizens in Defense of Oxford 
will appear in Milford Superior Court. They filed a lawsuit on Sept. 
15 seeking to overturn a decision by the Oxford Planning and Zoning 
Commission to allow Towantic Energy of Denver to build a 540-megawatt 
plant on 20 acres near the Oxford airport, as a special exception. 
In the end, said Sinclair of ISO, ``the market determines where these 
things get placed.'' Who gets considered, he said, is determined by 
a federal regulatory commission approach, on a first come, first served 
basis. ``As the list of applicants gets longer the issue of fairness 
comes to light,'' he said. ``Can we rearrange the sequence when a 
more worthy applicant shows up at the end of the line? We are working 
with the New England Conference of Public Utility Commissioners to 
find a way to separate the serious from the less serious.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>