<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981024.0103 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Taliban hard-liners who rule most of Afghanistan are arguably 
the world's most vociferous enemies of modern technology. When they 
aren't busy enforcing the rules that prohibit females from leaving 
their homes unveiled or unaccompanied by a close male relative, the 
Taliban religious police roam neighborhoods searching for radios, 
TVs, VCRs, phonographs, satellite dishes or computers, which are promptly 
destroyed while the owners are arrested. What a surprise, then, to 
go online, type in ``www.taliban.com'' and witness what spills forth: 
Taliban Online, a profusion of graphics and text (in awkward English) 
employing the most modern communications tool _ the Internet _ to 
extol the virtues and triumphs of the least modern of regimes. Here 
are excerpts from the site, which appears to originate in Pakistan 
and is evidently designed for external use only. _ By JOE SHARKEY 
(BEGIN ITALICS HERE) Among Taliban Online features are news summaries 
from the pages of the unofficial Taliban weekly newspaper, Dharb-i-Mumin, 
which chronicles efforts to enforce sharia, or Islamic law, in Afghanistan. 
Some recent items: (END ITALICS HERE) Drive of Kandahar Police Against 
Antisocial Elements: The Kandahar police, in a drive against antisocial 
elements yesterday, rounded up different criminals from around the 
city. They arrested a man and seized ... 240 song cassettes and packs 
of playing cards from his possessions. All the things were then set 
on fire while the culprit was handed over to the police. _ Oct. 4 
Televisions Seized and Smashed in Kabul: (The religious police) have 
started their country-wide campaign of destroying televisions, VCRs, 
satellite dishes, etc. ... On Tuesday, here in Kabul, hundreds of 
television sets and other instruments of immoral pastimes were seized 
from markets and work places and then destroyed. These means of corruption 
were, in some places, even thrown out of the windows of high buildings 
to smash on the streets below. A source revealed that the campaign 
will be carried on with the same fervor and zeal till the complete 
destruction of these instruments of moral depravity. _ Aug. 9 Kabul: 
16 Punished for Trimming Beard: (The religious police) arrested 16 
people in raids on different parts of the city, on the charge of having 
their beard trimmed to less than the required length. Two taxi drivers 
were also arrested for taking unattended, unveiled women as passengers. 
_ Aug. 2 Punishment on Trimming Beard and Keeping Un-Islamic Hairstyle: 
The religious police ... arrested several people in different crimes 
during several raids in different parts of the city. They arrested 
and gave sharia punishment to 13 shopkeepers for not offering congregational 
prayers. ... Similarly, dozens of people were (given) punishment for 
trimming their beards. ... Meanwhile, the religion police gave hard 
sharia punishment to three taxi drivers who had allowed (unescorted) 
women to sit in their taxis (and) issued an order according to which 
no women could go to the doctor even for medicine (unless accompanied 
by a male relative). Similarly, some private schools for women were 
also ordered to be closed which were open in homes. ... According 
to an official of the religious police ... some weak elements were 
trying to pave way for indecency and dissension among women under 
cover of education; therefore, all such schools have been ordered 
to close down. _ July 19 Liquor Seized at Kabul International Airport: 
A large amount of liquor was seized from Kabul International Airport. 
This liquor was being smuggled by the officials of an international 
welfare organization from Islamabad (Pakistan) to Kabul, when it was 
seized by Taliban security forces. Later liquor is burnt in fire. 
... Previously also, liquor bottles were recovered from the officers 
of Red Cross International organization during search at Kabul airport. 
_ July 26 Three Dozen Shopkeepers Punished: (government agents) punished 
three dozen shopkeepers for not offering congregational prayers in 
Kabul. The accused were also ordered to keep their shops closed for 
five days. Whereas, 25 persons were punished for trimming their beards 
and 12 taxi drivers were given sharia punishment for dealing with 
women and for listening (to) songs. _ July 26 Prohibition of TV, VCR 
Essential to Save Society from Destruction: An edict was issued by 
(the religious police) ordering the destruction or disposal of all 
TV sets, VCRs, videocassettes, etc., in the country within 15 days. 
``No one is allowed to keep these things in their home or shops. Selling 
or dealing in such goods is strictly prohibited from now on. Restriction 
is imposed upon mechanics of corruption and depravity,'' the order 
maintained. (In an interview), the deputy head of the Taliban's religious 
ministry said that they had no other option to cleanse the society 
of corruption and moral depravity. ``We had banned all televisions, 
videocassette recorders, videos, satellite dishes, audio cassettes 
of recorded songs and music from the country when we took control. 
But the ban had not been strictly imposed and, taking advantage of 
our leniency, people are watching TV in their homes. So we have decided 
to remedy this.'' _ July 19 The enemies of Islam cannot tolerate the 
existence of Dharb-i-Mumin even for a moment. So those ... who have 
become subscribers of Dharb-i-Mumin and pay their bills on time deserve 
congratulations. We are sure that by remitting the outstanding dues 
at the earliest possible moment, you will help in foiling the conspiracies 
of the enemies of Islam. (BEGIN ITALICS HERE) Taliban Online visitors 
can also double-click on scores of sites with titles like ``Why Women 
Should Stay in Their Homes.'' Banning women from schools, the workplace 
and even the streets prompted the government of Iran (no slacker when 
it comes to keeping women undercover) to protest recently that the 
Taliban are ``giving Islam a bad name.'' In a series of rhetorical 
questions and answers, the Taliban addressed such concerns at length: 
(END ITALICS HERE) Q. The Taliban use force in the enforcement of 
Islamic law. Their haste in implementing sharia is discrediting Islam 
in the eyes of the world. Shouldn't they have implemented it gradually, 
step by step? A. The Taliban have put a ban on wine, on the immorality 
of TV, a complete restriction on songs, photography or painting of 
living things. Shaving off the beard or trimming it less than a fistful 
is prohibited too, as is adopting an English hairstyle. Gambling, 
betting, pigeon-flying, dog-racing, sodomy are strictly forbidden. 
... When Islam has forbidden them and the Taliban have banned them, 
would it be called cruelty _ (this) use of force? To call it so would 
be criticizing Islam, and criticizing Islam leads to going astray. 
Q. The U.N., America, Britain, in fact the entire Western media accuse 
the Taliban of violating the rights of women, of banning them from 
jobs, of ordering them to observe ``purdah'' (a requirement that women's 
faces and legs be covered when in public). The Taliban are also accused 
of depriving women of their right to education. A. Neither do we acknowledge 
the rights given to women by the West, nor are we bound by them. ... 
Men in the West have made women an object of their lusts and desires. 
They have used them (as) they pleased. When these slaves-of-their-desires 
had to go to work, to offices and factories, they drafted the women 
along with them also. Women were made to work in offices, restaurants, 
shops and factories for the gratification of (male) desires. In this 
way did the Western man destroy the personality, position and identity 
of a woman. ... The women of the West are laboring under a double 
burden. One, she is torn by anxiety as to who will look after her 
in case she remains unmarried. ... She is thus forced to wander from 
door to door in search of security. Even in the matter of dress she 
is exploited. Men wear trousers which cover their ankles, while women 
are forced to wear skirts with their legs bare in every kind of weather. 
In the scantiest of dresses, merely a sleeveless blouse and miniskirt, 
the Western woman can be seen roaming in shops, airports, stations, 
etc. She is a target for unscrupulous men who satisfy their lust with 
them _ wherever, whenever they please. ... She has become no less 
than a bitch, chased by a dozen dogs in heat. If these are the rights 
of the Western women, then the West is welcome to them. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>