<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981024.0187 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Reduced now to ruins, the old Essex County Jail remains a sinister 
and forbidding place. Its rotting doors, barely hanging, are open 
to anyone who wants to get in, or out. There are fissures in the corroded 
roof, providing views of the wide-open sky from some cells. Even empty, 
the dark, cavernous cellblocks evoke echoes of bedlam. In the 1800s, 
murderers were hanged here. In 1967, the cells were crammed with people 
arrested during race riots. But the most vivid picture that remains 
is of the suspects investigated by the county's Bureau of Narcotics 
Control, which used the building as its headquarters after the jail 
closed in 1970. Strewn throughout the prison's cellblocks and offices, 
amid the trash and other debris left by squatters and drug addicts, 
are hundreds, perhaps thousands, of law enforcement records left behind 
by the narcotics bureau when the unit moved out in 1989. The records, 
dating from about 1970 to the mid-1980s, include arrest reports, police 
booking photos, rap sheets, transcripts of wiretapped phone conversations, 
search warrants and lists of evidence. Many of the subjects of the 
records are still alive. Some went to prison. Some still live in New 
Jersey. And the squatters who have ready access to the building could 
easily find information about them, including their addresses and 
Social Security numbers. By state law, none of the documents should 
be there. According to New Jersey's mandatory ``records retention 
and disposition schedule,'' every item left in the old jail should 
have been destroyed or placed in secure, permanent files. Instead, 
they lie matted under broken beer bottles and stuck together in wet, 
moldy cardboard boxes. In most cases, the type and the handwriting 
are still legible. The photographs are clear. ``I am working, a law-abiding 
citizen,'' said one woman whose booking photo, fingerprint card and 
rap sheet were left in the old jail. The woman, who lives in Newark 
and agreed to discuss her criminal past on the condition of anonymity, 
was charged with possessing drugs and stolen property in 1986 and 
served time in jail. ``I am actually shocked,'' she said when told 
where the documents were found. ``It could have gotten into the wrong 
hands and done damage to a lot of people.'' The Essex County sheriff, 
Armando Fontoura, said county officials were supposed to have destroyed 
the documents after the narcotics bureau left. ``The county was responsible 
for removing all the data, bringing the shredder in,'' Fontoura said. 
The sheriff said members of the sheriff's department, including the 
director of the narcotics bureau, Robert Scarillo, had looked over 
the materials and concluded that nothing important had been left there. 
He said he had asked the county several times to increase security 
at the former jail, noting that two people had been found dead in 
the building after overdosing on drugs. The most recent victim was 
found in 1997. Told of Fontoura's remarks, the Essex County administrator, 
Vincent DiMauro, said he would direct the public works department 
to clear out the old jail. DiMauro said he visited the jail about 
10 months ago in response to reports of homeless squatters and had 
noticed file boxes but did not see the records themselves. ``I guess 
I will have to take another look,'' he said. ``I will make sure our 
people take a look, assemble that data, make sure the sheriff's people 
look at it and make sure it's stuff that should be destroyed.'' The 
discarded records could pose legal problems for county officials, 
said Alan Zegas, president of the Association of Criminal Defense 
Lawyers of New Jersey. ``Let's say that an individual had his or her 
record expunged,'' Zegas said, ``and expungement requires the destruction 
of the underlying records, and now they are out on the street and 
can fall into anyone's hands. It's wrong.'' The potential legal liabilities 
include defamation, invasion of privacy and slander, Zegas said. ``If 
somebody has not been convicted of any crime but was simply investigated, 
leaving records out publicly exposes the individual to very severe 
harm to reputation as well as potential invasion of privacy.'' In 
addition, Zegas said, some of the records may reveal confidential 
information, like the names of victims and police informers. And the 
state could be exposed to lawsuits by the victims of crimes stemming 
from the discovery of the documents, he said. The records, it seems, 
got lost in the shuffle sometime in 1989 after a dispute arose between 
the county executive at the time, Nicholas Amato, and Thomas D'Alessio, 
then the sheriff, over the use of the jail by the narcotics bureau. 
Amato wanted the bureau to move so the county could sell the building. 
It is still owned by the county. The matter ended up in state Superior 
Court in Newark, where Judge Harry Margolis ordered the building evacuated 
because of structural damage and other dangerous conditions. The narcotics 
bureau set up trailers and a tent in a parking lot near the building 
and worked from there for about six months, said James Finkle, a longtime 
supervisor in the Sheriff's Department. Finkle said the documents 
were probably forgotten when the bureau moved to new offices. Designed 
by John Haviland, who also designed the original jail known as the 
Tombs in lower Manhattan, the Essex County Jail was built in 1837, 
a year after Newark was formally incorporated, and served as the county's 
main penitentiary for 133 years. It is the oldest government building 
still standing in the city and was listed on the National Register 
of Historic Places in 1991. In late 1991, it was used to film scenes 
for Spike Lee's movie ``Malcolm X,'' but since then, it has been empty. 
Plans are moving forward for a $350 million science park, featuring 
an international center for public health, to rise on 14 acres of 
land surrounding the building. The former jail may one day become 
part of the science park, perhaps used as a generating plant, which 
would allow its outer structure to be preserved. When the jail closed, 
the Bureau of Narcotics Control was a multiagency task force financed 
largely by the federal government, with investigators from municipal 
police departments and the county sheriff's and prosecutor's offices 
who worked closely with federal agencies, including the Drug Enforcement 
Administration. Richard Roberts, a former assistant county prosecutor 
who directed the bureau from about 1970 to 1981, said the jail building 
was used in part to keep the squad separate from the prosecutor's 
main offices, which are in the county courthouse. ``The narcotics 
squad uses confidential informants and things of that nature,'' he 
said, ``and to have them parading before the courts and the people 
going to court would be counterproductive. We used it as administrative 
offices. We kept evidence there in some of the cells.'' Some of the 
old jail's administrative offices were also used to monitor and record 
wiretapped conversations. Today, dozens of transcripts of such conversations, 
in official DEA logs, are still in the decrepit offices, piled on 
rusting metal desks. Roberts, who left the bureau for a private law 
practice in 1981, said that from the outset, jail cells were used 
as storage rooms. ``We had a detective in charge of evidence, and 
deep in the bowels of the old jail we kept evidence that we confiscated 
and kept until trial,'' he said. ``If it were narcotics, we kept it 
for a certain period of time and then we burned it. We kept it until 
the case was over and the appeals time was gone.'' One of the more 
bizarre reports found in the old jail details the arrests in the mid-1980s 
of two men charged with breaking into the building and stealing items 
from the narcotics bureau's own offices, including nine portable radios, 
a television set, two typewriters, a sheriff's badge, a leather holster 
for a 9-millimeter gun and two loaded ammunition clips. Even more 
bizarre was a memo about an incident that occurred while the burglary 
was being investigated. ``During the course of the above investigation,'' 
Detective Arthur Lang wrote, ``Detectives Calvin Thomas, Derrick Westry 
and the undersigned seized one military rocket launcher in front of 
8 Sheffield Drive in the city of Newark, New Jersey. Said launcher 
was turned over to the evidence office.'' However, most of the documents 
are routine, detailing charges against various suspects and the efforts 
of the law enforcement agents who investigated them. Architects, engineers 
and other planners working on the science park have made many inspections 
of the old jail, almost always escorted by police. Dillon Waltner, 
administrative and technical coordinator for University Science Park 
Inc., the company developing the park, and others who have visited 
the building said they had noticed the abandoned records and other 
evidence, including a roomful of confiscated gambling machines. ``There 
are still quite a few old files that are in there,'' Waltner said. 
``It's a scary place, isn't it?'' Another person who noticed the discarded 
records was Camilo Vergara, a Manhattan photographer and historian 
who is working on a book about American ruins and is using the old 
jail as a subject. Earlier this month, Vergara returned to tour the 
building with a reporter and two historians, Kenneth Jackson of Columbia 
University and Clement Price of Rutgers University. ''You see those 
records and all the time people took in putting those records together,'' 
Vergara said. ``They have bearing on people who for all you know may 
be walking right outside.'' Vergara said he was drawn to the old jail 
for its architecture and history and had been awed by the eeriness 
of a place that once housed as many as 400 prisoners and where gallows 
once stood in a courtyard. ``It's a wonderful building,'' he said. 
``It is a real ruin, with the smells, with the dilapidation, the paint 
falling, the plaster falling. This is not a flimsy structure. It was 
built to last.'' David Abramson, a Newark architect who was hired 
by University Science Park to conduct a study on possible uses for 
the building, has suggested that it be used as a power-generating 
plant. ``It's an incredible structure, one of grandeur and decay,'' 
said Abramson, adding that he expected any plans for the building 
to be hotly debated. ``This has been and will continue to be and will 
become a controversial issue. The historic preservation community 
looks at this, rightly, as a very significant resource.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>