<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981024.0131 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A year ago this week the Florida Marlins executed a double play unique 
in baseball history. First they won the World Series and then they 
planned the instant demolition of the World Series champions. Fortunately 
for baseball and its fans, that scenario will not occur this year. 
The Marlins' brain trust waited only four days from the last game 
of the World Series to lay the groundwork for the destruction of the 
1997 champions. The New York Yankees' strategic planners won't take 
much longer than that to lay the groundwork for moves that they hope 
will turn the 1998 champions into 1999 champions. The Marlins' method 
has become one of the ugliest developments in recent history. ``I 
don't have second thoughts, but I have done a lot of thinking about 
it,'' commissioner Bud Selig said when asked if the Marlins should 
have been prevented from dismantling their team. ``While I still understand 
the reasons for it, I wish even more fervently that it hadn't happened.'' 
Marlins players and fans, drastically reduced though their number 
may be, are also sorry it happened. The Marlins shed 68 percent of 
their players and lost 26 percent of their attendance. As astute a 
businessman as H. Wayne Huizenga, soon to be the former owner, is 
supposed to be, he scuttled two economic opportunities with his demolition 
project. He lost out on the attendance increase that invariably follows 
a championship, and he lost the chance to generate public support 
for a new ball park. His actions left even his friends wondering why 
he bothered spending the money he did, knowing how much he would lose 
and how fragile the chances were for getting to the World Series in 
the first place. George Steinbrenner and the Yankees, on the other 
hand, are not going anywhere; nor are they going to embarrass baseball. 
In contrast to Huizenga, Steinbrenner will do what he thinks has to 
be done to repeat, not regress. ``It's the nature of people in our 
business to treat every year different,'' said Detroit Tigers general 
manager Randy Smith, discussing the Yankees and next season. ``You 
look at their club and what they still have in their farm system, 
and they have a terrific situation. Look at the balance of the club 
up and down the lineup. Look at the pitching depth. They're going 
to be awful tough in the foreseeable future.'' In addition, Smith 
said, if the Yankees lose a player, they can go out on the market 
and replace him. The Yankees can also pursue a player without losing 
one. Speculation has sprung up, for example, on whether or not the 
Yankees might go after Mo Vaughn, a free agent, and trade their incumbent 
first baseman, Tino Martinez, even though he has led the team in runs 
batted in each of his three years with the Yankees. The speculation 
about Vaughn has been fueled by the close relationship his agent, 
Tom Reich, has with Steinbrenner. Offering his personal view of the 
matter, Reich said: ``The Yankees, aside from having a great team, 
have the best chemistry team I've seen since the 1970s. It has as 
much a bearing on their success as their talent. I would think they'd 
like to try to keep that team together. The Yankees have a very good 
first baseman who's a terrific guy and a part of this chemistry.'' 
The makeup of the team was reflected in the the way the Yankees played 
on a daily basis. Barely two months into the season, they had an 11-game 
lead with a 46-13 record, and they could have coasted the rest of 
the way. But they played as though every day they were a game out 
of first and had to win that day to gain a share of the top spot. 
They compiled a 68-35 record (.660) the rest of the way. Compare the 
rest of their season with the experience of the 1984 Detroit Tigers 
and the 1990 Cincinnati Reds. The Tigers started 35-5, then tailed 
off to 69-53 (.566) the rest of the way. The Reds began 33-12, then 
struggled at 58-59, a losing record, through the remainder of the 
season. ``I'm amazed at how they go about it more than how they do 
it,'' Sparky Anderson, who managed the 1984 Tigers, said during the 
World Series. The former manager is known for hyperbole, but in assessing 
the Yankees he didn't need it. ``This is one of THE very best teams 
I've ever watched,'' he said. ``You never remember walking into the 
Yankees clubhouse and seeing so many professionals. I would have been 
very proud to manage that team because they are professional-acting 
people. This team has done baseball proud, along with McGwire and 
Sosa. They've contributed so much to the whole game. At times I'm 
overwhelmed watching them.'' nn 
</TEXT>
</DOC>