<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981024.0144 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The muscular outboard engine on Captain David Blinken's 20-foot flats 
skiff gurgled and growled pleasantly as we left his slip in the harbor 
under the still, leaden skies of October. The boys and girls and Porsches 
and lattes of summer were long gone from the East End of Long Island, 
and this cozy, overcrowded harbor had regained its identity as a seafarer's 
outpost, where luxurious pleasure craft and monstrous, rusting dredgers 
and other ``work'' ships added equal measures of character and charm 
to the harborscape. ``We'll be looking for fish busting the surface 
as soon as we round the jetty,'' said Blinken, 37, who operates the 
North Flats Guiding service. ``We could find the albies'' _ false 
albacore _ ``anywhere today.'' The false albacore is a relatively 
new target for saltwater anglers, especially flyfishers. These robust 
little tuna, which typically weigh between 6 and 10 pounds, appear 
along the Long Island coastline in late August and often provide fishing 
into the first week of November. And Blinken is a relatively new type 
of guide _ a pioneer of Florida Keys-style light tackle flyfishing 
on the inshore waters and fertile, shallow flats of the east end, 
environments that teem with bluefish, striped bass, bonita, false 
albacore and other gamefish from about the middle of May until after 
the snow flies. Back in his college days at Boston University, Blinken 
played drums in a band, Das Messerschmidts. Perhaps that left him 
predisposed to the curious demands of fishing for false albacore, 
a process in which these steel-hard and radiantly handsome fish strafe 
schools of bait in brief, explosive blitzes, while a captain tries 
to position a boat within the absurdly close distance required for 
the flyfisher to reach the albies. Soon we were motoring along Gin 
Beach, heading toward Shagwong. About 200 yards to our right, on Washington 
shoal, two dozen gulls were balled up just above the gray-olive surface. 
Blinken turned hard, approaching the birds. Wings aflutter, they pecked 
like chickens at the surface, trying to snatch frenzied baitfish driven 
to the top by a school of false albacore. The fish created small explosions 
and silver slashes on the surface. They flew from the water, mouths 
agape, the sunlight gleaming on their iridescent flanks. They locked 
onto their targets like living missiles, and their slender dorsal 
fins sliced the brine. Richard Franklin and I feverishly began casting 
as the backwash from the boat gently lifted and pushed us into the 
midst of the activity. The albies were all around the boat, boiling 
and ripping the water. We cast and quickly stripped back our flies 
_ we were using the slender and ethereal ``albatross'' and ``jellyfish'' 
pattern created by Blinken _ but momentarily the blitz was over. The 
water swelled gently around us, still and unmarked. ``Not to worry,'' 
Blinken said, grinning. ``It's the nature of the game.'' The birds 
began working 300 yards closer to shore, almost on the beach. We raced 
over, but again wasted our opportunity. Although 30 seconds is a short 
interval by most standards, time seems to stop in the heat of a blitz. 
It's really an eternity that lasts half a minute. And if your captain 
is expert at positioning the boat, you may get a few precious extra 
seconds to boot. I finally hooked up over the fourth pod of fish. 
The albie streaked off, making a long run despite the tightly set 
drag on my reel. Then it sounded, deep under the boat, forcing me 
to do a few laps inside the craft. When Blinken finally tailed and 
hauled the fish out of the water, I blinked in disbelief at the exquisite 
design and coloration of the fish. Among other things, the albie has 
a distinctive bar filled with black squiggly markings on either side 
of its thick olive back, a dorsal fin that folds into a narrow slot 
as securely as the blade on a good jackknife, and iridescent silver 
sides. The thick body tapers off to a slender ``wrist'' just fore 
of the albie's graceful, streamlined tail. This is a swimming and 
eating machine, which it proved by promptly throwing up a shower of 
silver baitfish, right into Blinken's lap. ``Well, now we know what 
they're eating,'' the captain said, closely examining a badly tattered 
anchovy. He then held the albie head down and dropped it in the water. 
Undignified as it may seem, this is the preferred method of release. 
The fish vanished in the splash. For the rest of the day, we madly 
chased pods of albies all around Shagwong. Fishing the albie blitzes, 
you constantly crash and burn, but always rise to fish again. By the 
end of the day, I had burned out the guts of one flyreel and destroyed 
a line. My fingers were blistered and bloody. Who can ask for anything 
more? We also learned that despite the ignoble taint of its name, 
the only false thing about this creature is that unlike its cousins 
in the tuna family, the albie's flesh is too blood-laden and rich 
to eat. What a wonderful way for a fish to fall short of our expectations. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>