<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981024.0077 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
At a meeting at an Albany hotel recently, the Democratic nominee for 
New York lieutenant governor was introduced as Sandra Feldman, the 
longtime teachers' union leader. Never mind that the candidate's name 
is Sandra Frankel and that the speaker was none other than the chairwoman 
of the Democratic Party. Ms. Frankel, a town supervisor from the Rochester 
area, had suffered such indignities before; in an earlier party press 
release she had been called Barbara. The gaffes were telling in a 
state where the second-ranking job in government involves little more 
than refereeing Senate debates and has become so marginalized that 
New York's current lieutenant governor, Betsy McCaughey Ross, hasn't 
had a substantive conversation with Gov. George Pataki in at least 
three years. But their relationship is not typical. When it comes 
to questions of how seriously one should view the backup quarterbacks 
in the nation's state capitals, the answers often depend on the particular 
stadiums in which they are warming the bench. In some states, the 
No. 2 person actually has clout, and campaigns for the job are serious 
matters. In Georgia, for example, where the lieutenant governor has 
broad authority to shape the legislative agenda, this year's race 
has been tough and personal. Ads for the Republican candidate, Mitch 
Skandalakis, imply that his Democratic opponent, Mark Taylor, has 
resumed a prior, admitted cocaine problem. Taylor responded with a 
lawsuit accusing his opponent of slander. In Texas, where Gov. George 
W. Bush is expected to win re-election next month, attention has shifted 
to the lieutenant governor's race, in part because the winner would 
succeed Bush if he were to win the presidency in 2000. Texas is among 
18 states in which voters can choose a governor and lieutenant governor 
of different parties, and often do. To head off such a situation, 
Bush's famous father has made a TV commercial on behalf of the Republican 
who would be his son's understudy. ``The job is what you make it,'' 
said Sherry Bebitch Jeffe, a political analyst at Claremont Graduate 
University in California, who was speaking of her home state but could 
have easily been citing many others. ``Nelson Rockefeller referred 
to the vice presidency as `standby equipment,''' she added. ``If you 
are the lieutenant governor and your governor is not of the same party, 
you're not even perceived as standby equipment. You're out there in 
orbit.'' California Lt. Gov. Gray Davis, a Democrat, has been in such 
an orbit for four years. Whenever Republican Gov. Pete Wilson leaves 
the state, Davis' office floods reporters' fax machines with press 
releases that begin, ``Acting Governor and gubernatorial candidate 
Gray Davis. . . .'' Davis is now running to succeed Wilson. But that 
pales in comparison to the friction two decades ago between former 
Gov. Jerry Brown, a Democrat, and Mike Curb, his Republican lieutenant. 
Once, Ms. Bebitch Jeffe recalled, Brown raced to get a flight back 
to California because Curb was trying to capitalize on the governor's 
absence by appointing a conservative judge whom Brown opposed. Some 
view the lieutenant's job as a steppingstone. After a 16-year career 
as Georgia's lieutenant governor, Zell Miller was elected governor 
in 1990. Bob Finch, the first lieutenant governor in California under 
Ronald Reagan, was appointed secretary of health, education and welfare 
by President Richard M. Nixon. And Mario Cuomo, elected New York's 
lieutenant governor in 1978, was elected governor in the next three 
elections. But others have gone the route of Malcolm Wilson, who waited 
in the wings behind Rockefeller for 15 years and became governor in 
1973, when Rockefeller chose to step down before the end of his term. 
Wilson was defeated the next year by Hugh Carey. Still, Wilson was 
governor long enough to leave a legacy, of sorts: The Tappan Zee Bridge 
was renamed the Gov. Malcolm Wilson Tappan Zee Bridge in 1993. Some 
of his successors in the No. 2 spot have found fame more fleeting. 
Having found little to occupy his time during the Cuomo administration, 
Alfred DelBello resigned the lieutenant governor's post in 1985 to 
take a position with a waste management firm in New Hampshire. And 
then there's Mary Anne Krupsak, Carey's lieutenant. She failed to 
unseat him in the 1978 Democratic primary and never again held elected 
office. She now runs a chamber of commerce for the counties in the 
Finger Lakes area and is the co-owner of Pasta Only's, a restaurant 
in Geneva, N.Y. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>