<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981024.0072 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the past eight weeks, Akezhan Kazhegeldin says, his press aide 
was attacked by masked men, a weekly newspaper close to him was firebombed 
and he was shot at. If the intended message is that Kazhegeldin, 46, 
a businessman and former prime minister, should drop out of next January's 
presidential election, he is not listening. Instead he has bought 
a bulletproof vest, hired a battery of Washington lawyers and plunged 
into an election race against President Nursultan Nazarbayev. The 
former Communist boss, and Kazhegeldin's erstwhile political patron, 
Nazarbayev has ruled here for nine years and won every election with 
Soviet-style, 90 percent-plus votes. ``Let them shoot if they can,'' 
said Kazhegeldin, a compact man with a shock of black hair. ``This 
will not stop me.'' The treatment he has received offers the latest 
lesson in the autocratic politics of the Caspian Sea region. A jigsaw 
of nations that have attracted attention in the United States and 
elsewhere for their oil and natural gas reserves, the area has never 
been especially democratic. Rigged votes are the norm, and transfers 
of presidential power come in coups. Here in Kazakhstan, Nazarbayev, 
who until recently had nurtured an image abroad as a relative moderate, 
has moved to consolidate his grip. His rubber-stamp parliament has 
lifted a two-term limit that would have forced him to step down in 
2005, effectively freeing him to rule for life, which most foreign 
analysts believe he wishes to do. The court system he controls has 
threatened Kazhegeldin with disqualification from the Jan. 10 election 
under a law barring elective office for anyone convicted even of a 
traffic offense. At issue is $80 that Kazhegeldin was fined for meeting 
with a political movement not registered with the government. He has 
appealed. The president's much-energized KGB successor agency has 
carried out a Soviet-style character attack against Kazhegeldin. ``It 
is rather worrying,'' said Adam Smith Albion, an American expert on 
the region, adding, ``If this kind of thuggishness is going to continue 
in Kazakhstan politics, it is reminiscent of how the Soviets treated 
political figures they didn't like.'' Smith Albion, a fellow of the 
Hanover, N.H.-based Institute of Current World Affairs, was interviewed 
from Tashkent, Uzbekistan. Kazhegeldin has certainly breathed life 
into the region's one-dimensional politics. In place of the customary 
drab opposition candidate, Kazakhstan is being treated to a well-spoken 
businessman who has published a glossy book in English on his economic 
ideas, and who jets around Europe. Kazhegeldin made his fortune during 
the chaotic final years of the Soviet Union. Sent to Moscow's KGB 
Academy to study international business, he moonlighted in the black-market 
scrap-metal trade, for which the spy agency expelled him in 1989. 
He then got rich smuggling chemical fertilizer abroad. Five years 
later Nazarbayev appointed him prime minister. Kazhegeldin began selling 
off decrepit former jewels of Kazakhstan's industrial base _ oil fields, 
refineries and plants _ and stabilizing a new currency, the tenge. 
But he was also slowly accumulating an independent political base. 
After three years in the job, he was forced out last October. He has 
since applied his fortune to toppling his old boss. Among those on 
the Kazhegeldin payroll are two Washington law firms and the public 
affairs specialists Hill &AMP; Knowlton. Among his supporters is Bigeldi 
Gabdullin, editor of The 21st Century, a pro-Kazhegeldin weekly whose 
offices were firebombed Sept. 26. ``Nazarbayev has only one goal _ 
to remain president,'' Gabdullin said. ``And he wants to get rid of 
those who are interfering.'' Certainly Kazhegeldin has annoyed someone. 
On Oct. 13, he says, he was strolling after a horseback ride when 
two shots rang out. A bodyguard grabbed him, and together they rolled 
to safety behind a car. By contrast, what diplomats call the official 
effort to muzzle Kazhegeldin has been comic. One of his American lawyers, 
Charles Both, was addressing reporters recently in a ballroom at Almaty's 
top hotel when the manager charged in and declared the meeting was 
``to be dispersed.'' When no one left, he turned off the lights. Next, 
the nation's spy agency called a rare news conference. The No. 2 spymaster, 
Alnoor Musaev, said that Kazhegeldin was lying about the shooting 
incident and that no one had fired at him. Furthermore, he said, the 
former prime minister ``doesn't have the moral right to head our state,'' 
because he is being investigated in Belgium on suspicion of money 
laundering. Kazhegeldin says there is no such case. In Brussels, the 
district attorney's office said it could not comment. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>