<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981024.0186 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
While New York is a city of both historic buildings and historic signs, 
the signs have largely faded into history. But Douglas Leigh, who 
created many of them _ including the one that sent those Camel smoke 
rings wafting across Times Square _ is still very much around. ``I'm 
an idea man, a concept guy,'' says Leigh, 91. After 1900, in the decade 
Leigh was born, electric signs converted Broadway near Times Square 
from a daytime advertising venue to a nighttime spectacle of wriggling 
fish, flashing chariots and other extravaganzas that excited the growing 
numbers of passers-by. To the big sign companies, with their far-flung 
and large-scale operations, such spectaculars were sidelines. But 
to the Alabama-born Leigh, who dropped out of the University of Florida 
in 1927 after making $5,000 selling yearbook advertising, the big 
sign was the only thing. Leigh started his business in 1933, with 
an option on a location at Fordham Road and Crotona Avenue in the 
Bronx. He persuaded the St. Moritz Hotel to put up a billboard on 
the site. His pay was $50 a month and a room at the hotel for a year. 
This gave him only enough to eat at the Automat, he says, but it also 
provided a Central Park South address for his stationery. Later in 
1933, he came up with the idea for a steaming coffee cup, 15 feet 
wide, at the southeast corner of 47th Street and Seventh Avenue, and 
he sold it to A&AMP;P to advertise its coffee brands. Although he 
had started work in the middle of the Great Depression, Leigh's soft-spoken 
sales ability helped him carve out a very comfortable niche. Within 
a few years he had thrown switches in Times Square on a blinking penguin 
for Kool cigarettes, a clown tossing quoits in the shape of the Ballantine 
ale logo, and an animated cartoon for Old Gold cigarettes. During 
those years Leigh had been thinking about the city's need for a big 
weather sign, and in 1938 he was contemplating a Coca-Cola slogan, 
``Thirst knows no season.'' The result was a giant illuminated Coke 
display on the north side of Columbus Circle that forecast the next 
day's weather with a 30-foot-wide dial framing a rural house over 
which rain, sun, snow, clouds and other weather effects appeared at 
the appropriate times. By then Leigh controlled more than $1 million 
in sign contracts and was living at 1 Beekman Place. In June 1941, 
E. J. Kahn Jr. profiled him in The New Yorker and counted him responsible 
in the previous seven years for 32 large signs with more than 75,000 
bulbs. ``If New York is ever thoroughly blacked out,'' Kahn said in 
a reference to the war in Europe, ``no man will take it harder.'' 
But Leigh's imagination was working on that too, and the same year 
he developed the Camel billboard at the southeast corner of 44th Street 
and Broadway, which puffed out five-foot-wide smoke rings of steam. 
Wartime blackouts began in force in 1942, but they only accelerated 
Leigh's imagination. In 1944 he told The New York Times that he foresaw 
a postwar Times Square full of three-dimensional signs in softer colors: 
a colossal, translucent glass of orange juice and a huge bottle of 
perfume with scent puffed out onto the street. He saw wind machines 
blowing trees and flags, searchlights playing on blimps, bubble machines, 
artificial snow and fog, the smells of coffee and cocoa and beer, 
even live giraffes and other animals, making Times Square a giant 
performance event in the service of advertising. In his mind the Empire 
State Building tower was an excellent glowing cigarette for Lucky 
Strike, and the Rock of Gibraltar _ when the war was over _ was a 
perfect signboard for Prudential Insurance. In 1948 Leigh persuaded 
Barney Ruben, the head of the Bond clothing store, to put up a $350,000 
montage rising 90 feet above the entire length of his Broadway store, 
from 44th to 45th Streets. In Leigh's design, twin 50-foot-high figures, 
one male, one female, flanked a central waterfall 27-feet high and 
120-feet long. Strands of electric lights seemed to clothe the chunky, 
modern Classical figures at night, but by day they appeared nude. 
In the 1950s and '60s, Leigh began focusing on and buying entire buildings, 
including the old Times Tower in Times Square. He owned the Times 
Tower until 1963, when it was rebuilt as the marble-sheathed Allied 
Chemical Building. By the 1970s he was back to lighting effects, such 
as the red, white and blue design he persuaded Harry Helmsley to adopt 
for the Empire State Building for the 1976 bicentennial. The design 
inaugurated the skyscraper's tradition of multicolored lighting. He 
also created floodlighting for the Waldorf-Astoria, the Con Edison 
tower at 14th Street, the Citicorp Building at Lexington Avenue and 
53rd Street, and the four corners of 57th and Fifth Avenue. At the 
same time Leigh was working on lighting master plans for entire cities, 
among them Atlanta and Cincinnati. The Atlanta plan was carried out 
temporarily, while the Cincinnati one is still in place. Leigh now 
divides his time between Oyster Bay, L.I., Palm Beach, Fla., and an 
apartment at River House on East 52nd Street. His most recent project 
is a floodlighting program for Donald Trump's 40 Wall Street. Trump's 
office said the program would be put in next spring. Over the years 
his signs have vanished, and now there is a new generation of sign 
spectaculars in Times Square, among them Spectacolor's giant ATM for 
Fleet Bank at 46th Street and Broadway, with a moving bank card and 
money. Leigh says he still has ideas: for the old Times Tower he sees 
a 30-story building on part of the site, with a giant waterfall pouring 
into one corner. Not many people call him these days, he says _ ``but 
I'm still available.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>