<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981024.0141 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
No man, the Bible says, can serve two masters. But it is silent on 
what happens when a company has two masters, each of whom is used 
to being the sole boss. The reality these days is that few things 
are more likely to mess up a merger _ either before or after it is 
completed _ than squabbles about the duties and prerogatives of the 
two erstwhile chiefs. The latest casualty of such a battle is David 
Coulter, the 51-year-old president of BankAmerica. Coulter was chief 
executive of BankAmerica before it was taken over by NationsBank in 
what was officially called a merger of equals and left Coulter No. 
2 and heir apparent to Hugh McColl, No. 1, the man who built NationsBank 
(now called BankAmerica) into a giant. That merger became effective 
only a few weeks ago, not long before the merged bank reported that 
profits were slashed by an ill-fated hedge fund investment made by 
the bank that Coulter had run. Analysts friendly to McColl immediately 
began speculating that Coulter was a goner, and his ``resignation'' 
was announced last Sunday. Whether or not Coulter deserved to walk 
the plank, he did so without much financial pain. His compensation 
package will bring him about $30 million as he leaves. Still, his 
departure highlighted what has become a major problem: how to deal 
with a man _ there are few women running large companies _ who is 
used to being the top guy, the one who always gets his way, but who 
will now have a boss. Often, when two huge companies merge, the solution 
is for the younger of the two chief executives to become No. 2, with 
a promise, stated or implied, that he will replace the older boss 
at retirement. Trouble is, there probably was at least one other executive 
who thought he had a shot at the top job. So the new No. 2 not only 
has to get used to having a boss, but also must learn about a new 
company in the presence of executives who resent his arrival and would 
love to get rid of him. Sometimes the solution has been to let each 
guy stay as boss. That was the plan when Sandy Weill and John Reed 
were made co-chief executives of Citigroup, the combination of Travelers 
and Citicorp. The plan may even work, although it should be noted 
that few companies voluntarily choose such an arrangement except in 
mergers. A co-boss arrangement was also chosen when American Home 
Products agreed to merge with Monsanto. But that deal fell apart after 
the two bosses began squabbling over almost everything. It was the 
third drug-industry merger of the year to fail as the result of such 
bickering. Probably the oddest management plan yet devised for a merged 
company came when Cendant was formed late last year by a merger of 
HFS and CUC International. Henry Silverman, the boss at HFS, was to 
run the company for a few years, with his old subordinates holding 
down other top jobs. Then that whole team was to step aside and let 
the old CUC team take over. That arrangement blew up, with the former 
head of CUC, Walter Forbes, forced out (with a $35 million severance 
package) after investigators concluded there had been massive accounting 
fraud that inflated profits for years at CUC. But even before that 
fraud was uncovered, Forbes' old underlings were being forced out 
in what could be viewed as a power play by the HFS team. The Cendant 
disaster is clearly extreme, but it highlights a common problem in 
making a merger work. Two management teams try to get the best arrangement 
they can in a merger, for themselves and for their shareholders, and 
each may suspect that the other side was not totally forthcoming about 
its problems. Then, when the deal is done, all are supposed to work 
together. It is not easy to do. The merging companies may talk of 
cost savings and strategic vision, but in the end what often counts 
are the needs and wants of people who are used to running their own 
show. Once you have been No. 1, being No. 2 is no fun. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>