<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981024.0054 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Not so many years ago, it would have been impossible to find Genaro 
Arriagada on the side of Chile's former military dictator, Gen. Augusto 
Pinochet. As a prominent academic in the years after Pinochet took 
power in 1973, Arriagada churned out critical studies of the military 
and its rule. When Pinochet finally agreed to submit his regime to 
a popular vote in 1988, Arriagada organized the coalition that campaigned 
successfully for his defeat. But as street demonstrations in Chile 
began to turn violent late last week, following the 82-year-old general's 
arrest in London on Oct. 16 on human rights charges filed by a Spanish 
judge, Arriagada argued bitterly against the prosecution. And though 
he had just taken over as Chile's new ambassador to Washington, his 
reasons, it seemed, have more to do with his own views than with his 
government's arguments that Pinochet should be protected by diplomatic 
immunity or released on humanitarian grounds. ``Part of the achievement 
of our transition back to democracy has been to take all of the demons 
of this history and put them into some kind of closet,'' Arriagada 
said in an interview. ``This case brings them all back out again. 
What right does some Spanish judge have to do that?'' Within hours 
of Pinochet's arrest, a parade of law professors was pointing out 
that a strong basis for his prosecution has been established over 
the past decade in international law. The threat of what are often 
called universal crimes, so grotesquely demonstrated in Africa and 
the Balkans, has prompted many states, especially in Western Europe, 
to codify in their national laws the jurisdiction that international 
conventions have offered since the aftermath of World War II. But 
Arriagada and others maintain that unlike the recent prosecutions 
of accused war criminals from Bosnia and Rwanda, the success of human-rights 
lawyers targeting Pinochet will almost certainly come at the expense 
of the uneasy political compromise by which Chile achieved a measure 
of reconciliation and peace. Beyond that argument, moreover, lie serious 
practical difficulties in mounting a legally compelling case against 
figures like Pinochet _ particularly at a distance of several thousand 
miles. When the investigating judge, Baltasar Garzon, prevailed on 
Scotland Yard to arrest the general on charges of murder, genocide 
and terrorism relating both to 94 Spanish citizens and others among 
the more than 3,000 people believed to have been killed during Pinochet's 
reign, he overcame only the first obstacle to prosecution. Now, Garzon 
must persuade Spain's right-of-center government to formalize his 
request for the general's extradition. Then he must convince British 
Home Secretary Jack Straw to grant the extradition. Then Garzon will 
almost certainly need some help from the government of Chile to build 
a successful criminal case. ``We may be seeing an increasing readiness 
by governments to enforce these international human-rights laws,'' 
said Theodor Meron, a professor of international law at New York University. 
``But when you open up the code book and try to prosecute, you find 
that you have to deal with a lot of bread-and-butter criminal statutes 
to get there.'' The lawyers, judges and activists seeking justice 
for human-rights crimes are not the only ones running into such challenges. 
Since the end of the Cold War, countries like France, Britain and 
the United States have tried to extend the reach of their laws across 
borders to combat crimes like terrorism and drug trafficking. Although 
these efforts have had a more solid legal foundation than the human-rights 
cases, they have run constantly into questions of sovereignty and 
jurisdiction. Officials in Switzerland were reminded of such difficulties 
last week when they announced the seizure of $114 million that was 
hidden in European banks by Raul Salinas de Gortari, the elder brother 
of Mexico's former President. To some U.S. law-enforcement officials, 
the Swiss detectives had done heroic work: They had started out with 
virtually no experience in Mexico's narcotics underworld, and faced 
considerable resistance from some officials in Mexico and the United 
States. Still, they managed to use a legal-assistance treaty to pry 
open U.S. jails. There they found informants who, in several cases, 
had apparently been ignored or mishandled by U.S. prosecutors, and 
who said they had witnessed Salinas taking huge bribes from drug traffickers 
to arrange for the protection of their loads. Not surprisingly, many 
Mexican officials viewed the conclusions of the Swiss investigation 
differently. They acknowledged that Swiss detectives might have developed 
enough evidence to keep the money; if Salinas' lawyers challenge the 
seizure in court, as they have promised to do, the Swiss government 
will only have to argue a civil rather rather than a criminal case 
_ one with a considerably lower standard of proof than what would 
be required to convict Pinochet. Nonetheless, the Swiss investigators 
were hit immediately by a barrage of procedural and jurisdictional 
questions from Mexican officials. As U.S. Customs agents learned last 
May when they set off a diplomatic confrontation by disclosing that 
they operated under cover in Mexico to trap bankers accused of laundering 
drug money, it is hard to overestimate how quickly concerns about 
sovereignty can outweigh those of criminal justice when one country 
sees another acting unilaterally on its soil or in its affairs. Echoing 
Chilean nationalists, former British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher 
offered such an argument on Pinochet's behalf last week. ``The people 
of Chile, through successively elected democratic governments, have 
determined how they should come to terms with their past,'' she wrote 
to The Times of London. ``An essential part of that process has been 
the settlement of the status of General Pinochet and it is not for 
Spain, Britain or any other country to interfere in what is an internal 
matter for Chile.'' At nearly a decade's remove, the deal that centrist 
politicians like Arriagada reluctantly cut with Pinochet strikes many 
Chileans as too generous, even accounting for the relative prosperity 
and political stability that the country has enjoyed since. Others, 
including some of the general's critics, argue that however unsatisfying 
Chile's solution might have been, the strength of its example can 
be seen in similar accommodations with military rulers and repressive 
regimes from Central America to South Africa. ``If these transitions 
to democracy were just about trials, we could leave them to the judges,'' 
Arriagada said. ``But these transitions are about achieving a great 
number of goals, including political goals, economic goals _ and also 
human rights goals.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>