<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981024.0017 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Most golfers would envy the year that Davis Love III has enjoyed. 
Love is 10th on the PGA Tour money list. He won the MCI Classic. And 
he ranks among the tour's top 10 in scoring average, putting average, 
birdie average and eagles. Yet 1998 has not met Love's expectations. 
After winning his first major at the 1997 PGA Championship, Love's 
best finish at a major this year was seventh place, again at the PGA, 
and back problems during the spring plagued him for two months. So 
sizzling round of eight-under-par 64 at the National Car Rental Classic 
at Walt Disney World was a welcome change for Love, who hopes to end 
the year by making a statement that he is back on his game. While 
most players were bothered by blustery conditions and lightning-quick 
greens, Love surged into a six-way tie for first place at seven-under 
137 after Friday's second round. Several of Thursday's leaders struggled. 
Duffy Waldorf, who started the day with a three-stroke lead after 
an opening-round 63, shot a 78 Friday at Magnolia and fell into a 
tie for 29th place at three under par. Tiger Woods, Jesper Parnevik 
and Len Mattiace, who started the day tied for second place at six 
under par, failed to make a move. Parnevik (Magnolia) and Mattiace 
(Palm) both shot even par Friday to remain at six under for the tournament, 
one stroke off the lead. It was a crowded leader board, with five 
others joining Love in first place: Glen Day, John Huston, Doug Martin, 
Rocco Mediate and Tom Purtzer. With the wind gusting to 25 miles per 
hour, and with lightning-fast greens making putting an adventure, 
Love navigated his way around Disney's Palm Course with little trouble, 
making nine birdies and two bogeys. And if Love wins this week and 
has a strong showing at next week's Tour Championship, he will look 
back on this season with much fonder memories. ``A year after winning 
a major I've seen a lot of guys have a letdown,'' said Love, who won 
last year's PGA Championship at Winged Foot Country Club in Mamaroneck, 
N.Y. ``So I'm at least happy that I came back and played fairly well. 
It's not what I wanted by any stretch. I was thinking more like winning 
some majors and player of the year, that kind of stuff. But you win 
this week or next week, it isn't too bad a year.'' Starting the day 
at even par, Love had the day's best round, using his length off the 
tee and a smooth putting stroke to move back into contention. His 
best stretch came between the ninth and 15th holes, when he birdied 
six of seven holes, capped by a 15-foot putt for birdie on No. 15. 
In the first two rounds, the field alternated between the Palm Course 
and the more difficult Magnolia Course. After shooting a 72 Thursday 
on the Magnolia Course, Love knew he needed to capitalize with a low 
score Friday despite the wind. ``I've always got a good feeling about 
bad conditions, because it's going to eliminate a lot of guys,'' Love 
said. ``I don't panic when conditions get bad. I always try to find 
something positive, and today, I knew the whole field wasn't going 
to run away.'' Woods shot a 73 on the Magnolia Course and fell into 
a tie for 14th place at five under par, two strokes off the lead. 
All things considered, Woods was glad to remain in contention. ``I 
didn't hit the ball very well today, and I struggled with my tee shots,'' 
Woods said. ``Thank God for my short game. I think I only hit nine 
or 10 greens today, but I got up and down from everywhere. I just 
didn't feel very comfortable with my swing. But I'm only two back, 
and after playing the way I did today, that's not bad at all.'' But 
Love's round was superb, and it gave him confidence heading into the 
weekend. Love missed the cut in his last appearance at Disney, so 
this tournament has already been an improvement. ``I was determined 
that I wanted to be around for the weekend,'' Love said. ``I'm feeling 
better. I got beat up at the U.S. Open, and when I tried to play hurt, 
I kind of lost my confidence. I got a lesson on Tuesday, and I came 
out today not even thinking about my swing. I think that was the difference.'' 
CHIP SHOTS Those who missed the cut (at even par 144) included PAYNE 
STEWART (146), SCOTT HOCH (147) and PHIL MICKELSON (150). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>