<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981024.0084 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The brother of a former aide to President Carlos Saul Menem was found 
hanging from a rope early this month with a newspaper clipping about 
a bribery scandal involving the government and IBM stuffed in his 
mouth. A retired navy captain was found dead late in August with a 
bullet through his head, four days after he was questioned about illegal 
sales of Argentine government weapons to Ecuador. Last week, Menem 
publicly called for the reopening of an investigation into whether 
his son, thought to have been killed in a helicopter accident three 
years ago, may actually have been murdered. It might all be grist 
for a Jorge Luis Borges thriller in a society that has long been fascinated 
by intrigue and whose bookstores are full of accounts of how many 
times Evita Peron's body has disappeared and been exhumed. But even 
by Argentine standards, the country has been treated to a barrage 
of recent news coverage about suspicious deaths. Though on the surface 
the deaths do not seem to be linked in any way, and may simply be 
a series of macabre coincidences, the news reports have spawned vague 
suggestions in the last several weeks that organized crime or the 
Menem government itself is involved and blocking the cause of justice. 
These latest skeptical reports come on top of a dozen deaths of potential 
witnesses over the past three years in cases involving customs fraud, 
arms smuggling and a number of other government scandals. The recent 
deaths of the former presidential aide's brother and the navy captain 
were officially attributed to suicide. The list of the other dead 
include a general and another army officer who were killed in a helicopter 
crash, two other government and military employees who died in reported 
criminal assaults, and several more people who reportedly succumbed 
to heart attacks and brain seizures. ``Of those witnesses who survive, 
who will dare to talk?'' asked a headline on the cover of the Oct. 
8 issue of Veintiuno, an influential weekly political magazine. Emblazoned 
with a picture of a noose, the headline continued, ``Let the next 
in line come forward.'' In a recent front page headline about the 
death of the retired navy officer, Clarin, Argentina's leading circulation 
newspaper, asked, ``Was the death of the navy man a message?'' Menem 
reacted angrily to the speculation early this month, saying, ``Those 
stupid people who want to blame the government are totally wrong.'' 
But prosecutors, the press and opposition figures continue to express 
bewildered concern about this string of fatal misfortunes that has 
befallen people in high places. ``Of course, I'm confused about this 
like everyone else,'' said Carlos Escude, a political scientist at 
Di Tella University in Buenos Aires. ``In a transition to democracy, 
unfortunately, you usually have an increase in crime and mafia-like 
procedures.'' Trying to find a silver lining to the deadly mysteries, 
he added, ``With widespread media coverage, it's harder to get away 
with murder.'' As an example of the confusion, take the case of Marcelo 
Cattaneo, the younger brother of Menem's former deputy chief of staff. 
Prosecutors say they believe he committed suicide three weeks ago, 
but even they concede that they cannot be absolutely certain. Cattaneo 
had been missing for three days when he was found by a fisherman on 
Oct. 4, hanging by the neck beside a homeless man's shed outside Buenos 
Aires. The newspaper article stuffed in his mouth referred to the 
investigation by an Argentine federal judge into allegations that 
IBM, the American computer company, gave government officials up to 
$21 million in 1994 and 1995 to win a contract with the state-owned 
Banco de la Nacion. IBM officials in the United States have repeatedly 
denied any involvement, saying local executives who have since left 
the company were acting on their own. In the months before his death, 
two former directors of Banco de la Nacion named Cattaneo as the man 
who offered to bribe them with money from two shell companies that 
had separate contracts with the local IBM subsidiary. Cattaneo was 
an executive in the two companies along with his brother, Juan Carlos, 
who was forced to resign three years ago as Menem's deputy chief of 
staff as the scandal unfolded. Juan Carlos Cattaneo has charged that 
the bribes paid by IBM were somehow destined for the current presidential 
campaign of Domingo Cavallo, a former economy minister in the Menem 
government who now serves in the Senate, although he offered no proof. 
Cavallo has denied the charge, and accused Menem's current chief of 
staff, Alberto Kohan, of being behind the bribery scheme. In an interview, 
Kohan denied any involvement in the IBM scandal. ``There are media 
and legislators who say things when they have no proof, people like 
Cavallo,'' Kohan said. ``There is no mafia in Argentina, absolutely 
not. I've not seen any proof of it, and it's hard to disprove a lie.'' 
Opinion polls published in the Buenos Aires press indicate that fewer 
than 10 percent of the population believe that Cattaneo died by suicide, 
even though forensic tests found no signs of violence. Skepticism 
in the news media was fueled by reports that police had failed to 
seal off the crime scene for more than 10 days. Reports in the local 
media have repeatedly compared Cattaneo's death to the apparent suicide 
in May of Alfredo Yabran, a millionaire businessman who had close 
ties to the military juntas that ruled the country in the 1970s and 
1980s and who had benefited from several privatizations of companies 
in the early 1990s. Yabran reportedly shot himself at his ranch as 
police prepared to arrest him in connection with the killing of an 
Argentine magazine photographer, but a government investigation into 
his death continues. Another scandal that has seized the attention 
of the country involves illegal shipments of Argentine weapons to 
Ecuador and Croatia between 1991 and 1995. The arms scandal had been 
simmering for years and two years ago led Oscar Camilion to step down 
as defense minister when he was implicated in the affair. But it jumped 
back on the front pages after the death of the retired navy captain, 
Horacio Estrada, on Aug. 25, four days after prosecutors began questioning 
him about arms sales to Ecuador. The Argentine media raised the question 
of why Estrada was found with an entry wound on the left side of his 
head when he was right-handed. In the weeks after his death, the local 
press reported that prosecutors had learned that the arms shipments 
to Ecuador and Croatia followed the signing of four secret presidential 
decrees by Menem. The decrees assigned the arms sales to Panama and 
Bolivia, and government officials have blamed international arms dealers 
for diverting the shipments without authorization. A former senior 
manager of the state arms factory was indicted and a second was arrested 
in the last week on charges of smuggling gunpowder to Croatia in the 
early 1990s, falsifying official documents and breaking a U.N. arms 
embargo in place at the time. Prosecutors say they are investigating 
the role of former Defense Minister Antonio Erman Gonzalez, who is 
now labor minister, and Gen. Martin Balza, the army commander. Both 
have said they knew nothing of the clandestine shipments, but are 
expected to testify in court. The American Embassy here has denied 
that the United States knew Argentina was breaking the U.N. embargo, 
responding to Argentine news reports suggesting that the shipments 
were condoned by the Clinton administration to help stop Serbian aggression. 
Of all the deaths, the one that has received the most speculation 
is that of Menem's son, Carlos Jr., three years ago. Several witnesses 
said he and a friend were operating the helicopter recklessly, dipping 
wildly at low altitudes, before the crash. But Menem's former wife, 
Zulema Yoma, has long expressed skepticism that the crash was an accident. 
After a judge closed his investigation last week, Ms. Yoma gave a 
radio interview, saying her former husband ``knew from the beginning 
it was a hit.'' Adding to suspicions, she said of Menem, ``He has 
to face up to what point the mafia will not allow him to act.'' Put 
on the defensive by her remarks, Menem for the first time suggested 
publicly that maybe his son was murdered and called for the investigation 
to be reopened. ``A mother's concerns are understandable,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>