<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981212.1830.0067 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It is now 4-4, four articles of impeachment against President Clinton 
considered, four adopted. Today, the house Judiciary committee, on 
a straight party line vote, approved the fourth article. This one 
accuses the president of abuse of power. The articles passed yesterday 
accuse the president of perjury and obstruction of justice. The stage 
is now set for consideration of impeachment by the full house next 
week. But today's debate in committee was very much an indication 
of what will be heard then. Here's ABC's Linda Douglass on Capitol 
Hill. Today, it seemed that the momentousness of the committee's action 
was finally was sinking in. Democrats argued that Americans had better 
understand they are now one step closer to removing President Clinton 
from office. We are talking about a polite paper-exchanging voting 
process in which we rip out the 42nd president of the United States. 
Everyone who votes for this votes to remove the president from office. 
Democrats pointed to the impeachment resolution itself, which charges 
the president's actions "warrant removal from office." But republicans 
urged the public to understand that the president cannot actually 
be removed unless the Senate tries and convicts him. Ours is but a 
partial role in the drama of impeachment. The trial is held in the 
other body. Democrats accused republicans of trying to leave the impression 
that their impeachment vote is merely symbolic. They want to throw 
the president out of office, but they don't want to own up to the 
political consequences of taking that position. The vote to impeach 
was a foregone conclusion, even as members battled over the fourth 
article -- abuse of power. Republicans had charged the president with 
abusing his office in several ways, including lying to the nation. 
But today they whittled it down to a single charge -- that he lied 
when answering 81 questions posed to him by the committee. This article 
stands as an assault on the Congress because of the false and misleading 
answers he gave to Congress under oath. The president should have 
and it would have been within his rights to tell us "I don't choose 
to answer," because they were an attempt to get the accused to condemn 
himself out of his own mouth. Mr. Boucher. aye. The final article 
passed on a party-line vote. One republican spoke out against democrats 
who say republicans are just out to get the president. We're not being 
vengeful. There's no Lynch mob mentality over here. I've had knots 
in my gut all week because of this. I'll have knots in my gut next 
week when we cast votes. I don't take it lightly. I don't take it 
gleefully. Democrats fought to have the committee vote out an alternative 
to impeachment -- a motion to censure the president. It states that 
he has "dishonored the office" of president and accuses him of making 
"false statements" and taking steps to "delay discovery of the truth." 
The censure moment failed tonight. Today the leader of the house democrats, 
Richard Gephardt wrote to the speaker-to-be Bob Livingston besearching 
him to allow a vote so censure next week. Livingston told ABC News 
he is not likely to do that. When members vote, it is likely to be 
a vote to impeach or not. Thanks very much, Linda Douglass on Capitol 
Hill. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>