<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981212.1830.0277 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It will take a majority of the house next week, 218 votes, to actually 
impeach the president and send the issue to the Senate for trial. 
ABC News has been polling members, admittedly a very inexact science 
at this point. By our count, 206 members will vote to impeach or are 
leaning that way, a Dozen votes short. 22 members we see as undecided. 
22 members are under a lot of pressure, getting a lot of calls from, 
among others, ABC's cokie Roberts, who joins us from Capitol Hill. 
I'm not pressuring them, Charlie. I'm just trying to find out what 
they're going to do. These numbers are obviously too close to call 
next week? Absolutely too close to call. Some people are genuinely 
undecided and waiting to see if something happens between now and 
next Thursday that will they want him to say I lied and I'm willing 
to take the consequences. If he does that still, that could make a 
difference. On the other hand, the more it seems like a debt bed conversion. 
Are there any republicans worried about how they're doing in all of 
this a Lot of people feel that the republicans blew the midterm election, 
didn't win as many races as they might have because they were pushing 
impeachment strongly. But their calculation is that this will not 
be a problem until 2000. By then, a lot of people will have forgotten 
about it. And the people who will not have forgotten is the conservative 
base of their own party. One republican undecided said, you know, 
if I vote against impeachment, I'm going to be stuck in middle management 
forever. I'll never be able to run for Senate or governor because 
the people in my state who control the party are the conservatives 
and they would never let me do that. It makes it harder to vote against 
impeachment. Very quickly, about that issue that Linda raised, that 
some republicans feel they may have a free vote, that they can vote 
for impeachment and send it up to the Senate, pass the Buck to the 
Senate knowing they'll probably not convict the president. That is 
something that some of them were saying, that impeachment is the ultimate 
censure. But there is a serious question about what it means for the 
House of Representatives for a Lame duck House of Representatives 
on a party-line vote to vote to impeach the president when they know 
the Senate won't do it. I think you'll hear a lot more in the days 
to come about the institutional problems that raises. Cokie Roberts, 
thanks very much in the Washington bureau. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>