<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981212.0833 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Fluttering over Bethlehem's Manger Square, the U.S. red, white and 
blue jostles the Palestinian red, white, black and green. Atop Jerusalem 
telephone poles, the Stars and Stripes gently lap Israel's Star of 
David. Roads were ready Saturday for the presidential motorcade in 
Israel and the Palestinian areas _ but Bill Clinton faces a bumpy 
ride, with violence dogging Mideast peace efforts hours before his 
plane lands. Residents of Bethlehem strung a banner across the entrance 
to their city reading ``Bill Clinton: Welcome to Palestine,'' a marked 
reminder that the Palestinians hope to declare statehood by May _ 
a plan Israel says would kill chances for peace. Above the banner, 
a family decorated their balcony for Christmas _ on Monday, Clinton 
is to light the Palestinian-grown Christmas tree in Manger Square 
up the street. Minutes later, masked Palestinian youths chanting ``Long 
Live Palestine!'' marched towards Israeli troops guarding the entrance 
to the city, and began lobbing stones and firebombs. The family retreated 
into their apartment; the troops responded with rubber bullets and 
soon, the banner welcoming Clinton was enveloped in wisps of tear 
gas. Seven Palestinians were injured in the clash before Palestinian 
police quelled the riot. That was a sign of Palestinian leader Yasser 
Arafat's determination to smooth the Clinton visit _ Palestinian authorities, 
while disclaiming responsibility for the recent upsurge in violence, 
have done little to contain it. Clinton's visit was meant to celebrate 
the U.S.-brokered agreement achieved at Wye River in October; instead, 
Clinton will now try to salvage it. The Palestinians are angry that 
Israel refuses to release Palestinians jailed for anti-Israel activities 
and has instead released mostly common criminals to meet its prisoner 
release commitments. The Palestinian Authority refused to allow Israeli 
Trade and Industry Minister Natan Sharansky to participate, in the 
opening ceremony of a new industrial park at Karni, on the border 
between Israel and the Gaza Strip, a source close to Sharansky said. 
US Secretary of Commerce William Daley and Palestinian Industry Minister 
Sadi Kranz will be at the ceremony. Sharansky complained to Daley 
that the Palestinians were trying to conceal the fact that Israel 
contributed 60 million shekels (dlrs. 14.6 million) in aid for construction 
of the park, said the source, who spoke on condition of anonymity. 
An Israeli woman was struck in the face by a rock as she drove past 
the Palestinian village of Husan, near Bethlehem. She was taken to 
a hospital where here injury was described as medium. Two Palestinian 
protesters killed in clashes Friday in the Palestinian-administered 
town of Qalqilya were buried Sunday. Approximately 10,000 people attended 
the funeral of Kamal Adwan, 21, in Qalqilya. Some carried Palestinian 
flags and chanted ``Revenge!''; others chanted ``No sacrifice is too 
great for the prisoners.'' The release of the prisoners ``would be 
a real indication Israel is implementing the Wye Memorandum,'' Arafat 
said in Gaza after discussing the prisoners issue with Jordanian Prime 
Minister Fayez Tarawmeh. Palestinians aiming their slingshots at Israeli 
troops in Bethlehem said they were not opposed to the Clinton visit. 
``I'm protesting by throwing stones so that my brother will be released 
from prison,'' said 18-year-old Khaled Dakakta, slingshot in hand. 
``This is not timed for Clinton ... but we will not stop until they 
will be free.'' The highlight of the visit will be Clinton's attendance 
at a meeting of the Palestine National Council on Monday evening, 
intended to abrogate clauses in the Palestinian charter calling for 
Israel's destruction. Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, under 
pressure from hard-liners who may bring down his government unless 
he scraps Wye, has said he will not go ahead with a planned withdrawal 
from further West Bank territory unless the offending passages are 
abrogated in a clear-cut vote. Arafat says that ``affirmation'' is 
enough. Asked what that means, he said Saturday that ``we are not 
in need of a vote.'' Although he likely has a majority behind him, 
Arafat may be backing off a vote because he lacks the numbers to get 
the required two-thirds quorum of the 600-member PNC to attend Monday's 
meeting. On Saturday, 104 rejectionists said they would not attend 
the meeting on principle; Israel has refused to allow some other PNC 
members into Gaza. Arafat's deputy, Mahmoud Abbas, said that there 
would no assessment of whether there was a quorum. Arafat said he 
had accepted a U.S. proposal for a trilateral meeting after the PNC 
meet _ but that Israel had yet to respond. Netanyahu is unlikely to 
attend such a meeting unless he is satisfied with the PNC results. 
In a pamphlet published Saturday, the militant Islamic group Hamas 
dismissed Clinton as ``an enemy of the Arabs'' who is arriving to 
``personally supervise in the direst way the destruction of the Palestinian 
charter.'' Hamas warned Arafat to release its leader, Sheik Ahmed 
Yassin, from house arrest by Dec. 25 _ otherwise it would carry out 
attacks against Israel. After Saturday's rioting, Bethlehem residents 
returned to preparing for Clinton's visit _ and for Christmas. Municipal 
workers used a cherry picker to attach tinsel and colored bulbs Locals 
shopping for presents mingled with U.S. agents securing the site. 
``I wish that Mr. Clinton could make Netanyahu release our prisoners 
and move forward with the peace process,'' said one shopper, Georgina 
Khoury. For Halil Tamari, Clinton's presence was symbol enough. ``It's 
a dream come true that the leader of the world, the leader of the 
United states is visiting the country now called Palestine,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>