<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981212.0359 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Sitting at the wheel of an Italian-made speedboat racing past the 
green mountain shores of Lake Tangyanika, a rebel commander said Saturday 
his troops were poised to capture the last government stronghold of 
the vast central African lake. Col. Nora Songolo said his forces, 
backed by Rwanda and more recently Burundi, were in control of all 
other towns on the western shore of 720-kilometer (450-mile) long 
lake and were fighting to capture Molira, on the border with Zambia. 
``From (the northernmost Congolese lakeshore town) Uvira to the Zambian 
border, we control the lake,'' said Col. Nora Songolo. ``We are about 
to capture Molira.'' The rebels and their Rwandan allies use the fiberglass 
speedboats with anti-aircraft guns to move swiftly and fire on government 
fighter jets whose regular raids have slowed but not stopped rebel 
advances in eastern Congo. As the war advances, efforts at peace appeared 
to be again foundering Saturday, with the announcement of a delay 
in a meeting of involved parties who were to discuss a cease fire 
proposed last month. The Zambian government, which was to host the 
meeting in the capital Lusaka on Dec. 14-15, said Saturday the summit 
was postponed until Dec. 28, to give officials time to drum up support 
for peace efforts. The meeting was originally set for Dec. 8. Songolo, 
a defector from the capital of the southern Katanga region Lubumbashi, 
said the priority now was getting Kabila to negotiate peace directly 
with the rebels. So far, Kabila's refusal to negotiate directly with 
the rebels, saying they are pawns of their backers Rwanda, Uganda 
and Burundi, has torpedoed international and regional efforts to negotiate 
a cease-fire. Kabila insists the war against him is a foreign invasion 
and that those countries troops must leave before any cease fire can 
be implemented. ``We will continue pushing for Lubumbashi until Kabila 
realizes our military strength,'' Songolo said. ``He has no other 
(choice) but to negotiate with us.'' Songolo said the rebels control 
the airstrip and fishing village of Moba, 160 kilometers (100 miles) 
north of Molira, dismissing as false government claims of a successful 
counteroffensive. However, the rebels had yet convince war-weary fishermen 
and farmers to return to their abandoned hamlet, Songolo said. Like 
a ghost town, most of Moba's mud brick and straw roof houses stand 
empty since the town fell to rebels a month ago. The few remaining 
residents said their relatives and friends were hesitant to come back, 
afraid of either the new army or air strikes by Zimbabwe, President 
Laurent Kabila's main ally in the four-month war. On Tuesday, a Zimbabwean 
MiG-21 dropped bombs on abandoned houses a few meters (yards) from 
the port. There were no casualties. Songolo said he was setting up 
anti-aircraft guns around the town's grassy airstrip, on a plateau 
of the lush, 3,000-meter (9,900-foot) high Mugila Mountains. The fertile 
soil once fed the mineral-rich Katanga Province before the second 
war in as many years made roads too dangerous. But the greatest difficulty 
facing the rebel coalition of ethnic Tutsis, disaffected Congolese 
soldiers and opposition politicians who took up arms Aug. 2 is convincing 
Kabila's Baluba tribesmen in eastern Katanga to cooperate. Like Kabila, 
most people see the rebels as foreign invaders and they have yet to 
prove the benefits of their democratic programs for the potentially 
rich but impoverished country. The conflict has drawn in Zimbabwe, 
Angola, Namibia and Chad on Kabila's side and Rwanda, Uganda and Burundi 
on the rebel side. Burundi offically denies involvement in Congo, 
but missionaries, political sources and rebels said an estimated 3,000 
Burundian troops were present along Congo's Tanganyika shores to secure 
Burundian coffee exports to Zambia and keep Burundian Hutu fighters 
from using eastern Congo as their rear base. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>