<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981212.0130.1470 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Each year, the holiday season arrives, bringing a promise of peace. 
This year, that promise is a bit closer to becoming a reality for 
the people of northern Ireland. Margaret Lowrie has that. Christmas 
time in Belfast. This season, the streets are full of shoppers. Some 
years back, you would have had army, you would have police, you would 
have people coming down wondering where the next bomb was going to 
be. People are more positive now. They're happy to come in to town. 
I think they believe that it will eventually succeed. Believe the 
peace process will succeed. I hope it will work some day. It's the 
only thing for us. We don't want to go back to what it was. What it 
is now, some say, is more than just politicians working together. 
It is people finding their own way along the path to the future. I 
think the peace process has done a good deal for the province, especially 
the relationship between Protestants and Catholics. I'm sitting here 
with a Catholic, in the bar, having a pint. I think all leaders have 
showed that, and it doesn't matter what religion you are, what political 
outlook you have on things at the end of the day, if everyone believes 
in peace. After a lifetime of the troubles, peace will come harder 
to some. I actually think everybody's living in a false sense of security. 
I think that this is all to appease I.R.A./Sinn Fein. It just seems 
like a vicious circle. No different, 'cause I've been born into it, 
I think it would be strange for it to be at complete peace. But I'd 
certainly like to think it would come to that, definitely. Some say 
it is easier for the young to bridge the divide between the communities. 
Northern Ireland there's a Negative place. And our generation is less 
Negative than it was, say 25 years ago. So I think it will work. The 
peace process is relying on the younger generation growing up with 
peace and wanting to maintain peace. Just take a look around the ice 
rink this morning. Everybody of all different religions are skating 
together. A few years ago, that'd been unheard of. Maybe we don't 
believe it at the minute. Maybe we can't see it at the minute. But 
we're really trying with each other. I honestly don't know what way 
it's going to go, but I'm hoping for Emmy's sake, as well as everybody 
else's, that there will be peace in the end. I look at the Christmas 
tree. Look around ya. There is a feeling of a real Christmas here. 
People want that. There is, of course, still concern, still fear, 
things may go wrong again. But peace is an evolutionary process. And 
while there may not be peace on earth this Christmas, for many, there 
is finally a sense of peace in northern Ireland. Margaret Lowrie, 
CNN. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>