<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981212.1830.0085 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. Tonight, President Bill Clinton's place in American 
history has been insured, and not the way he had hoped when first 
elected to office. He has become only the third president on a very 
short list of chief executives to have been the recipient of the most 
sweeping power granted to congress by the framers of the constitution. 
As today, the fourth and final article of impeachment was approved. 
The house will get the case next week. Then, perhaps, a trial in the 
Senate to decide the two-term presidency of bill Clinton. The president 
is overseas tonight, while his fate is being decided just a Few hundred 
yards from here. We have complete coverage this evening, beginning 
with NBC's Gwen Ifill here with us on the hill. Good evening, Gwen. 
Good evening, Brian. The house Judiciary committee today completed 
its work on impeachment, approving a fourth article against the president 
and rejecting democratic appeals for a Lesser punishment. Republicans 
drastically scaled back their final charge against the president. 
Gone -- charges that Mr. Clinton abused power by making false and 
misleading statements, lying to the public, lying to his cabinet and 
White House aides to deceive the people of the United States, blocking 
investigation into his conduct when he corruptly asserted executive 
privilege. All that remains is an assertion that Mr. Clinton made 
false and misleading sworn statements in response to 81 questions 
the committee sent the White House about the Lewinsky matter. This 
article stands as an assault on the Congress because of the false 
and misleading answers he gave to Congress under oath. The vote for 
this last article of impeachment, once again divided strictly along 
party lines. aye. no. Democrats said the president's answers to the 
81 questions, considered arrogant and evasive by republicans, may 
have been annoying but not impeachable. I don't think they should 
have been sent because I think they were improper. a subsequent democratic 
alternative to censure the president failed. The president, democrats 
said, "violated the trust of the American people," "Dishonored the 
office," and made "false statements" but it stopped short of declaring 
he lied under oath. What we're doing here today is we are offering 
an olive branch. Republicans argue that the constitution does not 
allow censure. It's similar to yelling at a teenager. It purges you 
of some emotional feelings, but I don't see what it accomplishes. 
House democratic leader Richard Gephardt appealed to incoming-speaker 
Bob Livingston instead, writing him that not allowing lawmakers to 
"vote their conscience on impeachment and an alternative, will most 
certainly result in a bitterly divided house." Livingston and Newt 
Gingrich have agreed neither will preside over tuesday's vote, handing 
the role over to a junior lawmaker instead. The committee adjourned 
for the year tonight. It will take only a simple majority to vote 
for impeachment. Democrats hoping for a backlash. Republicans, certain 
they have done the right thing. David? Brian, with only five days 
to save the president from possible impeachment, the White House is 
proceeding on three fronts -- issuing a new appeal to undecided lawmakers 
to listen to the American people, trying to exert what little leverage 
it has on republican leaders to allow a vote on censure, and finally 
warning that if the house does impeach the president it would -- "divide 
the country, gridlock the government and defy the will of the people." 
Those words were spoken by lawyer Greg Craig, who walked to the microphones 
just moments after republicans approved the fourth and final article 
of impeachment. Nothing about this process has been fair, nothing 
about this process has been bipartisan, and nothing about this process 
has won the confidence of the American people. By huge majorities, 
the American people have said that they do not want this president 
removed from office, that they do not want their election decision 
overturned by a party line vote. They want their elected officials 
to stop their bipartisan bickering and get back to work on the issues 
that are important to them. But there is every indication that the 
president's latest apology yesterday fell mostly on deaf ears. Mr. 
Clinton refused again to say he lied under oath. Today, one of those 
undecided lawmakers was flying with the president to israel. He said, 
the president has had numerous opportunities to confront the reality 
of what he has done, and missed those. Lazio said "the president must 
look himself in the mirror and decide what's more important -- his 
career, or the health and future of the country." I can tell you that 
the president is getting much of that same advice from democrats close 
to him, but thus far, it's going unheeded. Brian? David Bloom, thanks. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>