<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981212.0221 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In his latest effort to overturn his apparent defeat in the November 
election, state Attorney General Dennis Vacco has challenged the votes 
of Elias Alvarez, Susan Linder, Edleena Alexander and 100,000 others 
in New York City, asserting that they had moved or were otherwise 
ineligible. But a check by The New York Times of all the voters challenged 
by Vacco in three election districts found nearly all at home, living 
at or near the addresses on their voting records, and many furious 
with Vacco and his tactics. The findings suggest that Vacco's challenge 
has serious methodological flaws. Vacco's charges of widespread vote 
fraud will be taken up in a state court Monday. Vacco skipped about 
a third of all Assembly districts, but in districts where he challenged 
votes, he cut deep into the election rolls, challenging one in eight 
votes cast. This approach produced a challenge list of a virtual cross-section 
of New York society _ or at least of registered Democrats. The largest 
shares of votes that he challenged were in minority neighborhoods 
_ including one of every three votes cast in a Bedford-Stuyvesant 
section of Brooklyn, a largely poor black neighborhood. Trailing his 
Democratic challenger, Eliot Spitzer, by slightly more than 26,000 
votes, Vacco, a Republican, has already raised, and then dropped, 
technical challenges to absentee ballots, and broad claims that thousands 
of votes might have been cast in the names of dead voters. In his 
latest challenge, Vacco questioned voters whose names and addresses 
appeared in election registration lists but did not exactly match 
the names and addresses provided by Experian, a commercial credit 
reporting and mailing list company. Vacco has so far unsuccessfully 
sought to get the police to canvass challenged voters to see if they 
exist and are eligible, meeting citizenship and residency requirements. 
When The Times systematically looked at the challenged voters in election 
districts in three neighborhoods, it found the vast majority of the 
challenged voters late last week with little more than a day of legwork, 
at or near an address provided by the election board. In Alvarez's 
mostly Hispanic election district in Washington Heights, 22 voters 
were challenged. One voter had an unlisted phone at her address on 
Dongan Place and could not be found, and a building superintendent 
said that another had moved out in the last few weeks, around Election 
Day. The others, like Alvarez, a maintenance worker at a UNICEF office 
on First Avenue in Manhattan, were identified through interviews, 
or by relatives, neighbors, building workers or mail carriers or through 
drivers' licenses and other government records. One voter, Patricia 
Reilly, has worked as an Election Day inspector for 20 years. Ms. 
Reilly, a retired executive secretary, said she had lived at the same 
address for 36 years. ``He has a lot of nerve,'' she said of Vacco. 
In Mrs. Alexander's election district around West 129th Street in 
Harlem, The Times accounted for all but three of the 32 people challenged. 
Neighbors said two people on the list had moved out of their apartments 
and a third was registered at a building that was said to be unoccupied. 
Under election rules, voters who move are supposed to vote at their 
new polling places. But election officials said that if someone votes 
at his old voting place and still lives in the city, the vote is still 
valid. Mrs. Alexander has lived at the same address on West 129th 
Street for 15 years. A few years ago, she and her husband, a contractor, 
moved into Apartment 11, and then to Apartment 8 in the same building 
during renovations, and she wondered whether that was enough to snare 
her in Vacco's challenge. ``I can't believe he is nit-picky like this,'' 
she said. ``I was born into the world a Democrat. But if someone says 
something worth listening to on the other side, I will vote for that 
person. But I don't think Vacco has what it takes. Somebody who is 
so involved in something so minor like this could never get my vote.'' 
And in Ms. Linder's more affluent high-rise neighborhood around East 
63rd Street in Manhattan, populated by investment bankers, lawyers 
and the like, all 24 challenged voters were found living at their 
official addresses. And 14 of the challenged voters in the district 
had listed telephone numbers in their own names. While the Vacco campaign 
challenged only 24 people there, they represented roughly one in four 
Democratic votes cast in the district. ``Well, at least they didn't 
think I was dead,'' said Gail Zahler, who has lived on East 64th Street 
for 29 years. She said the list of challenged voters showed a business 
address she had used eight years before. But Ms. Linder, a fund raiser 
at the New York Public Library, could not fathom why her name appeared. 
``Is this a Nixon enemies list?'' she asked. ``I think it is outrageous 
to arbitrarily find Democratic names, and frankly I don't have much 
sympathy for Vacco. I think he is a sore loser.'' Thomas J. Spargo, 
Vacco's lawyer, said that because of difficulties in exactly matching 
names, and because people move within the same building, he had always 
expected to find that half of the votes cast on his list were legitimate. 
He said that he still hoped to find enough questionable votes to invalidate 
the results, but that no effort was made to target minorities. ``To 
me, this is a mathematical exercise,'' he said. ``I have no idea where 
those election districts are or who resides in them.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>