<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981212.0062 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With a huge plateful of large and complex corporate mergers to review 
and a host of major civil enforcement cases against corporate America's 
biggest names, antitrust officials are experiencing a renaissance. 
Federal officials report that they have filed a record number of challenges 
this year to mergers and other anti-competitive practices and have 
collected record amounts in civil fines and other penalties. They 
have stretched some old antitrust theories and applied a few new ones 
_ such as now routinely requiring every merger examination to include 
a look at how the proposed deal may affect product innovation and 
development. Their targets have been a Who's Who among corporate powerhouses 
and include Microsoft and Intel, Mastercard and Visa, Lockheed Martin 
and Northrop Grumman. ``Antitrust is a highly political discipline, 
and it tends to ebb and flow,'' said Herbert Hovenkamp, a professor 
at the University of Iowa College of Law and the author of a leading 
treatise on the subject. ``It's flowing right now.'' In part, the 
renewed vigor is a consequence of two related economic trends: the 
deregulation of certain industries and the unparalleled wave of business 
mergers and acquisitions. In the fiscal year ending on Sept. 30, the 
Justice Department and the Federal Trade Commission, the two main 
agencies that enforce U.S. antitrust law, examined 4,728 proposed 
mergers, more than at any other time, and three times as many deals 
as in 1992. As a result of the merger-and-acquisition wave, the agencies 
are now reviewing five of the largest business transactions in U.S. 
history: the proposed $80 billion acquisition of Mobil Corp. by Exxon, 
the $62 billion purchase of Ameritech by SBC Communications, Bell 
Atlantic's $52 billion acquisition of GTE, AT&AMP;T's $32 billion 
purchase of Tele-Communications Inc. and British Petroleum's $48 billion 
buyout of Amoco. However the agencies rule on those deals _ they can 
seek to have them blocked or modified, or they can simply approve 
them _ their aggressive view of the law has already made them a central 
force in setting economic policy in a wide range of industries left 
untouched by other policy-makers. Stepping into a vacuum created by 
the deregulation of such industries as airlines and telecommunications, 
they have restructured or blocked numerous multibillion-dollar mergers 
and joint-venture agreements that once fell under the purview of other 
officials. For the first time since the airline industry was deregulated 
in the late 1970s, they filed a lawsuit two months ago to prevent 
a big airline merger, one involving Northwest Airlines' acquisition 
of Continental. But through such civil suits as the Microsoft case, 
they are also evolving into the role of overseeing emerging areas 
of enterprise like the Internet, and through challenges of proposed 
mergers involving large and small research and development companies, 
they are playing an important role in arranging the corporate landscape 
in biotechnology. Despite these trends, some experts said that the 
vigorous enforcement was still less aggressive than at other points 
in history, such as the 1930s and the 1960s, and noted that the new 
vigor was not a consequence of any significant Supreme Court victories 
involving the nation's competition laws or any major revisions of 
the guidelines that are used to scrutinize mergers. ``Interestingly, 
there have not been any major doctrinal changes,'' said George Priest, 
a professor of law and economics at Yale University. ``They are using 
some different theories, and they are trimming some proposed mergers 
back in order to facilitate them. But they are also sometimes bringing 
cases without articulating a clear theory or vision about what they 
are trying to accomplish.'' Joel Klein, the head of the Justice Department's 
antitrust division, said that antitrust enforcement ``reflects a point 
of historic convergence involving a commitment of deregulation and 
competition.'' ``The essential component of that confluence is active 
antitrust enforcement,'' he said. By all accounts, the Clinton administration's 
enforcement record is a marked departure from those of Republican 
predecessors. During the Reagan administration and to a lesser extent 
under President George Bush, the antitrust division and the FTC were 
backwaters that suffered from severe staff cutbacks. Particularly 
under Reagan, they followed a laissez-faire philosophy that found 
little value in broad enforcement of antitrust law. ``Their attitude 
was that everything was self-correcting,'' said Robert Pitofsky, an 
antitrust professor and former dean at Georgetown Law School, who 
is now the chairman of the FTC. ``But as time has gone on, we've seen 
how wrong that was.'' The two agencies continue to suffer from staff 
shortages, having never recovered from the cutbacks in the '80s. Because 
of the large number of mergers, they have been forced to undertake 
a kind of regulatory triage, delaying and thinly staffing civil enforcement 
inquiries in order to complete merger reviews under the deadlines 
set by Congress. Nonetheless, the agencies are doing things that have 
not been done in a long time, if at all, using novel legal theories 
and stretching more conventional ones. For instance, recognizing that 
research in many emerging industries is ultimately more important 
than the products they may make, the officials have ordered the redrawing 
of mergers of companies that are in nascent research-and-development 
stages, years away from production. In a case involving the merger 
of the Swiss-based drug giants Ciba-Geigy and Sandoz, the FTC required 
the sale of patents and technological know-how involving their pioneering 
research in gene therapy for various diseases, even though the companies 
did not expect to bring any such products to market for years. With 
greater frequency, they have also taken a more concentrated look at 
the effect of a merger on new companies rather than the older, more 
conventional analysis that looks at whether a merger has a likelihood 
of promoting collusion and oligopolies in a wide range of industries 
from retailing to military contracting. This ``theory of unilateral 
effects'' was first articulated by an economist in 1929. But it was 
never widely used by regulators because it was thought to be too difficult 
to gather market data. With technological advances, such as the use 
of price scanners in stores and the proliferation of powerful personal 
computers, it has become easier to manipulate data and apply the theory. 
The result, according to Hovenkamp, ``is more aggressive enforcement.'' 
They are also challenging mergers involving so-called vertical integration 
_ a supplier buying a manufacturer, or a manufacturer buying a wholesaler. 
At the FTC, officials restructured four important mergers in the last 
year either in whole or in part because of questions of improper vertical 
integration. One such case involved the $10 billion purchase of Energy 
Group PLC of Britain, which produced about 15 percent of the coal 
in the United States, by Pacificorp, a leading Western utility. (Pacificorp 
itself agreed last week to be acquired by Scottish Power PLC for nearly 
$13 billion in equity and debt.) Antitrust officials required the 
divestiture of certain coal mines that would have enabled the new 
combination to raise a rival's generating costs, and as a result, 
the wholesale price of electricity in the West. In another case, the 
officials forced TRW Inc. to sell a Pentagon engineering business 
as a condition of its $975 million purchase of BDM International in 
order to satisfy concerns that the deal would not put TRW in a position 
to favor itself as a competitor for ballistic-missile contracts. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>