<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981212.0132 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Forget about the will of the people, the democratic process and the 
good of the country. The extremists in the Republican Party are trying 
to bludgeon their way to an impeachment that hardly anybody wants 
and nobody needs. If the government and perhaps even the economy are 
thrown into a tailspin as a result _ well, so be it. The fanatics 
of the right are willing to pay any price, bear any burden, to hammer 
the man they hate above all others, Bill Clinton. I'm no champion 
of the president, but I know a lynch mob when I see one. Obsessed 
with the sins of Clinton, the right-wingers believe with their idol 
Barry Goldwater that ``moderation in the pursuit of justice is no 
virtue.'' (Goldwater's views on fooling around in the workplace are, 
nevertheless, not helpful to his spiritual descendants. Laurence J. 
Peter, author of ``The Peter Principle,'' quotes the late senator 
as follows: ``I think any man in business would be foolish to fool 
around with his secretary. If it's somebody else's secretary, fine!'') 
Most Americans thought the campaign to impeach Clinton had been derailed 
by the Democrats' strong showing in the November elections and Newt 
Gingrich's decision three days later to relinquish the speakership 
and leave Congress. There was a general feeling that if the president 
hadn't been punished enough, the country certainly had. It was hoped 
that Monica-all-the-time would give way to Monica-every-now-and-then. 
But somebody forgot to tell Tom DeLay. DeLay is the onetime exterminator 
from Sugar Land, Texas, who has emerged as the Republicans' chief 
pro-impeachment fanatic. He's the Republican whip, the man who rounds 
up the votes in the House. Nothing short of impeachment will satisfy 
him. He is adamantly opposed to the House even considering a censure 
resolution. If you want a sense of how extreme DeLay can be, consider 
his approach to the environment. He believes the Environmental Protection 
Agency is the ``Gestapo of the government.'' He believes that DDT 
is A-OK. Not harmful. He is not bothered by threats to the ozone layer. 
When the Nobel Prize in chemistry was awarded to the discoverers of 
the link between chlorofluorocarbons and ozone depletion, he mocked 
the award as the ``Nobel Appeasement Prize.'' Another piece of work 
in this bizarre drama is Rep. Bob Barr, a Republican from Georgia 
who has long been recognized as an impeachment fanatic and was widely 
regarded as a crank. Nevertheless he is on the Judiciary Committee 
and voted Friday for impeachment. That same day The Washington Post 
ran a story in which Barr acknowledged being a keynote speaker this 
year at a meeting of the Council of Conservative Citizens, a white 
supremacist group that is worried that blacks will exterminate whites 
by infiltrating their bedrooms. Americans may wish to put the sordid 
Lewinsky saga behind them, but if the GOP fanatics get their way and 
Clinton is actually impeached by the House, the very opposite will 
happen. The issue will become bigger than ever, overwhelming everything 
else in the government for months and months to come. A trial of Clinton 
in the Senate, presided over by Chief Justice William Rehnquist, and 
with star witnesses like Monica Lewinsky and Linda Tripp and Vernon 
Jordan, will make the O.J. Simpson story look like a warm-up act. 
It will seem like Monica-forever-and-ever. Much of the government 
would come to a halt. Any semblance of legislative bipartisanship 
would vanish. There would be no possibility of an agreement on Social 
Security, no patients' bill of rights, no serious federal initiatives 
on education. ``It would poison every relationship,'' said a Capitol 
Hill veteran. Said another: ``You'd have to consider the legislative 
year over.'' Wall Street executives fear the stock markets would be 
adversely affected and the long economic expansion could be undermined. 
There is no doubt that Bill Clinton has demeaned the presidency. There 
is no defense for his actions or his lies. But the voters have chosen 
him twice by substantial margins and they stand behind him still. 
It is not up to the hatchet men of the Republican Party to undo that. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>