<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981212.0131 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the 1970s, a rush for coal shattered the quiet of eastern Montana. 
As giant shovels gouged the rolling grasslands in search of the mineral, 
ranch families and communities were torn as well, bitterly at odds 
over whether to accept the windfall from coal companies and give up 
parts of their ranches, or to join environmentalists and fight the 
assault on their way of life. The price of Western soft coal has plummeted, 
to $5.90 a ton from $12.50 a ton over the last 16 years, and the controversy 
has quieted. But a battle over soft coal has surfaced again, this 
time in the form of a proposed 117-mile, $385 million rail link to 
haul the coal from south of this tiny town in the heart of one of 
Montana's most isolated and beautiful areas, the Tongue River Valley, 
to the main railroad at Mile City. ``I've got cold, hard market data 
that shows if the Tongue River railroad can be completed by 2001, 
we can double the supply of coal coming from Montana,'' said Michael 
Gustafson, president of the concern formed to build the link, Tongue 
River Railroad Co. Gustafson predicted the rail line would bring the 
opening of new strip mines. The state now produces about 28 million 
tons of coal a year, all of it from this area. As the Clean Air Act 
forces Midwestern utilities to use low-sulfur coal, a fuel that burns 
more cleanly than hard coal, to meet standards that go into effect 
in 2000, Gustafson said, Montana's vast reserves of such coal will 
grow invaluable. The rail line would bring startling change to an 
area where stillness is broken only by cattle lowing or an occasional 
tractor-trailer hauling livestock. Gustafson envisions the line being 
used by as many as 18 trains a day, each with 125 cars _ about a mile 
long _ filled with coal pulled by two 4,000-horsepower locomotives. 
``You can hear it 20 to 30 miles away,'' said Randy Knutson, chairman 
of the United Transportation Union, which represents railroad workers. 
``The horns are piercing. It will be an overwhelming presence.'' The 
union opposes the new rail link because it says some 30 railroad jobs 
would be lost on the Burlington Northern Santa Fe, which now serves 
this area. But the Burlington Northern's link to Mile City is on a 
294-mile route, 177 miles longer than that proposed by Gustafson. 
Opponents of the new link say the existing line makes the new one 
unnecessary. Gustafson counters that the shorter route would greatly 
reduce the price of the coal. The fight against the new railroad has 
been a long one; the rail link was first proposed in 1986. But despite 
lawsuits and lobbying by the Northern Plains Resource Council, a coalition 
of ranchers and environmentalists based in Billings, the Tongue River 
Railroad may soon be barreling down on this quiet corner. Last summer 
some ranchers here were served with papers notifying them that the 
railroad would begin exercising its right of eminent domain, granted 
by the federal and state governments, and would be coming to survey 
their land. Gustafson said he hoped to begin construction next spring. 
Several ranch families vowed to continue their fight in court. The 
cost to the Tongue River Valley, ranchers say, will be unbearable. 
``It's already split the community,'' said Irv Alderson, a 68-year-old 
rancher whose spurs jingled softly as he fried up a pan of venison 
steaks and potatoes. ``There's people who don't speak to each other 
anymore.'' Such tension is especially difficult in a place where neighbors 
depend on each other if they get stuck in the mud, or a grass fire 
breaks out. Some think the valley needs the money the railroad construction 
would bring, because beef prices have dropped. Though the Tongue River 
Valley is a sprawling chunk of real estate where ranches are measured 
in sections, or square miles, there are only 56 landowners along the 
river, with at least 29 of them opposed to the railroad. The closest 
town is Birney, which is anywhere from a mile to 15 miles for many 
families, and it has dwindled to fewer than 50 people. The grocery 
here closed in the 1980s, and the one-room schoolhouse has just 16 
students. The nearest sizable town, Sheridan, Wyo., is an hour-and-a-half 
ride, when the gravel road is not clogged with mud. ``We've got a 
lot of people in a world of hurt,'' said Jay Nance, a rancher north 
of Birney, who is a member of an economic development committee. He 
endorsed the railroad, saying: ``The world is bigger than my ranch. 
I would like to see something that will keep my kids around here.'' 
But the valley is also part of the ancestral homeland of the Northern 
Cheyenne, whose reservation lies just a few miles to the east. They 
gather plants for medicine and ceremonies here. And the railroad would 
bisect the site of the battleground of what the Indians call the Battle 
of Wolf Mountain, the last battle fought by the Sioux and Cheyenne 
before they surrendered in 1877. ``We still eat deer, still eat pheasants,'' 
said Freda Standing Elk, who lives in Birney Village, a small Cheyenne 
settlement seven miles from Birney. ``We still use the hide to make 
buckskin dresses, to make moccasins.'' The trains could drive off 
the game, she said, ``and we could lose all that.'' Jeanie Alderson, 
who with her two sisters and father, Irv, is a partner in the Bones 
Brothers Ranch, which straddles Hanging Woman Creek, says she worries 
about several things: grass fires started by sparks from trains, weeds 
that might be carried in to grazing land and the fact that cattle 
and horses would have to cross high railroad embankments to reach 
the Tongue River, the only source of water. ``I had a fellow call 
me to tell me what a nightmare it is to have a railroad for a neighbor,'' 
she said, looking out at several quarter horses in a corral near her 
home. ``He had 24 show horses killed by a train. He said it was a 
quarter-million-dollar loss and a year later he hadn't got a dime.'' 
Up the road in a deep canyon carved out by the Tongue River, Bill 
Musgrave has other concerns. He said he could not sell his ranch because 
buyers feared the effect of a new railroad. On a walk through one 
of his pastures he pointed to a series of towering, rugged hills. 
``They want to obliterate the tops of those hills and use the dirt 
to fill in between'' for the railroad bed, he said, on more than two 
miles of his land. ``They're letting on like they can mitigate all 
this but they can't,'' he said, referring to erosion and other environmental 
effects. Gustafson bristles at the criticism. ``I've been cast as 
a speculator and a promoter,'' he said. ``All kinds of names have 
been thrown at me. But I'm a creative entrepreneur and I feel strongly 
I've tried to do it right. I'm frustrated but I've made a concerted 
effort to work with those people.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>