<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981212.0130 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It is too late for pettiness. It is too late for partisanship. It 
is too late for slander. It is too late for gossip. It is too late 
for polls. It is too late for everything that has characterized the 
ugly, thoughtless, vengeful, casuistic debate of what is now, without 
doubt, the greatest constitutional excruciation of our time. It is 
time for only one thing, and that is sobriety. All the noise and the 
nonsense have ushered in a chilling moment of gravity, for the president 
and the Congress and the country. You would think that, at such a 
moment, a sense of politics would give way to a sense of history. 
But it is alarming how many of the players in this great drama are 
still acting cheap and chuckleheaded. The familiar old moves are everywhere. 
At the White House, the president and his henchlings do not seem quite 
sobered up. They still believe that devious formulations and dodges 
and smears will save them. On Friday afternoon, Bill Clinton emerged 
from the Oval Office, from which he can no longer address the nation 
without the risk of snickers, to offer another re-apology. We put 
hope over experience and believed he would say something we had never 
heard. Experience defeated hope. He repeated his feeble words of tactical 
``grappling.'' Then he offered the uncommitted moderate House Republicans 
a verse from ``The Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam.'' But did it have to 
be the one about the ``moving finger''? Why not this one? ``Indeed 
the Idols I have loved so long Have done my Credit in Men's Eye much 
wrong: Have drown'd my Honour in a shallow Cup, And sold my Reputation 
for a Song.'' The apology was startling in its tepidity. The president 
seemed like a practiced escape artist who knows how to pace himself. 
Why give all the profound feeling before the committee votes? Dribble 
out the best bathos for the House vote, and later for the Senate vote. 
But it wasn't only Clinton's re-calibrated penitence that made you 
wonder. All week long his defenders have been retreating behind the 
old insulting avenues of defense. The White House counsel came before 
the House Judiciary Committee and said the president did not commit 
perjury because he did not lie because he did not believe that he 
was lying. The satanic spinners of the West Wing, who cannot pause 
even at this moment that should give pause, faxed around an old piece 
from The Chicago Tribune recounting that David Schippers, the majority 
counsel at the committee, once represented a porn star named Seka. 
(He even took her to a Chicago White Sox luncheon!) And the Democrats 
on the committee issued a statement asserting that Monica Lewinsky's 
memory ``is impaired by prescription drugs.'' The president regrets 
the pain he caused his family, but his ex-girlfriend, the stalker, 
was on Effexor and Serzone. In short, Bill Clinton is pathologically 
incorrigible. He couldn't stop himself from touching her, he couldn't 
stop himself from lying about it, he couldn't stop himself from asking 
others to lie about it, he couldn't stop himself from allowing the 
ruthlessness to proceed, he couldn't stop himself from polling the 
truth. And yet, he must be defended. The Republicans are trying to 
impeach Bill Clinton for being Bill Clinton. But being Bill Clinton 
is not an impeachable offense. Neither is perjury about sex, or about 
anything else that bears no relation to a president's public duties. 
What Clinton did was a low crime and misdemeanor. Since Watergate, 
there has been a pendulum of partisan revenge. And right now, Republicans 
want their payback for Watergate, for Bork, for Iran-Contra, even 
for Woodstock. Like Kenneth Starr, the Republicans are attempting 
to repeal the 1960s. There is a cultural war at the heart of this 
political war, and it accounts for the scandalous Republican refusal 
to react to Clinton's offenses with any sense of proportionality. 
It is time to move beyond the surreal to the real. The Republicans 
are doing something far more ominous than what Bill Clinton did. He 
debased the presidency, but they are debasing the Constitution. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>