<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981212.0088 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Leaning forward on a lectern, a brilliant smile on his mustachioed 
face, Husam Khader chose to make a pointed political joke during a 
recent meeting of the Palestinian Legislative Council. Khader, a legislator 
from Nablus, exasperated by the council's impotence, proposed a bill. 
``Why don't we declare Yasser Arafat the god of Palestine?'' he suggested, 
referring to the president of the Palestinian National Authority. 
The moment spoke volumes about how far Palestinian society has come 
in the last five years and how far it has to go. On the one hand, 
Khader was speaking from the floor of the democratically elected Legislature, 
engaging in debate that allows for barbed humor aimed at the Palestinian 
leader. On the other, his words conveyed a central frustration for 
those involved in the building of the Palestinian state: Arafat's 
viselike grip on the reins of power. ``I think we have a serious, 
deep yearning for democracy,'' said Eyad Sarraj, who runs the Gaza 
Community Mental Health Program, a nongovernmental organization. ``The 
problem is that Arafat is untouchable. He is a holy symbol, while 
right now we could use a mere mortal.'' Still, an interesting thing 
has happened on the way to statehood, a journey that for many Palestinians 
crosses a major threshold with the visit of President Clinton to Gaza 
on Monday. As the Israelis have come to realize with great alarm, 
the Palestinians view Clinton's visit, starting with the flight into 
the new Yasser Arafat International Airport, as a diplomatic endorsement 
of their aspirations. Despite Arafat's best efforts to suppress them, 
the fledgling institutions of democracy, some mandated by international 
agreements, have taken on a life of their own. And this has significantly 
altered the mind-set of a clan-based society that lived under occupation 
for 50 years. After 1993, when the interim peace accord was reached 
in Oslo, many symbols of sovereignty emerged: Palestinian flags, Palestinian 
license plates, Palestinian passports (accepted by 80 countries), 
Palestinian Coca-Cola and, two weeks ago, the new airport in Gaza. 
The chaos that had reigned, particularly during the seven years of 
Palestinian uprising, began to recede. Schools and hospitals were 
refreshed, restocked and operated continuously. Traffic policemen 
appeared at busy intersections, roads were paved and telephone lines 
run into villages. A night life sprang up in Ramallah, and in Nablus, 
a fledgling Palestinian stock market. But most important, perhaps, 
were the new democratic institutions: the Palestinian Legislative 
Council and the Palestinian Supreme Court, both stipulated by the 
Oslo accords, and a burgeoning, quickly ubiquitous press corps, together 
with a host of dissident weeklies. The very fact of these institutions 
created an appetite for authenticity on the part of some of the legislators, 
justices and journalists who participated in them. There were sharp 
divisions between those who had grown up under Israeli occupation, 
observing the model of Israeli democracy, and those who had only recently 
returned from exile in the more autocratic Arab nations. But those 
who craved authentic institutions wanted what amounted to too much 
too soon, or sooner than Arafat was prepared to allow it. ``We were 
ready for democracy,'' said Rawiya Shawwa, a legislator from Gaza 
and an outspoken columnist for the newspaper Al Quds. ``Our struggle 
for independence was built on coalitions. We made decisions by voting. 
And we had this neighbor, our occupier, with a democratic lifestyle. 
We experienced their demonstrations, and their media, and their freedom 
of saying.'' But the appetite for authenticity went largely unfulfilled. 
The legislators passed many laws that were not implemented; the judges 
issued many court orders that were ignored; the journalists either 
censored themselves, faced rebuke and arrest, or found their newspapers 
closed. At the same time, Arafat gave much power to the half-dozen 
security organizations he created like a small army around himself. 
After Khader proposed his bill to deify Arafat, several legislators 
and journalists laughed aloud, and some stared ahead with widened 
eyes. One representative jumped him, demanding an apology, and Khader 
sardonically congratulated his beefy attacker, saying that Arafat 
would witness his loyalty while reviewing the videotapes of the meeting. 
The entire incident was expunged from the minutes. ``I don't want 
to trick myself into thinking that we have institutions, laws and 
rules,'' Khader said. ``It's tempting. We go through the motions. 
We argue, we bargain. We have procedures and votes and lobbyists of 
a kind. Yes, the council dances beautifully. But in the dark.'' Still, 
the Palestinians, with a relatively sizable intellectual elite, international 
help and the model of Israel, have moved more quickly and closer toward 
developing democratic institutions than any of their Arab neighbors, 
experts say. ``It's very exciting to see,'' said Joseph Alpher, director 
of the American Jewish Committee in Israel. ``What they have done 
in the last five years is more democratic than any Arab society. It's 
a limited democracy, or guided democracy, under the very firm hand 
of Arafat. But it has potential.'' Fayez Noureldin, a Gaza-based photographer 
for Agence France-Presse, hit one of the first bumps on the road to 
the limited democracy. During a heat wave two years ago, he took a 
picture of children trying to drag their donkey into the ocean for 
a bath. The photograph ran in publications around the world. Palestinian 
officials were furious. They thought he was trying to make the Palestinians 
look asinine, literally. He was arrested and roughed up. But a nascent 
union of local journalists ran to his defense. High-ranking Palestinian 
officials released him, apologized and punished the arresting officers. 
And such ham-handed clampdowns became less frequent, giving way to 
a more subtle dance between the journalists and the authority. They 
have developed a relationship based on the understanding that there 
are limits to the freedom of expression, but that these limits are 
constantly shifting. After the Oslo peace agreement, the news media 
blossomed in numbers, with two new daily newspapers, a handful of 
new weeklies, three new radio stations and 15 new television stations. 
The very act of covering events beside their Israeli and foreign colleagues 
proved an education, making the Palestinian journalists _ already 
experts at linguistic subterfuge from years of dealing with Israeli 
military censors _ yearn to operate freely. But the three dailies 
are tightly controlled, and tend to be timid since they can face censure 
for such things as burying a small article that reflects well on Arafat. 
The leading paper is the veteran publication, Al Quds, which is privately 
owned but closely allied with the Palestinian leadership. And of the 
two new dailies, one is financed by the Palestinian Authority, and 
the other run by an adviser to Arafat. Still, it can be surprising 
to see what is tolerated, especially in small weeklies or monthlies. 
Recently, a rights group put a paid insert into newspapers about torture 
in Palestinian prisons, complete with gory photographs _ and a government 
advertising permit. A monthly magazine, People's Rights, subtitled, 
``Building the rule of law in Palestine,'' routinely runs harsh articles 
about corruption and police brutality. Last week, as Gaza was being 
scrubbed for Clinton's visit, which the Palestinian Authority officially 
considers extremely important, editors at the major newspapers were 
snipping criticism from their columns. Yet the paper of the Islamic 
Holy War movement, Al Istiqlal, printed these words of welcome: ``American 
President Bill Clinton, who is known as Monica's secret lover, is 
about to visit our noble and beloved Gaza. With his vulgar presence, 
he will desecrate its pure soil that has been saturated for more than 
50 years with the blood of our holy martyrs.'' When the mandated elections 
were held for president and Legislative Council in 1996, some 86 percent 
of Palestinian adults turned out to vote. More than half of the 88 
council members came from Arafat's Fatah party, and one of his right-hand 
men, Ahmed Querei, or Abu Ala, became speaker of the House. Still, 
there remained about 29 independent legislators, including some members 
of Hamas, the Muslim fundamentalist organization. And some Fatah members 
behaved more independently than their leader liked. Many of the legislators 
took their mission quite seriously. In two years they passed about 
20 laws, often stopping to research a point of procedure, to inquire 
how the Israeli Parliament would handle it. It took them almost two 
years to draft a constitution, gingerly constructing clauses about 
the protection of civil liberties and human rights. One passage, about 
the terms of succession for a president who lost the confidence of 
the council or became incapacitated, was stricken because the legislators 
were timid. But only 12 bills were signed by Arafat; the constitution 
still sits on his desk. A law ordering municipal elections was ignored, 
as was the one to hold elections for a new Legislature at the expiration 
of its term next May. Few laws have been carried out, but one that 
will be stands out: a bill to raise the salary of civil servants. 
Because so many Palestinians are employed by the authority, it is 
considered an important step toward raising the standard of living. 
Still, by the very nature of their enterprise, the legislators accomplished 
the critical task of altering the terms of public debate. Some grew 
more outspoken, especially on the issue of corruption within the Palestinian 
Authority. They felt themselves powerless when their demands to weed 
out corrupt officials were ignored, but if Arafat did not listen, 
the Palestinian people did, through the media coverage of the Legislature. 
Some felt both informed and emboldened by the public discussion, but 
others criticized the council for caving in, for acting as a rubber 
stamp for Arafat. ``People feel they're just there for decoration,'' 
said Sarraj of the Gaza mental health program. ``There's no separation 
of powers between the executive, the legislative and the judiciary.'' 
Like the Legislature, the Palestinian high court tried to shut out 
the pressure from Arafat and develop a rule of law. But it was impossible. 
If a judge went too far _ as in the case of Amin Abdel Salam, the 
former chief justice of the West Bank, who demanded the release of 
some students in detention _ he was dismissed. Others resigned. One 
Palestinian rights group, which used to monitor Israeli violations, 
counts 27 ignored court orders. The total issued is unknown. ``If 
our leaders ignore court orders, then our people will, too,'' said 
Samir Muhsen, a lawyer and journalist, ``and before we know it, they'll 
start taking the law into their own hands. Is that the way we want 
to inaugurate our Palestinian civil society, with chaos?'' Some of 
the ignored court orders demand the release of Hamas members who are 
being detained indefinitely without charges. And that is where the 
Israeli interest in having Arafat clamp down on terrorism comes into 
play, countering any encouragement Israel might have offered toward 
developing democratic institutions in Palestine. Many Palestinians, 
even those pushing at the edge of the permissible, accept that it 
is only after Arafat leaves what appears to be his lifetime office 
that things will change. And, in a surprising comment in Ramallah 
last week, Arafat made that time seem not so far away. ``I don't know 
if I'll live one year or two years,'' he said at a meeting with the 
Washington-based Institute of Near East Policy. That makes many Palestinians, 
and some international experts, worry about the fledgling character 
of the democratic institutions in place. ``Can they handle a transition 
of power in what are likely to be horrendous circumstances?'' said 
Alpher of the Jewish committee. Mrs. Shawwa, the Gaza legislator, 
wonders if Palestinian society needs more time to prepare even for 
statehood, let alone a change of leadership. ``My opinion is maybe 
we are not ready for a state,'' she said. ``Maybe we should wait until 
we have genuine institutions.'' The freedom with which she speaks 
can be confusing to those who equate such public conversation with 
a more mature democracy. But to many it only indicates that Palestinian 
society is not the monolithic entity usually portrayed to the world. 
``As far as the world is concerned, only they _ the Israelis _ have 
public opinion,'' Hanan Ashrawi, a prominent Palestinian and council 
member, said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>