<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981212.0121 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Rep. Peter King, R-N.Y., is not unique among members of Congress for 
having supported the Irish Republican Army. But, as far as anyone 
can tell, he remains the only congressman to have called himself the 
Oliver North of Ireland. King is also not alone among Republicans 
in having publicly criticized Newt Gingrich, the House speaker who 
is resigning. But it seems fairly certain that he was the first to 
describe Gingrich as ``road kill on the highway of American politics.'' 
In other words, King is not prone to moderation, at least not in the 
verbal thrust and parry of politics, which he fondly calls ``a contact 
sport.'' And he is at it again, loudly cajoling his fellow Republicans, 
in his immoderate fashion, to dispose of President Clinton's impeachment 
crisis in, of all things, a moderate way. King has emerged as the 
leading Republican voice in Congress for punishing Clinton through 
some means short of impeachment. He has become a familiar face on 
television arguing against his Republican leaders, has been discussing 
strategy daily with White House aides and has joined House Democrats 
in circulating a proposal for censure. It has been a lonely effort. 
Although he contends that as many as 20 Republicans are prepared to 
vote against impeachment this week, he remains one of only five to 
have taken that position publicly. And he is the most outspoken Republican 
in advocating censure, a penalty many other Republicans say they favor 
but are certain their conservative leadership will block. ``No one 
knows how this is going to play out,'' he said in an interview from 
his Capitol Hill office last week. ``I may be looked upon in a few 
months as the only genius in the Republican Party, or the guy who 
never got it right. But I do think this is going to be much more traumatic 
than people realize right now. Because the country does not realize 
we are going through with impeachment.'' With the House moving inexorably 
toward that end, King has framed his appeal in the starkest terms, 
telling his party mates that they are driving themselves toward minority 
status by defying what he sees as the public's deep animosity toward 
impeachment. But beyond that, this product of the most vaunted Republican 
political machine in the country, the Nassau County Republican Committee, 
says he is fueled by a profound distaste for the ``reform politics'' 
that he contends have criminalized the American system with complex 
campaign finance rules and independent counsel statutes. ``When we 
elect a Republican president, I just imagine some left-wing group 
or some liberal Democratic foundation sponsoring a lawsuit against 
the next president,'' he said. ``I just envision payback time for 
the Democrats.'' The son of a New York City police detective, King 
talks in the fast-paced mumble of a wisecracking officer on the beat. 
He does not hesitate to take pokes at rivals, but also peppers his 
conversation with self-deprecating jokes. Clearly, he has yet to inspire 
fear among members of his staff, who broke into guffaws recently when 
his train of thought ran off track, causing King to say glumly, ``There 
was something brilliant I was going to say, if I could only remember 
it.'' After all of King's efforts against impeachment, many reporters 
have taken to calling him a moderate, a label he despises. He is proud 
to have received a 100 percent rating from the Christian Coalition 
and is unabashed about opposing abortion, affirmative action, bilingual 
education, gun control, the National Endowment for the Arts and anything 
that smells like a ``good government'' proposal. ``Barry Goldwater 
said, `Moderation in the pursuit of justice is no virtue,' and that's 
where I am,'' he said. The grandson of Irish immigrants, Peter Thomas 
King was born April 5, 1944, in the Sunnyside section of Queens, two 
doors down from the Celtic Cafe. He graduated from Brooklyn Prep and 
helped put himself through St. Francis College in Brooklyn by unloading 
trains in Manhattan's West Side rail yards. ``There were a lot of 
old-time Democrats, conservative in their views, who moved from places 
like Sunnyside to Nassau County,'' said Rep. Thomas Manton, D-N.Y., 
who is close to King. ``They ended up becoming Republicans there, 
but they still have a lot of old-time Democratic values. Peter is 
in that group.'' While earning a law degree from Notre Dame in the 
mid-1960s _ he follows the football team with rapt attention _ King 
worked two summers for Richard Nixon's Manhattan law firm, alongside 
another law student named Rudolph Giuliani. (The two men are both 
considering running for the Senate in 2000 and are not particularly 
friendly.) King remains a fan of Nixon, keeping several photographs 
of the former president on his office wall. ``He never got the full 
credit that he was entitled to,'' King said of Nixon, the last president 
to face impeachment hearings. In college, King wrote a paper defending 
Mayor James Walker of New York City, who was forced to resign in 1932 
amid corruption charges. After law school, King worked briefly for 
the lawyer Roy Cohn before getting a legal job with what Democrats 
consider a modern-day Tammany Hall: Nassau County government. He later 
served on the Hempstead Town Council and as Nassau County comptroller. 
He remains a staunch defender of political machines, contending that 
they help middle-class people attain office. Without them, he says, 
``only rich people and wackos'' will go into the business. Though 
he grew up hearing stories about Irish heroes, it was not until the 
late '60s that King became active in Irish politics. He organized 
protests outside the Nassau Coliseum when a British marching band 
performed there, helped raise money for IRA hunger strikers and became 
something of a spokesman for the cause. Along the way, he was accused 
of supporting terrorism, including helping to finance IRA arms purchases. 
King denies that, despite his joking reference to himself as Oliver 
North. On his office wall, King has a photograph of a 1994 Washington 
reception for the prime ministers of Ireland and Britain in which 
House Speaker Thomas Foley, who had leveled the terrorism charge, 
is stepping off the reception line rather than shake King's hand. 
After he was first elected to Congress, King was a strong supporter 
of Gingrich. But soon after the Republicans took control of Congress 
in 1994, King said he began to feel that the party had become anti-Northeastern 
in its outlook and oratory. A strong labor supporter, he also worried 
that Republican officials were needlessly antagonizing blue-collar 
workers and their unions _ something he says Ronald Reagan would never 
have done. In 1996, King accused the Republican leadership in Congress 
of appealing to ``barefoot hillbillies.'' He says today: ``These were 
guys who were making us a regional party. If I were in a national 
leadership position, I wouldn't be saying things to offend people 
in Mississippi or Alabama.'' Then in 1997, King accused Gingrich of 
abandoning Republican principles on issues like tax cuts and affirmative 
action, writing an article in The Weekly Standard calling Gingrich 
``road kill.'' The speaker was furious with King until later that 
year, when King refused to join an attempted coup against Gingrich. 
But it took Sen. Alfonse D'Amato, King's fellow Long Island Republican, 
to reconcile the two. As King tells it, he and D'Amato were in a Washington 
bar when Gingrich strolled in. D'Amato waved the speaker over and 
said: ``You don't have to worry about King. He'll shoot you in the 
front.'' Some Democrats say King has become a strong defender of the 
president because Clinton is popular in New York and King is positioning 
himself to run for the Senate in 2000. But King says his defense of 
Clinton will probably only hurt him. He also worries that his outspokenness 
on impeachment could cause friction between him and House Republicans, 
including some in leadership. But in his affable way, King brushes 
such concerns aside. ``There's a small majority, so the Republicans 
will have to deal with the cards they're dealt, and I'm one of the 
cards,'' he said, referring to the Republicans' slim six-vote majority 
in the House next year. ``Hope it's not the joker.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>