<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981212.0133 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial for Sunday, Dec. 13: With 
the House now headed for a vote on impeachment, it is essential to 
cut through the constitutional distortion that developed during the 
Judiciary Committee debate. One of the most dangerous notions is that 
impeachment by the House is an acceptable functional substitute for 
censure _ the equivalent of a stinging grand-jury indictment or a 
rebuke that can be passed in anticipation that the Senate will not 
remove the president. Members of the committee and GOP leaders like 
Tom DeLay, who has filled the leadership vacuum left by the inaction 
of the designated speaker, Robert Livingston, have been hawking this 
idea. The same constitutional heresy pops up in the more thoughtful 
but equally mistaken Rep. Bill McCollum, R-Fla. Attempting to head 
off the popularity of a true censure resolution, he argues that impeachment 
is simply ``the ultimate censure.'' The Democrats are right, of course, 
that use of impeachment as a signal of condemnation distorts the evidentiary 
and punitive cycle envisioned by the Framers of the Constitution. 
They clearly intended for impeachment to pass the House only when 
its members wanted to remove the president, not simply to scare or 
punish him. By suggesting that impeachment could be used to rebuke 
the president or to send a signal about the primacy of law, the Republicans 
are defining impeachment down, to borrow from Sen. Daniel Patrick 
Moynihan's warning about ``defining deviancy down.'' The idea of using 
impeachment as a symbolic punishment is contradicted by the language 
of the Clinton impeachment articles themselves, as approved by the 
Judiciary Committee. Each concludes with the statement that President 
Clinton's conduct ``warrants impeachment and trial, and removal from 
office. . ..'' The Republicans feel justified in misusing the impeachment 
process because they have the sorry task of coping with a president 
who has defined down the standards of presidential responsibility. 
The Constitution, with its proper emphasis on high crimes and misdemeanors, 
does not specify how to deal with the low antics of a rogue chief 
executive like Clinton. But it does provide the room to craft a punishment 
short of impeachment by the House and removal by the Senate. From 
the standpoint of both public opinion and the Constitution, censure 
is still the preferred way to punish Clinton. But he left Washington 
Saturday without offering meaningful assistance to those who are trying 
to save him from being the second president to be impeached by the 
House of Representatives. By putting his own semantic roadblocks in 
the way of censure, Clinton is giving new meaning to political self-destruction. 
He is daring a Republican congressional majority that should not be 
dared, and in the case of the House Judiciary Committee, he is diverting 
attention from its misapplication of the impeachment process. Weeks 
ago Henry Hyde and other Republican leaders grandly spoke about the 
importance of avoiding partisan division if the Lewinsky case ever 
came before the House. They were right then, and wrong now to manipulate 
the Constitution in their pursuit of Clinton. If the Republicans will 
allow a censure resolution to be placed before the House, and if Clinton 
will finally give up his evasions and admit that he lied under oath, 
this matter can be fairly and properly concluded with the censure 
of the president. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>