<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981212.0283 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
On most nights, the Tampa Bay Lightning looks like the league laughingstock. 
Saturday night, the Lightning had company. The game against the New 
York Islanders at Nassau Coliseum was funny, all right. But not in 
a good way. The league-worst Lightning was laughably bad, and so were 
the slumping Islanders. There were so many misfired shots. There were 
more than a few errant passes. And there were two games worth of play 
stoppages. It made for a game that was almost unwatchable. So it seemed 
fitting that the Islanders lost, 2-1, on an own goal with 43 seconds 
left in overtime. It was scored by Benoit Hogue, who was standing 
behind the goal. His shot deflected off of Islanders' defenseman Scott 
Lachance's knee, off of Tommy Salo, the Islanders' goalie, and finally 
into the back of the netting. The goalies played well, at least. Salo 
made 24 saves. Corey Schwab made 34 saves for the Lightning, who withstood 
a late flurry by the Islanders. The Islanders' Claude Lapointe hit 
the post for the second time Saturday night with 6 minutes 22 seconds 
left. The Islanders came into Saturday night's game having lost six 
straight and nine of their last 11. They came in with a chance to 
end their miserable slide against the Lightning, which the Islanders 
had beaten six straight times, including four straight shutouts. When 
the Islanders were mired in an 0-10-1 slide last season, they beat 
the Lightning in Tampa for some temporary relief. After a slow and 
sloppy first period, both teams scored once in the second period. 
Karl Dykhuis gave the Lightning a 1-0 lead with a slap shot that beat 
Salo over the shoulder 43 seconds into the period. He was set up by 
Chris Gratton, who was obtained from the Flyers this afternoon. Dykhuis' 
goal ended the Islanders' shutout streak against the Lightning at 
277 minutes 44 seconds. Trevor Linden scored a shorthanded goal for 
the Islanders at 17:14 to tie the score at 1-1. He stick-handled out 
of the corner to the slot, where he slapped the puck through Schwab's 
pads. Just hours before the start of Saturday night's game, the Lightning 
re-acquired Gratton, a talented center, for offensive right wing Mikael 
Renberg in a four-player deal. Tampa Bay also got Mike Sillinger; 
Philadelphia got Daymond Langkow. In August 1997, the Lightning lost 
Gratton, then a restricted free agent, to the Flyers, who tendered 
a front-loaded, $16 million offer sheet. Rather than send five first-round 
draft picks as compensation, Philadelphia sent Renberg to Tampa Bay. 
SLAP SHOTS: The scoreboard above center ice at Nassau Coliseum will 
be replaced by a new $3 million scoreboard. which will be in place 
for the Islanders' next home game, on Dec. 22. The old scoreboard, 
which has a broken video board and does not show replays, penalty 
time or shots on goal, was part of the off-season legal battle between 
Nassau County and the team. The team said the hoist holding up the 
scoreboard was unsafe and later moved out of the arena. ...The Islanders 
scratched Jason Dawe, Eric Brewer, David Harlock and Mike Hough. ... 
Islanders enforcer Steve Webb was groggy after a hard hit into the 
end boards by Karl Dykhuis in the first period. He did not return. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>