<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981212.0234 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In 1986, when the Birmingham Historical Society offered tours of the 
first loft apartments carved out of a couple of low-rise former retail/warehouse 
buildings, large numbers of curious people turned out to see what 
a new concept for this old industrial city _ downtown living _ would 
be like. For a low-density metropolitan area of just under 1 million, 
with wooded suburbs just a 10-minute drive from downtown, a further 
demand for downtown residences seemed unlikely. But 14 structures 
now have apartments, and with six more projects under way, there will 
be a total of 236 units. They are part of a long-term effort by the 
city and its various partners to remake its downtown as a lively urban 
neighborhood. The most recent developments _ the reopening of the 
long-closed Loveman's department store in the old retail district 
elsewhere in the city center as the McWane Center science and children's 
museum and the restoration of the adjoining Alabama Theater _ have 
stimulated interest in renovation for office, residential and other 
uses. Under Richard Arrington Jr., the city's first black mayor, who 
is now in his fifth four-year term, reviving the downtown through 
renovation and new development has been encouraged through low-interest 
loans, a strategic use of urban renewal programs, parking decks coordinated 
with new projects, park upgrading and sidewalk improvements. ``This 
is a new concept for Birmingham,'' said Michael Calvert, who since 
1982 has headed Operation New Birmingham, a public/private nonprofit 
organization charged with promoting renovation and new development 
in the four-square-mile city center, including downtown. The organization 
also acts as middleman between developers and the city and expedites 
such matters as tax credits for historic preservation. ``There is 
no tradition of living in the city center like you find in older, 
East Coast cities,'' Calvert said. ``We've found it's a niche market, 
but a bigger niche than most people anticipated, and a growing one.'' 
Initially, rental lofts fared better than condominium sales. But as 
the market became established, ownership has increased. Currently, 
45 percent of the apartments are owned by individuals, mostly occupants. 
Many loft residents are lawyers or others with offices downtown, but 
the live/work option has also proved appealing. Of 11 units in the 
three-story former Rhodes-Carroll furniture warehouse, built in 1914, 
occupants with studios as well as living space include a photographer, 
a film editor and the owner of an advertising company. ``I used a 
2,400-square-foot space for living and working, but we've grown again, 
so now I have a separate 1,200-square-foot space a floor above for 
living,'' said John Montgomery, owner of BIG, a public relations and 
advertising firm. ``It's a creative environment. There is no commute. 
A lot of our customers are downtown.'' But he did voice a yearning 
for two more things in the district _ ``a park, mainly for our animals, 
and a small deli market to pop in and grab the things we need.'' Several 
of the newest projects involve architecturally distinguished but functionally 
obsolete towers ranging from 10 to 21 stories. Most dramatic is the 
1912 John Hand Building, a 21-story former bank building at the corner 
of First Avenue North and 20th Street. That building and three others 
at the corner, the city's first skyscrapers, are one block from the 
railroad lines that helped make Birmingham an iron-and-steel boom 
town soon after its founding in 1871. The John Hand Building was bought 
at auction for $1.5 million in 1997 by Jimmy Taylor, a retired banker 
who, with a group of local investors, then bought a small suburban 
bank, renamed it and installed it in their building. ``I was so worried 
somebody was going to buy John Hand and not do it right,'' said Taylor. 
``It's really the building that got me back into banking.'' Above 
the space restored for the new Bank of Birmingham, floors four through 
seven will be leased office space, eight through 19 will be converted 
into condominium residences and the top two floors will be reserved 
for a new athletic club. Taylor said about $10 million would be spent 
by the investment partners on renovations. All but one of the 5,600-square-foot 
residential floors have been sold at $200,000 per floor, unimproved. 
About half of them will be single units; the rest of the floors will 
have two or three apartments each. Taylor and his wife, Martha, will 
move from a distant suburb to live on the 19th floor. Charles Barkley 
of the Houston Rockets professional basketball team, who grew up in 
the Birmingham area, has taken a floor. The ease of conversion from 
office to residential use has surprised Robert Black, an architect 
who is supervising overall renovations and is designing the apartments. 
``We are able to save many features, even keeping some glass hallway 
panels that will let us draw light to the interior,'' he said. The 
modest floorplate size means all residents will have views of Red 
Mountain to the south, downtown to the north and west and, to the 
east, Birmingham's main airport just three miles away. The city is 
covering the $3.8 million cost of new sidewalks and a parking deck 
bridging adjacent vacant lots. Motives for the painstaking process 
of renovation vary. ``It takes a special person to want to do this,'' 
said Calvert of Operation New Birmingham, ``and love of old buildings 
is a big factor. But many also see a chance for a great deal of appreciation 
over the years as city-center values rise.'' Adam Cohen and his father, 
Woody, who have a costume-jewelry business have taken on four downtown 
residential projects. Among them is the long-vacant, 17-story art-deco 
Watts Building, an office tower built in 1929 in the heart of downtown. 
Purchased three years ago for $327,000, its needed renovations have 
been hard to finance. But with the help of a $970,000 low-interest 
loan from the city, work is now under way on a $6 million renovation. 
Floors one through six will be built-to-suit offices; the rest of 
the building will be occupied by rental apartments ranging in size 
from an 880-square-foot one-bedroom to a 1,400-square-foot two-bedroom 
and two 2,400-square-foot penthouses. Rents will range from $800 to 
$975 for the one- and two-bedroom apartments; the penthouses will 
rent for $2,300. Elias and Gaynell Hendricks, who own a chain of five 
local day-care centers, bought the 10-story Transportation Building 
in the heart of the roughly 12-square-block loft district and have 
completed 17 loft apartments. They put one of their Wee Care Academy 
operations on the ground floor and renovated the top two floors for 
their residence. Anna Erdreich and her brother, Jeremy, an architect, 
recently bought the former New Ideal retail building, built in 1927, 
to convert it into 25 apartments with retail on the ground floor. 
They made their purchase, they said, because Ms. Erdreich had enjoyed 
living in Washington and her brother enjoyed living in downtown Manhattan. 
The city's director of planning, engineering and permits, William 
Gilchrist, an architect by training, also points to new residential 
construction, like the Southside Station market-rate apartments near 
the University of Alabama at Birmingham medical center, which have 
been developed by Atlanta's H.J. Russell company, as further advancing 
the goal of 24-hour activity. ``We are working hard to make permitting 
smoother and provide amenities like new sidewalks, benches and trees. 
But we will stick with design review, too. We need to keep the quality 
there. That's why people have come.'' John Lauriello, whose Southpace 
Properties has renovated 40 city-center buildings over the last 15 
years for office or retail use, said that the emergence of residential 
use as an option has two positive effects: It takes vacant Class B 
and C office space off the market and adds value to other uses because 
of the tone it brings to the area. ``You hear many comments about 
people walking their dogs,'' he said. ``Apparently, this makes everyone 
feel more comfortable about the place. And in a city where living 
downtown takes getting used to, comfort sells.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>