<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981212.0072 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the early 1980s, as many South American countries were preparing 
to switch from military to civilian rule, they were hugely encouraged 
by Spain's recent passage from dictatorship to democracy. Just seven 
years after Francisco Franco's death in 1975, Spain had elected a 
socialist government, while its handsome young prime minister, Felipe 
Gonzalez, had become a political pinup throughout Latin America. Less 
attention was given to a key reason for Spain's successful transition: 
Still carrying the scars of civil war and repression, Spain had decided 
to address its future by turning the page on its past. There was no 
question of punishing the abuses of the Franco regime. And even then, 
a military revolt in early 1981, albeit defused by King Juan Carlos, 
was a chilling reminder that true reconciliation would take time. 
Here, too, Spain served as something of a model for much of Latin 
America _ and, in a particular irony, for Chile. In 1990 the region 
duly adapted Spain's gradual transition to its own circumstances. 
But now it finds itself at odds with Madrid over a Spanish prosecutor's 
efforts to punish the former Chilean dictator, Gen. Augusto Pinochet, 
for crimes allegedly committed up to 25 years ago. In most Latin American 
countries, ``borron y cuenta nueva'' _ ``wipe the slate and start 
afresh'' _ was the preferred approach. Only in Argentina did some 
former junta members end up in jail because only in Argentina was 
a military regime forced out of office (after defeat in the 1982 Falklands 
war). Elsewhere, including Chile, armies ceded power slowly and reluctantly 
and, while special commissions issued ``Never Again'' reports on assassinations, 
disappearances and torture, those responsible were rarely charged. 
It seems all the stranger then that Spain should now be trying to 
extradite Pinochet to Madrid to face trial for the genocide, terrorism 
and torture of Spanish nationals under the rules of international 
law. The 83-year-old general, who was arrested in London in October 
at the request of a Spanish judge, appeared before an English magistrate 
Friday for a preliminary hearing into Spain's extradition request 
after his claims to immunity were rejected. Thursday, he was formally 
indicted in Madrid. The case has caused a storm in Chile's relations 
with both Spain and Britain, with Pinochet sympathizers calling for 
reprisals and warning that his trial could destabilize Chile's new 
democracy. Even the country's center-left coalition government has 
urged that the former dictator be released, hinting unconvincingly 
that he might even be brought to trial once home. And, of course, 
Chilean conservatives have remarked that Spain is trying to do to 
others what it did not do to itself. A perhaps stranger twist is that 
while Spain is now being applauded by center-left governments and 
human rights groups for daring to apply international humanitarian 
law, this new status is hardly relished by Prime Minister Jose Maria 
Aznar. Indeed, his conservative government repeatedly argued before 
a Madrid court that Spain had no jurisdiction in the case, although 
its challenge was finally rejected by a panel of Spanish high court 
judges. Last week the government said it ``wholly respected'' the 
legal process; in private, officials said they would prefer it if 
the general just flew home. Aznar's position is not difficult to understand. 
In the 1980s, Spain's relations with Latin America were essentially 
political and cultural as both sides reached out for international 
respectability after years of authoritarianism. But when Latin America's 
economies opened up in the 1990s, with many government-owned enterprises 
becoming privatized, Spain's focus changed. Suddenly, Spain saw the 
region as one big business opportunity. With a rush of investment 
in telecommunications, banking, electrical energy, airlines, book 
publishing and other areas, Spain's annual direct investment in Latin 
America grew to $4.7 billion in 1997 from just $155 million in 1990, 
according to the Madrid-based Institute for European-Latin American 
Relations. Chile, which has had the region's fastest economic growth 
this decade, was a particularly enticing target for Spanish business 
interests. Last month, Spanish Foreign Minister Abel Matutes estimated 
that Spain has some $7 billion worth of direct investment in Chile. 
With so much in the balance, then, the last thing that Spain wants 
is to be seen to be pulling rank, playing the colonial master, interfering 
in the region's affairs in the manner of, well, the United States, 
the country that moved quickly to expand its influence in Latin America 
after Spain was chased out in the 19th century. Having left its linguistic 
and cultural stamp on Latin America, Spain now prefers to be thought 
of more as friendly brother than overbearing mother. And much of Latin 
America is keen to reciprocate. It was charmed by Gonzalez and it 
routinely mobs King Juan Carlos and Queen Sofia on their frequent 
visits. It was disappointed when Spain's entry into the European Union 
in 1986 did not multiply Latin American exports to Europe. But Spanish 
investment still has the singular advantage of not being American. 
Will all this be disturbed by the maverick Spanish judge, Baltasar 
Garzon, and his audacious moves against Pinochet? In Chile perhaps 
it will be upset temporarily, above all if the extradition process 
in Britain drags on for many months. ``The current situation is going 
to complicate our lives somewhat from a political viewpoint, depending 
on how things play out,'' noted Rodolfo Martin Villa, chairman of 
the Spanish utility Endesa, which has bought a 32-percent share of 
Enersis, Chile's main distributor of electricity. Elsewhere in Latin 
America, Spain seems unlikely to be much affected. Because of Washington's 
record of intervening politically or militarily in the region, most 
Latin American countries react nervously to threats to their sovereignty. 
Yet the people who are now presidents of several Latin countries themselves 
spent time in either jail or exile while military regimes were in 
power. At a regional summit last week, they stated their belief that 
international law should apply to ``crimes of international transcendence.'' 
More relevant, perhaps, with democracy well entrenched in the region 
and no imminent perils of military takeovers, Latin American governments 
are today far more concerned about managing their troubled economies 
than reliving the ideological confrontations of the 1970s and 1980s. 
``Latin America needs capital and Spain has capital,'' the Spanish 
writer and sociologist Amando de Miguel noted, ``so even Chile needs 
Spain. That's why I don't think reprisals are very likely.'' Indeed, 
as Latin American officials and diplomats look to the future, they 
have a concern that is more immediate than whether international justice 
should be applied to Pinochet or other retired generals with brutal 
human rights records in, say, Argentina, Uruguay, Colombia, El Salvador 
and Guatemala. It is what can be done to prepare a peaceful transition 
to democracy in the region's last remaining undisguised dictatorship, 
Cuba. And there, Spain's original model of ``borron y cuenta nueva'' 
may again prove useful. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>