<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981212.0073 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After nine months of debate that strained Mexico's maturing democracy 
and threatened to destabilize the financial system, the government 
and a major opposition party have reached full agreement on reorganizing 
a $61 billion bank bailout that had become an example to taxpayers 
of spectacular corruption favoring the wealthy. The bailout discussion 
utterly dominated Mexican politics this year, becoming the first opportunity 
for opposition parties voted into new positions of power in 1997 to 
question the government's past economic performance, force it to admit 
errors and change its ways. The National Action Party, or PAN, a conservative 
opposition group, decided to accept an eleventh-hour resolution with 
the government to signal to Mexican bankers and debtors and international 
investors that the opposition will not push partisan politics at the 
expense of the nation's financial well-being. The opposition party 
reached the bailout deal late Friday with the government's party, 
the Institutional Revolutionary Party, or PRI. The proposal was immediately 
voted out of a congressional committee and is expected to be approved 
by the full lower house of the Congress later Saturday. Approval by 
the Senate is pro-forma because the PRI holds a majority there. In 
the end, it was the delegates from the National Action Party who blinked 
in a standoff _ which had stalled the discussions for weeks _ over 
the resignation of Guillermo Ortiz as head of the central bank. The 
party's leaders were insisting that Ortiz leave, because they argued 
that he had violated the Mexican Constitution when, as finance minister, 
he cobbled together the first bailout program in 1995. The National 
Action Party lawmakers settled for language in the bill that puts 
some pressure on Ortiz to resign in coming months but does not require 
him to do so right away. Ortiz is a close ally of President Ernesto 
Zedillo, and the government staunchly refused to consider letting 
him go now. The complex legislation sets up a new agency that will 
absorb roughly $36 billion of the debts carried by the current bailout 
program, known as the Bank Fund for Savings Protection. Unlike the 
fund, the new agency will be able to issue fully guaranteed bonds 
for trading on international markets to raise capital. Banks will 
be required to pay higher quotas to the new agency to help with interest 
and administrative costs. The entire portfolio of the fund is being 
scrutinized by international auditors. Loans found to be fraudulent 
will be returned to the banks. The package also includes a program 
that will cost about $4 billion over five years of new assistance 
for mortgage holders and other debtors who were wiped out when interest 
rates soared over 100 percent during the 1995 economic meltdown. Although 
the government blundered badly at the outset of the debate, it came 
out surprisingly well. Finance Minister Angel Gurria failed to anticipate 
the explosive issues behind the bailout and thought he would easily 
persuade Congress to transform the billions of liabilities on the 
Bank Fund's books into public debt. His proposal in March initiated 
the accusations by the opposition that the government had used the 
banks and the bailout to shore up its corrupt cronies and finance 
the 1994 campaign of Zedillo. But the government stuck to technical 
arguments while the interest costs of the bailout continued to multiply. 
Meanwhile damaging rifts opened between the National Action Party 
and the other main opposition party, the Party of the Democratic Revolution, 
which accused the National Action Party of catering to the government. 
The Party of the Democratic Revolution will vote against the bailout 
reform. The Party of the Democratic Revolution took out full-page 
ads in major Mexican newspapers in recent days denouncing the government 
and the National Action Party as ``traitors'' to Mexican wage-earners. 
The formula that saved Ortiz has to do with the board of seven members 
that will govern the new agency, to be opened in March 1999. One seat 
will go to the head of the central bank, but the bill specifically 
bars Ortiz from occupying it, because of his role in the original 
bailout. Another official, Eduardo Fernandez Garcia, the head of the 
National Banking Commission, is also barred. The agency can function 
with the two seats empty, but PAN deputies argued that the situation 
would grow increasingly uncomfortable for Ortiz and Fernandez and 
would eventually force them out. Several government officials, who 
spoke on the condition of anonymity, agreed with that prognosis. They 
said that the bruising debate had done critical damage to Ortiz's 
political standing, although not to his reputation as a financial 
manager. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>