<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981212.0077 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A touch of dignity and a heavy dose of uncertainty surround the capital 
on Saturday, as what seems to be the only city in the United States 
that takes impeachment seriously looks toward a House vote on articles 
calling for President Clinton to be removed from office. While few 
are predicting the result with much confidence, there is one area 
of agreement _ that the outcome depends on a dozen, or 20, maybe even 
30, undecided members of the House. But that is where broad generalizations 
break down _ as they have throughout this 11-month agony. The best 
example came Friday, when Clinton's latest apology speech was dismissed 
as a failure, because he did not say ``I committed perjury'' or ``I 
lied'' or even ``I did not tell the truth.'' Several Republicans said 
they might have been won over by such a confession, and were disappointed. 
But that hardly proves that other lines in the speech, the greater 
level of expressed sorrow and even the apology for putting the nation 
through this mess, did not matter, either by persuading some other 
member or by keeping someone on the fence. For this process is now 
in a singular stage, where hundreds of White House officials and reporters 
and politicians deal with a speech heard by several million people, 
and no more than 30 of the potential listeners matter. They are individuals, 
and even friends who know them well do not know just what will move 
them when they have to vote this week. For some it might be an admission; 
others may still be wrestling over the strength of the evidence, or 
whether the offenses alleged actually rise to a level demanding impeachment. 
One obvious example is Rep. Bob Ney of Ohio, who said after the speech 
that he was disappointed Clinton did not say, ``I didn't tell the 
truth under oath.'' But, Ney said, ``It didn't alter me in any direction.'' 
Ney really seems to be worrying about how he ought to vote, a position 
that leaves him vulnerable to a clamor from the right, which generally 
approves his conservative voting record. To him this is a solemn occasion. 
The committee seemed to be grappling with solemnity on Saturday, too, 
after days of debate in which opposing arguments were ridiculed as 
``smokescreen'' or ``shell game.'' On Saturday morning, Rep. Charles 
Schumer, New York's Democratic senator-elect, said an abuse-of-power 
count was so broad that its terms could apply to George Washington, 
and every president since him. Rep. Howard Coble of North Carolina, 
sometimes a fierce attacker, insisted, ``I'll have knots in my guts 
next week when I cast my vote,'' and added, ``I don't take this lightly 
at all.'' He said the last time he felt an issue so heavily was nearly 
eight years ago when he voted to send U.S. troops into combat in the 
Persian Gulf. But while the committee's often petty and almost always 
partisan and personalized consideration of the question may be weighed 
in history _ no Barbara Jordans were heard last week _ it probably 
has no impact whatever on what comes next. By now most members of 
the House have made up their minds on charges, either on the evidence 
or on their sense of political survival. In the insular world of the 
House of Representatives, few members really have to fear the other 
party. Among the Republicans re-elected last month, for example, only 
10 won with 52 percent or less of the vote. Among the Democrats, only 
five did. But there are real risks in going against your own party. 
One is the din of complaint from old supporters. Another is a possible 
primary challenger. So the focus comes back to those 30 or fewer truly 
undecided members _ most, but not quite all of them Republicans. Some 
Republican leaders seem sure that defections will be few enough so 
they will win the impeachment vote. They are plainly trying to build 
momentum with a series of announcements from members who say they 
were previously undecided. Some were; some were just unannounced. 
They count on pressure from the Republican base, and sometimes use 
the argument that the vote is really inconsequential because the Senate 
will ultimately acquit the president. For the White House and the 
Democrats, the issues are more complex. Their target is 11 more Republican 
defectors than Democrats who desert the president (or 10 if no one 
finds the convicted congressman, Rep. Jay Kim of California, and gets 
him back to vote). This White House has always had dismal relations 
with House Republicans and knows few of them well. It is hard to find 
a way to approach them directly. But there are some careful hopes 
among those involved in preserving Clinton's presidency from impeachment 
and trial. One belief is that most of the people who say they are 
undecided really are. The second, more dubious hope is that Speaker-designate 
Robert Livingston of Louisiana will have to confront a group of fence-sitters 
demanding a chance to vote for censure, and arguing that without one 
they _ and with them the Republican majority _ are at risk in 2000. 
Expect the White House and its allies to shout about the unfairness 
of denying the House a censure vote, starting on Sunday's television 
talk shows. Some of their hopes are even more uncertain. They think 
the public will be alerted by the committee votes, angrily discovering 
that the impeachment that pundits so easily dismissed after the elections 
is real after all. The White House hopes that such a suddenly intense 
unhappiness will be communicated to members. Once again, just as with 
the issue of how Clinton described his dubious statements about his 
affair with Monica Lewinsky on Friday, this is not something that 
can be measured on a national scale. If three old friends come up 
to one wavering Republican after church on Sunday and are furious 
about impeachment, that could decide one vote. But Washington's expectations 
about the country's mood have proved wrong all year long _ and the 
polls that show the public does not want Clinton thrown out do not 
reflect much intensity. Except among African-Americans, it is hard 
to locate pockets of dedication to Clinton. Another argument to be 
used _ and perhaps by the president if he is heard from again before 
the House vote _ is that the country and the Congress should not be 
distracted from real business by the debilitating experience of a 
Senate trial, with the undertone that the exercise is pointless since 
everyone knows how it will come out. Abbe Lowell, the Judiciary Committee's 
Democratic counsel, raised that idea on Thursday when he said impeachment 
would ``doom the country to additional months of this ordeal and government 
paralysis.'' It is far from clear that a trial would last months, 
although no one ever got rich betting on the Senate to do things quickly. 
But it might take it a while to get started, because several serious 
procedural questions have not really been addressed. Sen. Orrin Hatch 
of Utah, chairman of the Judiciary Committee, rattled off a list of 
those questions on Saturday morning, like a rules change to explicitly 
allow the Senate to conduct other business along with a trial, questions 
over whether there would be limits on evidence and numbers of witnesses 
or the time of cross-examination, and whether a select committee could 
be given some of the Senate's tasks. Sen. Tom Daschle of South Dakota, 
the Democratic leader, explained last week that he and Sen. Trent 
Lott of Mississippi, the Republican leader, ``are not preparing anything, 
but that's because we're not trying to decide what the House would 
do.'' He said action, even open discussion ``would be premature and 
it assumes things that we don't want to assume'' _ meaning a vote 
to impeach. Daschle said he and Lott would ``talk quickly about what 
we would have to do'' if there was a vote to impeach. Hatch offered 
a solution, too, to the problem of a drawn-out trial when 45 Democratic 
senators could almost certainly deny the Republicans the two-thirds 
majority required for impeachment. Although for months the House Republicans' 
biggest problem has been finding a way to put the impeachment genie 
back in the bottle, Hatch said the rules make it clear ``that the 
Senate could at any time say `We have heard enough''' and end the 
trial without a verdict. That, of course, takes one back to the historic 
difficulty the Senate has in doing things quickly. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>