<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981212.0229 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Tucked away in old manufacturing buildings in the Flatiron District, 
in SoHo or on the West Side near Hudson Square _ and with a significant 
concentration downtown _ new-media companies are becoming an important 
factor in commercial real estate in the New York area. ``There is 
a reason why the vacancy rate in Midtown South _ from 34th Street 
to Canal Street _ is 4.6 percent,'' said Rob Martin, a managing director 
at Insignia/ESG, the real-estate services and brokerage concern. ``There 
are more of these companies and they are growing.'' Michael Ippolito, 
a managing director at Newmark &AMP; Company Real Estate, added: ``Over 
the last three years, new media has emerged as a major force in the 
city.'' Real estate executives say that the concentration of advertising 
and publishing companies in New York has attracted technically oriented 
companies who want to tap into the city's talent pool. ``New York 
has become the content capital of the Internet industry,'' said Mark 
Mandell, an associate director of Cushman &AMP; Wakefield and a specialist 
in new-media companies. The term ``new media'' generally applies to 
activities now done on computer screens that were once done on paper 
or film, and it is usually stretched to include electronic commerce 
and services consumed by new-media companies. ``Information technology'' 
is also a term used to describe these companies. According to a study 
published in October 1997 by the Coopers &AMP; Lybrand consulting 
and accounting firm, employment in new-media companies increased from 
a total of 71,500 at the end of 1995 to 105,000 by the middle of last 
year and was projected to hit about 140,000 by the end of this year. 
There are no generally agreed-upon estimates of the amount of space 
being used by new-media companies, partly because many of them also 
fall under such categories as advertising agencies. But if each of 
the workers counted in the Coopers &AMP; Lybrand survey occupied 100 
square feet of office space _ well below the 150 to 250 square feet 
typical in office buildings _ the total amount would be well into 
millions of square feet. Many of these new companies _ 3 years old 
is considered mature in this industry _ are opting for locations north 
of the Wall Street area, where the city-sponsored Plug 'n' Go program 
has attracted high-tech companies to subsidized prewired space in 
the financial district. ``My impression is that Silicon Alley started 
in the Flatiron area and Wall Street was added later,'' said Joshua 
Glantz, the director of business development at Rare Medium, an interactive 
advertising agency that has 15,000 square feet at 44 West 18th St. 
``Silicon Alley'' is the shorthand term used to describe the new-media 
and related companies, echoing the ``Silicon Valley'' label for the 
concentration of computer-related companies near San Francisco. The 
Coopers &AMP; Lybrand report included a map showing everything south 
of 41st Street as Silicon Alley. Glantz said that a lot of startup 
companies and those that are in their second or third phase of growth 
were taking space in the Flatiron area. ``There must be a half a dozen 
companies like ours between 18th and 20th streets and Fifth and Sixth 
avenues,'' he said. ``You can't go to lunch and talk about business, 
because you are probably going to have a competitor at the next table.'' 
This is not to say that the Plug 'n' Go program, sponsored by the 
Alliance for Downtown New York and the city's Economic Development 
Corp., has been unsuccessful. According to alliance officials, 171 
leases have been signed in downtown buildings since the program was 
initiated in February 1997 after the successful marketing of the building 
at 55 Broad St. as a high-technology center by Rudin Management Co. 
Plug 'n' Go offers incentives for landlords to install high-capacity 
telecommunications in their buildings and offers tenants below-market 
rents _ currently as low as $19 a square foot for the first year. 
Carl Weisbrod, the president of the alliance, said that a report in 
Crain's business weekly in April 1997, had said that 40 percent of 
the information-technology companies signing leases over the previous 
two years had moved in below Chambers Street. But brokers say many 
companies are wary of downtown's still-sparse nightlife in terms of 
hiring technical staff. ``The quality of after-work life is not great 
compared to SoHo and Flatiron,'' said Mandell of Cushman &AMP; Wakefield. 
``When they grow out of those incubators, they tend to look to Midtown 
South, so there are no negatives in attracting highest-quality people.'' 
Cushman &AMP; Wakefield sees the new-media business as so attractive 
that it is one of the sponsors of the New York New Media Association, 
a trade association for the people in new-media companies. Alice O'Rourke, 
the executive director of the group, said 1,400 new members joined 
the group this year, pushing membership to close to 3,200, or a 60 
percent increase in one year. Most of the new-media companies have 
similar histories. A small group of people think they have an idea 
that could be commercially viable. On the West Coast, these startups 
have traditionally been located in garages. In New York they begin 
in people's apartments. If the idea is a good one, the task is to 
search for an ``angel,'' an individual or company willing to make 
an investment so the new enterprise can grow fast enough to keep up 
with the rapidly changing world of new media and electronic commerce. 
At this point, the fledgling enterprise usually moves from apartments 
to commercial space in low-rent districts. For Rare Medium it was 
2,500 square feet on 17th Street from 1995 until it moved into its 
present location early this year. When growth pushes the number of 
employees from a few dozen to hundreds, and more substantial financial 
backing has been found, the firm leaves its incubator for larger space 
where it has more control of the communications, electric power and 
other infrastructure issues. Trev Huxley and a partner started Muze 
in Huxley's 600-square-foot apartment in the Williamsburg section 
of Brooklyn in 1990. Now he has 121 employees and 28,000 square feet 
of space on the top floor of the building at 304 Hudson St., between 
Spring and Vandam streets. Muze supplies information on music, videos 
and books to retailers selling those products, both in traditional 
stores and online at Web sites. As befits a company whose roots are 
in music, one of its early angels was Bob Weir of the band Grateful 
Dead. The company is now largely owned by John Kluge of Metromedia 
Co., although Weir maintains his investment. Although he said he personally 
likes Williamsburg and still lives there, Huxley said that by the 
mid-1990s it became obvious that the company needed a location in 
Manhattan. ``It was difficult for the staff to get to Williamsburg 
and we needed a place where we could meet with clients,'' Huxley said. 
His decision to move to Manhattan came at a time when Trinity Church, 
which owns much of the property in the Hudson Square area, was in 
the midst of replacing the printing companies that had operated there 
for decades with higher-tech tenants. ``This is the kind of tenant 
we were looking for,'' Stephen Heyman, the director of commercial 
real estate for Trinity Real Estate, said of Muze. ``This is New York's 
fastest-growing sector in terms of office. We did not so much target 
them as they started knocking on our door.'' Because of 304 Hudson's 
industrial history there is plenty of electrical power for the big 
servers and the hundreds of personal computers these technology-based 
companies require, Heyman said. And because the site is close to the 
Holland Tunnel, where the main fiber-optic telecommunications lines 
enter the city, it is relatively easy to provide the robust communications 
services that online companies need. ``Any building of reasonable 
size can get this stuff, but you have to be in the city,'' he said. 
``If you are out in New Jersey it won't be as easy.'' According to 
Huxley, a grandson of the author Aldous Huxley, moving Muze into the 
Hudson Street building raised other issues. Most of the company's 
employees enter data and add comment to the databases on music, books 
and videos. This information is used to update touch-screen terminals 
in retail stores and for the Web sites. For example, in a bookstore 
a person could request a list of titles by author, geographic area, 
or a period in time. The screen will list the titles available. By 
touching or clicking through to subsequent screens, a shopper can 
find descriptions of the work and reviews of it. The company supplies 
monthly CDs to stores with freestanding terminals, but updates its 
electronic database more quickly as information becomes available. 
``We are a little like a news organization, and we sometimes work 
24 hours a day, seven days a week,'' Huxley said, noting that Muze 
rushed out additional information on Frank Sinatra after the singer's 
death earlier this year. ``But the building turns the heat off at 
5 p.m., so we had to add heat.'' Conversely, in the summer, heat is 
a big problem, since the company has large server computers operating 
around the clock and has approximately three personal computers for 
every employee. All that equipment generates heat. ``So we had to 
add extra cooling,'' Huxley said, ``and since we can't afford to go 
down, we need redundant power and telecommunications.'' Like most 
new-media companies, Muze has avoided the standard office layout of 
executive offices on the outer perimeter of each floor in favor of 
an open layout that allows natural light from the windows to penetrate 
to the interior. Nor has it bothered with a dropped ceiling to conceal 
the utilities. Instead, most of the wiring is in a tray about 10 feet 
off the floor where it will not be in people's way but will be readily 
accessible when changes are needed. At 8 years old, Muze is an established 
company that is contemplating a public stock offering and can afford 
to be a bit choosy about where its space is located and how it is 
finished. Newer firms being financed by their founders have fewer 
options. Thinking Media Corp. occupies about 3,000 square feet in 
an old garment-industry building at 34 West 17th St. The space is 
raw and open, with wiring exposed on the walls and not an air conditioner 
in sight. ``This was an old shoe factory _ we are the first office 
tenant,'' said Owen Davis, the chief executive of the company, which 
produces interactive advertisements and customer-tracking software. 
On the company's Web page (www.thethinkingmedia.com) is an advertisement 
for Procter &AMP; Gamble's Bounty paper towels that invites viewers 
to drag a graphic representation of a towel to clean up a spill and 
then asks users for information in exchange for a free sample. Davis 
said he located the 3-year old company on 17th Street two years ago 
``because the rents were incredibly cheap.'' But they have risen as 
the area has attracted more tenants and he said he may be forced to 
move to a less expensive location in the future. Brokers said space 
in side-street buildings in Flatiron and Chelsea could be rented annually 
for $10 to $14 a square foot two to three years ago and can still 
be found in the midteens today. But they say that space near the Flatiron 
Building at Broadway and 23rd Street and along Park Avenue South has 
risen to the high teens and mid-$20s. Mandell said space in the Hudson 
Square area is renting in the low $20s for lesser quality buildings 
to close to $30 a square foot for well-situated, well-equipped space. 
Some landlords apparently have a strategy of renting unimproved space 
to fledgling high-technology concerns at low rates secure in the knowledge 
that the companies will pay for improvements they need to operate. 
``This was a sweatshop,'' said Glenn Meyers, the president of Rare 
Medium, referring to the company's space on West 18th Street. ``There 
was lead cable in the risers and no electricity,'' he said, adding 
that there were problems of electrical interference from industrial 
companies still operating in the building. ``We had to put in fiber 
risers for telecommunications, more electricity and surge protection,'' 
Meyers said. ``We fixed the building for the landlord and changed 
$5 space to $25 space.'' Nevertheless, he said, the company may be 
forced by its rapid growth to consider moving. ``We are pretty much 
maxed out of space here,'' he said. ``That's how it goes in this business, 
you grow, max and move.'' Brokers said successful companies that are 
moving to larger quarters typically sublet their old space to startup 
companies that benefit from the improvements already made. There appears 
to be another side to this landlord-tenant duet. Real-estate executives 
say landlords are often willing to spend money building space for 
new-media companies with questionable prospects and no credit, because 
they can usually rent it to another high-tech company without doing 
much more than painting the walls. ``Our track record with Internet 
companies is better than average, but if they get in trouble, they 
usually merge and somebody else steps in,'' said James Doran, director 
of property management for Trinity Real Estate. ``If you do have one 
go under, what you are left with is a prebuilt unit for the next guy. 
This is usually not the case with standard office tenants.'' We wire 
our spaces to the hilt, so that when we grow and move on, it is suitable 
for a startup,'' said Ronald Ruegg, controller of Interworld Corp., 
which went from an apartment to three small spaces of under 5,000 
square feet each in Chelsea to 50,000 square feet at 395 Hudson St., 
between King and Charlton streets. Visitors to Interworld are greeted 
by a glassed-in computer room as they step off the elevators, with 
the blinking lights of the powerful machines indicating the work going 
on within. The room is meant to convey the look of matured high technology, 
said John Henderson, a designer with Studios Architecture, which designed 
the interior. Strictly speaking, Interworld is not a new-media company, 
its executives insist, but they admit that because they are involved 
in electronic commerce they get counted as a Silicon Alley company. 
``Our expertise is in transaction processing,'' said Charles Rich, 
a senior strategic analyst for the company. He said the company produced 
systems that allowed companies selling on the Internet to fulfill 
orders and process payments. ``We are here because the relevant expertise 
is on Wall Street,'' he said. ``When you need to process a large volume 
of highly valuable transactions and do it without making mistakes, 
you are describing what Wall Street has been doing for years.'' But 
the Interworld executives say their admiration for Wall Street talent 
does not extend to wanting to physically be downtown. The prewired 
spaces in the Plug 'n' Go program were unattractive, Ruegg said, because 
they were not specialized for Interworld's needs. ``We wanted to build 
our own space and do it our way,'' he said. And although it presents 
a corporate front for customers and investors, the company is still 
a high-tech operation with a pool table, a pinball machine and a weight 
room to allow employees to work off strain and tension. ``We have 
a cultural advantage here,'' Rich said. ``Downtown is very impersonal. 
This location protects our identity.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>