<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981212.0156 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
If I were Oliver Stone, I'd be gathering material right now for a 
new film on the National Basketball Association's plot to wreck the 
season to save the game. I'd probably give the film a jokey title, 
``Hoop Schemes'' or ``We Got No Game,'' so as not to scare off the 
Shaq and ``Space Jam'' crowd who could wander into the theater by 
mistake. But this would be a serious piece of work about a conspiracy 
so pernicious it would need an Independent Referee to untangle. Once 
we nailed the NBA, we might move on to the National Football League, 
although its resistance to instant replay is pretty much the same 
issue: management keeping control of the game. The really complicated 
stories of the week, Mike Tyson's training camp as a psychiatric halfway 
house and the revelation that those cute college kids are playing 
with point spreads again, may have to be online stories, because psyches 
and souls are so hard to dissect on screen without animation. First, 
basketball. Commissioner David Stern draws a salary in the high seven 
figures because he is that much smarter than the rest of us. He managed 
to take a struggling sport, a gambler's game that had lost public 
confidence, and turn it into a hot entertainment commodity. His was 
a simple genius; he moved the league away from mere winning and losing, 
which is sport's traditional point-of-sale strategy, and hustled it 
as a fashion show, an outpost of hip-hop, a global export, a ``Cheers'' 
for deranged celebrities like Woody Allen and Jack Nicholson. But 
Stern realized before the rest of us did that the NBA was in trouble 
again. The NBA was becoming a mature product and its bad boys were 
endangering its brand equity. Despite the minor market correction 
of having Michael Jordan quit for a season, no new transcendent crossover 
personality emerged. The league was on a plateau and in jeopardy of 
rolling off its Just Do It edge. The mere superstars, Hakeem, Sir 
Charles, were simply old, while the good (Grant Hill), the bad (Allen 
Iverson) and the ugly (Dennis Rodman) were getting tired. Also, all 
those teen-agers who had been signed out of special ed were simply 
not that interesting yet. Stern sensed the league needed a sabbatical. 
It had to let out some air. The current Bulls market required a major 
correction. So here we are, deep in a lockout siege. Some days the 
possibility of even a postseason becomes more remote. There were days 
last week when optimism rose like a trial balloon to see if anyone 
cared beyond journeymen, like Charles Oakley, who need the dough and 
are not getting younger. The fans, the ones expected to rant and rave, 
have been acting strangely grateful for the time off. What are they 
doing with their new leisure? One hopes they are not watching the 
women's winter pro league and men's and women's college games too 
fanatically. Once fans get intense about a sport, trouble follows. 
Every time college basketball spikes in popularity, ungrateful athlete-scholars 
begin to wonder why they are doing all the heavy lifting while the 
colleges and the coaches make all the money. Next thing you know, 
some snake offers an apple in exchange for blowing a layup. No big 
deal, assures the snake. Very big deal. Scandals divert coaches from 
what they are supposed to do _ win games _ and force them to become 
father figures, counselors, psychologists, baby sitters, in loco parentis, 
heaven help us, teachers. Next thing you know, this will start happening 
in the women's game. Once there was money to be made in women's college 
hoops, men began pushing women out of coaching jobs. Now that is happening 
in pro hoops as well. Before long, women basketball players will learn 
to shave. The less said about Mike Tyson the better. Nevertheless, 
it is to boxing's everlasting credit the way it senses the needs of 
its mentally ill athletes to work out their problems with each other 
in public. Football has shown much of the same sensitivity to its 
performers' need for therapeutic violence, although it also protects 
their right to be violent in private. A recent book by Jeff Benedict 
and Don Yaeger, ``Pros and Cons: The Criminals Who Play in the NFL'' 
(Warner Books), has estimated that one of five NFL players has been 
charged with a serious crime. The book has been ignored by the league, 
by the television sports shows it controls, and even by the network 
magazine shows on the networks that broadcast games. This is shortsighted. 
The book could get our minds off instant replay, which is a terrible 
idea because it would take control of the game away from the referees, 
who unconsciously make decisions for the good of the sport. Call it 
wishful officiating, which this year means wishing the Jets win the 
Super Bowl and coach Bill gets to thank his sponsors, God and Cadillac, 
for not locking him out. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>