<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981212.0143 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
College football's most coveted prize looked lonely in that trophy 
case. That's what the 18-year-old Californian was thinking four years 
ago as he gazed at Earl Campbell's 1977 Heisman, kept behind glass 
at the University of Texas. His name was Ricky Williams. He was a 
would-be Longhorn on a recruiting trip. Williams made his prospective 
coaches a promise right then and there. Bring him to Austin and he 
would win another bronze statue to go with Campbell's. He was cocky 
enough as a freshman to make ``heisman(AT)UT'' part of his e-mail 
address, even though he was a blocking and pass-catching fullback 
in a pro-style offense that first year. He was hurt enough last year 
at not being invited to New York for the Heisman ceremony _ despite 
being the nation's leading rusher in his junior season _ that he thought 
of turning professional. But Williams returned for his senior year, 
and Saturday night at the Downtown Athletic Club he was expected to 
receive what is considered college football's highest individual honor, 
in what was not expected to be a very close vote. His numbers are 
prodigious. He owns all or part of 16 National Collegiate Athletic 
Association Division I records, including most career rushing yards 
_ 6,279 _ which Tony Dorsett held for 22 years until Williams' final 
game of the 1998 season. His biggest achievement, however, may be 
expanding the perception of how a Heisman Trophy winner looks and 
acts. He looks like an art student off the field with the dreadlocks, 
the stud in his tongue and the four tattoos, the most colorful being 
the Mighty Mouse on his arm. But on the field, Williams is a 6-foot-1-inch, 
225-pound bulldozer who prefers to use his 4.3-second speed in the 
40-yard dash to run over defenders, rather than around them. Williams 
is a gifted athlete who spends summers as an outfielder in the Philadelphia 
Phillies organization, but whose eventual goal is to put an education 
degree to work teaching elementary school. He speaks engagingly of 
the evolution of the reggae star Bob Marley, but is just as enthusiastic 
while discussing the legacy of Doak Walker, the 1948 Heisman winner 
whom Williams befriended a year ago and helped comfort during his 
paralysis after a skiing accident. Walker died this fall. Williams 
even wants to change what the Heisman Trophy means. Told that the 
trophy was college football's greatest individual honor, Williams 
shook his head vigorously in dissent. ``I disagree,'' he said. ``It's 
a team award. ``You can't become a finalist without the effort and 
hard work of the whole team. The best part of this whole season is 
that I was part of a Texas team that won eight games.'' The Texas 
teams in Williams' freshman and sophomore years were better, but this 
year's Longhorns _ 8-3 and Cotton Bowl bound _ are his favorite. He 
decided to return for his senior year last January after a lunch with 
the new coach, Mack Brown, and a moving experience at his church in 
San Diego over the Christmas break. Brown, who built a national power 
at North Carolina, assured him only that the Longhorns would be disciplined 
and committed to reversing the 4-7 record of the year before. Not 
a word was said about the number of carries Williams might get or 
a push for the Heisman Trophy. It was what Williams wanted to hear; 
he had come into Texas with a 10-2 Sugar Bowl team, and wanted to 
come out with a winning record. Then Bishop Joel Trout delivered a 
sermon at the North Park Apostolic Church that straightened Williams 
up in his pew. It was about the grass not always being greener on 
the other side. ``It made me think that I was pretty happy where I 
was,'' Williams said. ``Why would I need to get more when I really 
don't need it, and risk being unhappy?'' He liked school. He liked 
his frequent visits to children's hospitals and elementary schools. 
He liked being a Longhorn. ``I've learned a lot about life, about 
football, about dealing with people,'' he said. ``You really do grow 
up in college.'' Still, Texas began the season 1-2 after blowout losses 
to UCLA and Kansas State. Entering the season, Williams acknowledged 
that any Heisman hopes he had were compromised by what most considered 
a rebuilding year for Texas. He even lamented that the Heisman had 
come down to recognizing ``the best player on the best team.'' Early 
in the season, the three other players who would become Heisman finalists 
_ all quarterbacks _ gained momentum that threatened to knock Williams 
out. UCLA's Cade McNown was leading comebacks and amassing 3,130 yards 
and 23 touchdowns as the Bruins maintained a perfect record until 
the final week of the season. Likewise, Kansas State's Michael Bishop 
was putting up terrific numbers: 2,844 yards and 23 touchdown passes, 
14 more touchdowns on runs _ until the Wildcats' perfect season was 
ruined in the Big 12 championship game. Kentucky's Tim Couch, a junior, 
went overland for 4,275 passing yards and 36 touchdowns in an all-out 
passing attack dubbed Air Raid. But the Longhorns quietly regrouped, 
reeling off six straight victories, because Brown turned Williams' 
Heisman campaign into a team crusade. They upset Nebraska, 20-16, 
in Lincoln behind Williams' 150 yards and a touchdown-saving tackle 
he made on an interception, which turned the game around. Cornhusker 
fans were so impressed that many stayed to give Williams a standing 
ovation as he left the field. The Longhorns beat Oklahoma in a game 
made more poignant by Williams, who received permission to wear No. 
37 _ Walker's number _ at the Cotton Bowl in Dallas, where the Southern 
Methodist star played his home games. At halftime in a tight game 
against Oklahoma State, Brown apologized to Williams for abandoning 
the running game to ride the hot hand of the freshman quarterback, 
Major Applewhite. ``He told me that we talked too much about his individual 
records,'' Brown said. ``Then he went over to our offensive coordinator 
and told him to keep throwing the ball.'' The Longhorns won, 37-34, 
Applewhite threw for a school-record 408 yards, and Williams rushed 
for 90 yards _ 42 of them on the game-winning drive. Afterward, Brown 
asked his players to stand up if they wanted Williams to win the Heisman. 
``They jumped to their feet,'' said an emotional Brown. ``I mean everybody. 
It was the neatest thing I've seen. This has been a magical year.'' 
Finally, there was the afternoon Williams broke Dorsett's record, 
in the last game of the season against a blood rival, Texas A&AMP;M, 
at Darrell K. Royal Texas Memorial Stadium. He came in needing 63 
yards. He told Brown that since the record run would be replayed for 
years, he wanted a long one. One with style. Late in the first quarter, 
Williams burst 60 yards, first inside, then out. The record fell with 
Dorsett cheering on the sideline and thousands of Longhorn-hating 
Aggies reluctantly clapping along. Williams ended the day with 259 
yards, and the Longhorns ended it with a 26-24 victory. ``You know, 
Ricky has called his own shots everywhere along the way,'' Brown said. 
``I never will doubt him.'' It was likely that the Heisman voters 
didn't, either. Whether they knew about that day four years ago in 
the Texas trophy room or not, it looked like Williams would give Campbell's 
trophy a twin. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>