<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981212.0148 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
White House aides grimly set about the task Saturday of securing 218 
House votes to prevent the impeachment of President Clinton on four 
grave charges of presidential misconduct reported by the Judiciary 
Committee. Aides spent the day reaching undecided members of the House 
and marshaling legal and political arguments against impeachment. 
There was neither hope nor pervasive gloom among White House officials, 
only a sense of unreality and a determination to do everything in 
their power to save Clinton from the ignominy of being only the second 
President in history to be impeached. Clinton left for Jerusalem early 
Saturday with no further comment on the impeachment votes beyond his 
latest statement of contrition delivered on Friday afternoon. But 
a political ally who spoke with the president on Friday night, after 
the Judiciary Committee approved three articles of impeachment, said 
that Clinton was in a state of ``disbelief'' about the week's events. 
The president did not think he would lose his job, Sen. Robert Torricelli, 
D-N.J., said in an interview. But he has not yet reconciled himself 
to the strong possibility that the House next week will impeach him 
and plunge the country into a period of constitutional crisis. ``The 
president knows ultimately the position of the Senate is against impeachment,'' 
Torricelli said. ``I don't think he is weighing the possibility of 
ultimately being removed from office. He is more focused on the fact 
that he will be distracted from his responsibilities and the nation 
will be engaged in a protracted and divisive legal struggle in the 
United States Senate.'' Clinton was not making telephone calls to 
members of Congress from Air Force One en route to Israel, aides said, 
but they did not rule out his using free time on the four-day journey 
to contact members. Two undecided Republican moderates, Reps. Rick 
Lazio of New York and Jon Fox of Pennsylvania, were among the 13 members 
of Congress accompanying the president on the Middle East trip. The 
White House strategy boiled down to two central elements: to provide 
any wavering members of the House a detailed legal defense of the 
president, while driving home the point that a vote to impeach and 
remove Clinton from office would have dire effects not only on the 
nation but on the Republican Party. The president's allies are reminding 
members that the likelihood that the Senate will not convict Clinton 
does not lessen the import of next week's House vote. ``We are telling 
them that a vote for impeachment is not a statement of principle or 
a way to punish the president,'' one senior aide involved in the president's 
defense said Saturday. ``A partisan vote for impeachment would not 
remove the president but would mark this Congress in history and plunge 
us into a God-awful spectacle of tying all three branches of government 
in knots for months over allegations of sexual infidelity.'' Gregory 
Craig, the White House special counsel who is coordinating the anti-impeachment 
effort, said the committee's deliberations this week have been unfair 
and deeply partisan, and have alienated the American people. He reminded 
Congress again of what the public has been saying in polls since the 
Monica Lewinsky scandal surfaced 11 months ago. ``I appeal to the 
members of the House of Representatives to approach this grave and 
solemn duty with an open heart, with an open mind, and with a full 
appreciation of the desires of the American people,'' Craig said. 
``For in the end, the American people will make the final judgment 
about whether the impeachment of this president is in the national 
interest.'' White House political advisers began making naked political 
appeals to undecided moderate Republicans to try to sway their votes, 
arguing that a public that opposes the removal of Clinton by a wide 
margin would not soon forget their votes and would punish them at 
the polls in 2000. ``I have a hard time believing that a great and 
storied political party is this hellbent on its political destruction,'' 
a senior White House aide said. White House polls taken late this 
week showed no slippage in support for the president, aides said. 
Clinton's job approval rating is at nearly 70 percent and two-thirds 
of Americans oppose his removal from office, according to an official 
familiar with the poll results. ``There has been absolutely zero change 
through all of this,'' the official said. He said that only about 
25 percent of respondents believe that the House will actually impeach 
the president, based on what they have seen so far of the case against 
him. ``They are going to be angry if Congress proves them wrong,'' 
he said. Torricelli said House Democratic leaders have told him there 
is no way to predict how the House will vote on the impeachment resolution 
at the end of next week. White House officials are operating on the 
same assumption, although they are prepared for the worst. ``I think 
they're hurtling toward a partisan impeachment, but there definitely 
are enough undecideds to result in a different outcome,'' one top 
presidential aide said. ``This reminds me of Rosemary in the movie 
`Rosemary's Baby' waking up and seeing chaos all around her and saying, 
`This is no dream, this is really happening.''' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>