<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981212.0137 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
If Rear Adm. John Scudi had been more discreet _ if the rovings of 
his heart had not drawn witnesses and whispering _ he might still 
be sitting quietly behind a desk at the Pentagon, his career, reputation 
and pension intact. If the transgressions attributed to him were merely 
sexual, and not entwined with other accusations of wrongdoing, he 
probably would not be under house arrest at the National Naval Medical 
Center in Bethesda, Md. But what triggered the Navy's investigation 
of Scudi, and what he was found guilty of early this month at an administrative 
hearing, was not adultery alone. It was a pattern of deceit and denial, 
of steering $150,000 in military contracts to his mistress and then 
lying about it. It was also the fact, Navy officials said, that people 
working around him caught a whiff of that corruption, compelling the 
Navy to make clear its disapproval. In addition to 30 days of house 
arrest and a fine of about $7,000, Scudi agreed to early retirement 
at a lower rank, with a reduced pension. Scudi's case refocused attention 
on the military's widely criticized, thoroughly scrutinized prohibition 
against adultery, a rule that also factored into charges filed by 
the Army earlier this month against Maj. Gen. David Hale, a two-star 
general. The experiences of both officers shed further light on the 
circumstances under which military officials are most likely to take 
disciplinary action against men and women accused of adultery. ``There 
is some rhyme and reason to these things,'' said Col. Frank Moran, 
who is retired from the Air Force and is the executive director of 
the Boston Bar Association. Moran and other experts on military law 
say that accusations of adultery trigger investigations and punishment 
principally when the adultery is flagrant enough to jeopardize the 
morale of a unit or operation, when the people involved or the spouses 
of the people involved hold different ranks, and when there are other 
offenses. ``I think there are some rules of the road,'' said Susan 
Barnes, a Denver lawyer who specializes in military issues that concern 
women, ``the main one being that adultery is rarely made a part of 
a court-martial unless there are other, more serious charges.'' That 
is not to say that military prosecutions of adultery are even-handed. 
Ms. Barnes and several other people who monitor the military justice 
system said that women were often treated more harshly than men. For 
example, Navy officials declined to subject Scudi to a court-martial 
and possible prison sentence, choosing instead to hold a closed-door 
administrative hearing. Air Force officials, on the other hand, were 
on a course to put 1st Lt. Kelly Flinn through a court-martial on 
charges of adultery, giving false statements and disobeying orders 
until she publicized her case. Facing intense criticism and charges 
of sexism, Air Force officials ultimately agreed to abandon the court-martial 
and to grant Lt. Flinn, the nation's first female B-52 bomber pilot, 
a general discharge last year. Another inconsistency suggested by 
a comparison of the cases of Scudi and Lt. Flinn is that high-ranking 
officers sometimes draw more lenient treatment. ``Commanders are more 
prone to be sympathetic toward high-ranking officers, because these 
are their friends,'' said Mike Powell, a former lieutenant colonel 
in the Marines and a lawyer who defends officers and enlisted people 
accused by the military of crimes. The initial treatment of Hale supported 
that assessment. Although the wife of an officer under his command 
had filed a complaint saying that he had coerced her into a sexual 
relationship, Hale was allowed to retire in February, seemingly as 
a way of avoiding further investigation and prosecution. Only after 
those circumstances came under public criticism did Army officials 
switch courses, charging Hale with 17 counts of misconduct, including 
adultery, making false statements and obstructing justice. Hale could 
face a court-martial. Despite those discrepancies, experts said, there 
are certain truths connecting many of the cases in which military 
officials prosecute adultery, whether those prosecutions proceed to 
an administrative hearing or court-martial. Officials take particular 
exception to behavior that threatens the orderly hierarchy of rank 
or smacks of the abuse of a position of power, experts said. Lt. Flinn 
had an affair with the husband of a female airman who held a lower 
rank. Rear Adm. Ralph Tindal, a Navy officer who was put under house 
arrest and was coaxed into early retirement in 1995 for offenses including 
adultery, was accused and found guilty in an administrative hearing 
of engaging in an affair with a female enlisted aide directly under 
his supervision. Military experts said that investigations and prosecutions 
of adultery tended to go forward almost exclusively when someone around 
the officer or enlisted person in question had lodged an actual complaint, 
which happened in the cases of Scudi and Lt. Flinn. Such a complaint 
suggests that the adultery is conspicuous and may threaten the authority 
or respect that the person is able to command. Several military officials 
and experts on military law said that one reason no punitive action 
was taken against Gen. Joseph Ralston, an Air Force officer who was 
briefly considered last year for the position of chairman of the Joint 
Chiefs of Staff, was that the adulterous relationship to which he 
had confessed occurred more than a decade earlier; and Ralston did 
not lie when confronted with rumors about it. But his career did suffer. 
After his admission became public, he was essentially forced by public 
pressure to withdraw his name from consideration for the chairmanship. 
``One big factor is the notoriety of the thing,'' said John Jenkins, 
the associate dean of the law school at George Washington University 
and a retired Navy admiral. ``The adultery has to bring discredit 
to the military, and Ralston's case is a perfect example that if nobody 
knew about it at the time of the event, there was no discredit.'' 
Jenkins was referring to the frequently overlooked fact that under 
military law, adultery in and of itself is not a crime; for a case 
to be prosecuted, it must be proved that the adultery tarnished the 
reputation of the military or compromised good order or discipline. 
Although Defense Secretary William Cohen emphasized those conditions 
in proposing new guidelines last summer to regulate and limit prosecutions 
of adultery, the conditions have existed for more than four decades. 
The new guidelines _ which are still under review _ merely spell out 
in detail the kinds of situations that meet the criteria. The guidelines 
also underline what several military experts said had long been the 
case: by and large, military officials are not interested in ferreting 
out adulterers or taking a stern moral position against adultery. 
When Navy commanders make condoms available to sailors docking in 
a port of call, for example, those sailors are not grilled about their 
marital status, Navy officials acknowledged. Navy officials who spoke 
on the condition of anonymity said that Scudi had drawn scrutiny first 
and foremost because of improprieties in the awarding of contracts. 
``In 9 out of 10 cases, adultery cases aren't investigated beyond 
the preliminary stage,'' said Robert Maginnis, a senior policy adviser 
for a conservative political group and a retired Army colonel. ``They 
have enough to do just keeping operations moving along.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>