<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981212.0075 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Joseph Estrada won a smashing victory seven months ago in the Philippine 
presidential election as a champion of the poor. But today, diplomats, 
business people and politicians say, Estrada is mainly benefiting 
the rich, the very people he inveighed against on the hustings. Some 
people here fear that under Estrada's relaxed style of leadership, 
the Philippines is drifting back into corruption and cronyism, a hallmark 
of the country's deposed dictator, Ferdinand Marcos, and an occasional 
weakness of his successors, Corazon Aquino and Fidel Ramos. Since 
taking office in June, Estrada has helped nudge one of his main campaign 
contributors into the top job at San Miguel Corp., the biggest company 
in the Philippines. He has worked to rescue Philippine Airlines, which 
is controlled by another wealthy supporter. And he paved the way for 
a politically connected Hong Kong company to acquire control of Philippine 
Long Distance Telephone. Two recipients of Estrada's aid were notorious 
cronies of the late Marcos: Eduardo Cojuangco, scion of one the most 
powerful Filipino families, who now runs San Miguel, and Lucio Tan, 
an ethnic Chinese billionaire who controls Philippine Airlines and 
is considered the richest man in the Philippines. ``It's something 
we are watching and worrying about,'' said Guillermo Luz, executive 
director of the Makati Business Club, which represents corporate interests. 
``Because it's not just the old cronies who are coming back. It is 
the practice of cronyism that is coming back.'' To be sure, nobody 
is comparing Estrada to Marcos, who awarded vast monopolies to trusted 
supporters and is suspected of looting billions of dollars from the 
Philippines during his 20-year rule. But Estrada's actions are raising 
eyebrows even in a country where high-level corruption is as familiar 
as the gaily painted jitneys that carom through the streets of Manila. 
``Everyone has been rooting for him to succeed,'' said Sergio Osmena, 
a member of the Philippine Senate who was jailed by Marcos. ``But 
sometimes you neglect moral principles in paying back debts.'' Adding 
to the fears of resurgent cronyism is the strange case of Imelda Marcos, 
the widow of Marcos. After denying for more than a decade that she 
and her husband plundered the country, Mrs. Marcos unexpectedly announced 
on Monday that she intended to sue several Marcos cronies to recover 
more than $12 billion in assets that her husband amassed during his 
presidency. ``We own practically everything,'' Mrs. Marcos said in 
an interview with The Philippine Inquirer. Her admission left officials 
here flummoxed, since they have spent more than a decade fruitlessly 
prosecuting the Marcos family. Advisers to Estrada denied that the 
president was engaged in Marcos-style cronyism. They said his critics 
were distorting well-intentioned gestures by Estrada to undermine 
his credibility. ``In the first place, crony capitalism only thrives 
in an autocratic or dictatorial government,'' said Edgardo Espiritu, 
the finance secretary and one of Estrada's closest advisers. ``In 
a system that is democratic, everyone must compete in a field that 
is supposed to be level.'' Espiritu acknowledged that Estrada had 
befriended some powerful tycoons. But he added: ``You may be a friend 
of the president, you may be a friend of politicians. But if you want 
to survive in the field, you have to be efficient, and you have to 
be ready to compete.'' Estrada's ties to wealthy businessmen contrast 
with his careful cultivation of an image as friend of the common man. 
Even on screen, the 61-year-old former actor often played Robin Hood 
characters. With his generous paunch, garbled diction and Elvis Presley-style 
coiffure, Estrada put off many affluent, educated voters. But those 
same qualities made him a hero to poor voters, who referred to him 
by his nickname Erap, which is a play on the Tagalog word for friend, 
``pare.''. Even now, rank-and-file voters believe Estrada is looking 
out for them. The president's approval ratings are among the highest 
of any Filipino leader and have not been damaged by charges of cronyism. 
``My dedication to the poor will be unwavering,'' Estrada said in 
an interview last month at the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation summit 
meeting in Malaysia. ``But I would say that although we are pro-poor, 
we are not anti-rich. We are pro-business because I believe business 
leads to growth.'' Indeed, political strategists here said Estrada's 
campaign was financed by some very rich business people, notably Tan 
and Cojuengco. It is difficult to determine exactly how much they 
contributed because laws on disclosing campaign contributions are 
riddled with loopholes. But several political experts said Tan was 
the largest single donor to the campaign. It is clear that he has 
easy access to the president. During the summit meeting in Malaysia, 
Tan hovered at the back of the room while Estrada gave interviews 
to the foreign news media. ``He owes Lucio Tan a lot of favors,'' 
said Alexander Magno, president of the Foundation for Economic Freedom, 
a research group in Manila. Tan has been struggling for months to 
rescue Philippine Airlines, the nation's flagship airline, which he 
took over in 1994 and which is $2.1 billion in debt. Estrada has plunged 
into the rescue effort, brokering an agreement between the airline 
and its union, and trying to attract foreign carriers to invest. Estrada 
insists that the government will not bail out Philippine Airlines, 
but he also says he will not allow the nation's flag carrier to fail. 
As a result, he is likely to grant a request from Tan that would tighten 
restrictions on rivals and make it harder to compete with Philippine 
Airlines. And the government is trying to line up public and private 
bank loans for Tan's company. At San Miguel, the giant beer and beverage 
company, the government's role was less direct. Cojuangco had been 
frustrated that he could not take control of the company even though 
his family owned 20 percent of its shares. A Philippine court had 
denied him the right to vote the shares because of charges that his 
family got them unlawfully during the Marcos regime. Just before Estrada 
took office in June, however, the court finally allowed Cojuangco 
to vote his shares. He soon persuaded other stockholders _ including 
the government, which owns 27 percent of the shares _ to support his 
effort to oust the chairman. Sen. Osmena said Estrada's advisers pressed 
other shareholders to accede to Cojuangco. Some political analysts 
contend that although the Marcos-era cronies are making a comeback, 
the Philippines now has more vigorous institutions, like the Legislature 
and the news media, to blunt their influence. However, at a conference 
here on Dec. 4, the former American ambassador to the Philippines, 
Nicholas Platt, warned that Americans were reluctant to invest because 
of a perception that cronyism was on the rise. Platt said investors 
were particularly skeptical of the Philippine courts, which have failed 
to convict either Mrs. Marcos or her husband's associates. ``The Philippines 
is a forgiving society, an engaging trait to many,'' Platt said. ``But 
international investors ask whether they will get a fair hearing or 
a rapid resolution when involved in a dispute here.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>