<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981212.0086 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
From his perch greeting customers at the Main Street Cafe in the heart 
of the quaint downtown here, Paul Janos found the House Judiciary 
Committee's party-line votes to impeach President Clinton surprisingly 
familiar. Janos, a candidate for mayor of this Hudson River village 
of 11,000 people 25 miles north of New York City, has himself stood 
square in the middle of squabbles between his fellow Republicans and 
Democrats, not over a sex scandal, but over the more mundane questions 
of how to develop the waterfront. ``I see what happens with partisan 
politics in a small village like this,'' said Janos, 43, who grew 
up here and opened his bustling restaurant six years ago. ``I can't 
even imagine what it's like in Washington.'' ``I know that a lot of 
people are tired of it, myself included, but what's right is right, 
what's wrong is wrong,'' Janos said of Clinton. ``I don't think he 
should be exempt. I'm afraid of what the market reaction would be, 
though. I wonder, in the scope of things, is it worth the turmoil?'' 
As the Judiciary Committee approved articles of impeachment, the seriousness 
of the situation began to sink in around this historic village, where 
red plastic bags reading ``Season's Greetings'' covered the parking 
meters downtown, encouraging shopping by eliminating the cost of parking. 
Many people, like Janos, complained that the Monica Lewinsky scandal 
had dragged on too long and the investigation had cost too much, comparing 
the endless publicity to that of the O.J. Simpson trial. But people 
in this media-saturated region have refocused on the matter in recent 
days, and a number said it is time for Clinton to go, even as they 
worried that impeachment might be the wrong way to achieve this or 
would threaten the nation's high-flying economy and strong position 
in the world. With its landmarks and legends, from the Rockefeller 
mansion to Sleepy Hollow, Tarrytown is a quiet place with views of 
the Hudson and the Tappan Zee Bridge. Commuters pour off Metro-North 
trains at the 108-year-old Victorian train station, some heading to 
the million-dollar estates on the hill, others to row houses and condominiums 
they bought for $200,000 to be near good schools. Children kick a 
soccer ball down Main Street, as civic groups meet at the Masonic 
Hall. It is a place of thoughtful suburban parents struggling with 
what to do about Clinton, who earned 55 percent of the village's vote 
in 1996, and carried it with 52 percent in 1992. ``I've been fluctuating 
all day long,'' said Claudia Smith, a trademark lawyer, as she waited 
at the YMCA for her son, Evan Davies, 5, to finish swimming lessons. 
``I'm torn.'' ``The more I read about it, the more I change my mind 
about how serious this matter is,'' added Ms. Smith, who said she 
was tempted to stay in the car on Friday afternoon to listen to the 
Judiciary Committee debate on the radio. ``It's not just jokes about 
the dress anymore.'' Indeed, the snickering has stopped and the bickering 
has begun. At the hardware store, a man with a couple of divorces 
under his belt said the president should be ousted, while his friend 
said the scandal was just about sex, nothing significant. At the Y, 
a Democratic mom was denouncing the tactics of the Republican congressional 
majority as absurd, when a Republican mom butted in to echo the call 
for impeachment. And at the Main Street Cafe, a group of retired school 
employees from York, Pa., who stopped for lunch at the end of a five-day 
bus tour were remembering the impeachment vote against President Nixon 
a quarter-century ago and differing over whether men can be expected 
to say no when tempted. ``This was not a government crime,'' said 
John Markish, 71, who said he had been propositioned practically every 
Saturday night while playing bass in a dance band as a young man. 
``The same way your father might do it, or your neighbor might do 
_ except there's no Senate investigation of your neighbor.'' Sara 
Dice, 73, a former school secretary, said, ``It's a crime against 
his family.'' ``And society,'' added Dee Verostic, an accounting teacher, 
who said she retired after hearing one too many stories about students 
having sex in the stairwell. Miss Verostic suggested that Clinton 
be shunned, like the practice in Amish country, with his face banned 
from every newspaper, and perhaps be forced to wear a sweatshirt with 
a big letter on it, as in ``The Scarlet Letter.'' Though Republicans, 
Miss Verostic and her friends voted for Clinton and had hoped that 
with his ideas for education and the elderly, he would be the best 
president they had seen. ``I can't figure it out,'' she said, ``why 
good sense doesn't go with intelligence.'' All around the village, 
people were shaking their heads at the same question, calling Clinton 
a jerk and worse, saying they could not trust him and wished he and 
the whole scandal would go away. They said they would have readily 
forgiven the president had he stood up and admitted wrongdoing in 
January when the scandal surfaced, but they were none too anxious 
for another apology now. The congressman representing the region is 
Benjamin Gilman, who has not disclosed his position on impeachment. 
Some people have been shutting out the issue. Darron Copeland, a tax 
accountant from Stamford, Conn., who plunked down $500 at Tarrytown 
Art and Antiques Co. for a rust-colored egg chair from the 1960s, 
said he would rather watch the History Channel than 30 seconds of 
political commentary these days. Cynthia Ferguson, president of the 
local Chamber of Commerce, said people had clapped when she changed 
the channel from the hearing in the waiting room of the hospital where 
she had been to visit her father. But others were following the committee's 
hearing closely. Janos said he had been persuaded that Clinton should 
be punished, when the Republicans called witnesses who had been imprisoned 
for perjury. Peter Royston, who was shopping for a surprise for his 
wife at Whimsies Incognito, mentioned David Schippers, the Republicans' 
chief lawyer, by name. Though he found Schippers' argument for impeachment 
convincing, Royston said he favored censure over impeachment. ``It's 
not just a slap on the wrist, he said. ``It's going to be with him 
for history. Long after he's dead, they'll say, `That's the guy who 
was punished for this.''' Gregg Goldberg, the fourth-generation owner 
of Goldberg's Hardware, which opened in 1904, worries more about business 
than politics. ``If you take him out of office, it could hurt me right 
here,'' Goldberg, 31, said, patting the pockets of his jeans. ``Let 
him get a divorce from his wife,'' Goldberg said, suggesting, like 
several others, that Clinton face the consequences of his actions 
in court, as a private citizen, after his term ends. ``Don't take 
him out of executive office and disrupt the country.'' But others 
think it is too late, with the country already woefully disrupted, 
not to mention embarrassed. The retired school employees suggested 
comparing a list of legislation passed by this Congress and the hours 
politicians have spent in front of television cameras talking about 
the president. Julia Fullenweider, a nurse heading to New York for 
the evening on Friday, complained of the time and money she felt had 
been wasted in a country where many children have no health insurance. 
Back at the Main Street Cafe, a portrait of George Washington embroidered 
by Janos' great-great aunt with the message ``Never Told a Lie'' was 
a reminder to patrons of what was happening in Washington. ``If he's 
lying about this, what else is he covering up?'' asked Mrs. Ferguson, 
the Chamber of Commerce president. ``I just don't know who to trust.'' 
Her husband, Douglas Ferguson, an investment manager who favors impeachment, 
said: ``Other presidents have lied. But because of television, it's 
like he lied in your living room. To you personally.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>