<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981212.0255 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The House Judiciary Committee completed action Saturday on its bill 
of charges against President Clinton, approving a fourth article of 
impeachment to stand alongside the three it voted on Friday. The final 
roll-call came a few hours after President Clinton donned his peacemaker's 
cloak and flew to the Middle East, where he arrived just before midnight 
in an effort to shore up the Wye Plantation accords. He left behind 
a capital in wintry disarray, gripped by a pervasive sense of sadness, 
with grievous divisions between the two parties unmended and legislative 
business effectively stalled. Republicans and Democrats alike viewed 
the road ahead with doubt and apprehension. Along with the rest of 
official Washington, the president's aides grappled with the ever-more 
imminent prospect that he will face trial next year in the Senate. 
``Impeachment by the full House is starting to look inevitable,'' 
a senior White House official said. Congressional leaders prepared 
for a vote on the four articles by the 435 House members this week, 
probably on Thursday. Chances appeared dim for a floor vote on the 
alternative preferred by Democrats, a resolution of censure for his 
misconduct with Monica Lewinsky. Censure was defeated in the committee 
tonight, 22-14, after a lengthy debate. The speaker-designate, Robert 
Livingston, said he would fight any further effort to bring censure 
to the floor. The committee approved the fourth article, in considerably 
watered-down form, by a party-line vote of 21-16. Rep. Dick Gephardt 
of Missouri, the Democratic leader in the House, said that failure 
to permit a floor vote on censure ``will most certainly result in 
a bitterly divided House.'' Ultimately, he suggested, the American 
people would pass judgment on the fairness of the impeachment process. 
Gregory Craig, the president's special counsel, said in a statement 
that ``the certain result'' of the committee's actions ``will be to 
divide the country, gridlock the government and defy the will of the 
people.'' Speaking at the White House, he added: ``Nothing about this 
process has been fair. Nothing about this process has been bipartisan. 
Nothing about this process has won the confidence of the American 
people.'' In a session marred by harsh charges of bad faith and improper 
pressure, Republicans with the backing of most of the committee's 
Democrats substantially narrowed the reach of the fourth article. 
It had originally dealt with allegedly widespread abuses of power, 
but most allegations were removed, leaving only one major charge: 
that Clinton had falsely or incompletely answered many of the 81 questions 
the committee submitted to him. The fourth article as originally constituted 
had been considered the weakest of the lot, with the poorest chance 
of winning approval in the full House. Rep. John Conyers of Michigan, 
the senior Democrat on the committee, became so exercised at one point 
that he exclaimed, ``This does sometimes, to some people, begin to 
take on the appearance of a coup. It's staggering.'' That produced 
an uproar among the Republicans. Rep. Ed Bryant of Tennessee shot 
back, ``This is the orderly process of the Constitution, not troops 
in the streets.'' Rep. Sheila Jackson Lee, one of the fiercest Democratic 
foes of impeachment, accused the Republicans of showing insufficient 
respect to Clinton, who, she heatedly reminded them, ``is still the 
president.'' More than a dozen congressmen, many of them still undecided, 
joined Clinton at Andrews Air Force Base as he boarded Air Force One. 
It seemed probable that the president, always formidable in one-on-one 
situations, would seize the opportunity do some lobbying on the trip. 
Whether he will be able to inject any adrenaline into the flagging 
Middle East peace process is another question. He is to meet privately 
with both Benjamin Netanyahu, the Israeli prime minister, and Yasser 
Arafat, the Palestinian leader, and make a number of public appearances. 
Even in the very best of times, the Middle East has proved a minefield 
for American presidents. In this, the worst of times for his presidency, 
Clinton is taking his own minefield with him, and it is not clear 
how much influence he retains there, if any, given his difficulties 
at home. The president is due back in Washington before Thursday's 
vote in the House. Only Andrew Johnson among Clinton's predecessors 
has ever faced such a perilous roll-call, and Clinton may try once 
again to make a statement that would sway moderate Republicans to 
avoid impeachment. But his closest advisers said they did not know 
what more he could say, beyond another expression of his regret and 
contrition. The president tried that on Friday afternoon, to no avail. 
Republicans looking for an admission from Clinton that he had lied 
were disappointed; most agreed with Rep. Steve Chabot of Ohio that 
``the president did not say nearly enough.'' The advisers said there 
was no chance he would ever do so, if the moderates were seeking an 
acknowledgment of a crime. Impeached by the House, Johnson escaped 
conviction by the Senate by a single vote, but he was enfeebled by 
the process. If impeached, Clinton is expected to survive in the Senate 
by a wider margin, given the close partisan division and the requirement 
for a two-thirds vote to convict. The widespread fear in Washington 
is that he, too, would be crippled, with almost two years left to 
serve on the second term he won in 1996. Several Democrats on the 
Judiciary Committee raised that prospect in arguing that impeachment 
without conviction was a destructive idea. ``The next president and 
the president after that and the president after that,'' asserted 
Rep. Steven Rothman of New Jersey, ``will be looking over their shoulders 
every time they make a controversial decision with a Congress that 
is controlled by the opposition party.'' True to his long-standing 
promise to try to wrap things up by Christmas, the Judiciary Committee's 
chairman, Rep. Henry Hyde of Illinois, gaveled the panel to order 
shortly before 10 o'clock Saturday morning _ an unusual hour for a 
Capitol Hill committee meeting, especially on a Saturday. With the 
10-week inquiry nearing its end, Saturday's session descended almost 
immediately into more partisan wrangling. For more than three hours, 
the two sides had at each other, despite Hyde's efforts to move things 
along. At one point his usual civility slipped a bit as the speeches 
droned on, and he complained, ``We've had everything from aardvark 
to Zimbabwe.'' Both Hyde and Rep. Robert Livingston of Louisiana, 
the incoming speaker, were said by staff members to be opposed to 
allowing a censure resolution to reach the House floor. Their strategic 
calculation was this: If members reluctant to vote for impeachment 
but determined not to let the president escape without punishment 
were given the chance to vote for censure, they would not cast their 
votes for the more severe measure. But Hyde relented to the degree 
of permitting committee debate on censure. Democrats continued to 
push for a floor vote, to no evident effect, with Rep. Thomas Barrett 
of Wisconsin insisting that ``no member of this institution should 
be denied the chance to vote his conscience.'' Later, Rep. Rick Boucher, 
D-Va., introduced the censure resolution, stating that the president 
had ``dishonored the office.'' He said that while ``the president's 
conduct was reprehensible, it did not threaten the nation'' and did 
not warrant impeachment. Republicans termed the resolution a slap 
on the wrist and said it was precisely what Clinton wanted. Little 
of Saturday's debate dealt with the merits of the Republican move 
to narrow the scope of the proposed article four by excluding abuse 
of executive privilege and false statements to the public and White 
House aides. Sponsored by Rep. George Gekas of Pennsylvania, it was 
eventually approved by a vote of 29-5, with three members voting ``present.'' 
Rep. Christopher Cannon of Utah, a Republican, voted ``no'' because 
he favored keeping the excised material in the article, and four Democrats 
voted ``no'' to demonstrate their opposition to the one remaining 
charge in the truncated article. Rep. Charles Schumer, D-N.Y., who 
would have a chance to vote in the Senate trial as a new member of 
that body next year, said one part of the original fourth article 
was ``the greatest reach of all, the most absurd thing'' in any of 
the allegations lodged by the Republicans. That was the charge that 
by lying to the American people in speeches on television Clinton 
had committed an impeachable offense. If he had, Schumer said, every 
president since George Washington had done the same. Rep. Barney Frank 
of Massachusetts restated the Democrats' case that Republicans were 
starting a process ``designed to kick the president out'' in the full 
knowledge that the Senate would never do so. That course of action, 
he said, demeaned the constitutional process as well as the House. 
Hyde rebutted him, quoting the late Rep. Barbara Jordan, D-Texas, 
who in the committee's proceedings against Richard Nixon almost 25 
years ago said that ``the House accuses, the Senate judges.'' The 
House's job, Hyde insisted, was simply to decide ``whether there was 
enough evidence to warrant a Senate trial,'' not fully to weigh the 
evidence itself. Rep. Bill McCollum of Florida, also a Republican, 
summed up his party's view by saying, ``The House does not convict; 
it merely accuses.'' If the Senate failed to convict, he said, the 
House's vote to impeach would stand as a far more effective rebuke 
to Clinton than a mere censure. ``Censure is the scarlet letter,'' 
said Rep. Robert Wexler, D-Fla., in a rejoinder typical of Democratic 
attempts to drive home the seriousness of the House's proceedings. 
``Impeachment is the removal of the president.'' Frank conceded that 
that was not literally true, but in the House ``we hold the keys to 
this door,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>