<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981212.0146 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Louis B. Mayer he is not. Not yet. In a nondescript strip mall here, 
George Jacob from Kerala state in India has just opened a theater 
that shows two first-run Indian films every night. It is testimony, 
of course, to the suburbanization of Indian immigrants _ 110,000 live 
in the 25 counties ringing New York, 20,000 more than in the city 
itself _ but testimony also to the plucky, seat-of-the-pants ingenuity 
of newcomers like Jacob. Like Mayer, the Warner brothers and the Jewish 
immigrants who invented Hollywood, Jacob did not come to movies as 
a fine-arts connoisseur. Mayer dealt in junk before he opened the 
Massachusetts theater that became the germ of Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer. 
But he had an immigrant's visceral feel for the hungers, pains and 
loneliness of a nation of immigrants and guessed that movies could 
provide relief by sweeping people into imagined worlds. Jacob, who 
operates an Indian grocery and video store in nearby Nanuet, has those 
instincts as well. He wants to put compatriots in touch with their 
homeland, with the ways of the parents, brothers and sisters they 
had to leave behind. He also wants to help them show their Americanized 
children the homeland's traditions. ``That is a major issue we're 
confronting here, because you're trying to impose the old cultural 
values in different circumstances,'' said Jacob, whose family name 
has been Anglicized for generations. The 42-year-old Jacob, who has 
the slight build and mustache of Groucho Marx but is far more bashful 
and British-mannered, has a story not atypical of other suburban Indians. 
A hospital administrator, he immigrated 15 years ago to marry his 
wife Saramma in a match arranged by their parents. Settling in East 
Hartford, Conn., he worked as a mental-health administrator. Then 
two years ago he needed to find something for his newly arrived brother, 
so he started the video store and grocery. The store eventually stocked 
10,000 Indian videotapes in four languages and brought home to Jacob 
how important movies were as a link to the old country. His instincts 
were cunningly grounded in marketing principles: Prospering Indians 
were gravitating to the suburbs and many newcomers were settling there 
to be close to jobs at computer firms and hospitals. In November, 
he took a leap, signing a lease on a shuttered twin cinema. He liked 
its ample parking. ``Our Indian ladies are very afraid about night, 
so they want to park very close,'' he said. On a recent weeknight 
at his Maveli Cinema, Jacob took money at the box office, then ushered 
patrons to seats. The projectionist sold Indian snacks like peanut 
sweet balls and fried jackfruit to the sparse crowd. For one moviegoer, 
Renu Kurian, a software engineer in Yorktown, who left her mother 
and sister behind, the blithe romances and domestic dramas remind 
her of the tight ``togetherness of families,'' something she brought 
her 7-year-old, Rachel, to appreciate. For Mrinmoy Mallik, a 27-year-old 
software programmer in northern New Jersey, they relieve the emptiness 
of bachelorhood by recalling love affairs back home. The films are 
laced with splashy musical numbers designed to delight the subcontinent's 
vast poor populace just as Busby Berkeley movies entertained Depression-era 
Americans. The stories are often about lovers plotting to skirt arranged 
marriages without wounding their parents. Shown here, where such marriages 
are a touchy generational issue, the movies can start conversations. 
Now about the Louis B. Mayer part. The restless Jacob already produces 
an Indian cable show in Rockland County. On vacation in India, he 
met with a television executive to explore satellite broadcasts. Then 
he talked with a producer friend about making films based on the lives 
of Indians in the United States so moviegoers in India can get a sense 
of how their kin are faring. The producer ``wants to make a movie 
about a fellow who came here and succeeded and a fellow who came and 
didn't succeed,'' Jacob said. The fellow who succeeded need only turn 
to Jacob as his model. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>