<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981212.0101 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In theory, the independent counsel statute was supposed to be a legal 
traffic light, blinking red and green at the crossroads of law and 
politics. It would stop frivolous charges against high-level officials, 
but serious accusations would be waved on to an outside prosecutor. 
In recent days, however, the statute's already overloaded circuitry 
seems to have blown a fuse. Complaints about the law are coming at 
a critical time: The statute is due to expire next year, and Democrats 
and Republicans are lining to up declare that, after two decades, 
the law intended to keep politics out of corruption cases should be 
allowed to die. Last week an independent bipartisan commission that 
included Howard Baker, the former senator and Reagan administration 
chief of staff, and Griffin Bell, the former Carter administration 
attorney general, issued a report saying the law doesn't work. The 
evidence of breakdown seems to be everywhere. In big-name independent 
counsel cases, like Kenneth Starr's $33 million sex-and-lies impeachment 
investigation of President Clinton, or less pricey prosecutions, like 
Donald Smaltz's unsuccessful $17 million case against former Agriculture 
Secretary Mike Espy, prosecutors seem to be ending up in bitter controversy 
or humiliating defeat. And even when a scandal seems like a natural 
candidate for an independent counsel, involving allegations of serious 
violations of federal election law and accusations against a president 
and vice president, the law doesn't seem to apply _ at least in the 
hands of Attorney General Janet Reno. Over the years about 20 independent 
counsels have been appointed (some ended their tenure after brief 
inquiries that were never made public) to investigate charges against 
both Republican and Democratic presidents, Cabinet officers and lesser 
officials. At the moment, five independent counsels are still in operation, 
in inquiries focused on Clinton and four current or former Cabinet 
officers. Democratic critics cite Starr and Smaltz as prime examples 
of what the statute can produce: overzealous inquisitors operating 
with limitless budgets and without the usual constraints on Justice 
Department prosecutors. The critics complain that Starr and Smaltz 
seemed to be obsessed by playing cat and mouse with a single quarry, 
in the process bullying witnesses and spending years fruitlessly pursuing 
investigative trails that career prosecutors would have dropped in 
months. Of course many of the Democrats who are now complaining about 
Starr were silent when the Republicans assailed Lawrence Walsh's four-year 
independent counsel investigation of the Iran-Contra affair. But even 
that inquiry largely failed to hold anyone criminally liable for the 
profound constitutional issues at the heart of the scandal. The inquiry 
ended abruptly when President George Bush, after being defeated by 
Clinton, pulled the plug on the prosecution by pardoning former Defense 
Secretary Caspar Weinberger and five other former officials on Christmas 
Eve in 1992. Some inquiries have never gotten off the ground. Twice 
in the last two weeks Ms. Reno has terminated 90-day preliminary inquires 
with decisions that cleared Clinton and Vice President Al Gore of 
wrongdoing in campaign fund raising. Her decisions made it highly 
unlikely that either will ever be investigated by an outside prosecutor 
for their role in the 1996 Democratic fund-raising effort. Her recent 
decisions were consistent with her refusals over the last two years 
to seek an outside counsel to investigate myriad charges of campaign 
finance abuse, overruling both FBI Director Louis Freeh and Charles 
La Bella, the former head of her campaign finance unit. Each had concluded 
that the evidence required that the case be sent to an independent 
prosecutor. Sen. Fred Thompson, R-Tenn., chairman of the Senate Governmental 
Affairs Committee, said last week that Ms. Reno's decision was probably 
the ``final nail in the coffin of the independent counsel law.'' If 
Republicans complain that Ms. Reno has set the standard too high in 
the campaign finance case, Democrats complain she has set it too low 
in the case of lower-level Clinton administration officials, who have 
been its most frequent targets. A case in point is the investigation 
of former Housing Secretary Henry Cisneros over the relatively small 
issue of whether he lied to the FBI about how much money he paid his 
former mistress. So for whatever reasons recently, the law has been 
toothless in cases of possibly serious violations of campaign finance 
laws but has been used aggressively to investigate gifts of sports 
tickets, payments to a mistress and whether Clinton lied about his 
relationship with Monica Lewinsky. But it's not over yet. Ms. Reno 
has one more independent counsel decision. On Nov. 30, faced with 
a decision on whether to seek an outside inquiry of Harold Ickes, 
formerly Clinton's deputy chief of staff, Ms. Reno got a 60-day extension. 
At issue is whether Ms. Ickes lied about his activities on behalf 
of the teamsters' union in a labor dispute with a California walnut 
processor. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>