<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981212.0064 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For nearly two months now, the 7,500 workers who punch in every morning 
at Iran Tractor Manufacturing Co. have found themselves with almost 
nothing to do. The assembly line has all but shut, starved of raw 
materials that the government can no longer afford to import. Tractor 
sales have plummeted; most customers are struggling to make ends meet. 
Only the promise of a paycheck keeps workers showing up, but last 
month most got just half their $130 wage. Iran's economy is growing 
sicker by the day. The price of Iranian oil, the export lifeblood, 
has dipped below $10, a 25-year-low that has forced the government 
to slash imports, dig deep into reserves and postpone payments on 
foreign debts. Already, the consequences have been sharp: rising prices, 
plunging productivity, stagnant economic growth. And in their quest 
for further remedies, Iranian leaders seem dwarfed by the country's 
troubles. ``If the government is not capable of solving the economic 
problems, the economic problems could ultimately overwhelm the government,'' 
said Rahim Oskui, a prominent private economist. In political terms, 
the situation has not yet rebounded against President Mohammad Khatami, 
who seems almost as popular as when he was elected 19 months ago. 
But with prices rising, the currency falling and production at factories 
grinding to a halt, there is clear discontent. Economists say there 
are no easy solutions to what Khatami has called Iran's ``chronic 
illness.'' And as he and his rivals weigh the hard choices that remain 
after two decades of economic mismanagement, a widespread sense of 
urgency has left them increasingly exposed. As the world's third-ranking 
oil exporter, behind Saudi Arabia and Norway, Iran possesses a blessing 
and a curse. Even as its population has soared, more than doubling 
in the last 20 years, its oil earnings have kept afloat a bloated, 
centrally controlled economy that enjoys little foreign investment 
and spends $11 billion a year on subsidies. But that has also allowed 
Iranian leaders to shrug off the depth of their dependence on oil, 
which still accounts for 80 percent of the country's foreign currency 
earnings. And even as the plunge in prices has caused oil revenues 
to tumble, from more than $19 billion in 1986 to about $10 billion 
this year, Iranians still seem to find it hard to accept that big 
changes might be required. ``We don't have an economic model in Iran, 
and that is why we lack economic security,'' said Ramazanpour Nargessi, 
a member of the conservative-dominated Parliament who is sympathetic 
to Khatami. Indeed, until late last month, even Khatami, who has coupled 
his calls for greater political openness in Iran with vaguer calls 
for economic change, had in fact done virtually nothing to address 
the country's economic ills. His only real proposals had been stopgap 
measures to address a crisis that has been partially of his government's 
doing. Khatami has often acknowledged that Iran's economic problems 
are considerable. He has said he hopes to encourage foreign investment 
and to ``break the monopolies'' held by government-affiliated foundations, 
which control as much as 40 percent of the economy. But he has never 
spelled out whether or not he hopes to shrink the Iranian government's 
role in an economy only about one-fifth of which is in private hands. 
And he appears torn, Iranian analysts say, between an appreciation 
for free-enterprise and a commitment to what he calls social justice. 
The budget that Khatami's government drafted a year ago was based 
on the assumption that oil prices would average $17.50 a barrel _ 
a guess so wildly optimistic that even the supportive Iran News has 
said it ``inflicted irreparable harm on our economy.'' In the last 
two weeks, Khatami has zeroed in on the costly, wasteful gasoline 
subsidies that allow Iranian motorists to fill up for just 12 cents 
a gallon, a price lower than anywhere else in the world. But his opponents 
in the conservative-dominated Parliament have vowed to block him on 
any price increase, saying a price increase would be too burdensome 
for ordinary Iranians to bear. Economists and other experts see the 
stalemate as a worrying indication that political rivalries could 
get in the way of any quest to put Iran's economy on a solid long-term 
footing. ``There may be too much fear and too much inertia,'' a Western 
diplomat said of the prospects for fundamental change, ``because any 
tinkering with the system now in place is bound to have social consequence 
for the population at large.'' To many economists, including Fereydoun 
Barkeshii of the semi-official Institute for International Energy 
Studies, the gas subsidy is far and away the most onerous example 
of the distortions that riddle Iran's economy. With it, the price 
Iranians pay for gasoline is about one-third what it costs the country 
to produce it. Even Iran's wealthier neighbors in the Persian Gulf 
sell gas at a higher price, so a good bit of Iranian gasoline makes 
its way there, to a tidy smugglers' profit. Iranian refineries cannot 
meet the outsized demand, so that Iran must import gasoline, at market 
prices, at a cost of more than $150 million a year. Oil Minister Bijan 
Namdar-Zanganeh has said that a cut in subsidies represents ``the 
only way to reduce domestic consumption and decrease imports.'' But 
critics led by Ali Abbas-Pour, a conservative member of Parliament, 
have objected to any price rise on the ground that it would contribute 
to inflation, already running about 20 percent. Without such support, 
the only kinds of emergency measures for which Khatami has so far 
won approval include those that are mostly smoke-and-mirrors, like 
the ``forward selling'' of more than $1 billion of oil still in the 
ground. But Iran is still expected to face major budget deficits, 
this year and next year, forcing it to turn to a central bank willing 
to print more money. Its problems have been compounded by its restrictions 
on most imports, which have left factories without the raw materials 
they need to generate any significant revenues. Even so, the country's 
bill for food and other vital imports and for payments on foreign 
debt is still expected to exceed the $13 billion in foreign currency 
revenue that Iran is expected to earn this year from its oil and non-oil 
exports. As a result, after dipping heavily into its foreign exchange 
reserves, Western diplomats say, Iran halted payments in late September 
of the $5.9 billion it owes this year to Germany, Italy and Japan, 
part of a debt package that has already been rescheduled once, in 
1993. The government is now negotiating with banks in those countries 
in hopes of stretching out those payments further, but no one has 
been able to rule out the prospect that it might have to declare a 
formal default. As one way to ease financial pressure, some Iranians 
inclined toward a freer market have specifically proposed that the 
government begin to sell shares in state enterprises to private investors 
_ a first step toward reversing the nationalization that was a centerpiece 
of the Islamic revolution. ``Those who have decentralized their economies 
are heading toward success,'' said one such advocate, Assadollah Asgaroladi, 
vice president of Iran's chamber of commerce. But despite his vague 
comments in the same spirit, Khatami and others in government have 
not yet shown any willingness to embrace such a campaign. Any real 
move toward privatization would require a political challenge to the 
powerful bounyads, the government foundations that were set up with 
holdings confiscated from the shah and now operate without oversight. 
The foundations are controlled by pillars of a conservative establishment 
opposed to Khatami. Although they have been the targets of fierce 
criticism by some of Khatami's supporters, they are seen by others 
in Iran as important legacies of the revolution that should not be 
swept away. ``There's been no sign that Khatami is really ready to 
make tough economic decisions,'' a Western diplomat said. ``But unless 
he does, there is a danger that things could get much worse, and that 
what he has done to make Iran more open could begin to seem less consequential.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>