<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981212.0200 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As New York City moves to close the giant Fresh Kills landfill on 
Staten Island, it is becoming a truism that nobody wants the city's 
garbage. The point is underlined by fierce opposition in New Jersey 
and Brooklyn to giant transfer stations proposed in those locales 
by Mayor Rudolph Giuliani. But what if the garbage came with a promise 
of no odor, no rats and no spills? Furthermore, what if people living 
near the station were promised acres of parkland, a new business complex 
dedicated to recycling industries that might employ 400 workers, and 
millions of dollars each year for 20 years to use for schools, roads 
or other civic projects? That is the plan being pushed by a developer 
who has helped finance $3 billion worth of solid-waste transfer stations, 
incinerators and other related projects and an environmentalist who 
formerly worked as the City Sanitation Department's chief of composting. 
They teamed up to propose that a large portion of the city's residential 
garbage move through an ultramodern transfer station to be built at 
an abandoned industrial site on the northwest corner of Staten Island, 
about five miles north of the Fresh Kills landfill. But after 50 years 
of living with Fresh Kills, Staten Island residents want no more of 
anybody else's garbage, even if it is just the passing-through sort. 
The mayor rejected the Staten Island transfer station and seven other 
ideas two weeks ago in favor of three locations he proposed _ two 
in New Jersey and one in Brooklyn ``We're dead,'' said Stephen Lynch, 
the would-be financier of the Staten Island station. Perhaps not completely. 
Lynch and his partner, Thomas Outerbridge, the compost expert, are 
quietly continuing to push their plan as an alternative if opposition 
dooms any of the proposed Brooklyn or New Jersey sites. Gov. Christie 
Whitman of New Jersey adamantly opposed New York City's exporting 
garbage to transfer stations in her state when Giuliani proposed that 
idea. The developers are playing an intricate endgame, based on the 
notion that the city will become increasingly desperate as the Dec. 
31, 2001, deadline set by New York state for closing the landfill 
approaches. ``We basically know we have to ride through an extended 
period of time at the bottom of the pile,'' said Outerbridge, whose 
Staten Island roots go back to his great grandfather, for whom the 
Outerbridge Crossing, one of the island's three bridges to New Jersey, 
is named. ``That's the nature of our site.'' As the barrage of legal 
and political opposition demonstrates, the city's plan to export trash 
does indeed seem far from settled. Last week, a group of 16 environmental, 
consumer and neighborhood groups wrote Deputy Mayor Joseph Lhota asking 
for a meeting to question virtually every aspect of the policy. The 
letter said unraveling a skein of complex issues ``is essential if 
the city's Fresh Kills closure program is not to run into a series 
of dead ends.'' And so many companies are suggesting new ideas that 
Lhota recently said the city may ask for another round of proposals. 
Other companies that were at first rejected, encouraged by a a statement 
by the mayor that their bids might later be re-examined, have not 
given up. ``We're not out of the picture,'' said Ron Klempner, executive 
vice president of American Marine Rail LLC, which had its bid for 
a transfer station in the Bronx rejected. Although Lynch is not as 
optimistic as other developers, at Friday's meeting of the Staten 
Island Chamber of Commerce, he and Outerbridge politely pressed their 
campaign to convert a vacated Procter &AMP; Gamble factory, which 
once made Ivory Soap, into what they described as a safe and secure 
garbage-transfer station. Like the other proposed stations, it would 
accept barges in a tightly enclosed building, compact the garbage 
they brought, pack it in airtight containers and ship it out by rail 
within 24 hours. As they have at Rotary and Kiwanis Club meetings 
and before community boards for more than a year, the principals of 
the Port Ivory Recycling &AMP; Transfer Alliance said that geographic 
logic argues in their favor. Their site is one of the biggest patches 
of available industrially zoned land in the city; it is a half-mile 
from any houses, and barges would pass much less of the Staten Island 
and New Jersey shores than they do on their way to Fresh Kills. The 
land also has access to rail lines to New Jersey. Almost every major 
waste company looked at the site, according to Bill Hettler, a real 
estate agent helping Procter &AMP; Gamble to sell it. The other companies 
rejected it because of Borough President Guy Molinari's opposition 
to any other borough's garbage ever again coming to Staten Island, 
according to Outerbridge. But the Port Ivory backers are betting on 
a positive response to their promise to heap environmental benefits 
on Staten Islanders: 25 acres of restored parkland that would include 
a wildlife habitat, 50 acres of land for recycling industries and 
financial support for a community environmental fund or other civic 
projects. Port Ivory has been endorsed by such national environmental 
groups as the Natural Resources Defense Council, the Environmental 
Defense Fund, and the Trust for Public Land. The Tri-State Transportation 
Campaign, an advocacy group supporting more rational transportation 
planning, backs it. On Staten Island, it has drawn support from the 
Sweet Bay Magnolia Biological Reserve Conservancy, an environmental 
group, and the Staten Island Building and Construction Trades Council. 
``It's a very much enlightened proposal,'' said Mark Muscaro, executive 
vice president of the builders group. But the questions at the Chamber 
of Commerce meeting suggested that it will face continued opposition. 
Some questioners asked about economic benefits and jobs, but more 
asked about rats and odors. What if the railroad bridge collapsed 
and the garbage backed up at the transfer station. What would happen 
to the barges in bad weather? Afterward, Patricia Marceante, a public-relations 
executive, approached Lynch. ``I was impressed by your presentation,'' 
she said, but added that she opposed anything like it. ``I don't care 
how foolproof it is. Nothing in life is foolproof. I don't want any 
more garbage on Staten Island.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>