<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981212.0167 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
An example of Mike Shanahan's intellect, a hint of his now infamous 
bravado, surfaced almost 20 years ago, long before his amazing knack 
for coaching offensive football would lead the Denver Broncos to the 
doorstep of immortality. In 1982, Shanahan was a 29-year-old coach 
at the University of Florida, with a handsome mug and a mind like 
a nuclear physicist. He infused a new level of sophistication into 
the offense: multiple formations, new and dazzling plays _ and the 
courage to call them. One afternoon, Florida was at home playing Southern 
California, at the time a huge game for the Gators. With Florida at 
its own 5-yard line, Shanahan, the offensive coordinator, would make 
a daring play call. ``Southern Cal had them pinned and Mike called 
a slant play,'' said George Henshaw, now an assistant coach with the 
Tennessee Oilers, who was the offensive coordinator for Florida State 
at the time. ``Now that's a bold call, because if the pass is intercepted, 
it's a touchdown.'' It wasn't. That pass from quarterback Wayne Peace 
to wide receiver Dwayne Dixon went for 47 yards and was a key play 
in Florida's 17-9 victory. ``A safe play would have been to run the 
ball, but he called for the slant, it worked, and it turned the game 
around,'' Henshaw said. ``You know what? Ninety-nine percent of coaches 
would not make that call, but that's Mike. He had the smart play, 
and he wasn't afraid to use it.'' Shanahan was just getting started. 
Sixteen years later, his Broncos playbook now resembling the Encyclopedia 
Britannica, Shanahan has shown that smarts and guts do not fade with 
age. Last week, Denver trailed Kansas City by three points in the 
fourth quarter and faced a third-and-1 at the Chiefs' 24-yard line. 
The safe call would have been to send running back Terrell Davis diving 
into the middle for the first down. If that does not work, then kick 
the tying field goal. That was Shanahan's first call. But after a 
timeout, he changed the play from a Davis run to an end-zone pass 
to tight end Shannon Sharpe. It was a risky move, because the Chiefs 
had played man-to-man coverage on Sharpe with zone coverage behind 
it, limiting him to zero catches to that point. But the play-action 
pass to Sharpe caught the Chiefs by surprise and went for a game-winning 
touchdown. Another successful Shanahan strategy. Any search for a 
reason the Broncos, the defending Super Bowl champions, are 13-0 heading 
into their game with the New York Giants on Sunday and flirting with 
the first perfect season since the 1972 Miami Dolphins, starts and 
ends with Shanahan, the man some in the National Football League simply 
call ``the genius.'' ``Mike will work harder than the next guy to 
find your weakness,'' Dennis Green, coach of the Minnesota Vikings 
and a friend of Shanahan, said. ``It may take him a minute, a day, 
a week, a month, but he'll keep trying until he finds something on 
your defense to exploit.'' Shanahan's plays are a combination of simplicity 
and elegance. He will run them from three, four, sometimes more formations. 
Defenses can't keep up. His nose for player talent is second to none. 
Davis, whose 59 touchdowns are the most in league history for a player 
in his fourth season, was a sixth-round draft pick. His practices 
are crisp and efficient. He makes his offensive players sprint an 
extra 30 or 40 yards after a catch or run, as if they are running 
away from a defender in a game. That is why the Broncos do not tire 
in the fourth quarter. Combine all of these things with Shanahan's 
great instincts and play-calling courage, and it is easy to see why 
Denver has scored 30 or more points in 10 of 13 games this season, 
a team record, and why a victory over the Giants would be the Broncos' 
19th straight, an NFL record. More important, they are the reasons 
Denver has a realistic chance to go 19-0 this season, something that 
has never been done in the NFL. ``Mike has done the best coaching 
job this year, without a doubt,'' Giants coach Jim Fassel said. Where 
did Shanahan get his football smarts? Even though he was an offensive 
coordinator and quarterbacks coach for the Broncos before becoming 
their head coach, as well as a head coach with the Oakland Raiders, 
it was his three years with the San Francisco 49ers, from 1992-94, 
that made Shanahan the coach he is now and the Broncos the team they 
are. ``I tried to hire him after he had been with the 49ers for one 
year,'' said the Broncos' owner, Pat Bowlen. ``But I think the best 
thing that happened to Mike and this organization was that he stayed 
in San Francisco for a few more years. When I finally did hire him, 
he was very well rounded.'' Shanahan, who was offensive coordinator 
under George Seifert, watched the way the 49ers practiced _ with no 
pads or heavy hitting, so as to preserve players' bodies. The way 
they went after free agents _ you can never have too many good ones. 
The way they dealt with players _ treating them like men, not serfs. 
Most important, Shanahan completely devoured the West Coast offense. 
Then he added his own twists, like more deep passes. It is no coincidence 
that when he was the coordinator, the 49ers led the league in offense 
in consecutive seasons (1993 and 1994) for the first time in team 
history. ``Mike was always good with strategy,'' Green said, ``but 
after being around that system, he just went into another dimension.'' 
Shanahan said that he ``had a great background with the 49ers, and 
I learned so much there.'' ``I've tried to incorporate what I learned 
with some things of my own,'' he said. Shanahan brought something 
besides ideas to Denver from San Francisco _ he brought Neal Dahlen, 
one of the best player personnel directors in football and someone 
NFL executives and coaches refer to as ``Shanahan's secret weapon.'' 
Dahlen spent 17 years in the 49ers' organization, working with former 
coaches Bill Walsh and Seifert. Because Bowlen trusts Shanahan, who 
has Bill Parcells-like control of the Broncos' organization, he lets 
Shanahan sign any player he feels can help the team. Dahlen helps 
Shanahan identify whom to bring in. Shanahan and Dahlen have made 
some solid free-agent acquisitions in the 1990s: blocking fullback 
Howard Griffith, and defensive linemen Keith Traylor, Alfred Williams, 
Neil Smith and Marvin Washington. They traded for offensive lineman 
Tony Jones, and snagged off the free-agent market key players like 
Ed McCaffrey, Bill Romanowski, Bubby Brister and Harry Swayne. ``The 
average person will say, `Why do you need Traylor and Neil Smith? 
They are both good players, why do you need both?''' said Green, also 
a former San Francisco assistant coach. ``Well, the 49ers stock players 
because they don't want to be good, they want to be great. Mike brought 
that attitude to Denver.'' Finding the players is half of the equation; 
the mind of Shanahan is the other. Shanahan has taken the West Coast 
offense and expanded it _ flipped it on its head, really _ to the 
point where his offense and the Vikings' are the most complex and 
unstoppable in the league. One week, Denver will feature a series 
of plays with two wide receivers, one tight end and no backs in the 
backfield. The following week, they will use the same plays, but with 
two tight ends, one wide receiver and two backs. Shanahan will take 
his base offense and throw in a dozen tiny permutations, but get big 
plays from them. No other coach manipulates his schemes and personnel 
to such extremes. Take the Broncos' core running play, ``18 handoff.'' 
Opposing coaches say no team executes its basic rushing play with 
such precision, a testament to the focus Shanahan demands from his 
players in practice. Another reason the Broncos are able to use the 
play so regularly is that Shanahan runs it from a number of formations, 
keeping defenses guessing. Davis has rushed for 1,654 yards this season, 
with the bulk of them coming from ``18 handoff'' or a small variation 
called ``19 handoff.'' Shanahan said: ``In the running game, we try 
to do some different things to give defenses some different looks. 
We try to be physical, but we're smart, too.'' What has become a Shanahan 
trademark is the way he scripts the Broncos' first 12 to 15 plays, 
something Walsh was known for. Doing that enables him to probe a defense 
and see how it reacts, because Shanahan is always looking for weaknesses. 
Longtime San Francisco offensive line coach Bobb McKittrick, who in 
20 years with the 49ers has worked with Shanahan, Green, Mike Holmgren, 
Walsh and Seifert, among others, said that Shanahan can decipher what 
defenses are doing faster and more accurately than any other coach 
he has ever been around. If Shanahan notices a team trying to stop 
Davis, he will call plays for Sharpe. If Sharpe is double-teamed, 
Shanahan will to go wide receiver Rod Smith, who in the last three 
weeks has 22 catches, or McCaffrey, the former Giants receiver who 
is a dangerous deep threat. ``Over the course of a game, the staff 
gathers information,'' Smith said. ``They may change things in the 
middle of a game, not just at halftime like other coaches do. Then 
sometimes in a game, we'll try things we've never practiced before. 
The staff trusts us.'' San Diego coach June Jones, who lost twice 
this year to Denver, said, ``Because of everything they do, that offense 
is as good as I've looked at in the 20 years I've been around the 
league.'' After the Chiefs game, Shanahan, dressed in a dark blue 
suit, saw Sharpe in the locker room. ``Great call,'' Sharpe said with 
a smile, referring to the game-winning touchdown catch. Great call, 
yes. But which one? In Denver's incredible season, Shanahan has made 
so many. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>