<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981212.0150 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
What will pro football's zebras do Sunday? Will an official signal 
a touchdown even if a ballcarrier has been stopped short of the goal 
line? Will an official declare a pass complete even if the receiver 
is out of bounds? Will an official confuse heads with tails during 
the coin toss? Whatever the zebras do or don't do surely will affect 
the opinions of the eight general managers and coaches on the National 
Football League's competition committee in their Tuesday conference 
call to discuss the possibility of restoring instant replay for the 
Super Bowl XXXIII playoffs. An absence of game-turning embarrassments 
could cool the controversy for now, postponing a ballot until the 
NFL meetings in March. More game-turning evidence of the zebras' fallibility 
could provoke a proposal that the 31 club owners would vote on soon. 
Mike Holmgren, the Green Bay coach, and Rich McKay, the Tampa Bay 
general manager, are the co-chairmen of the competition committee. 
It also includes two other coaches (Dennis Green of Minnesota and 
Bill Cowher of Pittsburgh) and four other general managers (Jerry 
Jones of Dallas, Bill Polian of Indianapolis, Mike Brown of Cincinnati 
and Charlie Casserly of Washington). But with the zebras under a larger 
magnifying glass than ever before, if it doesn't appear that there 
are at least the required 24 votes to suddenly restore instant replay 
for the playoffs, which begin on the Jan. 2-3 weekend, the committee 
might not bother proposing that all 31 clubs vote. Wellington Mara, 
the Giants co-owner who is the NFL's most respected club owner, has 
consistently voted no and is now, as he said last week, ``absolutely 
opposed to rushing into replay.'' Several other clubs among the 21 
that voted yes at last March's meeting also are reported to be opposed 
now. The committee's telephonic discussion on Tuesday, with Commissioner 
Paul Tagliabue and George Young, its vice president for football operations, 
listening in, isn't expected to involve the merits of instant replay 
so much as the merits of suddenly using it in the playoffs, presumably 
with some sort of coach's challenge system, after not having used 
it throughout the season. Under one proposed coach's challenge system, 
a team would lose a timeout if the call were not reversed. Instant 
replay has always been favored here, but a coach's challenge system 
adds a different dimension. Unless a controversial play occurs near 
a coach on the sideline, or at least along his sideline, a coach usually 
won't be able to tell immediately if an official's call should be 
challenged. Bill Parcells, for example, couldn't see if his Jets quarterback, 
Vinny Testaverde, was in the end zone last Sunday. Parcells reacted 
to the incorrect call of Earnie Frantz, the head linesman who, according 
to one CBS camera angle, appeared to be trailing the play by a yard 
or two. Under a challenge system, a head coach on the sideline would 
usually need to depend on his players or on an assistant coach looking 
at a television monitor in the coaches' booth upstairs to alert him 
as to whether a call should be challenged. It doesn't seem right to 
ask a coach to suddenly adapt to a challenge system in the playoffs. 
When a challenge system was tested in this year's preseason games, 
10 calls were challenged. Seven were upheld (including a down-by-contact 
call that wasn't eligible for review) and three were reversed (including 
one that was incorrectly reversed and another down-by-contact call 
that wasn't eligible for review). Of the nine teams that challenged 
a call in the preseason, only Denver is assured of a playoff berth. 
Miami, New England, Pittsburgh, Oakland and Tampa Bay are playoff 
contenders. Seattle and the Giants are long shots, and Carolina has 
no chance. Of the nine clubs that voted no on instant replay at last 
March's meeting, only Buffalo, Oakland, Tampa Bay and Arizona are 
alive for the playoffs. Ralph Wilson, the Bills' owner, has said he 
would vote yes for the playoffs, but Tampa Bay isn't sure. Bill Bidwill, 
the Cardinals' owner, is still opposed. So, presumably, is the Raiders' 
Al Davis. For now, it's doubtful that the NFL will restore instant 
replay for the playoffs. Then again, what will the zebras do Sunday? 
</TEXT>
</DOC>