<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981212.0103 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Nearly every morning for the last eight days at the University of 
Zimbabwe's campus, several hundred worshippers have gathered under 
a large sea-blue tent to sing and pray before a 15-foot teakwood cross 
adorned with a large carving of the African continent. The pairing 
conveys to many participants at the Eighth Assembly of the World Council 
of Churches one of the most significant challenges within Christianity 
these days: its rapid growth in the developing world, and in Africa 
in particular. At some point early in the 21st century, ``Africa may 
have the largest Christian population of any continent,'' the Rev. 
Konrad Raiser, the council's general secretary, said in an interview. 
``Therefore people have been talking about a shift in the center of 
vitality from the north to the south.'' Anglicans, Methodists, Presbyterians 
and others have all claimed significant growth in Africa. The World 
Lutheran Federation says membership in Lutheran churches in Africa 
grew by two-thirds in seven years, to 9.1 million in 1997. During 
the last two decades, the Vatican says, the number of Roman Catholics 
has doubled, to more than 100 million. But the situation varies from 
country to country (Anglicans claim great growth in Nigeria, Lutherans 
in Tanzania, for example); numbers can be quite general, and not everyone 
here agrees which church is growing most rapidly. Some detect significant 
growth among new denominations known as African-instituted churches, 
which have been founded by independent African religious leaders and 
may embrace beliefs like the ability of believers to prophesy under 
divine inspiration. At the current assembly, the council admitted 
one African-instituted church, the Harrist Church from Ivory Coast. 
It claims 100,000 members and takes its name from a Liberian missionary, 
William Harris, who was active early in this century. Others here 
said church growth was greatest among charismatic congregations that 
have sprung up in the cities and attract people with high-energy services 
offering physical and spiritual healing. Those who have followed Christianity's 
growth in Africa often say it has been aided by urbanization, economic 
uncertainty and the search for a broadly encompassing spiritual outlook 
_ factors frequently cited in the growth of Islam as well. Others 
say some churches have grown by embracing African forms of worship, 
sacred music and dance, and by moving away from styles linked with 
former colonial rulers _ a process several African theologians say 
must become widespread if the faith is to strengthen. Bishop Owdenburg 
Mdegella, a Lutheran from Tanzania, said that in his country, ``most 
of the Protestant churches have developed their own liturgy, their 
own music.'' ``So even the people who thought the church was of a 
distant aspect think the church is part of their society,'' he said, 
adding that he had composed hymns himself. Christianity's growth in 
Africa, and a similar expansion in parts of Asia, present a challenge 
to the ecumenical goals of the council, which was founded 50 years 
ago largely by European and American clerics to advance the cause 
of unity. As the council celebrates its jubilee year, said Raiser, 
questions of doctrine and institutional structure that preoccupied 
leaders of European and North American churches seem less significant 
than questions of national identity, and of class, cultural and ethnic 
differences among the churches of the world. At its founding in 1948, 
the council had 147 member churches. Now the council _ which assembles 
every six to eight years _ has 339 Protestant and Orthodox Christian 
member churches, most from Africa, Asia and the South Pacific. (The 
Roman Catholic Church does not belong to the council but sends observers.) 
Last July, when the world's Anglican bishops gathered in Canterbury, 
England, for their once-a-decade Lambeth Conference, prelates from 
Africa and Asia outnumbered counterparts from the Church of England 
and the Episcopal Church in the United States. The social conservatism 
that comes with this shift was illustrated when many African and Asian 
bishops supported a statement that criticized homosexual behavior 
as ``incompatible'' with Scripture. No similar debate is planned here, 
although gay Christian groups and their supporters have offered several 
workshops on homosexuality and the Bible. But another issue, the problem 
of poor nations' international debt, which deeply concerns many church 
leaders from developing countries, is on the agenda. Some theologians 
here cautioned that the growth of Christianity in Africa presents 
specific problems. In a speech at a plenary session dealing with African 
issues, Mercy Amba Oduyoye, a Methodist from Ghana, said: ``We have 
become heavily Chistianized. Could we engage in influencing the shape 
of global Christianity or at least develop our own distinctive African 
practice and articulation of the faith?'' Another theologian, the 
Rev. John Pobee, an Anglican from Ghana, said in an interview that 
he avoided talking about membership growth, which he said was occurring 
largely outside the mainline Christian churches in his country, because 
he did not think it necessarily represented a sign of spiritual strength. 
``This growth needs to be tested, not only in terms of width but in 
terms of depth,'' said Pobee, who will begin serving as a bishop next 
year. He noted that ``there was once a vibrant Christian church in 
Roman North Africa,'' which produced one of greatest Christian theologians 
of all time, St. Augustine, but which largely disappeared with the 
coming of Islam in the seventh century. For the current growth to 
endure, he said, the faith must be presented in accord with African 
needs, as community-oriented and socially involved. Worship services 
need to be engaging emotionally as well as intellectually. ``We've 
got to learn to couch our articulation of God in songs and in poems,'' 
he added. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>