<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981212.0248 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Todd Harvey has a sore thumb, and he acted like a sorehead. For either 
of these reasons, Harvey might miss at least Monday night's game when 
the New York Rangers play Calgary at Madison Square Garden. And if 
the National Hockey League is serious about its crackdown on cheap 
shots and blows to the head, Harvey might miss more than just one 
game. He may be the heartbeat of the Rangers, as his coach has said, 
but Harvey needs to skip a couple of beats for his gratuitous attempt 
to beat up Vaclav Varada of the Buffalo Sabres. Harvey's right hand 
was bandaged after Friday night's 2-0 loss in Marine Midland Arena. 
He said he did not injure it when he charged the celebrating Varada 
from behind and clubbed him in the back of his helmeted head. Varada 
had taken his sweet time about dropping the puck into the empty Ranger 
net in the final minute after goalie Mike Richter was pulled for an 
extra attacker. The injury, Harvey said, came earlier, when another 
Sabre slashed him with a stick. Colin Campbell, the league's senior 
vice president and director of hockey operations, told the Rangers 
Saturday that he was looking into the matter. In his first season 
in this sheriff's role, Campbell, the former Ranger coach, has given 
out several severe suspensions for bad behavior. Matt Johnson of Los 
Angeles got 12 games for a sucker punch that knocked out the Rangers' 
Jeff Beukeboom. Blows to the head, the league has said, cannot be 
tolerated. Varada suffered only a headache, and his thought process 
was clear enough to restate blunt opinions that have offended Harvey 
and other Rangers. A member of the Sabres' checking line, Varada said 
late last month that it was not that difficult to cover Wayne Gretzky 
and his linemates in this, the Great One's 20th NHL season. After 
Friday's game, he was unrepentant. ``I said what was the truth,'' 
Varada said. ``I didn't lie, and I was right. I can say anything I 
want if it's true.'' As for Harvey's attack, Varada added, with sarcasm: 
``Hockey is a fair-play sport. Really smart from his standpoint.'' 
In the spirit of the emperor's new clothes, such observations about 
Gretzky are offensive to the hockey establishment, particularly to 
the Canadian hockey establishment, especially when spoken by a young 
European. Once again Friday night against the Sabres, Gretzky and 
his linemates were ineffective. Gretzky had one shot on goal in 17 
minutes and 24 seconds of ice time, including duty on four power plays. 
After Varada knocked Gretzky down hard in the third period, Gretzky 
limped to the bench so slowly for a line change that he got caught 
in a Sabres rush. In the ensuing confusion, the Rangers were penalized 
for too many men on the ice. Gretzky's wing men, Kevin Stevens and 
John MacLean, received reduced playing time in the third period. After 
a spurt of three goals and four assists in three games, Gretzky has 
gone scoreless in the last four, with just two assists. Will it help 
the Rangers to trade for a sharp-shooting right wing to skate alongside 
Gretzky or another of their centers? So many seem to be on the market. 
Among the names heard are Vancouver's Pavel Bure, Calgary's Theo Fleury, 
Montreal's Mark Recchi, Colorado's Claude Lemieux and Tampa's Mikael 
Renberg. Despite denials from the Pittsburgh owner Roger Marino, the 
financial crisis facing the bankrupt Penguins could eventually force 
them to consider offers for the high-salaried and multitalented Jaromir 
Jagr. Yes, the Rangers would be interested. But would an expensive 
addition help the Rangers in the short or the long run, particularly 
if they have to give up young talent such as center Manny Malhotra, 
left wing Niklas Sundstrom or goalie Dan Cloutier? This season, such 
an acquisition might help them qualify for a low playoff berth. The 
last two games, a 2-1 loss to the Avalanche and the 2-0 loss to the 
Sabres, might have been victories or ties with a timely goal or two 
from a sniper. The Rangers played well both nights, better than in 
some victories over lesser foes. But, in the bigger picture, this 
is a rebuilding team that will usually work hard, occasionally entertain 
and sometimes suffer noble defeats. The addition of another veteran 
will not suddenly reverse the long-term erosion of what is still, 
overall, an old and slow team. The reconstruction began last spring 
with the addition of the youthful Harvey, who adds the spunk and spirit 
they have lacked. Harvey's attack, wrong in the narrow frame, was 
a positive development from a team that is regaining its self-esteem. 
Judged in this context, a short suspension is a worthwhile price to 
pay, a down payment on a long-term investment. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>