<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981212.0037 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Picture this for high drama: All 100 senators are in their seats. 
In the well of the Senate is a defense table. President Clinton may 
or may not be at the table, but his lawyers are, on the edge of their 
chairs. Facing them, at a prosecution table, are Rep. Henry Hyde and 
a few of his Republican colleagues. High on the dais, Chief Justice 
William Rehnquist leans forward in the presiding officer's chair and 
reads solemnly into the microphone from a slip of paper handed up 
to him by the Senate parliamentarian: ``Senators, how say you? Is 
the respondent, William Jefferson Clinton, guilty or not guilty? The 
clerk will call the roll.'' One after another, as their names are 
called alphabetically, the senators rise behind their desks and utter 
the first words they have spoken about the matter in public session 
since the impeachment trial began. No speeches. No explanation. Just 
``guilty'' or ``not guilty.'' That is the way the trial will end _ 
probably sometime next summer _ if a majority of the members of the 
House of Representatives vote this week to impeach the president on 
the accusations recommended by the House Judiciary Committee, and 
if the Senate goes forward with a trial. Many people in and around 
Congress think it will never get that far _ that somehow, though no 
one can say just how, the Senate will avert a drawn-out legal process 
that could tie up the country for months. That might seem logical, 
since no one imagines that the Senate will come close to obtaining 
the two-thirds majority needed to convict the president and remove 
him from office. But others _ not just Republican opponents of the 
president but also steadfast guardians of the Senate's prerogatives 
like Robert C. Byrd, D-W.Va., _ believe that the Senate would be obligated 
to try the president if the House voted to impeach him. Besides, nothing 
about an impeachment trial would be logical, by ordinary legal standards. 
This trial would be part law and part politics, governed partly by 
the Constitution, partly by ancient Senate rules and partly by the 
seat of the pants. In the history of the nation, there have been only 
13 such trials (one of a president), and only 7 convictions (all of 
federal judges). The only trial of a president, in which Andrew Johnson 
was acquitted by one vote, was 130 years ago. In all of academia, 
in all the library stacks, in all the cubicles and carrels of the 
Capitol, there is no reference book that spells out what the impeachment 
trial of a president would look like in 1999, and there is no person 
who considers himself or herself an absolute authority. ``The most 
important thing to know about a Senate trial of a president is how 
much we do not know,'' said Walter Dellinger, a constitutional scholar 
and former acting solicitor general. ``We don't know whether it can 
be confined in a rational way or whether it will get out of control 
and take on a life of its own.'' Consider these anomalies: _ The rules 
_ 26 of them _ would essentially be those written for the Johnson 
trial in 1868. In that era, there were only 54 senators, in session 
only a small part of the year and working with quill pens under gas 
lamps. But Senate rules are so hard to change that it is unlikely 
these would be tinkered with in any meaningful way. _ Under the Constitution, 
the chief justice must preside. (The Founding Fathers realized it 
would be a conflict of interest for the vice president to preside 
over the Senate in an impeachment trial of a president.) The chief 
justice could be overruled on any matter by a majority vote of the 
senators. But if a tie vote occurred, he would cast the tie-breaker. 
_ Under the Senate rules, the senators, who think nothing of speaking 
for hours on the most mundane topic, would not be allowed to speak 
during the trial. To question a witness, they could pass a note to 
the chief justice, who would pose the question. _ All witnesses would 
testify and all evidence would be presented in public _ presumably 
on television, no matter how salacious and how embarrassing. But the 
senators' deliberations would be in closed session. No senator would 
be allowed to speak for more than 10 minutes in these sessions on 
preliminary matters. When the final verdict was debated, 15 minutes 
would be allotted each senator, again behind locked doors. Senate 
Majority Leader Trent Lott insists he is making no plans for a trial, 
and there is no evidence to the contrary. To plan before the House 
votes to impeach, he says, would be presumptuous. But hardly anyone 
who has examined the impeachment process believes that a trial could 
be concluded in ``three days to three weeks,'' as Lott suggested in 
a recent television interview. Alan Baron, a Washington lawyer who 
was special impeachment counsel during the trials of two federal judges 
in the 1980s, figures that if the Senate takes up the case in early 
January, a trial might be completed by late summer. ``We are,'' Baron 
cautions, ``on the edge of a real seismic event.'' The first question 
to be answered would be whether a vote of impeachment by the lame-duck 
105th Congress would be sufficient for the Senate to conduct a trial 
in the new Congress or whether the new House (with a smaller Republican 
majority) would have to impeach the president all over again. Rehnquist 
would rule first on this. His ruling would be subject to reversal 
by the senators. Because this is a constitutional question, the matter 
would doubtless go next to the Supreme Court _ where the chief justice, 
of course, presides. (Paradoxically, Rehnquist comes as close as anyone 
in the country to being an expert on impeachment trials. In 1992, 
he published a book, ``Grand Inquests,'' on the two most famous impeachment 
trials, both of which ended in acquittal _ the Johnson trial in 1868 
and the trial of Supreme Court Justice Samuel Chase in 1805.) Next, 
motions on other questions would arise. What standard of proof would 
be required for conviction _ ``beyond a reasonable doubt'' as in a 
criminal trial; ``preponderance of evidence,'' as in a civil trial, 
or something completely different? What is the definition of perjury, 
the accusation in the first two articles of impeachment recommended 
last week by the House Judiciary Committee? What rules of evidence 
would apply? For instance, would hearsay evidence be allowed? Would 
the president's lawyers and senior advisers be protected from testifying 
by attorney-client privilege and executive privilege? If misconduct 
by Independent Counsel Kenneth Starr can be proved, should the case 
be dismissed? To prepare for a Clinton trial, scores of witnesses 
would have to be interviewed and documentary evidence would have to 
be reviewed. The prosecution could not rely, as the House Judiciary 
Committee did, solely on Starr's investigation. In some respects, 
the trial would be similar to those in courtrooms. There would be 
opening statements, presentation of witnesses and evidence by both 
sides, cross-examinations, rebuttals and closing arguments. The witnesses 
_ Monica Lewinsky, Linda Tripp and the rest _ would testify in public, 
under oath, and would be subjected for the first time to cross-examination. 
The prosecution would be supervised by a team of congressmen, called 
House managers, led by Hyde. They would function like district attorneys 
who oversee cases but leave the courtroom work to assistants. The 
organization of the prosecution's case, questioning of witnesses and 
opening and closing arguments presumably would be handled by prosecutors 
hired from the outside. Clinton's defense would also be conducted 
by a team of hired lawyers. Because his defense in an impeachment 
trial is one of the president's official duties, the cost would be 
borne by the government. The president could choose whether to appear 
at the trial and whether to testify himself. A big difference from 
a courtroom trial, of course, would be the nature of the jury. Senators 
would not represent an impartial jury of the president's peers. Unlike 
an ordinary jury, the senators would decide questions of law as well 
as fact. And the verdict, no doubt, would turn more on politics than 
on evidence. Under the Constitution, it would require a two-thirds 
vote of the senators present to convict the president and remove him 
from office. The other big qualification to keep in mind is that under 
the Senate rules, the trial could be abandoned at any point by a majority 
vote. This is how a plea bargain might occur. The senators could agree 
to stop the trial if they decided to censure or otherwise punish the 
president instead, and if the president agreed to accept the offer, 
as he indicated he would on Friday. The last time the question of 
a Senate impeachment trial was seriously considered was in August 
1974, after the House Judiciary Committee had voted to recommend the 
impeachment of President Richard M. Nixon. The Senate voted to direct 
its Rules Committee to examine the procedures and precedents. Then 
Nixon resigned. Whatever thought had gone into the matter was quickly 
shelved. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>