<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981212.0141 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Rep. Robert Livingston, the incoming speaker of the House, diminished 
the likelihood Saturday that the full House would have the choice 
of voting on a censure resolution when it considers the impeachment 
of President Clinton next week. Asked if he would allow the full House 
to vote on censure even if the Judiciary Committee voted, as expected, 
against it, Livingston told reporters here: ``Not very likely.'' Until 
now, he has been deliberately ambiguous about whether he would allow 
such a vote. As one who strongly respects the committee system, Livingston 
has been at pains to avoid sounding as if he were interfering with 
the Judiciary Committee. But pressure is building on him to take the 
reins of impeachment as the matter heads to the full House. Livingston 
also gave his strongest hints of his own views, suggesting that President 
Clinton's apology to the nation on Friday was not enough to influence 
his own vote on impeachment. In a brief talk with reporters before 
he gave the commencement address at Southeastern Louisiana University, 
Livingston, a former criminal prosecutor, evinced a clear displeasure 
with Clinton. ``The president has his own actions to justify,'' he 
said. ``I will not seek to give him counsel at this late date. A year 
has gone by and we've concentrated on little other than his actions 
in the White House.'' He said that, judging by the reaction of his 
colleagues to the president's newest expression of regret, issued 
from the White House on Friday, ``it doesn't appear that it's made 
a big difference.'' Asked if it made a difference to him, he said, 
``I anticipate that it won't make a great deal of difference.'' The 
statements, although vague, were the most revealing Livingston has 
given so far on his personal attitude in the weeks since he became 
the speaker-elect. Other than responding to these questions, Livingston 
seemed to revel in his distance from Washington this weekend, even 
as the Capitol has become gripped by the impeachment spectacle. He 
delivered a commencement speech Saturday that was void of any reference 
to the goings-on. Rather, he painted a self-deprecating portrait as 
a kind of knockabout who achieved what he has by having a lot of luck 
and a good mother. He said he was not much of a scholar or an athlete 
and was even a bad golfer who a few years ago managed to pitch himself 
into a lake in a golf cart. He told the students that from today on, 
they should make the right choices, ``not sell out for money or betray 
my friends or my conscience or my religious convictions,'' adding: 
``If you make the wrong choices, if you do take that short way out, 
you might get by with it, but sooner or later, the piper's got to 
be paid and you'll fall in the abyss.'' University officials said 
they offered Livingston the choice of canceling his address because 
he had made the commitment months ago, before he became speaker and 
before anyone knew that the Judiciary Committee would be voting on 
impeachment. Sally Clausen, president of the university, said she 
had someone ready to fill in for Livingston, but ``he reminded me 
that he was elected from this area.'' Pressure has been building in 
Washington for Livingston to step into the breach. He has talked behind 
the scenes with Democrats, including Rep. Dick Gephardt of Missouri, 
the Democratic leader, and John Podesta, Clinton's chief of staff. 
At the same time, some of the 31 Democrats who voted earlier to allow 
the Judiciary Committee to proceed with the impeachment inquiry wrote 
a letter urging Livingston to allow a vote on an alternative to impeachment 
when the full House takes up the matter next week. Livingston had 
left Washington for New Orleans on Friday by the time the letter circulated. 
He has held a round of low-key events here in his district and avoided 
direct mention of Clinton except when asked. He said Saturday that 
he would not make any recommendations about what the full House should 
do until he sees the Judiciary Committee's report, which is expected 
to be available on Wednesday. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>