<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981212.0139 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Yosef Kazen, a Hasidic rabbi who pioneered the use of the Internet 
as a powerful recruiting and educational tool for the Lubavitch movement, 
died Dec. 1 at New York Hospital. He was 44 and lived in Crown Heights, 
Brooklyn. The cause was complications of non-Hodgkins lymphoma, said 
Moshe Kotlarski, his brother-in-law and the development director at 
the Lubavitch World Headquarters in Brooklyn. The Hasidic branch of 
Judaism is rooted in the mysticism of 18th-century Eastern Europe, 
but the Lubavitch movement has long used modern means to propagate 
its teachings, and Kazen staked a claim in cyberspace in the late 
1980s, before the World Wide Web existed. An early user of computer 
bulletin boards, he was inspired by the notion of adding a 24-hour 
Web site to the movement's worldwide network of outreach and study 
centers. He digitized and made thousands of documents available on 
the Web, including an English translation of the Tanya, a seminal 
text of Jewish mysticism, and the writings of Rabbi Menachem Schneerson, 
the Lubavitcher spiritual leader, who died in 1994. With the growth 
of the Web's popularity, Kazen's Internet site, Chabad-Lubavitch in 
Cyberspace, served as a model for other Jewish organizations, which 
created their own educational Web sites. Visitors to www.chabad.org 
can read articles on science and Judaism, listen to religious melodies 
and browse a gallery displaying the work of Hasidic artists. In addition 
to building a Jewish library on the Web, Kazen sought to create an 
online congregation and to answer questions by e-mail, operating first 
from his own basement and later from a cramped office at the Lubavitch 
headquarters. His Internet activities varied from helping to organize 
a Passover service held on a boat near Antarctica to dispatching kosher 
recipes to Jews living far from centers of Jewish population. Kazen 
developed automated responses to the most frequently asked questions 
and responded personally to some messages, like the e-mail from a 
student in New Mexico who wanted to know whether it was permissible 
to smoke marijuana on the morning of the Sabbath. ``I wrote him back 
that, within Judaism, the concept is that the prayer itself gives 
you the high,'' the rabbi told Jeff Zaleski, author of ``The Soul 
of Cyberspace'' (1997). In his last months, Kazen kept a laptop computer 
in his room at New York Hospital so he could continue his electronic 
correspondence. Kazen was born in Cleveland and grew up there in a 
Yiddish-speaking household, the youngest of seven children of Russian 
immigrants. He became a rabbi at the United Lubavitcher Yeshivoth 
in New York. A heavy-set man with a carrot-colored beard, he was also 
at the forefront of the more traditional Lubavitch outreach programs, 
which include the ``Mitzvah tanks,'' the vans and trucks that dispense 
both prayer books and tefillin (boxes containing scriptures worn during 
prayer). He saw distinct advantages in adapting new technologies to 
an ancient purpose. ``Some guy in a black hat and tefillin comes to 
you, and you have the stereotype,'' Kazen said in an interview in 
The New York Times in 1994. ``When you go to the Internet and you 
read about Judaism, you go straight to the intellect and the stereotypes 
fall away.'' Kazen is survived by his wife, Rochel; six children, 
Raizel, Michoel, Shmuel, Elchanan, Peretz and Sarah; his parents, 
Rabbi Zalman and Shifra Shula Kazen, of Cleveland; and six sisters, 
Esther Alpern of Sao Paulo, Brazil; Devorah Alevsky of Cleveland; 
Henya Laine of Brooklyn; Bluma Weinberg of Kansas City, Kan.; Rivkah 
Kotlarsky of Brooklyn, and Rochel Goldman of Johannesburg, South Africa. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>