<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981212.0227 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Donald Royal would pull out of his driveway on a glorious day and 
find himself winding through the golf courses that brush stroke the 
fringes of Orlando, Fla. Fresh-cut grass was everywhere. Normally, 
Royal would have inhaled the scent. But now he knew the slightest 
sniff would cause his 6-foot-8-inch frame to recoil in nausea. So 
he would press on in his 15-mile drive with the windows rolled up 
and his choices in front of him. What route would he take this time: 
Interstate or back roads? No matter how often he varied the trip, 
the journey he has taken five times each of the last six months would 
lead him to the parking lot of the M.D. Anderson Cancer Center. He 
knew that the moment he walked through the door it would hit him, 
this foul odor that only people like himself could detect. Only people 
going through chemotherapy. ``It's the worst smell you can ever imagine,'' 
Royal said in an interview on Wednesday, two days before his last 
chemotherapy treatment. ``It's weird, but no one else would notice 
but us.'' Inside the clinic, Royal would take his seat in the waiting 
room with other patients. He would nod politely to the familiar faces. 
How could a slash-to-the-basket forward in the NBA end up with a diagnosis 
of colon cancer at age 32 on a summer day in June, just one month 
after he was springing off the bench for the Charlotte Hornets in 
the playoffs? That question was not on his mind as he waited, however. 
``You know what I think about?'' he said. ``The people around me. 
``Once I went to the center and did the chemo and saw people dealing 
with the same thing,'' Royal said in a voice that was weary but steady, 
``I realized that I should be thankful for the fact that my situation 
is curable. At times, you're sitting next to people who are desperate, 
people on their last hope. They're getting chemo and radiation at 
the same time. And it's kids. You see them losing their hair and with 
skin that has turned green from the treatment. It hurts your heart. 
I know my situation, as tough as it is, theirs is twice as bad. All 
anyone in that room is doing is trying to survive.'' For Royal, the 
word survival has a tangible meaning. On July 1, at the same time 
the NBA began its lockout, a catheter was being surgically planted 
in Royal's chest for his first 15-minute treatment _ it's called a 
``push'' _ of chemotherapy. While other players began to talk of ``fighting 
for our livelihood'' and ``struggling for survival,'' Royal was losing 
20 pounds from his customary 218 because of nausea and fatigue that 
made him too tired to eat. As owners argued that they needed a new 
basic agreement with the players to guarantee the economic health 
of their franchises, Royal was popping Jolly Ranchers to cover the 
metallic taste that coated his mouth. ``People ask me, `What's going 
on in the league?''' said Royal, who was a player representative for 
the Orlando Magic when the last collective bargaining agreement was 
signed, in 1995. ``I get calls from people and hear what's going on. 
But I don't concern myself with it like I did in the past. I don't 
need the extra stress. There are other things to focus on. My priorities 
are very different now. One thing you gain is perspective. I'm just 
so grateful for what I have.'' nn Royal has never lacked gratitude. 
He did not barge into the NBA as a hot draft choice with a shoe deal. 
He was a Notre Dame graduate with a political science degree. As the 
Cavaliers' third-round draft choice in 1987, Royal was viewed as a 
quick but limited player saddled with a hard-boiled jumper. He was 
released in the pre-season. It was either give up and settle into 
an office job or labor in the lunch-pail atmosphere of the Continental 
Basketball Association. He chose the latter, which meant spending 
three years eating Thanksgiving meals in restaurants like Denny's. 
By 1990, he was playing in Israel. Not long after his arrival, Royal 
was in a Tel Aviv mall when a woman placed a bag next to him. It was 
ticking. Royal did not notice at first, but then people started scattering 
and a man pulled on him and told him to run. As he dashed from the 
mall, the bomb went off. That was not his only narrow escape. Twenty-four 
hours before Iraq launched its first Scud missile at Israel during 
the Persian Gulf War, Royal boarded the last flight out of the country. 
``I've been in some tight situations, I guess,'' Royal said. ``A lot 
has happened, hasn't it?'' Yes, it has. Eventually, he got his chance. 
After stops in Minnesota and San Antonio sandwiched around his time 
in Israel, he went from role player to starter with the Magic in 1993 
and landed a two-year, $2 million contract. It was solid money for 
a solid, middle-tier player, and he was thankful for it. When he became 
a participant in the collective bargaining negotiations that led to 
the 1995 agreement, Royal's demeanor was in stark contrast to the 
chest-thumping rhetoric that has been on display during the current 
labor dispute. ``Donald was a calm voice,'' former union president 
Buck Williams said. ``He was soft-spoken and really cared about the 
guys he represented, guys that were role players. At the right time, 
he'd say just the right thing.'' Royal is level-headed and cool by 
nature. Bombs could not rattle him. But cancer did. In a scenario 
similar to that of the Yankees' Darryl Strawberry, Royal discovered 
he had colon cancer just in time to give himself a chance. In February, 
shortly after he was waived by the Heat and signed by the Hornets, 
he began to notice blood in his stool. It was sporadic, and Royal 
shrugged it off. By the end of the season, the sight of blood grew 
more frequent and abdominal pains started to bother him. But the playoffs 
were on and this was no time to get sick. ``I thought if I just avoided 
it, it would go away,'' Royal said. ``No man wants to go and get his 
colon checked out.'' After the season, he dropped into a family clinic 
one day in mid-June. In one surreal week, he learned he had an orange-sized 
tumor that was malignant. After surgery to remove the tumor on June 
24, doctors discovered cancer in one of the 17 lymph nodes taken from 
the area. His shock was quickly replaced by tears and horror. ``I'm 
thinking, `I got it too late; oh no, I got it too late,''' Royal said. 
But doctors assured him that he had hope. With chemotherapy, there 
was a good chance of survival. But nothing could have prepared him 
for the effects of chemotherapy. Not only are there physical ravages, 
but the weakening of the immune system leads to physical isolation. 
Going out can be unhealthy. Anyone with a sniffle is off limits. It 
has helped to have family around the house, like his wife Robin, his 
daughter Shauntel and his mother. When everything else makes him queasy, 
Royal can still find room for a hot helping of his mother's red beans 
and rice. When he is cooped up in his house, phone calls form a bridge 
to the outside world. One call came from Eric Davis, the former Baltimore 
Oriole who recovered from colon cancer to play baseball again. ``When 
we first talked, I just wanted to pump him up, almost like a pep talk 
when you're up by 1 point with 30 seconds on the clock,'' said Digger 
Phelps, who coached Royal at Notre Dame. ``You tell them, `Hold on 
and you're going to win.' I knew he had to go through this whole horrible 
process. I just wanted him to know he was going to get through this. 
``The thing with Donald, he knows how to fight. There's a silent force 
inside him that's very powerful. I think sometimes if you put yourself 
in the right mental state you can beat anything.'' On Friday, Royal 
completed his last chemotherapy treatment. After six months, it is 
finally over. ``I made it through,'' he said. While he is optimistic 
about his future _ he would like to play two more years _ he will 
be monitored for the rest of his life. ``I don't know about the league,'' 
Royal said with a half-laugh. ``But I know I'll be fine.'' Years may 
pass before he truly knows if he has beaten cancer. But for now, Royal 
can take comfort in knowing that his taste buds and his sense of smell 
will return in the coming weeks. Fresh-cut grass can be appreciated 
again. Soon, he will feel like his old self, lively and energetic. 
The weight room awaits. Soon, the scent that rudely greeted him at 
the door of the cancer center will fade from his memory. And yet, 
he will never forget the people he sat with in the waiting room. ``I've 
seen what chemotherapy does to people,'' Royal said. ``In that room, 
there are all races and creeds, elderly and young. There are kids 
in there on a drip, which is an IV. They are in there for three hours. 
I was 15 minutes and out. The chemo I went through was minor in comparison. 
You see the desperation around you, and you know you're the lucky 
one.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>