<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981212.0199 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Winter will seem longer and grayer this year. Alberto Tomba has retired, 
and his season and sport are hardly the better for it. He was not 
the most successful men's Alpine skier in history: Ingemar Stenmark 
won 36 more World Cup races. But with his innate feel for the big 
moment and brash comment, Tomba was certainly the most charismatic. 
For 13 rollicking and delightfully well-documented years, Tomba jerked 
his often insular sport out of the Alps and the Rockies and into the 
wider world's living rooms below. He was the city mouse who roared 
on a circuit traditionally dominated by country mice; a child of privilege 
from the sophisticated Italian city of Bologna who was taught to ski 
by private instructors on weekend visits to the resort of Cortina 
d'Ampezzo. He was irrepressible and utterly embraceable _ unless you 
were a paparazzi _ although not nearly as bacchanalian in his habits 
later in his career as his enduring playboy image and La Bomba sobriquet 
would suggest. Tomba was a dominant personality with an even more 
dominant presence on the slopes, and although the essential sometimes 
got lost in the white noise he generated off the mountain, the sight 
of a predatorial Tomba on skis was a sight to behold. With his powerful 
lower body, superb sense of balance and quick feet, he thrived on 
steep, technically challenging courses, and the direct line he chose 
to pursue through the gates, instead of around, changed his sport 
forever. You could see Tomba's influence last season in the bold approach 
of Hermann Maier, the sturdily constructed Austrian who dominated 
the World Cup circuit and won two gold medals at this year's Winter 
Olympics in Nagano, Japan. Tomba won no medals in Nagano, a disappointment 
that helped remind him that it was time to move on. But it was in 
the psychologically daunting, all-or-nothing crucible of the Olympics 
that he left his deepest impressions in the snow. He would finish 
with three gold medals and two silvers, becoming the first Alpine 
skier to defend an Olympic title successfully and the first to win 
medals in three consecutive Olympics. Traditionally, the downhill 
has been skiing's glamour event, but with Tomba, the less risky and 
spectacular technical events assumed center ring in the White Circus. 
In 1988 in the Calgary Winter Games, after bursting onto his sport's 
radar screen the previous season, he won his first two gold medals 
and considerably more hearts and minds with his swarthy good looks 
and bravado. Previous Italian champions, like the man who would become 
his personal coach, Gustavo Thoeni, had been laconic northerners, 
often from the German-speaking South Tyrol. Tomba looked and often 
acted like he belonged in a convertible with the top down and the 
Mediterranean in his rearview mirror. ``I care about good food, nice 
women, soccer matches and fast cars, just like every Italian,'' Tomba 
once said. Before his first run in the giant slalom in Calgary, he 
turned to his opponents and said with typical brio: ``OK boys. Keep 
calm, and good luck to all.'' He won and then cheerfully and accurately 
predicted another victory for himself in the slalom. When he returned 
to Bologna, he was flown by helicopter into a soccer stadium where 
50,000 of his fellow Italians were expecting him, and Tomba often 
made it clear that if he had his druthers, ski races would be staged 
in such stadiums instead of remote resorts. The hangover came the 
next season, when he put on weight and lost his edge, but by the next 
Olympics in 1992 in Albertville, France, he had returned to form, 
albeit with certain modifications. ``Before I used to party until 
5 in the morning with three women,'' he said upon arrival. ``At the 
Olympic Village, I will party until 3 in the morning with five women.'' 
Tomba had already coined the sparkling motto, ``Last to bed, first 
to finish.'' He soon dubbed the Olympic city ``Alberto-ville'' and 
won another gold in the giant slalom and a silver medal in the slalom, 
rising from sixth place after the first run with one of his typically 
aggressive and intimidating efforts in the second. In Lillehammer 
in 1994, he made an even more spectacular second-run revival in the 
slalom, leaping from 12th place to another silver medal as his overwrought 
rivals took turns falling on their own poles. It would be Tomba's 
last Olympic moment worth savoring, but not his last triumph. The 
following season was arguably his finest, and he won the overall World 
Cup title for the first and only time. But when the world championships 
in Sierra Nevada, Spain, were postponed because of lack of snow, he 
decided to postpone retirement, and in February 1996 he finally ended 
his run of misfortune at the world championships, somehow recovering 
after slipping and bouncing off the snow in his final giant slalom 
run. He would win both his events in Sierra Nevada, which left him 
with nothing left to win in his sport. Instead of turning his attention 
to his wine cellar (``only 5,000 bottles'') and acting aspirations 
(``Maybe I could be on skis, something like `Cliffhanger'''), Tomba 
let his agents and his father, Franco, persuade him to delay retirement 
again to compete in the world championships in the Italian resort 
of Sestrieres in 1997. Tomba pared down his entourage, parted ways 
with Thoeni, his longtime coach and conscience, and proceeded to win 
only three more races in his last two seasons. Along the way, he ran 
afoul of the Italian authorities, who are currently investigating 
him for tax evasion, along with his father and some of their former 
financial advisers. Last January in Cortina d'Ampezzo shortly before 
the Olympics, Tomba was clearly on edge and very weary of the scrutiny. 
``In Italy, they don't care about me if I win the race, because it's 
the same thing I have done before,'' he said. ``Instead they write 
about my private life, about my money and about my girlfriends. You 
know it's not funny. Italy is a very difficult place to live when 
things are like this.'' But despite the investigation and his forgettable 
visit to Nagano, Tomba still found a way to laugh last: winning his 
final race, a slalom in Crans Montana, Switzerland, last March. It 
was his 50th World Cup victory, second behind Stenmark, a better skier 
but not a better entertainer. Tomba chose not to entertain when he 
announced his retirement in a terse statement released through the 
Italian News Agency. But in January, when asked how he hoped to be 
remembered when he stopped competing, he did not hesitate, saying: 
``Was good guy. Won everything. Was extroverted. Had to be extroverted 
to win the race.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>