<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981212.0085 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Clinton donned his peacemaker's cloak and flew to the Middle 
East Saturday as his aides grappled with the ever-more-imminent prospect 
that he will face trial next year in the Senate. Clinton left behind 
a capital in wintry disarray, gripped by a pervasive sense of sadness, 
of once-shining hopes thwarted, with more grievous divisions than 
ever between the two parties and legislative business stalled. While 
the House Judiciary Committee debated a fourth article of impeachment 
to stand alongside the three that it voted on Friday, House leaders 
began preparations for a vote on them by all 435 members next week, 
probably on Thursday. Chances for a House vote on a resolution of 
censure, the alternative preferred by Democrats, appeared dim. One 
White House official said, ``Impeachment by the full House is starting 
to look inevitable.'' At the beginning of Saturday's session, Republicans 
on the committee sought to narrow substantially the reach of the fourth 
article. It had originally dealt with allegedly widespread abuses 
of power, but Republicans argued for the removal of most of those, 
leaving only one major charge, that Clinton had falsely or incompletely 
answered many of the 81 questions that the committee submitted to 
him earlier in its proceedings. The fourth article as originally constituted 
had been considered the weakest of the four, with the poorest chance 
of winning approval in the full House. More than a dozen members of 
Congress, some of whom have not yet decided how to vote on impeachment, 
accompanied Clinton as he left Andrews Air Force Base aboard Air Force 
One in the pre-dawn darkness. It therefore seemed probable, if rather 
bizarre, that the president, always formidable in one-on-one situations, 
would seize the opportunity do some lobbying on the trip. Whether 
he will be able to inject any adrenaline into the flagging Middle 
East peace process is another question. He is to meet with both Benjamin 
Netanyahu, the Israeli prime minister, and Yasser Arafat, the Palestinian 
leader. Even in the very best of times, the Middle East has proved 
a minefield for U.S. presidents. In this, the worst of times for his 
presidency, Clinton is taking his own minefield with him, and it is 
not clear how much influence he retains there, if any, given his situation 
at home. The president is due back in Washington before Thursday's 
vote in the House. Only Andrew Johnson among Clinton's predecessors 
has ever faced such a humiliating and perilous roll-call, and he may 
try once again to make a statement that would swing enough moderate 
Republicans to his side to avoid impeachment. But his closest advisers 
said they did not know what more he could say, beyond another expression 
of his regret and contrition. The president tried that on Friday afternoon, 
to no avail. Republicans looking for an admission from Clinton that 
he had lied were disappointed; most agreed with Rep. Steve Chabot 
of Ohio that ``the president did not say nearly enough.'' The advisers 
said there was no chance he would ever do so, if what the moderates 
were insisting upon was an acknowledgment of a crime. Impeached by 
the House, Johnson escaped conviction by the Senate by a single vote, 
but he was enfeebled by the process. If impeached, Clinton is expected 
to survive in the Senate by a wider margin, given the close partisan 
division and the requirement for a two-thirds vote to convict. But 
the widespread fear in Washington is that he, too, would be crippled, 
with almost two years left to serve on the second term he won in 1996. 
True to his long-standing promise to try to wrap things up by Christmas, 
the Judiciary Committee's chairman, Rep. Henry Hyde of Illinois, gaveled 
the panel to order shortly before 10 o'clock Saturday morning _ an 
unusual hour for a Capitol Hill committee meeting, especially on a 
Saturday. With the 10-week inquiry nearing its end, and three articles 
already approved, Saturday's session had a bit of the air of afterthought, 
however momentous its proceedings. Both Hyde and Rep. Robert Livingston 
of Louisiana, the incoming speaker, were said by staff members to 
be opposed to allowing a censure resolution to reach the House floor. 
Their strategic calculation was this: if members reluctant to vote 
for impeachment but determined not to let the president escape without 
punishment were given the chance to vote for censure, they would not 
cast their votes for the more severe measure. Democrats continued 
to push for censure on Saturday, and they resumed the attack on the 
majority Republicans at the start of the session despite the Republican 
move to narrow the scope of the proposed article by excluding abuse 
of executive privilege and false statements to White House aides. 
Rep. Charles Schumer, D-N.Y., who will have a chance to vote in the 
Senate trial as a new member of that body next year, said one part 
of the original fourth article was ``the greatest reach of all, the 
most absurd thing'' in any of the allegations that had been lodged 
by the Republicans. That was the charge that by lying to the American 
people in speeches on television Clinton had committed an impeachable 
offense. If he had, Schumer said, every president since George Washington 
had done the same. Rep. Barney Frank of Massachusetts restated the 
Democrats' case that Republicans were starting a process ``designed 
to kick the president out'' in the full knowledge that the Senate 
would never do so. That course of action, he said, demeaned the constitutional 
process as well as the House. Hyde rebutted him, quoting the late 
Rep. Barbara Jordan of Texas, who in the committee's proceedings against 
Richard Nixon almost 25 years ago said that ``the House accuses, the 
Senate judges.'' The House's job, Hyde insisted, was simply to decide 
``whether there was enough evidence to warrant a Senate trial,'' not 
fully to weigh the evidence itself. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>