<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981023.1830.0318 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
the president didn't say very much about the fate of Jonathan pollard, 
the american who spied so effectively for Israel, but it is a story 
replete with all the trappings of espionage, money and ideology, treason 
and very deep anger. With more, here is ABC's John McWethy. As a U.S. 
naval intelligence analyst, Jonathan pollard regularly stuffed his 
briefcase with top-secret documents and satellite photographs and 
smuggled them to his Israeli handlers. The volume was staggering -- 
the equivalent of 45 file cabinets of secret paper. The Israelis paid 
pollard $2,500 a month, provided him a lavish honeymoon and bought 
his wife a diamond ring. Pollard said he would have done it all for 
free to make sure Israel obtained the information that he claimed 
the U.S. should have given an important Ally. Pollard became a national 
hero in Israel, was given citizenship and demands for his release 
became a national cause. From his prison cell in North Carolina earlier 
this year, pollard told an israeli reporter -- Speaking as an Israeli 
citizen, I couldn't be prouder of my government for having done this. 
In the last two years, Israeli officials have made urgent requests 
to release pollard at virtually every high-level meeting with americans. 
At least three times, President Clinton has considered offering Clemency 
to pollard. Each time, the FBI and intelligence community opposed 
it. This man is chairman of the intelligence committee. Intelligence 
officials are so adamant because they claim pollard still knows how 
the U.S. collects its secrets and from whom. This poses a threat to 
the U.S. only if he is free. John McWethy, ABC News, the state department. 
there were a couple of moments today when the Israelis thought they 
would have Jonathan pollard back on the plane with the Israeli prime 
minister. What's the mood there about pollard? Well, people are a 
little confused. I think there was a point today where they thought 
he was coming back. It was being reported. We were told the prime 
minister was negotiating hard. This plays to prime minister Netanyahu 
right-wing coalition members, the very people he needs to try to sell 
that peace deal he signed today. It was very much in his interest 
to try and bring him back. He obviously didn't succeed, although he 
has a promise to have this negotiated, there are people on the left 
that are calling this an embarrassment. In one word, do you think 
he comes back, Netanyahu, stronger or weaker after this agreement 
today? I think he comes back stronger, but people are expecting him 
to implement it and that's going to be the tough part. Thanks very 
much. Gillian Findlay in Jerusalem tonight. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>