<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981023.0811 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Russia's chief banker predicted Friday that only a fraction of the 
country's commercial banks would survive the current economic crisis, 
even with help from the Central Bank. ``We reckon that only a small 
number of banks will be able to stay afloat in the current situation,'' 
said Central Bank chairman Viktor Gerashchenko. ``I expect that 200-300 
banks will be able to cope with the financial problems,'' he said, 
according to the Interfax news agency. The Central Bank recently estimated 
there were 1,700 commercial banks in Russia, although the Profil business 
weekly said only 905 remained profitable after the crisis erupted 
in mid-August. Russian entrepreneurs rushed to open banks in the post-Soviet 
era, but few of the enterprises ever established a solid financial 
footing or offered western-style retail services. Many collapsed in 
the wake of the crisis or froze accounts. Dealing among other banks 
all but stopped, due to the plummeting ruble, a lack of capital and 
potential losses resulting from huge investments in the treasury bills 
the government defaulted on. Talks between Russian officials and foreign 
banks that hold many of the treasury bills broke down in London on 
Thursday, but Germany's Deutsche Bank AG said they will resume next 
week. Foreign banks fear they will be offered less favorable repayment 
rates than Russians. The Central Bank said Thursday that 61 billion 
rubles (dlrs 3.58) would be needed to bail out the country's banking 
system. It said it would help the most viable and important banks, 
as well as key banks in the regions. Meanwhile, the government lowered 
import duties Friday on meat, milk and other staples in an effort 
to prevent any shortages this winter. Russia relies heavily on imports, 
which have fallen since the crisis as become more expensive as the 
ruble loses value. The country has not experienced any food shortages, 
and is not expected to. But the government wants to make sure there 
is plenty of food on hand for the winter. The Interfax news agency 
said the import duties on meat have been trimmed from 15 percent to 
10 percent, on milk from 10 percent to 5 percent and on butter, from 
20 percent to 15 percent. Duties on other foods, such as soybeans, 
also were lowered. The government continued talks Friday with officials 
from the International Monetary Fund. Few details have been released, 
but the IMF top representative in Russia, Martin Gilman, has said 
that the question of further IMF loan installments has not come up. 
A dlrs 22.6 billion loan package, put together by the IMF before the 
crisis, was frozen in September after the first dlrs 4.8 billion installment 
was provided. The IMF has said it will not release more money until 
it sees Russia's plan for coping with the economic crisis and signs 
that it is being implemented. Russia has already indicated it is putting 
together only short-term measures, rather than a comprehensive, long-term 
plan. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>