<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981023.1131 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Long-awaited results of tests on Princess Diana's Mercedes show the 
car had no technical problems, was going slower than originally believed, 
and definitely brushed against a Fiat Uno, sources close to the investigation 
said Friday. The tests on the Mercedes, which have been conducted 
for the past 13 months at a police lab outside Paris, have been seen 
as the biggest piece of the puzzle still missing in the investigation 
into Diana's death in a Paris traffic tunnel on Aug. 31, 1997. Two 
sources, both of whom spoke to The Associated Press on condition of 
anonymity, said the tests had been completed and will be transmitted 
to Judge Herve Stephan on Nov. 2. They included both crash tests and 
tests using a computer. According to the sources, they showed that: 
_ The Mercedes had no problems with its brakes, contrary to reported 
testimony in the police record that car was precarious when braking 
suddenly. It also had no problems with its airbags, the sources said. 
Investigators were believed to have been looking at whether the front 
air bags may have inflated before the car struck the tunnel's pillar 
_ perhaps as a result of the brush with the Uno. _ That driver Henri 
Paul was only going at 100 kilometers per hour (62 mph). That is much 
slower than initial reports speculated. Still, it is twice the speed 
limit. Paul, who was drunk at the time of the crash, was killed, as 
was Diana's boyfriend, Dodi Fayed. The only survivor was bodyguard 
Trevor Rees-Jones. _ That the Mercedes, as has long been believed, 
did indeed have a brush with a Fiat Uno before crashing. However, 
it is not known to what extent the incident caused the crash. Police 
have questioned almost 3,000 owners of Fiat Unos, but are thought 
to have long ago given up hope of finding either the car or the owner. 
Judge Stephan will have to decide whether he now has enough information 
to complete his investigation. Still in limbo are the 10 paparazzi, 
under formal investigation in the crash. It is believed that they 
will be cleared on the manslaughter charge, but a few may be tried 
on the charge of failing to aid people in danger. The Mercedes was 
rented by the Ritz Hotel from the Etoile Limousine company. The Ritz, 
where Diana and Dodi Fayed dined that night, is owned by Mohamed Al 
Fayed _ Dodi's father. Before concluding the investigation, Stephan 
has several other elements to consider, including a report on the 
level of carbon in the driver's blood, a report on the exact causes 
of death of the victims, as well as a suit by Rees-Jones against the 
Ritz and Etoile Limousine, claiming they endangered the lives of others 
by failing to provide a licensed chauffeur. The main causes of the 
crash are still believed to be drunkenness and speed. Repeated blood 
tests found Paul was heavily drunk at the time of the crash. That, 
and even a speed of 100 kph (62 mph) into curving tunnel, created 
a highly dangerous mix. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>