<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981023.0283 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Echoing Western claims, Kosovo's main ethnic Albanian leader said 
Friday that Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic has not fulfilled 
NATO's demands to remove his troops from the province and that little 
progress has been made to defuse the crisis. Although fighting has 
all but ceased, tension remains high in Kosovo, despite the agreement 
reached Oct. 12 between Milosevic and U.S. envoy Richard Holbrooke 
to avert NATO airstrikes. The U.N. refugee agency said Friday that 
only a ``trickle'' of refugees are returning to their homes because 
of fear and intimidation by Serb police. ``The impression our staff 
got on the ground is while some people trickle back to their ruined 
homes, widespread destruction of housing and fear of the continued 
Serb military and police presence prevent signigicant return,'' U.N. 
spokesman Kris Janowski said in Geneva, Switzerland. In Kosovo's capital 
Pristina, ethnic Albanian leader Ibrahim Rugova told reporters that 
``Serbian forces have not yet withdrawn from Kosovo,'' despite Yugoslav 
claims to the contrary. ``We cannot say any progress was made and 
NATO should maintain its `activation order' and keep pressing the 
Belgrade government,'' Rugova said. Yugoslavia has repeatedly insisted 
it has withdrawn all its special troops sent after Feb. 28 to suppress 
an ethnic Albanian revolt in Kosovo. The pro-government daily Vecernje 
Novosti quoted unidentified police sources Thursday as saying that 
the only troops still in Kosovo were those that had been there before 
the crackdown began. U.S. and other Western diplomats dispute this, 
however, warning that continuing violence threatens the Serbian province's 
peace process and raises the threat of NATO airstrikes. NATO has extended 
the deadline until Tuesday for Milosevic to comply. ``We are not satisfied 
with the level of compliance,'' U.S. envoy Christopher Hill told reporters 
Thursday. In Washington, Defense Department spokesman Kenneth Bacon 
said all of the paramilitary police are not out and roadblocks remain 
that ``we don't believe are proper.'' The troop withdrawal is a key 
condition of the U.S.-brokered agreement to achieve lasting peace 
in Kosovo, an overwhelmingly Albanian area of the Yugoslav republic 
of Serbia. NATO has given Milosevic until Tuesday to comply with U.N. 
demands or risk airstrikes. The demands include removing all special 
troops sent to Kosovo during the crackdown and allowing tens of thousands 
of ethnic Albanian refugees to return safely to their homes. ``The 
military and police presence is there,'' Janowski said. ``Even though 
people trickle back during the day, they hear shots at night and they're 
off again.'' Laura Boldrini of the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees 
said ethnic Albanians who returned two weeks ago to the village of 
Poklek fled again this week because of intimidation by Serb police. 
``It's a never-ending story,'' Boldrini said. International observers 
in the field said they heard increased tank and artillery fire in 
some areas, after three days of relative calm. American diplomat William 
Walker arrived in the Yugoslav capital Belgrade late Thursday to oversee 
the establishment of a 2,000-member mission to make sure Milosevic 
honors the agreement. Walker will head the mission under the direction 
of the Vienna-based Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe. 
State-controlled media said Yugoslavia's foreign minister, Zivadin 
Jovanovic, assured Walker the government will stick by the deal. Walker 
was headed later Friday to the Kosovo capital Pristina to meet Rugova. 
Milosevic also agreed to talks with ethnic Albanians on the future 
of the province, which is part of Yugoslavia's largest republic, Serbia. 
About 90 percent of Kosovo's 2 million people are Albanian, and most 
want independence or self-rule. The rebel Kosovo Liberation Army has 
insisted it will not abandon its goal of independence. The United 
States and the Europeans reject independence but support some form 
of autonomy for Kosovo. At U.N. headquarters in New York, the U.N. 
Security Council is working on a resolution endorsing the Kosovo peace 
deal. Russia raised objections Thursday that the language might authorize 
military action. Diplomats and U.N. officials said the council was 
aiming for a vote on Friday. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>