<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981023.0588 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Japan's government put its long-awaited bank-bailout-plan into action 
Friday by taking over one of the country's biggest lenders, the debt-ridden 
Long-Term Credit Bank of Japan. The takeover _ the first nationalization 
of a Japanese bank since World War II _ avoided a full-scale collapse 
of LTCB, which would have further eroded confidence in Japan's banking 
system and shaken world markets. The government took over the bank 
under a recently approved set of laws aimed at revitalizing the financial 
system and lifting Japan out of its worst recession in half a century. 
The laws, which went into effect Friday, also open a line of 60 trillion 
yen (dlrs 515 billion) in public money to the banking industry. The 
government can use the money to bail out weak banks or help healthy 
ones rid themselves of a crushing burden of bad loans. Estimates of 
the size of Japan's bad-loan problem run as high as a dlrs 1 trillion, 
much of it left over from the collapse of Japan's high-flying speculative 
``bubble economy'' of the 1980s. Announcing the move, Prime Minister 
Keizo Obuchi sought to assure the bank's jittery clients and customers 
_ and international markets. ``The government will continue to take 
all possible measures to protect depositors and others, to maintain 
an orderly financial system, and to stabilize financial markets at 
home and abroad,'' Obuchi said. The takeover was seen as a clear signal 
that Tokyo is at last willing to end the so-called convoy system, 
where the government offered unconditional protection to banks, and 
begin allowing market forces to sift out winners and losers. ``We 
wanted to see if the government would be willing to close down non-viable 
banks,'' said James Fiorillo, a senior analyst at ING Baring Securities 
in Tokyo. One group that stood to suffer was LTCB's shareholders. 
The stock last traded at 2 yen (2 cents). Though the government would 
have to buy the shares as part of the nationalization plan, they were 
expected to pay only about 1 yen (1 cent). Japan's taxpayers, who 
will now have to pick up the tab for the bank's bad loans, also stood 
to lose. Government auditors said Friday that as much as 4.62 trillion 
yen (dlrs 39.8 billion) of LTCB's loans may be irrecoverable. The 
auditors, from the Financial Supervisory Agency, also said LTCB liabilities 
exceeded its assets by some 340 billion yen (dlrs 2.9 billion) _ meaning 
the bank is insolvent. LTCB issued an apology and said all of its 
directors would resign once the government had appointed new managers. 
The government didn't say what was in store for the bank in the long-run 
but the takeover seemed likely to spell the end of LTCB's 46-year 
history. Founded in the aftermath of Japan's military defeat to provide 
cheap, long-term loans to industry, the bank helped lead the country's 
spectacular rise to economic superpower status. But like the U.S. 
savings and loan industry a decade ago, changes in regulations and 
the economy made specialized lenders like LTCB obsolete. Desperate 
for new customers, the bank increasingly lent to riskier enterprises 
such as real estate developers until property prices crashed in the 
1990s. The most likely outcome for the bank, said analysts, would 
be for the government to keep control for one year while its bad loans 
are sold and another company is found to absorb its healthy operations. 
A possible partner would be Sumitomo Trust and Banking Co., which 
agreed to merge with LTCB earlier this year but then backed out as 
the size of LTCB's troubles became known. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>