<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981023.2130.0048 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Only time will tell, but President Clinton is hoping the Gee graphical 
significance of wye river will carry the same weight as camp David 
and others. Today, the stab at history was signed during an interim 
peace agreement for the Middle East. Wolf Blitzer reports. It took 
nine days, and several sleepless nights, but president clinton finally 
managed to prod Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu and Palestinian 
authority President Yasser Arafat into signing their long-delayed 
interim peace agreement. This agreement is designed to rebuild trust 
and a new hope for peace between the parties. But it almost collapsed 
Friday morning when the Israelis refused to sign the agreement unless 
President Clinton committed to release convicted Israeli spy Jonathan 
Jay pollard. Israeli officials thought they had won such a promise, 
not so said the president. I have agreed to review this matter seriously 
at the prime minister's request. I have made no commitment as to the 
outcome of the review. The agreement calls for another Israeli troop 
withdrawal from the West Bank in exchange for extensive Palestinian 
security assurances that will be monitored by the U.S. central intelligence 
agency. Today is a day when Israel and our entire region are more 
secure. To win a key commitment from Arafat to revise the Palestinian 
charter by eliminating references calling for Israel's destruction, 
Mr. clinton promised to travel to the Middle East in the coming weeks 
to address the Palestinian national council. Arafat went out of his 
way to thank him and to reassure Israel. We will never leave the peace 
process. We will never go back to violence and confrontation. No return 
to confrontation and violence. Witnessing the agreement and adding 
an emotional element was jordan's king Hussein who's suffering from 
cancer. There has been enough destruction, enough death, enough waste. 
It was a personal triumph for President Clinton coming only days before 
congressional elections and weeks before scheduled impeachment hearings. 
He is a warrior for peace. I mean, he doesn't stop. The president's 
aides say the agreement proves once and for all that the president 
still has the international clout to deliver. Wolf Blitzer, CNN, the 
White House. As for reaction to the accord, it was certainly not all 
positive. Members of the Islamic Jihad said they could not accept 
Washington's solutions to their problems. Hard-line Jewish settlers 
vowed to shut down the West Bank Sunday. Some of prime minister Netanyahu's 
allies in the Knesset say they will vote against the agreement. But, 
one member of the opposition labor party said it will come to the 
support of Netanyahu giving him quote, "A safety net in the coming 
weeks." 
</TEXT>
</DOC>