<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981023.2100.0475 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Jonathan pollard's father is standing by to talk to us. First some 
background. President Clinton has twice before refused formal request 
to let Jonathan pollard go. So did the president before him, George 
bush. In fact, American military and intelligence officials are unanimous 
in opposing any release for a man who handed overpb thousands of sensitive 
secrets, no matter who wanted them then or who wants him now. Here 
is NBC news justice correspondent, Pete Williams. He's in a class 
by himself, pollard, the only American ever sentenced to life in prison 
for spying for a U.S. Ally. In the early 1980's, working as a civilian 
intelligence analyst for the navy, he became convinced the U.S. wasn't 
doing enough for Israel, so he began smuggling top-secret papers out 
of the navet intelligence center, handing them to Israel contacts. 
By the time the F.B.I. caught up with him in 1985, trying to seek 
asylum in israel's embassy, he'd been spying for 18 months, enough 
time for pollard to fill 30 file cabinets with stolen documents, closely 
guarded secrets about U.S. weapons, and on intelligence sources in 
the Middle East that were cut off after pollard's spying. There's 
no telling what Israel did with that information. What would be stopping 
the Israelis from brokering that information and giving to, for example, 
the Russians in exchange for something that they wanted or even to 
another Middle Eastern company? The man who prosecuted pollard 12 
years ago said it would be a disaster to release him. The Israelis 
are asking us to do is give them an American who betrayed america. 
Intelligence officials say pollard has even tried slipping classified 
information he remembers into his letters in prison, another reason 
they hope he's never released to Israel. Standing by, we have a person 
you just saw in the set-up piece. Joe digenova is going to talk to 
us. But first, we're going to talk to Morris pollard, Jonathan pollard's 
father. He is with us from south bend, Indiana. Mr. pollard, why should 
your son be released? The typical question goes on to say there's 
a whole bunch of inmates who would like to be somewhere else. You 
want to know why he should be released? yes. There was a bottom line 
on this case. It was written by judge Steven Williams of the U.S. 
court of appeals, who stated quite clearly that because the government's 
breach of the plea agreement against Jonathan pollard, the case against 
-- of Jonathan pollard is a fundamental miscarriage of justice. And 
he recommended that the sentence be vacated and the case be heard 
before a new judge, and the person responsible for this miscarriage 
was the prosecutor, Joe digenova. This is in writing. It's part of 
the official court record. Let me go back to the beginnings. First 
of all, I admit without hesitation that Jonathan broke the law, that 
he should have found another way to communicate important information 
through channels to Israel. But I have a letter from admiral shafere, 
chief of naval intelligence, who said one reason why your son is being 
punished is because he revealed to israel the development of weapons 
of mass destruction in Iraq, information which was not given to Israel, 
and which was classified until the first day of the gulf war. But 
do you see the point that it wasn't up to him? I don't -- I don't 
argue that point. But let me -- let me continue this. Jonathan was 
indicted on a single count of passing classified information to Israel 
for the benefit of Israel and on that basis, a plea agreement was 
set up in which, for exchange of information and cooperation, Jonathan 
pollard would be spared a life sentence. And this was signed by Joe 
digenova, prosecutor. When the prosecutor then had Jonathan's signature 
on that plea agreement, they changed the indictment without going 
back to the grand jury, to damage to the United States. Now, Joseph 
digenova didn't have the foggiest idea of what Jonathan knew or not 
until he confessed in agreement with the plea agreement. And who did 
-- who is responsible for all of this? There was a op-Ed in the August 
6 issue of "the Wall Street Journal," by a Staff member of the Senate 
committee on espionage -- on intelligence oversight in which he said 
that Jonathan made one great blunder -- And say it, and then we got 
to run. He said that Jonathan revealed to Israel information on the 
rearming of iraq, which the people responsible for it were distressed. 
And that was weinberger and George Schultz. That's the last word. 
We have to give Mr. digenova his response. Thank you. Joe digenova, 
you've heard what Mr. pollard had to say. Before we talk about what 
was at stake here today in the talks, your defense of the charges 
you've just heard. Well, first of all, Mr. pollard, if I were in his 
shoes, I would be a Loving father as well. And I do not in any way 
wish him ill. I know exactly how Mr. pollard feels. And if I were 
in his shoes, I would be saying the same things about my son. And 
I wish him well. The case of Mr. pollard was affirmed by the United 
States court of appeals, judge Williams was a dissenter. The je man 
that Mr. pollard quoted. The court of appeals held that the case was 
fought hard but fairly and that mr. pollard deserved the sentence 
he got and that was the end of the matter. But that's history. Was 
Netanyahu rolling the dice today, Joe, just hoping for -- to catch 
the president in a good mood? no. I think Mr. Netanyahu had a serious 
plan here. He thought the president was weakened. He thought that 
by making this a trip wire that would foil the agreement that he might 
force the hand of someone he believed to be in a weakened political 
position because of the allegations concerning impeachment. Mr. Netanyahu 
made a mistake. The president, to his credit, may I say, performed 
as the chief law enforcement officer of the United States, as he should, 
rejected this outrageous demand after an agreement had been reached 
and said no and gave the fig leaf of a promise to review the case 
fully at some point in the future. He's done that twice during his 
presidency, and on both occasions, has rejected Clemency. You know, 
the case is made that there are crimes, and there are crimes. And 
pollard at the end of the day really was spying for an Ally, the information 
was going to come out sooner or later, but I presume you're unswayed 
by that. First of all, I don't know the information was going to come 
out sooner or later. Mr. pollard compromised the largest physical 
compromise of U.S. technical information in history. The damage assessment 
is still under way 13 years later. What Mr. pollard did and the reason 
he got a tough sentence was, first of all, he broke U.S. law, and 
second of all, it was a signal to other government employ eyes that 
even if you spy for an Ally, don't expect leniency. Why the great 
love of pollard on Israel's part? Why get him out of jail here? I 
don't get what the payoff is. Well, you know, Brian, this is a political 
issue in Israel. I followed this case very closely and have dealt 
with Israeli journalists ever since 1985. There are a great many people 
in Israel, who believe Mr. pollard was being loyal to them, he was 
doing what he believed was right and therefore should be released 
to them. Unfortunately, he's a U.S. citizen. He is not an Israeli, 
although he was granted their citizenship. He's an American who betrayed 
his country. This demand which was made of President Clinton today 
was interesting because we are not parties to this negotiation. It's 
fascinating that a mediator would have demands made on him. Joe digenova, 
thank you very much, as we thank Morris pollard again for coming on 
on this day when Mr. pollard almost became an issue again. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>