<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981023.2100.1174 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This afternoon's hard-won peace agreement was not without risk for 
the president. It was also probably the best thing to happen to him 
in nine months. Forgetting the marathon hours, the sleepless nights, 
the tedium of the negotiation, the peace talks allowed him to look 
like a president and change the subject from dresses and cigars for 
a time. With hearings nearing in the house, will he get any bounce 
from this diplomatic victory? John Broder, White House correspondent 
for the "New York Times," is covering the president's role in the 
peace talks for tomorrow's paper and is with us from Washington. John, 
of course the cynical view is camp David didn't get Jimmy Carter a 
Peace prize or a second term, that the most we can expect here is 
Americans this week saw their president being president. Well, that's 
true. And there was a conscious calculation made by the White House 
and by this president that this was the most productive use of his 
time. Even though we're ten days out from a mid-term election, one 
that's not likely to be terribly favorable to democrats, the president 
calculated he would be best essentially unseen for eight or nine days, 
out of view of the cameras at wye river, doing the work of diplomacy, 
rather than raising money for democratic candidates. So, it could 
be said that the time to really arrive at at least a tentative mideast 
peace deal was as much Dick dated by concerns here as concerns there? 
Well, to some extent. But I think that secretary of state Albright 
and other foreign policy advisors told President Clinton that this 
process was just stalled, frozen in the ice, and the only way to get 
it moving was for the president of the United States, the only person 
in the world that could really serve as mediator, to inject himself 
personally. Ordinarily, a president doesn't do that unless he's sure 
of success. In this case, there was absolutely no certainly that nine 
days ago we would be where we are today. But the president took that 
risk, and it may have been a minor risk for him, because even if the 
peace talks had broken down, I don't think President Clinton would 
have been blamed. It would have been generations of em anyy between 
the Arabs and the israelis. And probably far from being blamed, he 
might have received credit for trying. So, this was really net gain 
all around. I think that was the calculation and, as well, that there 
aren't all that many candidates around the country who are screaming 
for appearances by President Clinton for their local campaigns. So, 
he felt the best use of his time was, in fact, to advance American 
interests in the mideast and try and bring these two guys together. 
And, also, a different and interesting dynamic today, John, I know 
didn't escape you. The first speaker today, the man who interviewed 
-- introduced, rather, everybody in the east room, was the vice president. 
How big a role did Al Gore really play in all this? Well, he was present 
for the first few days of the talks at wye river. Then he went off 
on his own campaign swing. He's a popular surrogate for the president. 
And he gave a rah-rah pep speech for the president, talked about his 
perseverance, stamina, and ability through sheer will to bring this 
negotiation to a successful conclusion. The rest of the speakers were 
a little more somber and less self-congratulatory than the vice president. 
John, next time we talk, it'll be about the house hearings toward 
impeachment. But thank you for previewing the article in tomorrow 
"New York Times." 
</TEXT>
</DOC>