<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981023.0352 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the recent wave of supermarket mergers, Ronald Burkle has proved 
to be the master deal maker. As chairman and largest shareholder of 
Fred Meyer, he engineered its planned $8 billion sale to Kroger last 
Sunday. The previous week he guided Dominick's Supermarkets, of which 
he was also chairman and major shareholder, into the arms of Safeway 
for $1.85 billion. These are just the latest deals for Burkle, 45, 
who parlayed the buying and selling of supermarkets into a fortune 
estimated by Forbes at $1 billion before the latest transactions. 
Son of a supermarket executive in Southern California, he began his 
career bagging groceries in junior high school. In 1986 he formed 
the Yucaipa Com., a Los Angeles buyout firm. Yucaipa consolidated 
various supermarket chains in Southern California that were sold last 
year to Fred Meyer, of Portland, Ore. Burkle, a major donor to politicians 
of both parties, was so busy wrapping up the sale of Fred Meyer that 
he missed a long-planned luncheon at his Beverly Hills mansion last 
Monday for Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin and some U.S. Representatives. 
He took time later in the week to talk about the forces causing supermarket 
chains to merge, a trend he sees tapering off. Q. (italics)What was 
the genesis of the two recent mergers, particularly the Kroger acquisition 
of Fred Meyer? Was it to stave off an acquisition of Kroger by Safeway?(end 
italics) A. No. I've actually been a believer and committed to the 
consolidation of the grocery business for a long time. Purchasing 
power has become more and more of an issue, and systems have allowed 
the business to be run in different ways and have raised the ante. 
Not many small companies can afford $200 million for systems. Two 
or three billion a year in sales used to be considered the middle 
of the pack; it's now hard to operate at that size. As you look at 
consolidation, every time somebody does something, there are fewer 
players left. So if you want the best partner, you have to be at the 
front end of it. I've had a toy Kroger truck and Kroger car in my 
office for about a year, and it was just a question of when was the 
right time to do it. Q. (italics)Do you see the consolidation continuing, 
or are we nearing an end?(end italics) A. I think the number of really 
high-quality players out there is diminishing. It will continue, but 
there aren't a lot more things that can happen. Many of the remaining 
companies are family owned, and whether they sell often depends on 
considerations other than the price of the stock. Q. (italics)You 
don't see the existing giants combining into fewer chains?(end italics) 
A. You couldn't see Safeway and Fred Meyer-Kroger go together, because 
there are too many overlaps. You couldn't see Safeway and American 
Stores go together. You would have a lot of FTC and antitrust issues 
that would be difficult or impossible to resolve legally or financially. 
Q. (italics)What's in this trend for consumers? There have been concerns 
that consolidation will lead to higher prices, fewer and less conveniently 
located stores, and reduced selection as regional and ethnic food 
suppliers have trouble getting shelf space.(end italics) A. Anyone 
who forgets to look out for the customer will be out of business. 
New systems allow you to do that much more. You can keep better track 
of what you sell store by store. In the past, a tremendous number 
of decisions had to be made at the division level. Now you can do 
that centrally with technology. But it actually means you know more 
about what customers want. There's plenty of competition. I don't 
think anyone's ever accused Albertson's and Safeway of being easy 
to operate against. If the chains aren't serving part of the market, 
new competitors open up. If anything, having everyone well capitalized 
and buying at the lowest possible price is good for the consumer, 
whereas in the past maybe everyone wasn't buying at the lowest possible 
price. Q. (italics)With these mergers, you seem to have worked yourself 
out of a day job. What is next for you? Is the grocery business going 
to be a big part of your future?(end italics) A. It could be. I'm 
fairly opportunistic. I love to do trading, and I love to do real 
estate, and I have other companies today. I'll be the largest individual 
shareholder of Kroger, but I'll be watching them as chairman of the 
executive committee rather than as chairman of the board. But I wasn't 
an active chairman of the board anyway. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>