<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981023.0472 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial on Saturday, Oct. 24: The 
body language in the East Room of the White House on Friday was more 
eloquent than the words that were uttered and the accords that were 
signed. For the first time since Benjamin Netanyahu became prime minister 
of Israel more than two years ago, he looked at ease with Yasser Arafat, 
the Palestinian leader. The distrust and stiffness between the leaders 
seemed to be gone, replaced by the kind of respect and partnership 
that can make a permanent peace possible in the Middle East. That 
growing trust and cooperation may be the most important achievements 
of the nine days and eight sleepless nights of bargaining and posturing 
in Maryland. The agreements reached by the Wye River point the way 
toward a Middle East settlement. But without faith in one another, 
Netanyahu and Arafat will never reach that destination or work through 
the spasms of terrorism that are likely to come. The Maryland agreements, 
if fully carried out, should remove many of the tangled issues that 
have paralyzed the peace effort over the last 19 months. Thanks to 
intense, sustained mediation by President Clinton and his aides, and 
the inspirational intervention of King Hussein of Jordan, the two 
leaders settled on a detailed plan to preserve Israeli security. U.S. 
intelligence officers, who already work with Israeli and Palestinian 
security officials, will closely monitor Palestinian authorities to 
insure that they arrest terrorist suspects and confiscate illegal 
weapons. Israel agreed to withdraw its troops from a further 13 percent 
of West Bank territory, bringing to 40 percent the amount under full 
or partial Palestinian control. Both sides now accept this as a reasonable 
next installment on a final settlement. It allows the Palestinians 
to enter the final phase of talks with an overwhelming majority of 
the West Bank's Palestinian population, and a decent portion of its 
territory, under their administration. The Palestinians also agreed 
to complete the revision of their national charter so there will no 
longer be any calls for Israel's destruction. If all these pieces 
of the peace puzzle can be held in place in the months ahead, the 
two sides can find an imaginative way of reconciling Israel's insistence 
that Jerusalem remain unified and under its authority with Palestinian 
demands that some part of Jerusalem become the capital of a future 
Palestinian state. They must decide the status of some 150,000 Jewish 
settlers now living in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, many in the 
heart of what would probably be Palestinian territory under a final 
settlement. Arrangements must also be worked out for dividing up the 
rest of the West Bank between Israeli security zones and Palestinian-administered 
territory. Forms of Palestinian statehood must be explored that would 
not create a military threat to Israeli survival. Less dramatic, but 
just as important, scarce water resources must be fairly apportioned. 
It would greatly assist the resolution of all these matters if the 
case of Jonathan Pollard did not again enter the discussions. Pollard's 
espionage work for Israel in Washington properly led to his conviction. 
How long he remains in federal prison has nothing to do with the peace 
talks, and should not have become a disruptive issue in the last hours 
of the Maryland summit meeting. Making peace in the Middle East will 
be hard enough without such distractions. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>