<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981023.0247 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As almost anyone with a market memory can attest, the month of October 
is not usually friendly for stocks. Since 1915, the Dow Jones industrial 
average has fallen an average 0.17 percent in the 10th month of the 
year, according to Birinyi &AMP; Associates. Only Septembers have 
been worse. This year, September was a washout. But with one week 
to go, October has proved to be the best month since January 1987. 
The performance has been enough to induce hibernation in many bears. 
Then there is James Grant, editor of Grant's Interest Rate Observer. 
Q. (italics)Many people seem to think the stock market has seen its 
lows. You don't agree?(end italics) A. If this were the bottom, it 
would be the most remarkable one in history, one where the Standard 
&AMP; Poor's 500 index is trading at 25 times earnings. That is a 
valuation rarely achieved at the top of a market. I think that this 
is a bear market rally. I would suppose that if the market gods were 
designing a bear market rally, they would make it look as irresistible 
as possible and would want as many participants as possible before 
opening the trap door. Q. (italics)But there are hundreds of stocks, 
especially small caps, that are down 25 percent or more this year. 
Are they overpriced?(end italics) A. Really cheap stocks are beginning 
to appear. The great, overarching question is whether you are well 
advised to seize values in the secondary and tertiary parts of the 
market when the primary market is selling at these multiples. In my 
view, the answer is no, because when the GEs, the Charles Schwabs 
and the other chosen fall, they will crush the smaller ones beneath 
them. Q. (italics)Do you see value anywhere?(end italics) A. I have 
two favorite things: small-cap Japanese stocks and gold. There are 
opportunities in Japan to buy profitable companies at little more 
than the net cash on their balance sheets. You get the business for 
free. Gold, now at an 18-year low, has disappointed more people than 
the old Brooklyn Dodgers. But I think it will be the beneficiary of 
continued chaos in the credit markets and a worldwide economic slowdown. 
Q. (italics)Do you see anything of value closer to home? Or a company 
that is a massive, screaming short?(end italics) A. I see both, actually. 
In Canada, there is an outfit called Legacy Hotels, which is a real 
estate investment trust with a bunch of lovely properties spun out 
by the real estate division of Canadian Pacific. You can buy this 
stock for about half of book value, with a yield in the low teens, 
an outfit with good management that is priced in Canadian dollars, 
which are very cheap relative to the U.S. dollar. The risk is that 
there is a severe recession and the business travelers stay home. 
Q. (italics)What about the screaming short?(end italics) A. The short 
sale is Charles Schwab, a stock that is trading at 38 to 40 times 
earnings, 10 times book value. Schwab is priced as if there were no 
doubt about the continued health and prosperity of the bull market. 
Q. (italics)Now that the Fed has cut interest rates twice in a matter 
of weeks, fears of a credit crunch and recession have diminished. 
Is that an appropriate reaction?(end italics) A. The credit crisis 
may sound melodramatic, but over the last several months there has 
been a very severe bear market in credit of all kinds. And it should 
be seen in the context of the preceding bull market in credit, where 
it was freely, if not almost promiscuously, available. There is no 
recession we know of right now, and yet we have had a credit crisis 
in this country, which in the postwar period is a rare if not unique 
occurrence. It makes you wonder what will happen to this institution 
of borrowing and lending if there is an actual deflation, or an actual 
recession. Q. (italics)But isn't it the Fed's job to take steps to 
prevent a credit crunch?(end italics A. It has been the suppression 
of cycles that paradoxically has created a lot of the volatility we 
have seen in the credit markets. By succeeding in perpetuating the 
expansion, the Fed has failed in the sense that it has changed the 
behavior of people with money. By saving Mexico a couple of years 
ago, the authorities changed the way people view sovereign credit 
risk. Hence the surprise when the Russian government defaulted. A 
visitor from Mars would not have been surprised that a country without 
money could not pay its bills. But many were surprised, because they 
had come to expect that the integrity of the system will be defended. 
By suppressing the volatility of the credit and business cycle, by 
trying to head off price inflations and deflations, the Fed has thrown 
a boomerang in the air, which is the risk tolerance of people who 
invest money. The Fed ought to be in the business of central banking, 
not central planning. Alan Greenspan ought to say that people who 
risk money stand to lose a lot of it. That is in the nature of cycles 
and markets. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>