<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981023.0455 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Years before someone took responsibility for torching a Colorado ski 
resort this week in the name of the Earth Liberation Front, the name 
was used by radical saboteurs who say they strike to protect animals 
and wildlife habitat. The name has been used for several years by 
vandals in the United Kingdom to claim credit for actions as diverse 
as sabotaging construction equipment and uprooting genetically modified 
beets. Two years ago near Eugene, Ore., the name was spray-painted 
at the scene when someone damaged trucks at a forest service ranger 
station; a few days later another ranger station in the area was set 
afire. But while the movement's adherents have claimed credit for 
many crimes, it is not clear whether the Earth Liberation Front is 
truly an organization an ideological umbrella for unrelated extremists 
or a front for saboteurs from other, more public organizations. Its 
methods seem to have evolved from the militant animal-rights movement's 
tactics against animal experimentation, fur production, hunting and 
meat production. The people claiming responsibility in Vail, Colo., 
for committing the most expensive act of eco-terrorism in the nation's 
history ``on behalf of the lynx'' are using a name that is closely 
associated with the much more well-known Animal Liberation Front (ALF), 
which began in England in the mid-70s and has a national press office 
in Minnesota. In what law enforcement officials said was almost certainly 
arson, gasoline was used to set several buildings and chair lifts 
ablaze at Vail Resorts atop Vail Mountain. The names of the two groups 
appear on the same Web site for publicity and on joint news releases 
claiming responsibility for setting fires at two federal animal research 
stations in Olympia, Wash., in June and for raiding a research fur 
farm near Madison, Wis. in July. But unlike the Animal Liberation 
Front, the Earth Liberation Front has no known spokesperson. It appears 
to have started as a way of distancing extreme acts like vandalism 
from other forms of civil disobedience sometimes adopted by radical 
environmental groups. Katie Fedor, a spokeswoman for the Animal Liberation 
Front in Osseo, Minn., said that the Earth Liberation Front isn't 
planning to organize a press office or headquarters. ``They're not 
going to jeopardize their actions by coming out,'' she said. ``They 
can't be active if they're in prison.'' The Animal Liberation Front 
has a press office to explain its actions, she said, and it is answering 
queries about the Earth Liberation Front ``because the goals of the 
organizations are the same: the end of animal suffering. As long as 
they meet the guidelines of not hurting anyone, having a strict non-violent 
policy of not hurting any humans or animals, we support what they 
do.'' Five years ago, the Department of Justice called the ALF ``a 
loose configuration of small, autonomous `cells,' with no centralized 
command structure. It is also believed that there are no formal membership 
requirements beyond the willingness to inflict damage upon an animal 
enterprise.'' Although the ELF was unknown in this country at the 
time, much the same description would appear to fit. The ELF name 
showed up in England in about 1992, a time when Earth First! was expanding 
there. Conceived as a way to separate sabotage actions from less secretive 
activities, the English ELF quickly allied itself with the ALF operations 
there, according to various accounts published by sympathizers. In 
1994, Judi Bari, an American Earth First! leader, noted in one of 
the group's publications that while England's Earth First! group ``may 
sympathize with the activities of ELF, they do not engage in them. 
If we are serious about our movement in the U.S., we will do the same.'' 
``Civil disobedience and sabotage are both powerful tactics in our 
movement,'' wrote Ms. Bari, who had been injured a few years earlier 
in an unexplained explosion of a bomb in her car and later died of 
cancer. ``For the survival of both, it's time to leave the night work 
to the elves in the woods.'' But Earth First!, the Eureka, Ore.-based 
radical environmental group whose members have chained themselves 
to trees to block loggers, denies any connection to the other group. 
Theresa Kintz, an editor of the journal, said the two groups probably 
share ``a philosophy of defense of the wild.'' ``There are a lot of 
individuals trying to save the wild,'' she said. In Animal Liberation 
Frontline, the online newsletter of the North American ALF Supporters 
Group, one article says that the ELF ``is now active in 10 to 15 countries, 
with some daring actions taking place in the Netherlands, Finland, 
Poland, and now Canada and the U.S.'' ``The biggest worry for security 
services will be when the earth and animal liberation movements get 
together,'' it said. ``Well, they have _ world, watch out, 'cause 
we've got a big planet to save, plus millions of species depending 
on us.'' The group's Web pages contain information on making devices 
for arson. Ron Arnold, the vice president of the Center for the Defense 
of Free Enterprise, a defender of property rights and a critic of 
environmentalists who specialize in cataloguing eco-terrorism, says 
the groups are closely linked. In a hearing before the Crime Subcommittee 
of the House Judiciary Committee last summer, Arnold said that ``I've 
been able to determine that certain criminal Earth Firsters, Earth 
Liberation Front members, and Animal Liberation Front members are, 
in fact, the same people.'' In a 1993 report to Congress on animal-rights 
extremism, the U.S. Justice Department said that the ``ALF is believed 
to have a very loosely organized membership of 100 or fewer militant 
activists who are willing to inflict large-scale damage or destruction 
on behalf of their cause. All extremist animal-rights groups are believed 
to be associated with each other by leadership, membership or both.'' 
But while England's movement may have inspired the one in this country, 
that report found ``no evidence that would suggest that there are 
any operational, logistical, or financial connections between ALF 
or other groups in the U.K. (or other countries) and their counterparts 
in the United States.'' Other radical groups said the Earth Liberation 
Front is a fairly new movement which they know little about. ``We 
wouldn't even know where to reach them,'' said Cain Allen, a member 
of the Liberation Collective in Portland, Ore. He said the Liberation 
Collective, which is aligned with animal-rights groups and labor-rights 
groups, does not speak for the ELF but dispenses communiques it receives 
from the group and from others. The first mention of the ELF the Liberation 
Collective received, Allen said, was in a faxed release last fall. 
In it, both the Animal Liberation Front and the Earth Liberation Front 
claimed responsibility for a fire in Oregon that caused $450,000 in 
damages to a holding corral where 488 wild horses and 51 burros captured 
by the Bureau of Land Management were scheduled to be sold, possibly 
for slaughter. Mainstream environmental organizations outspokenly 
denounce anyone who takes the law into their own hands, saying that 
extreme and illegal actions undermine the widespread support for sound 
environmental policies. ``Undermining the rule of law cannot possibly 
advance the cause of environmentalism, '' said Fred Krupp, the head 
of the Environmental Defense Fund. ``Regardless of what one's view 
of the lynx is, or the expansion, the arson at Vail is an outrage.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>