<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981023.0361 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Last spring and summer, officials at the Sierra Club gathered for 
a series of confidential meetings to plot how to make the environment 
an issue in elections around the United States. But their deliberations 
often had little to do with such matters as polluted streams or global 
warming. Instead, they focused on political tactics _ which candidates 
to help and which to punish. Sen. Lauch Faircloth, R-N.C., who has 
often been denounced by environmentalists, would be a target; his 
own hog farm was said to be a big polluter. Another Republican, Sen. 
Alfonse D'Amato, R-N.Y., appeared less vulnerable. ``The problem with 
D'Amato is he doesn't do a lot of dumb things,'' the group's media 
consultant said. They decided to help Sen. Harry Reid, D-Nev. _ until 
he crossed them by voting the wrong way on an environmental bill. 
Sierra Club officials insist that they do not play politics. Their 
advertising, they say, simply seeks to educate voters about issues. 
In the last two years, however, the Sierra Club has spent more than 
$6 million to make itself heard in 15 House and 8 Senate contests. 
And it is just one of dozens of interest groups spending millions 
on advertisements that dodge campaign finance laws and prohibitions 
on political activity by being labeled ``issue advocacy.'' From the 
AFL-CIO to the Republican and Democratic parties, from the health 
care industry to groups of religious conservatives, the advertising 
has proliferated to the degree that some candidates complain that 
they have lost control of their own messages. This year, independent 
groups are spending at least $260 million to press their issues in 
television advertisements, twice the amount they spent in 1996, according 
to a study by the Annenberg Public Policy Center of the University 
of Pennsylvania. While the din of the Clinton scandal in the Monica 
Lewinsky investigation has led some groups to spend relatively less 
on television this year and more on get-out-the-vote campaigns, the 
commercials are more prevalent than ever; in many cities they have 
dominated the airwaves over the last week. The Sierra Club made possible 
a case study of this important new phenomenon by allowing a reporter 
to attend its strategy meetings and to examine its internal memorandums 
over several months. The result shows that even groups like the Sierra 
Club, known to many people for its scenic calendars and nature books, 
can play politics as ferociously as any other interest group. With 
550,000 dues-paying members, the Sierra Club is the nation's oldest 
and largest grass-roots environmental organization. Of its annual 
budget of $42 million, $12 million is devoted to lobbying and policy 
matters. In strategy meetings week after week, Sierra Club officials 
made no secret of their goal: helping to elect Democrats with solid 
records on the environment _ it is backing only two Republicans, both 
moderates _ and to defeat their foes. ``We need to be even more focused 
in choosing places where we want to attempt to unseat anti-environmental 
opponents, and spend significant resources per race to do so,'' the 
club's political director, Daniel Weiss, wrote in a memorandum to 
his bosses on Sept. 5, 1997. The club has a political action committee, 
which spends some money on direct political advertising in about a 
half dozen races. But its efforts overwhelmingly involve the more 
subtle ``issue ads,'' which escape federal election regulations and 
spending limits by not expressly endorsing candidates. The organization 
is so concerned that it not be perceived as exploiting election laws 
that it periodically issues staff memorandums on what constitutes 
a legitimate issue ad. One advised what to tell reporters who ask, 
``Are you trying to influence this political race?'' The recommended 
answer: the club's objective is ``to educate the public about the 
votes of our elected officials.'' Interest groups are prohibited from 
contacting campaigns about issue advertisements on their behalf. But 
the Sierra Club's strategy is clearly to complement campaigns' own 
efforts. In California, the club broadcast ads in May promoting the 
record of Sen. Barbara Boxer, a Democrat, before her campaign began 
advertising, allowing her to conserve her resources. Besides commercials, 
the Sierra Club has begun issuing 1 million voter guides promoting 
candidates in pivotal races around the country. ``Our goal is really 
to roil the waters,'' the Sierra Club's outside media consultant, 
Kim Haddow, said after one strategy meeting. ``There's a big shrug 
out there. But we believe because we're out there in their faces, 
the saliency of this issue will rise.'' The Sierra Club's decisions 
on where to channel its money are far more complicated than simple 
questions about which candidates most support its positions. Throughout 
this year, officials at the club's headquarters in San Francisco spoke 
on conference calls with their political staff members in Washington, 
often debating practical considerations: which candidates needed their 
help and had a reasonable chance of winning; which contests offered 
opportunities to have an impact, which regions had strong Sierra Club 
field operations. Last spring, for example, officials agreed that 
Faircloth should be aa target because of his hog farm. The club's 
associate political director, Chris Norman, said: ``All the pundits 
here say Faircloth looks vulnerable. He has a huge pig farm and he 
has a deplorable rating'' on environmental issues. But she added, 
``The only problem is the local chapter is not as sophisticated as 
we'd like.'' The club decided to produce an advertisement anyway, 
focusing on river pollution in North Carolina and mentioning Faircloth's 
farm. The senator's general counsel in Washington, Sean Callinicos, 
said the Sierra Club had overblown a minor incident on the farm when 
``cattle feed spilled into a creek as a result of vandalism from a 
disgruntled employee.'' The ad was no surprise, he said, because ``the 
Sierra Club is simply part and parcel of the D.C. Democratic establishment.'' 
While Weiss, the political director, and Ms. Haddow, the outside media 
consultant, usually had the most to say about the broad political 
landscape, the club's top officials often deferred to staff members 
in the field to tell them how races looked. One who got his way was 
the Midwest field director, Carl Zichella, who in midsummer sent an 
e-mail to several officials to head off the Washington staff, which 
wanted to pull back from aiding Sen. Russell Feingold, D-Wis., opposed 
by Rep. Mark Neumann, a Republican. ``The early soft polling has lulled 
some folks into a sense of complacency about the Neumann-Feingold 
race,'' he wrote. ``THIS IS VERY DANGEROUS. I believe that Senator 
Feingold is threatened by low turnout and easy access to campaign 
resources from right-wing contributors.'' After reviewing fresh polls 
that showed the race tightening, the group relented, agreeing to finance 
two more weeks of ads to help Feingold. Sometimes the Sierra Club 
acts purely out of concern _ or distress _ about a candidate's votes. 
In July, Ms. Haddow urged her colleagues to cut back plans to help 
Sen. Harry Reid, D-Nev., in a tough re-election fight. He had just 
voted for a bill that could make it easier for developers to evade 
local planning regulations. Weiss said, ``I would rather spend the 
money on someone who is with us other than Harry Reid.'' The officials, 
saying it was the latest of several disappointing votes by Reid, then 
canceled three weeks of radio advertising. The Sierra Club tries to 
stay flexible enough to make last-minute adjustments. Early in the 
year it had high hopes in Missouri for Attorney General Jay Nixon, 
a Democrat running for the Senate against Republican incumbent Christopher 
Bond. But in midsummer the group shelved $17,260 from the race _ a 
week's worth of radio ads _ after concluding that Nixon was waging 
a lackluster campaign. ``Bond seems like a no-brainer,'' Ms. Haddow 
said of the decision to not help Nixon. She added that the incumbent's 
record on the environment had improved ``because we've been whacking 
on him'' in advertising. A spokesman for Nixon, Allen Mattison, acknowledged 
that the campaign had had problems. ``It's a very different race now 
than it was five months ago,'' he said. Asked if he was disappointed 
that the Sierra Club had decided to be less active, he said, ``The 
Sierra Club members that I've seen have been very active here.'' Officials 
regularly looked for races where they could trim budgets to conserve 
resources for tighter contests later in the season. While Representative 
Neil Abercrombie was ``in big trouble'' in Hawaii, Weiss and Ms. Haddow 
wrote, there was ``little marginal utility'' in buying a fourth week 
of radio advertising. The savings: $9,750. Usually the conversations 
were courteous. But at one session Bruce Hamilton, the club's conservation 
director, complained bitterly that his staff members seemed too quick 
to rejigger spending priorities to conform to the latest polls or 
conventional wisdom about a race. ``It's very demoralizing to put 
the money out and to be constantly changing signals,'' Hamilton said. 
At a strategy meeting this summer, Weiss excitedly told his colleagues 
about an idea for a ad to help Rep. Lane Evans, D-Ill., who is being 
challenged by a Republican, Mark Baker. ``The local organizer has 
actually found someone who's gotten sick from drinking water contaminated 
by a hog farm,'' Weiss said. ``This person's story sounds fabulous! 
It would be great to get this girl on camera because we'd have a human 
victim instead of a dead fish, which is already in the ad.'' The girl 
could be used to personalize the danger that large hog farms pose 
to public water supplies, Weiss said _ and to make the point that 
Evans has worked to clean up his district's waters. It was too good 
to be true. The girl, it turned out, did not live in Evans' district. 
And, Weiss said, ``We decided that didn't want to seem like we were 
exploiting a tragedy.'' But the Sierra Club has hardly been timid 
about spending hundreds of thousands of dollars to attack its opponents. 
Last December the organization commissioned focus groups in five states 
to help develop messages for its advertising. One of its biggest targets 
is Rep. Linda Smith, R-Wash., who is aggressively challenging Sen. 
Patty Murray, D-Wash. ``I would like to hold Linda Smith accountable 
on water and salmon,'' the director of the Northwest regional office 
in Seattle, Bill Arthur, announced at a meeting in July. ``She is 
consistently wrong on those issues.'' The Sierra Club decided to focus 
on Ms. Smith's support for a bill it says was intended to remove the 
ability of local governments to protect salmon and limit suburban 
sprawl. To avoid being accused of being political, the group likes 
to refer to pending legislation in issue ads; in this case, a vote 
was pending in Congress on budget bills that included money for enforcing 
clean water laws. But when Ms. Haddow and Weiss, back in Washington, 
D.C., entered an editing studio to assemble the 30-second advertisement, 
they spent much of their time looking for evocative pictures of salmon 
and polluted water _ and scouring an illustrated field guide to salmon 
to make sure they had the right fish. ``We don't want people saying, 
`You guys don't know what you're talking about,''' Weiss said, looking 
through the guide. Ms. Haddow also said that to be most potent, the 
ad should give viewers ``a sense of place.'' So she rejected a video 
clip of coho salmon because the guide said Coho are not generally 
found in Washington State. They found footage of other salmon, but 
were not certain of the type. ``They look like sockeye,'' Ms. Haddow 
said, comparing the salmon on an editing screen with the field guide. 
``I don't think they're pink enough for sockeye,'' Weiss replied. 
They moved on to another fish in the salmon family. ``Are you sure 
that's not a tuna?'' Weiss asked. ``No, it's a chinook,'' Ms. Haddow 
insisted. Finally, they settled on footage of king salmon teeming 
upstream, juxtaposed against shots of bulldozers. The narrator says: 
``The Columbia ... the Columbia Gorge ... Puget Sound ... king salmon 
_ all are threatened by development. But instead of helping our communities 
rein in the sprawl and pollution that's threatening our water quality 
and wild salmon, congresswoman Linda Smith voted to make it easier 
for developers to bypass local land-use decisions.'' In a new approach, 
the Sierra Club ran the advertisement just before Labor Day. Usually, 
the most effective advertising is in the weeks before an election. 
But rates are much cheaper in the summer and there are fewer competing 
ads, so Sierra Club officials figured they could get more attention 
and afford more ads by going early. Jim Troyer, a spokesman for the 
Smith campaign, said the advertisement obscures the fact that Ms. 
Smith has ``a tremendous record of balancing environmental votes and 
property rights votes,'' and added: ``These attack ads are based upon 
partisan politics. They selected competitive races where they can 
have an impact.'' A possible downside of the early advertising in 
Washington is that the Senate race has not become as close as Sierra 
Club officials expected. But the club maintains that its early ads 
helped Senator Murray solidify her support among people who care deeply 
about the environment. Most of the Sierra Club's advertising is over, 
but in Boulder, Colo., the club has been broadcasting an ad over the 
past two weeks with the goal of influencing one of the most competitive 
races in the country, for the open seat in Colorado's 2nd Congressional 
District. The decision to advertise in Boulder followed an unexpected 
opportunity: the Republican candidate, Robert Greenlee, a wealthy 
businessman and City Council member, was scheduled to vote in the 
City Council on an environmental measure. That pending legislative 
action enabled the Sierra Club to run an issue ad attacking Greenlee's 
environmental record. ``Instead of helping us protect our quality 
of life,'' the announcer says as images of traffic jams and exhaust 
fill the screen, ``City Councilman Bob Greenlee has voted against 
plans that would have reduced traffic congestion, eased air pollution 
and protected our open spaces.'' At a cost of about $50,000, the effort 
was not as large as some in other states, and does not appear to have 
significantly shifted the campaign to environmental matters. Still, 
the Democratic candidate, Mark Udall, a state legislator and avid 
mountain climber who is being outspent by Greenlee, said he was thrilled 
to learn of the Sierra Club's efforts. ``I appreciate their help,'' 
said Udall, the son of Morris Udall, a longtime Arizona congressman 
who sought the Democratic presidential nomination in 1976. ``I like 
the fact that they point out how strong I am on the environment _ 
I need to get that message out.'' Greenlee angrily accused the Sierra 
Club of twisting his record and masquerading its efforts to damage 
his campaign behind the label of ``issue advocacy.'' ``It's very clear 
to me, to everyone, that the Sierra Club has gone beyond the boundary 
of a nonprofit group,'' Greenlee said in his office in Boulder as 
he brandished a Sierra Club flyer that compared his record with Udall's. 
``They're trying to push an agenda and a candidate.'' Far from the 
objective comparison of records that is required by law, Greenlee 
said, the flyer was ``clearly a campaign piece.'' It is often difficult 
to determine just what impact a Sierra Club campaign, or that of many 
advocacy groups, has in an election. The groups' efforts rarely can 
be credited with shifting the dynamic of a race. But the club's efforts 
can help put its opponents on the defensive and, at the least, draw 
publicity in the local news media. Weiss cites anecdotal evidence, 
like the fact that Matt Fong, Boxer's Republican opponent in California, 
took a river rafting trip after the Sierra Club ran an ad to help 
Ms. Boxer. He also took credit for D'Amato's recent testimony at a 
hearing on acid rain, saying he was spurred on because ``we've been 
beating on D'Amato since April'' in ads. In the Colorado race, Greenlee 
said he feared that the Sierra Club's campaign could cost him votes 
among swing voters that are crucial in this election. ``It may have 
an impact,'' he said. Yet, rather than run advertisements countering 
the Sierra Club, Greenlee said he planned to ignore it unless he appeared 
to be losing significant support because of the effort. ``It's probably 
better not to play into it,'' he said. ``You'd have to have the IQ 
of a houseplant to do that.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>