<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981023.0450 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Amid growing concern that the season will be in jeopardy if the labor 
dispute runs into December, the chief negotiators for the National 
Basketball Association owners and the players have tentatively set 
meetings for this weekend in Manhattan. However, barring a major compromise, 
neither those talks nor a bargaining session scheduled for next week 
would prevent the league from canceling more games. A league official, 
who spoke on condition of anonymity, said Friday that it will announce 
next Wednesday or Thursday that it will cancel the rest of November's 
games and, to avoid embarrassing biweekly announcements of further 
cancellations, as much as the first two weeks of December's schedule. 
``November is pretty much gone and most of December is being looked 
at,'' the official said. The league has already canceled the 99 games 
of Nov. 3-16, an average of nearly seven per team. The next round 
would lop more than 20 games off each team's schedule, a total close 
to the number of cancellations that Commissioner David Stern has implied 
would jeopardize a legitimate season that would be embraced by fans. 
``We don't want to put an exact date on it,'' said Russ Granik, the 
deputy commissioner, ``but if you don't have an agreement by early 
December, it gets harder and harder to have a season.'' There have 
been no negotiations since Oct. 13, but when the sides meet they may 
want to rent a large ballroom. Billy Hunter, the executive director 
of the union, said he had invited all 400-plus members to attend the 
talks, which will also include owners and team representatives from 
the league's 29 teams. The league holds the meetings of its Board 
of Governors on Tuesday and Wednesday. Meanwhile, tonight at the University 
of Houston, some players held their first of several loosely planned 
exhibition games. The original idea was to generate money for financially 
struggling players during the lockout, which entered its 120th day 
and has already cost the players nearly $100 million in salaries. 
Hunter tried to get the process moving last summer but had little 
success in receiving firm commitments from players or sponsors from 
the United States and abroad. If tonight's game was indicative of 
future obstacles, the players have a lot of work ahead of them. Only 
3,800 seats in a 6,600-seat arena had been sold before the game. The 
proceeds benefit a local hospital's cancer care center and not the 
players. The featured performers were scheduled to be David Robinson 
and Tim Duncan, but the San Antonio twin towers decided at the last 
minute to skip the game, as did several other big-name players. Sponsors 
from a local health club were said to be paying the players $2,000 
to $10,000 apiece, but there was some concern about whether the payment 
might interfere with contract clauses regarding injury. ``We've got 
a decent group, but not all the names I wanted,'' said Kenny Smith, 
the former Rockets point guard, who helped organize the event. ``I 
tried to get Mike,'' he said, referring to Michael Jordan. ``But, 
you know, that's like trying to get the President these days.'' On 
Thursday, 240 players gathered here to proclaim their solidarity in 
a charged, free-wheeling meeting that one participant described as 
more pep rally than open discussion. ``I expected them to be united, 
but I'd also like to think we both feel a need to get the process 
moving,'' Granik said. Jordan showed up here, standing on a podium 
with Shaquille O'Neal, Karl Malone, Scottie Pippen and Robinson, among 
others. There were some differences in opinion: for example, two participants 
in the meeting said that when John Stockton said it might be worthwhile 
to discuss accepting a lesser percentage of revenue from the owners, 
he was drowned out by more militant players. Yet the 240 voted unanimously 
not to accept a hard salary cap, a device the owners want to install 
to put a ceiling on salaries. The two sides have alternated proposals 
about a luxury tax on clubs that pay high salaries, but they have 
been so far apart that neither side has even indicated that a tax 
system may be the mechanism upon which they can forge a new collective 
bargaining agreement. Given the posturing on Thursday, it remains 
to be seen what Hunter and Granik can agree on over the weekend that 
could possibly speed up negotiations. Only one certainty emerged: 
In what would have been the end of their third week of training camp, 
the players left Las Vegas with their careers and salaries still in 
limbo. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>