<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981023.0413 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
On a recent Sunday night at Le Cirque 2000, dinners were flying out 
of the kitchen like baseballs from a batting machine. In a matter 
of four hours, over 300 diners would be decadently fed, plied with 
wine, and sent home filled with black truffles and chocolate. Mike 
Camelo, 26, a cook whose arms are striped with burn scars, was working 
the meat station. When an order of beef tenderloin was ready to go, 
the saute cook handed it to him on top of a cloth napkin. Camelo sprinkled 
it with chopped parsley and coarse salt and placed it on a heated 
plate, atop a mound of glistening vegetables. He ladled on the sauce, 
made earlier in the day by the saucier, and then walked the finished 
dish over to Sottha Khunn, the executive chef, who looked it over, 
covered it with a silver dome and, with a flick of his wrist, signaled 
for the plate to be delivered to an expectant diner. Camelo did this 
all night long. He plated food and poured sauce. Food. Sauce. Food. 
Sauce. And not just this particular evening. This is his routine six 
nights a week. His pay is $12.55 an hour. And his is a highly sought-after 
job in the cooking world _ a field gaining a reputation as one filled 
with opportunity, fame and fortune. Opportunity certainly abounds. 
With the strong economy and the steady increase in two-worker households, 
more people are eating out. And as more restaurants open, the demand 
for restaurant workers just keeps growing. According to projections 
by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, food preparation and service will 
be the fastest-growing occupations through 2006. Among chefs, cooks 
and kitchen workers alone, the government expects an average of 1.27 
million jobs to be created each year. But for all the job openings, 
there can be only one executive chef in every restaurant. And there 
are even fewer star chefs, the ones who clone their prestigious restaurants 
and turn themselves into hot ``brands.'' Even in New York, where there 
are more restaurants than in any other city in the United States, 
only five have won four-star ratings from The New York Times. In a 
simpler time, succeeding as a chef was primarily about talent and 
the ability to endure the long hours and physical demands. Today, 
though, rising to the top of the profession _ becoming the next Sottha 
Khunn or Jean Georges Vongerichten, of Manhattan's Jean Georges, JoJo 
and Vong _ involves much more. It takes careful planning and networking, 
years of sharp-elbowed ladder-climbing in the kitchen and, usually, 
a large financial investment on which the return will probably be 
slow. First, of course, you must learn to cook. This year, there were 
740 cooking school programs in the United States, compared with 360 
in 1989. That count includes vacation classes for cooking enthusiasts, 
vocational school and community college programs, and academies like 
the French Culinary Institute in Manhattan. The largest schools that 
offer cooking programs _ like the Culinary Institute of America in 
Hyde Park, N.Y.; the New England Culinary Institute in Montpelier, 
Vt., and Johnson &AMP; Wales University in Providence, R.I. _ are 
full-blown colleges with two- and four-year programs. The benefits 
of top-drawer training are clear. ``If you're lucky enough to go to 
a school like the CIA or the FCI, that almost assures you some kind 
of higher entry-level position,'' said Michael Batterberry, the founder 
of Food Arts magazine, a trade publication. But that assurance doesn't 
come cheap. Tuition and meals for the two-year degree program at the 
Culinary Institute of America, for instance, run $15,400 a year; students 
who stay on for a four-year bachelor of professional studies degree 
pay $10,800 for each of the last two years. After four years, graduates 
can leave with loans totaling more than $52,000, according to Andrea 
Harding, director of public relations at the school. Yet while the 
graduates of top cooking schools have far more hands-on experience 
in their field than a Harvard MBA does in, say, closing an investment 
banking deal, the payoff on a degree hardly compares. Gina Santiago, 
a recent graduate of the New England Culinary Institute, has about 
$20,000 in loans to repay but makes just $12.55 an hour as a garde-manger 
(or cold-appetizer station) cook at Le Cirque 2000. ``For the experience 
I'm getting in a restaurant of this caliber, it's fine,'' said Ms. 
Santiago, 22, who returned to her native Puerto Rico after graduation 
but came to New York for the chance to work at the restaurant. ``You're 
here so many hours, it all equals out. We get our meals here.'' Le 
Cirque 2000 is hardly the most tight-fisted kitchen in fine dining. 
It is unionized, and its pay scales are higher than those in most 
independent restaurants. Prep cooks, who cut vegetables, strain stocks 
and perform minor cooking tasks, make $11.57 an hour; line cooks, 
who prepare dishes for table service, make at least $12.55. One of 
those line cooks, Bridget Eagan, who works the pasta station, takes 
home $496 a week for six long days of work. Ms. Eagan, who is 21, 
considers that an acceptable salary for her first job out of school. 
But her roommate _ who is several years older and much more experienced 
_ earns less, as a line cook at Cafe Boulud, an expensive new bistro 
owned by one of New York's star chefs, Daniel Boulud. (Asked about 
the salaries at Cafe Boulud, Alex Lee, the sous chef, said, ``I try 
to tell people who come here that they're investing in their future.'') 
These days, the first few years out of cooking school can be seen 
as a form of graduate school. In New York, the way you earn your advanced 
degree determines your future. Those aspiring to be four-star chefs 
try to get jobs in four-star restaurants like Le Cirque 2000. They 
put in at a least a year, but almost never more than two, covering 
as many stations in the kitchen as possible before moving on to study 
with other master chefs. Camelo, a graduate of Johnson &AMP; Wales, 
has worked every station at Le Cirque 2000 during the last year and 
a half, from the garde-manger to the pasta and risotto station to 
the grill. He is now what is called a tournant, which means he floats 
around the kitchen, from noon to midnight, working wherever he is 
needed. Cooks are competitive about stations, which in a kitchen this 
large _ there are over 40 cooks _ are clearly defined. Garde-manger 
is low on the ladder; a bit higher are the cooking stations for hot 
appetizers and pasta and risotto. Highly coveted are the positions 
at the fish, meat and grill lines, where the main courses are prepared. 
The cooks keep track of who is coming, who is going and where they 
can make their next moves. Even Pedro Cabrera, 42, a prep cook who 
has not gone to cooking school and does not speak English, is positioning 
himself for promotion. He comes in early every day to study with the 
fish butcher, so that he can take over that position should the current 
butcher leave. What is most important for these cooks, though, is 
to maintain a good rapport with Khunn. That way, when their time in 
his kitchen is up, he will help them get jobs at other top restaurants. 
A cook needs to move around, Khunn explained in his thick Cambodian 
accent: ``Like a designer, he needs to see the Calvin Klein, the Prada, 
before he decides what style he wants.'' New York's restaurant world, 
as enormous as it may seem, is actually quite cozy, chefs say. ``Chefs 
get together, and they talk to each other,'' said Dorothy Cann Hamilton, 
founder of the French Culinary Institute. ``They know when a cook 
is on the line and he's ready for the next step.'' Cooks who stay 
in the city come into contact with one another again and again. Networking 
is vital, and missteps can be costly. If, for instance, a cook leaves 
a job before completing the time the chef expected him to stay, word 
spreads quickly and he could lose his ticket into other kitchens. 
In large cities across the United States, cooks spend a few years 
traveling circuits similar to those in New York, trying to move up 
the ladder as they hop from restaurant to restaurant. After five to 
seven years at top restaurants, a cook can easily be poised to open 
her own small restaurant, if she can find backers, or to be hired 
as a sous chef _ the second in command _ at one of the top spots, 
if she can sublimate her ego to the proprietor's. Some cooks, though, 
trade academic training, or the early years of domestic networking, 
for tours abroad. ``I don't think there's any experience that replaces 
going to Europe,'' Ms. Cann Hamilton said. ``It shows curiosity and 
stamina.'' For instance, Traci Des Jardins, the chef and owner of 
Jardiniere, a San Francisco restaurant known for its blend of French 
and California cuisine, bypassed cooking school to apprentice with 
Joachim Splichal of Seventh Street Bistro in Los Angeles. Then she 
worked at several of Europe's gastronomic temples, including Lucas 
Carton and Arpege in Paris and Louis XV in Monte Carlo. After just 
eight months at these Michelin three-star restaurants, she returned 
to the United States and was snapped up by the Manhattan restaurateur 
Drew Nieporent, who hired her as the sous chef at Montrachet, his 
three-star restaurant in Tribeca. As a cook gets closer to setting 
out on his own, he must know how to market himself. ``As with any 
art, there's the element of luck _ meeting the right patrons who think 
your cooking is terrific, and terrific enough to back it,'' Batterberry 
said. ``But that's a little like discovering Lana Turner at the soda 
fountain.'' It helps to work in a place where you have visibility. 
Thomas Keller, the chef at the celebrated French Laundry in California's 
Napa Valley, for instance, established a following in Manhattan with 
his inventive cuisine at Rakel. Vongerichten became known when he 
was the chef at Lafayette, the restaurant in the Drake Swissotel, 
where he helped revive the reputation of hotel restaurant dining. 
When these men made the move to chef and owner, both investors and 
faithful diners followed. Advancement to the level of executive chef 
is faster these days. The emergence of the celebrity chef _ people 
like Wolfgang Puck and Emeril Lagasse, with multiple restaurants, 
television shows and book contracts _ has driven up the pace of ambition. 
So have the career changers increasingly entering the field, drawn 
by the prospect of fame and familiar enough with success that they 
are disinclined to pay their dues. ``People are leaving Wall Street; 
they're leaving law professions,'' Ms. Cann Hamilton said. ``They're 
not going to want to wait to get a decent salary.'' Many chefs lament 
this new attitude. ``The kids, they go to school and they are made 
to think they become chefs,'' Khunn said. ``But that is not the reality.'' 
Though pay scales have improved over the years, they remain much like 
those for other artistic professions. ``For every rock singer who 
makes a zillion dollars, there's a group that's barely able to eke 
it out,'' Batterberry said. It is the same, he added, for chefs. According 
to a study by the National Restaurant Association, salaries for people 
with the title of executive chef _ the kitchen CEOs _ averaged just 
$38,000 in 1995, and pay has not escalated much since then. Other 
than salaries, probably the most eye-opening reality for aspiring 
chefs is learning what an executive chef does. Much more time is spent 
managing staff, controlling costs and schmoozing with customers than 
on cooking, much less creating. At Le Cirque 2000, Khunn _ who generally 
works 12 to 16 hours a day, seven days a week _ spends much of his 
day taking inventory and ordering food so that there is enough to 
feed nearly 1,200 customers a day at lunches, dinners and banquets. 
He hires cooks, arranges schedules and, during mealtimes, darts around 
the kitchen, keeping an eye on the line cooks' sauces, advising the 
garde-manger about the thickness of the sliced prosciutto, expediting 
orders and putting those silver dome lids over finished dishes. But 
almost never does he stir, slice or saute. In top restaurants, much 
of the cooking and creating is left to the sous chef, sometimes called 
the chef de cuisine. ``If you want the focus of what you're doing 
to be cooking, then get to be a sous chef in a good kitchen,'' Ms. 
Des Jardins said. ``I really miss that, coming in and being at the 
stoves all day.'' But even getting to that level means years of hard 
physical work, long hours and mind-numbing repetition. Cooking is 
an art, but working proficiently in a professional kitchen is a craft. 
Perhaps Ms. Cann Hamilton summed it up best: ``You make this fantastic 
Jean Georges dish, but then you have to serve it 10,000 times.'' It 
is no wonder that there is so much transience. Over two recent weeks 
at Le Cirque 2000, the entire fabric of the kitchen altered. One of 
the pasta cooks quit. Two cooks, one from Germany and one from France, 
arrived to begin 18-month apprenticeships. Camelo gave notice. (``I've 
been feeling trapped here a little,'' he explained.) And Andrew Carmellini, 
the sous chef, who had helped Khunn get Le Cirque 2000 up and running, 
dropped a bomb by giving notice, too; he had been hired away by Cafe 
Boulud. Khunn was scrambling. In addition to making an appearance 
at Le Cirque 2000's new restaurant at the Bellagio Hotel in Las Vegas 
and continuing to train his small army of New York cooks, who at various 
moments during dinner service looked confused, he had to search for 
a new sous chef. For this important hire, Khunn cannot place collegial 
calls to other chefs. He has to headhunt, and it is likely that he 
will hire someone away from another restaurant, much in the same way 
his understudy was plucked away from him. Resumes, anyone? 
</TEXT>
</DOC>