<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981023.0402 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For 13 years, the case against the convicted spy Jonathan Jay Pollard 
has symbolized darker aspects of the normally warm relationship between 
the United States and Israel while also exposing fissures long dividing 
American and Israeli Jews. Time and again, the Pollard case has emerged 
from the diplomatic wings and crept toward center stage whenever U.S. 
and Israeli leaders have sat down to talk. Rarely, though, has it 
been the dominant force that it suddenly became on Friday, when it 
looked for a while as though it might unsettle the latest peace agreement 
between Israel and the Palestinians. Yet despite strong emotions in 
both Israel and this country produced by Pollard's life sentence, 
the exact nature of his crimes has never been fully clear. Supporters 
demanding his release from a federal prison in North Carolina say 
he has served more than enough time, arguing that he handed Israel 
strategic information that in their view the United States should 
have been sharing with an ally from the start. On the other side are 
officials of U.S. security agencies and the Justice Department who 
say it is impossible to overstate the damage that Pollard's espionage 
inflicted on U.S. intelligence-gathering in the Middle East and possibly 
also in the former Soviet Union. From bits and pieces that the Defense 
Department has made available to the courts, it is evident that Pollard 
gave the Israelis intelligence on hostile Arab countries, including 
chemical weapons production in Iraq and Syria, and Libya's air-defense 
capabilities. In ``The Samson Option,'' his 1991 book on Israel's 
nuclear program, Seymour Hersh wrote that Pollard also supplied top-secret 
data on the Soviet Union's defenses, including the location of its 
military targets. The Israelis, Hersh said, passed along some of this 
material to Moscow as a goodwill gesture, presumably to encourage 
more liberal emigration policies for Soviet Jews. But none of this 
has been confirmed by Washington, which has never laid out precisely 
what Pollard did, except to say that it was serious _ a view that 
thus far has been sustained by three U.S. presidents: Ronald Reagan, 
George Bush and Bill Clinton. The fact that Pollard acted on behalf 
of a friendly nation was irrelevant, the chief prosecutor in the Pollard 
case, Joseph diGenova, said Friday. ``The United States doesn't have 
two standards for spying,'' said diGenova, a former U.S. attorney 
for the District of Columbia. ``It's all bad.'' Pollard, now 44, was 
a civilian intelligence analyst for the Navy in 1984 when he and his 
wife, Anne Henderson Pollard, began feeding Israeli agents thousands 
of pages of highly classified data from intelligence reports, electronic 
intercepts and satellite photographs. The material was vast. Federal 
agents estimated that if it was all put together, the stacks would 
stretch 6-feet wide, 6-feet long and 10-feet high. A bearded, somewhat 
bookish man, Pollard keenly felt his Jewish identity, having grown 
up in South Bend, Ind., where his father taught at Notre Dame and 
where he was the only Jew in his grade school. When he decided in 
the mid-1980s that intelligence material in his grasp had to be passed 
along to Israel, he worked through several Israeli handlers. One of 
them was Raphael Eitan, a spymaster who had taken part in the 1960 
kidnapping of the Nazi war criminal Adolf Eichmann, taking him from 
Argentina to Israel for trial and eventual execution. In November 
1985, it became clear to Jonathan and Anne Pollard that the FBI was 
on their trail. They sought refuge in the Israeli Embassy in Washington, 
only to be turned away at the gate and arrested by the Americans. 
Mrs. Pollard, now divorced and living in Israel, was sentenced in 
1987 to five years in prison. But to the shock of some, a federal 
judge handed her husband a life sentence. That put Pollard in the 
same category as spies like John Walker and Aldrich Ames, who sold 
secrets not to an ally but to the enemy Soviet Union. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>