<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981023.0429 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Throughout the 1980s, while the U.S. government was pouring millions 
of dollars of military aid into Honduras, the Honduran armed forces 
committed hundreds of human rights violations against its own citizens, 
the CIA has found. According to a newly declassified report, internal 
investigations by the agency found that although CIA officers in Honduras 
knew that the military operated a right-wing assassination squad, 
the officers' poor reporting on human rights problems left senior 
CIA officials unaware of their seriousness and scope. The CIA also 
sometimes gave misleading information to Congress, the 1997 report 
indicated, downplaying Honduran involvement in abuses at least in 
part so as not to jeopardize the country's crucial support for rebels 
fighting against the Sandinista government in Nicaragua. ``CIA reporting 
to Congress in the early 1980s underestimated Honduran involvement 
in abuses,'' the report states. ``By the mid-1980s, CIA provided more 
detailed information to Congress, but some of the notifications were 
inaccurate.'' A redacted copy of the 211-page report of the inspector 
general was released to the human rights commissioner of Honduras, 
Leo Valladares, and was made public by the National Security Archive, 
a nonprofit research group in Washington. The document was heavily 
censored by the agency, with large sections blacked out entirely for 
reasons that are not clear. Nonetheless, the report indicates that 
the CIA had specific knowledge of serious and widespread abuses at 
a time when it suggested to Congress that the transgressions of the 
Honduran military were being exaggerated by its ideological foes. 
In a telephone interview Friday night, the CIA's former station chief 
in Honduras during part of the period covered by the report continued 
to dispute that U.S. intelligence officers there had information about 
widespread abuses by the Honduran security forces or failed to report 
what they learned on the subject. ``The Honduran military was a very 
benign kind of military,'' said the former official, Donald Winters, 
who headed the CIA's operation in Honduras between 1982 and 1984. 
``It was not repressive. It did not murder. It did not torture.'' 
CIA officers, he said, reported on the problem ``to the fullest of 
our knowledge.'' The CIA's internal inquiries into the matter began 
in response to a series of articles published in 1995 by The Baltimore 
Sun. The articles asserted that the CIA trained and supported the 
Honduran military despite reports that a secret army intelligence 
unit was kidnapping, torturing and murdering hundreds of suspected 
leftists. A first CIA investigation in 1995 and 1996 by a committee 
appointed by the then-director of Central Intelligence, John Deutch, 
found no information to show that CIA officers ``authorized or were 
directly involved in human rights abuses.'' Nor could it corroborate 
reports cited in the newspaper that a CIA employee was present during 
the torture by army intelligence officers of a Honduran woman thought 
to have been a guerrilla. The scope of the inspector general's assessment 
was more narrow, dealing with a handful of questions left unresolved 
in the first inquiry. Both investigations dealt largely with events 
that took place in Central America between 1980 and 1984, the period 
in which the Reagan administration used the CIA to establish bases 
in Honduras for the Nicaraguan rebels who were known as counterrevolutionaries, 
or Contras. At the time, the CIA's station in Tegucigalpa, the Honduran 
capital, served as a command center for the Nicaraguan war and grew 
to be the agency's largest anywhere in the world. Officials who served 
in the American Embassy there at the time said that for both Winters 
and other station chiefs, and for U.S. Ambassador John Negroponte, 
the overriding priority was to insure that the Honduran government 
and its powerful, often independent military hierarchy continued to 
support that war effort. According to a CIA cable in 1995 that was 
also made public Friday, the intelligence branch of Honduras' paramilitary 
security forces maintained a secret unit between 1980 and 1984 that 
was known as the Honduran Anti-Communist Liberation Army. The unit's 
stated purpose was to fight Honduran leftists, including a fledgling 
rebel army that was backed by both the Nicaraguan government and Marxist 
rebels in El Salvador. In practice, the cable stated, the unit's operations 
``included surveillance, kidnappings, interrogations under duress, 
and execution of prisoners who were Honduran revolutionaries.'' Other 
reports of Honduran military abuses followed a major army operation 
in 1983 in the northwestern province of Olancho, where the small rebel 
force was active. Although the inspector general's report is not entirely 
clear on the subject because of its heavy redactions, it appears to 
show that the agency failed to properly investigate and inform Congress 
about reports that the military executed a number of prisoners during 
the sweep. One of the people reported killed during the operation 
was an American Jesuit priest, the Rev. James Carney. Although the 
report does not resolve questions about how Carney died, it suggests 
that the CIA received numerous allegations that he was among the prisoners 
who were executed. Guerrillas with whom Carney was traveling said 
he died of starvation. ``There is more substantial information in 
this report than the CIA has ever given before,'' the Honduran human 
rights ombudsman, Valladares, said in a telephone interview from Tegucigalpa. 
``It is an important first step.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>