<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981023.0422 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Parallel investigations of the recordings made by Linda Tripp of her 
telephone conversations with Monica Lewinsky have moved forward in 
recent days with the issuance of new subpoenas and the questioning 
of important witnesses. Kenneth Starr, the independent counsel, is 
examining whether Mrs. Tripp or anyone else may have altered or duplicated 
the tapes. Maryland authorities have convened a grand jury to examine 
whether Mrs. Tripp broke a state law when she made the recordings 
without Ms. Lewinsky's consent. While the tapes were considered significant 
evidence in the early days of the inquiry, their role diminished significantly 
in the impeachment case against the president once Ms. Lewinsky agreed 
to testify and turn over other evidence about their relationship. 
Still, Democrats have signaled that the legality of the tapes and 
any alterations to them could surface as issues if the House decides 
to hold impeachment hearings after next month's congressional elections. 
Starr's investigators spent three hours on Friday questioning Lucianne 
Goldberg, the New York book agent who urged Mrs. Tripp to make the 
tapes. On Wednesday they questioned Mrs. Tripp for two hours. At least 
seven of the tapes appear to be duplications, according to inquiry 
records that Starr handed over to Congress last month. In an interview 
after she spoke with the investigators, Ms. Goldberg said she made 
no copies or alterations. ``I didn't do it and Linda didn't do it, 
that's all I know,'' she said. Mrs. Tripp had told the grand jurors 
that she made no duplications, a position that she repeated to investigators 
this week, a lawyer for Mrs. Tripp said. The lawyer, Anthony Zaccagnini, 
said Mrs. Tripp was continuing to cooperate with the Starr inquiry 
but that cooperation would end if Starr indicated that she was to 
become the target of his investigation. In the Maryland inquiry, meanwhile, 
another lawyer for Mrs. Tripp, Joe Murtha, received a subpoena from 
the grand jury seeking any original tapes or copies that contained 
Ms. Lewinsky's voice. ``We're outraged,'' Zaccagnini said. ``We view 
this as an evasive violation of the attorney-client privilege and 
part of the effort to intimidate Mrs. Tripp and her lawyers. We will 
not back down. We will fight the subpoena.'' Zaccagnini would not 
say whether Murtha or any of the lawyers had any of the tapes that 
prosecutors were seeking. Prosecutors are asking witnesses for tapes 
because an immunity agreement between Mrs. Tripp and Starr prohibits 
the Maryland authorities from using the tapes that Mrs. Tripp turned 
over to the independent counsel. Lawyers involved in the Lewinsky 
inquiry have maintained that Mrs. Tripp decided to turn to the independent 
counsel last January largely to get immunity from a possible state 
prosecution. At the time, she had been told by an earlier lawyer representing 
her that making the tapes could be a violation of Maryland law. But 
the immunity deal is not all-encompassing, and Maryland authorities 
have been working since last July to see if they can make a case against 
Mrs. Tripp without the tapes that she turned over to Starr. A local 
grand jury has already heard from a salesman at the Radio Shack that 
sold Mrs. Tripp the tape-recorder she used and a lawyer involved in 
the Paula Jones sexual harassment suit. It was in that lawsuit that 
the independent counsel contends the president lied about his relationship 
with Ms. Lewinsky. Among those scheduled to testify next month in 
the state case are Ms. Goldberg and her son, Jonah. Ms. Lewinsky is 
not expected to make a grand jury appearance in Maryland but may provide 
information for the inquiry either through a deposition or an affidavit, 
lawyers involved in the inquiry said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>