<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981023.0505 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The next S-Class, the luxury flagship of Mercedes-Benz, will be 500 
pounds lighter and loaded with high technology. The imposing slab-sided 
styling of the current car will give way to a striking, smoother design 
that Mercedes says will be the most aerodynamic car on the market. 
The new model, to go on sale in March as a 2000 model, is lower, shorter 
and narrower, yet it has more usable interior room. With the next 
S-Class, Mercedes will have completed the transformation of its lineup 
to cars that are lighter, livelier, better equipped and more aggressively 
priced than their predecessors. This strategy has paid handsomely, 
with U.S. sales up 56 percent so far this year, on top of a 35 percent 
gain for 1997. North American versions of the S-Class will come with 
two V8s that meet ultra-low emissions standards: The S430 has a 4.3-liter 
engine with 275 horsepower, and the S500 has a 5-liter power plant 
that turns out 302 horsepower. The six-cylinder S320 will no longer 
be sold in the United States. The S500 will have xenon-gas headlamps, 
heated seats, napa leather upholstery and burled walnut inlays; the 
S430 will have eucalyptus trim, with most of the other items available 
as options. Every S-Class will have a five-speed automatic transmission; 
anti-lock brakes; traction control; the ESP anti-skid system; electronic 
brake assistance (which provides maximum braking force in panic stops), 
and electronic brake proportioning (which prevents the rear wheels 
from locking up). Also new are 14-way-adjustable power seats; air 
bags in all four doors; a side ``air bag curtain'' that deploys from 
the headliner to stretch across the side windows, and rear head restraints 
that rise automatically when a passenger is present. The Baby Smart 
system deactivates the air bags if it detects the use of a child seat. 
An exclusive option coming in the second half of 1999 is Distronic, 
a cruise control that uses Doppler radar to monitor the car's proximity 
to the vehicle ahead. When the cruise control is on, if the vehicle 
in front gets too close, the system gradually cuts engine power. It 
then applies up to 20 percent of the car's braking force to maintain 
a certain distance _ which the driver can set _ between the S-Class 
and the vehicle ahead. The system worked flawlessly in a test drive 
on a German Autobahn, and seemed perfectly natural after a few minutes 
snugged up behind another car. Mercedes has returned to an air suspension, 
similar to that of the old 300 and 6.9 models, but it says this one 
is more robust and more reliable. Jointly developed by Bosch and Mercedes, 
it keeps the ride quiet while adjusting for the weight of a load. 
Controls for the Mercedes-Bosch navigation system, the stereo, the 
air conditioning and the telephone have been integrated into a cathode-ray-tube 
system in the dashboard, with a control button just below; the TV 
screen tells the radio station you're listening to, the CD track you 
have selected, the telephone number you have dialed, and information 
about the climate control _ even where you are, where you are headed 
and how to get there. Mercedes has not announced prices, but hints 
that even with the additional features, the new S-Class will be less 
than the current car, which begins around $75,000. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>