<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981023.0346 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
These are flush times for Republicans in the Midwest and Mike Johanns 
is not being shy about it. ``We are within days of recapturing the 
governor's office,'' Johanns, the Republican candidate for governor 
in Nebraska, crowed to a luncheon of the Benson Women's Republican 
Club in a church basement on the north side of Omaha. As for the other 
state and federal offices, he asserted, ``If we do our job right, 
we'll have a clean sweep.'' If the polls are any gauge, he is probably 
right. In the latest poll, Johanns leads his opponent, Bill Hoppner, 
by 20 percentage points in their race to replace Gov. Ben Nelson, 
a Democrat who is barred by law from seeking a third term. Republicans 
are expected to easily retain all three of the state's congressional 
seats; in fact, there is no Democrat running in the 3rd Congressional 
District. In state races, the Democrats are running no candidates 
for two seats on the Nebraska Public Service Commission, which regulates 
phone service, and the Democratic candidate for state attorney general 
was chosen by the party only after no candidate made the filing deadline 
and a write-in candidate declined to run. ``It's not just the governor's 
office, it's up and down the line,'' said Dr. Robert Sittig, a political 
science professor at the University of Nebraska in Lincoln. ``The 
Democrats _ they're really going to get hosed this time in Nebraska.'' 
Democrats have seen better days in much of the Midwest. Only Nebraska, 
Indiana and Missouri have Democratic governors. And Republicans are 
considered likely winners in at least seven of the nine governors' 
races in November. Republicans now control 14 of the 23 legislative 
chambers in the 12 states. (Nebraska's unicameral Legislature is nonpartisan.) 
Democratic Senate seats in Ohio, Illinois and Wisconsin are considered 
vulnerable and Democrats are in tough races to retain congressional 
seats in Indiana, Illinois, Ohio, Wisconsin and Iowa. ``The Midwestern 
Republicans have done much better in the 1990s than they did in the 
1980s,'' said John Green, director of the Bliss Institute, a nonpartisan 
political research institute at the University of Akron. ``These folks 
have been able to take their program down to the state legislatures. 
Even when they don't win, they're kind of the dominant force politically.'' 
In the last few years, especially since Republicans took control of 
Congress in 1994, the party's influence has grown stronger and deeper 
in nearly every Midwestern state, experts say. They say Midwestern 
Republicans have crafted a different strain of elected official. Drawing 
on the plain-spoken, no-nonsense Midwest ethos _ and realizing that 
to win they have to play to urban centers like Cleveland and Detroit 
_ these politicians are seen as pragmatic and moderate, focusing more 
on fiscal and administrative issues and less on ideological ones. 
``The Midwestern Republican parties are much more moderate than the 
party at large and than the South,'' Green said. ``They tend to stay 
away from issues that you can't compromise on: abortion, gun control, 
gay rights. Some of these Midwestern Republicans are kind of uninspiring 
people. They are really managers rather than ideologues. You ask them 
where are the big policy changes and they just give you a blank look 
_ `This is the big policy change. We're running the government well.''' 
These Republicans are not only interested in running government efficiently, 
but in using the government to implement policy, experts say. Gov. 
Tommy Thompson of Wisconsin has been the nation's most aggressive 
governor on welfare reform, an issue that has also been seized by 
Gov. John Engler of Michigan and Gov. George Voinovich of Ohio. And 
Gov. Jim Edgar of Illinois and Gov. Terry Branstad of Iowa have tried 
to convince more conservative Republican legislators to increase education 
funding. ``They aren't conservatives who don't want to do anything,'' 
said John Bibby, a political science professor at the University of 
Wisconsin at Milwaukee. ``They want to solve problems.'' Many Republican 
candidates for statewide office in the Midwest seem to fit the more 
moderate mold. In the Kansas gubernatorial primary, Gov. Bill Graves 
defeated a candidate backed by the conservative Christian right. Johanns, 
the mayor of Lincoln, Neb., who describes himself as a ``pragmatic 
conservative,'' defeated two more conservative opponents in the primary. 
One exception is Peter Fitzgerald, a Republican state senator who 
is ahead in the polls against Sen. Carol Moseley-Braun, D-Ill. Experts 
believe his conservative views would make victory difficult if it 
weren't for a series of political and personal missteps made by Moseley-Braun. 
In general, Democrats say Republican efforts to embrace more moderate 
constituencies, and their ability to preside over the recent booming 
economy, have made it difficult for Democratic challengers. ``There 
wasn't enough difference between me and Bill Graves to motivate moderate 
Republicans to vote for me,'' said Jim Slattery, a former Democratic 
congressman from Kansas who ran unsuccessfully for governor in 1994 
against Graves. ``That's the problem that Democrats are running into. 
If you drift to the right or the left, there isn't much room in there 
before you drift into the danger zone.'' In this climate, it seems 
no accident that in Indiana, Evan Bayh, the Democratic former governor 
who is given a solid chance of winning the race for Senate, uses the 
word ``conservative'' several times in his advertising and does not 
mention the word ``Democrat.'' In Illinois, the Democratic nominee 
for governor, Rep. Glenn Poshard, with his opposition to abortion 
rights and some gay rights issues, as well as his past votes against 
gun control, has been accused of being more conservative than the 
Republican candidate, Secretary of State George Ryan. James Reichley, 
a professor of political science at Georgetown University, said that 
with the decline in Midwest Democratic machine politics and as cities 
sprawl further into the suburbs, Democrats ``can't rely on those bases 
like they used to, in cities like Detroit and Cleveland.'' An extreme 
example of a weakened Democratic Party, he said, is playing out in 
Michigan, where Geoffrey Feiger, the iconoclastic and abrasive lawyer 
for Jack Kevorkian, won the Democratic primary for governor even though 
party leaders did not endorse him. In Nebraska, the Republican ascendancy 
did not happen overnight. Registered Republicans in the state have 
long outnumbered Democrats, but Sittig said there has been such a 
strong Republican surge in the past few years that there are now about 
125,000 more registered Republicans than Democrats. Republicans have 
even pulled ahead in Douglas County, which includes Omaha and has 
been the most reliable source of Democrats. And registered Republicans 
now seem more likely to vote Republican. Over the years, Nebraska, 
proud of its independent-minded voters, has elected many Democratic 
governors and senators. But in 1996, Chuck Hagel, a Republican businessman 
and political newcomer, won a race for the U.S. Senate against Gov. 
Nelson. ``For whatever reason we've seemed to always elect Democrats,'' 
said Kerry Winterer, chairman of the Douglas County Republican Party. 
``Historically we've always had this populist streak and frankly, 
I think that's what changed. Republicans have done a better job of 
trying to get people to identify with parties.'' Hoppner, a former 
aide to Sen. Bob Kerrey and former Sen. Jim Exon, said he was confident, 
polls notwithstanding, that Nebraskans would continue voting for Democratic 
governors. ``There's more and more Nebraskans that understand what 
my background is and what I'm about,'' he said. But Anne Boyle, chairman 
of the Nebraska Democratic Party, said it has been difficult for Democrats 
to raise enough money to campaign across a large rural state. She 
also believes, she said, that Republicans have managed to win the 
votes of anti-abortion Democrats. Ms. Boyle said she was trying to 
re-energize the party and noted that Democrats have historically been 
able to unseat Republican governors after just one term. But these 
days, there is even talk about whether Nelson, considered a conservative 
Democrat, will switch parties. Nelson, who is believed to be toying 
with another run for the Senate in 2000, says he did not start the 
speculation. But he is not discouraging it either. ``I've been very 
careful not to rule anything in or rule anything out,'' Nelson said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>