<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981023.0403 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the first nationalization of a Japanese bank since World War II, 
the government decided Friday to take over the Long-Term Credit Bank 
of Japan, one of the nation's biggest financial institutions. The 
takeover, a prelude to sorting out the bank's bad loans and eventually 
selling it to another institution, represents the start of a $509 
billion plan aimed at stabilizing battered banks and reviving the 
economy. While Japan still is locked in its worst recession in half 
a century, some analysts say they have some hope that the country 
may muddle through its financial and economic crisis a bit more smoothly. 
``I think the outlook has changed quite dramatically,'' said Richard 
Koo, chief economist at Nomura Research Institute in Tokyo. ``Now 
I think the pieces are beginning to fall into place.'' But Koo was 
quick to add that Japan will continue to release some horrible numbers 
for months to come. ``If you took a snapshot of the economy on Oct. 
23, 1998, it's still in a state of meltdown,'' he said. Japan's economy 
is expected to shrink by at least 1.8 percent in the fiscal year ending 
March 31, 1999, and with the nation's wobbly banks reluctant to lend, 
the country's flow of credit has started to dry up. The troubles in 
the Japanese economy are worsening Asia's economic crisis and increasing 
the risk of a global slowdown. In one sign that Japan may be able 
to deal with its banking problem, a growing number of banks said today 
that they were interested in applying for government money to bolster 
their capital. These include Industrial Bank of Japan, Tokai Bank, 
and Daiwa Bank _ while Fuji Bank Ltd., Sakura Bank Ltd., Sanwa Bank 
Ltd., Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi Ltd., the Mitsubishi Trust and Banking 
Corp. and others said they were considering the idea. The government 
approved a $509 billion bank bailout, but until the last few days 
it had seemed that many institutions would not take part because they 
believed the conditions were too onerous. ``The banks getting on board 
is an important hurdle, and we're still in midair, but it looks like 
we're going to clear this thing,'' said James P. Fiorillo, banking 
analyst at ING Barings in Tokyo. ``But there's nothing yet in the 
package that guarantees that the government isn't going to abuse these 
measures and take us backwards again.'' Banks argue that the financial 
strength of many of their clients has deteriorated, so that even if 
they had more money to lend, they would not necessarily want to do 
so for fear that they might not be repaid. The government's bank bailout 
is intended to push the banks to lend money and help revive the economy. 
Some critics say this is in itself a problem: the government's blueprint 
for reviving the economy and dealing with the debt crisis may depend 
in part on encouraging banks to make more bad loans. ``It's like the 
government is telling them, `Do not be good banks, please give this 
money to bad companies,''' said Craig O. Chudler, strategist at Salomon 
Smith Barney in Tokyo. ``That's why the market may be skeptical. Do 
you want to be investing in a market where they're creating more distortions 
than are already there?'' The announcement of the nationalization 
of Long-Term Credit came as two long-awaited banking bills went into 
effect Friday. Prime Minister Keizo Obuchi promptly took advantage 
of the new legislation to announce that the government would temporarily 
take control of Long-Term Credit. The government stressed that it 
would guarantee all Long-Term Credit's obligations, from its complex 
derivatives deals to the debentures and deposits held by individuals. 
Obuchi said that the government put the bank under state control to 
avoid a cutoff of credit to the bank's longtime corporate borrowers, 
many of which are ailing but still able to repay their debt. Long-Term 
Credit told Obuchi early this morning that it could ultimately default 
on some of its obligations to creditors. The potential collapse of 
one of the nation's largest institutions had worried markets for months. 
After months of insisting that Long-Term Credit was solvent, Japan's 
Financial Supervisory Authority, which audits the banks, acknowledged 
Friday that at the end of September, the bank had a negative net worth 
of 340 billion yen, or $2.9 billion, if its huge paper losses were 
absorbed. As a result, the government will probably buy the common 
shares of Long-Term Credit at a price that is virtually zero. The 
supervisory authority also reported that the bank had $11.2 billion 
in loans that were likely to be unrecoverable, with another $28 billion 
with questionable prospects. The government is to separate out the 
bank's bad loans and try to liquidate or collect on them, though many 
are to firms in hard-hit, politically powerful industries like retailing 
and construction. The Tokyo Stock Exchange will remove Long-Term Credit's 
listing from the exchange, and next week, the bank's board members 
will resign after the government selects a new management team. After 
it reorganizes the bank's loan portfolio, the government hopes to 
resell Long-Term Credit to another institution to preserve its operations. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>