<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981023.2000.1258 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is THE WORLD. I'm Tony Kahn. It's Friday, which means we're set 
to ask foreign correspondents based in Washington how they're covering 
American stories for their audiences overseas. Yoshi Kamori is Washington 
editor of Japan's "Sanke Shimbo" newspaper and Michael Crawford reports 
for the Finnish Broadcasting Company. This week in Washington, lawyers 
presented opening arguments in a case that alleges anti-competitive 
business practices by Microsoft, the world's largest computer software 
company. Well, let's begin with the headlines that you'll be writing 
or hope to write about that story in your native language. First, 
Yoshi. Well, we have said, which means in English, Microsoft and the 
U.S. government going into a trial. And in your language, you'd be 
speaking in Swedish on the Finnish Broadcasting Company. Is that right, 
Michael? Yes. which means Microsoft in court, its empire crumbling. 
Well, one thing is very clear from hearing both of your headlines, 
it is Microsoft no matter what language you speak. And I'm wondering 
is the presence of Microsoft a very strong one in terms of the software, 
the importance of computers? Oh, absolutely. As you perhaps know, 
Finland is a very high tech country. In some ways for say under 50 
crowd, Microsoft and Windows especially is as common as a fridge or 
television. Everybody knows it as a trademark and as product. I think 
Microsoft goes which is household word or household name in Japan. 
It represents the sort of spirit and core of what Japanese people 
perceive as the free, unrestricted entrepreneurship in America, which 
by the way, is what a lot of Japanese people now look up to, given 
the economic recession that the country has been in. And a lot of 
people attribute this plight of Japanese economy to too much government 
regulation and their lack of free competition. And Bill Gates and 
Microsoft represents sort of the other end of the spectrum. But the 
trouble that I have been having sort of explaining this Microsoft 
case to the Japanese readers, the average readers is that the question: 
Why the U.S. government have decided to obviously clamp or put more 
brake or control over this obvious winner in the free competition. 
Michael, to take up Yoshi's question, it would seem that from your 
part of the world, the feeling might be, "Well, because perhaps they 
stifle innovation." Oh, yeah, that's certainly a point here. I would 
like to mention that Microsoft isn't necessarily considered as being 
that bad in Finland. Finland has tradition of monopolies, for instance, 
say, television was monopolized ten years ago and so on. So, of course, 
we have to remember that a big point is that Bill Gates has built 
this personality cult, you know. He's the richest man in the world, 
which of course, makes him easier to perceive as a bad guy also. It 
is intriguing. I think also the feeling of intrigue is enhanced by 
the view coming from the Japanese high tech software industry that 
Microsoft triumph in fact has been stifling the free competition of 
ideas and new initiatives. So tell me, how are you going to cover 
this trial? Is this something you're going to cover every single day? 
Yoshi, I'm thinking about how you might handle it. In a way, it's 
like these two huge sumo wrestlers: United States government and Bill 
Gates are circling each other seeing who's going to push whom out 
of the ring. Will you cover it as a day-to-day event? No, we have 
not been covering it day-to-day-basis mostly because, you know, in 
Japan, all those deadly serious and important issues with regard to 
the economic situation just dominates the news media scene, simply 
because Japan is in the worst ever economic recession. And anything 
related to that is of prime importance. So your leaders want you at 
the Federal Reserve Building. But it doesn't mean that, you know, 
people don't realize this unique kind of case that Microsoft and the 
U.S. government are involved in. So I think we will continue covering 
it in sort of a... I think Bill Gates is trying to call you right 
now, as a matter of fact. Somebody's beeping me. Probably Bill Gates. 
It's a Finnish sounding device, you're right. Oh, OK, I've silenced 
Bill Gates. We can continue. So tell me about him, now that you're 
free to talk about him, now that he isn't on the line. How will you 
cover the trial, Michael. I will definitely come back to it from time 
to time, but I won't cover it on a daily basis. I mean, we have Mid 
East peace discussions. We have a lot of stuff here. And the risk 
is that this trial will go too much into the specifics for being interesting 
for the common listener in Finland. But as I said, I will, of course, 
follow it and do perhaps stories every time when it's warranted. How 
often, I don't know. When something big happens in the trial. Michael 
Crawford, who reports for the Finnish Broadcasting Company and Japan's 
"Sanke Shimbo" reporter Yoshi Kamori. Thank you both very much for 
talking with us. Thank you. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>