<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981023.2000.2997 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is THE WORLD. I'm Tony Kahn. When the summer blockbuster movie 
"Armageddon" smashed its way onto American movie screens, the critics 
were appalled at the noisy, dumb spectacle, but the reaction here 
was positively glowing compared to the howls of protest heard in Russia 
when the movie opened there. From Moscow, THE WORLD's Andrew Harding 
explains. It's not the film's daft plot which offends Russians, it's 
not even Bruce Willis and his one liners. The United States government 
just asked us to save the world. Anybody want to say no? The trouble 
with "Armageddon" is the way it portrays the Mir Space Station. In 
the film, Mir is a floating wreck of tangled wires and pipes manned 
by a drunk, half mad Cosmonaut in a fur hat and fixes his computer 
but smashing it with a spanner. Now I know what you're thinking. That 
sounds just like the real thing. But be warned. The Russian parliament 
is not amused. Mir may have had its problems in the past, but MPs 
are determined to protect their country's dignity. You see, you have 
a bad joke and good joke. Communist MP Alexei Povdoreoskyn is not 
laughing. It is a big problem of state politics, even the politics 
of national security, I would say. In my country nowadays, the people 
are very much bothered because some of those films are just insulting 
for the Russians. And it's not just "Armageddon." In this central 
Moscow video store, there's a whole stack of new Hollywood films poking 
fun at Russia and the Russians. This country always used to play the 
evil empire. Russians were always the baddies, but these days, they 
seem to be branded drunks, gangsters, or idiots. In the old days, 
the West may have shown the Soviets as Communist goons but Moscow 
gave as good as it got. Hey, Russians, drop your guns. Hey, Ruskia. 
In films like this one, Americans were caricatures blood thirsty and 
greedy. I'll tell you one thing, you guys, if we do this, we'll go 
bankrupt. But these days, it's all become rather one-sided, as the 
Russian commentator Masha Gessun observed after watching "Armageddon." 
Russians most certainly find it offensive, especially because there 
is a real inferiority complex in this country. There's always been 
one and we always sort of suspected we're not quite as good as the 
West. And I think that's why there is such a strong reaction to it. 
But not everyone in the audience took it all so seriously. I think 
it's a bit funny, that's all. I go for this more for just your acting 
and to see a big show. It doesn't bother me. Besides, the film has 
a happy ending. It's the mad Cosmonaut with his spanner who ends up 
saving the day. For THE WORLD, I'm Andrew Harding reporting from Moscow. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>