<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981023.2000.2028 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Chemical weapons experts met at the United Nations today to determine 
whether Iraq loaded deadly VX nerve gas onto missile warheads before 
the 1991 Gulf War. The conclusions, which won't be released until 
Monday, are important to the U.N. Special Commission, which is in 
charge of Iraqi disarmament. The scientists' findings are also being 
anxiously awaited in Baghdad, which has barred UNSCOM inspectors since 
August 5th. As THE WORLD's Andrew North reports, in those 11 weeks, 
the United States has been relatively quiet about Iraq's refusal to 
let the arms monitors do their work. There have been no U.S. threats 
of air strikes, no new sanctions. According to a State Department 
spokesman, the Clinton administration has been treading more softly 
in the current standoff because of concerns that responding too aggressively 
would play into Saddam Hussein's hands. The official says U.S. policy 
hasn't changed and that containing Iraq remains a priority. But Iraq's 
U.N. ambassador, Nizar Hamdoon, believes Washington's softer approach 
is due to a change in mood within the Security Council. I think lots 
of members on the Council really want to see an end to this whole 
story. It's getting boring, it's getting very much frustrating, not 
only to Iraq. I think, many other states in the world would like to 
see an end to this episode. Washington has stepped away from this 
crisis. And for that reason, says former State Department adviser 
Harvey Sickerman, the Iraqi leader is now closer than ever to achieving 
his objective. Saddam is definitely about to get out of his cage, 
meaning that he will gain both a relaxation on the sanctions issue 
and the effective end of the inspection regime. Sickerman says the 
Clinton administration's first big stumble on Iraq was its backing 
for U.N. Secretary General Kofi Annan's agreement with Saddam Hussein 
in February. That deal ended the last major crisis over weapons inspections, 
but it may have led the Iraqis to believe that U.N. resolutions are 
negotiable. And Annan's talk in recent months of a comprehensive review 
of U.N. inspections and sanctions may have encouraged that impression. 
In a recent interview for this program, Annan explained what he meant 
by comprehensive review. The general idea would be for the council 
to review where we started, where we are, what has been achieved, 
what needs to be done, and get Iraq to understand what has to be done 
and really get them also engaged in the process of "This is what you've 
done, this is what you need to do. And if you want sanctions lifted, 
move on with it and do it and do it within a reasonable period." I 
think it's good for the council itself to know what has been achieved 
since we started this in 1991, and where we are, and how it can use 
its own authority to pressure the Iraqis in support of UNSCOM's work. 
But which party Annan's comprehensive review would benefit is unclear. 
Iraq's U.N. ambassador Nizar Hamdoon, has no doubt it will be Baghdad. 
Though we trust the Secretary General, we trust the concept that he 
has come up with. We think that a fair judgment under this comprehensive 
review of Iraq's compliance for the Security Council will produce 
one thing. That is the eligibility of Iraq at this point to have the 
sanctions lifted. And that may be under discussion right now in Baghdad 
where Kofi Annan's special envoy is currently talking to the Iraqi 
government. In this climate, today's U.N. scientific meeting to discuss 
whether Iraq loaded some of its missile warheads with the nerve gas, 
VX, could be, well, academic. Even if the experts agree with the U.S. 
findings, many doubt Iraq will suffer as a result. A different approach 
that has gained support in Washington in recent weeks is boosting 
efforts to topple Saddam Hussein. Congress has approved $97 million 
to fund Iraqi rebel groups, but Harvey Sickerman calls that strategy 
a last resort at best. Ultimately, people in the Persian Gulf who 
were afraid of Saddam Hussein aren't going to rely on the United States 
if our only policy there is to try to foment a revolution against 
Saddam. They don't care for the revolution fomenting business anyway. 
In fact, America's best hope for getting rid of Saddam Hussein may 
be for the Iraqi leader to make another miscalculation such as threatening 
his neighbor, Kuwait, again, thereby galvanizing the international 
community against him once more. But Saddam seems to have learned 
from his previous mistakes and appears to be biding his time, hoping 
that the longer he can prevent U.N. inspectors from working, the less 
point they'll be in their hanging around, and the sooner the Security 
Council may just tire of the standoff and send them home. For THE 
WORLD, this is Andrew North. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>