<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981023.2000.0866 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
One factor in the Middle East power equation that's not addressed 
directly in summit negotiations but provides a subtext for talks is 
Israel's nuclear weapons capability. In the new book, "Israel and 
the Bomb," security analyst Abner Cohen, provides evidence that the 
Jewish state developed atomic weapons earlier than was previously 
thought and that the United States knew about it. THE WORLD's Clark 
Boyd reports. Abner Cohen's book sheds new light on old suspicions, 
suspicions that Israel's quest to become a nuclear power goes back 
four decades. From very early on, that is to say from essentially 
from the founding of the state of Israel 50 years ago, Israeli Lewis 
and in particular Bagullion felt that given the basic structural geopolitical 
asymmetries between the Israelis and the Arabs in terms of population 
in size, the only way for Israel to assure its survival for the long 
run would be to use, as Bagullion called it, the Jewish genius or 
the Jewish brain. So from '55 to '60 to '70 was the search: How can 
we do it? According to Cohen, that search for nuclear weapons potential 
culminated in a working nuclear facility near the Negave Desert town 
of Demona. Cohen says that the plant was in operation as early as 
1957 and it wasn't too long after that the Jewish state achieved its 
nuclear goal. As early as 1966, Israel has crossed the threshold, 
the nuclear threshold, and has acquired the capability of having nuclear 
weapons. On the eve of that '67 war, Israel, as a matter of alert, 
as a matter of worrying us about the situation, put two devices on 
alert. This was done in such a way that neither Israel's foes nor 
its friends knew about it. One of Israel's close friends during the 
six-day war was the United States. Cohen says he wonders why Washington 
didn't' follow up on its knowledge of Israel's nuclear weapons program. 
The author says it's a question that perplexes others who have investigated 
the initial nuclear intelligence that found its way to President Dwight 
D. Eisenhower, who then failed to act on it. Their speculation was 
probably he knew about it from his own sources, other sources. They 
caught perhaps some American scientists, Jewish scientists were talking 
about it and he decided to be quiet about it. So it's still a puzzle. 
The fact is the U.S. did discover it three years later and we are 
not sure why, what was the reason for the delay. It was certainly 
an intelligence blunder. Cohen argues that a kid of tacit understanding 
developed between the United States and Israel. Washington agreed 
to look the other way and Israel agreed to keep a low profile on its 
nuclear capability. William Quant, who was involved in formulating 
Mid East policy under both Presidents Nixon and Carter, confirms Cohen's 
view. I can only recall once that the head of the CIA came in with 
a briefing paper for Kissinger on his real nuclear capability and 
handed it directly to him as if here's something you should know about, 
but it wasn't subject to discussion. So, yes, we knew but we also 
didn't expect the Israelis to unleash their nuclear weapons for anything 
short of a military catastrophe from their standpoint. Israeli censors 
deemed the information in Abner Cohen's book too sensitive for publication. 
That's why Cohen brought his research to the United States to have 
it published. But David Horowitz, editor of the "Jerusalem Report," 
says that even if Cohen had been able to release his book in Israel, 
he'd have been the second person after Mordecai Vanunu to report the 
story. Mordecai Vanunu. They could be detailed on the entire story 
of Israel's nuclear capability, how the plant itself worked, what 
was on each level, the number of weapons that were stockpiled. And 
really, what he did was he exposed a great big hole in the nuclear 
cover up here. Vanunu revealed his secrets to the "Sunday Times of 
London." That exposure landed him in an Israeli jail in 1986, where 
he's been ever since. Officially, Israel maintains that it has no 
nuclear weapons and the Israeli press is not even allowed to say that 
Israel has a nuclear program. Nevertheless, the U.S. government and 
publications such as "Jane's Defense Weekly," estimate that Israel 
has between 200 and 300 nuclear warheads stockpiled, and the Demona 
nuclear reactor remains in operation 40 years after it was built. 
For THE WORLD, this is Clark Boyd. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>