<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981023.0600.0351 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is VOA News Now, coming to you from Washington, I'm Elizabeth 
Arat, along with Imani Crosby. The Middle East summit is in its ninth 
day, with all sides saying they are close to a new land-for-peace 
deal. VOA's Nick Simione is at the summit site in Wye Mills, Maryland, 
near Washington. And we have Nick on the line now. Nick, where do 
the talks stand right now? Well, it looks, from all indications, that 
an agreement with His Imminence here, both Palestinian and Israeli, 
sources are saying that it's expected to be signed in the next few 
hours. These Palestinian sources are saying that it's already being 
drafted at this point. The United States, which has been mediating 
these now nine days of talks, as an agreement is close, but it's not 
there yet. President Clinton has spent 80 hours of his time negotiating 
near 20 of them just in the past alone. He's been here all night. 
He began talks here early Thursday morning. It's now early Friday 
morning he's been beating with both the Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin 
Netanyahu and Palestinian Leader Yassir Arafat both one-on-one and 
together and it looks like we could have some sort of announcement 
in the coming hours. Nick, as you said, Mr. Clinton's been up all 
night. He seems to have invested a lot of effort into these talks. 
Is there a sense that this is a critical junction in the peace process? 
It has been has been stalled for almost two years or more than a year 
and a half. What's -- what's the sense of urgency there? It is -- 
there is a sense of urgency among U.S. officials because they rapidly 
see the May 4, 1999 deadline approaching. That is the date set by 
the Oslo Peace Accords for all issues in the Israeli-Palestinian -- 
to be resolved, including the thorniest ones, inclu -- and that would 
include the status of Jerusalem and the final boundaries of Palestinian 
land. They have to get through this hurdle before they can get to 
those talks, though. This hurdle being another Israeli troop pullback 
of 13 percent and lot of interim issues that go along with it, such 
as revising the Palestinian charter, which Israel still wants stripped 
of lines that it called for Israel's destruction. Nick, where does 
it go from here? Well, the president is still meeting at this hour. 
Like I said, it's been 20 hours of nonstop marathon talks. We're expecting 
a briefing at some point in the next few hours about what's been accomplished 
overnight. There's been word that just about all of the key points 
that were in dispute overnight, which had been reduced to about six, 
according to State Department James Rubin, the State Department spokesman. 
They've all been worked on in those time -- in the time since and 
it looks like we could see some sort of tentative agreement emerge 
in the coming hours. Well, Nick, -- Mr. Clinton's famous for staying 
up all night and maybe he'll just wear everybody all down. Thanks 
so much for joining us. That's VOA's Nick Simione at Wye Mills, Maryland, 
the site of Mideast peace talks. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>