<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981023.0600.1347 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The late James Dickey was the author of award-winning poetry and the 
best-selling novel, "Deliverance." His son Christopher is also an 
author and currently Paris bureau chief for "Newsweek" magazine. But 
while the two shared a common gift for words, their personal relationship 
was often a troubled one. Christopher Dickey tells their story in 
his new book, "Summer of Deliverance: A Memoir of Father and Son." 
VOA's Nancy Beardsley has more. Whether he was writing a news story, 
a novel or a celebrity profile, Christopher Dickey says the theme 
of the fathers and sons kept creeping into his work. But it wasn't 
until he went back to see his father in South Carolina in 1994 that 
he confronted the subject head-on. In search of common ground, he 
eventually invited Jim Dickey to help him write a book about the making 
of the movie version of "Deliverance" and about what came before and 
after. Before that, things were developing that would become problems. 
My father was out touring, reading his poetry. He was falling in love 
with the fans who fell in love with him and his family seemed vaguely 
disappointing to him, when he would come home. But after "Deliverance," 
as he would say himself, he went Hollywood. And he just had an idea 
of himself and the kind of spectacle that people expected of him that 
was impossible to live with. With its haunting country string music 
and spectacular wilderness scenery, "Deliverance" helped make a southern 
literary star out of James Dickey. He even had what seemed like a 
typecast role in the film. As a small-town sheriff telling actors 
Ned Beatty and John Voigt to go back to the city. In reality, James 
Dickey was from the city of Atlanta, Georgia himself. And the folksy 
steps and hats and fringed leather jackets he wore in public masked 
a giant intellect and complex personality. He could be warm and caring, 
recalls Christopher Dickey, but also selfish and cruel. He had this 
ability to draw you out to make you feel as if you were an extraordinary 
person with great talent, with great possibilities, but when he became 
vindictive, angry, when he was so drunk that he didn't want to listen 
to any voice but his own, then you felt the loss that much more acutely. 
The novel that changed everything for the Dickey family was a decade 
in the making. Christopher Dickey was a young boy when his father 
came home from a canoe trip, shaken after capsizing in the rapids. 
Out of that incident grew a much more harrowing story of four suburban 
men fighting for the lives on a wild Georgia river. Christopher Dickey 
believes "Deliverance," published in 1970, captured concerns that 
ran throughout his father's life. This question of the way men relate 
to the wild, I think the idea of pushing people to the edge of their 
possibilities and then beyond, I think all that was very important 
to my father and whether he was writing a poem about the last Wolverine 
or "Deliverance," about the suburbanites who learned to kill and survive. 
The filming of "Deliverance" in 1971 became a drama in itself. Christopher 
Dickey worked as a stand-in. His father meanwhile tried to impose 
his own vision on the film, until he was asked to leave the set. The 
movie was public triumph for James Dickey. But his son believes it 
gave him a dangerous sense he could now do anything. But mainly what 
he started to do a lot of was drink. And the effect on my mother was 
more quiet, but much more dramatic. She had succeeded in drinking 
herself to death by 1976. And my father was enormously guilty about 
that. Two months after his wife's death, James Dickey married a young 
woman who later turned out to have a serious drug problem of her own. 
Feeling angry and betrayed, Christopher Dickey made sure his career 
as a foreign correspondent took him far from home in the years that 
followed. I can go and I could live in Mexico and Central America 
and nobody ever said, "Aren't you Jim Dickey's son." And it wasn't 
until almost 20 years of doing that that I felt I could go back to 
my father and say I know how the world is without you; now I want 
to find out again what it's like with you. By his death in 1997, James 
Dickey had stopped drinking and begun speaking with unusual honesty 
about his past. As they looked back over what they'd shared and what 
they'd missed as a family, Christopher Dickey and his father finally 
reconciled. If "Deliverance" helped push them apart, "Summer of Deliverance" 
helped bring them back together. I'm Nancy Beardsley. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>