<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981223.1830.0067 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. Is it possible the president could actually be removed 
from office? There has been a flurry of talk the last few days about 
the Senate voting censure of the president, talk based on the belief 
that the 67 votes needed to remove him from office aren't there. But 
today, the third-ranking republican in the house, Tom DeLay, who has 
led the charge against President Clinton, said if senators see the 
evidence that he has seen, evidence not yet made public, those votes 
might appear out of thin air. Here's ABC's John Cochran. This is just 
the kind of scene that has the president's critics worried -- Mr. 
Clinton out among his supporters as they try to create more momentum 
for censure. He got backing today from Maryland governor parris glendening, 
who earlier this year did not want to be seen in public with him. 
We need you at the helm as we continue to help Americans reach their 
individual potential. Today, one of the president's fiercest critics, 
house whip Tom deLay, tried to slow down the censure train before 
it becomes an express. DeLay saying, "without any review of the evidence, 
it is premature to be talking about a deal or short-circuiting the 
process. There are reams of evidence that have not been publicly aired 
and are only available to members." House republicans will urge the 
Senate to examine allegations of presidential misconduct involving 
women other than Monica Lewinsky. ABC News has learned that house 
investigators reinterviewed these women after they had been questioned 
by Ken Starr's office. Two of them, Kathleen Willey and Dolly Kyle 
browning, claim they were pressured not to reveal their relationships 
with the president. Another woman, known as Jane Doe number five to 
protect her identity, was questioned about a possible sexual assault 
going back 20 years -- an allegation the White House calls outrageous. 
A democratic senator said Tom DeLay should not interfere. We don't 
really need to have house republican leaders telling us how to do 
our job. This is a time when they seem to be on a fishing expedition 
in the house, and we're trying to fish for some answers here that 
will bring this to a Conclusion that I think most Americans would 
like us to achieve. As for the White House, tonight spokesman Jim 
Kennedy said, "Having put the hammer to his colleagues in the house, 
Tom DeLay is trying to do the same in the Senate, and we believe that 
the senators will reject the politics of personal destruction." The 
White House says the additional evidence is irrelevant, but if most 
senators want to see it, they will, and most senators are republicans. 
Charlie? John Cochran tonight at the White House. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>