<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981223.1830.1222 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We're going to take "A closer look" tonight at faith and the first 
amendment. There is always a certain amount of controversy that surrounds 
the celebration of Christmas. It's about the government, religion, 
and who has the right to display what where. Who can put up a nativity 
scene or cross, and where can they do it? It gets to the very heart 
of freedom of religion in this country and the separation between 
church and state. Our religion editor Peggy Wehmeyer reports, the 
lines are anything but clear. When the city of San Diego began decorating 
for Christmas, a Local church sent residents a very public reminder 
of the reason for the season. We were sharing what we believe is great 
news, that that baby that was born in Bethlehem came for a purpose. 
The church called them Christmas cards to the city -- more than 300 
billboards and bus Shelter ads about Jesus. But the metropolitan transit 
board, which prohibits advertisements about sex, alcohol, drugs and 
religion, pulled the church ads off of every bus shelter. We're in 
the category of alcohol, drugs and tobacco? Is it offensive that God 
is opening his arms to everybody and offering forgiveness of sins? 
San Diego is one of many cities across the nation debating the role 
of religion in the public square. It's the December dilemma, when 
Christmas carols in public schools and manger scenes in front of city 
halls challenge the courts to determine just how high to raise the 
wall between church and state. In turon, Kansas, the mayor demanded 
a cross come off the town Christmas tree. She took the Christ out 
of Christmas, taking that cross down. In Chester, South Carolina, 
a Jewish family was forbidden to put a menorah by the town tree. And 
in Somerset, Massachusetts, a federal judge has ruled that the town's 
60-year-old tradition of placing a nativity scene in front of the 
town hall is illegal. Charles Haynes is a religious freedom scholar 
at the freedom forum first amendment center. The first amendment protects 
our right to express our faith in the public arena of America. But 
the first amendment prohibits the government from endorsing religious 
speech r M citizens can put up religious symbols on public property 
if other religious symbols are allowed, but the government cannot. 
Government displays must be secular. So in Somerset, the city tried 
to minimize the sacred by adding an 18-foot santa, frosty the snowman 
and some reindeer. I'm horrified by Santa claus towering over the 
creche. In Somerset, the courts ruled the government had entered into 
the religion business. But in San Diego, the government may have gone 
too far the other way, by restricting citizens' free expression of 
religion. The government has no business discriminating against religious 
speech when it allows other kinds of speech in the public forum. When 
the transit board was challenged on that point, it backed down. We 
made a mistake. I think we have to own up to that. The church ads 
are going back up in bus shelters in time for christmas. But in many 
parts of the country, this thorny December dilemma is far from being 
resolved. Peggy Wehmeyer, ABC News, 
</TEXT>
</DOC>