<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981223.0925 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat on Wednesday freed Hamas spiritual 
leader Sheik Ahmed Yassin from house arrest, a move immediately branded 
by Israel as ``acquiescing'' to the radical Islamic group. The ailing 
sheik's release adds a volatile new element to angry debate that has 
flared in recent weeks over the two-month-old Wye River peace accord. 
Israel has already suspended its compliance with the U.S.-brokered 
land-for-security pact, and Arafat's decision to end Yassin's unpopular 
detention could signal growing unwillingness on the Palestinian leader's 
part to run political risks for the sake of the faltering agreement. 
In the slums of Gaza City, the charismatic Islamic cleric's release 
set off rejoicing among his disciples. Outside the simple concrete 
home where Yassin had been confined since Oct. 29, a knot of neighbors 
gathered around his wheelchair, showering him with kisses and offering 
respectful greetings. For Israel and the Palestinians, the freeing 
of Yassin is cause for yet another outbreak of mutual mistrust. Israeli 
government spokesman Moshe Fogel said releasing the sheik _ who had 
been placed under house arrest hours after Hamas tried to blow up 
a school bus full of Jewish settler children in the Gaza Strip _ amounted 
to a show of bad faith. Citing what he called the Palestinians' ``revolving-door 
policy'' on jailed militants, Fogel said Arafat's government has ``conducted 
a high-profile policy of ostensibly taking actions against Hamas ... 
but in reality, quietly acquiescing to Hamas activities.'' Palestinian 
officials, furious over Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's failure 
to carry out a promised troop withdrawal in the West Bank earlier 
this month, have been saying for days that Israel is in no position 
to lecture them about the accord's provisions while it refuses to 
comply with them. Well aware of how sensitive a subject Yassin's release 
was, Arafat's government made no statement about it. The release was 
carried out quietly; Palestinian police simply appeared at Yassin's 
door to inform him he could leave the house. Although Palestinian 
leaders resent Israeli criticism over freeing Yassin _ after all, 
Israel itself let him out of prison 16 months ago, as part of a deal 
to ransom Israeli agents who botched a bid to assassinate another 
Hamas leader _ the sheik's release is far from good news for Arafat 
himself. Yassin's presence in Gaza serves as a constant reminder of 
the threat that unforgiving fundamentalist groups like Hamas pose 
to Arafat's far more secular, freewheeling leadership circle. If there 
is to be a Palestinian state, Hamas wants it to be an Islamic republic. 
Hamas, which opposes any peace with Israel, has proved over and over 
again its ability to derail peace talks by setting off suicide bombs. 
By freeing Yassin, Arafat leaves himself open to familiar Israeli 
accusations that he has failed to contain Islamic militants _ particularly 
if Hamas stages some new attack. It has only been nine days since 
Arafat stood in triumph with U.S. President Bill Clinton in Gaza, 
basking in Palestinian euphoria over the boost to statehood hopes 
that the presidential visit conferred. But last week's U.S. airstrikes 
against Iraq put a damper on Palestinian goodwill toward America and 
the peace process. Faced with angry protests, Arafat may have seen 
the release of Yassin as something of a safety valve. Acting against 
Yassin has always been politically difficult for Arafat because of 
the sheik's street following, especially in Gaza. And it could prove 
personally dangerous as well. During Yassin's house arrest, in a leaflet 
signed by its military wing Izzedine al Qassam, Hamas demanded Yassin's 
release and made a rare direct threat against the Palestinian leader 
if the sheik were not freed. Despite that, Hamas appeared to be trying 
to smooth over the entire episode, avoiding at least the appearance 
of anger at Arafat. Hamas leader Ismail Abu Shanab said Yassin's release 
would ``reinforce the solidarity of the Palestinian people.'' The 
sheik himself appeared content _ for the moment _ to declare victory, 
calling his release a sign of the peace process' failure. ``At the 
time that Wye was signed, the intent was to prove that no voice was 
louder that that of Wye,'' Yassin told reporters. ``Today, after the 
sound of Wye has become inaudible, it is inevitable that other voices 
will be heard.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>