<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981223.0701 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Ex-NATO secretary general Willy Claes received a three-year suspended 
jail sentence Wednesday after being convicted of corruption in two 
defense contracts he awarded in the late 1980s while economics minister. 
After a four-month trial, the supreme court also gave two-year suspended 
sentences for corruption to ex-defense minister Guy Coeme, 52, former 
vice-premier Guy Spitaels, 67, and Serge Dassault, 75, head of France's 
Dassault aviation concern. Eight former aides and associates received 
suspended sentences of up to two years, also for corruption. All defendants 
lost the right to vote in elections or run for office for up to five 
years. The court said Claes, 60, had to know that Italy's Agusta SpA 
offer to pay 51 million francs (dlrs 1.37 million) to win a December 
1988 contract for 46 army helicopters was a bribe for his Dutch-speaking 
socialist party. ``It is not excluded that, prior to awarding the 
contract, (Claes) gave his assent to his chief Cabinet aide to accept 
the offer made by Agusta,'' Marc Lahousse, the court's presiding judge, 
said in a decision that took four hours to read. He said Claes' and 
others bent the rules at the expense of France's Aerospatiale SA, 
which was also bidding for the contract. The court also found Dassault 
Aviation SA's gift of 60 million francs (dlrs 1.62 million) to grease 
a June 1989 deal to equip Belgian F-16 jets with new electronics was 
a bribe to beat a U.S. rival, Litton Industries Inc. Another 30 million 
francs (almost dlrs 900,000) from Dassault ended up in the coffers 
of French-speaking socialists. The Agusta and Dassault contracts were 
each worth hundreds of millions of dollars. Claes and the other 11 
defendants, who pleaded innocent, went on trial Sept. 2. In addition 
to suspended jail terms, Claes and three former aides were ordered 
to repay 110 million francs (dlrs 3.2 million). Appeals of the high 
court ruling are not possible. A haggard-looking Claes hurried out 
through a side door and made no statement. The others expressed shock. 
``In the 11 years as president of the (French-speaking) socialist 
party, the socialist party never committed an act of corruption,'' 
said Spitaels. ``I will defend that on my children's honor until my 
last breath.'' Coeme, the former defense minister, said he was innocent 
and spoke of ``an enormous judicial error.'' The Agusta and Dassault 
bribes were paid to Belgium's Dutch and French-speaking socialist 
parties through secret Swiss and Luxembourg bank accounts. The high 
court trial came after the parliamentary immunity of Claes and the 
others had been lifted. It was a final curtain for party bosses who, 
until the 1990s, paid political expenses out of their wallets, unhindered 
by laws banning corporate political donations. It was not until 1989, 
Belgium outlawed such donations. Thus, prosecutors did not have to 
prove corporate money was paid in 1988 but that the Agusta and Dassault 
``gifts'' were timed so closely to the awarding of contracts Claes 
and the others had to know they were bribes. The trial's origin lies 
in the still unresolved murder of Andre Cools, a one-time socialist 
minister slain in 1991, presumably because he knew of financial wrongdoing. 
Claes became NATO Secretary-General in September 1994. He quit 13 
months when the Augusta investigation made it untenable for him to 
lead the western alliance. He was long a power broker in the Dutch-speaking 
Socialist Party. For Coeme, a francophone socialist, the trial was 
his second in two years. In 1996, the supreme court gave him a two-year 
suspended jail term for corruption. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>