<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981223.0737 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In a move that may increase already tense relations with the United 
Nations, Baghdad on Wednesday ordered the U.N. observer force that 
monitors the Iraqi-Kuwait border to cancel a scheduled flight to Iraq. 
The regime offered no explanation for the decision. Also Wednesday, 
U.N. humanitarian aid workers went back to work and began assessing 
the damage to aid programs caused by four days of U.S. and British 
airstrikes against Iraq. The 93 aid workers returned to Iraq Tuesday 
night. They were withdrawn after the United States and Britain launched 
attacks last week against military and government targets to punish 
Iraq for blocking U.N. weapons inspections. The arms monitors are 
responsible for eliminating Iraq's chemical and biological weapons 
and long-range missiles. Iraq has said it will not allow the arms 
inspectors to return. The Wednesday flight would have been the first 
since the beginning of the bombardment. The flight by the U.N. Iraq-Kuwait 
Observer Mission, or UNIKOM, was to have flown from the Jordanian 
capital Amman to the Habaniyya air base outside Baghdad, a U.N. official 
said. Iraqi anti-aircraft gunners are still on alert, and U.N. officials 
said the flight may have been canceled to avoid any danger. A U.N. 
official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said he hoped the measure 
was temporary. In New York, U.N. spokesman Hiro Ueki said that ``Iraqi 
authorities notified the United Nations they would not allow U.N. 
flights in Iraq under the present circumstances. We don't know why.'' 
Secretary-General Kofi Annan's envoy to Iraq, Prakash Shah, had planned 
to fly out of Baghdad on Wednesday but instead traveled by road to 
Amman. The U.N. observer force monitors the Iraqi-Kuwait cease-fire 
line and a demilitarized zone between the two countries. It was set 
up after U.S.-led forces expelled Iraq soldiers from Kuwait in 1991 
following Baghdad's seven-month occupation of the oil-rich emirate. 
Syria also denied the United Nations clearance for the flight, U.N. 
officials said. The planned route would have carried the aircraft 
through Syrian air space. UNIKOM has offices in Baghdad and Kuwait 
and its officials regularly visit both capitals for consultations. 
The flights are routinely scheduled for Sundays and Wednesdays, U.N. 
officials said. U.N. aid workers inspected grain silos and food warehouses 
as they began to assess the damage caused by the raids, a U.N. official 
said. The attacks destroyed a warehouse filled with 2,600 tons of 
rice in Tikrit, the hometown of Iraqi President Saddam Hussein. A 
U.N. official said he was unaware of any other aid stocks that were 
destroyed but cautioned that the survey was not yet complete. The 
U.N.-approved aid program is designed to alleviate the suffering of 
Iraqi civilians caused by U.N. trade sanctions. The sanctions, imposed 
after Iraq's 1990 invasion of Kuwait, cannot be lifted until U.N. 
weapons inspectors certify that Iraq has dismantled its programs to 
build weapons of mass destruction. Benon Sevan, head of the U.N. humanitarian 
program at U.N. headquarters in New York, ordered that the survey 
take no more than a week. Iraq has ordered an assessment of casualties 
and material losses from the bombardment. Iraqi officials have said 
the strikes killed 62 soldiers and an unspecified number of civilians. 
In a front-page editorial, Al-Thawra newspaper called on the U.N. 
Security Council to demand that the United States and Britain ``pay 
full reparations to Iraq for both human and material losses.'' The 
Arabic daily is published by the ruling Baath Party. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>