<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981223.0966 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Mothers who give birth to their first child later in life tend to 
live longer than those who start large broods early on. That's the 
conclusion of researchers who reviewed the British aristocracy's 1,200 
years of genealogical records. They found that long-lived married 
women tended to have later first births and fewer children than other 
women. This is the latest study in the past decade to back up what 
researchers have long suspected _ that fertility and longevity are 
linked. The reasons for the link are not so apparent. Some researchers 
say that giving birth and raising a family simply take a physical 
toll on the body that shortens a woman's lifespan. But the authors 
of the latest study say that deliberately delaying motherhood will 
not necessarily make a woman live longer. Instead, they argue that 
there is a genetic tradeoff between fertility and longevity in women: 
Those who are programmed to live long lives are less fertile. ``If 
you have to invest such an enormous amount of energy into maintaining 
the body for a long life, there must be a cost. And the theory says 
there's a cost in fertility,'' said researcher Rudi G.J. Westendorp 
of Leiden University Medical Centre in Leiden, the Netherlands. Similarly, 
fruit fly studies conducted in the early '90s found that insects bred 
for a long life were less fertile. The new study was published in 
Thursday's issue of the journal Nature. Westendorp and Thomas B. L. 
Kirkwood of the University of Manchester in England studied the computerized 
records for 13,667 married female aristocrats born in Britain between 
the years 740 and 1875. Women who died between age 50 and 80 had an 
average of 2.4 to 2.6 children each, while those who lived into their 
80s averaged 2.1 children and those who reached their 90s averaged 
1.8 offspring. Westendorp also found a link between lifespan and a 
woman's age when she gave birth to her first child. Those who died 
between age 50 and 80 had their first child on average at age 24.3. 
But women who lived into their 80s gave birth to their first child 
about age 25.1, and those living into their 90s had their first child 
at an average age of about 27. The study only briefly touched on married 
women without children. It said almost half the women who lived past 
81 had no children and fewer than one-third who died before that age 
were childless. Dr. Thomas Perls, a geriatrician at the Beth Israel-Deaconess 
Medical Center in Boston, said differences in the number of children 
were not that significant to support a big link between longevity 
and reproduction. But Perls said his own research last year suggests 
women who give birth for the first time in their 40s have an increased 
chance of living to 100. He suggested their biological clocks are 
ticking slowly _ their fertility peaks later in life, and they age 
more slowly. Other researchers said Westendorp's findings hint that 
there may be an optimal number of childbirths beyond which women pay 
a physical toll. ``It suggests that if you have a lot of kids at a 
young age there's a drain on your resources and your life span is 
not as long,'' said Caleb Finch, a professor of gerontology at the 
University of Southern California. Whatever the numbers show, they 
may only reflect the story of the British aristocracy long ago _ a 
time of drafty manors, poor diet and primitive medicine, said Richard 
Suzman, associate director for behavioral and social research at the 
National Institute on Aging. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>