<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981223.0946 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Russia's hopes for getting a desperately needed budget soon dimmed 
Wednesday, as various parliamentary factions warned they would demand 
that debates on the draft 1999 budget, scheduled for Thursday, be 
postponed. An austere, realistic budget is crucial for resolving the 
economic crisis. A sound budget is also a key condition for getting 
new international loans that Russia desperately needs. The lower house 
of parliament, the State Duma, is scheduled to begin discussing the 
draft budget Thursday. But on Wednesday, the two largest factions 
in parliament _ one Communist and one reformist, Our Home is Russia 
_ announced they would ask for a postponement of the hearings at least 
until next Tuesday, the Interfax news agency reported. The decisions, 
which came only one day after factions across the political spectrum 
expressed support for the draft budget, were prompted by a message 
from the upper house of parliament, which criticized the draft. While 
the passage of past years' budgets has been stalled for months by 
rancorous debates in the hardliner-dominated Duma, the upper house, 
called the Federation Council, has usually passed the budgets without 
much delay. However, the draft 1999 budget includes the government's 
plans to change the way tax revenues are distributed between the regions 
and the federal government. Regional governors, who make up the Federation 
Council, object to the plan. Russia is gripped by its worst economic 
crisis since the Soviet collapse. Foreign lenders froze aid to the 
country after the government defaulted on some debts and devalued 
the currency in August. Inflation has soared since the start of the 
crisis, reducing the wages of millions of Russians to nearly negligible 
levels. About one in three Russians are now living below the poverty 
line, according to official figures. Even those wages routinely go 
unpaid for months. Russia's trade union chief Mikhail Shmakov warned 
Wednesday of major protests next year if the government doesn't pay 
off overdue wages and raise current ones, Interfax reported. Deputy 
Prime Minister Valentina Matviyenko said that in 1999, the government 
plans to raise state workers' wages 50 percent to try to compensate 
for inflation _ which is already running at 70 percent this year. 
``This is much less than the population needs, but it is the maximum 
we can afford,'' Matviyenko said, according to Interfax. Finance Minister 
Mikhail Zadornov also said the government plans to repay wage and 
pension arrears by the end of this year, the ITAR-Tass news agency 
reported. The government has warned it would resort to paying money 
to pay off the wages and other expenses, unless it gets foreign aid. 
The move is likely to spur further inflation. But the government has 
only printed 16 billion rubles (dlrs 780 million) so far since October 
_ much less than the 25 billion rubles (dlrs 1.2 billion) it had planned 
to print in the fourth quarter of the year, Zadornov said. Russia 
signed a long-awaited agreement with the United States on Wednesday 
for a dlrs 625 million food aid package, aimed at staving off hunger 
by Russia's poor. Meanwhile, Russian Prime Minister Yevgeny Primakov, 
on a visit to Kazakstan, said Wednesday that his country will repay 
all its debts, but would need to restructure them because of the economic 
crisis. Russia faces dlrs 17.5 billion in foreign debts that fall 
due next year, but the government has earmarked only dlrs 9.5 billion 
for foreign debt servicing and wants to reschedule the remainder with 
creditors. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>