<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981223.0236 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Weakening growth in farm incomes over the past two years is raising 
the potential for unrest in rural areas and undermining efforts to 
boost economic growth, China's agriculture minister said Wednesday. 
Growth in farm incomes has slowed severely, particularly in 1998, 
despite government efforts to improve grain trade and invest more 
in rural construction, Chen Yaobang said at a news conference. Net 
farm income increased 4.6 percent in 1997, compared with 5.6 in 1996. 
The rate of increase this year is estimated at only 3 percent, he 
said. China wants its farmers to earn and spend more. Rural domestic 
demand is considered a key to keeping the economy growing at a target 
of 8 percent. Rural incomes are depressed in part because village 
and township industries that absorb many underemployed farmers have 
been stung by a decline in exports due to the Asian financial crisis. 
Meanwhile, state-owned enterprises in the cities have been laying 
off millions of workers as part of reforms to turn around the heavily 
debt-ridden state sector. Laid-off urban workers often take jobs that 
once went to migrants from the countryside. China also has not been 
able to solve the problem of local governments collecting too many 
random fees from farmers, Chen acknowledged. A government rule limiting 
such fees to 5 percent of a farmer's income is violated in many places, 
he said. Over the past few years violent disputes have broken out 
in many areas between farmers and local officials. China expects a 
bumper harvest this year of more than 490 million tons of grain, about 
the same as last year, despite devastating summer floods. Chen said 
good fall weather in much of the country helped boost production. 
Yet the abundant supply of agricultural goods is keeping prices down 
and further depressing farm incomes. In a cautious step toward more 
market-driven farm production, China in 1999 will liberalize prices 
for cotton. Chen predicted cotton output would shrink to 3.5 million 
metric tons in 1999, from the 4.2 million tons expected this year. 
But China will maintain its tight grip on the grain market, continuing 
a decades-old tradition intended to ensure an adequate grain supply. 
Part of China's domestic grain sales are at a government purchase 
price, and the rest is at a price that guarantees farmers a decent 
minimum return. If not for price supports, farmers would turn to other 
crops that earn more, Chen said. Although farmers have not benefited 
as much as their urban counterparts from market-oriented reforms, 
many have benefited from two decades of rapid economic growth, Chen 
said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>