<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981223.0722 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Two men suspected of sabotaging train tracks in an attempt to extort 
10 million marks (dlrs 6 million) from the German railway have been 
arrested, officials said Wednesday. Authorities had been chasing the 
blackmailers for weeks amid a growing holiday-season scare for railway 
passengers and employees. Air force reconnaissance planes, helicopters 
and 400 extra border police were called out last weekend to patrol 
rail lines. The suspects, one of them reportedly a former railway 
worker, were blamed for three attacks since late November on rail 
lines around Berlin. The most serious caused a cargo train to derail 
last Friday. No one was hurt but damage estimates were in the millions. 
After that accident, rail officials revealed they had received four 
letters since Nov. 23 demanding money. At a news conference Wednesday, 
Ulrich Kersten, head of the Federal Criminal Police Office in Wiesbaden, 
said the decision was made to go public with the threats in an attempt 
to re-establish contact with the extortionists. The main suspect, 
identified only as an unemployed 46-year-old German from the eastern 
state of Saxony, called German rail headquarters in Frankfurt that 
same day and again on Saturday, Kersten said. The suspect initially 
demanded police turn over the money in Frankfurt Tuesday morning, 
but then directed them in a series of phone calls across hundreds 
of kilometers (miles) into Bavaria. He was finally arrested Tuesday 
night at a highway rest stop on the autobahn between Munich and Salzburg. 
Federal agents, including members of an anti-terrorist squad, nabbed 
him as he was looking for the money in the trunk of a police car. 
After the arrest, Kersten said the suspect confessed to the three 
sabotage acts. He also warned that bombs planted in train stations 
in Frankfurt, Nuremberg and Hamburg would explode if he wasn't released. 
Those stations were temporarily closed and searched, causing headaches 
for travelers, but no bombs were found. A 44-year-old man suspected 
of also being involved in the plot was arrested Wednesday morning 
in his apartment in Chemnitz, a city in Saxony, Kersten said. The 
two men had been in trouble before for extortion, he added. German 
Transport Minister Franz Muentefering voiced relief at the arrests, 
calling them ``reassuring news for the safety of all train travelers 
at Christmas time.'' The cargo train, carrying paper rolls, derailed 
Friday near Anklam, 160 kilometers (100 miles) north of Berlin, after 
someone loosened bolts holding down the tracks. No one was hurt. Officials 
believe the tools used were stolen from the railway. Also linked to 
the extortion was a similar attack that forced a high-speed ICE passenger 
train enroute from Hannover to Berlin into an emergency stop on Dec. 
8. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>