<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981223.0196 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Iraq ordered the United Nations on Wednesday to cancel a scheduled 
flight of military observers headed to Baghdad to monitor the cease-fire 
and demilitarized zone on the Iraq-Kuwait border, a U.N. official 
said. Iraq offered no explanation for its decision, which was likely 
to increase tensions with the United Nations. The U.N. official, who 
spoke on condition of anonymity, said he hoped the measure was temporary 
and that the U.N. is pursuing the matter with Iraq. The flight had 
been scheduled to carry members of the United Nations Iraq-Kuwait 
Observer Mission, from Amman, Jordan to Habaniyya air base outside 
Baghdad, the official said. The force was set up after the 1991 Gulf 
War which evicted Iraqi forces from Kuwait following their seven-month 
occupation of the tiny oil-rich emirate. The official said the Iraq 
move appeared to be related to the U.S.-British military airstrikes 
on Iraq to force it to comply with U.N. resolutions to eliminate its 
weapons of mass destruction. The four nights of strikes ended Saturday. 
Iraqi air defenses are still on alert for further possible attacks, 
and the cancellation of the U.N. flight may be the result of Iraq's 
fears. Iraq had warned Tuesday that it won't forgive Kuwait for allowing 
the United States and Britain to use its military bases to mount last 
week's airstrikes against the country. Meanwhile, U.N. humanitarian 
workers resumed their normal duties Wednesday after returning from 
Jordan. Their first task will be to judge the impact of the bombing 
campaign on the U.N.-approved oil-for-food program and other international 
efforts to help the 22 million Iraqis, said U.N. officials who spoke 
on condition of anonymity. Benon Sevan, head of the U.N. humanitarian 
program at U.N. headquarters in New York, ordered a survey taking 
no more than a week to determine what repairs are needed, the officials 
said. They said U.N. food observers also went out Wednesday to check 
grain silos and aid distribution centers in Baghdad and elsewhere 
in Iraq. Some 120 U.N. humanitarian workers returned to Baghdad on 
Tuesday night after a bus trip across the desert from Amman, where 
they were evacuated last week during the bombing campaign. The United 
States launched the missile attacks to punish Iraq for failing to 
cooperate with U.N. weapons inspectors who are responsible for eliminating 
Iraq's chemical and biological weapons along with long-range missiles. 
Until the inspectors certify that their job is done, economic sanctions 
imposed on Iraq for its 1990 invasion of Kuwait cannot be lifted. 
The Iraqi government also has ordered an assessment of civilian and 
military losses from the U.S. and British bombardment. Iraqi officials, 
also insisting on anonymity, said the government intends to formally 
ask the U.N. Security Council for compensation. The ruling Baath party 
daily Al-Thawra said in a front-page editorial that the Security Council 
was required now ``to condemn America and Britain and lift sanctions.'' 
Iraq has long insisted it has destroyed its weapons programs and demanded 
the lifting of the sanctions. Iraq on Tuesday accused U.S. and British 
warplanes of firing two missiles toward the southern city of Basra, 
saying the renewed aggression was part of a policy ``to harm Iraq.'' 
The Pentagon and the British Defense Ministry denied the claim, which 
was reported by the official Iraqi News Agency. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>