<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981223.2100.2867 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Jesse "the body" Ventura is a true political outsider and has had 
a steep learning curve since his election November 3 but as he tells 
Maria shriver he's ready to take on the mip minute statehouse. Now 
part two of "dateline NBC's" report. Despite the overwhelming nature 
of his new job, the new governor-elect seems to be prevailing too. 
Since his election, he's won high marks for visiting every state agency 
to learn and to mingle, sending many long-time bureaucrats into shook. 
I've worked here 22 years, never seen a governor here. Can I shake 
your hand? Sure. Do you find that the people you meet at these agencies, 
out on the streets, are treating you with respect? Curiosity? Or like 
a -- They're excited. There's an excitement throughout Minnesota everywhere 
I'm going where people really have smiles on their faces. They come 
up to me daily and shake my hand and wish we well and good luck. Governor-elect 
Jesse Ventura! And blile the excitement and curiosity are undeniable, 
some criticize Ventura for his insensational appetite for appearances. 
Television appearances, even talk of a made for TV movie. Good morning, 
advisors. I'm here to be advised. He dismisses charges of publicity-seeking 
but acknowledges he now needs to come up with a real agenda for governing. 
Work hand and glove with the legislature. I was talking to a veteran 
Pol and they said, they're going to eat Jesse Ventura alive. He doesn't 
have any cronies there to help him. What credentials do you bring 
that make you feel you can do that? Because I've been a Navy seal. 
That makes you ready to be the governor? Uh-huh. Yeah. Sure, it does. 
Where did you come up with that? Easy. Because I worked with things 
in being a Navy seal that could kill me. He returns to that seal experience 
a lot. He sees it as a model for how he wants to run the state. Most 
of my career I've been an independent person doing independent things 
where all I had to do was watch out for myself, take care of my family 
and make sure that that happens. But when you get involved in an organization 
like state government I think you have to view it more from a military 
viewpoint of been the commander officer and you delegate down to your 
subordinates. You're dressing better. You think so? Yeah. Looking 
great. I'm more comfortable with my jeans and T-shirts. That new wardrobe 
is his concession to the dignity of his new office. I'm 6'4," 260, 
270 pounds, I don't need people to baby sit or bodyguard me or anything 
but from that moment, I've become a prisoner of my own home in a way 
because now I can't go anywhere without protection. How do you feel 
about that? Well, it's a responsibility I accepted when I ran for 
governor and so I'll deal with it. You have to get much thicker skinned. 
You have to learn to take insults a lot more than I normally would. 
Really? Oh, yeah. The Jesse before this wouldn't take all the insults 
that I would take now because now I'm in a position, especially now 
that I'm the governor-elect and that's bigger than me and I have to 
fulfill that office and the dignity of it. 15, 20 years from now will 
we look back and say Jesse Ventura for all that work and sacrifices, 
made any difference? Yeah. He made the difference and showed the world 
that it could be done. That you could go against the money, you could 
go against the power, you could go against the status quo, the government, 
whatever you want to call it, and win. I think yes, winning was huge. 
Yes, beating the system was huge but now the new challenge is now 
that you've done that, now you have to prove why the first one happened. 
That's why I can't fail, and I won't fail. I can't allow that to happen. 
One other note about Jesse Ventura. He says that due to the demanding 
nature of the job he set aside sundays to spend exclusively with witness 
wife and children. He's told his staff don't call, don't ask, don't 
mess with my sundays. It's for my wife and kids, and he hopes fellow 
minnesotans will do the same. Jesse Ventura will be sworn in January 
4 and MSNBC will carry his inaugural address live. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>