<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981223.1830.0069 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. The weather is frigid, and the economy is hot. The bombing 
is over for now and Washington is taking a breather. That all seems 
to add up to a happy holiday for America, even if it's an icy one. 
The weather map spells out the story for Christmas. After an unusually 
mild autumn, Arctic air came on with a vengeance. So the warmest year 
on record is ending on a very cold note from coast to coast, and NBC's 
Jim Cummins has more. Winter has arrived on schedule in places like 
in Duluth, minnesota. But this Arctic blast drove air temperatures 
to record lows in Los Angeles, turned interstate highways into parking 
lots in Texas, causing widespread power outages in Mississippi and 
stranding thousands of air travelers on the eve of the busiest holiday 
travel period ever -- more than 45 million people going somewhere 
for Christmas. There's absolutely no parking. It's unbelievable. And 
I thought Thanksgiving was bad. In much of the country, highway travel 
is even worse. The deep south is in a deep freeze, and most of the 
ice covers the roads. Rain, freezing rain and sleet stretch from Texas 
across the Tennessee valley into the carolinas. Overnight, there were 
two chain reaction accidents near Austin, Texas, involving 58 cars. 
At least two dead, 16 injured. Okay, why don't we just shut it down. 
Patrolman Todd Myers helped rescue a woman from one car. Everybody 
rubber necking, nobody paying any attention to the road. You got her. 
Head is kind of stuck, okay. In Dallas, 502 wrecks between midnight 
and noon. I didn't have too bad a time of it until right here. "right 
here" is sandwiched between a city bus and a minivan. The timing couldn't 
be worse. The need to De-ice airplanes in places where there are few 
De-icers will affect mail deliveries, overnight service, too. Fed 
ex admits some delays because of icy conditions at their hub in memphis. 
And slick roads will delay or even cancel last-minute Christmas shopping. 
In some places, the police can't wait for the salt and sand trucks. 
And some motorists simply ignore warnings to slow down. Keep it spread 
out. Bob Davis, a citrus Grower in the central valley of California, 
says he's waging a war against this early winter assault. It is a 
war, and we use any ammunition we have available. Including water 
helicopters fans and Orchard heaters. We're up to 29 1/2, so it's 
really -- because it was as cold as 26. We're above critical. But 
this first real blast of winter has caught much of the country off 
guard, bringing a white Christmas from the upper midwest to northern 
New England. But for much of the south, there is no relief in sight. 
The deep freeze here is forecast to last through Christmas. And experts 
are warning there could be even more ice storms. Jim Cummins, NBC 
news, Dallas. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>