<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981223.1830.1562 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There's a temptation in some quarters to say young people these days 
are not made of the right stuff. That they're too self-involved. The 
"me" generation and all that. Like most sweepings conclusions, it 
is vastly overstated. We have to look no farther than a deeply troubled 
neighborhood in New York City. A story of brothers, home and an extended 
family. It has been said, you can't go home again. Brothers hans and 
Ivan hageman will tell you otherwise. They didn't just grow up in 
the violent streets of east Harlem, they were engulfed by them. Their 
family home -- a drug rehab center run by their parents. Each day, 
a lesson in survival. I remember our mother putting us down on the 
floor during the Harlem riots to make sure snipers wouldn't shoot 
at us through the window. The brothers got out, got educated -- Harvard 
and Columbia. Hans became a lawyer. Ivan, a teacher. They wouldn't 
ever have to return to Harlem unless they chose to. They chose to. 
Leaving the possibility of riches behind, they opened the east Harlem 
school in the very same building they grew up in, a middle school 
for neighborhood kids with promise. If they make it through this place 
and they make it through those streets, then they're going to be stronger 
than anybody. So it's exciting to be behind kids who I know are going 
to be radically successful. Their sacrifice is not lost on their students, 
like teniel Roman. I don't think many people would do that, give up 
a career where they can make, probably, millions to come and teach 
students from Harlem. And just that extra love that they give. The 
55 African-American and Latino students receive much needed affection 
and lots more. The discipline is consistent. The standards are rigorous. 
And the work is challenging. And all three of those are at a very 
high level here. This school has a room with a view. A bleak view 
of dangerous temptations. Students, like the fatherless David Ward, 
are led by example. You don't really know what's right and what's 
wrong until you look at them and see what they've done. And if you 
want to go with them, then that's great. If you don't, then you're 
dead. Two brothers, coming home to show their neighbors what the future 
looks like. We're '60s babies. We want to change the world. I mean, 
we're just doing it in our own way here in a small place. When you 
come to this school, you can have more than just, you know, a Wish. 
It can actually come true if you work hard. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>