<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981223.0203 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Scores of Iowa middle-school students were squirming on a recent afternoon 
as they inspected tumors inside a colon as part of a career-information 
seminar about the medical profession. The students, however, were 
not even in the same room as the diseased colon _ or the same county, 
for that matter. The hundred or so middle schoolers were spread out 
all over the state, at six different schools. The images of the colon, 
preserved in a jar in Des Moines, as well as the reactions (``Gross!'' 
and ``Cool!'') were carried over hundreds of miles of fiber optic 
cable that make up the Iowa Communications Network, which is nearly 
a decade old but is still revolutionary. The idea of the state-owned 
and operated network, the only one of its kind in the nation, was 
pushed forward by a group of state legislators during the administration 
of Gov. Terry E. Branstad in 1990. Approved and paid for with hundreds 
of millions of dollars by the Iowa Legislature, the network links 
Iowa's 99 counties, enabling the instantaneous transmission of two-way 
interactive video, data and audio communications. The network began 
as an educational tool for the state's schools; the goal was to open 
up opportunities for rural Iowa. The idea of children in rural Iowa 
taking foreign-language classes via the network struck state leaders 
as a prime example of how opportunities afforded to students in Des 
Moines and Cedar Rapids could be made available to those in rural 
Inwood. The network could go a long way toward satisfying an Internet 
user's lust for bandwidth _ technojargon for the size of the pipeline 
that carries data to and from a computer. The more bandwidth a user 
has _ the fatter the pipeline between the computer and the Internet 
_ the faster and more useful that computer is. And a fiber optic network 
is a fat, fat pipeline. While that fat pipeline is now available to 
only a limited number of public and educational institutions, there 
is a public debate about expanding that availability and about the 
state's role as a communications carrier. City and county governments 
want to be included in the network, and there is even talk of forging 
public-private partnerships that would make the network available 
for more private uses. The network has wired the state with cables 
made of individual strands of optical fiber spiraled together. Harold 
M. (Tommy) Thompson, the chief operating officer of the network, said 
that while an entire encyclopedia could be downloaded in 38 minutes 
with a copper T-1 line, one of the fastest widely available means 
of connecting to the Internet, the Iowa network could transmit the 
same information in 1{ minutes. He said he hoped that financing would 
be allocated to update the network, tripling its bandwidth. Officials 
estimate that since the network's inception, the state has spent close 
to $300 million to build and run it. That includes $178 million for 
the original cable that wired every county, plus an additional $95 
million for the current effort to wire every school, which would put 
all the state's residents closer to a network access point. Even though 
federal and state agencies pay for network access, rate subsidies 
and the expense of building up the network are costing the state around 
$25 million a year. To encourage educational uses, the state subsidizes 
the service for schools, charging public and private elementary and 
high schools an hourly fee of $5.25 for two-way interactive video; 
public and private universities pay $6.30 per hour. Libraries' rates 
are similar. Hospitals and state and federal agencies are charged 
$45.50 an hour, which is what providing the service costs the state. 
To use the network for phone calls and Internet hookups, users pay 
the network for production costs, which varies depending on the kind 
of hookup. Private individuals and businesses cannot gain access to 
the network under the state law governing it. The legislature has 
refused to pass several bills that would widen access by allowing 
city and county governments to participate. (Some counties are already 
connected for law enforcement and disaster services.) Despite some 
public grumbling over the network's costs, its advocates insist that 
the investment will be well worth it and that costs are dropping as 
usage expands. Thompson, who has run the network for four years, said: 
``In addition to direct savings that the network creates for state 
agencies _ for example, phone service that they don't pay private 
sector rates for _ there are savings that are impossible to quantify, 
such as savings from a sick veteran not having to leave his hospital 
to see a specialist. Those kinds of things you just can't price.'' 
Nobody knows if fiber optics will continue to be desirable as a high-bandwidth 
Internet conduit as technology changes; cable modems and wireless 
technology, among others, are also strong contenders. But Thompson 
said the Iowa network would remain valuable for years. ``Who knows, 
maybe 25 years from now there will be a new technology and somebody 
will be able to do what we're doing better and cheaper,'' he said. 
``If that's the case, we'll try to position ourselves so that we can 
adapt to any of those changes, but it's pretty far in the future.'' 
Though born as a tool for education, the Iowa network has been tapped 
for telemedicine, telejustice (a term coined by Iowa judicial officials) 
and even military purposes. James C. Twedt, an administrative judge, 
used to spend hundreds of hours on the road conducting parole revocation 
hearings. Now Twedt travels down a flight of steps in the Polk County 
Courthouse in Des Moines to a former conference room that has been 
transformed into a network video room, equipped with a monitor, camera, 
microphone and all the other fixings of a network access point. There, 
the judge can listen to three cases in 45 minutes. Twedt estimated 
that he could process three times as many cases with the network than 
he could before. The Iowa Parole Board also uses the network for parole 
hearings. That eliminates the travel and security costs previously 
incurred with transporting criminals. Twedt said more than 1,000 parole 
hearings had been held over the network. The network is also used 
in telemedicine. While telemedicine is practiced in other states as 
well, the Iowa network makes the most sophisticated system possible. 
It allows instantaneous, high-quality two-way interactive video so 
the doctor and patient can talk to each other. Of course, that does 
not substitute for face-to-face contact, but it does allow for great 
technological leaps. For example, from his office at the University 
of Iowa Hospitals in Iowa City, Dr. Michael Kienzle is able to use 
the network to listen to the hearts of patients anywhere in the state. 
``It allows you to establish a rapport with the patient,'' Kienzle 
said. ``As a doctor, 80 percent of the information you need to make 
a diagnosis comes from conversation with the patient. This network 
allows that as though you're sitting in the examining room with them.'' 
Kienzle said that while equipment and maintenance costs for the network 
might seem exorbitant, telemedicine saved money. In rural Iowa, a 
patient who needs a specialist has four alternatives, Kienzle points 
out: not seeking medical attention, driving to where it is available, 
seeing a specialist from a city who periodically visits rural towns 
or using telemedicine. If the patient needs immediate attention, the 
choices are limited to the last two, and the costs of missed work 
to family members and the transportation costs of driving for treatment 
can be quite high, Kienzle noted. The first consultation over Iowa's 
network was conducted in early 1997, and several hundred took place 
in that year. Kienzle said he expected those numbers to increase a 
lot as insurance companies became more comfortable with the practice. 
In addition to private patients, Kienzle said, telemedicine is used 
in Iowa to treat most prisoners. The network is also used for programs 
like training seminars for state workers and a pilot program allowing 
plastics molders in private industry to take community college courses 
to get their certification more quickly. Beyond that, the National 
Guard uses the network for mobilization and emergency services planning. 
With National Guard personnel scattered throughout the state, the 
network lends itself to military use, network officials said. Commanders 
and policy makers can hold meetings over the network, eliminating 
travel to a central location near Des Moines, and training exercises 
have recently been developed to take advantage of the network. Thompson 
said that in the last few months, state military personnel at different 
network points around the state had participated in a war simulation 
over the network; communications, tactical maneuvers and strategy 
were planned and carried out via the network. But Iowa's network has 
not been given an easy ride by the state legislature. There was heavy 
opposition from the state's telecommunications industry, which said 
that with more than 150 long-distance phone companies already operating 
in Iowa, the government should not get into the business as well. 
But the network's proponents were able to convince the legislature 
that to provide service to the whole state, only the government would 
be willing to wire areas that might not otherwise be profitable for 
private industry. But many of those involved agree that the state 
must form some sort of partnership with the private sector at some 
point, expanding the network's availability to private corporations. 
That same uneasy telecommunications industry, however, still fears 
expanded competition from the state. And the state wants to maintain 
its original vision of servicing all Iowans, regardless of profitability. 
The solution, optimists say, is to transfer some operations to the 
private sector but to have a state regulatory body make sure that 
costs remain affordable and that the service area continues to expand 
throughout the state. ``To the extent that some sort of hybrid arrangement 
can promote growth and still accommodate the public good, I would 
be for it,'' Kienzle said. Economic development officials say they 
hope that a partnership will allow the private sector all of the network's 
advantages and attract new business to Iowa. But many officials are 
not so optimistic because other states, like North Carolina and Wisconsin, 
have encountered problems with similar arrangements. ``While the state 
runs the network, we only have to break even and we're not paying 
taxes and fees _ it's just cheaper,'' Thompson said. ``If we turn 
it over to a private carrier, in order for them to cover costs and 
then profit, I'm afraid prices will get too high.'' Meanwhile, the 
legislature has promised $3 million, largely for subsidies, in the 
next fiscal year, and Thompson says the network's technology will 
continue to push boundaries. That means that middle-school students 
will continue to squirm at human innards, even when they are halfway 
across the state. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>