<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981223.0274 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In a Greenwich Village garden apartment, seven young Japanese women 
conferred over a worktable. ``Is it too tall?'' Akiko Ogita asked. 
Pondering the possibilities for error, she stood as still as a philosopher 
contemplating fate. ``I'm worried; I don't have confidence,'' Ms. 
Ogita, 26, confessed. ``This is my first time.'' Finally, she reached 
out with her scissors, snipped a blossom from a potted begonia, and 
stuck the cut stem in a vase that was slowly filling with pink amaryllis 
buds and scarlet berries. She arranged the blossoms in a way that 
seemed nice. It was. Japanese women coming to New York for lessons 
in flower arranging seems as absurd as New Yorkers going to Tokyo 
for rudeness seminars. Three centuries ago, when forest covered Manhattan, 
the art of floral design called ikebana flourished in Japan, where 
the intricate craft is still revered as a national treasure, like 
the tea ceremony. First Coca-Cola, then Levis and sneakers. Now comes 
the ultimate insult to Japanese tradition: American flower arranging. 
That might explain the intensity of the secretaries and shop clerks 
who were in Greenwich Village seeking floral freedom during a three-day 
seminar. They were cultural rebels in New York to commune with the 
Rolling Stones of floral expression, Tom Pritchard and Billy Jarecki, 
who in the late 1980's and early 1990's pioneered an American natural 
style with their Pure Madderlake shop and books. Breaking the hush 
as the women hunched over the vases, Jarecki cheered them on. ``This 
isn't brain surgery, and you're not carving granite,'' he said, pausing 
for an interpreter to translate. ``If it's not so beautiful, you're 
going to throw it out eventually anyway.'' Those are fighting words 
in Japan, where blossoms cost two to three times what they do here, 
and ikebana, also known as the way of the flower, involves hundreds 
of precise rules about cutting, bending and placing stems, right down 
to angles of 10 degrees this way or that. Though encouraged to follow 
their instincts, the women constantly asked for reassurance. Perched 
on two-inch platform shoes, Ryoko Ahta adjusted and readjusted two 
flowering eucalyptus stems in a cocktail shaker. Like the other women, 
Ms. Ahta, a 23-year-old English major who works part time at a Wendy's 
in Tokyo to support her flower habit, seemed to meditate over her 
selections, moving as slowly as in a tai chi exercise. ``Is it too 
big?'' she asked, gesturing at the eucalyptus leaves sticking above 
her arrangement. A classical ikebana master might measure the height 
of the main stalk in comparison with side branches, the vase and sparse 
blooms. The Madderlake style is built on casually airy arrangements, 
antique accessories and woodsy flourishes. Pritchard scrutinized her 
stems. ``Just right,'' he said. In the kitchen, Tomoko Shiihara prepared 
to take an even bigger risk _ Pritchard was showing her how to wash 
the roots of three lily of the valley sprigs, which she planned to 
combine with thick pink heather. It would be a tricky combo, since 
two kinds of roots would show through the clear glass container. A 
student of ikebana for 10 years, she was all too aware of her creative 
daring with this freewheeling below-the-water's-edge style, which 
is a Madderlake hallmark. ``I am trying to understand the natural 
way,'' she explained. ``I don't understand because I never studied 
it.'' But then, natural isn't always what it seems in America, either. 
In the 1980's, when elaborate, overblown arrangements were fashionable, 
Pritchard and Jarecki spread their revolutionary style, first in Greenwich 
Village, then on Madison Avenue, then at a SoHo shop called Pure Madderlake 
(after a dark shade of red). Their carefully wild esthetic swept society 
circles from the White House to the Hamptons. Soon, lavish was out, 
natural was in, including pricey boxes of nothing but grass. In 1993, 
two years before they closed their New York retail shop, the partners 
opened a design studio in Tokyo. Drawn by publicity in Japanese magazines, 
young women began studying with a Madderlake disciple, Takaaki Nonen. 
The twice-a-year trips to New York are a chance for students to learn 
from their idols, whose relaxed manner is part of the draw. ``First, 
we tell them its OK to laugh,'' Pritchard said. Occasionally, the 
women do. In Japan, flower arranging has become a flash point for 
many young women. Before World War II, ikebana certificates, earned 
through weekly study, were considered a prerequisite for marriage. 
Even today, well-bred women in conservative communities must study 
the exacting rules of ikebana to make a good marriage. Like those 
American career women today who studiously can't cook, some young 
Japanese women simply refuse to dally with buds. In adopting the Madderlake 
style, the Japanese women throw out the rules but keep the flowers. 
The classes in Tokyo with Ms. Nonen are exercises in self-expression 
that culminate in the New York tours, which cost the young women $3,000 
to $4,000. ``The Japanese are reluctant to say their feelings,'' Ms. 
Nonen explained. ``They ask, `Am I right to say it is beautiful?' 
They need experience in trusting themselves.'' The experience included 
leisure time to see the musical ``Chicago,'' tour the Metropolitan 
Museum of Art and shop at stores like Tiffany's. Shopping was serious 
business, though, when the women cruised the 26th Street flea market 
for flower containers, ranging from retro Fiestaware vases to a martini 
pitcher. ``The choice of material is 90 percent of the battle,'' Pritchard 
told his students, urging them to visualize the mood they want to 
express. ``Do you want to impress, overwhelm or coax?'' In another 
excursion, they visited the wholesale flower district. At Caribbean 
Cuts, the women marveled over miniature oranges and pineapples. At 
Fischer &AMP; Page, they gaped at the color riot: peonies from New 
Zealand, hydrangeas from the Netherlands, roses from South Africa. 
The piles of blossoms in flagrant bloom amazed the women. In Japan, 
flowers for sale are displayed with closed buds from behind glass 
refrigerator cases. ``It's not right,'' said Junko Sone, 26, who works 
at her family's computer company. ``The flower is a flower. It should 
be seen in bloom,'' she added, opening her closed hand to demonstrate 
a bud unfolding. Transported by the touchable displays of open blooms, 
Ms. Sone seemed to flush from the heady vision. Later, in the tranquillity 
of the workshop, she ly positioned, then repositioned, first left, 
then right, the last sprigs in a bouquet of lilies. ``This is such 
a special time,'' she said through the translator. ``It's not superficial. 
It's mental. It's spiritual for me. If you see these beautiful things, 
you don't need words.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>