<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981223.0401 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Few Americans care whether Europe buys bananas from Ecuador, Guatemala 
or Honduras. So many wondered whether the Clinton administration recklessly 
started a trade war when it announced this week a list of European 
luxury products _ ranging from cashmere clothing to chandeliers _ 
that it vowed to tax into extinction if the European Union did not 
open its borders to bananas from Latin America. Suspicions grew worse 
when it became known that a political power behind the administration's 
action was Carl Lindner, a large contributor to both political parties 
and the chief executive of Chiquita Brands International, one of two 
big American distributors of Latin American bananas in Europe. But 
whatever the motive, the administration picked its battle wisely. 
If Europe gets its way in this otherwise trivial trade spat, it could 
gut the world's three-year-old mechanism for resolving trade disputes, 
a mechanism that professor John Jackson of the Georgetown University 
Law School regards as ``the finest international legal tribunal in 
the world.'' Europe's complicated system for allocating licenses to 
import bananas discriminates in favor of European companies that distribute 
bananas grown in Europe's former colonies in the Caribbean and Africa. 
Some types of discrimination are allowed under international trade 
rules. But Europe's system flagrantly violates these rules, according 
to three international trade tribunals over the last six years. Europe 
ignored the first two rulings, exercising the right under the toothless 
pre-1995 procedures of defendants to veto adverse rulings. But veto 
rights were rescinded three years ago when the world's trading partners 
created the World Trade Organization and adopted a revised system 
for referring trade fights to impartial dispute panels. Victorious 
plaintiffs, like the United States in the banana case, were explicitly 
authorized to impose sanctions under authority of the WTO if the offending 
country refused to make amends. Or so the United States thought. But 
in the banana case, Europe has exploited a loophole in the rules. 
By revising its licensing laws in a manner that the United States 
and other countries call a sham, Europe contends it has complied with 
the trade panel's ruling, thereby stripping the United States of any 
authority to retaliate. The European Union's trade commissioner, Sir 
Leon Brittan, has called the Clinton administration's threatened sanctions 
``unilateralism at its worst.'' The pros and cons of the banana dispute 
are not overly important. Europe's legal maneuver is. The truth, according 
to Jackson and many other legal experts, is that WTO rules include 
one section that appears to give the United States the right to retaliate 
if Europe does not correct its licensing system. But another section 
appears to give Europe the right to declare itself in compliance and 
force the United States to begin a new trade case, taking years to 
resolve, if it cries foul. And there is no guarantee that once the 
new case is resolved, Europe will not carry out another sham response, 
ensnarling the United States in one fruitless legal dispute after 
another. But as cynical as Europe's ploy may be, it has a point. Its 
accuser, the United States, cannot, once a panel has ruled, serve 
as sole judge as to whether Europe's practices conform to international 
standards. Yet victorious plaintiffs cannot tolerate indefinite delay 
as international tribunals are asked to review every evolution of 
a nation's trade rules. If Europe's interpretation prevails, the WTO 
will become as toothless as its predecessor. Jeffrey Schott of the 
Institute for International Economics in Washington proposes a way 
out of the box. He would submit Europe's new licensing system to binding 
arbitration. The arbitrator would decide whether the system conforms 
to WTO rules. Fairness would require appointing as arbitrator someone 
from the WTO appeals panel that ruled on behalf of the United States. 
Otherwise, the United States would be faced, in effect, with having 
to win its case twice _ once before the initial panel and then again 
before an arbitrator. Jackson agrees that binding arbitration is the 
best way to close the loophole exposed by Europe's maneuvering and 
cites precedent under the WTO for such a solution. He cautions that 
it will take a lot of time and effort because more than 100 member 
countries would have to approve new trade procedures. Whatever effort 
it takes to fix the dispute mechanism is warranted because the three-year-old 
system has been a nearly unqualified success. In a series of politically 
delicate and economically tricky cases, trade panels have issued carefully 
crafted and smart rulings that show no bias in favor of the rich and 
powerful. The WTO, for example, ruled in favor of Venezuela and Brazil 
when they correctly accused the United States of shutting out their 
oil exports. To the administration's credit, it quickly brought American 
trade practices into line, giving it credibility in the current dispute 
with Europe. Jackson points to other rulings that he says were carefully 
balanced: against Europe's prohibition of beef imports from the United 
States that the Europeans say are tainted with growth hormones, and 
against an American prohibition on imported shrimp caught by vessels 
that endanger sea turtles. In an odd sense, Europe's stance may be 
indirect payback. During the 1994 congressional fight over membership 
in the new WTO, Clinton's trade representative, Mickey Kantor, infuriated 
many Europeans by arguing that membership in the trade organization 
would not obligate America to obey its rules. The United States could 
defy the rules and accept retaliation knowing full well that few countries, 
no matter how valid their case, would choose to initiate a trade war 
with the United States. Europe has not explicitly endorsed Kantor's 
legalistic view. But its maneuvering on bananas bears the footprints 
of his legalisms _ legalisms that if unchecked could undo a system 
that has so far kept big and small countries playing by the same set 
of fair rules. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>