<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981223.0444 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Perhaps it is no coincidence that as the Cold War ended, the golf-club 
war began. In their quest for the ultimate ball launcher, club manufacturers 
turned to the space-age materials, computer-aided design techniques 
and laid-off engineers of their Southern California neighbors, the 
aerospace companies. And they guard their secrets just as closely. 
``The security here is tighter than it was at Lockheed,'' said Tom 
Preece, who worked as an engineer on the F-22 fighter and is now product 
design manager at Callaway Golf Co., where robots test clubs by hitting 
balls with a consistency that would make a weekend duffer weep with 
envy. But now _ also like the aerospace business before it _ the golf-club 
industry is enduring a serious retrenchment. Despite aging baby boomers' 
rising interest in golf and a new influx of young players, sales in 
the $2.5 billion American golf-club market are off 10 to 20 percent 
this year, executives and analysts said. Golfers who once paid as 
much as $500 for the latest oversize titanium driver are becoming 
more cost-conscious. So prices are falling and inventories rising. 
What's worse, new rules being adopted by the U.S. Golf Association, 
the sport's governing body, could make it far more difficult for manufacturers 
to devise the next great advance that might stimulate demand. Indeed, 
the USGA's season-long review of how technology affects the game hung 
over the industry like a cloud all year. One of the hardest hit has 
been the largest club maker, Callaway, which is known for its Big 
Bertha line. In October, the company dismissed its chief executive, 
Donald Dye, and gave the reins back to Ely Callaway, 79, its founder. 
In November the company dismissed 700 employees, or nearly a quarter 
of its work force. Taylor Made Golf Co., the second-largest club maker, 
and Cobra Golf Inc., the third-largest, have also had layoffs; Cobra 
president Bob Dubiel departed a few months ago. Lynx Golf Inc. and 
Snake Eyes Golf Clubs Inc., two smaller manufacturers, have filed 
for bankruptcy protection. The problems come at a time when, by most 
measures, the sport is doing well. Owing largely to the popularity 
of Tiger Woods, the number of American golfers increased 7 percent 
in 1997 to 26.5 million, according to the National Golf Foundation, 
an industry group. The number of golf newcomers soared 51 percent, 
to 3 million. Until those gains, the numbers had barely budged since 
1990, the foundation said. Figures for 1998 are not available, but 
people in the industry say the Tiger Woods boom has cooled. To some 
extent, the industry was hurt by the poor weather inflicted by El 
Nino storms early in the year as well as by the economic crises in 
golf-loving Japan and the rest of East Asia. Callaway, which relies 
on Japan for about 10 percent of its sales, is selling half as much 
in that country as it was a year ago. But a bigger problem, analysts 
and retailers say, is a lack of new products to excite golfers. Club 
sales boomed in the 1990s, spurred initially by ``oversize'' drivers 
_ which were said to offer a bigger sweet spot for hitting longer 
and straighter shots _ and then even more when the industry developed 
clubs made of titanium, which is lighter and stronger than steel. 
The number of golfers barely changed, but club sales in the United 
States soared like a perfectly hit seven-iron, from $1.3 billion in 
1993 to $2.5 billion last year, according to the National Sporting 
Goods Association. Now, though, golfers have their titaniums and neither 
Callaway nor Taylor Made has introduced anything to replace them. 
``There's no must-have club out there,'' said Bud Leedom, publisher 
of Golf Insight &AMP; Investing, a newsletter in San Diego. With the 
giants idle, two companies came out of virtually nowhere to pitch 
new fairway woods. Orlimar Golf Equipment Co., an obscure operation 
for most of its 38-year history, expects sales of more than $50 million 
this year from its Trimetal clubs, versus only $1.5 million in 1997. 
And Adams Golf, of Plano, Texas, which makes the Tight Lies clubs, 
should achieve sales of about $100 million this year, up from $3 million 
two years ago. Most of their gains came out of the hide of Callaway, 
whose market share in metal woods fell from about 39 percent a year 
ago to 27 percent in September. Taylor Made also lost a few points 
of market share. But the golf industry's problems might be catching 
up even to the new highfliers. Adams, which went public in July at 
$16 a share, closed Wednesday at $3.875 and the company expects to 
barely break even this quarter. Orlimar, based in Hayward, Calif., 
postponed plans to go public. Some golfers say equipment makers raised 
prices too high. ``It got to a ridiculous point, with Callaway coming 
up with bigger heads and charging $100 more each time they improved 
it,'' said David Palmer, 28, a corporate bond salesman at Lehman Brothers, 
who has not yet bought a titanium driver. Prices have started to plummet. 
Taylor Made, for example, cut prices three times in 12 months on its 
top-of-the-line Ti Bubble 2 driver, bringing the retail price down 
from more than $450 to as little as $250. The slowdown has hit hardest 
in Carlsbad, a city of 70,000 about 20 miles north of San Diego that 
is home to Callaway, Taylor Made, Cobra and smaller companies like 
McHenry Metals Golf Corp. That has earned it the moniker ``Titanium 
Valley.'' But there is less interaction among the companies than, 
say, in Silicon Valley. Callaway and Montgomery, for example, have 
never met. And the companies are always shooting barbs at one another 
in their public relations. Golf remains the biggest industry here, 
but the number of workers has shrunk from more than 5,000 to about 
4,000, about a tenth of the town's labor pool. Still, city officials 
say, Carlsbad is not suffering; unemployment in San Diego County was 
only 3.2 percent in November. The opening next spring of a Legoland 
theme park should also help. Callaway's layoffs came after its net 
income dived 84 percent in the third quarter to $5.8 million; sales 
fell by a third, to $173 million. Based on the success of the Big 
Bertha line, Callaway's sales shot from $21 million in 1990 to $843 
million last year. But this year sales will drop to about $700 million; 
the company's share price has plunged from a 12-month high of almost 
$34 in February to $10 on Wednesday. Some analysts say the company 
simply took its eye off the ball. It began moving into other businesses 
like golf-book publishing and driving ranges. That strategy, now abandoned, 
cost Dye, the former chief executive, his job. Callaway, who was chairman 
during Dye's two-year tenure, said the worst is behind the company. 
``We're not going to have anywhere near the negative surprises we've 
had,'' he said. But the company also does not expect significant sales 
increases for several quarters. Other companies are also hurting. 
Cobra experienced a ``significant'' decline in sales and profits in 
the third quarter, according to its parent company, Fortune Brands, 
a conglomerate that also makes Titleist clubs and balls and Footjoy 
golf shoes. Cobra sales are down 2 percent for the year, but 15 percent 
in the third quarter. In contrast to Cobra, Titleist's golf club sales 
are up 38 percent this year because of new product introductions. 
Callaway is also trying to promote new lines. In August, it introduced 
a smaller-headed line of steel drivers and fairway woods that seems 
to have stopped its losses to Orlimar and Adams; it is now working 
on a new line of titanium woods. Callaway would not say when it would 
be introduced but suggested that the clubs would stay oversized and 
expensive. He scoffed at those who say that club heads have gotten 
too big and prices too high. ``If we come up with something that's 
better than what we have now, the price will be secondary,'' he said. 
Still, there is a question of just how much better any club can get. 
When the U.S. Golf Association initiated its review of whether technological 
advances in equipment let players hit the ball with greater distance 
and accuracy _ thus imperiling the integrity of the game _ the industry 
held its breath. The USGA could have, for example, banned titanium 
clubs, but took a middle path instead. In November, it adopted new 
regulations to limit what it called a ``trampoline effect,'' in which 
the club face bends inward when it hits the ball and then springs 
back, propelling the ball farther. Under ferocious lobbying by the 
makers, though, the USGA said that virtually all existing clubs conformed 
to the new standard. Even so, some manufacturers say, future advances 
will be stymied. Callaway acknowledged that a ``substantial improvement 
over existing clubs probably will not conform'' to the association's 
guidelines. He threatened to sue if the association rejected a Callaway 
club. Some say the sport needs to attract more players by making playing 
times shorter and protocols less intimidating. The bulk of golf equipment 
is bought by only about 5.6 million avid golfers. ``People don't realize,'' 
said Leigh Bader, manager of the pro shop at the Pine Oaks Golf Course 
in South Easton, Mass., ``what a small pie is being fought for.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>