<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981223.0215 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
On screen, a Tomahawk missile rushes over the ocean. It is the Persian 
Gulf at night, and there is cloud cover, but you can see the texture 
of the waves. From the starboard side, the camera rolls around the 
circumference of the missile to follow it from behind. And you can 
see the flare, a flash of light from the rocket's rear and a misty 
condensation trail, reflected in the water. This is a computer game. 
This is ``NBC News Special Report.'' On Wednesday, Dec. 16, while 
the nation channel-surfed between air strikes and impeachment, NBC 
was broadcasting footage from Jane's Fleet Command, a strategy simulation 
game scheduled for release this spring. The credited source was Electronic 
Arts, the nation's largest publisher of entertainment software. ``They 
realized that they could use our 3-D models and things like that much 
quicker than they could develop their own,'' said Kristen McEntire, 
a spokeswoman for Electronic Arts. ``They don't have the internal 
resources to build a 3-D model of a carrier in an afternoon. We've 
already got it built. We've got the detailed models. We know how the 
elevators work and how they bring the plane up from the hangar bay 
and how it launches off the carrier, the whole thing. We can do 27 
different angles of it at different times of day. We can give them 
ready-made footage in one second, and we know it's accurate. ``We 
actually played the game, recorded the whole thing and supplied them 
with several hours of footage of different scenarios: nighttime attacks, 
daytime attacks, different types of missiles. Launches from airplanes, 
launches from ships. ``It's easier for us to do it on the fly,'' Ms. 
McEntire said, ``because the game comes with a detailed mission editor 
so the player can place targets in different parts of the world and 
then turn on the game and see how it plays out. It takes 10 minutes. 
You just go drop drop drop drop _ you just drop things in where you 
want them and say go. NBC had all different sorts of situations already 
recorded. And when the time came, they selected the scenarios that 
fit what actually happened and credited Jane's Combat Simulations 
and Electronic Arts.'' The Jane's brand, in this case, was rather 
important because Jane's Information Group is a 100-year-old publisher 
that supplies the defense community with reliable information about 
military equipment _ things like ships, tanks, satellites, tracking 
systems, who's looking to buy surface-to-air missiles, who wants to 
unload fighter planes for extra cash. If you want a down-to-the-millimeter 
description of every fighter plane on earth, you can buy Jane's All 
the World's Aircraft on CD-ROM for $1,145. If you want the entire 
encyclopedia of everything that rolls, flies or floats, it will set 
you back $16,000. Jane's Defense Weekly is a must-read for 20,000 
military officials, intelligence officers and defense contractors 
in 165 countries. These people are hard core. The consumer products 
are, as they say in the marketing department, a ``brand extension'' 
for Jane's. It's a licensing deal between the bible of the defense 
industry and the 900-pound gorilla of video game publishing. Jane's 
bumps up the name recognition. Electronic Arts gets the military equivalent 
of a Good Housekeeping Seal of Approval for its air combat simulations. 
And news outlets like NBC can feel less squeamish about using computer 
game footage to illustrate world events on the nightly news. There 
is some residual discomfort about this. Duane Emery, the ``Dateline 
NBC'' program coordinator who originally procured the Fleet Command 
footage, did not use the g-word when he passed it on to the producers 
of the ``NBC News Special Report.'' ``They knew that it was from Jane's 
Combat Simulations,'' Emery said. ``And I said to them that this was 
a product not out on the market yet. But I don't say that it's a computer 
(italics)game.(end italics) I don't refer to any of these kinds of 
things as games. Most of the people that do computer simulations don't 
even call them games. That's why they call them flight sims. They're 
a game, technically, but they're a lot more technological. And I'd 
prefer that you not use the term `game' when you're talking about 
this broadcast. ``We use Electronic Arts (italics)technology(end italics) 
that they incorporate into a simulation. We do not pull our information 
off a video game. Plus, this was something that was in development. 
They built something for us, too. We have a B-52 that doesn't appear 
in the game, OK?'' Methinks the program coordinator protests too much. 
Because it is a computer game. But then, so is most of America's military 
activity, if you believe the Pentagon's press releases about the smart 
bombs and remote air strikes and precision missile-guidance systems 
(which sometimes aren't so precise), or if you turn on the news. Because 
damage and death on the news is abstract. Targets hit, buildings destroyed, 
a tally, a scoreboard. We saw the Persian Gulf in 1991 through the 
cross hairs of a laser gun sight on CNN. And ever since then, we have 
understood war as something tactical and technological and mediated. 
Something very close to a computer game. So computer game footage 
on television feels familiar. Virtual cruise missiles in the moonlight 
are more credible than the ghostly night-scope footage _ images filmed 
in another dimension (or stolen from ``The X-Files''). Three-dimensional 
models of military hardware seem more authentic than the lantern-jawed, 
flak-jacketed correspondents looking stern for the camera, playing 
War Reporter. They seem more real, in a way, than the impeachment 
hearings. Virtual weapons are so perfectly measured. You can study 
them from any angle. All the details are known. And it's all contained 
on the surface of a CD-ROM, $49.95 at Software Etc. ``And after the 
product ships,'' Ms. McEntire promised, ``we'll be able to do real-world 
scenarios like the attack in Iraq and put the new missions up on our 
Web site for free download for our customers.'' So you can replay 
the war on your home computer, just as they do on television, with 
the same brand of data the real generals use. So the military strike 
and the media coverage and the computer game will all look the same. 
Viva convergence. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>