<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981223.0378 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In a highly unusual racial discrimination case, the U.S. Equal Employment 
Opportunity Commission has determined that black officers in the Baltimore 
Police Department have been disciplined more harshly in recent years 
than white officers. The finding grew out of a complaint by Louis 
H. Hopson Jr., a black police sergeant with 18 years on the force 
who was discharged this year after a police disciplinary board ruled 
that he had made a false statement in a trial. But Hopson, 47, said 
he was dismissed because he testified two years ago before a City 
Council committee that racial slurs and harassment against black officers 
were common within the department. The Equal Employment Opportunity 
Commission investigated, and, in a finding that was signed last week 
by Gerald S. Kiel, the commission's acting district director for Baltimore, 
said that not only were Hopson's civil rights violated, but also those 
of other black officers in the department. ``Credible testimonial 
and documentary evidence revealed that African-American officers, 
as a class, were treated disparately with respect to discipline,'' 
Kiel said. ``The record showed,'' he added, ``that African-American 
officers who protest racial discrimination or file complaints of racial 
discrimination are subjected to retaliatory actions including, but 
not limited to, being targeted for Internal Investigation Division 
investigations.'' Efforts to reach Kiel were unsuccessful. Reginald 
Welch, a commission spokesman, said officials of the agency were prohibited 
by law from discussing any case. The report, called a determination, 
was hailed by black officers, who say they have been complaining for 
years about racial practices within the department. ``For the federal 
government to step in with a strong statement like this, it validates 
what we've been saying,'' said Richard A. Hite Jr., president of the 
Vanguard Justice Society, an organization of 700 officers that campaigns 
for the rights of black officers on the Baltimore Police Department. 
The department has denied Hopson's charges and any accusation that 
black police officers who complain about discrimination suffer any 
form of retaliation. But Officer Robert Weinhold, a department spokesman, 
conceded that ``the issue of racial disparity has been present in 
the department for decades.'' Several black officers have filed discrimination 
suits against the city, including one by Robert Richards, a sergeant 
who is seeking $13.5 million on accusations that his transfer from 
a helicopter division to street patrol was racially motivated. But 
Weinhold said Commissioner Thomas C. Frazier, who was appointed in 
1994, had recognized these problems and had taken strong measures 
over the last 18 months to correct them. Weinhold said that since 
Frazier was hired, the proportion of black officers on the 3,200-member 
force had doubled to 36 percent and that many had been promoted to 
senior command positions, including those that oversee discipline, 
hiring and training. ``The department views this as a journey, not 
a destination,'' Weinhold said. ``The commissioner is committed to 
implementing substantial measures to address this very serious issue.'' 
While Hopson has the right to use the commission report as part of 
a lawsuit against the city, the next step for the commission is to 
work with both sides to mediate a settlement. If that fails, the commission 
would turn the case over to the Justice Department for prosecution. 
Welch, the commission spokesman, said most of the complaints that 
that the commission heard involved private employers. Only a ``relatively 
small number'' of the 80,000 complaints that have been filed on average 
each year since 1990 have resulted in charges of wrongdoing against 
a state or local government agency, he said. Welch also said that 
few complaints filed each year, less than 5 percent on average, have 
led federal investigators to find reasonable cause of discrimination. 
In about 60 percent of the cases, the charges are too weak to pursue, 
he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>