<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981223.0484 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
WASHINGTON _ CIA officers in China told headquarters in March 1996 
that a consultant for American aerospace companies had made payments 
to Chinese officials in hopes of getting lucrative contracts, U.S. 
intelligence officials say. The allegation, made in a secret cable, 
should have set off alarm bells. U.S. law bars companies or individuals 
from paying bribes overseas to secure contracts, and the CIA has agreed 
to share information about potential criminal activity with the Justice 
Department. But for reasons that remain unclear, the cable languished 
in CIA files for more than two years, the officials said. It was unearthed 
this year only after congressional committees began examining whether 
the Clinton administration had compromised national security in its 
zeal to promote high technology exports to China, the officials said. 
The consultant is Bansang Lee, a Chinese-American who worked for Hughes 
Space &AMP; Communications and for Loral Space &AMP; Communications. 
It is not clear whether the cable specifies on whose behalf Lee would 
have been making any payments to Chinese officials, or what kind of 
officials these were. Nor is it clear whose money the CIA believed 
it was, or how much money passed hands. Administration officials say 
the Justice Department is now examining Lee's activities more closely. 
His lawyer, Brian O'Neill, said his client ``has never made any unlawful 
or improper payments of any kind to any Chinese official.'' Spokesmen 
for Hughes and Loral deny any wrongdoing but declined to discuss Lee's 
activities. A CIA official said the failure to pass the cable on to 
the Justice Department had been an oversight that was now being reviewed 
by the CIA's inspector general. But it marks the second time this 
year that CIA officials have acknowledged that they failed to disseminate 
potentially significant information about questionable dealings involving 
China and American satellite manufacturers. The incident also illustrates 
the pressures that confront American manufacturers as they compete 
with European companies for a share of a Chinese market in which individual 
satellite sales can be worth as much as $1 billion. Lee was born in 
China but educated in the United States, receiving a doctorate from 
Princeton University in electrical engineering. Industry executives 
say he served as a crucial intermediary between American companies 
and Chinese aerospace officials who on one hand were buying Western 
satellites and on the other hand marketing their country's ability 
to launch these satellites with China's own rockets. State Department 
documents and interviews with industry executives suggest that Lee 
appears to have had a hand in both endeavors. During his years working 
for Hughes, the company sold hundreds of millions of dollars in satellites 
and telecommunications equipment to Chinese concerns, and Loral made 
its first satellite sale to China after it hired Lee. When he was 
working at Loral, Lee suggested that the company help Chinese rocket 
scientists understand the causes of a failed satellite launch in 1996, 
according to State Department documents. Loral sent technicians to 
China, and their dealings with Chinese scientists, carried out without 
U.S. government approval, are now the focus of a criminal investigation 
and Congressional inquiries. A federal grand jury is examining whether 
Loral, in 1996, and Hughes, in an earlier accident investigation, 
illegally shared American expertise with China, helping it improve 
the reliability of their launchings of satellites and ballistic missiles. 
The companies deny any wrongdoing. That inquiry had its roots nearly 
a decade ago when American satellite manufacturers sought to do more 
business with China after the Bush administration approved the first 
launches of American satellites on Chinese rockets. Hughes was the 
first American satellite maker to establish a foothold in Beijing, 
and it opened a new office for Asian deals in Tokyo. The company hired 
Lee as a Hong Kong-based consultant in 1989, and by the early 1990s, 
former executives said, Hughes was seeking closer ties to the powerful 
China Aerospace Corp., which sells missiles, launches rockets and 
makes communications satellites. Lee was an ideal go-between. He had 
a close working relationship with Liu Jiyuan, the chairman of China 
Aerospace, a satellite industry executive said. Lee moved to Beijing 
in 1992 and the next year became a full-time Hughes employee, satellite 
executives said. One executive said the company was so pleased with 
the business that Lee had generated as a consultant that it failed 
to conduct a thorough background investigation before hiring him. 
One year later, Lee's Chinese business dealings came under scrutiny 
within Hughes after company employees in Beijing raised questions 
about some of his private business deals, said a former Hughes executive, 
who declined to be identified but read from notes he kept of the inquiry 
into Lee's activities. One of Lee's separate business deals with a 
China Aerospace subsidiary entitled him to payments of about $1 million 
for every Hughes satellite launched on a Chinese rocket, the former 
Hughes executive and a government investigator said. Lee told Hughes 
officials that no payments had ever been made, that he had disclosed 
the general outlines of the deal to the company previously and that 
the agreement was no longer active, former Hughes executives said. 
But some Hughes officials called for his immediate dismissal, the 
former executives said. A few weeks later, Loral, which was trying 
to break into the Chinese market, hired Lee, aerospace executives 
said. Thomas Ross, Loral's vice president for government relations, 
said the company was not aware of any ``allegations at the time'' 
it hired Lee and knows of ``no allegations of wrongdoing by Lee during 
the period he has served as a consultant to Loral.'' A former Loral 
executive said Loral's chief of security had been concerned about 
Lee's close ties to Chinese officials. But other satellite executives 
said Loral had been pleased with Lee's work, especially his instrumental 
role in getting Loral to sell its first satellite to China, Chinasat 
8. Lee's activities in China appear to have attracted little attention 
in Washington, except for the neglected 1996 CIA cable. Intelligence 
officials said the cable mentioned both Hughes and Loral, but further 
details could not be learned. The issue was dormant until 1998, when 
it was disclosed that Loral and Hughes were under investigation for 
possible illegal transfers of rocket expertise to China. Congress 
began its own inquiries, and a House select committee asked the CIA 
for information about Lee, bringing the 1996 cable to light. About 
the same time, inquiries from the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence 
led to the discovery that a CIA scientist, Ronald Pandolfi, had learned 
about Hughes' sharing of expertise with the Chinese in 1995. Pandolfi 
wrote a draft intelligence estimate report warning about the military 
implications in April 1996, about a month after the cable arrived. 
The CIA decided not to distribute the classified report to select 
government officials, as is routinely done with intelligence estimates, 
saying it was insufficiently rigorous. Both the cable and Pandolfi's 
report were written at a time when President Clinton was moving to 
ease restrictions on satellite deals and had shifted primary oversight 
of sales from the State Department to the Commerce Department. In 
recent reports the Pentagon largely embraced Pandolfi's conclusions, 
saying Hughes had provided valuable technological insights to the 
Chinese in 1995. And last week, the State Department's intelligence 
arm asserted in a separate report that China had significantly improved 
its ability to launch rockets reliably as a result of the help from 
Hughes, lessons inherently applicable to China's missile program, 
an administration official said. The Pentagon and State Department 
have raised similar concerns about the help that Loral gave the Chinese 
in 1996 as it investigated another failed launch. The outside review 
of that accident was organized by Liu, the China Aerospace chairman 
and associate of Lee. In February 1996, before the outside committee 
was formed, Lee asked the Chinese to include a Loral representative 
as part of the investigation, according to a State Department cable 
recounting what Lee told a U.S. diplomat at the U.S. Embassy in Beijing. 
Several weeks later, when Liu specifically sought a top Loral executive 
to head the outside review, Lee relayed the Chinese request to the 
Loral executive, according to Loral documents. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>