<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981223.0207 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Executives from the major classical-music recording companies often 
speak about their work with a sense of mission. But it is hard to 
discern much mission at this time of market glut, as the major labels 
seem to flail about, desperately trying to figure out what will sell. 
The glut comes not just from further reduplications of the standard 
repertory by heavily promoted new performers but also from countless 
reissues of almost anything, and gimmicky collections like ``The Best 
of Tchaikovsky'' or ``Ten Tenors in Prayer.'' In fairness, the major 
labels are also issuing many valuable items, like Philips's series 
of lesser-known Russian operas conducted by Valery Gergiev, and RCA's 
recent, historic nine-disk collection of performances by the great 
pianist William Kapell. Yet for a really tenacious sense of purpose, 
one should look not to the major companies, which must, after all, 
answer to the international conglomerates that own them, but to small, 
independent record labels. A few _ Albany Records, GM Recordings, 
Bridge Records and New World Records _ have staked out a commercially 
unviable corner of the repertory, contemporary music and particularly 
American contemporary music, and developed notably adventurous catalogues 
and telling histories. If the major labels worry that even a new recording 
of Ravel may sell only 1,500 copies, how many copies of a program 
of chamber works by the respected but low-profile composer Donald 
Erb can New World realistically expect to sell? The same question 
applies to Albany's disk of piano music by Benjamin Lees, or GM's 
recording of three orchestral works by the Serialist Robert DiDomenica, 
a rather hermetic figure in the contemporary-music scene, known perhaps 
only for his 1972 opera ``The Balcony.'' ``What we record is totally 
based on our vision,'' said Peter Kermani, the co-owner of Albany 
Records, which was founded in 1987 in the city of that name. ``We 
don't care about composers of other centuries, even composers of today 
from other countries who are already well represented by other labels, 
big and small. We have an obligation to American composers of our 
own time.'' Of course, the releases from these new-music labels can 
seem at times like just more items glutting the market. Critics who 
sincerely want to bring attention to worthy contemporary music know 
what it is like to have to sort through piles of CDs of works by unfamiliar 
composers, many of which are the recording equivalents of vanity publications 
by authors. Yet these disks can be exciting, and they fill a crucial 
need not just for the field of music but also, some would say, for 
the (italics)cause(end italics) of music. Kermani, for one, sees his 
label as being essential to the dissemination of new music, given 
the pressures on performing ensembles not to overload audiences with 
contemporary music. The composer Gunther Schuller, who founded GM 
Records some 20 years ago as an adjunct to his two publishing companies, 
takes a similar view, adding that for better or worse, recordings 
nowadays represent ``the real publishing of music.'' ``For most composers, 
paper publication is almost meaningless, except in terms of rentals 
of parts,'' Schuller said. ``To publish a string quartet, for example, 
is the most ridiculous thing in the world. To the few players that 
will want to perform it, a composer winds up giving copies away. Recordings 
offer some way to disseminate this stuff.'' Good theory, perhaps, 
but how do these scrappy, idealistic operations stay solvent? Not 
easily, said Kermani. Although Albany has accumulated more than 300 
recordings in just over 10 years, its staff is lean: four full-time 
employees with occasional part-time help. Albany also runs a distribution 
service for small labels, which brings in additional income. But sales 
of records are actually the primary source of revenue, and some of 
them do surprisingly well. A recording of works by Peter Mennin, who 
died in 1983 _ the Fifth and Sixth Symphonies and the Fantasia for 
Strings, performed by the Albany Symphony Orchestra _ has sold more 
than 2,000 copies. Another Albany Symphony disk _ works by Morton 
Gould, who died in 1996, including ``String Music,'' which won a Pulitzer 
Prize in 1995 _ has sold more than 3,000 copies. Numbers like this 
are exceptional, Kermani said, but sales of 1,000 are not unusual. 
He believes strongly in two recent disks: a program of songs by Henry 
Cowell (``nobody knows this music,'' he said, ``but it's extraordinary''), 
and a program of choral music by Ned Rorem, ``Sing My Soul,'' performed 
by Concora. ``The Rorem disk is a beauty,'' Kermani said. ``But even 
with Rorem's drawing power, a record of recent choral music will be 
lucky to sell 200 copies.'' If that is so, listeners will miss something, 
because the music is elegant and fresh, and the performances are sensitive. 
Some composers come to Kermani with projects partially financed, whether 
by a foundation or by a university at which the composer teaches. 
For example, James Yannatos, who directs the Harvard-Radcliffe Orchestra, 
submitted a master tape of his Symphony No. 4 and Piano Concerto from 
a concert he had conducted. ``The music was excellent, and the recording 
was beautiful,'' Kermani said. ``So we released it happily.'' Outside 
sources of financing sometimes also help Schuller at GM. But for the 
first 15 years, he said, he subsidized the company annually with some 
$30,000 to $50,000 of his own money. The company is driven by his 
conviction that composers have more to gain by cooperating with one 
another than by competing. The story of his championing of Milton 
Babbitt's ``Transfigured Notes,'' a 25-minute work for string orchestra, 
manifests the intensity of his own commitment. ``Transfigured Notes,'' 
which Schuller describes as ``horrendously difficult,'' was commissioned 
in the mid-1980s by the Philadelphia Orchestra and scheduled for a 
premiere under the baton of Erich Leinsdorf, who reluctantly withdrew 
after examining the score. The new-music specialist Dennis Russell 
Davies was brought in, but he abandoned the work after only 45 minutes 
of one rehearsal. Then the Dutch conductor Hans Vonk took it up and 
rehearsed it vigorously before declaring it ``unplayable at the standard 
of excellence audiences are entitled to demand of a professional ensemble.'' 
Babbitt recently spoke of the affair: ``Several of the players from 
the orchestra came to me very upset about the whole matter. They felt 
that they indeed could play the piece in good time.'' But time was 
the problem. Like most major American orchestras, the Philadelphia 
operates in the weekly subscription-series format, which makes it 
difficult to devote an exceptionally large amount of rehearsal time 
to any one work. Determined to make a point to the symphony orchestra 
establishment as well as to help an important colleague, Schuller 
gave the work's premiere with a select group of 43 freelance players 
in 1991 at Jordan Hall in Boston. The difficulties of the piece, though 
substantial, are not insurmountable. Schuller likens it to a ``gigantic, 
multilayered, collective improvisation,'' comprising restless, nonrepetitive, 
overlapping lines. In its shimmering surface colors and slow but inexorable 
gait, the music recalls the mood of the seminal work that inspired 
it, Schoenberg's ``Transfigured Night.'' Schuller scheduled 12 rehearsals, 
financed the concerts himself and wound up losing $42,000. But the 
piece was finally given brief life, and more: a recording drawn from 
those first performances has now been released on a disk with Schoenberg's 
``Transfigured Night'' and Stravinsky's Concerto in D. ``I have no 
problem admitting that the performance of the Babbitt is not flawless,'' 
Schuller said. ``It starts off wonderfully, but one can hear, about 
halfway through, the sort of mental and digital energies of the players 
draining away. Still, I felt the performance was presentable.'' It 
is more than that: despite its complexity, the music has a haunting 
surface beauty, which comes through in the performance. And as a gesture 
of principle, the recording is a triumph. Bridge is another label 
founded by a composer, David Starobin, who is also a classical guitarist. 
His wife, Becky Starobin, the company's managing director, calls the 
company, now in its 23rd year, ``our third child.'' And parental care 
has nurtured it. Typically, the budget is supplemented by grants and 
foundations. Costs of projects have ranged from a few thousand dollars 
to $66,000 for a recording of choral works by Elliott Carter, and 
what has resulted is a catalogue of distinction. Significant releases 
include a four-disk recording of Morton Feldman's ``For Philip Guston,'' 
a vast 1984 homage to the American painter, performed by the California 
EAR Unit; recordings of music by Paul Lansky; the Piano Concerto and 
Violin Concerto of Richard Wernick, and a fine new rendition of John 
Cage's Sonatas and Interludes for Prepared Piano, performed by Aleck 
Karis. The story of New World is significantly different. Other new-music 
labels may feel like charities, but New World, in a sense, (italics)is(end 
italics) one, complete with a nonprofit tax status. The company, headed 
by Herman Krawitz, was founded by the Rockefeller Foundation in 1976 
as a special project for the American bicentennial. The stated mission 
was to release a 100-disk anthology of Americana, encompassing not 
just concert music and opera but also folk and ethnic music, early 
20th-century popular songs and historic recordings. The anthology 
was given free to some 7,000 educational institutions around the world; 
2,000 more sets were sold at cost to like institutions. By 1978, Krawitz 
had decided to keep the company going as an independent label. Since 
then, financing has come from private and government foundations (especially 
a program of the National Endowment for the Arts that supports first 
recordings of American music). But more than 60 percent of expenses 
are met by record sales, this despite the fact that the commercial 
appeal of a project is never a factor in deciding to undertake it, 
according to Paul M. Tai, the marketing director. ``Our mandate has 
always been American music, particularly overlooked music, and contemporary 
works are a major component of that,'' Tai said. ``This music by nature 
is not going to be successful in the marketplace. We know that.'' 
The New World catalogue now offers more than 300 recordings, and it 
increases by about two disks per month. It is an ``absolutely fundamental 
tenet'' that New World records never go out of print, Tai said. ``We 
only work with distributors who respect that.'' Many a major label 
would envy the critical success New World has enjoyed. Over the years, 
17 titles have been nominated for Grammy awards, and 3 have won: Samuel 
Barber's opera ``Antony and Cleopatra'' in 1984; Leonard Bernstein's 
``Candide'' (the 1985 opera house version) in 1986, and a program 
of Rorem orchestral music (the String Symphony, ``Sunday Morning'' 
and ``Eagles'') in 1989. Although these small labels champion the 
new, they occasionally dip into the past. Bridge, for example, is 
issuing a series of historic recordings from the Library of Congress, 
including performances from the 1940s by the Budapest String Quartet. 
On the other hand, major labels, to their credit, continue to release 
significant recordings of works by living composers. Some large companies 
even support subsidiary labels specifically geared toward contemporary 
music. But whatever the merits of such ventures, they tend to result 
in prestige releases, which represent no significant risk for the 
major companies, and risk is the daily fare of every small label that 
champions new music. ``Sometimes I think I am very heroic,'' Schuller 
said. ``Other times I think I am totally foolish.'' Kermani, at Albany, 
knows the feeling. Yet he believes to his core that his work is essential, 
and, despite money woes, even enjoyable. ``In our own little niche,'' 
he said, ``we are having a good time.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>