<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981223.0294 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
My mother grew up in a place where it was safe to be out after dark. 
Every inch of her neighborhood was familiar, from her front porch 
all the way down the hill to the railroad tracks, where she met the 
late train that dropped off her uncles after their conductors' shifts 
ended. Nearly 50 years later, in 1992, when I arrived in eastern Kentucky 
to help bury my grandmother, there were still no strangers in town. 
Something about my face was instantly familiar; the local funeral 
director greeted me by announcing, ``When I was a boy, I once saw 
your granny's brother, Red Mynhier, wrestle a full-grown hog to the 
ground.'' Apparently my long-dead relative had the biggest hands anybody 
could remember seeing in Floyd County, a story my own daughters hear 
often. This is part of my campaign to instill in them, three generations 
later, a similar sense of small-town security. Despite the absence 
of hog wrestling in the Long Island suburb where we live, for years 
I was smug enough to think I could succeed. But the other day, my 
daughters shattered my illusions. It started innocently at brunch 
at the home of a friend whose 9-year-old daughter has a computer and 
a modem _ in her bedroom. My two older daughters went to investigate. 
Soon they experienced e-mail: they watched in awe as their friend 
Maddy exchanged instant messages on America Online with a . . . boy! 
He was from her old school, they later reported. ``I need to be on 
America Online,'' Zoe, 9, said later. That prompted Ella, 7, to invoke 
subsection 11(d) of the Me Too clause in her Little Sister Contract: 
``If Zoe gets one, I get one.'' Together: ``Pleeeeease?'' ``When you're 
20,'' I said. I would have preferred that they take up hog wrestling. 
This was one of those unpleasant moments when two contradictory parental 
impulses collide. On one hand, I wanted them to test the limits of 
their world as freely as my mother had explored hers. On the other 
hand, I did not want them roaming around in a community with 14 million 
neighbors. The reason is this: on America Online, I feel assaulted 
by unsavory strangers. On the Internet at large, I have never accidentally 
stumbled across pornographic sites. But in the three months since 
I opened an AOL account, I have received dozens of unpleasant, unsolicited 
e-mail messages, creating the impression that there is a kook behind 
every corner. Although my AOL address is one of four I use, it receives 
almost all of my spam. On Nov. 25, for instance, someone sent e-mail 
exhorting me to ``Come See My Dirty Pics!!'' No less annoying was 
a missive on Dec. 3 (subject: Ear Cleaning Procedure!'') or another 
on Dec. 12 (``Red Hot Fun''). It's odd that so much spam pollutes 
America Online, considering that the service has taken great pains 
to promote its family-oriented atmosphere with such features as a 
newly redesigned Kids' Only Channel. Certainly, other aspects of the 
service, like the easy-to-use interface that enables even a child 
to navigate smoothly, have attracted millions of family users; 43 
percent of AOL's customers have children. When I brought this up to 
AOL's officials last week, Tricia Primrose, a company spokeswoman, 
reminded me that AOL aggressively tracked spammers, suing them and 
blocking their e-mail addresses. To protect children, AOL has parental 
control features that allow account holders to set up customized log-ins 
that block access to things like e-mail, instant messages, the Internet 
and chat rooms. But the parental controls remind me of another quandary. 
I want to protect my children. But I worry that instead of instilling 
a sense of the majestic sweep of information available on line, these 
sorts of accounts limit the sense of possibility, blocking children 
from the very things that make online communication so exciting. I 
phoned America Online's vice president for programming, Katherine 
Borsecnik, for advice. ``There's nothing wrong with limiting their 
behavior, either on line or off line,'' she said. ``Just as you want 
to learn the names of all their friends off line, just as you want 
to know who is sending them real mail, you want the same kind of information 
when they go on line. So you start by limiting them to exchanging 
e-mail with people you know. Kids earn your trust over time.'' The 
next afternoon, I created screen names for the girls, stringently 
limiting my 7-year-old's access. For my older daughter, I customized 
the log-in so she could exchange instant messages with her friend 
Maddy. It took Zoe about 10 seconds to figure out how to click on 
the AOL icon to log in using her screen name. It took her 5 more seconds 
to figure out how to click on the Write icon to compose e-mail. It 
took about five minutes to hunt and peck the following: ``Hi Dad this 
is Zoe school was fine. Will you be late? Love, Zoe.'' Intuitively, 
she clicked on the Send Now icon. I was happy to see that she was 
bored and wanted to log off. For now, she viewed AOL merely as a substitute 
for licking a stamp and addressing an envelope, not as the sort of 
full-fledged community where champion hog wrestlers were revered. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>