<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981223.0406 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Concerned that sentiment in the Senate is running toward censure and 
against a full impeachment trial, conservative Republicans in both 
houses said on Wednesday that they want to hear a thorough airing 
of the evidence and arguments from the prosecutors and President Clinton. 
With many senators searching for ways to end the impeachment process 
quickly, Rep. Tom DeLay, the majority whip who was the driving force 
for impeachment in the House, said it would be wrong for the Senate 
to ``short-circuit the process'' through a quick censure vote. He 
urged senators to review the ``reams of evidence that have not been 
publicly aired.'' ``Before people look to cut a deal with the White 
House or their surrogates who will seek to influence the process, 
it is my hope that one would spend plenty of time in the evidence 
room,'' DeLay said in a statement. ``If this were to happen, you may 
realize that 67 votes may appear out of thin air.'' DeLay's staff 
said later that the Texas congressman was simply urging the senators 
to study all the evidence closely, and was not referring to anything 
in particular. Last week, as the impeachment vote was approaching, 
about a dozen wavering House Republicans were invited into a sealed 
room where they reviewed a number of documents. Those papers, first 
placed under seal by the independent counsel, Kenneth Starr, and then 
made available to House members, include a hearsay accusation that 
Clinton had forced himself on a woman about 20 years ago. The president's 
lawyers released an affidavit from the woman early this year flatly 
denying that such an incident took place. DeLay's statement about 
a full trial was echoed in large part by several conservative Republican 
senators on Wednesday, who said they want a thorough trial in the 
Senate followed by a vote on whether Clinton is guilty of one or both 
articles of impeachment approved by the House. Those articles charged 
that the president lied under oath and obstructed justice. ``For us 
to make a decision prior to considering all the evidence in a formal 
setting would be a dangerous precedent,'' said Sen. Rick Santorum, 
R-Pa. ``We must commence the trial and consider the evidence. We can 
begin by considering the evidence presented by the House. We could 
end a trial at that point. But we need to exonerate this president 
or convict this president.'' Referring to talk about a quick resolution 
of the impeachment process, Sen. Gordon Smith, R-Ore., said, ``I've 
just been alarmed that since Sunday so many of my colleagues think 
this band wagon is gaining speed. Well, nobody called me.'' Senate 
Democrats continued to insist on Wednesday that there were not enough 
votes in the Senate to convict the president and that there was strong, 
bipartisan sentiment to find a way to open a trial but then wrap it 
up quickly, through a swift vote to dismiss the charges, to acquit 
the president or to censure him. ``I think there's a real desire to 
move in a bipartisan way and with more dispatch than was done in the 
House,'' said Sen.-elect Charles Schumer, D-N.Y., who voted against 
impeachment in the House and plans to vote against conviction in the 
Senate. In an effort to bring about a quick conclusion of the process, 
Tom Daschle of South Dakota, the Senate minority leader, has been 
serving as an unofficial liaison between the White House and Senate 
Majority Leader Trent Lott in discussions over the shape of a trial 
and the possibility of censure, according to several senators. Lott 
is on vacation in his home state of Mississippi and was not available 
for comment on Wednesday. But his spokesman, John Cwartacki, said 
Lott has said that he would oppose ``any effort to short-circuit'' 
the impeachment process, and thinks that a trial must at least begin 
in the Senate. One Democratic senator criticized DeLay following his 
statement on Wednesday, asserting that he should not be trying to 
influence the Senate. Sen. Robert G. Torricelli of New Jersey said 
that efforts by House Republicans to meddle in the Senate ``will be 
resisted and resented and not just by Democrats. They can present 
their case when called upon on the Senate floor but otherwise their 
involvement in the process is over.'' A House panel will present the 
case for impeachment on two charges, perjury and obstruction of justice, 
to the 100 senators, who will serve as jurors. Abbe Lowell, the chief 
investigative counsel for the Democrats on the House Judiciary Committee, 
said of DeLay's remarks: ``The notion that there is any evidence in 
the secure room that if read in its entirety would add anything to 
the debate is not true.'' The allegation that Clinton sexually assaulted 
a woman about 20 years ago came up in the Paula Jones sexual harassment 
trial. Earlier this year, the president's lawyer, Robert Bennett, 
released a signed affidavit in which the woman, known as ``Jane Doe 
No. 5,'' flatly dismissed the accusations, which were originally made 
by acquaintances of the woman, as untrue. But Republican investigators 
from the Judiciary Committee went back and did their own interviews 
in the case, and some of that information has been available to House 
members. Lowell added, ``When I last checked, Mr. DeLay was the majority 
whip of the House and I hadn't realized that somewhere between last 
Saturday and today he had become involved in the leadership in the 
Senate.'' A spokesman for DeLay said he was not trying to direct senators 
to particular documents. ``It just meant, `Take your time and listen 
to the evidence,' '' said Michael Scanlon, a spokesman for DeLay. 
``What we're saying is there's a lot of evidence there and we didn't 
pass these articles of impeachment on a whim.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>