<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981223.0310 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
``So what kind of friendship is this?'' pleads Eddie (Sean Penn) to 
his suave housemate, Mickey (Kevin Spacey), in David Rabe's pitch-black 
comedy ``Hurlyburly.'' ``Adequate,'' Mickey replies with a shrug. 
No, there's hardly any nurture in the friendships shown in the teeth-grinding 
Hollywood shark tank of ``Hurlyburly.'' In evoking the casual cruelty 
of contemporary life in a certain time and place, this screen adaptation 
of David Rabe's play is a misanthropic triumph. The film, which takes 
place ``a little while ago,'' is set in a movie-industry milieu that 
feels like the 1980s, when the play was first produced and when cocaine 
was still conspicuously fashionable in Hollywood. In this toxic social 
climate, friendships are duplicitous power games and male-female encounters 
ugly skirmishes in a never-ending series of battles. The main characters 
in this bilious study of macho camaraderie, sexual exploitation and 
substance abuse are Eddie, a casting director coming apart from drugs 
and alcohol, and his cool, sarcastic business partner and roommate, 
Mickey. These two party animals share a sleek mirror-and-glass-filled 
condominium in the Hollywood Hills. As the movie begins on a morning 
of runny noses and hacking coughs, the only breakfast food in the 
refrigerator turns out to be a package of moldy Snowballs. Penn's 
Eddie is a whiny, hysterical motor-mouth, a sort of improvisatory 
philosopher of doom whose unstrung rants are inspired by television 
images gleaned from his compulsive channel-surfing. Blond and reptilian, 
Spacey's Mickey gazes at the world through hooded eyes, his mouth 
curled in a supercilious sneer. What kind of friendship do they have? 
On this particular morning, the atmosphere is sharpened by Eddie's 
certainty that his sometime girlfriend, Darlene (Robin Wright Penn), 
has just slept with Mickey. As the friends argue by car phone, Mickey 
calmly reminds Eddie that he gave him tacit permission to sleep with 
Darlene when he announced that ``everybody's free.'' Dropping by the 
house to snort cocaine, smoke dope and swap nasty sexual war stories 
are Artie (Garry Shandling), a beady-eyed Hollywood bigwig, and Phil 
(Chazz Palminteri), a thuggish would-be actor with ``three kids in 
Toledo I haven't seen since I went to prison.'' One afternoon Artie 
brings his buddies a sexual ``care package'' in the person of Donna 
(Anna Paquin), a brash, itinerant teen-ager he met in an elevator. 
Phil, a human pit bull who idolizes Eddie, is desperate to save his 
unraveling marriage to a wife he has been beating up. Should he stop 
taking pills to reduce his sperm count and give her the baby she craves? 
In the movie's chilliest moment, after that child has arrived, Artie 
picks up the baby girl and marvels at the fact that ``this sweet little 
thing, this innocent little thing, guys, this is a broad of the future.'' 
That tender moment arrives long after Eddie has fixed up Phil on a 
disastrous blind date with Bonnie (Meg Ryan), a stripper, single mother 
and self-described ``drug person'' who in another of the movie's nastier 
moments is recalled having had sex in the back seat of a car while 
her traumatized 6-year-old daughter looked on. As directed by Anthony 
Drazen, ``Hurlyburly'' has been opened up somewhat. (A crucial act 
of violence not shown in the play is portrayed in the movie.) The 
film nevertheless still captures the play's claustrophobic sense of 
being trapped in a smoke-filled room with people who might explode 
at any second. The film's close-up photography magnifies every reddened 
eyelid and plume of cigarette smoke. After a while the images of dissipated 
faces and the rhythm of the characters' aimless, ugly, hard-boiled 
banter settles into a woozy, sodden tango of word and image. These 
are people most of us would rather not be in the same room with, but 
the movie shoves them in our faces. The ensemble acting surpasses 
that of any other film this year. Penn, his face swollen and crumpling, 
his voice rising in childish hysteria, burrows so deeply into Eddie 
that he almost vomits his character onto the screen. Spacey's cobralike 
Mickey is as slippery and cool as Penn's Eddie is volatile, while 
Shandling's Artie is the loathsome distillation of a particularly 
repulsive kind of sleaze: think Larry Sanders without charm or scruples. 
Palminteri, in a heaving, tragic performance that matches Harvey Keitel's 
stage original, finds the vestige of a soul under the leathery skin 
of a stupid, compulsively violent thug with delusions of talent. ``Hurlyburly'' 
has been called sexist because of its female characters' slatternly 
eagerness to gratify these misogynists. Yet each of the film's three 
women is capable of standing up for herself. Ms. Wright brings a defensive 
sang-froid to Darlene, whose dispassionate attitude toward sex drives 
Eddie into a frenzy. (In a ghastly comic set piece, her refusal to 
choose between a French and a Chinese restaurant sets him off.) Ms. 
Ryan, muting her customary perkiness, finds a core of pugnacious resilience 
under Bonnie's bleary-eyed dishevelment. Ms. Paquin's Donna (the least 
credible of the three women) also has a prickly edge of defiance. 
As it traces Eddie's downward spiral, ``Hurlyburly'' touches on many 
themes. But above all, it is a contemplation of male friendship and 
power that proposes the existence of an immutable pecking order. As 
Mickey is to Eddie (superior, condescending, and betraying), so Eddie 
is to Phil. Or as Mickey coldly assures Eddie, ``Phil is very safe, 
because no matter how far you manage to fall, Phil will be lower.'' 
In this bleak vision of male bonding, the quest for dominance (or 
if not dominance, approval from above) is so all-consuming that women 
are little more than trophies and bargaining chips. The war between 
men and women, the movie proposes, is only an offshoot of a larger 
and more deadly war: the one waged by men against themselves. PRODUCTION 
NOTES: `HURLYBURLY' Directed by Anthony Drazen; written by David Rabe, 
based on his play; director of photography, Changwei Gu; edited by 
Dylan Tichenor; music by David Baerwald and Steve Lindsey; production 
designer, Michael Haller; produced by Mr. Drazen, Richard N. Gladstein 
and David S. Hamburger; released by Fine Line Features. Running time: 
122 minutes. This film is rated R. With: Sean Penn (Eddie), Kevin 
Spacey (Mickey), Robin Wright Penn (Darlene), Chazz Palminteri (Phil), 
Garry Shandling (Artie), Anna Paquin (Donna) and Meg Ryan (Bonnie). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>