<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981223.0399 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Pacificare Health Systems seems insulated from the problems of the 
rest of the managed-care industry. While the majority of HMOs are 
losing money covering the elderly under Medicare, Pacificare, the 
nation's largest Medicare HMO, is solidly profitable. The company 
is even telling Wall Street analysts that it should be able to increase 
its earnings by about 25 percent in 1999. And while managed-care stocks 
are down by an average of 7 percent so far this year, Pacificare's 
nonvoting class B shares are up an impressive 49 percent. The shares 
closed Wednesday at $77.9375 each, down 6.25 cents. But some analysts 
and investors are not convinced that Pacificare is quite as exceptional 
as it may appear. Some say that the company's impressive performance 
is a result in part of how it is accounting for its future medical 
costs, which has resulted in higher earnings. Others believe that 
it is only a matter of time before the harsh economics facing HMOs 
that serve the Medicare population _ whose medical costs are rising 
faster than premiums _ catch up with the company. Kevin Holt, an analyst 
with the Strong Opportunity and Common Stock funds, has been avoiding 
Medicare HMOs and has been trying to find HMOs with less exposure 
to the market. While Pacificare has been able to control its costs 
better than many competitors, the overall environment ``makes me pretty 
nervous,'' he said. Others have similar worries. ``Pacificare is likely 
to disappoint investors severely in 1999,'' warned Anne Anderson, 
an analyst with the Atlantis Investment Company in Parsippany, N.J., 
who is widely credited with predicting the downfall of another HMO, 
Oxford Health Plans. She is shorting the stock, or betting that the 
shares will fall in price. Pacificare is not without its defenders, 
of course. The company has recovered nicely from the trouble it had 
in digesting its acquisition of FHP International, when it found itself 
with some unprofitable business. Its stock has also bounced back from 
its lows of early 1997, although it is still trading below its July 
high of $93.25. Pacificare, based in Santa Ana, Calif., also enjoys 
some important advantages. The bulk of its members are in California, 
where doctors are used to operating under managed care, as the state 
has been a pioneer in the field. The company's contracts largely protect 
it from rising costs because many of its doctors have agreed to provide 
whatever care is necessary for a fixed sum. The company says that 
about 80 percent of its Medicare costs are controlled through these 
so-called capitated arrangements. Pacificare has ``off-loaded the 
risk to multispecialty groups and other types of providers,'' said 
Joseph Martingale, a consultant with Towers Perrin in New York. But 
at least some of Pacificare's recent success seems to be a result 
of changes in the way the company is accounting for future medical 
costs. Its reserves _ the money it puts aside to cover medical claims 
and benefits _ have not kept up with the growth of its premiums, according 
to a report by the Center for Financial Research and Analysis Inc., 
a Rockville, Md., group that scrutinizes accounting for investors. 
As a percentage of its quarterly premium revenue, Pacificare's medical 
reserves had declined to 27.9 percent at the end of September from 
30.5 percent at the end of 1997. The lower reserves may have resulted 
in ``an artificial boost to reported earnings,'' according to the 
center. Had Pacificare kept the amount of its reserves constant as 
a percentage of its premiums, medical costs would have increased by 
about $62 million for the first nine months of the year, the center 
calculated, and its net income over that period would have been reduced 
by about $32 million. Earnings would have been $2.41 a share, compared 
with the $3.12 a share that Pacificare reported. Many of Pacificare's 
competitors, including Humana, Wellpoint Health Networks and Foundation 
Health Systems, are reserving a much higher portion of their premium 
dollar, according to the center. Foundation Health, for example, has 
38.6 percent of its premium revenue in reserves, and Humana has 60.6 
percent. Pacificare's relatively low level of reserves ``could leave 
the company vulnerable to the potential depletion of its reserve and 
a possible charge to earnings in the event of higher-than-anticipated 
future claims,'' the center said. Alan Hoops, Pacificare's chairman 
and chief executive, said that Pacificare was able to lower the amount 
it was putting into reserve because it had sharply reduced its claims 
backlog. Its contracts also allow it to reserve less than its competitors. 
``As compared with many other companies, we are not as exposed to 
claims liability,'' he said. But even if Pacificare's success has 
entirely been the product of its own abilities, the future looks uncertain. 
The company may not be able to lower its reserves as a percentage 
of its premiums in future years, and the Medicare market is proving 
extraordinarily difficult for any HMO to make money. ``We are asking 
health plans to operate with too little money,'' said Kirby Bosley, 
a principal with the consulting firm of William Mercer in Los Angeles. 
The government is expected to pay HMOs about 2 percent more next year, 
but health care costs are expected to climb 6 to 8 percent. The costs 
of prescription drugs are expected to rise even faster, anywhere from 
12 to 15 percent, she said. Doctors, who have been pushed to accept 
less to deliver care and assume more of the risk of unexpected spikes 
in medical costs, may not be willing _ or able _ to provide care under 
these terms. Pacificare plans to offer them about half the premium 
increase it will get in 1999 _ an increase of less than 1 percent. 
Doctors ``are hurting already with what they are being paid,'' Ms. 
Bosley said. And if some medical groups fail, Pacificare may be affected. 
When FPA Medical Management, a company that bought and managed physician 
practices, filed for bankruptcy protection earlier this year, Pacificare 
had to ante up $35 million to cover possible unpaid claims by FPA 
and other insolvent providers. But Hoops of Pacificare contends that 
FPA was an exception and that the vast majority of medical groups 
are financially sound. To be sure, the government could end up paying 
these plans more for their coverage than it indicated it would. But 
predicting what will happen in Washington is not easy. Dealing with 
the government also represents another risk. According to the Center 
for Financial Research and Analysis, the mass defection of HMOs from 
the Medicare market could prompt the Office of Inspector General of 
the Health Care Financing Administration to take a look into how HMOs, 
``particularly those with relatively large Medicare concentrations,'' 
are determining the benefits they offer and designing their plans. 
Pacificare said it believed it was in full compliance with any federal 
rules. No matter what happens, Pacificare could have a hard time achieving 
its ambitious profit goals next year. The company says it can get 
the bulk of its higher earnings through its commercial business, where 
it has been increasing its rates. But a third of the costs it incurs 
covering employees is not controlled through its capitated arrangements. 
And Pacificare is still counting on some improvement in profitability 
in its Medicare business by increasing membership and lowering overhead 
expenses. And its Medicare business still accounts for more than half 
of its revenue. Pacificare is also counting on increasing its overall 
membership by about 5 percent ``in our existing markets,'' according 
to Hoops, despite the membership declines the company expects to report 
for 1998. Pacificare may prove the skeptics wrong. But it will not 
be easy. Even Hoops concedes that if the government continues to refuse 
to increase its payments in line with rising medical and drug costs, 
the company may be forced either to cut its benefits or raise its 
prices. ``We can't make it,'' he said, ``and neither can the physicians.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>