<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981223.0372 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With the brief distant fury of battle passed, the American troops 
at Prince Sultan Air Base in Saudi Arabia gathered in the early morning 
hours Wednesday for a post-Desert Fox, pre-Christmas celebration, 
anticipating praise from the defense secretary and music by Carole 
King, Mary Chapin Carpenter and David Ball. Only there was no concert, 
no raucous USO roadshow to cheer the troops as they prepared to spend 
yet another holiday in the desert, trying to keep down President Saddam 
Hussein of Iraq. At the last minute the American Embassy pulled the 
plug, fearing that a show could offend the sensibilities of the Saudi 
hosts during the holy Islamic month of Ramadan. Defense Secretary 
William Cohen still managed to rouse lusty cheers when he reannounced 
the Pentagon plan to increase military pay and pensions. And Ms. King 
sang an a cappella version of ``You've Got a Friend.'' But it was 
hard to hide the disappointment. ``It seems a shame to bring all this 
equipment all this way and not play,'' a member of the traveling party 
grumbled as Cohen and the United Services Organization entourage boarded 
a C-17 jet bound for its next stop on a whirlwind holiday tour with 
the troops. If there was ever a paradox that captured the complexities 
of the American military presence in the Persian Gulf, it is that 
the United States could continue bombing after the dawn-to-dusk fasts 
of Ramadan began on Friday night but feel uncomfortable allowing a 
Christmas concert to thank the troops in Saudi Arabia, one of its 
closest allies. ``It would be like bringing the circus to Jerusalem 
during Yom Kippur,'' a Pentagon spokesman, Kenneth H. Bacon, said 
by way of explaining the unease that Saudi rulers feel not only toward 
perceived insensitivity to Ramadan, but also to overt displays of 
Christianity, like Christmas trees. The Clinton administration has 
portrayed the four nights of strikes against Iraq as a success that 
has badly weakened Saddam's military. But the attack, by far the largest 
campaign that President Clinton has ordered, has done little to change 
the prospect that American forces will have to remain in Saudi Arabia 
and in other gulf outposts for the foreseeable future. In fact, with 
the strikes' sounding the apparent end to the United Nations weapons 
inspections in Iraq, the United States will have to rely more than 
ever on the threat of force to check Saddam, even as the ambivalence 
about the American presence deepens. ``I don't think we should have 
fixed permanent bases out here,'' said Marines Corp Gen. Anthony Zinni, 
commander of American forces in the region, who led the Iraq strikes. 
``I think that sends the wrong message. Our presence here is temporary.'' 
But then he added, ``I think for a long time we'll have forces here.'' 
With each passing year the amenities for the troops improve. The 4,000 
Americans at Prince Sultan are slowly moving from tents to permanent 
housing put up by the Saudis. All the bases now have American fast-food 
restaurants, cable television and e-mail. Airman Chiffon Goss, 18, 
who oversees the local workers in the mess hall at Prince Sultan, 
said she first heard that the air and missile strikes had begun Thursday 
morning, Saudi time, when an e-mail arrived from her mother, who was 
watching CNN in Texas. In the holiday season many bend the strict 
prohibitions that the Saudis impose. Deep in the communications tent, 
a furtive four-foot Christmas tree twinkled on a table. ``We try our 
best,'' Staff Sgt. Ricardo Aponte said. But the rolling waves of deployments 
_ where one squadron or brigade or ship replaces other, over and over 
_ have strained morale, training and readiness. Many troops interviewed 
here were on their second, third or fourth tours since the Gulf War 
ended in 1991. Zinni said the record was 10. For most of the troops, 
the attack on Iraq proved a short-lived, though eminently satisfying 
distraction from the day-to-day routine of launching aircraft to patrol 
the ``no flight'' zone that was established over southern Iraq in 
1992. ``It wasn't your everyday get-up-and-launch-the-planes-for-no-reason 
kind of day,'' Chief Petty Officer Russ Celia, 37, of Whitbey Island, 
Wash., said in an interview Wednesday aboard his ship, the aircraft 
carrier Enterprise. It was, he said, was his fourth tour in the gulf. 
The Enterprise, the nation's first nuclear carrier, played a large 
role in the attack, with its F-18's, F-14's and EA-6B's conducting 
about half of the 250 combat missions flown by American or British 
forces. Commander Michael Shoemaker, a pilot of an F-18 who flew into 
Iraq each of the four nights, did not believe at first that they were 
actually going into battle, recalling the last-minute order to abort 
an attack in November. ``I kept thinking they'd call it off,'' he 
said. Shoemaker, 38, who has flown for the Navy for 16 years but never 
before in combat, said the attacks by his squadron, the Gunslingers, 
had been successful, despite antiaircraft fire that intensified as 
they neared Baghdad, but he said it would take time to assess the 
long-term damage. ``We spool it up each time Saddam acts up,'' he 
said. ``Most of the guys around here say enough is enough.'' For Cohen, 
Zinni and the USO, the spirit of the tour picked up considerably aboard 
the Enterprise _ ``four and a half acres of sovereign U.S. territory,'' 
the Navy likes to say _ and even more so Wednesday night at a visit 
to Army and Marine troops at Camp Doha, near the Kuwaiti capital, 
where there was no qualms about allowing the concert. The Enterprise 
is leaving the gulf, as soon as Christmas Eve, replaced by the Carl 
Vinson, which arrived in time to take part in the fourth day of strikes. 
The concert, finally unbound, included the improbable scenes of the 
secretary of defense ``doing the Locomotion'' and Ms. King leading 
the battled-tested crew assembled on the Enterprise's deck in a sing-a-long 
of one of her best-known songs, ``(You Make Me Feel Like) A Natural 
Woman.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>