<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981223.0201 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Asian board game of Go was the game of the samurai. Among noble 
accomplishments for Chinese gentlemen, Go ranked with calligraphy, 
poetry and music. For centuries, Go has been used as a tool to teach 
military strategy. It is the game from which Japanese businessmen 
draw metaphors. Now Go is on the Internet, and the ancient game's 
relatively sudden encounter with modernity has produced a microcosm 
of the tension that exists between virtual worlds and the real one. 
Go players can now log onto a computer and play 24 hours a day. The 
advent of online Go has erased barriers of language and distance, 
while lifting the game from obscurity in the United States. At the 
same time, the online version of the game comes at the expense of 
many traditions surrounding its play. In this country, some local 
Go clubs, the lifeblood of the Go-playing world, are suffering a decline 
in membership as more people play from their homes via computer. Go 
originated in China sometime around 2300 B.C. and was later adopted 
by Korea and Japan. The game is played on a board divided into a grid 
by 19 horizontal and 19 vertical lines. Black and white pieces called 
stones are placed on the intersections of the grid. The object is 
to win and defend territory by surrounding it with stones. Go is an 
easy game to learn to play, but it is extremely difficult to master. 
``I can teach you the rules in 20 minutes, but the strategy will take 
a lifetime,'' said David Saunders, a lawyer in New York who is an 
avid player. Go is often compared with chess, another game of skill 
and strategy, but Go players are careful to distinguish between the 
two. They view chess as one big bloody skirmish, and Go as an endlessly 
complex process of negotiating for territory. In China, Japan and 
Korea, Go is a national pastime, and millions of people play. The 
United States, by comparison, has relatively few players. The American 
Go Association has just 1,300 members. The largest and most popular 
virtual venue for playing Go is the Internet Go Server, or IGS, where 
hundreds of people _ amateurs and professionals alike _ from around 
the world play some 4,500 games each day (igs.joyjoy.net). Now owned 
by NKB, a Japanese communications company, IGS was created in 1992 
by two American Go players, Tim Casey and Mark Okada. The IGS server 
is in Tokyo, and Casey and Okada do their administrative work from 
northern California. As Internet connections in Asia have grown more 
reliable, the popularity of IGS and other Go servers has soared. Usually 
at least 250 people are logged on to IGS at any one time. At night 
in the United States, as people in Asia are starting their day, the 
server really comes to life, with as many as 700 players logged on 
at once. Face-to-face games are surrounded by ritual. Before a game 
in Japan, the weaker player says, ``Dozo o ne gai itashi masu'' (``Please 
teach me''), to the stronger player, accompanied by a slight bow. 
By comparison, IGS has all the ambience and decorum of a singles bar. 
``Fast game, anyone?'' flashes onto the computer screen in ``shout'' 
mode, for all to see. Some non-English speakers simply send a computer-generated 
match request to another player. Banter, some of it related to Go 
and some of it not, is continuous. Face-to-face games can last for 
hours. Every game on IGS is timed, and many people who play on the 
server say their games last about 45 minutes. At a local Go club, 
when two professionals play, the handful of spectators are careful 
to remain quiet and discreet. If two well-known professionals are 
playing on IGS, there can be 500 people watching and typing their 
commentary, which is often very blunt, into a separate kibitzing channel. 
The players cannot see the comments. For all its intellectual rigor, 
Go is also very tactile, and its esthetics are carefully prescribed. 
The board, often made of a Japanese fir-like wood called katsura, 
is a source of pride to its owner, as are the stones, made of slate 
and clamshell. Before being played, each stone is held with practiced 
precision between the forefinger and middle finger, and it is placed 
on the board with an equally practiced, satisfying clap. All of that 
contributes to what players describe as the delight of the game. ``There's 
a lot of pleasure in having that big whap as you put the stone down 
feel just right,'' said Lloyd Gowen, a longtime player who is president 
of the San Francisco Go Club. As cyberspace eliminates these dimensions 
of the game, however, it adds others. Perhaps the biggest appeal of 
online Go is its convenience. ``You can play Go in your shorts at 
3 a.m., if that's your pleasure,'' said Saunders, who uses the screen 
name dsaun on IGS. Saunders is helping to start a scholarship for 
online lessons for those who cannot afford professional Go lessons. 
``You can find people your level or stronger or watch people of professional 
strength 24 hours a day,'' he said. ``It's a larger universe of players 
than any local Go club has.'' As a result, more players opt to play 
from home rather than drive to their local Go club. ``A lot of stronger 
players have stopped going to local clubs because it's difficult for 
them to get a good game,'' said Okada, a strong player himself whose 
IGS handle is simply tweet. ``A lot of them are playing on line because 
there's a stronger variety of players to play with.'' Phil Straus, 
47, the former president of the American Go Association, discovered 
IGS. in 1993. ``Suddenly I was able to play people at any strength 
I wanted 24 hours a day, 7 days a week,'' he said. Even with the arrival 
of a a new Go club within walking distance of his house, Straus said, 
he prefers to play on IGS. ``It's harder to get away than to find 
half an hour to play someone on IGS.,'' he said. He Jian, a 26-year-old 
player in Hangzhou, in eastern China, said he still played a three-hour 
face-to-face game with a friend every weekend but had grown addicted 
to playing on IGS. since he registered last July. He pays $30 a month 
for his Internet connection, one-fifth his monthly salary. Paul Celmer, 
34, a player who helped organize the Go club in Chapel Hill, N.C., 
laments the trend away from face-to-face play. ``It has hurt the intangibles, 
the romance of the game,'' he said. Further, Celmer said, local players 
no longer show up at area tournaments. Celmer recounted the lonely 
tale of Yoshiteru Suzuki, one of the strongest players in the area, 
who started a Go club there last year. ``There have been times when 
I have been the only person at his club,'' Celmer said. ``Here is 
a man willing to share his time and formidable skill, yet most do 
not want to be inconvenienced by the time it would take to drive to 
his club. This lack of interest would never have happened in the days 
before the Internet, I assure you. Suzuki's time and skill would have 
been as precious as gold.'' At the same time, online Go is helping 
to attract players who might not otherwise be interested. Susan Weir, 
an avid Go player and a strong proponent of the cognitive benefits 
of Go playing, teaches the game to fourth and fifth graders in public 
schools in Ann Arbor, Mich. On the first Friday of every month, Ms. 
Weir's students attend a ``cybercamp'' on IGS, where they play people 
from around the world. With the growing popularity of Go among young 
people, Ms. Weir and her husband have started a weeklong summer Go 
camp on the Michigan shore, the first of its kind in the United States. 
At the camp, only face-to-face games are played. On-line playing has 
introduced to the Go-playing world a new set of troubles, which may 
be intrinsic to online life but have stripped the game of much of 
its dignity. Cheaters _ players who consult books or have someone 
sitting in for them _ are one problem. So-called escapers _ people 
who vanish into cyberspace as soon as they start losing _ are another. 
To cope with the problem of escapers, the IGS administrators imposed 
a new rule: if an interrupted game is not completed within 30 days, 
the person who dropped out takes a loss. ``You see lots of shenanigans,'' 
Okada said. ``It's no different from other corners of cyberspace but 
still out of character for the Go-playing world.'' Whether on line 
or off, Go playing is likely to remain human to human for many years 
to come. Unlike chess, Go has yet to succumb to the computational 
muscle that helped Deep Blue, a chess-playing computer, beat the world's 
best chess player in 1997. An expert Go-playing computer program must 
be able not only to analyze moves but also to recognize complex patterns. 
Piet Hut, an astrophysicist at the Institute for Advanced Study in 
Princeton, N.J., and a fan of the game, said it could be several decades 
before a computer could beat an expert human player at Go. IGS isn't 
for everyone. For one thing, Internet connections are still expensive 
in some parts of Asia, especially China, where 20 to 30 people often 
share one IGS account. For elderly retirees in Japan, who are among 
Go's most avid players and have no trouble finding an opponent, the 
Internet is not just unwanted but unnecessary. For others, like Philip 
W. Anderson, a Nobel-prize-winning physicist at Princeton University, 
IGS is simply a bad fit. Anderson has played Go for 45 years and began 
playing on line four years ago. ``I find playing on the Net very frustrating 
because I don't visualize patterns well on the small screen,'' he 
said. ``And I think I play a couple of ranks below my true strength 
as judged by nonvirtual games.'' Thomas Hsiang, an engineering professor 
at the University of Rochester who is one of the strongest amateur 
players in this country, said IGS had improved his game, mostly because 
of the ease with which he can observe professionals' games and play 
against stronger players. But playing on the Net, he said, has also 
encouraged some bad habits. ``Internet games tend to be fast,'' Hsiang 
said. ``One major disadvantage is the tendency to play sloppily.'' 
Earlier this year, Hsiang represented the United States in the World 
Amateur Championship in Tokyo. Hsiang held his own quite well in the 
first seven rounds, he said. Winning his final game would have made 
him the third-ranked amateur in the world. But while he was leading 
by a wide margin, he made a careless mistake and lost. ``This can 
be attributed to my Net habit,'' Hsiang said. ``But, of course, if 
I had not been practicing on the Net, I would probably have never 
gotten that far.'' Players like Hsiang still show up at the big tournaments. 
At next year's annual Go Congress, to be held in San Francisco in 
July, as many as 400 people are expected to attend. ``People still 
get a charge out of face-to-face contact, conversations and direct, 
over-the-board competition,'' Straus said. ``That says to me that 
people have a craving for physical community.'' The Internet Go Server, 
or IGS, is the Jones Beach of virtual Go parlors. It's wall-to-wall 
players. At peak times, as many as 700 people can be logged on at 
once, some flexing their muscles, others just lounging around and 
taking in the scene. Still, it is relatively easy to carve out a spot 
for yourself. You can take an online lesson or watch one. You can 
observe a match between professional players or watch a replay of 
an old match. It is also very easy to find someone of your strength 
to play with. You can reach IGS with the telnet command. (Windows 
95, 98 and NT machines have telnet software already installed, but 
Macintosh computers do not.) Telnet software is also available on 
the Web. A variety of Windows telnet programs are listed at www.davecentral.com/telnetclnt.html, 
and Macintosh programs can be found at www.cstone.net/rbraun/mac/telnet 
and www.macatawa.org/mthomas/telnet.html. To play the game with a 
realistic picture of a Go board, download software from the IGS Web 
site (igs.joyjoy.net). Then, connect via telnet by typing in the host 
name igs.joyjoy.net 6969. IGS is free for all players outside Japan. 
Most players in Japan must pay $20 a month, or $2 per game. If you're 
looking for a less crowded spot than IGS for your Go match, there 
is Yahoo's gaming area, games.yahoo.com, which uses a Java-based applet 
for playing. Go is also available at Microsoft's MSN Gaming Zone, 
zone.msn.com. The Yahoo and Microsoft sites are not for serious Go 
players. Unlike IGS, they have no rating system, and there are no 
official tournaments. That's good for rank beginners, who might feel 
a bit intimidated by the IGS crowd. There are also several IGS lookalikes, 
accessible through telnet. One, called the No Name Go Server, or NNGS, 
is available by telnetting to nngs.cosmic.org 9696. It looks exactly 
like IGS, but far fewer players go there. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>