<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981223.0424 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The number of killings reported so far this year in New York City 
has fallen to 606, putting the city on a pace to end the year with 
fewer homicides than it had in 1964, when the Beatles played the Ed 
Sullivan show, the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge opened and a young woman 
named Kitty Genovese was killed in Queens. The huge drop in crime 
means that the city will log fewer than a third the number of homicides 
this year than it did in 1990, when a record 2,262 people were killed. 
Overall, the number of major crimes reported through Dec. 20 dropped 
11 percent from 1997, according to preliminary police figures. The 
biggest declines were in homicide, which dropped 19 percent from last 
year, and car thefts, which dropped 15 percent. Reported crime dropped 
in every borough, in the subways and in public housing. There were 
fewer reported robberies, assaults, burglaries, grand larcenies, car 
thefts and _ despite early indications that the drop in rapes was 
leveling off _ 11 percent fewer rapes. The reasons for the decline 
are varied: Experts point to the stronger economy, a drop in the number 
of people in their late teens and early 20s, the waning of the crack 
epidemic and an increase in the number of people behind bars. But 
a growing number of criminologists now also give credit to police 
assignments and strategies. Police Commissioner Howard Safir said 
that the plummeting crime rates vindicate the department's move away 
from the community-policing strategies of the early 1990s, which called 
for more neighborhood officers on the beat, toward a new strategy 
of using computer maps to chart crime and assigning officers to major 
anti-drug initiatives in all five boroughs. ``I'm not going to be 
bullied by community activists who say, `We want feel-good cops,' 
'' Safir said in an interview. ``The bottom line is crime reduction.'' 
Crime has been dropping across the nation for the last six years, 
but not as steeply as it has in New York City. In 1997, the last year 
for which national statistics are available, reports of major crimes 
dropped 2 percent nationwide but 9 percent in New York City. To some 
extent, criminologists say, the decline in New York City has contributed 
substantially to the nationwide statistical drop in crime. But while 
the city is on pace to log even fewer homicides this year than it 
did in 1964, when 636 people were reported killed _ among them Kitty 
Genovese, who was stabbed to death as 38 neighbors heard her screams 
and did nothing _ little else about the nature of crime in the city 
and the criminal justice system remains the same. In 1964, 27 percent 
of the city's homicide victims were killed by guns; in 1998, more 
than twice as many victims _ roughly 60 percent _ were killed by guns. 
After guns, the most common means of murder in 1998 were knives, blunt 
instruments, brute force and strangulation in that order, according 
to police statistics. It is difficult to compare how other crimes 
measure up to 1964 levels because the Police Department overhauled 
its counting methods in 1966, charging that ``self-serving'' police 
officials had undercounted crimes other than homicide for several 
years. So the official 1964 levels, which experts say they believe 
are artificially low, show that there were fewer than half as many 
rapes then as there were in 1998, a quarter of the robberies and half 
as many assaults. The number of reported burglaries this year is roughly 
the same as it was in 1964. While overall population slightly decreased 
_ 7,781,984 in the 1960 census compared with 7,322,564 in 1990 _ the 
size of the Police Department has grown tremendously since 1964. Then, 
there were 25,897 people on the force. Now, the department has swelled 
to nearly 40,000, fed by the 1993 mergers with the transit police 
and housing police and by the Safe Streets-Safe City tax increase 
to pay additional officers. The number of arrests has skyrocketed 
since then as well. While 93,627 people were arrested in 1964, 396,237 
people were arrested this year, largely a result of the Police Department's 
crackdown on ``quality of life'' crimes. And the number of prisoners 
has gone way up. In 1964 the average daily population in the city's 
jails was 10,848; this year it is nearly 18,000. The increase in state 
prisons is even more pronounced: The average daily population has 
risen from 19,439 in 1964 to over 69,000 prisoners today. The subways, 
which saw a troubling increase in crime in the last months of 1997, 
showed a 24 percent drop this year. Safir added more than 300 officers 
and detectives to the Transit Bureau late last year. There was only 
one murder case in the subways this year, down from four homicides 
last year, and it involved a woman killed by her former husband. There 
were 369 fewer robberies reported and 89 fewer assaults. Rapes, however, 
saw a marked increase in the subways. Fourteen rapes were reported 
in the system this year, up from only two last year. Investigators 
believe several of those rapes were the work of a serial rapist now 
in custody. Crime dropped in every precinct in the city, Safir said. 
In Central Park, where a murder and a flurry of well-publicized muggings 
created the perception of a crime wave this fall, crime actually dropped 
by 22 percent. In Greenwich Village, where residents grew concerned 
that there were four killings this year, up from none the year before, 
overall crime was down nearly 5 percent. The biggest drops in reported 
crime were in the traditionally most dangerous neighborhoods. The 
32nd Precinct in Harlem saw a 70 percent drop in reported homicides, 
to six this year from 20 last year. The 34th Precinct in Washington 
Heights saw a 55 percent drop in killings, to eight this year from 
18 the year before. Homicides did rise in some areas. The 48th Precinct 
in the Fordham section of the Bronx saw the number of killings rise 
64 percent this year, to 23, up from 14 last year. And the 75th Precinct 
in East New York, Brooklyn, reported the most homicides in the city 
this year, 37, up from 31 the year before. But it is well below 1993, 
when 110 people were killed there. Safir said that the department's 
anti-drug initiatives in northern Manhattan, northern Brooklyn, the 
south Bronx, southeastern Queens and Staten Island had helped drive 
crime down across the city. The initiatives use undercover officers 
and detectives who focus on rounding up drug dealers, and uniformed 
officers who are sent to new sites every day to crack down on ``quality 
of life'' crimes. Safir and Mayor Rudolph Giuliani are both fond of 
pointing out that the leaders of adjacent communities have complained 
to them that New York's effective policing has moved crime to neighboring 
areas. And for Giuliani, the continued drop in crime under his watch 
is sure to become a potent campaign issue should he run for higher 
office. But while there is plenty of anecdotal evidence that people 
are beginning to feel safer in the city, from the new bodegas opening 
in Washington Heights without bulletproof glass to the families who 
stroll through Times Square to a boom in tourism, many New Yorkers 
have yet to cast off their seemingly innate wariness. Even as crime 
fell this year, the number of security guards who were licensed by 
New York State rose to 97,261 this year, up from 91,852 last year. 
Private security companies, burglar alarm manufacturers and armored 
car companies are all reporting increased earnings, said John Mallon, 
publisher of Security Investing, a monthly newsletter. ``Although 
the crime rates are down in the city and elsewhere, you wouldn't know 
it by the continued growth of the security industry,'' he said. And 
while some of the old neighborhood crime watches that were formed 
during the worst of the crime epidemic of the early 1990s are now 
having trouble enlisting volunteers, plenty of new neighborhood watch 
groups are springing up. ``Many of the longstanding patrols are sort 
of suffering because people have dropped off,'' said Ed Powell, executive 
director of Umma Group, a community organization that trains neighborhood 
watch groups. ``There seems to be a sense that crime is down, that 
everything is better.'' But some new groups are taking the places 
of the old ones. ``Strangely enough, a lot of new patrols are popping 
up now,'' Powell said, noting that he had just been helping a group 
of Pakistani immigrants form a watch group in Flatbush, Brooklyn. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>