<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981223.0288 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With technology you can surf the Web, route telephone calls through 
satellites and send people to the moon and robots to Mars. So what 
about losing weight? Is there no 500-megahertz weight-reduction machine 
that translates fat into RAM, for instance? The short answer is no. 
There are, however, gadgets that are supposed to be able to tell you 
how fat you are, and many of them are enhanced by microprocessors. 
In this season of dietary excess, health clubs and appliance stores 
alike are offering a new generation of inexpensive devices that measure 
a person's percentage of body fat. Reducing that percentage is up 
to you, of course. Can the technology measure the proportion of fat 
in the body? Well, maybe. I found that a person with a well-placed 
pinch and a carnival barker's gift for sizing up strangers could be 
just as accurate as the high-technology items with high price tags 
used in laboratories _ and a far cry more accurate than their mass-market 
cousins, which have recently broken the $100 barrier in this holiday 
season. The two home body-fat measurers I tried are the handheld Body 
Logic Fat Analyzer (HBF-301) from Omron and the Body Fat Monitor/Scale 
(TBF-611) from Tanita. The first works, the manufacturer says, by 
sending a very low-voltage current of electricity from one hand to 
the other hand. The Body Fat Monitor is a scale that also sends a 
low-voltage current through the body, but the current travels from 
the front of the foot and returns to the back. Each has a retail price 
under $100. I was disturbed to learn that my body fat was somewhere 
between a svelte 16 percent and a husky 27 percent. That was akin 
to being told that I weighed somewhere between 100 pounds and 160 
pounds. I tested myself many times before deciding that I must be 
a flawed subject. So I tested a friend, and her results were similarly 
skewed. The next day, the makers of the two products told me that 
these devices were designed to be used once a week as motivational 
tools and that the timing of the tests _ morning or evening, before 
or after a meal or drinks, or after working out _ would affect the 
results. It turns out that I should have used a fancier version of 
the Tanita scale and fat monitor with an athlete mode, like the TBF-612. 
Apparently my years as a high-school lacrosse player and as a several-times-a-week 
runner since then qualified me as an athlete. At least there was some 
good news in that 26 percent reading. But why would such variables 
matter in measuring body fat? In spite of their billing, the gadgets 
actually measure how much body tissues impede the flow of electrical 
current _ their impedance. The devices record the drop in the speed 
and strength of the electrical current sent through the body. With 
fatty tissue, the signal drops more quickly because it impedes the 
current more than lean tissue. The hard part is determining just what 
that impedance number means because other factors also affect impedance. 
Tall people impede the signal more because the signal has farther 
to travel. Women tend to carry more of their weight in their legs, 
so their legs impede the signal more. Athletes can have more bone 
mass, which increases impedance. So an impedance result for someone 
will not accurately predict body-fat content unless it is compared 
with the results of people who are similar in various ways _ like 
age, weight, sex, height and athleticism _ and who have also been 
tested with some more accurate measuring tool. So the gadgets rely 
on results from hundreds of clinical studies to interpret impedance 
numbers. Omron's Body Logic compares its impedance results with results 
from an underwater weighing method for computing body fat that had 
been considered the most accurate approach until recently. Body Logic 
told me that I was 16 percent fat. Tanita's Body Fat Monitor/Scale 
is modeled on something called the Dexa method, which I later tried 
and which is now considered one of the most accurate methods. The 
Body Fat Monitor told me that I was 26 percent fat. The results were 
confusing, even a little maddening. They sent me to the Body Composition 
Unit at St. Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in New York, where I 
tried some more sophisticated tests and found a human being who could 
best them all. The lab's tests ranged from dunking me in a tub to 
clawing me head-to-toe with a pliers-like tool called calipers and 
sending an electrical current from my hand to my foot. But the test 
the lab considers the most reliable for measuring fat is known as 
Dexa, or Dual Energy X-Ray Absorptiometry; it does not rely on assumptions 
about a person's body composition. It produces a picture of each individual, 
using X-rays of such low power that no one in the room with me wore 
any protective clothing. The patient lies still while a low-power 
X-ray machine scans back and forth across the width of the body. With 
each new line drawn, it moves a bit further south until it reaches 
the tip of the toes. A digital picture of the body shows not just 
the percentage of fat but also the percentage of muscle and bone. 
But in this case, the most sophisticated technology was matched by 
Dr. Jack Wang, associate director of the Body Composition Unit, who 
came up with an estimate of 20 percent with one pinch of my waist 
between his fingers and a gaze at my build. A dead match with Dexa, 
which had taken a half-hour. Wang's talent is the product of 28 years 
and some 16,000 tests conducted on people of all races and of a wide 
range of ages: 4 to 110. Had I read the research on fat testing before 
I started, I would not have been surprised by any of this. In 1994, 
the National Institutes of Health conducted a technology assessment 
conference on devices like these. In its report, it concluded, ``Calculations 
of an individual's body fat may vary by as much as 10 percent of body 
weight because of differences in machines and methodologies used.'' 
It went on to say, ``Digital readouts and computer software calculations 
and interpretations may give a false sense of data accuracy.'' Carol 
Benson, who is in charge of research and product development for Tanita, 
said that since 1994, Tanita had sought the best and most accurate 
research and had made that research available to the public as well 
as to scientists. After the conference, the National Institute of 
Standards and Technology, a federal agency, tested about 10 of the 
devices to see how well they measured impedance, but not how well 
the impedance number correlated with body fat content. The accuracy 
of the devices ranged from within 1 percent to about 20 percent; accuracy 
falls at the edges of the range of body sizes. A participant at the 
conference, Dr. Steven B. Heymsfield, a doctor at St. Luke's-Roosevelt 
Hospital Center who is the deputy director of the Obesity Research 
Center there, said no standards had yet been set for the devices as 
fat monitors. But Wang said the home devices could be useful, since 
50 percent of Americans are overweight and 20 percent are obese, according 
to the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. ``This has 
an important impact, even if this isn't entirely accurate,'' he said, 
pointing at the Body Fat Monitor. ``It wakes people up.'' Happy dieting. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>