<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981223.0404 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the first frenzied weeks after the name Monica Lewinsky lurched 
into the news last January, it was clear that the media had entered 
uncharted waters _ a rip current where competition between old and 
new media was rewriting the rules of gathering and reporting news. 
There was Matt Drudge, who first posted the story, pilfered from Newsweek, 
on his Internet tip sheet; the talk shows that gave it legs; the 24-hour 
cable news networks that rode it up the ratings, and the handful of 
respected newspapers that publicly stumbled in the scramble to keep 
up. Looking back on the past 11 months, many people inside and outside 
journalism described the episode as a laboratory experiment for the 
post-modern media age _ the moment when the diverse forces of the 
instant communication era converged for the first time on a major 
political scandal. How members of the media have performed _ and how 
the public fared _ is a subject of stark disagreement. After months 
of criticism, many working journalists now express a sense of almost 
vindication. Most of what was reported, they said in recent interviews, 
has turned out to be true. Others, however, described the last 11 
months as ``a very dark chapter in the history of the American press,'' 
as Geneva Overholser, a former ombudsman for The Washington Post, 
put it. After such shameful excesses, some said, it is an inadequate 
defense to point out that the stories were not wrong after all. ``There 
is this other task,'' said Jay Rosen, a journalism professor at New 
York University. ``The news media have to help us have the best conversation 
we can about what became a constitutional crisis. Looked at that way, 
the performance of our journalists can be seen as a kind of national 
tragedy. ``It was a tragedy because the media cooperated in the expansion 
of this story to a sort of partisan, divisive and directionless game,'' 
Rosen said. ``It also produced a level of public exhaustion that is 
now a serious defect. We don't need the American public to be exhausted 
by impeachment at this hour.'' The specific charges against the media 
are familiar by now: sensationalism, rumor-mongering, overreliance 
on unnamed sources, sanctimoniousness, speculation, salaciousness, 
leaping to judgment and losing all sense of proportion and self-control, 
to name a few. Reporters became ``tank drivers'' for Independent Counsel 
Kenneth Starr, said David Halberstam, the journalist and author. Cable 
television talk shows were more like professional wrestling than real 
dialogue, said Rem Rieder, the editor of The American Journalism Review. 
``It was a kind of Chinese water-torture news,'' said Robert Lichter, 
a political scientist who is president of the Center for Media and 
Public Affairs, a nonpartisan media monitoring group in Washington. 
``People were driven mad by the constant dripping of rumor.'' And 
now, after offering up to $1 million to any woman who could prove 
she had had sex with a member of Congress, Larry Flynt, the publisher 
of the sex magazine Hustler, is taking credit for the disclosure of 
extramarital affairs that forced House Speaker-elect Bob Livingston 
to announce on Saturday that he would resign from the House. Nevertheless, 
many working journalists look back on the coverage quite differently 
than do their critics. Not only have nearly all the stories been borne 
out, including the improbable tale of Ms. Lewinsky's unclean dress, 
but also, one can no longer argue that the subject did not deserve 
the attention, they said. They pointed out that, now that the media 
encompass everything from The Wall Street Journal to Drudge, they 
can no longer be seen as monolithic. Certain news organizations did 
well, especially those that relied on their own reporting and stuck 
to their standards, many said. Some were heartened by what Gene Roberts, 
a former managing editor of The New York Times, called the ``self-correcting 
process'' at work, through which news organizations that reported 
stories that could not be substantiated ended up becoming the focus 
of media scrutiny themselves. Print journalists tended to praise the 
work of the print media and disparage that of television. Broadcast 
television journalists faulted cable. People at CNN drew distinctions 
between their network and those of Fox News and MSNBC. One online 
editor criticized newspaper editorial pages. ``I feel pretty good 
about what we did,'' said Rich Oppel, the editor of The Austin American-Statesman 
and a former Washington bureau chief for Knight Ridder. ``I would 
credit the major newspapers with having handled the story responsibly. 
And clearly, the story has had sustained importance.'' Erik Sorenson, 
vice president of MSNBC, the cable news network whose blanket coverage 
earned it the nickname the Clinton Impeachment Channel, said, ``I'm 
not sure there is anything I would have done differently in terms 
of coverage decisions and programming decisions.'' Even some close 
observers outside journalism said much of the criticism was misplaced. 
Michael Schudson, the author of ``The Good Citizen'' (Free Press, 
1998), a history of American civic life, said that over-eager media 
coverage had little to do with the crisis set in motion by the story 
of Ms. Lewinsky. ``The story is that there is an intense and bitter 
partisanship in Washington which has its own logic,'' said Schudson, 
a professor of communication at the University of California at San 
Diego. ``I think that's why, between Washington and the rest of the 
country, there is such a gulf.'' The story may mark the moment at 
which the notion of a serious so-called disconnect between the public 
and the press became conventional wisdom. The press presumed to understand 
what was important, and what was not, in a way that many Americans 
came to resent. Steven Brill, whose media-watchdog magazine, Brill's 
Content, made its debut in July with a critique of the coverage, said 
the magazine's mail suggested that many Americans viewed the Washington 
press corps and political leaders in many ways as one and the same. 
``They're celebrities and they're having their own debate and discussion 
about this, and we don't care much about it,'' Brill said, characterizing 
the view of the public. All of which worries people, particularly 
an older generation of reporters who wonder about the question: On 
what basis do people make up their minds about important issues when 
they have lost confidence in the institutions that once brought them 
the news? ``If it's not on the basis of what the CBS `Evening News' 
reports but on the basis of talk shows, Internet gossip, chat rooms 
and water-cooler conversations, we have a very serious and historic 
problem,'' said Marvin Kalb, a former correspondent for CBS and NBC 
who is now director of the Shorenstein Center on press, politics and 
public policy at Harvard University. But others are encouraged. Louis 
Rossetto, a co-founder of Wired Ventures, the original publisher of 
Wired magazine and the creators of Hotwired, an Internet magazine, 
said the loss of credibility was good. The old media are losing their 
monopoly on analyzing current events, he said. ``There is no one overarching 
mainstream like Walter Cronkite talking to the entire nation,'' Rossetto 
said. ``To me, that's a lot healthier. Everyone then has a more skeptical 
attitude about the information they're getting. People shouldn't believe 
what they see; they should question what they're told.'' As for the 
future, only a few journalists made any predictions. ``The next time 
an intern walks into the Oval Office with a pizza and flashes a piece 
of lingerie, I think the president is likely to call the Secret Service 
and say, `Get this lunatic out of here!''' said Jeff Greenfield, a 
senior analyst for CNN. ``That's what I would predict.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>