<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981223.0241 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Diamond Rio PMP300 personal music player, one of the most significant 
new products to appear in 1998, comes in a box that promises ``Internet 
music in the palm of your hand.'' We can all be grateful that Internet 
music is a new distribution system, not a new musical genre. Having 
seen computer nerds dancing at their company parties, I can say with 
little fear of contradiction that as dancers, they are very gifted 
programmers. But these computer programmers are transforming the music 
industry. The catalyst is a compression formula called MP3, which 
is the basis of the $199.95 Rio player, from Diamond Multimedia, and 
the music industry's sudden intense interest in the Internet. There 
is nothing new about music on the Internet, of course. More than 40 
million copies of a free program called Real Player have been downloaded 
from Real Networks (www.real.com) to enable Web users to listen to 
music and radio broadcasts ``streaming'' through their computers. 
But with a few exceptions, the music is transient. It goes in one 
virtual ear and out the other. MP3, whose formal technical name is 
MPEG Level 3, is emerging as the most popular format for storing music 
on computer hard disks and on the Internet. It will eventually be 
replaced by something better, but for now, MP3 is the Internet software 
du jour. MP3 allows big audio files to be condensed to about one-tenth 
their size without significantly harming the music quality. The Rio 
is the first and so far only portable MP3 player, so there is a lot 
of pent-up demand for it among MP3 fans, especially young people who 
are already using their computers as alternatives to dorm-room stereos. 
Rio-type MP3 players could quickly become an alternative to portable 
cassette or CD players, and that would further strengthen MP3's role 
at the desktop. These devices will evolve quickly, as will the technical 
standards, so cautious consumers may want to wait for the chorus before 
plunking down a couple of C-notes. Compression is very important for 
the Rio, and indeed for music distribution over the Internet. MP3 
allows a 40-megabyte song to be compressed to 4 megabytes or less, 
so it can be transferred in one-tenth the time. As Internet connections 
get faster, music downloads that once took hours will be compressed 
to minutes, and minutes to seconds. MP3 music is often described as 
``near CD quality.'' Some people, whom I suspect were terriers in 
their previous lives, can discern the subtle differences between ``near'' 
CD quality and CD quality, but most normal humans cannot. MP3 music 
on the Rio sounds better than FM radio. Where is this leading us? 
On the fastest Internet connections, the kind that record stores and 
companies like Amazon.com might some day maintain in kiosks in malls, 
it might be possible to buy and download a song, an album, an audio 
book, an electronic textbook, a piece of sheet music _ anything that 
can be digitized and delivered over a computer network _ in less than 
a minute. The music, or other digital content, might be downloaded 
into a portable music player like the Rio, or into a digital camera, 
or a smart cellular phone, or a PC smart card, or a palm-size PC or 
any other small digital device that has storage capabilities and standard 
digital interfaces. Once home, the device could be emptied into a 
PC and the content routed to the appropriate digital playback device, 
whether it is a digital stereo, a digital television or an electronic 
book. The Rio PMP300 is in effect a prototype of these future digital 
devices. It is about the size and weight of a pack of playing cards, 
so it can be clipped to a belt or tucked in a pocket. It has simple 
controls and comes with a set of ``ear bud'' speakers. Inside, the 
Rio has 32 MB of flash memory on a special chip, enough to hold about 
one hour of compressed digital music. You can increase the capacity 
of the Rio in 30-minute increments by adding 16 MB memory cards, which 
cost $49.95 each. Because the music is stored on a chip, there is 
no skipping or jitter during playback, as there often is with portable 
CD or cassette players. Even mountain-bikers and jackhammer operators 
can appreciate a scratch-it-out hip-hop tune without those annoying 
mechanical jumps and skips. The Rio cannot record music directly from 
the Internet. It merely plays back MP3-encoded music that has already 
been recorded onto the hard disk of a personal computer. Once the 
music is copied into the Rio's flash memory, it can only be erased, 
but not copied again. The Rio comes with software (for Windows 95 
and 98 only) that enables computer users to encode their own music 
collections in the MP3 format, typically through the CD-ROM drive 
(similar software, both commercial and freeware, is available on line). 
People who want to digitize and compress their vinyl albums, cassettes 
and reel-to-reel tapes will have to surmount other hurdles. The Rio 
itself is easy to set up and to operate, although there is plenty 
of room for improvement in such areas as changing the sequence of 
tunes. So, MP3 signals the dawn of cheap, global distribution of near-CD-quality 
music over the Internet. Why, then, do music industry lawyers reach 
for the garlic and wolf bane whenever someone mentions it? The Recording 
Industry Association of America went to court earlier this year in 
an unsuccessful attempt to block Diamond from introducing the Rio, 
citing its lack of a copy-protection mechanism. The beauty of digital 
music, or the horror of it, depending on your point of view, is that 
you can make an infinite number of copies of an MP3 file without any 
loss of quality. Without some sort of copy protection, the record 
companies and the artists they represent have no guarantee that they 
will be paid. Without that guarantee, the lawyers say, artists and 
their labels will have no incentive to make music or to pay music 
industry lawyers. Civilization as they know it will come to an end. 
Last week, a coalition of music industry and Internet companies agreed 
to form the Secure Digital Music Initiative, whose ambitious goal 
is to develop a universal digital copyright protection scheme that 
will prevent the unauthorized copying of digital recordings. The group 
believes it can do in less than a year what the entire computer software 
industry has been unable to do in two decades: stop software piracy. 
Competition for the Rio is expected to appear at next month's Consumer 
Electronics Show in Las Vegas, Nev. Earlier this month, Samsung Electronics 
of Korea announced plans to bring its Yepp MP3 player to North America 
sometime next year. A ``deluxe'' version of the Yepp includes an FM 
radio, a voice recorder that can store 40 minutes of speech and a 
display that shows the song title, artist and even lyrics of each 
tune being played. Prices were not announced. Creative Labs showed 
a prototype MP3 player at last month's Comdex trade show in Las Vegas 
but was coy on the timing of its entry to market. Some companies may 
be holding off until the Secure Digital Music Intitiative's efforts 
become clearer. Diamond Multimedia, maker of the Rio, said it will 
support the SDMI standard when it emerges. But in response to a question 
sent by e-mail earlier this week, a Diamond spokeswoman wrote, ``It's 
too early to determine whether or not Diamond's current Rio would 
support such a standard through software, or if the company will support 
the standard through a new device.'' In other words, it will be at 
least a year before the music industry comes up with an alternative 
to MP3. When it does _ if it does _ the current crop of MP3 players 
may not work with the new format. In the meantime, MP3-encoded music 
is proliferating on the Web and the Rio is for now a stylish way to 
tune in. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>