<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981223.0292 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Last week this column focused on buying dimensional lumber. Buying 
lumber is one thing; getting it home is another. You can, of course, 
have the lumberyard deliver the goods. This is certainly a good idea 
if you are buying in quantity: 25 sheets of wallboard, or 50 2-by-4s. 
There are, however, two drawbacks to this. First, you may have to 
wait a few days for it to arrive. This can be awkward if the delivery 
date doesn't fit into your work schedule. Second, when you have lumber 
delivered you cannot select the pieces you want; the lumberyard does 
that for you. If you decide to do the hauling yourself, there are 
several issues to consider. You really cannot place long boards inside 
your car unless you have a hatchback. Your best option then is to 
load the boards on the car roof. First purchase a pair of roof racks. 
These will make it easier to tie the load securely and protect the 
roof of your car. Home centers, auto supply stores and sporting good 
stores carry roof racks. They range in price from $30 to more than 
$150. Before purchasing the racks, look at the specifications on the 
box to see if the racks will attach to your car. Some racks clip to 
the rain gutters on either side of the car roof, but not all cars 
have these. Other models lock to the ledges situated just behind the 
tops of the car doors. Also check to see if the racks have a weight 
limitation. Better racks have a carrying capacity of 150 to 200 pounds. 
In addition to sturdy construction, these models have broad feet that 
distribute the weight over a wider area, so they are less likely to 
put dents in the car roof. Even with the roof racks, you will have 
to tie all the lumber securely so the boards do not slip loose while 
you're moving. Remember that a flying piece of construction lumber 
can be lethal even at slow speeds. To insure a firm tie-down, work 
systematically. First make sure the roof racks are secure by giving 
each rack a strong tug in each direction before loading. Then place 
the widest boards at the bottom, centering them on the racks so the 
weight is evenly distributed across the roof. Next place the narrower 
pieces on top of these. Avoid piling on too many boards _ too much 
weight can dent the roof. When all the lumber is in place, tie it 
down. You can use flexible rubber cables with hooks at each end, flat 
nylon straps with self-clinching buckles and rope to tie the load 
in place. Rubber tie-downs are useful for pulling the whole load together 
and making it manageable, but don't rely on them exclusively. They 
have a tendency to stretch when the load shifts. When that happens, 
individual boards, particularly those in the center, can easily work 
loose. The best flexible rubber cable tie-downs are made of heavy-duty 
black rubber with hooks at each end. These grip the wood better than 
those lighter rubber tie-downs with multicolored, fabric covering. 
In addition to wrapping the tie- downs around the load, thread a few 
straps through the center. This will secure internal boards and prevent 
slide-outs as you move. Tie the load to the roof racks with nylon 
straps that have self-clinching buckles. Wrap the strap around the 
load and under and around each rack. Thread the strap end through 
the buckle and pull it taut. The gripper tab in the buckle will hold 
the strap and keep it from pulling loose. Be sure to attach a red 
flag on any boards that extend more than a foot beyond the rear bumper. 
Some lumber yards provide free flags of plastic or cloth, but it's 
best to bring your own just in case. Loading panels, like plywood 
or wallboard, requires a slightly different loading technique. Because 
of their size, it's difficult to tie the panels directly to the racks. 
So start by placing two 9-foot 2-by-4s across the racks. Position 
them so they are parallel, then tie them to the racks with rubber 
tie-downs. Place the panel on top of the 2-by-4s and run ropes across 
the face of the panel to the 2-by-4s. Probably the best kind of rope 
for this is a good- quality 1/4-inch diameter hemp rope. The coarse 
texture of the hemp keeps knots from slipping yet allows easy untying. 
When the lumber is loaded and securely tied down, you are ready to 
roll. Drive slowly, and avoid sudden stops or sharp turns. If possible, 
take a slow-moving route home. Remember, speed is not a consideration; 
safety is. After the first few minutes of driving, pull over and check 
to make sure that the load is still secure and none of the tie-downs 
have worked loose. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>