<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981223.0216 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Kente cloth's iconic powers are both considerable and quite possibly 
singular. For centuries, Asante and Ewe royalty in Ghana have worn 
gloriously colored kente of fine silk on state occasions. The garments 
have lent a grandeur to the festivities, and more important, they 
have been a means for chieftains to proclaim their authority and wealth. 
Small wonder that kente has become an almost universal totem of black 
identity. ``I can't think of another cloth that carries as much symbolic 
weight as kente does,'' said Doran H. Ross, the director of the Fowler 
Museum of Cultural History at the University of California, Los Angeles, 
who has devoted more than two decades to its study. ``Part of its 
potency,'' he added, ``are the intellectual ideas embedded in kente 
that give it a richness difficult to find in other textiles.'' Such 
notions are explored in ``Wrapped in Pride: Ghanaian Kente and African-American 
Identity,'' an exhaustive exhibition at the Newark Museum organized 
by Ross in collaboration with Anne Spencer, the museum's curator of 
Africa, the Americas and the Pacific. For the uninitiated and aficionados 
alike, its 185 examples of traditional and modern kente offer insight 
into the fabric's history, evolution and cultural significance. The 
exhibit remains on view in Newark through Jan. 3 and then travels 
to the Fowler Museum, the National Museum of African Art in Washington 
and the Detroit Museum of African-American History. Kente was developed 
by the Asante, a tribal people of south-central Ghana, in the late 
17th century, though it has roots in the long tradition of African 
weaving that dates back to 3000 B.C. Legend has it that two tribesmen 
learned the art by observing a spider weaving its web. When the Asantehene, 
the paramount chief of the Asante, heard of their discovery, he ordered 
that it become the royal cloth. (Kente derives from the word for basket 
in the Akan language.) Woven on treadle looms into strips four to 
six inches wide, lengths of kente are sewn together to produce large 
cloths. The strips may be arranged in a checkerboard pattern or in 
an alternating rhythm, creating at times an op-art effect of shifting 
colors and design. Kente is traditionally woven by men, using cotton, 
rayon and silk. Asante kente is noted for its bright primary colors 
and geometric motifs, while Ewe (pronounced A-way) kente often has 
a ``tweedy'' effect and figurative designs. Men usually wear one long 
cloth wrapped around the body, toga-like, with the right shoulder 
and hand uncovered; women typically wear two pieces wrapped around 
the body along with a head tie. There are more than 300 different 
types of cloth designs, each with its own name and meaning, somewhat 
like Scottish tartans. The exhibit offers examples of the oldest and 
most popular pattern, Oyokoman, taking its name from the Oyoko clan, 
which has produced every Asantehene for the last three centuries. 
It features wide gold and green warp stripes embedded in a maroon, 
red or burgundy field. Also on view is a pattern named in honor of 
the Akosombo Hydroelectric Dam, which opened in Ghana in the 1960s. 
Highlights of the exhibit include recreations of two stores showing 
the staggering diversity of kente designs as well as sample cloths 
that museumgoers are encouraged to try on. (A companion book, published 
by the Fowler Museum, is available at $39 in paperback, $70 in hardcover.) 
Kente came to the attention of most Americans when Kwame Nkrumah, 
Ghana's first president, wore it at the United Nations nearly four 
decades ago. It became associated with the black-consciousness movement 
of the 1960s, and today kente patterns can be found everywhere, on 
ties, handbags, book covers, picture frames, bedspreads, even Barbie 
dolls. Ross said that it was increasingly common to see Latino students 
wearing kente stoles at graduation ceremonies. Whether the trend merely 
represented one minority group showing solidarity with another, or 
something more profound, he said, was a matter for further study, 
though clearly, he added, the role of kente was expanding beyond ``the 
African-American experience.'' What is certain is that wider exposure 
has resulted in increased demand for kente among both museums and 
collectors. Ross said that the finest cloths sell for $6,000 to $9,000, 
with one from the 1920's having sold for $12,000. He said that high-quality 
cloths were available in New York for $1,200 to $1,500, roughly five 
times what they would cost in Ghana. Ross, 51, said that his abiding 
interest in kente stemmed from his first trip to Ghana in 1974. Seeing 
an Asante chieftain, carried on a litter on the shoulders of his tribesmen, 
his robe ablaze in color as he danced a ceremonial dance to honor 
his subjects, was, as Ross put it, ``a majestic sight.'' ``These cloths 
are dance,'' he added. ``They're a performance. There's a real style 
to how a man carries his cloths, how the cloths rise and fall to the 
rhythm of a drum orchestra.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>