<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981223.0265 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Sometimes the future works just the way it's supposed to. Soon after 
I got a Rio PMP300, the portable player for MP3 music files, I went 
to a Metallica concert. The band played songs by Diamond Head, a band 
whose original lineup made albums between 1979 and 1983; as a critic, 
I wanted to double-check what it sounded like. Since I don't have 
any Diamond Head albums, I went on line to the Ultimate Band List 
Web site (www.ubl.com), searched for Diamond Head and found a site 
with a few Diamond Head songs as MP3s. They weren't the songs that 
Metallica had played, but I couldn't be picky. Downloading two of 
them with my home modem took about 10 minutes per 4-minute song; then 
I drag-and-dropped them into the Rio's memory and listened on headphones. 
They sounded at least as full-bodied as a cassette on a Walkman _ 
an improvement over the sound card that came with my computer, which 
compares unfavorably with Dixie cups and string. Having confirmed 
that Metallica owes Diamond Head plenty, I deleted the songs from 
the Rio and, later, from my hard drive. Meanwhile, I couldn't help 
looking at the teetering piles of CDs in my office and imagining all 
that plastic gone, with the whole library in cyberspace instead. Not 
so fast, the recording business says. No money changed hands so I 
could listen to Diamond Head, and the major recording companies consider 
my gleanings piracy, pure and simple. Nobody paid Diamond Head or 
its label for the right to hurl their music into cyberspace, where 
MP3 files can be not just downloaded but copied, retransmitted or 
recorded onto CDs. Diamond Head didn't get a nickel when I listened 
to the songs. The Recording Industry Association of America, the trade 
organization for the major labels, has lately been busy searching 
for MP3 sites and sending cease-and-desist letters to their operators. 
Recording companies own the master recordings; they paid to make them. 
Some Web page providers now forbid users putting MP3s on their sites. 
But there are still hundreds and probably thousands of sites where 
MP3s are available, whether it's a handful (as on the Diamond Head 
site) or hundreds on categorized, alphabetized lists. Alta Vista, 
the search engine (www.altavista.com), even suggests as a sample search 
question, ``Where can I download MP3 files for instrumental music?'' 
Hoisting the Jolly Roger is easy enough. Plug ``MP3'' and a band name 
into a search engine, and something downloadable will turn up, although 
it probably won't be exactly what you're looking for. MP3 sites are 
unpredictable. One, Ripper, will hand over the free songs only after 
you've stayed at certain hotels in Czechoslovakia. A hip-hop site 
demanded that anyone who entered vouch that they were not from the 
recording-industry association and urged users to delete downloaded 
songs after 24 hours _ which it couldn't, of course, enforce. Clicking 
through sites, I found live Pearl Jam and Radiohead songs (one apparently 
recorded from a television on a cassette), house-music remixes of 
songs by Chinese pop stars, full albums by Bone Thugs-n-Harmony and 
obscurities from alternative-rock bands like Slint. I also found plenty 
of dead ends and sites that had been shut down or stripped of MP3s, 
including the one that promised rarities from Joy Division and New 
Order and specifically refused to include anything from commercially 
released albums. Most of the sites shared an almost messianic enthusiasm 
for the MP3 technology and an eagerness to trade music, not to profit 
from it. One site demanded that users upload one song for every three 
they downloaded. There are non-pirate MP3s around. Goodnoise (www.goodnoise.com) 
sells songs for 99 cents and albums for $8.99 from various labels, 
including the entire catalog of SpinArt Records; some songs are available 
free as samples, while downloading the albums requires a credit-card 
number. Some musicians use home-recorded MP3s to promote themselves 
outside the realm of recording contracts and labels, at Web sites 
like www.iuma.com and www.free-music.com. Even some established bands 
_ to the disgruntlement of their recording companies _ can't resist 
the idea of getting music to their fans instantaneously. Soul Coughing 
offers an ``MP3 o' the Month'' of a live performance or a song that 
doesn't appear on their albums, urging fans to ``Collect 'em All!'' 
(www.soulcoughing.com). Even with MP3 compression, music that sounds 
better than a transistor radio occupies nearly a megabyte per minute, 
which quickly clutters a hard drive; songs don't fit on 1.44 MB floppy 
disks. The Rio's 32 MB memory encourages an impermanent, constantly 
changing playlist, downloading at whim and deleting when the mood 
passes. The next time I wanted a song, I'd download it again. But 
that's the ideal. Finding music on line is easy; finding a particular 
song is a time-consuming, sometimes futile process, and it will be 
until the major labels agree on a way to get their cut of the action. 
Until that happens, I can only dream of empty shelves. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>