<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981223.0374 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Freezing rain coated highways with a thin, sometimes invisible cape 
of ice Wednesday in an expanse several hundred miles wide that stretched 
from Central Texas to the Carolinas, as unseasonably frigid winds 
swept out of the northwest and pushed their way toward the Gulf of 
Mexico. Dozens of wrecks and fatalities were reported in a half-dozen 
states. In the most freakish incident, a pair of apparently unrelated 
accidents that occurred just a few minutes apart on opposite sides 
of the same Interstate 35 overpass in Austin just after 1 a.m. Wednesday 
resulted in a 58-car pileup that left two people dead. Forecasters 
predicted more sleety, slushy, icy messes Wednesday night as the front 
slides gradually to the east and north. Traffic officials throughout 
much of the Southeast warned travelers to go slow or stay at home. 
Highs on Wednesday were in the single digits in the Upper Plains, 
in the teens and 20s from the Central Plains into South Texas and 
in the 30s and 40s in northern portions of the other Gulf Coast states 
and into the West. It fell to 26 degrees in Las Vegas, 21 degrees 
near San Diego. Officials in California's San Joaquin Valley worried 
that freezing temperatures would severely damage the region's fruit 
crops. At the same time, significant accumulations of snow had fallen 
across the northern Great Lakes states, upstate New York and the mountains 
of New England _ leading to good news, at least, for some of the regions' 
snow-starved ski areas. Snow was also in the forecast for Philadelphia 
and other parts of the Northeast, just in time for Christmas. But 
the areas of the country hardest hit Wednesday, particularly Texas 
and Tennessee, had only a bleak Christmas in the forecast, with predictions 
of more freezing rain and sleet. The two accidents that began the 
Austin pileup were relatively minor, but approaching cars were unable 
to stop and began plowing into one another in both the north and south 
bound lanes of the interstate at the Highway 290 overpass on the city's 
north side, said Kevin Buchman, an Austin police spokesman. Two people 
involved in those secondary collisions, a 19-year-old woman who was 
in one of the northbound cars and a 30-year-old man who was in a southbound 
car, both of them from Austin, were killed in the wreck. Jay Root, 
who managed to drive through the mess without crashing, described 
the scene. ``I noticed my windshield was freezing over,'' he told 
The Associated Press. ``I started to slow down. As I hit the brakes, 
I started sliding. I looked to my left, a car was sliding. I looked 
to my right, a car was sliding. A somehow threaded the needle between 
the two cars. There were wrecks to the left of me, there were wrecks 
to the right of me.'' In Central and South Texas, which rarely sees 
such conditions and had been enjoying temperatures in the middle 70s 
just a few days ago, officials frantically tried to warn motorists 
how to drive on ice and what to do if their heat goes out. Houston 
police issued a two-page primer on ``Driving in Inclement Weather,'' 
including warnings to ``make all your maneuvers smooth'' and ``avoid 
changing direction.'' Austin police responded to 350 accident reports 
between midnight and 11 a.m., Buchman said. Other departments around 
the state were reporting similar figures, far above what they would 
normally have seen. Four other deaths were reported on Texas roads; 
a seven-month-old baby and another man were killed in separate accidents 
on I-10 near San Antonio, a Fort Worth man was killed when his car 
slid into a fence, and a 33-year-old man from Duncanville was killed 
when his car slid into a highway sign on I-20 near Dallas. The San 
Angelo State School was without heat Monday night in 19-degree temperatures 
when a water line broke, forcing officials to keep the 317 mentally 
disabled residents warm with blankets and space heaters. Heat was 
restored Wednesday afternoon. Shelters in Houston, Dallas, San Antonio, 
Austin and other Texas cities were also reporting a huge influx of 
cold, homeless people and some said they were running out of coats 
and blankets. ``We are at full capacity, but we're not going to turn 
anyone away,'' said Gary Brown, director of the Star of Hope Men's 
Shelter in Houston. Numerous flights were delayed or canceled early 
Wednesday at Dallas-Forth Worth International Airport as efforts to 
de-ice the planes and clear runways bogged down. Many offices and 
businesses through the state were hastily closed Wednesday as the 
extent of the weather emergency became evident, and classes were canceled 
at many of the colleges and trade schools still in session. Oklahoma 
police reported 14 traffic fatalities during the storm that blanked 
much of the state with sleet and ice, and there was a five-mile backup 
at the Texas border on I-35 on Wednesday morning. A Tulsa man was 
found dead in his home from carbon monoxide poisoning, apparently 
caused by a portable heater. Heavy ice felled power lines and tree 
branches in Jackson, Miss. Other traffic deaths were reported this 
week in Kansas, Missouri, Arkansas and New York. Health officials 
warned of the effects of such a sudden drop in temperatures and asked 
people to take special precautions to guard against the frigid winds. 
A 76-year-old woman was found dead in her nursing home parking lot 
in Brighton, Colo., where temperatures fell below zero. And a 73-year-old 
man fell through the ice while fishing Tuesday in Cherry Creek State 
Park in Colorado. The same weather system also brought much of central 
Tennessee to a standstill. Brian Jones, a dispatcher for the Tennessee 
Highway Patrol, said the number of accident on area highways was ``uncountable,'' 
as most roads were ``ice-covered and very hazardous'' and there were 
several multi-car pileups. South of Nashville, several miles of I-24 
were closed for four hours Wednesday morning due to the weather, and 
even three hours after one lane was reopened the traffic was ``barely 
moving out there,'' Jones said. ``More than likely, we're going to 
have several more closures in the next day or so,'' he said, and the 
stretch of I-24 over Monteagle Mountain, north of Chattanooga, would 
be ``probably the first to go.'' Sleet was falling throughout the 
day in Tennessee, but forecasters said it would turn to freezing rain 
overnight. Alarmed residents were reminded of a ruinous 1994 ice storm 
that hit central Tennessee particularly hard. ``Those of us who lived 
for five or six days without power a few years ago are dreading it,'' 
said Robert Hicks, a music executive who lives in a rural area of 
Williamson County, southwest of Nashville. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>