<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981223.0451 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
``Parade'' is a big complex musical that looks as if it were just 
starting a long out-of-town tour designed to get things right before 
opening on Broadway. The cast is able, the staging is smooth and the 
scenery moves on and off without threatening the actors. Yet ``Parade'' 
is without life. It plays as if it were still a collection of notes 
for a show that has yet to be discovered. Unfortunately, ``Parade'' 
isn't in New Haven, Minneapolis, Baltimore or Toronto. The production, 
presented by Lincoln Center Theater in association with the now-bankrupt 
Livent Inc., is at the end of the line: in New York, onstage at the 
Vivian Beaumont Theater. What went wrong, and at what point did that 
happen? The show's provenance is impressive. The director is Harold 
Prince, who has directed more innovative Broadway musicals than anybody 
except maybe his mentor, George Abbott. Alfred Uhry (``Driving Miss 
Daisy'') wrote the book, and though Jason Robert Brown, the composer 
and lyricist, is here making his Broadway debut, he was picked by 
Prince, who should recognize talent when he hears it. The idea is 
also promising: the true and terrible story of Leo Frank, the Brooklyn-born, 
middle-class Jewish businessman, the supervisor of a pencil factory 
in Atlanta, who in 1913 was tried and convicted for the murder of 
one of his employees, a 13-year-old girl. The trial was so dubiously 
conducted, and brought into the open so much virulent anti-Semitism, 
that it became something of a cause celebre in the rest of the country. 
In 1915, shortly after Frank's death sentence had been commuted to 
life imprisonment, he was hauled out of a Georgia jail and lynched 
by a mob whose members were never identified. Though there were persuasive 
theories as to the identity of some killer other than Frank, the case 
was not pursued and no one else ever charged. The story of Frank's 
arrest, conviction and murder is clearly a very big subject, with 
all sorts of social and political associations, but ``Parade'' goes 
through them as if checking off the information for items listed in 
a curriculum vitae. Because the show has no real doubt about Leo's 
innocence, or about the identity of the probable killer (a roguish 
black man), the audience has little to do except consider the show's 
stern cues. That is, to try to weep for the innocent and to feel loathing 
for the opportunists and bigots who rule the world. The publicity 
for the production would have you believe that ``Parade'' is really 
a tragic love story about Leo, an uptight fellow, initially as chilly 
and finicky in his personal life as he is in business, and his wife, 
Lucille, who is vaguely characterized as a Southern Jewish belle. 
Having been brought together in an arranged marriage, she longs for 
romantic love, while he works long hours to support a woman whom he 
wishes were more serious and would recognize her Jewishness. According 
to ``Parade,'' disaster so transforms Leo and Lucille that at last 
he is able to express his feelings and she can mature into proud, 
assertive womanhood, becoming her husband's most effective defender. 
It is typical of ``Parade,'' however, that they seem to fall in love 
only late in the show and offstage. This leads to the couple's having 
one idyllic, somewhat unlikely picnic and conjugal visit at the jail 
(onstage), before he is kidnapped and hanged. Uhry is Georgia-born 
and bred, as well as Jewish. He knows the territory. Yet his book 
possesses none of the subtleties of character and event that make 
``Driving Miss Daisy'' such a wise and substantial entertainment. 
Except for Leo and Lucille, ``Parade'' is populated by characters 
who could have been ordered from a catalogue. Among them: the drunken 
newspaper reporter who rides the murder story to fame and fortune; 
the governor who says, ``We gotta get to the bottom of this one fast''; 
a fundamentalist newspaper publisher who denies Jesus was a Jew, and 
the district attorney who coaches perjured testimony from witnesses, 
including the black man who he suspects is guilty. The DA's excuse 
for going after Leo: ``We don't need another negra hanging from a 
tree.'' Suddenly, Jews take precedence over blacks as lynching material. 
As if to acknowledge this new perspective on race relations in the 
South, where, in spite of the fate of Leo Frank, the status of Jews 
has never been comparable to that of blacks, the show inserts a most 
peculiar number, ``A Rumblin' and a Rollin'.'' A small group of blacks, 
including the probable murderer, sing bitterly of white folks coming 
down South to protest Leo's trial and conviction (though there is 
no evidence of any such invasion on the stage). The point of the song: 
if the victim had been a black girl, nobody would have cared. The 
number purposely evokes the freedom marches and voter registration 
drives that would not come until the 1960s, when hundreds of activists, 
many of them Jewish, invaded the South to fight the good fight, some 
losing their lives in the process. Yet the effect of the song in the 
context of ``Parade'' is simply to reinforce the skepticism, held 
by some whites today but seldom openly expressed, that blacks have 
never fully appreciated the help they received from their kindly white 
Northern brothers. ``Parade'' has one short, splendid sequence (``Come 
Up to My Office'') during the extended trial scene. As three young 
women are testifying how Leo would spy on them, make them indecent 
proposals and fondle them, the shy, tautly strung Leo suddenly jumps 
up from his place at the defense table. He becomes the lewd, sweaty-palmed 
pervert the girls have described, as he sings, dances and proudly 
exults in the licentiousness they have talked about in such polite 
euphemisms. This burst of theatrical fantasy comes like a flash of 
lightning. It briefly lights up the show's murky landscape to allow 
you to see all that ``Parade'' hasn't achieved so far, and won't achieve 
again. Among other things, it also permits the audience to acknowledge 
for the first time the dimensions of Brent Carver's fine performance 
as Leo. You should remember Carver for his Tony-winning work as the 
window dresser in Prince's ``Kiss of the Spider Woman.'' In ``Parade'' 
he is so disciplined, so effective as the buttoned-up Leo that this 
glimpse into the character's raging psyche has the force of a coup 
de theatre. After that, the musical slips back into narrative conventions 
and social confusion. The first act ends with Patricia Birch's prettily 
choreographed hoedown in which the citizens of Atlanta merrily celebrate 
Leo's conviction. If the show were working, the end of the act would 
be ironic. As it is now, all that dancing just looks ill-timed. Brown's 
score has some pleasing melodies but his lyrics are banal (I assume) 
by design in the way of commonplace speech. They aren't easy to listen 
to. Mull over this plaint, sung by the newspaper reporter before he 
comes upon Leo's story: ``You got a kitten up a tree?/Well, come to 
me and I'll see/It makes it on the front page!/The mayor's mother 
broke her toe?/They gotta know!/It's the scandal of the age!'' And 
so on. In addition to Carver, the only actors to register with distinctively 
realized performances are Carolee Carmello, who plays Lucille and 
has a lovely voice, and Rufus Bonds Jr., who plays Jim Conley, the 
janitor at the pencil factory, the man thought to be the true killer. 
Bonds even survives one of the silliest chain gang scenes ever put 
on a stage. The material holds everybody else in check. The physical 
production is adequate. What was Prince thinking of in allowing ``Parade'' 
to be produced in this condition? He believed in it, certainly, but 
something happens in the course of long pre-production work, readings, 
workshops and rehearsals, even to the pros. Collaborators have a way 
of psyching one another up, as they should. At the same time, they 
can become so isolated, so self-absorbed, so removed from reality 
and so mired in tiny details that they begin to see results not visible 
to the outsider. The show then opens, but it's too late. That mysterious, 
pulsating entity they have been assembling turns out to be a corpse. 
--- Nicole Kidman, briefly nude and much in shadow, and Iain Glen, 
more boldly nude for a longer period of time (during which he turns 
what could be a dangerous cartwheel), are the stars as well as the 
entire cast of ``The Blue Room'' at the Cort Theater. This is Sam 
Mendes's Donmar Warehouse production, which originated in London, 
of David Hare's briskly satiric comedy adapted from Arthur Schnitzler's 
``Reigen'' (``Roundelay''), best known in this country as ``La Ronde'' 
for the exquisite 1950 French film version directed by Max Ophuls. 
Ms. Kidman and Glen each play five roles as they trace a sexual relay 
race through 10 couplings: a whore seduces a cabdriver who seduces 
an au pair girl who seduces a student who seduces a married woman, 
and so on. Each seducer, in turn, is effectively betrayed by the partner 
seduced. The sexual appetite is insatiable. Bleakness follows bliss 
followed by another conquest. The round continues. What does it all 
mean? Not a great deal, but it's refreshing to see the tall, coolly 
beautiful Ms. Kidman and the muscular, chameleonlike Glen move with 
such invention and ease from one distinct characterization to the 
next with the split-second timing of, say, Everett Quinton. They are 
prettier than Quinton, but he's funnier. It is also invigorating to 
behold the usually sober-sided Hare (``Plenty,'' ``Racing Demon,'' 
``Skylight,'' among others) having what looks to have been a lot of 
fun. It is apparent that he can write brutally sarcastic off-the-wall 
dialogue that brings to life characters of questionable intellect 
and few moral scruples, who reflect their times without presuming 
to analyze them. As a London critic once wrote of Myra Hess in a wartime 
concert: the playwright is in an unbuttoned mood. Though Hare's narrative 
is essentially the same as that of the Ophuls film, ``The Blue Room'' 
is far more brusque and punishing in its humor. Gone is the sophisticated 
Ophuls perspective, which is expressed not only in the text. It is 
also evident in the contrast between the rococo elegance of the Viennese 
decor and the blunt sexual needs of its mannerly characters. Hare's 
characters exist in bright, cold, neon-lighted isolation, but there 
is no doubt that the world's more grim realities are never far away. 
--- The characters in Paul Rudnick's newest comedy, ``The Most Fabulous 
Story Ever Told,'' at New York Theater Workshop, are searching for 
the meaning of life, and they are tired. They should be: they have 
been searching since the creation of the world. ``The Most Fabulous 
Story'' is ``The Skin of Our Teeth'' as it might have played if Thornton 
Wilder had been writing from the point of view not of Mr. and Mrs. 
Antrobus, but of two gay couples: Adam and Steve and Jane and Mabel. 
The one-liners are nonstop and suitably skeptical. Sample: ``Angels 
are just the Prozac for poor people.'' Adam and Steve and Jane and 
Mabel are tossed out of Eden, endure the Flood, tangle with the Pharoah 
who adopted Moses (here named Brad) and, in one way and another, arrive 
in New York in the time of AIDS, gay marriages, gay parenting and 
public access television gurus. The impeccable production was directed 
by Christopher Ashley. Alan Tudyk, Juan Carlos Hernandez, Becky Ann 
Baker and Kathryn Meisle head the excellent cast. Also note Amy Sedaris, 
as an unimpressed stage manager, and the scene-stealing Peter Bartlett, 
who plays the fashion-conscious Pharoah, just one of his five roles. 
Rudnick's second act goes on far too long, but he never bores. ``The 
Most Fabulous Story'' is a rudely hilarious lark. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>