<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981223.0355 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Muslim guerrillas in Lebanon fired Katyusha rockets into Israel Wednesday, 
wounding 13 people. The attack was retaliation for the killing of 
a Lebanese woman and six of her children in an Israeli bombing raid 
on suspected guerrilla targets on Tuesday. Prime Minister Benjamin 
Netanyahu pledged that Israel would respond to the rocket attack, 
which the Iranian-backed Party of God, or Hezbollah, said it had carried 
out. ``We cannot pass over this in silence,'' Netanyahu told reporters 
at Qiryat Shemona, which was struck by rockets. ``We will react according 
to our considerations at a time we see fit, and we will respond. Israel 
will respond.'' An estimated 20 to 30 rockets hit Qiryat Shemona and 
other communities in two salvos that began at 7:30 a.m., the army 
and residents said. A worker in a carpentry shop suffered moderate 
wounds, and 12 people were lightly wounded, the army said. Some buildings 
took direct hits. But serious casualties were avoided, because residents 
had been ordered to bomb shelters overnight in anticipation of an 
attack. The rockets landed at an hour when people usually head for 
work and drive children to school. ``I heard a few tremendous booms,'' 
Mali Nizri, whose house was hit, told Israel Radio. ``Glass flew. 
I was wounded in the hand. I lay on my son. I threw him to the floor 
so he wouldn't get hurt, because he was nearly killed by Katyushas 
last time. I lay on my son until the explosions stopped, and when 
I got up I saw the horror. My whole house was smashed.'' Hezbollah 
said it had attacked to avenge what it called the deliberate killing 
of the mother, Nadwa Othman, and her children. Her husband and a son 
were wounded. ``Once again the resistance has fulfilled its promise 
to protect our territory and our civilians,'' the group said in a 
statement. ``Violence must be answered with violence. Their blood 
must be spilled for ours.'' The bodies were buried in an eastern town, 
Baalbek, in a funeral that became an emotional protest against Israel 
and the United States. ``There is no God but Allah,'' mourners chanted. 
``Israel and America are the enemies of Allah!'' Israeli Defense Minister 
Yitzhak Mordechai expressed regret, saying the deaths were accidental. 
An army spokesman said the family's house had been hit by mistake 
in an air strike aimed at a Hezbollah training base and communications 
station near Janta in the Bekaa. The Israeli Army chief of staff, 
Lt. Gen. Shaul Mofaz, said in a television interview that a pilot's 
``incorrect target identification'' had caused the bombing error. 
A senior air force officer, identified only as Brig. Gen. Yossi, said 
at a news conference that two bombs had landed 300 to 400 yards from 
the base, hitting the house. The air force was investigating, he added. 
The air force has raided suspected guerrilla targets in Lebanon more 
than 100 times this year in a war of attrition with Hezbollah. The 
group is fighting to oust Israeli soldiers from a nine-mile-wide strip 
in southern Lebanon that Israel has held since 1985 as a buffer against 
guerrilla attacks across its border. Hezbollah has killed 20 Israeli 
soldiers this year and lost 37 men. Twenty-eight Lebanese civilians 
have been killed. Under a U.S.-brokered understanding reached in April 
1996 after a 17-day Israeli air and artillery offensive against Hezbollah 
in southern Lebanon, neither side may aim at civilians. But Hezbollah 
has fired Katyusha rockets at Israel several times in response to 
the killing or wounding of Lebanese civilians by Israeli forces or 
by their local militia ally, the South Lebanon Army. Visiting sites 
hit Wednesday by the rockets, Mordechai accused Hezbollah of ``blatantly 
violating'' the 1996 understanding by deliberately aiming at civilians 
in response to accidental killings by Israel. Drawing the same distinction, 
Netanyahu said, ``In contrast to the accident we had, in which civilians 
were tragically killed by mistake, there was malicious intent here 
to kill civilians and children on their way to school.'' The Qiryat 
Shemona attack reignited a debate here over the military presence 
in Lebanon. Agriculture Minister Rafael Eitan, who was army chief 
of staff in the invasion of Lebanon in 1982, said Israeli forces should 
widen the buffer zone to prevent rocket attacks from reaching border 
communities. The attack Wednesday was reportedly from areas north 
of the zone. A Labor Party legislator who wants a withdrawal from 
Lebanon, Yossi Beilin, said it was precisely the army's presence in 
the zone that was causing conflict harmful to Israeli civilians. ``What 
happened today in Qiryat Shemona is proof that the security zone cannot 
insure normal life on the northern border,'' Beilin said in a radio 
interview. ``Staying there is a deathtrap.'' The government has said 
it is prepared to withdraw if the Lebanese guarantee security along 
the frontier. But Lebanon and the main power broker in the country, 
Syria, have refused to provide such assurances, saying Israel has 
to withdraw without conditions. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>