<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981223.2000.2008 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The latest flashpoint in the Middle East is along the border between 
Israel and Lebanon. Today, guerrillas in south Lebanon fired dozens 
of rockets into northern Israel injuring at least 13 people. There 
might have been more casualties, but Israelis were ready for the attack. 
Two days ago, an Israeli air strike killed a woman and her six children 
in eastern Lebanon. It was the latest tragedy in a 13-year long war 
between Iranian-backed Hezbollah guerrillas and Israel. The BBC's 
Lise Dusette is in Jerusalem now. Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu 
today visited the area where the rockets landed. Can you tell us what 
his response has been? Well, his response was very categorical, but 
a little bit cryptic. He said that Israel would not remain silent. 
He said Israel would retaliate according, he said, "to our considerations, 
when we want." So he didn't spell it out, but he made absolutely clear 
that Israel would have to take some kind of retaliatory action. We 
know that this kind of guerrilla attack is not unusual along an Israel 
security zone in southern Lebanon. Is there any pressure at this point 
for Israel to withdraw its troops from the zone? Well, let us say 
that Israeli troops have been bogged down for a very long time, indeed, 
in this war of attrition in southern Lebanon. And usually, Hezbollah 
forces do not always or often launch attacks into northern Israel 
itself, so this will be seen as a severe escalation by Israel. Because 
in effect, its troops are in southern Lebanon ostensibly to protect 
the northern towns and settlements from this kind of attack. Of course, 
it will concentrate minds here on Israel's costly involvement because 
there have been greater calls, both from the public and politicians, 
including even from members of the government that Israel should find 
other ways to protect the north, that Israel should finally pull its 
troops out. But it's a very, very risky option for Israel because 
it fears that if it unilaterally pulls its forces out without guarantees 
from the Lebanese government or from Syria, the main power broker 
in Lebanon, then Hezbollah forces will just march right up to the 
border and penetrate and launch even more blistering salvos. Lise 
Dusette, could you remind us exactly why Israeli troops are there 
in southern Lebanon in the first place and what the roots of this 
conflict are? Well, sine 1978, Israel has occupied one part or another 
of Lebanon. In the early '80s, it actually invaded most of Lebanon, 
went right into Beirut. But when its forces pulled out, they remained 
in a small stretch of land about 15 miles wide in the south because 
it felt that it was too risky to leave its northern border exposed. 
But because, in fact, it doesn't really seem to be working, we also 
have seen 20 Israeli soldiers killed in southern Lebanon this year. 
Every time there is news of fighting in the zone, every Israeli mother 
worries because she knows that either her son is there, will be there, 
has been there. It's a very, very emotional issue here, and many Israelis 
feel that this is a useless war. Israel should not be involved there, 
and they want to find ways to get out. And those soldiers who are 
there, are they essentially occupying a stretch of Lebanon, in the 
correct term of occupation? Or does the Lebanese government actually 
support their presence? Well, the Lebanese government certainly does 
not support their presence, and the Lebanese government has repeatedly 
called on Israel to unconditionally withdraw from the south. But Israel 
does work with a sort of proxy militia, the South Lebanon Army there, 
and obviously one of its concerns is that if it unilaterally pulls 
its troops out, that members of its militia would just be slaughtered. 
So it also wants to try to find guarantees for their safety. But it's 
a very -- there are no easy ways out of Lebanon. It's another quagmire 
that Israel finds itself bogged down in. Mm-hmm. Perhaps you can clarify 
one other point. These cross-border attacks have come as the peace 
process is yet again stalled between Israelis and Palestinians. Are 
these two conflicts between Israel and the Palestinians and Israel 
and Lebanon entirely separate from one another? In a sense they are 
separate. They're different tracks. But Syria, the main power broker 
in Lebanon, obviously watches the Israel's negotiations, very difficult 
negotiations with the Palestinians very closely. And it is said that 
every so often Syria wants to remind Israel that it's a force to be 
reckoned with and that Israel has to consider Syria's interest as 
well. Of course, Syria's interest is, number one, to keep itself a 
place in Lebanon because it very much feels that it's its own backyard. 
But also, Syria wants to see the return of the Golan Heights that 
Israel has occupied. And so, therefore, it wants to remind Israel 
that there are other issues to be dealt with and that Syria will continue 
to be a thorn in Israel's side until these issues are taken care of. 
Thank you very much for the update. The BBC's Lise Dusette, speaking 
to us from Jerusalem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>