<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981223.2000.2899 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is The World. I'm Lisa Mullins. He's punk rock, and he's flamenco. 
He's got an ear for the sounds of a smash hit, but he doesn't care 
much for the record business. He speaks many languages, but he isn't 
happy until he can sing them. For today's musical closer, The World's 
Marco Werman introduces us to Manu Chao. On 42nd Street off Times 
Square, Manu Chao is wrapping up the final shots for a music video 
before he flies back to Paris. But this isn't some million-dollar 
video production. Manu Chao's manager is running the camera, and Chao 
admits it's just a Sony handycam. I won the prize for a video on MTV 
Latino for the best video. You see, you can make home-made video and 
win prizes. Although my videos are not so expensive as the videos 
of Michael Jackson, it's all my videos. We like it like that. If there's 
a way for Manu Chao to be unconventional, he'll find it. Manu Chao's 
Spanish parents fled the Fascist regime of dictator Francisco Franco. 
They settled in Paris, and that's where Manu Chao was born. When I 
was little kid in my house, there was a lot of people from Latin America, 
of course, a lot of people from Chile, from Argentina. Also there 
was a dictator in Uruguay. They came to Paris to hide from the dictator. 
So I was a kid and I was growing up with this kind of background, 
hearing a lot about South America, hearing a lot about the kind of 
idealistic things. Always the photos of Che Guevara in the house, 
you know? Manu Chao was weaned on a political baby bottle. As an adult, 
his music is also nourished by leftist politics. "Clandestino," the 
title track to Manu Chao's first solo album, is about a man who refuses 
to get identity papers and become part of the system. Manu Chao composes 
his songs in Spanish, French and English and likewise melds musical 
languages. He did the same thing when he fronted the million-selling 
French ethno-punk bank, Mano Negra. For me, it was natural to mix 
everything in my head, in my heart to mix Spanish with French, rock 
and roll with flamenco, it was all the music styles in my background. 
And also, North African music. It was not something we have invented, 
we say we're going to do this or do that. The songs come like that 
because it was mixed inside of me, inside of me and inside of my friends. 
When we formed Mano Negra, all the guys from the bands, they were 
all from cultures different. Some of them were from Latin culture. 
Some of them from North African culture. Some of them were French. 
So the mix was done. With compositions like "Super Chango," Mano Negra 
launched Manu Chao onto the music scene in the '80s. The band dissolved 
four years ago, but it wasn't a bitter separation. Actually, says 
Manu Chao, being with Mano Negra on the road showed him precisely 
that he didn't want to be a pawn in the music business. When we reading 
like a newspapers when we were kids about The Clash or about bands, 
we say we want to be like them. And when it started for us to like 
travel around the world like a rock band, it was OK. But after five 
months, we say, hey, this is not a nice life. Because the bands are 
touring, touring, touring, touring. But they see nothing but the countries. 
These days, ironically, it's on the road where Manu Chao is creating 
his music with the help of his portable recording studio. I found 
the studio of my life I've been expecting for years and years. It's 
the studio that I can get in my luggage. I don't like to bring musicians 
to a studio because when you go to a real studio like normal, people 
from the street and people they don't like -- because they say, "Oh, 
my God, what is that? A hospital or what?" You know? So I think it's 
better to bring the studio to the people's place. So that's why I'm 
happy with my little studio. I can go recording in the kitchen of 
my friend in Rio de Janeiro, in the circus in Colombia, anywhere. 
All you need is a little bit of electricity and go. Manu Chao also 
collects sounds. One of his favorites is an electronic keychain that 
makes a variety of video game noises. Chao uses it, he says, in a 
lot of his tunes as in "Bongo Bong." Mama was queen of the mambo. 
Papa was king of the congo. Deep down in the jungle, I start banging 
my first bongo. It's the story of a little monkey guy that lives in 
the countryside, and there he's the king of bongo because he plays 
good bongo, and people love him for that. He's the king of bongo. 
But the king of bongo, he wants more and more. So he leave with his 
bongo to the big town, to New York and say, "I'm going to get a bigger 
crown there." But in New York, he don't find any kind of bigger crown. 
He just find a ghetto and he just found that he have to sleep outside, 
and it's cold. But he don't mind. He say, "Anyway, no problem. I'm 
the king of bongo. I'm the king of bongo bong." He faith. On the ground, 
and he losing it bigtime. But I'm the king of bongo, baby. I'm the 
king of bongo bong. The single, "Bongo Bong," has the same goofy appeal 
as Harry Nilsson's 1971 hit "Coconut." But it's not getting much airplay. 
That's because when it comes to the music business, Manu Chao spends 
more time on the music than on the business. He doesn't listen much 
to what the promoters tell him. I don't care if what say the business 
or what they don't say. I make my music, and that's it. Actually in 
my life, I could die tomorrow. I'm full. I love my life. Now I can 
make music. I don't care if I sell or I not sell. So that's what makes 
me powerful. Power translates as ambition for Manu Chao. He's aiming 
to release an album a year, each focused on a different part of the 
globe. Manu Chao's current project, a traveling West African circus, 
going by train from Senegal to Mali. For The World, I'm Marco Werman. 
Mama was queen of the mambo. Papa was king of the congo. Deep down 
in the jungle, I start banging my first bongo. Every monkey like to 
be in my place instead of me. 'Cause I'm the king of bongo, baby. 
I'm the king of bongo bong. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>