<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981223.2000.0921 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The government of Senegal in West Africa is taking steps to ban the 
practice of female genital mutilation. The proposed law would impose 
a one year to five year jail sentence on anyone who carries out the 
procedure. Supporters of the practice say it's done for cultural and 
religious reasons. But opponents consider it an extreme form of oppression 
for women. Columbia University professor Nahid Toubia is president 
of an organization that's called RAINBOW, the Research Action and 
Information Network for the Bodily Integrity of Women. Dr. Toubia, 
could you give us some context for what's happening in Senegal now. 
We hear about this practice, considered a form of castration for women 
in several parts of the world, particularly in Africa. Why is Senegal's 
move to ban female genital mutilation across the country so significant? 
What's going on there is extremely exciting for all of us who have 
been working on this practice for a couple of decades. Senegal is 
not the only country or not the first country who's going to make 
it illegal. Because in 1994, Ghana made it illegal. In '96, Burkina. 
Last year, in '98, Codevoire and Togo. However, what's happening in 
Senegal is a very different process. About two years ago, a group 
of women in a village called Mallikundabar Bambara in rural Senegal 
were getting training on self-empowerment, where they get literacy 
training, information on health, information on women's human rights 
and also problem-solving and analysis. And they got the training without 
any mention of the issue of circumcision or genital mutilation. And 
by their own self-empowerment, by understanding how to read and write 
and process problem-solving, they came to the conclusion that this 
thing, this practice that happened to them is wrong. And they made 
a decision to actually stop it. Before we go on and talk more about 
the way that this grassroots movement worked, maybe you can remind 
us exactly what we are talking about here. Are we talking about specifically 
the removal of the clitoris? What's involved in this kind of mutilation, 
genital mutilation as it's called? In Senegal, as is true of most 
of West Africa, they practice local excision, which is removal of 
part of the clitoris and part of the labia minora. So what is it then 
about these programs or the programs in Senegal that is working where 
other programs elsewhere have not worked? In the past, a lot of the 
emphasis has been, "Oh, it's bad for you because it's going to cause 
you bleeding and infection and whatever," sometimes overexaggerated 
complications. Or even if they were to some extent real to a few women, 
they don't apply to everybody. So you're saying they didn't carry 
much weight? They didn't carry much weight. And it was also very much 
an outsider coming in, say "stop." You know, that kind of like, "Stop. 
Don't do." Mm-hmm. Rather than say, well, here is why -- how this 
weaves into the reality of life, your position as a woman, and getting 
them to reach that understanding for themselves. Professor Toubia, 
I wonder where your interest lies in this and why you feel so passionately 
about the issue? I feel passionate about it because I'm from Sudan. 
I'm a Sudanese woman and I'm an African woman. I come from a country 
where the most severe type of circumcision, genital mutilation occurs. 
In Africa, it's now all right and it's acceptable to talk about women's 
role in economic development, women's rights for education. But the 
whole dialogue about women's rights over their bodies is still a very 
-- it's in infancy, and it's very early in the discussion. And as 
African women, we feel it's about time we started the dialogue about 
women's control over their bodies in Africa. Professor Toubia, thank 
you very much for speaking with us. You're welcome. Professor Nahid 
Toubia of Columbia University is president of an organization called 
RAINBOW, the Research Action and Information Network for the Bodily 
Integrity of Women. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>