<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981223.2000.0698 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Humanitarian workers were back on the job in Baghdad today. Around 
100 United Nations workers who had evacuated to neighboring Jordan 
just before the air attacks have returned to the Iraqi capital to 
begin redistributing food and medical aid. The deputy coordinator 
for the UN's humanitarian program in Baghdad is Farad Zariff. Mr. 
Zariff, how do you first go about picking up the pieces after four 
days of bombings? For instance, what did you and what did your workers 
do today? The priority for us for the United Nations is to make an 
assessment of the damages caused as a result of the recent hostilities 
in all sectors of the economy that are related to the humanitarian 
program. We are now preparing ourselves to go to all the governorettes 
of Iraq and visit all sites that have been directly impacted by the 
air strikes. I know this is based on initial impressions, but can 
you give me your assessment at this point in terms of what kind of 
damage was done since the bombing, and how it's going to affect the 
work of humanitarian aid workers such as you? Well, it would be really 
difficult to make a judgment at this stage. We have, indeed, gathered 
some bits and pieces of information. For instance, the building of 
the ministry of health, the adjacent hospital, a number of schools, 
a number of water and sanitation plants and a number of production 
plants were either collateral or direct targets of hostilities. And 
as a result, the services that would have been rendered by these institutions 
were definitely interrupted during that period. We are not in a position 
as yet to say anything with regards to the magnitude of the damage 
caused to the infrastructure. If you can't talk about the damage, 
can you talk in terms of specifically what kind of damage you're looking 
at, even if we don't know the magnitude? In other words, how has your 
job changed in the wake of the bombings? It has not changed. It is 
in tandem with our overall responsibility under the humanitarian program. 
As you know, the oil for food program supports the humanitarian situation. 
Now, we are concerned whether or not the distribution of food commodities 
to the population have been interrupted in any part of the country. 
And if yes, to what extent, and what are the plans for remedying interruptions? 
For instance, any damage to water distribution network or electricity 
plants or education facilities, or anything like that. It will be 
measured and it will be assessed, and if possible, appropriate remedial 
measures would be taken in order to bring things back to normal. And 
I wonder if you can tell us a little bit about the people on the ground 
that you're speaking with there. Are they, at this point, coping well, 
even if there are no physical injuries, in terms of sort of psychologically 
coping with the aftermath of the attacks. How would you gauge how 
well they're doing? I'm pleasantly surprised to see that people are 
returning back to normal in terms of their psychology and emotions. 
They're going about their normal activities and work. You could see 
some of them starting -- repairing their houses or whatever belong 
to them. Emotionally and psychologically, I think the people have 
managed to cope with it quite admirably. Farad Zariff is the deputy 
humanitarian coordinator for the United Nations, speaking to us from 
Baghdad. Thank you very much for the update, Mr. Zariff. My pleasure. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>