<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981223.2000.2673 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Time now for the answer to today's geography puzzler. We're looking 
for one of England's most beautiful counties and the setting for many 
Thomas Hardy novels. It's also here that you'll find the Cerne Giant, 
a prehistoric figure carved into the hillside. The answer is the English 
county of Dorset, and the above suggests that Dorset is a quiet, mostly 
rural region where not a lot usually happens. So this week was definitely 
out of the ordinary. On Monday, a Dorset man unwittingly provoked 
a sequence of events that triggered an international rescue operation 
involving satellite tracking technology, the U.S. Coast Guard and 
a British helicopter. Details start in Dorset's Waymouth Harbor, where 
the local passenger ferry was having its emergency beacon replaced. 
Ferry company employee Simon Wilds picked up the old device. He put 
it in the back of his van and started to drive home. He didn't think 
twice when he hit a familiar pothole in the road. But the emergency 
beacon was jolted, and it started beaming its signal into space. A 
faraway satellite did what it was supposed to do, relay the message 
across the Atlantic to the Coast Guard in Miami. The Coast Guard pinpointed 
the distress signal to -- that's right -- Dorset, England, and contacted 
Britain's air and sea rescue service. A rescue helicopter was ready 
for action. Driver Simon Wild's boss Nick Dobbs picks up the story 
from there. The helicopter was deployed, searching obviously for the 
strongest signal and discovered the strongest signal, in fact, at 
Simon Wild's home. And he duly looked out the window and saw a helicopter 
flying above his house and put two and two together and suddenly realized 
that had a situation where the distress beacon had been set off. Some 
officials were amused to learn that the Coast Guard had been looking 
for a sinking boat in a residential neighborhood of Dorset. But Nick 
Dobbs says Simon Wilds wasn't so sure his bosses would see the humor. 
There was a slight shy look on his face or coy look on his face because 
he wasn't quite sure how we were going to react to it. Simon is actually 
quite a shy chap. He's not one to be exposed to the media, shall we 
say, but he was a little bit embarrassed about the incident. And obviously, 
it proves a point that as far as these kind of units, the concern 
is they are desperately sensitive. And obviously, he got caught out 
with it. But obviously, no harm done. Still, we assume that Simon 
learned his lesson. If you don't want the Coast Guard to send helicopters 
buzzing over your house, steer clear of those potholes. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>