<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981223.2000.2338 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This week is one of the busiest times of the year for air travel, 
which means airports will be more hectic, lines will be longer and 
passengers could be more unruly. It seems that once they step onboard 
a plane, more and more people these days are forgetting that stuff 
about good will to men and forgetting their manners. The phenomenon 
even has a name now -- air rage. The World's Alan Dow prepared our 
story. Come fly with me. Let's fly. Let's fly away. It wasn't so long 
ago that flying was something special -- a rare, exciting and sometimes 
romantic experience, and one could thrill at the thrust of takeoff 
and arrive at a destination faster than ever before. But these days, 
air travel has become a tedious and often stressful necessity in a 
world that expects us to do everything faster than ever before. Some 
passengers, it seems, just can't cope. Add alcohol to the equation, 
and the results are becoming explosive. He raised the bottle, and 
he hit it across my head. In October, British flight attendant Fiona 
Weir was attacked by a drunken passenger onboard a charter flight 
to Spain after telling the man he couldn't smoke in the lavatory. 
I've got my hands above my head, and he smashed the broken bottle 
across my arm. I was screaming for somebody to help me. My female 
colleague could do nothing because it was obviously happening within 
seconds. And if she had tried to help me, I'm sure he would have just 
put the bottle in her face. Weir's attacker was arrested and charged 
with assault by Spanish police once the plane arrived at its destination. 
But the problem of violent and abusive passengers is getting worse, 
according to studies carried out by some of the world's major airlines. 
Professor Gerald Post, who chaired a White House commission on aviation 
safety, says there are several types of unruly passengers. One, perhaps 
a symptom of our times, the individual who can't be told anything 
by anyone and believes he's entitled to the world's greatest treatment. 
Secondly, opposition to authority. "No one is going to tell me what 
to do." And this is related, I believe, to the issues of control. 
Giving up one's control to the air crew is associated perhaps by a 
magnified need to be in control. So when someone crosses that threshold 
says, "Don't do this. Button your safety belt. Do that, please," it 
can hit that button. And thirdly, the issue of anxiety -- fear of 
flying. Airlines say there's no excuse for violent or rowdy behavior 
onboard a flight, and the vast majority of passengers would, of course, 
agree. But air travel is now more accessible than ever before. It's 
relatively cheaper, and more people are flying. So the odds of sitting 
next to a troublemaker have increased. Travel writer Richard Parris, 
who spends a lot of time in the air, isn't surprised at this phenomenon 
of air rage. One spends hours at an airport checking in. The boarding 
procedures are very slow. The seats are crammed in, 10 abreast very 
often. Flights are terribly long. They're often delayed. Passengers 
know that the aircraft often gets warmer and warmer as the flight 
progresses. And today we have flights lasting up to 14 hours in length, 
crossing up to 10 time zones. And for years now, airlines have been 
handing out free drinks. So it's hardly surprising that we're seeing 
these incidents of unruly behavior. This month, a passenger on a flight 
from Thailand to Hungary punched a pilot and tried to choke an attendant. 
The crew and passengers strapped him to his seat, and a doctor onboard 
injected him with tranquilizers. By the time the plane made an emergency 
landing, the man had died from a reaction to the sedative. This is 
a very serious state of affairs. It is a growing phenomenon. It's 
growing in number, and it's growing in severity. David Learmount, 
an editor at the magazine Flight International, says airline officials 
worry about the possibility of an irate passenger attacking a pilot 
in the cockpit. That is a possibility. Flight crew have already been 
injured by obstreperous passengers. It is a danger to other people. 
Air crew have to act. Captains have to act on the assumption that 
it might go that far. And if they conclude that it might go that far, 
the pilot might have to divert the aircraft. Now, imagine the amount 
this costs the airline and the amount of inconvenience that the other 
passengers suffer. Basically, this is a crime. Many flight attendants 
are being trained to deal with violent passengers. They learn self-defense 
techniques, and some airlines now carry handcuffs onboard in case 
the need arises to actually restrain a passenger for the duration 
of the flight. Weather wise, it's such a cool, cool day. Maybe air 
travel isn't that special any more or maybe some people feel just 
buying a plane ticket entitles them to misbehave. Whatever the reason, 
to many people, air travel these days is about as much fun as riding 
the bus. For The World, I'm Alan Dow. Come fly with me. Let's fly. 
Let's fly. Pack up. Let's fly away. And don't tell your mama. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>