<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981223.2000.0384 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is The World. I'm Lisa Mullins. It's been four days since the 
United States and Britain halted their air strikes against Iraq. But 
in those four days, questions about the Clinton administration's long-term 
strategy toward Baghdad have become, if anything, more frequent and 
more hostile. Today, Washington suggested that its future strategy 
will not be terribly different from the policy it has pursued since 
evicting Iraqi troops from Kuwait in 1991. The White House says it 
will stand firm on keeping economic sanctions against Iraq. The World's 
Andrew North sounds out the policy debate. If there's one thing the 
recent U.S. and British air strikes on Iraq have achieved, it's been 
to throw every aspect of international policy on Baghdad open to debate. 
France, Russia and China, the most consistent critics of Washington's 
hard-line strategy, are all calling for new approaches, although they 
don't agree on what form they should take. France wants to reform 
UNSCOM, the disarmament body that has been at the center of almost 
every dispute with Iraq for the past seven years. Francoise Rivaceau, 
spokesman for the French Foreign Ministry, says a new UNSCOM should 
focus on monitoring weapons programs rather than destroying them. 
The best way to get complete and real control of Iraq armaments has 
to be based on cultivation and monitoring rather, obviously, than 
only on military strikes. As you know, we have always said that we 
wanted a strict implementation of the UN resolutions toward Iraq. 
Russia and China also want to reassess UNSCOM's operation tactics. 
But first, they want the special commission's chairman, Richard Butler, 
to resign. According to Sergey Lavrov, Russia's UN ambassador, Butler 
provoked the recent air strikes. The report which he submitted and 
which served -- which was quoted as a trigger for the military action 
was biased, and it was a provocation. Russia was the most outspoken 
in attacking last week's air strikes. Although apart from recalling 
its ambassadors to Washington and London, it took no substantive action. 
And today, the Kremlin's Washington representative returned to his 
post. Nonetheless, the White House is well aware that its policy on 
Iraq is coming under scrutiny as never before. The question today, 
of course, is where do we go from here? White House national security 
adviser Sandy Berger addressed the National Press Club in Washington 
today. He said the administration is not planning a full-scale U.S. 
invasion to remove Saddam Hussein. But Berger also said there was 
no question of easing the pressure on the Iraqi leader in the hope 
of winning his cooperation. We cannot evade the reality that Saddam's 
external aggression and internal repression were posed genuine threats 
to his neighbors and the world. Year after year in conflict after 
conflict, Saddam has proven that he seeks weapons, including weapons 
of mass destruction, not for some abstract concept of deterrence, 
but for the very real purpose of using them. And although the Clinton 
administration has said it will consider proposals for reforming UNSCOM, 
today its acting UN ambassador, Peter Burleigh, went out of his way 
to defend the disarmament body and its boss. The U.S. government views 
about UNSCOM are very clear. We admire the work they have done over 
the -- especially over the past year and a half, and year in particular, 
under very difficult circumstances. That includes the executive chairman, 
Richard Butler. So far, the only concession the administration is 
making to demands for change in Iraq policy is to discuss relaxing 
the oil embargo, providing that the Iraqis spend the extra funds on 
food and medicine. But in essence, the administration seems to be 
hunkering down for a policy of long-term containment. Anthony Cordesman 
of the Center for Strategic and International Studies says that's 
the only option. This is an agonizing problem, but so was the Cold 
War, and that lasted for 50 years. The Iraqi people are suffering. 
But the realities are that this is not a nation which is going to 
change its behavior. It is not a threat that you can ignore. And a 
lot of the criticism pretends that if you can ignore it, that somehow 
Iraq only left to its own devices would behave as a normal state. 
And Saddam Hussein, if he was only treated better, would behave as 
a normal leader. Well, I think that when someone has such a consistent 
behavior pattern over a period of nearly a quarter of a century, you 
have to deal with the realities and not with the hopes. Today, the 
UN Security Council is continuing its discussions on what to do about 
Iraq. But even if it is willing to listen to some new ideas, the United 
States has already made clear that on certain key issues, it won't 
compromise. It threatened to use its veto power if the Security Council 
attempts to lift sanctions. For The World, this is Andrew North. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>