<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981223.0500.0362 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Russia is asking U.N. Secretary General Kofi Annan, to submit an overall 
assessment of the disarmament and humanitarian situation in Iraq, 
as soon as possible. Moscow also calls on the U.N. Security Council, 
to formerly express regret about last week's British and U.S. air 
strikes. The question, of what this U.S. attack on Iraq accomplished, 
was discussed at a Washington conference, Tuesday. And, the answer 
varied from partial success, to nothing at all. VOA's Ed Warner, reports. 
Intelligence was better. Bombing was more precise, and less inhibited. 
That was the view of Michael Eisenstat, discussing the U.S. raid on 
Iraq at a recent meeting of the Washington Institute for Near East 
Policy. A military analyst at the institute, Mr. Eisenstaat, said 
the Clinton administration deserves some praise for the effort. I 
think the president and his senior advisors said all the right things. 
The military hit the right targets. With the containment reaching 
Cotadering and lacking the necessary support for a ground war to unseat 
Saddam, U.S. decision makers have to settle for half-measures that 
probably will never yield anything more than partial results. Less 
than partial, replied Elliot Cohen, Director of Strategic Studies, 
at the School of Advanced International Studies, at Johns Hopkins 
University. If you're Saddam Hussein, sitting there today, and you 
ask yourself, "Am I better off today than I was a week ago," it's 
conceivable to me that his answer would be "Yes." Mr. Cohen said the 
strike was not part of any larger strategy, and simply leaves Saddam 
Hussein stronger than, ever because he has stood up to the super-power, 
and can now end the weapon's inspections. "The only sound strategy 
is to reduce his military manpower," said Mr. Cohen. But the United 
States insists on keeping casualties, on both sides, to a minimum. 
Not a single American, or British life, was lost on the raids. ELLION 
COHEN; The most important measure of effectiveness, for this operation, 
is to be kind of brutal about it, not buildings destroyed, but people 
killed. Here, we really have developed a certain kind of skittishness 
about facing up to what it is we're really trying to do, which is 
to kill people. "The reluctance to take lives," said Mr. Cohen, "sharply 
limits the power of the world's only remaining super-power. It has 
awesome technology it is unwilling to use. Then why the bombing? Mr. 
Cohen says Iraq has few remaining weapons of mass destruction to destroy. 
Nor, could the United States eliminate them all, unless it wants to 
deny pesticides to Iraq, and abolish school laboratories. In his opinion, 
the attack was launched to preserve U.S. creditability. It seems to 
me this decision actually was made on autopilot. It goes back, a month 
ago; to the last standoff with Saddam, when the administration made 
a decision, which it never re-examined. The next time one of these 
things happens, they're just going to pull the trigger without thinking, 
and that's what they did. There was little thinking about the reaction 
of Muslims, according to some members of the audience. Ren Drihe Franc, 
executive director of an opposition group, the Iraq Foundation, said 
the United States may have been able to strike Iraq once, without 
the support of Arab countries. But, it is very difficult for them 
to tolerate the current strikes at Shortevic. And especially, I might 
add, strikes which don't have a big enough political result, and a 
political instinct. And, they're not tied to a political denoline, 
in Iraq. They're tied to punishment, or reprisal. Reno Franc said 
the United States will do better by working with the Iraqi opposition 
since discontent, in Iraq, is widespread. Ed Warner, VOA News, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>