<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981223.1600.0692 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Last week, when the U.S. House of Representatives impeached President 
Clinton, the deciding votes were case by moderate republicans. Several 
of them say they favored the lesser punishment of censure. But, they 
were not given that option by the House Republican Leadership. Now 
that the matter has advanced to the Senate, four republican House 
members, who voted in favor of impeachment, have sent a letter to 
Senate Majority Leader, Trent It calls on the Senate to consider censure. 
New York Congressman, Sherwood Boehlert, drafted that letter. Speaking 
today on ABC television's "Good Morning America," he said "Senators 
are, indeed giving censure proposition a lot of thought." There's 
very serious deliberations going on, right now. We wanted to add our 
voice. We did not want our votes misinterpreted. We did not have options 
in the house. It was either vote "yes," for impeachment, send the 
matter to the Senate for trial and consideration, or vote "no" and 
just walk away and do nothing. And, those were two, really, unacceptable 
alternatives. We think censure is the right way to go -- a strong 
censure -- a censure that represents punishment for the president 
for his misdeeds. The four republicans advocate a stiff fine for the 
president, and want to prohibit any pardon that would head off possible 
court action against Mr. Clinton in the future. Delaware Congressman, 
Michael Castle, was among those who signed the letter. He said some 
sort of censure seems inevitable, in the Senate. And he wants to make 
sure it represents a strong rebuke to the president. It's going to 
happen anyhow. There is no way in the world, with 55 republicans and 
45 democrats, you're going to get to the two-thirds, or 67 votes necessary 
for impeachment. So, ultimately, you're going to get the censure. 
If that is going to happen, shape it now. Shape it in such a way that 
there is a direct statement to the facts of this particular case. 
And, by the way, we're not saying " Do it." We're saying "Consider 
it." Along with the removal of the president, consider all the options. 
Look at the facts, and then make your decision. Mr. Castle said it 
was a mistake for his party's leaders to block consideration of censure, 
in the House. The Washington Post newspaper reports, today, that a 
dozen republicans, in the Senate, have been discussing censure. No 
Senate democrat is currently willing to convict the president on either 
of the two articles of impeachment approved by the House. Since 67 
votes would be needed to convict the president, all 55 republicans, 
and at least 11 democrats, would have to find him guilty of the impeachment 
charges. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>