<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981223.1600.2149 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
And I'm Tony Riggs along with Erin Brommet. This is VOA News Now. 
In the post cold-war world of low level conflict, in different parts 
of the globe, traditional diplomacy can be stretched too thin to be 
really effective. Increasingly, non-governmental organizations, or 
NGOs are being asked to fill, at least, part of that role that used 
to be left to governments. Some focus on humanitarian assistance. 
Others on civil institution building. Next on Dateline, a report broadcast 
earlier this year on the role of NGOs. Here's Pamela Taylor. Traditional 
diplomacy is government-to-government. Cease-fires and peace agreements 
are negotiated and signed by recognized governments. Otherwise, they're 
difficult, if not impossible, to enforce. But, the road between laying 
down guns, signing treaties, and actually achieving peace, can be 
a long one. Governments which have acted as mediators, can not always 
be there when conflicts are erupting in other parts of the globe. 
But non-governmental organizations can, whether they are giant aid 
agencies, like the Red Cross, and the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees, 
or small non-profit groups. A relatively new role for some NGOs is 
to train future diplomats. One such group is the Washington based 
Institute for Multitrack Diplomacy, headed by John McDonald, a U.S. 
ambassador in, both, the Carter and Reagan administrations. Mr. McDonald 
Mr. McDonald says it's not only recognized governments which seek 
his help, but also opposition figures and leaders in exile. We have 
been asked, for example, by the Dali Lama, to help him develop a different 
diplomatic aura, and how to negotiate with people, that they would 
interact with. We've been asked by Cuba. The foreign ministry of Cuba 
has invited us to train some of their diplomats. The foreign ministry 
in Israel has invited me twice. The most recent was in February of 
last year. A colleague of mine and I put on a week's training in the 
art of multi-lateral diplomacy, which is negotiating with three or 
more nations at the same time, like in the United Nations context. 
We've also been asked by the several people in Taiwan to do the same 
thing. And, now we've even been asked by the Palestinians, to help 
them. Mr. McDonald says NGOs are usually non-political. And, for that 
reason, are viewed as less threatening than government sponsored groups. 
We're not viewed as a threat, by governments. Because we don't try 
to solve the political problems dividing the country, but work with 
citizen leaders and provide them with skills that they don't have 
or build on the skills they already have. We're allowed to do this. 
John McDonald says the unofficial nature of NGOs will makes them invaluable 
adjuncts to official diplomacy, especially, he says, in a post cold-war 
world not structured to deal with the types of conflicts actually 
confronting it. From 1989 to 1992, experts have determined that there 
were 82 conflicts in the world in which more than 1,000 people were 
killed. Only three of those were wars. Now war is a legal term. It's 
a cross-border violation, one nation state invading another nation 
state, like the Iraqis invading Kuwait. That's a war. And, we're structured 
to cope with wars. Particularly effective now, at the end of a cold 
war. Security canuts of the U.N. charter have very definite rules 
at Geneva Conventions, and so forth. The remaining 79 conflicts, in 
that three year period, he said, all occurred within national boundaries. 
Mr. McDonald said the typical pattern is ethnic violence, or civil 
war situation, which gives rise to the delicate issue of sovereignty. 
The concept of national sovereignty is still there. And that says 
that you can't come into my country unless I invite you into my country. 
So, the people in power say we don't want your help, Mr. U.N. or whoever. 
We'll take care of these problems. And, of course, that's when the 
killing takes place. And so, today, there literally is no instrument 
that is recognized internationally that has the authority to go in 
without being asked, and help, except those rare cases under Chapter 
7 of the Charter of the United Nations, where Security Council rules 
that there is a violation of such importance that will move. But, 
that happens very rarely. John McDonald says his Institute for Multitrack 
Diplomacy, has brought many warring factions together, for talks in 
Washington -- many of them ethnic groups or political factions that 
previously had not spoken with one another, even in the United States. 
Some times NGOs are criticized for pursuing a western agenda, or for 
becoming too involved in local politics. Take a report, earlier this 
year, by the Washington based "Institute of Peace" on the role of 
NGOs in Bosnia's ethnically divided city. The report's author, urban 
planner Julia DeMichaelus, warned about the tendency of NGOs, like 
governments, who push their own agendas rather than listening to what 
the community wants. An example of that would be with the Bosnian 
Federation Forum, which is a select group of Bosnian politicians that 
was chosen by the American embassy to sign the legislation that the 
American Embassy writes, and push it through the Bosnian government. 
Now, most of these kinds of laws would be passed by the Bosnians, 
themselves, if given the time and the space to do so, with their own 
legal expertise, which is pretty impressive. You say they would be 
able to do this. I hear a "but" hanging in there. Would be able to 
do it but, the international donor community, and diplomatic community 
are in such a rush to put all of these structures into place, so that 
they can operate and achieve their own agendas. They don't allow the 
different Bosnians enough space to discuss among themselves. That's 
an interesting comment, because I've been to Bosnia, several times, 
and each time I go back, I hear criticisms on the ground that there 
are too many NGOs. Is there a grain of truth in that? Yes, there is, 
unfortunately, a grain of truth in that. And, I think we can distinguish 
between two types on NGOs. There are small activist NGOs which are 
not paying massive salaries, and are sending folks these human rights 
trained, local language-speaking people, on the ground to work with 
the communities. However, the larger, global NGOs are enforcing their 
own style, and type, of program onto the Bosnian people, which is 
inappropriate. They have acknowledged, within themselves, that they 
need to change how they are supposedly supporting Bosnians to rebuild 
their own society. One of the things they haven't yet acknowledged 
is that, if they substantially remove themselves and their resources, 
then the Bosnians would be able to focus on what they want their communities 
to be, and not to be polarized and distracted by what foreigners believe 
that they would like the Bosnian society to be. I suppose, ideally, 
the goal of the best NGOs is to make their own work obsolete. Yes, 
yes. Now, you recommend something very interesting in your report 
to the Institute of Peace, lessons for NGO implementers. When you 
say that they should strengthen the community and not the leaders 
-- but doesn't it mean we really need both? We need... yes. ...the 
official diplomacy on a leader-to-leader basis, even if we might disagree, 
very much with the leaders, and at the same time, the NGOs who are 
supporting the community efforts. Absolutely. It's up to each society 
to choose its own leaders. So even if our government disagrees with 
the philosophies and rules of a society, it's not our right to replace 
them. So, that their values, and their laws, are reflective of what 
we want. So, if we strengthen the community, then the community can 
decide. Julia Demichalus, speaking to us about her report to the Institute 
of Peace on NGOs and peace building in places like Bosnia. Thank you 
so much for talking to us. Thank you very much. The role of NGOs was 
the topic of today's Dateline. I'm Pamela Taylor. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>