<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981223.0500.1860 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Russia has called on the United Nations to evaluate the situation 
in Iraq, in the wake of last week's U.S.-led air strikes. The proposal 
also calls on the U.N. Security Council to express regret about the 
air strikes. But, the United States objects to that part of Moscow's 
proposal. Meanwhile, the United States says it's willing to consider 
expanding the Iraqi Oil for Food program, if the United Nations finds 
it necessary. However, a State Department official notes, Iraq has 
yet to take full advantage of the current program. VOA's Bill Rogers 
has this report. Under Secretary of State, Thomas Pickering, says 
Washington will carefully examine the possibility of expanding the 
U.N. Oil for Food program, if U.N experts say it's necessary. But, 
Mr. Pickering told reporters, Tuesday; it took Iraq seven years after 
the program was first introduced, before implementing was allowed 
by the U.N. Since then, he said, Iraq has been slow in pumping oil 
and exporting it in return for food and medicine. Adding that whatever 
change is made, Washington cannot force Baghdad to take full advantage 
of the program. The truth is that as you have stated they either haven't 
bought onto the program or are very, very negligent in implementing 
it. But, they bear the responsibility that it's taken a long time 
to get them to do more for their own people. We can open the door, 
but we cannot force them to walk through it. Mr. Pickering's comments 
came as U.N. council members held further discussions on what to do 
next, concerning Iraq, following the U.S. and British air strikes. 
Some council members have called for an end to sanctions, but Mr. 
Pickering ruled that out, Tuesday. Our policy is that, at this stage, 
there is a choice. Sanctions will remain in effect, if there is no 
disarmament. And, if there is no disarmament, we need UNSCOM, obviously, 
to ensure there is disarmament. If there is disarmament, if Iraq fulfills 
its obligations, under the Security Council resolution, then as we 
have always said, the issue of sanctions will be addressed, by the 
Security Council, in the context of those resolutions. The State Department 
official also dismissed calls by some Security Council members to 
change the role of the U.N. Special Weapons Commission, UNSCOM, which 
is responsible for searching for weapons of mass destruction in Iraq. 
Mr. Pickering said it would be a mistake to try to politicize UNSCOM. 
Bill Rogers, VOA News, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>