<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981223.0500.2693 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Autism is a bewildering neurological disorder that strikes its victims 
before the age of three, leaving these patients severely out of touch 
with the world, making normal life virtually impossible. Brian Sislak 
examines what researchers are learning about this rare, yet frustrating 
illness. Autism, derived from the Greek root autos, or self, is a 
life-long condition of withdrawal into oneself and extreme difficulty 
with social interaction and communication. It can involve long periods 
of self-imposed isolation, virtually total indifference, and lack 
of attention to others, late speech development, or unusual speech 
patterns, such as repeating what someone says instead of conversing. 
Often the autistic individual does not speak at all, or in some cases, 
apparently forgets how to speak. Physically, the individual often 
engages in repetitive arm flapping, or rocking back and forth, and 
self-destructive behavior like head banging. While three-fourths of 
autistic persons are considered mentally retarded, a large number 
show genius-like abilities in such areas as mathematics. Dr. Marie 
Bristol. One young man that I know, when he was young, you could say 
to him, "Joseph, what is 9,273 x 6,221?" And, before you could do 
it on the calculator, he could give you the answer. Dr. Bristol, of 
the U.S. National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, 
is an internationally known expert on autism. She said that it arises 
in the womb, or shortly thereafter. Four times as common in boys, 
as in girls, it's a problem with the so-called "hard wiring," in certain 
parts of the brain. It's believed to be genetic, although environmental 
agents, like certain drugs taken during pregnancy, might also be involved. 
Its comparatively rare, with 1 1/2 chances out of a thousand, of giving 
birth to an autistic child. Words are a problem for autistic persons, 
as Marie Bristol explains. The individual might know what a plate 
or a book is, but not know that the words, "plate" and "book", stand 
for those objects. BRISTOL; There are children, for example, who can 
sing commercials, who can recite the dialogue from a particular video 
they've seen on TV, but not be able to say something as cookie, or 
mama, or no. And, for many of these children, we understand, now, 
that they do not know what words are for. A key characteristic of 
autism, is heightened sensitivity to various stimuli, such as loud 
noises. Nancy Minsue, a neurologist at the Western Psychiatric Institute 
and Clinic in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, explains. Basically, they 
seem to perceive things in a heightened manner. They're even more 
aware of the details than we are. But they don't understand what's 
going on. They see every leaf on the tree, but they don't see the 
tree. Finding do the areas of the brain that are "miswired" in autism, 
is a leading frontier of neurological research. Marcel Just, of Carnegie 
Melon University, is using functional magnetic resonance imaging to 
map the autistic brain in action. The subject goes in the scanner, 
and has a little screen in front of him, and puzzles, or sentences 
appear on the screen. And, they do these puzzles and give an answer 
by pressing one of several buttons in various response alternatives. 
While they're solving these puzzles, we're recording the brain activity 
from every 50 millimeters of brain tissue, about once every second 
and a half. Researchers at the University of Chicago, recently identified 
a gene defect involving the brain chemical, Seratonin, in autistic 
children. The consensus clearly is, that multiple genes are involved 
in the brain "miswiring," leading to autism. Uncovering them might 
lead to gene therapy, that would correct the brain deficiencies, and 
the social and behavioral problems that accompany them. I'm Brian 
Sislak. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>