<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981223.0500.2205 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A published report says, none of the U.S. Senate's 45 democrats is 
currently willing to convict President Clinton on two articles of 
impeachment in the Monica Lewinsky scandal. The president faces a 
Senate trial, next month, on two articles of impeachment stemming 
from efforts to cover up an affair with Ms. Lewinsky. A vote by 67of 
the Senate's 100 members, to convict Mr. Clinton on either article, 
would remove him from office. The Washington Post says preliminary 
inquires show strong support for alternative punishment. Censure, 
which is a condemnation of his behavior, without removal from office, 
is the alternative now receiving significant attention. Censure is 
also considered the best deal Mr. Clinton can get from Congress. VOA 
Nick Simeone reports. The White House has been hoping lawmakers can 
quickly reach a compromise that would spare the nation, what could 
be, additional months of lengthy, and perhaps embarrassing, testimony 
about the president's relationship with Monica Lewinsky. Spokesman 
Bill Lockhart says the fact that several republicans in the House 
of Representatives say they favor a censure resolution, rather than 
pressing ahead with a full Senate trial, is a positive sign that Congress 
wants to put an end to the matter. We'll continue to make the case, 
publicly and privately, on the facts in the law, and more in the area 
of politics, that the country's looking for leadership to bring this 
to a bipartisan solution, quickly. As he as leaving budget talks at 
the White House, Tuesday, democratic senator, Christopher Dodd, told 
reporters an agreement that most senators could support -- one that 
would avoid a full Senate trial -- may be close. The next few days, 
he said, would be critical. What seems to be emerging, in my view, 
is that there are not the votes to convict this president for impeachment. 
There are the votes to censure this president. That seems to be a 
bipartisan consensus, that is emerging. If that is the case, and it 
appears to be, then it seems to me it's in the best interest of the 
Senate to move to that result, sooner rather than later. The White 
House won't speculate on what details it would like to see in a Senate 
proposal that would rebuke the president for being impeached for perjury 
and obstruction, including any requirement that he admit he lied under 
oath. Spokesman Lockhart says, that's for the Senate to decide, but 
he says, reasonable censure proposals that come forward in good faith, 
will be considered. Nick Simeone, VOA News at the White House. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>