<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981223.1600.1346 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
From late December through mid January, Americans are observing more 
Religious, and cultural holidays, than at any other time of the year. 
There's Jewish Hanukkah, Islamic Ramadan, Christmas, African-American 
Quonsa, New Years, old calendar Orthodox Christmas, and some others. 
Almost all U.S. schools take a winter break at the end of the year, 
and many parents take leave from work, so families can get together 
and celebrate. But, while most people take it easy during the holidays, 
the entertainment industry works hard. Restaurants, movie theaters, 
concert and dance halls are all a-buzz with holiday specials. Salatasa 
Hoke, has a report. From the end of November, until sometime in January, 
theaters in all major cities show classic holiday favorites, such 
as Tchaikovsky's ballet, "The Nutcracker," and the stage adaptation 
of "A Christmas Carol," by Charles Dickens. Performing Handel's 18th 
century oratorio, "Messiah," is a long-standing tradition in many 
churches and concert halls all across the country. Families enjoy 
these events, year after year, just like they enjoy the same Christmas 
dinner, and same Christmas ornaments, every year. Judy Kiseling, of 
the Washington Ballet, says some people who otherwise never go to 
the ballet, take their children to see the "Nutcracker" during the 
holiday season. The company has been performing the "Nutcracker" here 
since 1961. Miss Kieseling says, the production doesn't change much 
from year to year, only the dancers, of whom more than a half are 
students. We have a rotating cast. We have four Claras. We have a 
couple of nutcrackers. We have, you know, different children perform 
different roles at different performances. The most famous Christmas 
stage show in America, is at New York's Radio City Music Hall. The 
show called "Christmas Spectacular" has a cast of 180, including a 
famous chorus line, called the Rockets, singers and dancers who change 
costumes 8 times during each show. Howard Collins, the executive producer 
of the "Christmas Spectacular", says a million people see the show, 
annually, in New York City. But, the show also travels to other cities. 
Mr. Collins says, Radio City's "Christmas Spectacular" is famous for 
its two traditional parts. A segment inspired by the "Nutcracker," 
and a biblical vignette, focusing on the religious meaning of Christmas. 
The living nativity, which is the story of why we celebrate Christmas, 
and it's done with live animals and with a lot of wonderful costumes. 
And it's a great telling of this momentous story. And then the parade 
of the wooden soldiers, of which the Rockets are very well known for. 
Since 1933 in the show in New York that number has remained a fixture. 
Musical theaters, in general, are doing well, despite astronomical 
ticket prices. Some 30 million people attended the Broadway musical, 
last year, 10 million in New York City. And about 20 million attended 
touring performances. And the popularity of Alprine's, "All Son's 
Arise," especially among young Americans. Tickets for the most popular 
shows, during the holiday season, may be sold out well in advance. 
Television remains the most popular entertainment in the United States, 
and it's no different during the holidays Americans watch television, 
on average, four hours a day. And, according to some surveys, children 
spend more hours, per year, in front of television than in school. 
At this time of year, there are many good old classics on television, 
such as the 1940's movies, "Miracle on 34th Street", It's a Wonderful 
Life," "White Christmas," and "Holiday Inn." New Year's Eve is perhaps 
the biggest night for the entertainment industry, across the nation. 
While people tend to spend holidays like Christmas, Hanukkah, and 
Quonsa at home with family, on New Year's Eve, almost everyone is 
out, in restaurants, dance halls, theaters, even in the streets. But 
the day after that most exciting night of the year is relatively quiet. 
Many Americans, traditionally, watch live television broadcasts of 
college football, and the Rose Bowl parade from Pasadena, California. 
Others enjoy a traditional New Year's Day concert of waltz music, 
broadcast from Vienna, Austria. I'm Salasatas Hoke. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>