<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981223.1600.3169 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This year, California passed a controversial measure to ban bilingual 
education in the state's public schools. Implementation of the measure 
varies widely. And, as we hear from Mike O'Sullivan, the verdict is 
not yet in on the English immersion method for teaching immigrant 
students. California voters approved the measure, called Proposition 
227, last June. By September, it was in place in public schools, around 
the state. Bilingual education had been widely available for the past 
20 years. It was intended to help immigrant students make the transition 
to English, gradually, over a number of years. But, a group of Hispanic 
parents complained that their children spoke mostly Spanish in school, 
and were learning little English. They worried this would diminish 
their children's chances of entering college or of succeeding in a 
career. What they favored, instead, was called English immersion, 
in which students are placed in English language classrooms, and receive 
only limited help in their native language. The measure passed by 
a wide margin. But, its implementation was left to 1,000 local school 
boards. The California Department of Education, issued general guidelines. 
Leslie Demersemen the president of California School Board'aa Association 
says school districts interpret the new law in a variety of ways. 
The wording of Prop. 227, is very nonspecific. And, even the regulations, 
then that have been developed around Prop. 227, leave a lot of flexibility 
up to school districts. That's a very good thing, I think, for the 
children, because children learn in a lot of different ways. So, it 
would be a very unusual thing for there to be any single method of 
teaching children, that would work, and that would be successful for 
all the children. California has 5.7 million students in elementary, 
middle, and high schools. One quarter of them have limited English 
skills. Proposition 227 says that all must be placed in English immersion 
classes for the first 30 days of the school year. Afterwards, there 
are some options, according to Norman Gold, of the California Department 
of Education. Of course the starting point is the teaching of English, 
and English language instruction in the content areas for all students. 
But, the law explicitly lays out, waiver options for parents, and 
states that when those waivers are approved, the schools may -- in 
fact, must -- provide bilingual instruction, if that's an alternative 
adopted by the school district. So, while the intent of the proposition 
is to eliminate bilingual education, the law itself, brought in by 
Prop. 227, in fact, allows for bilingual instruction, under certain 
circumstances. And, those wavers are widely issued, according to Leslie 
Demersmen of the California Association of School Boards. Statewide 
records, however, have not yet been compiled. In San Francisco, as 
one local example, there are 20,000 students with limited English 
ability, says Sandina Robbins, a spokeswoman for the school board. 
But, within that figure, roughly half of the students are still in 
bilingual education classes. Now we call them English plus, English 
plush another language, because the instruction has always been access 
to learning English, but with support in the native language. Leslie 
Demersmen, of the California Association of School Boards, believes 
that dual language teaching should remain an option. She says successful 
transition to English only classes in the early years of schooling, 
is not the final test of the English immersion system. The supreme 
test is whether or not children actually can keep up and graduate 
with good skills, and can, then, go on to do whatever it is they want 
to do in their life. Ms. Demersmen says school districts must keep 
track of their students, at least through high school and college, 
to measure the impact of English immersion teaching. In the meantime, 
bilingual education will remain available for many students, whose 
parents believe they need it. California is the nation's most populous 
state, and school officials in other parts of the country are watching 
closely to see how the English immersion method fares here. Mike O'Sullivan, 
VOA News, Los Angeles. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>