<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981223.0500.1338 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A jazzy version of Handles' 250 year-old oratorio, "The Messiah," 
has become a new Christmas tradition in New York City. Correspondent, 
Martin Busch, reports. Five years ago, the founder and conductor of 
the Concordia Orchestra, Marren Allsop, decided it would be fun to 
both perform and hear, a jazzy gospel-style version of George Frederick 
Handel's, oratorio, "The Messiah." Concordia's executive director, 
Garbriela Blanco, says, Ms. Allsop took quick action. Well, actually 
I think it might have been Handel's idea as he, himself was really 
in to having a crowd-pleasing performance. But, in the 1990's version, 
it was Marren Allsop, herself, who thought that Handel might appreciate 
something that rocked out, today. So, she approached our two arrangers, 
Gary Anderson and Bob Christianson. They sat down and put together 
a gospel version, which I think Handel might have appreciated. Music 
reviewers have praised the modernized version of Handel's oratorio, 
re-titled "Two Hot to Handel, the Gospel Messiah." The New York pro 
says, "Marren Allsop has pulled it off. What a delight, uplifting, 
fresh, rocking. And yet, essentially respectful of Handel's themes." 
According to some historians, when England's King George II attended 
the premier of Handel's "Messiah," in London in 1743, the monarch 
was so enraptured by its "Hallelujah Chorus," he stood throughout 
its performance. Church and concert audiences have maintained that 
tradition ever since. But, Concordia's executive director, Gabriela 
Blanco, says "Audiences for Too Hot to Handel, do more than just stand." 
It is a crowd-pleasing performance that gets people standing up, screaming, 
shouting, at Lincoln Center's Aviary Fisher Hall, a place where you 
don't normally see people dancing in the aisles, and clapping in between 
numbers. And, I think Handel would have really gotten a kick out of 
seeing something like that. The New York Times describes the performance 
of "Too Hot to Handel," as a revival meeting. "The Hallelujah Chorus" 
was so ecstatically received, it was repeated as an encore. "Too Hot 
to Handel" has found an audience. Marren also created the 50-piece 
Concordia Orchestra in 1984, to play new music and to eliminate the 
barriers between Jazz and Classical Music. In 50 concerts, since it's 
founding, the New York based chamber ensemble has showcased the music 
of more than 100 composers, including 27 world premiers. Ms. Alsop 
believes Concordia's programs should be adventurous, accessible, and 
creative -- and one more thing, fun to hear. This is Martin Busch, 
VOA News, New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>