<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981223.1600.0359 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Just days after a major series of air strikes on Iraq, the United 
States is sending home, thousands of troops and some planes. Defense 
Secretary, William Cohen, says despite the cuts, a powerful force 
remains in place, that could strike Iraq again, if it threatens its 
neighbors. Jim Randall reports from the Pentagon. The order will move 
several dozen fighters, bombers, and other planes, back to U.S. bases. 
A number of ground troops are also heading home, and the thousands 
of sailors and Marines, aboard the aircraft carrier, Enterprise, and 
its escort ships, will head to the Mediterranean Sea, on a more routine 
patrol. Defense Secretary, William Cohen, says, that changes will 
cut U.S. forces to about 22,000 men and women, with about 200 aircraft 
and a dozen ships. That's about the same strength as U.S. forces in 
the Gulf before tensions, in November and December, sparked a sharp 
increase in U.S. military power, in the area. Mr. Cohen says, the 
remaining force will be enough to carry out air strikes he has promised 
to make, if Iraq resumes production of banned weapons, or otherwise 
threatens its neighbors. Mr. Cohen is visiting U.S. military personnel 
in Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, and aboard the USS Enterprise. That's the 
air craft carrier that launched many of the strike air craft that 
pounded Iraqi targets on four nights, last week. Mr. Cohen and other 
leaders of the U.S. military, make a point of visiting troops at Christmas 
time, when the strain of standing watch, far from home and family, 
seems greater than usual. Mr. Cohen tells sailors, airmen, soldiers, 
and Marines, the country appreciates their service and sacrifice, 
and that they're doing a good job. Back in Washington, members of 
Congress also praised the troops' performance. But, some questioned 
the wisdom of Washington's overall policy toward Iraq. Representative, 
Porter Goss, heads the House Select Committee on Intelligence, and 
he plans to hold hearings on the Iraq raids, early next year. And 
now there is questions about what has actually happened in terms of 
measuring success. What have we accomplished. And then there is the 
final question, of where exactly are we going? Is there a plan -- 
and the evidence is, there is none -- to go forward from here. Mr. 
Goss, a republican, says members of Congress are likely to ask pointed 
questions of the democratic Clinton administration, about the timing 
of the raids. He says they also want to assess whether the attacks 
helped, or hurt, Washington's efforts to stop the spread of weapons 
of mass destruction, and it's hopes of removing Iraqi leader, Saddam 
Hussein, from power. Defense Secretary, Cohen, says the raids were 
a success, while the commander Operation Desert Fox, General Anthony 
Zinny, says they may have been the most accurate campaign in military 
history. Mr. Goss does not dispute that, but says he wonders if the 
policy is aimed at the right targets. Jim Randall, VOA News, at the 
Pentagon. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>