<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981223.0500.0793 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Clinton, and his lawyers, are preparing for what could be 
a lengthy impeachment trial in the U.S. Senate, a trial that could 
lead to the president's removal from office. But, some democrats, 
and a few republicans, are considering a compromise punishment, known 
as a censure. As VOA's Jim Maolone, reports, a censure would allow 
President Clinton to finish his term in office. Censure, as a form 
of punishment, would include a public rebuke of the president, by 
the Congress, possibly combined with a substantial fine. As it stands 
now, the president has been impeached by the House, on charges of 
perjury and obstruction of justice. He now faces an impeachment trial, 
in the Senate, where he could be removed from office, if two-thirds 
of the Senate votes to convict him of high crimes and misdemeanors. 
Among those now embracing the censure idea, as an alternative punishment, 
are four House republicans who voted for the president's impeachment, 
last Saturday. Congressman, Mike Castle, of Delaware, is one of the 
four republican House members, who's now urging Senate Majority Leader, 
Trent Locke to consider censure as an alternative to an impeachment 
trial. I think it would be a terrible mistake not to consider a strong 
censure, at this time, along with the possibility of trial removal 
from office. On Monday, former presidents, Jimmy Carter and Gerald 
Ford, also proposed censure as an alternative to a Senate impeachment 
trial. As part of the Ford-Carter plan, President Clinton would have 
to acknowledge that he did not tell the truth in connection with his 
earlier denials of sex with Monica Lewinsky, an admission the president 
has, so far, refused to make. Despite this apparent hitch, the White 
House has been generally positive about the idea of a bipartisan censure 
proposal, which might short circuit a full Senate impeachment trial. 
This is Vice President Al Gore. I do hope that the United States Senate 
will rise to this moment, as it so often does, to be the voice of 
reason, deliberation, and healing that America needs. Some republicans 
object to the censure plan, on constitutional grounds. They say impeachment, 
by the House, and a trial in the Senate, is the only constitutionally 
permitted punishment for a president. But, constitutional scholars, 
like Harvard University law professor, Lawrence Tribe argue that censure 
would be permissible, as long as the president agreed to the terms 
of the punishment, including a fine, if necessary. But, there's nothing 
in the constitution that forbids arrangements of a voluntary kind 
between the president of the United States and, either the House or 
the Senate, or both, that would have the kind of elements that former 
presidents Ford and Carter have proposed. White House aides indicate 
that the sticking point in any censure deal might be the president's 
reluctance to admit to lying under oath, an admission which his lawyers 
fear would leave him vulnerable to prosecution, once he leaves office. 
But, such an admission may be crucial for Senate democrats, like Senator 
Dianne Feinstein, of California, who says the president must be willing 
to admit to wrong doing before she would agree to a censure deal. 
I think the important thing, to me, is that there be an admission 
of culpability, an admission of the seriousness of not telling the 
truth under oath. Most political analysts now believe it's likely 
that the Senate impeachment trial will begin in early January, as 
scheduled. But, they also expect the "behind the scenes" negotiations 
on a censure deal to continue even after the trial opens, in an effort 
to find a way to avoid, what could be, a lengthy and divisive trial. 
Jim Malone, VOA News, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>