<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981013.0576 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
BELGRADE, Yugoslavia (AP) _ U.S. envoy Richard Holbrooke proclaimed 
a breakthrough in efforts to end the Kosovo crisis after weeklong 
talks with President Slobodan Milosevic. But, he warned, ``we're not 
out of the emergency yet.'' He said it's up to Milosevic's government 
to prove its commitment to international demands it has agreed to 
honor. Milosevic agreed Monday to withdraw his forces from Kosovo, 
begin peace negotiations with separatist ethnic Albanians and allow 
some 2,000 international observers into the troubled Kosovo province. 
In a rare national television address, the Yugoslav leader declared 
that the agreements ``avert the danger of a military intervention 
against our country.'' ``Our task is to accelerate the political process 
and economic recovery of our country as a whole,'' Milosevic said. 
It was the first time the Yugoslav president had addressed the nation 
since the 1995 Dayton peace accords which ended the war in neighboring 
Bosnia. Tuesday's developments capped a dramatic series of developments 
to force an end to Milosevic's crackdown against ethnic Albanian rebels 
in the southern province in Serbia, the dominant Yugoslav republic. 
Before his television address, Milosevic said the agreement demonstrated 
his government's commitment to the peace process, but also reflected 
his position that the demands are unwarranted. ``The steps which our 
country is taking to solve the Kosovo problems by peaceful means show 
our firm commitment that all questions can be solved by political 
means, but also the determination to protect the country's territorial 
integrity and sovereignty,'' he said in a statement. Since the crackdown 
began Feb. 28, Milosevic has insisted the crisis was an internal matter 
in which foreign powers should play no role. The crackdown was aimed 
at crushing the Kosovo Liberation Army, fighting for independence 
of the majority Albanian province, which is a part of the Yugoslav 
republic of Serbia. Hundreds of people have been killed in Kosovo 
and hundreds of thousands of people have been forced from their homes 
during the seven-month operation. International leaders stepped up 
efforts to resolve the crisis because of fears that thousands of homeless 
refugees would die if they could not return to their homes by the 
time winter sets in. Yugoslavia expects that the verification mission, 
to be led by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, 
``will eliminate false, untrue and malicious reports about the situation 
in Kosovo,'' Milosevic said in his statement. To make sure Milosevic 
abides by the agreement, NATO agreed early Tuesday on the final step 
needed to authorize airstrikes. The 16-nation alliance set a four-day 
deadline for Milosevic to begin complying with international demands. 
In the Kosovo capital Pristina, an ethnic Albanian politician who 
claims to speak for the KLA. said he was pleased by the NATO action 
but expressed skepticism that Milosevic would live up to the agreement. 
The politician, Adem Demaci, said he was disappointed that the verification 
force would be unarmed. In neighboring Albania, Foreign Ministry spokesman 
Sokol Gjoka said he hoped Milosevic ``will not play with his promises, 
like he has done in the past.'' Kosovo rebels maintain sanctuaries 
in northern Albania. Ethnic Albanian rebels have insisted on independence 
rather than regaining the autonomy Milosevic stripped in 1989, and 
some militants want to establish a ``Greater Albania'' encompassing 
all Albanian-speaking communities in the southern Balkans. But international 
leaders oppose Kosovo independence, fearing that could lead to further 
instability in the tense Balkans. After late night meetings in Brussels, 
Holbrooke returned Tuesday to Belgrade and reached the agreement with 
Milosevic. ``We hope this will mark a turning point in the right direction. 
But the proof ... is in compliance with U.N. resolution 1199 and with 
actions on the ground in Kosovo,'' the U.S. trouble-shooter said. 
Soon after NATO formally moved to the verge of airstrikes, U.S. President 
Bill Clinton announced key concessions by Milosevic. NATO took its 
decision after Holbrooke flew to alliance headquarters in Brussels, 
Belgium, to brief ambassadors on his talks with Milosevic. Holbrooke, 
who noted that the deal will not affect existing sanctions against 
Yugoslavia, said the key to the accord was Milosevic's decision to 
allow a 2,000-member ``verification mission'' and to permit ``aerial 
verification'' by non-combat aircraft that could begin as soon as 
the end of the week. In addition, political negotiations with the 
ethnic Albanians will continue in Kosovo, led by Christopher Hill, 
the U.S. ambassador to Macedonia. In Brussels, NATO sources, speaking 
on condition of anonymity, said Milosevic must take four steps: immediately 
withdraw special troops from Kosovo, sign an agreement with the OSCE 
on the verification mission, sign an agreement with NATO on the airborne 
reconnaissance and hammer out a ``framework agreement'' by November 
outlining future talks with ethnic Albanians. The agreements with 
OSCE and NATO are expected to be signed within days, the sources said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>