<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981013.0281 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The third round of talks aimed at finding a peaceful solution to ethnic 
and political conflict in Burundi was set to begin Tuesday afternoon 
with four topics on the agenda, a spokesman for mediator Julius Nyerere 
said Monday. Gen. Hashim Mbita said all the delegations and special 
envoys Aldo Ajello of the European Commission and Howard Wolpe of 
the United States had arrived, and the meeting would open formally 
at 4 p.m. (1300gmt). On Monday there were reports that the government 
of President Pierre Buyoya was considering a walkout if sanctions 
imposed by neighboring countries two years ago when Buyoya seized 
power were not lifted. Sources close to former Tanzanian President 
Nyerere say he was not keen on lifting the sanctions until he sees 
how Buyoya's government performs at the latest round of talks, and 
Mbita said discussion of sanctions was not on the agenda. Subjects 
on the agenda included the adoption of general rules of negotiation 
and the appointment of chairmen of committees that will discuss the 
issues in the Burundi conflict. Two others dealt with administrative 
points. The Burundi government delegation rejected the proposal that 
Nigerian Gen. Victor Mallu, who was in charge of a West African peace-keeping 
force in Liberia, head the committee on peace and security. No reason 
was given for the rejection. For Etienne Karatasi, head of the preominantly 
Hutu Palipehutu party, the peace and security committee would play 
a key role in the negotiations. ``When there is security for everyone, 
it will be possible to arrive at appropriate solutions to other questions,'' 
he said. The first round of all-party talks opened in June and was 
followed by another in July when a cease-fire more or less took hold 
in most of the country. The sanctions were imposed to force Buyoya, 
a retired Tutsi military officer who had previously served as president 
from 1987 to 1993, to return to a constitutional regime and begin 
talks with Hutu rebels. Buyoya claims those conditions have been met 
and that the holding of the talks in which all major political parties 
and rebel groups are represented is proof. At least 200,000 people 
died since October 1993 when Tutsi paratroopers assassinated Burundi's 
first democratically elected president, Hutu Melchior Ndadaye. There 
were initial widespread reprisals by majority Hutus against minority 
Tutsis, but because the Tutsis control the army, they seized the upper 
hand and drove many Hutus out of Bujumbura, the capital and largest 
city in the tiny central African nation. Buyoya said he intervened 
in July 1996 to stanch the bloodshed after a coalition government 
was unable to control the situation. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>