<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981013.1108 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
On the eve of his departure for a make-or-break Mideast summit in 
Washington, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said Tuesday no deal 
would be signed on an Israeli troop pullback hours after an unknown 
assailant fatally shot an Israeli. The violence underscored the key 
issue of Thursday's summit: Netanyahu's demand that the Palestinians 
do more to prevent terror attacks against Israelis. ``In light of 
this gloomy reality, there is absolutely no chance, at this stage, 
of signing an agreement,'' said a statement released by Netanyahu's 
office. Netanyahu has agreed in principle to hand over 13 percent 
of the West Bank, with some restrictions. The United States wants 
Netanyahu and Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat to conclude the agreement 
on the troop withdrawal. But Netanyahu has come under increasing pressure 
from right-wing members of his government and newly appointed Foreign 
Minister Ariel Sharon, who oppose ceding land to the Palestinians. 
The key issue to be tackled in Washington is an agreement on what 
constitutes a good faith Palestinian crackdown on Islamic militants. 
On Tuesday, Netanyahu's Cabinet formulated a list of nine demands 
that the Palestinians must meet before a withdrawal can take place. 
They include cooperation on security, an end to public incitement, 
disarming militants and decreasing the size of the Palestinian police 
force. The Cabinet also said the Palestinians must remove clauses 
from their charter calling for Israel's destruction, arrest and extradite 
suspects in terror attacks and fight terror. Hard-liners in Netanyahu's 
coalition issued a new ultimatum Tuesday, saying the premier will 
have to choose between staying in power and signing a West Bank withdrawal 
in Washington. Netanyahu said he would bring back any deal for government 
and possibly parliamentary approval before a signing. But Michael 
Kleiner, who represents a powerful 17-member right-wing block in Netanyahu's 
coalition, said any indication that Netanyahu would agree to a pullout 
could topple his government. ``To us, initialing is agreement, and 
that would be enough for us to bring down the government,'' Kleiner 
told The Associated Press. Israeli Cabinet Secretary Danny Naveh said 
the government ``is seeking to reach an agreement with the Palestinian 
Authority on the condition that it will fulfill its commitments and 
Israel's security needs will be answered,'' he told reporters after 
the Cabinet met. The National Religious Party said it also would bring 
down the government if Netanyahu reaches a deal without securing the 
demands. The party, the patron of the Jewish settlement movement in 
the West Bank and Gaza, has enough seats in the 120-member parliament 
to rob Netanyahu of his parliamentary majority. Netanyahu said he 
would stick to security demands during the Washington talks. Arafat 
said many differences remained. ``There's a lot to be solved, if not 
here, then'' in Washington, he told reporters. Netanyahu condemned 
Tuesday's fatal shooting of two Israeli men bathing in a spring near 
the communal farm of Ora west of Jerusalem. Itamar Doron, a 24-year-old 
student from Ora, was killed and his friend, who was not identified, 
was in critical condition in Jerusalem's Hadassah hospital with gunshot 
wounds to the chest and stomach. Netanyahu said that if the assailants 
fled to Palestinian territory, as has been the case in the past, Arafat's 
Palestinian Authority must work immediately to apprehend them. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>