<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981013.1112 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Saddam Hussein and his top advisers decided Tuesday to delay 
a decision on resuming cooperation with U.N. weapons inspectors, the 
official Iraqi News Agency reported. INA said the decision came at 
a meeting chaired by Saddam of the Revolutionary Command Council and 
the regional command of the Baath party. The Iraqi leaders heard a 
report from Tariq Aziz, Iraq's deputy prime minister, who returned 
to Baghdad after meetings in New York with U.N. Secretary-General 
Kofi Annan. ``It was decided during the meeting to resume the discussion 
of these issues in a forthcoming meeting,'' INA said. It did not say 
when this would be. The meeting here came as top U.N. weapons inspectors 
briefed the U.N. Security Council on the stalled arms inspections 
and U.N. efforts to determine whether Iraq loaded VX nerve gas into 
missile warheads. Earlier in the day, some 25,000 Iraqi women marched 
through the streets of Baghdad in a government-organized protest to 
express anger at U.N. trade sanctions. It was the largest women's 
protest in Baghdad since the sanctions were imposed on Iraq in 1990 
to punish it for invading Kuwait. Iraq and the United Nations have 
been at odds over U.N. weapons inspections, which were mandated by 
U.N. resolutions following the 1991 Gulf War, which ended Iraq's seven-month 
occupation of Kuwait. Iraq on Aug. 5 announced that it was suspending 
cooperation with U.N. weapons inspectors. The U.N. Security Council 
retaliated by canceling its regular reviews of the trade sanctions. 
The sanctions limit Iraq's sale of oil, its economic mainstay. The 
Security Council has said they cannot be lifted until the inspectors 
certify that Iraq has eliminated its weapons of mass destruction. 
The Iraqi agency said that at Tuesday's meeting, Saddam and his aides 
discussed ``the flagrant American interference during the latest period 
in Iraq's domestic affairs.'' The leadership was particularly angry 
at a decision by the U.S. Congress to channel up to dlrs 97 million 
in military aid to opposition groups seeking to topple the Baghdad 
government, INA said. The legislation also provides dlrs 2 million 
to fund Radio Free Iraq to broadcast anti-government propaganda. The 
leadership termed as ``flagrant interference'' in its national sovereignty 
meetings by U.S. officials with Kurdish leaders. The talks were aimed 
at ending infighting among the Kurds, who have set up a semi-autonomous 
region in northern Iraq. The Iraqi leadership also lashed out at U.N. 
weapons inspectors for allegedly giving Israel ``sensitive and basic 
information on Iraq's security and its armed forces.'' It was a reference 
to disclosures by Scott Ritter, a U.N. inspector who resigned in August, 
that he received help from Israel in the search for banned weapons 
in Iraq. During the morning demonstration, the women protesters carried 
anti-American placards and shouted slogans against the U.S. government. 
``America is the enemy of God,'' they screamed as they approached 
the offices of the U.N. Development Program in Baghdad, where the 
organizers handed a letter of protest. Most of the women were clothed 
in black veils and many slapped their faces and beat their breasts 
at the sight of cars carrying symbolic coffins of children. Authorities 
say thousands of children have died because of medicine shortages 
caused by the sanctions. Iraq has often used such processions to try 
to get world backing for lifting the sanctions. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>