<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981013.0130.0248 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
president clinton paused during the fund-raising activities, and condemned 
the beating death of a gay university of wyoming student. and he called 
on congress to pass legislation that would make it easier to prosecute 
hate crimes under federal law. 21-year-old matthew shepard died monday 
five-days after he was found pistol-whipped and lashed to a fence 
post. president clinton says there is no place for such an act in 
american society. the thing that's special about america is that we're 
suppose to create a place for every law abiding citizen in this country 
no matter how different we all are one from another, by race, by religion, 
by circumstance, by neighborhood, no matter what. one of the things 
i've tried hardest to do as president, i think, with more success 
in the country than in washington d.c. is to reconcile americans to 
one another. across the country, people are expressing outrage over 
shepard's brutal death. judy fortin reports. one more song i will 
never forget from candlelight vigils in his home state of wyoming 
to a street corner in san francisco, to the south lawn of the white 
house, people are reacting to the death of matthew shepard, a 21-year-old 
gay man. in our shock and grief, one thing must remain clear -- hate 
and prejudice are not american values. shepard died early monday from 
injuries he received last week during a brutal beating. police say 
the two primary suspects intended to rob shepard. but others claim 
shepard was targeted because of his homosexuality, fueling the national 
debate about hate crimes. i hope that in the grief of this moment 
for matthew shepard's family and in the shared outrage across america, 
americans will once again search their hearts and do what they can 
to reduce their own fear and anxiety and anger at people who are different. 
and i hope that congress will pass the hate crimes legislation. only 
21 states have hate crime laws that relate to offenses based on sexual 
orientation. wyoming isn't one of them. the state's governor says 
shepard's father is concerned some organizations are overreacting 
and that matthew's tragedy will be turned into a national agenda. 
matt's father also said don't rush into just passing all kinds of 
new hate crime laws, be very careful of any changes and be sure you're 
not taking away rights of others in the process to race to this. shepard's 
family isn't alone in urging caution. the reason this is making national 
headlines is because it can be used by certain people to promote their 
political agenda. whether or not that's the case, gay rights groups 
are speaking out. we must take a stand. we must have public officials 
that come out and recognize and help to broaden people's understanding 
that lesbians and gay men are treated differently in america from 
any other group. while the national debate swirls around them, shepard's 
parents are faced with the task of burying their son. a memorial fund 
was established in matthew's name. his parents say the money will 
go to things he believed in. judy fortin, "headline news." 
</TEXT>
</DOC>