<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981013.2100.2042 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We reported here last evening that in Russia rumors are flying that 
President Boris Yeltsin is seriously ill. U've seen the videotape 
perhaps where he nearly fell down at a public appearance over the 
weekend. As Dana Lewis tells us, the evidence is growing that Yeltsin 
is not a strong leader. When the leader of the second largest nuclear 
power wobbles, the world woirds. Russian President Boris Yeltsin leads 
on the leader of Uzbekistan. A day later, doctors order the 67-year-old 
home early from Kazakhstan, where he appears disoriented, where even 
signing his name is a challenge. A Russian newspaper carries the headline 
"is Boris no longer along for the ride" and Russians spess concern. 
I doubt there's anyone running is place, says Alexandra lavrinyenko. 
Slava vernyeen -- it's time to place Yeltsin. If Yeltsin falls down, 
Russia will get better. Mikhail vinogradov works in Moscow, treating 
psychiatric disease. While he hasn't treated Yeltsin, the symptoms 
he sees, like the September blackout to his awkward, confused appearance, 
all add up to a verify serious lness. The president of any country 
should be healthy, not just physically but, more importantly, mentally. 
Alzheimer's or Parkinson's damages the mental activity. What we see 
every day on the television attests to the fact the president is not 
capable of working, maybe not even competent at all. Damage control 
at the Kremlin. Dmitri yakushin says his boss only his bronchitis 
Alzheimer's? He calls that speculation by doctors unethical. Still 
there is no denying Yeltsin has had major health problems including 
major heart surgery two years ago. Today, Russian television agreed 
to a Kremlin request not to show the latest video. Still, few here 
believe Yeltsin only has a cold. I'm afraid to say mentally, the president, 
he's not in charge of the nation and it is high time to start thinking 
really who is. Prime minister Yevgeny Primakov is managing day to 
day problems. T Russia, growing -- drowning in deep economic crisis, 
is growing restless. The communists are even punching -- pushing for 
impeachment. In principle, it means the president must go. Politically 
he has already gone. Now we are living in the post yementsyelts era. 
In St. Louis this weekend, former Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev 
warned if Yeltsin doesn't voluntarily step down, if there aren't elections, 
in his words, chaos and collapse. Nobody is ruling this country. Yeltsin 
and his country wobble dangerously forward. A new poll indicates only 
2% of ssians trust their president. Boris Yeltsin, once strong, now 
just holding on. But for how long? Dana Lewis, NBC news. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>