<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981013.2100.0235 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Today's layoffs and cutbacks at Merrill Lynch, just one firm, are 
in one way just a headline, a localized aspect of this story at reaches 
all away across the country. With us again this evening, veteran financial 
journalist Tyler mathison from snbc headquarters. Tyler some say look 
at the advertising business for the first sign of a downturn, others 
say look at the printing business. But as we show a list of companies 
and the number of cuts, is there anything that can be gained by looking 
at this as a whole? What is going on here? This is not just a Wall 
Street phenomenon, not just New York City, it is all across the country, 
from companies like Raytheon to Intel, the most powerful semiconductor 
business in the world, Nike, Gillette -- no more American brand than 
that. And all these companies are cutting back their work forces. 
why? Mostly, not exclusively but mostly because of a kind of global 
slowdown, especially in Asia where a lot of these companies do a lot 
of business. But it's coming to neighborhoods across the country. 
Main street U.S.A. as well. We know we've seen a ection. You and I 
talked last evening about whether or not this is a full-blown recession. 
Any thoughts on that today? No, not really. Remember the economy has 
been chugging along very nicely. In the most recent quarter for which 
we have numbers, which was the quarter that ended back on the first 
of July, the economy was still growing about 2%, about half as fast 
as in the first quarter of this year and I don't think many people 
would expect it to grow much faster than that in the quarter we're 
in now. The jury is still out about whether we're going to go into 
a recess segs. There is a staying on the stocket that the stocket 
has predicted 11 out of the last five recessions. We always like to 
leave people with some glimmer of good news. Any silver lining today? 
The underlying economy is still pretty strong, particularly in the 
United States but what we're seeing around the world is coming home 
to roost in a lot of bellwether mpanies. A lot of companies are trimming 
back the sails, battening down the hatches for what is probably T 
a full recession. Only J.P. Morgan has predicted a recession in 1999. 
Most think we will continue to move along albeit at a slower pace. 
Tyler mathison, thank you. A lot of prices retreaeas treated today. 
The Dow Jones lost 63, a lot of it because of southeastman Kodak, 
which lost 13% of its stock value in a day. NASDAQ down over 36.5, 
1509. I guess certain investments, there's a lot of bargains still, 
they keep telling us. The advice to others continues to be Hang on 
for the ride. I think Hang on for the ride. If you're a brave person 
it might be time to go in for bargains. But as we mentioned last night, 
lot of companies are coming out with profit reports, many not particularly 
Rosie. Tyler mathison on duty tonight in snbc. Ank you very much. 
Thank you, Brian. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>