<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981013.2100.0631 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
They were known as the wise men. A book was written about them. They 
rebuilt post-war Europe, kept America basically cool during the cold 
war and while they might have badly misjudged the Vietnam war they 
did decide that it was time for Dick Nixon to go and told him so. 
That brings us to present day and the search as some columnists have 
been doing for eir modern counterparts. Where have all the wise men 
or all the wise people gone? With us tonight, two men who spoke on 
behalf of two presidents this succession. Jody Powell lived with governor 
Carter during the campaign, then was press secretary for President 
Carter. Ron nessen was President Ford's press secretary and the very 
first press secretary, if memory serves, to appear on "Saturday night 
live." Rhonda guess -- Ron nessen, we'll begin with you. There was 
a Johnny appel column in the paper yesterday, speculating who are 
today's wise men. He brought up names like Nunn, strouse, and Cutler. 
Also I would add President Carter to that and on the republican side 
President Ford. Jim Baker, Howard Baker. Bob Dole. Bob Michael. All 
those, I think, are wise men who have, I think, as time has gone by, 
their partisanship has burned away and they've become re statesman 
like. And Jody Powell, considering the current firm Powell-Tate, your 
partner say woman, let's make this less gender specific and talk about 
the wise people. Who do you think they are today? I'll stay in the 
same gender for a moment. It struck me how many bobs there were in 
Ron's list. I'd add Bob Strauss to that list also. I think though, 
that it's not a question that we don't have wise men and women today. 
I think what you're seeing that this country has become progressively 
more difficult to lead over the past few decades and so the role that 
men and men like this can play has been -- has been, I think, greatly 
limited. Of course their role, Jody Powell, and you remember this 
om your years, remember when the president was having trouble and 
he brought in Lloyd cut lesh -- Cutler, surprised the entire journalistic 
community, brought in hedly Donovan from "time" magazine. Traditionally 
they show up especially a Washington outsider to guide us away from 
the rocky shores. Well, that is true. I think the quality of advice 
maybe as good or perhaps even better than it has ever been. But traditionally 
what those individuals that we historically recall could do was not 
only give good advice but they were a position to make things happen. 
To pull together small groups of ople and make decisions. The problem, 
I think, now is that there are no small, very few small groups of 
people who can make decisions about important matters. We are living 
in a society, in a world in which small D democracy much more with 
us than it ever has been. And as we all know, the flow of information 
and the reaction to information is many times more rapid than ever 
before. So that possibility for deliberation and reflection and careful 
zhrigs-making is there but much more difficult to accomplish these 
days. Ron nessen, let's be candid here. The discussion of wise men 
owes its people mostly to the people in the media saying what if it 
came to this, if this house came up with one, maybe two articles be 
impeachment against this president and some democrats had to form 
an ad hoc group when as happened during Watergate when th you had 
Scott, and Rhodes go down and talk to President Nixon? That's how 
this conversation started. Can you foresee that kind of a walk down 
Pennsylvania avenue in this day of age and given this president and 
case? First let me help you with the name of a wise woman. I would 
put Pat Schroeder on that list of wise men you mentioned earlier. 
There was some talk of wise men ing to the White House earlier on 
in the scandal when there was a lot of talk that President Clinton 
might resign or have to resign. You don't hear so much about that 
any more and my reading of his character and career is that he is 
not going to resign anytime soon. And for my own perspective it seems 
to me this process that's been started in the house has to play out 
a little further because no matter how this turns out there has to 
be a broad public consensus or else we're going to be stuck for the 
next 25 years argue about whether Clinton got off too easily or was 
railroaded. And I don't think that consensus exists right now. Think 
some of the impeachment hearings have to go ahead before there is 
a consensus of what punishment is right for this, if any. There was 
a consensus at the time Nixon resigned after the house Judiciary committee 
voted impeachment. There wasn't a consensus when Ford pardoned Nixon 
because he did it unexpectedly and suddenly, didn't build a consensus 
for it. I don't think the wise men are ing to be taking that walk 
down Pennsylvania avenue for the next couple months anyhow. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>