<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981013.2100.2927 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Try as you might, it is hard to forget the televised image and fwift 
twisted story of a woman named Mary Kay Letourneau, the Seattle teacher 
who went to jail for having a sexual relationship with a junior high 
school student, something she made more or less a regular practice. 
The boy in the case is talking, though, now 15 years old, French publishers 
are apparently interested in what he has to say. Keith Miller filed 
this report for "the today show." It is a tragedy looking for an audience. 
Pun lishers are bidding on "forbidden love," the story of Mary Kay 
Letourneau, in jail for the rape of one of her students. The co-author 
is a 15-year-old boy, villi fualaau. I just want to express what really 
happened. It was a real love story. It wasn't just sex. It wasn't 
just a teacher-student thing. What's the most important thing that 
you've written that's in that book? Me and Mary were in love. It wasn't 
just -- You shall serve six months. Yeah, a student sex crime thing, 
twantd just that. And it wasn't, to our eyes, it wasn't even a crime. 
Letourneau, 36, was a married mother of four children, when the affair 
with the 13-year-old student started. They have a baby girl, Audrey, 
and a second child is due any day. In the book, Letourneau has no 
regrets. Villi is 15 now, he's a father, and still no one wants to 
listen to him. He is not my victim and I am not a criminal. Our only 
crime was love. Is it a burdenern that's getting a bit heavy for you? 
For any other teenage parent my age, it's not -- you wouldn't say 
it's really easy for us to carry on and take care of our kids at our 
age with school and trying to live, our childhood and take care of 
our kids with our family at the same time. Would you have wished it 
to be different? Yeah. I would. Yeah, I wish it would be different. 
Was this love worth all the pain that has been caused to so many other 
people? It was worth all the pain and more. You have written in the 
book that it was you that made the pass at Mary, not Mary who made 
the pass at you you, that you initiated, started the relationship? 
Yeah, I led the -- she made the first move. -- I made the first move. 
She said no a couple times. Then after that we just started talking 
a lot to teach other, started being friends a lot. Then I see Mary's 
going to always be in my future. I can't really say like for sure 
I'm going to get back with her. If I ever see her again we're going 
to have a lot of talking to do before we do anything else. Villi fualaau 
gets most of the estimated $250,000 advance on the boofpblgt his lover 
as a convicted felon won't see a dime. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>