<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981013.1830.0529 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Clinton said today it's up to Yugoslav President Slobodan 
Milosevic to prove he will live up to the agreement hammered out last 
night that will end his violent eight-month crackdown on ethnic Albanians 
in Kosovo. The agreement calls for international monitors to verify 
the withdrawal of Serb forces from the region. The president reminded 
Milosevic, if he doesn't comply, force will be used. NAto sent a clear 
message to President Milosevic. NAto is ready to act. It is up now 
to the president of Serbia to follow through on his commitments. In 
Kosovo. There are big questions about whether that agreement will 
actually work. Will Milosevic come ply or is he making false promises. 
Ron Allen in Belgrade tonight. U.S. envoy Richard Holbrooke with promises 
from the Yugoslav government, but no guarantees nine days of tough 
talks and a possible peace deal will end the bloodshed in Kosovo. 
We can see a path to its end. I'm not here to declare the end of it. 
Today, Milosevic told the country he saved it from NATO attack, never 
mentioning he gave in on several key demands. Promising to allow NAto 
surveillance aircraft U-2s and pilotless drones to monitor troop withdrawals 
from Kosovo, as well as 2,000 observers on the ground. NAto plans 
to back up these monitors with a military rapid deployment force stationed 
nearby. Another Milosevic concession -- agreeing to give Albanians 
more self-rule, setting up a new police force, promising to hold elections 
in nine months. But today, Kosovo Albanians say they don't believe 
his promises. I don't think anyone should ever trust Milosevic. His 
pattern of behavior is pretty well-known. He makes promises but very 
easily breaks them. Why did Milosevic back down? His country in economic 
crisis, his popular support dwindling, many say he could not afford 
to push on with his offensive in Kosovo. On the streets of the capital 
Belgrade today, a tremendous feeling of relief. Ask most Yugoslavs 
about Kosovo, and they'll tell you President Milosevic created an 
international crisis in a place they care very little about. This 
government needs a crisis to stay in power. Milan stevanovic, who 
runs a computer graphics company, complains Milosevic doesn't care 
about people trying to make a living. I don't care about Kosovo. I 
live in Belgrade. I'm just thinking of business. The question now, 
though, is whether there's truly a solution to Kosovo's crisis or 
just Milosevic's promises soon to be broken. Ron Allen, NBC news, 
Belgrade. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>