<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981013.0195 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Of the eight Greek dessert choices on the menu at the highly regarded 
midtown Manhattan restaurant Molyvos, the one ordered least is mastic 
ice cream with Commandaria and fig sauce. Mastic ice cream? True, 
the dessert suffers from a name-image problem: it's not exactly loaded 
with lyricism. It is unfamiliar, too, except to those who know this 
rare and costly flavoring; at $60 to more than $100 a pound, mastic 
might be called the caviar of flavors. Strictly speaking neither a 
spice nor an herb, mastic is the resin of the mastic tree, or the 
pistacia lentiscus bush, an evergreen related to the pistachio plant, 
for which the Greek island of Chios is known. At Molyvos, the bold 
souls who take a chance on the unknown meet authentic mastic and are 
invariably rewarded. It makes a creamy and very rich ice cream with 
a haunting, slightly sweet flavor. The subtle taste of mastic is hard 
to pinpoint exactly. Jim Botsacos, the chef at the restaurant, describes 
it as a combination of fennel, anise and mint. To me, it's the taste 
equivalent of the smell of a pine forest. Mastic, an ancient Greek 
ingredient, was introduced to Molyvos by Aglaia Kremezi, a food writer 
in Athens who acts as a consultant to the restaurant. By e-mail from 
Athens, she confirmed that in the realm of flavorings, it's probably 
safe to say there is no substitute. It is an ingredient well known 
to home cooks in Greece and some Middle Eastern countries, but I have 
never seen it mentioned by name on a restaurant menu. Ms. Kremezi 
suggested using it at Molyvos in part because it is so little known 
here. It is sometimes inaccurately called gum arabic, ``but mastic 
should never be confused with that tasteless substance,'' Ms. Kremezi 
emphasized. Known from antiquity and thought to have healing properties, 
mastic straight from the tree was the first chewing gum and today 
it is still used as a kind of natural Chiclet. You can try it as chewing 
gum by putting a little mastic crystal in your mouth and chewing; 
if you try hard enough, you can even blow bubbles. Mastic is sold 
as crystals, and a handful of them look like tiny bits of golden rock 
candy or coarse colored sea salt. But to use it as a flavoring, the 
mastic crystals are ground into a powder (easy to do in a home spice 
grinder) and then added in small amounts to pastries, puddings, cookies, 
ice cream and breads, both savory and sweet. In Egypt and elsewhere 
in the Middle East, mastic is sometimes used in chicken dishes, combined 
with spices like cardamom and cinnamon. It blends nicely, but in a 
spice mix, subtle mastic tends to get lost. In a Greek sweet like 
loukoumades though, mastic can make a big flavor statement. These 
puffy deep-fried flour and yeast fritters, once commonplace as street 
food, are fast disappearing from Greece, Ms. Kremezi said. The mastic 
gives the light little fritters an unexpected complexity. As a bonus 
at Molyvos, the sauce served with the mastic ice cream introduces 
another relatively unfamiliar ingredient, Commandaria, a fortified 
dessert wine from Cyprus. Made from a blend of red and white grapes, 
this is an ancient wine _ some historians contend it is the world's 
oldest in continuous production. Commandaria is a dark wine with a 
rich sweetness, similar to some ports. It is great with biscotti and 
especially good with figs and chocolate. For the sauce, Botsacos reduces 
Commandaria with a bit of sugar and some cinnamon sticks, and then 
mixes in dried figs. (In the summer, he varies the sauce by using 
a muscat wine from the island of Samos, reducing it with a bit of 
sugar, thickening it with a little cornstarch and then letting fresh 
summer fruits macerate in the sauce for an hour or two before serving 
it with the ice cream.) More elegant than syrupy, Commandaria is readily 
available in this country and a great buy, too. The Commandaria St. 
John I buy at a local wine shop costs $9 for a 750-milliliter bottle. 
Mastic crystals are sold at Greek and many Middle Eastern shops, including 
Sahadi Importing Co., 187 Atlantic Ave., Brooklyn Heights, 718-624-4550 
($3.75 an ounce), and Kalustyan, 123 Lexington Ave., at 28th Street, 
212-685-3451 ($6.50 an ounce; mail orders accepted). The price is 
not as prohibitive as it may seem; a little bit of mastic goes a long 
way. My $5 bag from Sahadi (about an ounce and a half) has taken me 
through the following recipes, and beyond. Now, I'm using a half teaspoon 
or so of mastic as a flavoring in standard bread and cookie recipes, 
all of which, so far, have been masticated happily by all comers. 
Adapted from Molyvos restaurant Time: 30 minutes, plus chilling and 
freezing time } tablespoon mastic crystals, available at Greek and 
Middle Eastern food shops } tablespoon granulated sugar, plus { cup 
2 cups whole milk 2 cups heavy cream 15 egg yolks. 1. Put the mastic 
and } tablespoon sugar in a coffee-bean grinder, and pulverize into 
a powder. 2. In a large heavy saucepan over medium heat, bring milk, 
heavy cream and \ cup of sugar to a boil. While the mixture is heating, 
combine remaining \ cup sugar with the egg yolks in a bowl. With a 
wire whisk, beat until mixture is pale yellow. 3. Temper the yolks 
by gently pouring 1 cup of the hot cream mixture into the yolk mixture, 
whisking constantly until well mixed. Return the remaining cream mixture 
to the stove over low heat. Stir in the yolk mixture. With a wooden 
spoon, stir slowly over very low heat until the mixture thickens, 
about 6 minutes. Do not let it boil. To test, run your finger across 
the back of the spoon after dipping it into the cream. If it is sufficiently 
cooked, the line will hold. 4. Strain the hot mixture through a fine 
mesh sieve into a stainless-steel bowl. Stir in the ground mastic 
and sugar mixture, stirring until it has dissolved. Let cool for about 
10 minutes, stir again and refrigerate until thoroughly chilled. Freeze 
in an ice cream machine according to manufacturer's directions. Yield: 
one quart. COMMANDARIA AND FIG SAUCE Adapted from Molyvos restaurant 
Time: 15 minutes 1 bottle (750 milliliters) Commandaria 2 tablespoons 
granulated sugar 2 cinnamon sticks 1{ cups dried figs, stemmed and 
quartered. 1. In a deep sauce pan, combine the Commandaria, sugar 
and cinnamon sticks. Bring to a boil over medium heat, and boil for 
3 minutes. Reduce to a simmer, and cook over low heat until the alcohol 
cooks out, about 2 minutes. 2. Add the quartered figs, and over medium-high 
heat, cook until the figs are soft and the liquid has reduced by half 
and has a syrupy consistency, about 8 minutes. Serve warm, or let 
cool and refrigerate for up to a week. Reheat before serving as a 
sauce over mastic ice cream. Yield: 2 cups. LOUKOUMADES (BATTER FRITTERS 
WITH HONEY SAUCE) Adapted from ``Foods of Greece'' by Aglaia Kremezi 
(Stewart, Tabori &AMP; Chang, 1993) Time: 30 minutes, plus 2 hours' 
rising time 1 tablespoon active dry yeast 1 teaspoon mastic crystals 
2 cups all-purpose flour 1/3 teaspoon fine sea salt 2 tablespoons 
ouzo { cup granulated sugar 1 cup honey, preferably thyme-scented 
Olive oil or sunflower oil, or a combination, for frying Ground cinnamon 
Toasted sesame seeds Grated nutmeg. 1. Dissolve yeast in { cup warm 
water. Let sit for 10 minutes. Grind the mastic crystals to a powder 
in a coffee-bean grinder. 2. In a large bowl, mix the ground mastic, 
flour, salt, ouzo and { cup warm water. Stir well with a wooden spoon 
to make a thick but pourable batter. Cover loosely, put in a warm 
place and let stand until doubled in size, about 2 hours. 3. In a 
heavy saucepan, mix the sugar, { cup water and the honey. Bring to 
a boil, lower heat and simmer for 10 minutes. Set aside. 4. Heat 4 
inches of oil in a deep, heavy skillet or deep fryer to 375 degrees. 
5. Take a handful of batter in one hand and make a fist; in your other 
hand, hold a wet spoon. Squeeze your fist so that a 1{-inch spherical 
piece of dough emerges from the top of your fist, like toothpaste 
coming out of its tube. Collect the piece of dough on the wet spoon, 
then drop dough into oil. Dip the spoon in a glass of water, then 
proceed in the same way until all the batter is used. The fritters 
will puff up and rise to the surface. When they are golden brown, 
remove them with a slotted spoon and drain on paper towels. 6. Transfer 
fritters to a serving plate while still hot. Pour honey sauce over 
them, and sprinkle with cinnamon, sesame seeds and a little nutmeg. 
Serve immediately. Yield: 20 to 25 fritters. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>