<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981013.0197 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
I've sat at lunch with friends and heard them wonder when presented 
with a nicely crisped piece of fish, ``How do they get such a fabulous 
crust on there?'' The fish isn't fried, nor is it breaded: it's just 
perfectly browned. The detectives among them notice that the fish 
is perfectly browned on one side only, and that's the key. In fact, 
it is cooked on one side only _ or nearly so. Most fish is so moist 
that it is difficult to brown it. The surface of the flesh must dry 
out before it browns, and since fish cooks so quickly, the interior 
is usually done long before this happens. That's why fish is often 
coated before cooking; the coating browns much more rapidly than the 
fish itself. If, however, you brown only one side of the fillet, that 
side develops a crisp crust, and the center remains moist. In restaurants, 
where this technique is common, the cooking is completed by flipping 
the fish for the last minute or so of cooking, which is sufficient 
(it is then presented crisp side up, and few people ever notice that 
the downward facing side is completely pale). This technique will 
work at home, too, but the results are not only nicely cooked fish, 
but also a messy stove top and a lingering aroma. Restaurants solve 
these problems with powerful exhaust fans and a crew of night cleaners. 
Most home cooks need a different solution, and this is it: heat your 
oven to the absolute maximum before beginning to cook (even 600 degrees 
is not too hot). Start the fish on top of the stove to heat the pan 
a bit, then immediately move it to the oven (if you have a baking 
stone, place the pan on it; if not, place the pan on any oven rack). 
In just a few minutes, the fish will brown beautifully on the bottom 
and remain moist within (as long, of course, as it isn't overcooked). 
And you won't have to flip the fish. This technique works equally 
well with fish that has its skin and that has had its skin removed. 
If the skin is on, it becomes irresistibly crisp and delicious (especially 
when sprinkled with a little coarse salt). If it is off, the flesh 
becomes crisp and almost tough, a nice contrast to the remaining part 
of the fish, which remains moist and tender. A too-thin piece of fish 
will overcook in the time it takes to brown one side. You cannot follow 
this technique with, for example, a fillet of flounder or even a thin 
piece of cod. It is best performed with fillets of a near-uniform 
thickness of about one inch: thicker pieces of cod, for example, or 
center cuts of striped bass or salmon, or a thick piece of sea bass. 
All of these have edible, delicious skin, so see if you can get a 
piece that has not had the skin removed _ just make sure it has been 
scaled. STRIPED BASS COOKED ON ONE SIDE, WITH MUSHROOMS Time: 30 minutes 
3 tablespoons olive oil 2 tablespoons minced shallots 1 pound mushrooms, 
preferably a mixture like shiitake, crimini and button, trimmed, rinsed 
and sliced 1{ to 2 pounds of 1-inch thick fillet of striped bass or 
other fish in 1 or 2 pieces, preferably with skin on Salt and freshly 
ground black pepper to taste 1 teaspoon vinegar Minced parsley for 
garnish. 1. Preheat oven it to its maximum, at least 500 degrees. 
Place 2 tablespoons of oil in a large skillet, and turn heat to medium. 
Add shallots, and cook, stirring, until they soften, about 3 minutes. 
Add mushrooms, and raise heat to medium-high. Cook, stirring occasionally, 
until mushrooms give up their liquid and become tender, about 10 minutes. 
Season to taste and keep warm. 2. On the stove top, heat an ovenproof 
skillet over high heat. Add remaining oil; when it smokes, add fish, 
skin side down. Season fish with salt and pepper, and transfer to 
oven (place it on a baking stone, if you have one); set a timer for 
6 minutes. 3. Stir vinegar into the mushrooms; taste, and adjust seasoning. 
Check fish when timer goes off; it is done when the interior is opaque 
and a thin-bladed knife passes through it with little resistance. 
Serve fish, skin (or crisp) side up, on a bed of the mushrooms. Drizzle 
with the fish pan juices, and garnish with the parsley. Yield: 4 servings. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>