<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981013.0397 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Despite growing anxiety that global financial problems might soon 
affect Europe, the president of the new European Central Bank on Tuesday 
rejected demands to relax monetary policy in an effort to spur economic 
growth. In a toughly worded message aimed in part at European political 
leaders, the central bank said there was no need for worldwide reductions 
in interest rates or other forms of ``policy activism'' to jump-start 
economic growth. ``There is certainly some kind of slowdown, but not 
a crisis,'' said Wim Duisenberg, who as president of the European 
Central Bank now oversees monetary policy across the 11 countries 
that will adopt the euro as a single currency Jan. 1. ``Proposals 
for a reassessment of capital controls as an acceptable policy option, 
or recent calls for worldwide, uniform interest rate reductions, are 
inappropriate as they do not address the very nature of the problems,'' 
he said. Duisenberg's remarks, which came after a meeting of the bank's 
governing council, underline a growing divergence between monetary 
policy in Europe and the United States. While the Federal Reserve 
has begun lowering U.S. interest rates amid fear of a significant 
slowdown in the economy, the European bankers are barely flinching 
from their original course and remain preoccupied with establishing 
the new currency's credibility. A surprising effect of that policy 
has been the strength of existing European currencies, like the German 
mark and the French franc, which essentially mirror expectations for 
the euro. Traders, far from being skittish about an untested currency 
in the offing, have begun buying the current national currencies as 
a haven from global shocks in Asia, Latin America and Russia. The 
mark and the franc are nearly 10 percent stronger against the dollar 
than they were in August. In recent days, the European Central Bank 
has come under increasing pressure from national leaders to either 
reduce interest rates or support other measures to keep European growth 
from slipping. In Germany, Chancellor-elect Gerhard Schroeder has 
called for lower rates, and his designated finance minister has repeatedly 
assailed the German central bank's, and by extension the European 
bank's, tight-money policies as misguided. The French Cabinet continues 
its complaints against those policies. Most economists predict that 
growth in the so-called euro zone will remain above 2.5 percent through 
the end of 1998 but will substantially slow next year. The continuing 
problems in Asia and Latin America are expected to curtail demand 
for European exports, and the recent shift in exchange rates will 
dig more deeply by making European exports more expensive in dollar 
terms. Signs of slowing growth are already becoming apparent in Germany, 
where industrial exports have been the economic engine in the last 
18 months. Machine-tool and engineering companies have lowered their 
forecasts for exports next year. Hoechst, the chemical and pharmaceutical 
giant, warned Monday that its profits in the second half of this year 
would fall below those in the period a year earlier. European banks 
are also reporting big setbacks and are eliminating thousands of jobs 
because of losses in securities trading, soured foreign loans and 
heightened competitive pressure. In the last 10 days, the chairmen 
of two leading financial institutions _ UBS of Switzerland and ING 
Barings in the Netherlands _ have resigned in the wake of big losses. 
Some analysts expect more bad news in the months ahead, predicting 
that banks will be forced to write off more foreign loans than they 
already have. Duisenberg acknowledged that financial crises elsewhere 
would affect Europe. ``The number of signs suggesting that the world 
economy will slow down in 1999 is increasing,'' he said at a news 
conference in Frankfurt on Tuesday. He also noted that uncertainty 
had been heightened by the near-collapse of Long-Term Capital Management, 
the American hedge fund, and by the losses at individual banks. But 
he insisted that ``proposals inspired by policy activism'' must be 
avoided. He said he was not concerned about the recent plunge in the 
exchange value of the dollar, which could hurt European exports. And 
he said European interest rates were about where they should be. ``There 
are no signs of a credit crunch in Europe,'' he maintained. The European 
Central Bank is still struggling with the tools it will use to set 
monetary policy, torn between basing it simply on the growth of the 
money supply or on inflation targets. In principle, many central bankers 
would prefer to follow the example of the Bundesbank, which bases 
lending rates almost entirely on the growth of the German money supply. 
In practice, money statistics vary considerably between countries 
in the new currency union, and new forms of financial transactions 
have further complicated the definitions of money. After months of 
debate behind closed doors, Duisenberg announced that the bank would 
use both money supply and inflation targets. The overall goal will 
be to keep inflation under 2 percent. Duisenberg acknowledged the 
bank was under pressure. ``The political pressure could increase _ 
I would not deny that,'' he said. ``But it is pressure against a strong 
institution. We will make our own judgments, use our own analysis 
and reach our own decisions.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>