<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981013.0170 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Fascist humor may be an oxymoron. Fascism, after all, is a serious 
matter. It submerges the whims and freedoms of the individual to the 
uniform demands of the state. It treats its authority as natural law 
and any opposition as mortal sin. Humor is just the opposite. It thrives 
on offense, plays on vulnerabilities and absurdities, inverts authority 
and mocks nature; it is surreptitious, sly, iconoclastic. Humor may 
be, in its essence, anti-fascistic: It takes what is most self-important, 
most unyielding and most unforgiving, and dissolves it into absurdity. 
Fascism meets its match in farce. That is the approach, delicately 
taken, of the new Italian film ``Life is Beautiful,'' the winner of 
the grand jury prize at the 1998 Cannes International Film Festival. 
Its director and co-writer, Roberto Benigni, also stars in the film 
as an irrepressible Jewish bookseller in the 1940s determined to shield 
his 5-year-old son Giosue from the horrors of an extermination camp 
by pretending that it is all a game being staged for the boy's amusement. 
A bit bizarre, perhaps, not to mention risky _ turning something so 
evil into something so trivial. But down to his own jangling skeleton 
and rubbery sinews, Benigni's character Guido embodies an inversion 
of fascist ideals. He is impossibly voluble, a manic fantasist, an 
acrobat, an ironist. When he poses as a fascist official and has to 
demonstrate the superiority of the Italian race to a roomful of children, 
he strips to his underwear, grandly praising the nobility and proportions 
of his scrawny physique. Throughout this comic fable, which opens 
Friday, he undermines natural law (the very heart of fascist rhetoric): 
a key falls from the sky, a beautiful woman falls into his arms. And, 
for his son's benefit, he ``translates'' the threats barked out by 
a German prison guard into rules of a childhood game: no one is allowed 
to ask for a snack or cry out for mommy. These are efforts at a kind 
of enchantment, attempts to magically undo the fascistic order _ a 
trademark theme in farce about fascism. For doesn't fascism itself 
seem like a form of hypnotic enchantment, binding a nation to join 
in its singular horrors? This dark secret was caught early, in 1929, 
by Thomas Mann, in his short story ``Mario and the Magician.'' In 
an Italian summer resort, a hunchbacked hypnotist lures a woman to 
slavishly follow him, convinces a working-class man to give him an 
amorous kiss and demonstrates, in his ominous words, ``that there 
are powers stronger than reason or virtue, and not always so magnanimously 
ready to relinquish their prey!'' How can such enchantment be undone? 
Partly with other spells, some recalling the innocence of childhood. 
Benigni's character hypnotically waves his hand and tries to will 
objects and persons into place _ a gesture no more absurd than the 
triumph of the will being enacted all around him. When the Theatre 
de Complicite brought its staged version of Bruno Schulz's ``Street 
of Crocodiles'' to the Lincoln Center Festival in the summer, the 
image of the character sorting through books banned by the Nazis gave 
way to a fantastical universe of childhood memories, a world in which 
men walked on walls, turned into birds and became infants seeking 
comfort from impending doom. Enchantment in a rawer form occurs in 
the Italian director Lina Wertmuller's ``Seven Beauties'' (1976). 
The vain, bumbling hatchet murderer (played by Giancarlo Giannini), 
who has been imprisoned in a concentration camp, is brought to the 
private den of the grossly corpulent concentration camp commandant 
(Shirley Stoler). He sings her praises, declaring his love, hoping 
it will win him freedom: ``Who are you?'' he asks, ``An enchantress? 
A magician? Because you have put a spell on me.'' Sex with her, he 
secretly hopes, might set him free, but as he stares at her tree-trunk 
thighs he can barely work the necessary magic. But humor may be the 
most powerful of counter-spells. The risk, though, is that in the 
midst of dissolving fascism in farce, it also dissolves the suffering 
of its victims. Benigni, in a recent telephone interview from Italy, 
named Charlie Chaplin's ``Great Dictator'' as an important influence. 
In that 1940 film, characters resembling Mussolini and Hitler get 
into a petulant food fight; Hynkel (Hitler) has two sidekicks named 
Garbitsch and Herring, and Hitler's plans for world domination are 
lampooned in the now-classic ballet with an inflated globe, set to 
Wagnerian musical strains. Meanwhile the Jews in a ghetto become aware 
of at least part of Hynkel's great plan: ``Get rid of the Jews first, 
then the brunettes.'' But Chaplin also said that if he had known the 
extent of the German horrors, he would never have made the film. In 
his heavily accented English, Benigni acknowledged a similar concern. 
``I quote this a lot of times,'' he said. ``I worried about this a 
lot. Yes, of course. This is my first thought. Nobody can make a gag 
about Nazis; because humor must be detached, and here it can't be.'' 
Of course, one radical approach, taken by Mel Brooks in ``The Producers,'' 
is to charge ahead, treating even the anticipated offense as an object 
of humor. His Broadway impresario (Zero Mostel) yearns to offend his 
opening night audience, hoping for a theatrical flop. He courts tastelessness: 
he will turn Nazism into campy farce. But when the musical becomes 
a comic hit, crowned by the big production number, ``Springtime for 
Hitler,'' it is not just fascism that is dissolved into farce but 
solemn pieties about fascism. Benigni obviously did not want to go 
so far. But his character is also detached from both his surroundings 
and the intimations of fascist dominance in his town of Arezzo. At 
first he is unaffected by the disturbing signs, and later he is intent 
on seeming to be in order to protect his son. He is almost nonchalant 
about a sign in a store window, ``No Jews or dogs.'' He tries to turn 
it into a jest for his son, shielding him from its cruelty; he mentions 
a hardware store he once saw with a sign reading, ``No kangaroos or 
Chinese,'' and proposes a sign on his own bookshop, ``No spiders or 
Visigoths.'' This is how the movie works its double-edged spell: in 
trying to treat fascism itself as a game for a child, Benigni's character 
ends up revealing both its nightmarishness and its grotesque absurdity. 
The magic doesn't always work: there are times when Benigni's fable 
makes the camps so much less horrific than they really were that one 
begins to question the fable's premise. But the character's efforts 
to preserve his son's innocence, down to his final mocking goose-step, 
are heart-rending. Benigni said he had in mind the classic clown's 
ability to illuminate tragedy by touching the ``majesty of truth.'' 
This style of death-haunted clowning may even be part of the Italian 
theatrical tradition (something that Mann seemed to know in his tale 
as well). It is there in Fellini's 1974 ``Amarcord'' _ a film Benigni 
mentioned _ in which fascism has the aura of a circus, dominated by 
``the big, big face of Mussolini.'' It is also there in the Italian 
commedia dell' arte, in which the buffoon often faces death. The Italian 
clown Toto was immensely popular during the fascist period, Benigni 
pointed out. ``Physically, he was like a skeleton,'' he said. In the 
midst of his clowning ``everything was full of death; behind the laugh 
there was death.'' And behind fascism there might be a laugh. ``My 
pop planned something like this for me, too, when I was little,'' 
Benigni's character tells his son as they are being transported to 
the camps on their surprise outing. Ha. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>