<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981013.0160 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Vivian Bearing, at age 50 a professor of 17th-century poetry, has 
devoted her life to the ``Holy Sonnets'' of John Donne. She holds 
the sort of Ph.D. that restores some sense of academic majesty to 
the honorific of doctor, now most frequently used by radio and television 
people who tell us whether the sun is in or out. Vivian's concerns 
are a bit more cerebral: the line by line, word by word, comma by 
comma investigation of the work of a poet who jousts with God using 
wit, paradox, philosophical speculation and dialectics to get at the 
meaning of life. The poet never wins; his dazzling sonnets are ends 
in themselves. When first met in ``Wit,'' Margaret Edson's fine play 
now at the Off Broadway MCC Theater, Vivian is wearing a hospital 
gown of an institutional size and flimsiness to deny any patient's 
individuality. Her only distinguishing feature: a cherry-red baseball 
cap that doesn't quite hide her bald head. She has the beaky, hollow-eyed 
look of a large handsome chicken that has been plucked too soon. Right 
at the start of ``Wit,'' it is apparent that Vivian values words too 
much to waste them. ``It is not my intention to give away the plot,'' 
she tells the audience with mock humility, ``but I think I die at 
the end.'' She does die at the end but, for the next two hours that 
pass in a wink, the audience is treated to the kind of theatrical 
experience of which legends are made. We come to know and appreciate 
the mind and substance of this singular character and of the playwright 
who conceived her, as well as the ravishing potential of the singular 
actress who plays Vivian: Kathleen Chalfant. You have seen Ms. Chalfant 
in many productions, usually in support of other people; you probably 
remember her best as the mother in Tony Kushner's ``Angels in America.'' 
In ``Wit,'' Ms. Chalfant becomes a star, triumphing in the role of 
her career. Vivian has advanced metastatic ovarian cancer, identified 
as Stage Four (there is no Stage Five). In the course of the play, 
she is undergoing a cycle of still-experimental chemotherapy, which 
requires that she be hospitalized for up to a week out of every four 
over an eight-month period. It is a horrendous assault on the body 
and the psyche. Her constitution, which is that of an ox, astonishes 
the doctors. She is Exhibit A in their daily rounds as they talk over 
and around her, observing, feeling and probing. ``It's just like a 
graduate seminar,'' she says. ``Once I did the teaching; now I am 
taught.'' The doctor she sees most often is Jason (Alec Phoenix), 
a bright young clinical fellow on the oncology team in charge of her 
case. By chance, he had taken her course in 17th-century poetry. He 
had no interest in Donne, but he wanted to prove to himself that he 
could earn an A (he actually got an A minus) in one of the toughest 
courses the university offered. In a play of more commonplace goals, 
a sentimental bond might be established between the patient and her 
whiz-kid doctor. Not in ``Wit.'' There is a relationship, but it is 
one-sided: the increasingly introspective Vivian slowly recognizes 
in Jason the same kind of ruthless, utterly impersonal obsession with 
knowledge that propelled her own career. The only difference is that 
his field is cancer research. Theirs are ruthless obsessions, perhaps, 
but not worthless. They might even be called magnificent, the word 
used by Lloyd C. Douglas in the title of one of his sudsy romantic 
novels in the 1930s. Possibly the play's toughest, most moving confrontation 
is prompted by Jason's impatience with Vivian's attempts to be something 
other than a textbook case in his eyes. He doesn't apologize; he more 
or less admits that she is. He says that med school courses in bedside 
manners are a waste of time for researchers. When she continues to 
question him as to how cancer became his subject, he suspects that 
she is experiencing new symptoms: mental confusion, maybe even memory 
loss. She persists in her probing of him. More for his own satisfaction 
than hers, he begins to talk about the profound mysteries of cancer, 
sounding almost like a poet. Healthy cells, he explains, can be grown 
in the lab in a tissue culture, but they eventually conk out. Cancer 
cells are something else. They will replicate forever. It is called 
``immortality in culture.'' Says Vivian: ``It sounds like a symposium.'' 
Ms. Edson has her own remarkable feeling for words. Her accomplishment 
as playwright has been to take the life of a woman who never married, 
who had no lovers (as least none that still haunt her dreams) and 
who has no family, whose focus is narrow if deep, and create a big, 
strong character of enormous range and theatrical interest. In flashbacks 
we meet briefly but importantly her father (Walter Charles) and the 
professor, Dr. Ashford (Helen Stenborg), who initially taught Vivian 
the need for discipline and precision when dealing with Donne. Dr. 
Ashford is especially scathing about ``inauthentically punctuated'' 
Donne texts, what with their ``hysterical'' semicolons and exclamation 
points. A wonderfully grave and wise eccentric of 80, she returns 
toward the end of the play to read to the now heavily sedated Vivian. 
The scene, which could have been bathetic, is a killer. As superlatively 
directed by Derek Anson Jones, ``Wit'' is presented without an intermission, 
mostly in a series of hospital settings. These are speedily, minimally 
indicated by the use of the sort of hospital curtains that promise 
the patient a privacy never remotely achieved. The supporting cast 
is without flaw, but note particularly the work of Ms. Stenborg, Phoenix 
and Paula Pizzi, who plays the primary nurse of the cancer in-patient 
unit, the only person, aside from Dr. Ashford, who sees Vivian as 
the custodian of her own idiosyncratic soul. Ms. Chalfant inhabits 
the play from beginning to end. She is never off the stage. The performance 
proceeds seamlessly as a series of revelations while layers of Vivian's 
character are discovered, acknowledged and stripped away, until, at 
last, all Vivian can say is, ``Now is the time for simplicity.'' There 
is no ego left. After that, there is little thought of Donne, doctors, 
hospital routine or even the past. What remains of the present is 
consumed in the battle with pain, leading, ultimately, to a final 
stage image that at first shocks and then seems inevitably, supremely 
right. ``Wit'' is the first play by Ms. Edson, who is an elementary 
school teacher in Atlanta. Where will she go now, having made such 
an astonishing debut? ``Wit'' has taken some time to reach New York. 
It was first produced by South Coast Repertory in California in 1995. 
The current production, which originated last fall at the Long Wharf 
Theater in New Haven, began performances in New York on Sept. 13 for 
a four-week run, now extended through Nov. 22. It would seem to promise 
good things to come from the Long Wharf under Doug Hughes, who succeeded 
Arvin Brown as the artistic director in 1997. ``Wit'' is tough but 
it is not a downer. It is too intelligent and vibrantly theatrical 
for that. Also, don't mistake it for the kind of fatal-disease weepies 
Hollywood turns out with regularity. It is as sentimental as a CAT 
scan. Though it has a number of witty, sarcastic lines, it never pretends 
to find redeeming humor in despair, nor does it celebrate some comforting, 
all-purpose faith, either ongoing or opportunely reclaimed. ``Wit'' 
identifies death with the way that, according to Dr. Ashford, the 
use of a comma gives all-encompassing point to the last line of one 
of the most often quoted of the ``Holy Sonnets'': ``And death shall 
be no more, Death thou shalt die.'' Death, says Donne, is a slight 
pause, between life and life everlasting. `Corpus Christi' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>