<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981013.0287 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
While the election in three weeks has been portrayed in Washington 
as a referendum on whether President Clinton should be impeached, 
the scandal has not become a central part of the discourse _ or the 
candidates' strategies _ in the closest House and Senate contests 
in the country. In recent days, polls showing a backlash against the 
Republican Congress have led many Republicans to stop touting the 
Clinton scandal as a plus for their campaigns. No Republican House 
candidate is currently running a commercial that mentions the scandal, 
as a handful did only weeks ago, according to party officials. Yet 
as Democrats pore over the polls, searching for ways to capitalize 
on the unexpected turn, there is silence in their party as well. Most 
Democrats said they were still uneasy about seizing on the Lewinsky 
matter because _ backlash or not _ many voters seem to want it to 
go away. Still, in an election year of uncertainty and unpredictability, 
the aversion to bringing up the scandal could change overnight. Many 
Democrats, especially those trying to dislodge Republican incumbents, 
are wondering whether to close their campaigns with commercials that 
ridicule the Republicans' vote for an open-ended impeachment inquiry. 
But for now, at least, an examination of competitive races found that 
at campaign stops, voters rarely mentioned the scandal. The topic 
is not surfacing much at candidates' forums (except for a throwaway 
question here and there). And beyond long-shot candidates who are 
trying to attract attention, most campaigns have refrained from turning 
Clinton's troubles into fodder for commercials. Here on the front 
range of the Rockies, the contest for the seat left open by the retirement 
of Rep. David Skaggs, a Democrat, in Colorado's 2nd District is viewed 
by both parties as one of the 10 closest in the nation. But even as 
the candidates search furiously for ammunition that will give them 
an edge in a race that polls show is a dead heat, both have steered 
clear of the scandal that has unnerved Washington for nine months. 
``Everybody's been walking a high wire on this,'' said Mark Udall, 
a state representative and mountain climbing enthusiast who is the 
Democratic nominee, explaining that he had no intention of attacking 
Republicans for prolonging the impeachment inquiry. ``Trying to capitalize 
on it is a very risky strategy.'' His Republican opponent, Robert 
Greenlee, a self-made millionaire business executive and former mayor 
of Boulder _ the district's largest city _ predicted he's going to 
win ``because I have the right message.'' ``That's better than making 
my way to Washington on the sorrow and disgust that surrounds what 
the president did,'' he said. Greenlee said his biggest fear was that 
Democrats in this swing district would rush to the polls out of fury 
at the Republican Congress. ``It might begin to look like partisan 
piling on,'' he said. ``I was in Washington the week the Starr report 
was released. My first thought was, `I hope members of my party don't 
overplay it.' I still feel that way.'' With candidates avoiding the 
scandal, in district after district, they are using the same campaign 
themes that they first raised in January, before they or the nation 
had heard of Monica Lewinsky: education, taxes, health care and the 
environment. In another neck-and-neck House race for an open seat, 
Oregon's 1st District north and west of downtown Portland, the candidates 
are so wary of the White House scandal that they offered virtually 
identical, and measured, comments. Molly Bordonaro, the Republican 
nominee, said the impeachment proceedings should be handled in a ``fair 
and measured'' fashion. Her Democratic opponent, David Wu, said they 
should be handled in a ``measured, fair and expeditious'' manner. 
``This whole Clinton thing is something you can't assess,'' said John 
Easton, Ms. Bordonaro's campaign manager. ``It's an unknown you can't 
factor into your campaign strategy. It would be dangerous to do so 
because it could break against you.'' In Mississippi's 4th District, 
which stretches from Jackson to the Louisiana state line, Delbert 
Hosemann, the Republican nominee, has tried to portray his opponent, 
Ronnie Shows, as a liberal. Shows has campaigned as a conservative 
Democrat. Neither has said much about the scandal. They may be reflecting 
the sentiment of many voters in the district who said in interviews 
that they were simply tired of hearing about Clinton's transgressions. 
``I think they ought to get a firing squad and clean out some of it,'' 
Joseph Cato, a shoestore owner in the district who plans to vote Republican, 
said of the troubles in Washington. In another fiercely competitive 
House race, in Wisconsin's 2nd District, which includes Madison, candidates 
have focused on health insurance, Social Security, taxes and spending. 
Tammy Baldwin, a Democrat who is running for the seat against Josephine 
Musser, a Republican, said voters mention the presidential scandal 
``only to the extent that they want to express frustration that it 
has deflected so much of the nation's attention and so much of Congress' 
attention.'' But like candidates around the country, Ms. Musser complained 
that the intrusiveness of the scandal made it difficult for the campaign 
to gain momentum. ``The media in particular are very taken with the 
scandal,'' she said. ``And something new comes every day out of Washington 
and so each day we have to address the new vote or the new report 
or the new statement.'' Back here in Colorado, at a candidates' forum 
in Denver taped Tuesday night, the scandal in Washington never came 
up. At six forums attended by Greenlee and Udall so far, only one 
questioner has raised the scandal. That was at an event on the day 
last week when the House voted to move ahead with an impeachment inquiry; 
the candidates were asked how they would have voted. (Each said he 
would have supported his party's proposal for an inquiry.) One thing 
that both candidates in this race seem to agree on is that the outcome 
will be decided by the so-called unaffiliated or independent voters, 
a group that outnumbers registered Democrats and Republicans. That 
is why the contenders have concentrated their efforts in rapidly-growing 
suburban middle-class areas like Broomfield, east of Boulder and more 
conservative than much of Boulder. As he campaigned door-to-door in 
Broomfield on Monday evening, Udall did not once raise the Clinton 
scandal, and no voters mentioned the scandal on their own. They were 
mostly interested in topics like education and traffic congestion. 
Yet the scandal seemed to fester just below the surface: When prospective 
voters were asked about the matter by a reporter who accompanied Udall, 
one after another, people of all political stripes, burst forth with 
strong comments _ and reserved their harshest judgments for members 
of Congress. Dennis Eichner, a 54-year-old letter carrier, said he 
was not affiliated with one party or another and that he did not know 
Udall was a Democrat. But when asked about the scandal after the candidate 
approached him, Eichner made himself clear: ``No Republican is going 
to get my vote because they're the ones trying to keep this thing 
stirred up!'' Up the street, Russell Warmack, 71, a retired phone 
company worker, had a Greenlee sign in his front yard. Udall knocked 
on his door anyway, only to be informed by Warmack that he was ``a 
dyed-in-the-wool-Republican.'' But asked about the scandal, Warmack 
lashed out against lawmakers in his own party. ``I wish they'd get 
through with this thing,'' he said. ``It's trivial. Who cares about 
sex?'' Then, after calling the president a liar, Warmack pointed to 
Udall and said, ``You I can probably trust.'' That may explain why 
on a wall in his campaign headquarters Udall, whose father, Morris, 
was a congressman and presidential candidate, displays an autographed 
photograph of himself shaking hands with Clinton. But the photograph 
is no where to be found in Udall's campaign literature. Why not? Udall 
chuckled at the question and said: ``This is a local race. The president 
is not on peoples' minds.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>