<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981013.0343 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
American Home Products Corp. and Monsanto Co. scrapped their $34.4 
billion merger Tuesday, the third big combination in the pharmaceutical 
industry to fail this year. In a joint statement, the companies said 
the deal had been abandoned because it was not in the best interests 
of their shareholders. Yet, people close to the deal said Tuesday 
that the merger was terminated because of an insurmountable power 
struggle between the two companies' chairmen, John Stafford at American 
Home Products and Robert Shapiro at Monsanto. While a clash between 
the chief executives of merging companies is common, analysts said 
Tuesday that they were becoming increasingly concerned that these 
disputes were upending deals that could have benefited shareholders. 
All three of the drug industry's giant mergers this year have failed 
_ first between American Home Products and SmithKline Beecham in January 
and one month later between SmithKline Beecham and Glaxo Wellcome 
_ largely because one of the chief executives refused to yield power 
or compensation to a former rival. ``There have been mergers that 
have been scuttled because of people issues,'' said Viren Mehta, a 
partner at Mehta Partners, a biopharmaceutical investment firm. ``This 
appears to be one of them. The boards have a fiduciary duty to make 
sure that any individual needs don't get in the way of the needs that 
drive companies.'' The botched deal was also painful to Wall Street, 
which has been hit by sharp downturns in the financial markets in 
the past two months. With investment banks slicing their payrolls 
_ Merrill Lynch &AMP; Co. announced a huge cutback Tuesday _ the industry 
cannot afford to lose the fees a deal of this size would have generated. 
Analysts estimated Tuesday that Goldman, Sachs &AMP; Co., which advised 
Monsanto, and Bear Stearns &AMP; Co., which advised American Home 
Products, forfeited $50 million in fees between them. Investors also 
fled. American Home Products' stock drooped only slightly in midmorning 
trading, but then fell $5, or 10 percent, to close at $45. Shares 
of Monsanto, the smaller company, plunged $13.375, or 26.6 percent, 
to $37. The issues that sank the merger appeared to have been simmering 
since the deal was announced in June. At that time, the headlines 
could not have been brighter. The merger, the largest ever in the 
pharmaceutical industry and the sixth largest among U.S. corporations, 
would have created the nation's largest seller of prescription drugs 
and the world's largest agricultural company. Aside from such name 
brands as Advil painkiller, Centrum vitamins and Nutrasweet sugar 
substitute, American Home Products and Monsanto would have been one 
of the world's leading life sciences companies. Using biotechnology, 
it could not only develop new agricultural products but drugs and 
foods with specially engineered ingredients known as nutraceuticals. 
While the merger appeared promising on paper, none of the bankers 
calculated the effect the structure of the deal would have on its 
outcome, or adequately gauged the disparate personalities of the combined 
company's chairmen. Both companies described the deal as a merger 
of equals, but American Home Products was, in effect, purchasing Monsanto. 
Under the terms, American Home Products was to swap 1.15 of its shares 
for each Monsanto share, giving it 65 percent control of the new company's 
stock. Shapiro and Stafford said they would run the company jointly, 
an arrangement that raised skepticism in Europe and in the United 
States. Six months earlier, Stafford had refused to yield power to 
Jan Leschly, SmithKline Beecham's chief executive, a point that ultimately 
sank that merger. Though both are lawyers, Stafford had little in 
common with Shapiro. Shapiro, 60, worked his way through Searle before 
Monsanto bought it in 1985 but refused to move to Monsanto's headquarters 
city of St. Louis from his home in Chicago when he became chairman 
of the company. Instead, he has kept in touch with Monsanto executives 
largely through e-mail. Not only is Stafford, who is also 60, a constant 
presence at American Home Products headquarters in Madison, N.J., 
he sometimes goes to the company gym at his lunch hour to play pickup 
basketball games. There, some colleagues say, he is not above using 
his elbows to get a better position. The trouble between the two chiefs 
began in the summer. Analysts said Stafford became concerned about 
Shapiro's role in the proposed company and his anticipated level of 
compensation. Even though Stafford drew a higher salary at American 
Home Products than Shapiro at Monsanto, he made considerably less 
after stock options were included. Stafford was also said to become 
increasingly annoyed when Shapiro made decisions without consulting 
him. According to one source familiar with Monsanto, Stafford was 
angry that Shapiro had named Gary Crittenden as Monsanto's chief financial 
officer in August. Stafford was so irritated that he circulated an 
internal memo that assured his staff Crittenden would not hold an 
important role in the merged company. An American Home Products spokesman 
declined to comment about the memo. The dispute between the two intensified 
in recent weeks, analysts said, when Shapiro insisted he serve as 
co-chairman as originally planned. But Stafford refused, noting American 
Home Products had controlling interest of the combined company, not 
the other way around. A spokesman for American Home Products denied 
that the struggle between the two chief executives had anything to 
do with the merger falling apart. Shapiro repeatedly declined to discuss 
why the merger had collapsed, but said finally, ``It had a `Rashomon' 
quality,'' referring to the classic movie by Akira Kurosawa in which 
viewers see four accounts of a rape and murder with no hint of which 
is correct. ``Everyone will have different views of what happened.'' 
With this merger out of the way, other companies may attempt a deal, 
probably with Monsanto. Novartis, the Swiss-based company formed by 
the merger two years ago of Ciba-Geigy and Sandoz, has long been rumored 
to be interested in Monsanto. Daniel Vasella, the president of Novartis, 
said Tuesday through a company spokesman that it would be inappropriate 
to comment. American Home Products and Monsanto are both likely to 
try other mergers, analysts said, though not before next year. American 
Home has recently released a bevy of new products, which could significantly 
lift the company's sales. Monsanto appears to have the brighter future, 
at least in the short term. The company said Tuesday that it had arranged 
to add $2 billion to its revolving credit agreement with Citibank 
and that it would issue new equity as soon as conditions in the stock 
market improve. Monsanto did not say how much equity it would like 
to issue but it will ask the Securities and Exchange Commission for 
pre-approval covering the sale of as much as $6 billion in shares 
and debt. Monsanto will not be able to raise enough cash from investors, 
though, to sustain growth at G.D. Searle, its drug subsidiary. ``We 
will be back in the partnering business,'' said Shapiro, who long 
ago conceded that Searle was too small to adequately finance research 
and the introduction of new products on its own. Searle is marketing 
its most promising new product, an anti-arthritic drug called Celebra, 
in a venture with Pfizer Inc. that was announced before the deal with 
American Home Products. The nutraceutical business is also expected 
to rely more on partnerships to take advantage of Monsanto's technology. 
It is not yet clear whether the end products will be mostly consumer 
goods like vitamins, in which case the distribution skills of American 
Home Products would have been invaluable, or food ingredients, an 
area where Monsanto has more experience. Monsanto's agricultural business 
is likely to be the least affected by the collapse of the merger. 
Though American Home Products, with more than $2 billion in annual 
pesticide sales, is one of the largest crop protection companies, 
its major products are among those that have been losing ground to 
Monsanto's Roundup, the world's best-selling herbicide. And it is 
American Home that needed Monsanto, not vice versa, to gain expertise 
in applying biotechnology to crops and livestock. Shapiro also stressed 
that Monsanto remains committed to its goal of building a life sciences 
company. The vision is the same even though the opportunity to move 
years ahead in one fell swoop has been lost, Shapiro said. ``We just 
have to get the capabilities another way.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>