<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981013.0185 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When I opened my own pastry shop last year, I wanted the selection 
of pastries, cakes and chocolates to be so dazzling that people would 
not only have trouble deciding what to taste first, but also wonder 
how everything was made. Most of what we do at the shop is pretty 
complicated, and after all, if everyone could make these sweets at 
home, who'd need us? But in fact I have a large repertory of desserts 
that anyone can do at home _they're the desserts I prepare on my day 
off and the ones that my wife, Alexandra, makes for friends. For the 
next eight weeks, these are the desserts I'm going to share with you, 
starting with a pain d'epices from my childhood. All through my school 
years, my 4 o'clock snack was always the same: Van Damme's pain d'epices 
_ literally spice bread, in reality, a cross between a honey cake 
and a spice loaf. Even though my father and my grandfather were pastry 
chefs, I got the same straight-from-the-grocery cake everyone else 
did. Years later, still in love with the memory of Van Damme's, I 
decided to do my own version, one with deeper flavor and lots more 
add-ins. My pain d'epices is three-quarters nuts and dried fruits. 
When you cut a slice you see a mosaic of ingredients held together 
by the batter, which is nothing more than honey, water, sugar, flour 
and fragrant spices. There are no eggs and no butter in the cake, 
a rarity in the annals of pastry. I like to use strongly flavored 
pine honey for this cake, and although you can use just two or three 
different kinds of fruits and nuts, I urge you to get as many varieties 
as you can into the mix; it will make every bite of the cake that 
much more exciting. This recipe makes four small loaves. There's no 
reason to cut the recipe down, because this cake is an excellent keeper. 
In fact, it should not really be eaten until three days after it's 
made: Its flavors need time to ripen. In addition, this cake is great 
toasted for breakfast and superb with savory foods. At the bistro, 
Philippe Bertineau, our executive chef, brushes slices of pain d'epices 
with clarified butter, runs them under the broiler for a crisping, 
and serves the toast alongside equally spicy shrimp with lemon, capers 
and herbs. Pain d'epices has almost as many uses as it does spices, 
nuts and fruits. PAIN D'EPICES Time: 1 hour 15 minutes, plus cooling 
Butter for greasing pans Flour for dusting pans 2 cups nuts, preferably 
a mix of sliced almonds, slivered almonds, skinned pistachios, skinned 
hazelnuts, walnut halves and pine nuts 1 cup dried fruit cut in 1/4-inch 
dice, preferably equal amounts of apricots, figs, prunes and dates 
1/4 cup dark raisins 1/4 cup golden raisins Finely grated zest of 
1 lemon Finely grated zest of 1 orange 4 teaspoons baking soda 1 teaspoon 
pastis or other anise-flavored liqueur 1/4 teaspoon cinnamon 1/4 teaspoon 
freshly grated nutmeg 1/4 teaspoon ground cloves (optional) Pinch 
of salt 1 cup pine honey, or other strongly flavored honey 3/4 cup 
sugar 2 tablespoons dark rum 2 pieces star anise, tied in cheesecloth 
3 cups all-purpose flour, sifted. 1. Preheat oven to 350 degrees. 
Butter four aluminum-foil baby loaf pans, each 5 3/4 inches by 3 1/4 
inches by 2 inches. Dust the insides with flour, and tap out excess. 
Place pans on baking sheet; set aside. 2. In large mixing bowl, combine 
nuts, diced fruit, dark raisins, golden raisins, lemon zest and orange 
zest. Mix well. Add baking soda, pastis, cinnamon, nutmeg, cloves 
and salt. Stir to mix. 3. In medium saucepan over medium heat, combine 
1 3/4 cups water with honey, sugar, rum and star anise. Bring to boil, 
and immediately remove from heat. Remove and discard star anise. Pour 
liquid into bowl of fruit and nuts, and stir gently. Let mixture rest 
for 5 minutes, stirring occasionally. Add all-purpose flour, stir 
well and let rest for 2 or 3 minutes. 4. Divide batter among the pans; 
the pans will be about 3/4 full. Place baking sheet in oven. Bake 
until knife inserted in center of cakes comes out with the tiniest 
bit of moist batter at the tip, 45 to 50 minutes. (Check cakes after 
20 minutes of baking; if at any time the cakes appear to be browning 
too quickly, cover them loosely with tent of aluminum foil.) 5. Transfer 
cakes to a rack, and cool to room temperature. Unmold, and wrap in 
plastic film. To serve, cut into thin slices. The cakes are best after 
ripening for three days at room temperature. If sealed in airtight 
wrap, they may be frozen for a month. Yield: 4 small loaves. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>