<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981013.0383 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Last Tuesday, the attorneys general of Arizona, Connecticut and Iowa 
and officials from seven other states filed into a windowless conference 
room in a New York City hotel to review the latest proposal for a 
national tobacco settlement. Only 16 months before, state regulators 
had reached a $368.5 billion settlement with the nation's five largest 
tobacco companies, but their dizzying effort to reshape the cigarette 
industry crashed this June when federal legislation needed to cement 
the deal failed. Now, under the new proposal, cigarette makers would 
pay states some $198 billion over the next 25 years, accept some marketing 
bans, finance antismoking advertisements for five years and sign a 
pledge not to market to children. But other elements of last year's 
plan, from the federal regulation of nicotine to a ban on print advertising, 
had not even figured in the talks. Officials at the Oct. 6 meeting 
went home knowing they might soon face the choice of settling their 
states' lawsuits against the industry, or battling a powerful adversary 
in court. In a turn of fortune, the tobacco industry has weathered 
its fiercest firestorm ever to define the terms of a new peace, terms 
less onerous than those in last year's plan. ``I think they come out 
as the winner,'' said Robert Rabin, a professor of law at Stanford 
University who follows tobacco litigation. The states sued the companies 
to recoup health-care costs for treating smoking related illnesses. 
By ending the state actions, Rabin and others said, producers will 
erase lawsuits that had posed a significant legal threat and had also 
depressed the companies' stock values. Those involved in the latest 
talks insist that they fought for the best deal possible, without 
pursuing certain public health goals, like regulating nicotine, that 
would require federal legislation. But the story of this latest round 
of tobacco talks, which began in the spring, may be more than one 
of opportunities lost for the states. As the new talks progressed, 
the tide of courtroom opinions, which once seemed ready to swamp producers, 
turned in their favor. Also this time, public health advocates, who 
some negotiators blamed for overreaching, were excluded from the discussions. 
Although last year's plan was shaped by regulators who, fired by public 
health goals, pioneered novel lawsuits against the industry, the newest 
talks appear to reflect views of more conservative regulators who 
apparently had different objectives. ``The states that sued first 
were much more concerned about public health goals, not just the money 
they would get out of the deal,'' said Mary Aronson, president of 
Aronson Washington Research, which advises institutional investors 
on legal trends. The roots of current talks go back to May when it 
became apparent that a $516 billion tobacco bill proposed by Sen. 
John McCain, R-Ariz., would fail in the face of industry opposition. 
Joe Rice, a plaintiffs lawyer from Charleston, S.C., said he had approached 
outside lawyers for Philip Morris Co. and R.J. Reynolds Tobacco, a 
subsidiary of RJR Nabisco Holdings Inc., in a bid to shape a new settlement 
plan to deal with the 46 states that had either sued the industry 
to recover smoking-related health care costs or had not filed such 
actions. Rice, whose firm represented 25 states with such lawsuits, 
would soon become a central figure in talks. But the timing of his 
bid also came as momentum shifted to the industry. Producers had agreed 
to pay $40 billion over 25 years to settle lawsuits by Florida, Minnesota, 
Mississippi and Texas. And in Minnesota, they agreed to stinging terms, 
paying that state 50 percent more than it would have received under 
last year's plan. But the industry defeated McCain's bill, and it 
decided to draw the line with the Washington state lawsuit, which 
was to start in September. Pretrial decisions had weakened the state's 
case, reducing the potential amount of money it could collect by eliminating 
its ability to collect punitive damages. Industry lawyers told Christine 
Gregoire, the Washington attorney general, that they would not settle, 
said lawyers briefed on the talks. ``They made it clear that they 
wanted to lower the bar'' of expectations, one lawyer said. Ms. Gregoire 
could take her chances or accept terms less generous than those gained 
by Minnesota. Officials in some 20 other states faced more daunting 
prospects. They had sued late and did little to prepare their lawsuits, 
counting on congressional approval of last year's plan to yield a 
cash windfall. Working with Ms. Gregoire, Rice brought some other 
states into the still-secret settlement talks including New York and 
California, big states that were needed to forge a deal. Negotiators 
for the states and industry tried to shape a plan to present at a 
July meeting of state attorneys general in Colorado. But problems 
arose and a fracas among state officials erupted when word of the 
talks became public. Three states were added to the negotiating group, 
but Ms. Gregoire, who headed the team, insisted on keeping details 
secret. Apparently fearing that opponents might try to torpedo the 
talks, she insisted that officials briefed on their progress take 
a confidentiality pledge, said lawyers involved. Others, however, 
did bid to influence the talks. Both Matthew Myers, a lawyer for the 
Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids, an advocacy group, and Richard Scruggs, 
a plaintiffs lawyer who had been an architect of last year's plan, 
made suggestions, including that negotiators draft a new federal tobacco 
bill, said one lawyer involved in the talks. Myers said that he did 
seek to strengthen the plan's public health provisions but denied 
that he had proposed new federal legislation. Scruggs could not be 
reached. While state negotiators were able to raise the industry's 
original offer of $176 billion and add some public health provisions, 
the course of the talks was snail-like and little progress was made 
over the summer, said lawyers involved in the discussions. The major 
fracas was not between state and industry negotiators but between 
cigarette makers. Two producers, R.J. Reynolds and Brown &AMP; Williamson 
Tobacco, a subsidiary of BAT Industries, dropped out of the talks 
in August after a dispute with Philip Morris over how to deal with 
smaller cigarette makers who did not sign on to a settlement plan. 
That problem was resolved about two weeks ago, lawyers said, when 
the top executives of the three companies decided to give more favorable 
financial treatment to R.J. Reynolds and Brown &AMP; Williamson if 
producers who were not participating in the settlement plan took away 
market share. Ms. Gregoire said in a recent interview that the public 
health goals achieved under the new plan would outstrip those gained 
by Minnesota. But state officials are concerned about a number of 
provisions and are seeking to have the industry finance antismoking 
advertisements beyond the five years required under the current proposal. 
Lawyers involved in the talks said there was little left to do other 
than for the companies to sign off on the plan and for other states 
to make their decision. Most of the states are expected to accept 
the deal, which may be announced next week but could be delayed until 
after the fall election. Rabin, the Stanford professor, said state 
officials would face tough choices if a new deal was concluded. By 
going to court, they face the loss of billions of dollars if they 
fail. For the industry, settling with the states may be part of a 
larger plan. Internal Philip Morris documents show, for example, that 
the company as early as 1991 considered giving-up many advertising 
and marketing practices, including some contained in the current deal, 
in exchange for federal legislation to protect it against smoking 
lawsuits. As a result, concessions that producers refused to yield 
in these talks may resurface if Congress, as some expect, again takes 
up whether the Food and Drug Administration should regulate the tobacco 
industry. In 1996, FDA officials exerted such authority, but a federal 
appeals court held in August that Congress had not given the agency 
that power. But for now the tone among some state officials is reflective. 
``This is not the end of the war on smoking,'' said Iowa Attorney 
General Tom Miller. ``It is just the end of another chapter.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>