<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981013.0433 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Michelle Leung's kindergarten classroom at Public School 184 on the 
Lower East Side looks much like any other, with a few hard-to-miss 
exceptions. The tags taped onto her students' pint-size tables have 
their names written in bold block letters and also in painterly Chinese 
characters. Objects throughout the room _ the door, the clock, the 
closet _ also bear signs identifying them in English and Chinese. 
Indeed, the entire school day is infused with both languages because 
P.S. 184, which opened last month with two kindergarten classes, is 
the first public school in the nation designed to teach fluency in 
English and Mandarin Chinese. The school, one of more than 150 small, 
alternative public schools that have opened across the city in the 
last few years, is also known as the Shuang Wen Academy, after the 
Chinese for ``double language.'' But it is a distinct departure from 
the traditional bilingual programs that are criticized in many parts 
of the country these days as hindrances to immigrants' learning the 
language of their new land. Traditional bilingual programs seek to 
educate non-English-speaking children by teaching them in their native 
language until they are confident enough to learn exclusively in English. 
These classes, which remain widely accepted in New York, generally 
teach nonlinguistic subjects like science, history or math. Shuang 
Wen, where most of the students speak at least some English, has another, 
almost opposite goal. Like a small number of other dual-language schools 
across the country, it seeks to teach students the language and culture 
of their homeland for their own sake. ``We're different from a traditional 
bilingual program where children are taught in their mother tongue 
just long enough to get them fluent in English,'' said Ling-Ling Chou, 
the head of the school. ``Here we teach in both languages, and we 
want them to master both languages.'' For the parents, nearly all 
of them immigrants or children of immigrants, it is a way to help 
the children weave together their Chinese and American selves. As 
such, it serves much the same purpose as the dozens of weekend Chinese 
schools across the city, where children study Chinese language and 
culture. ``When I grew up I saw a lot of kids who rebelled against 
being Chinese and who rejected what they were,'' said Larry Lee, a 
social worker and one of the leaders of the group of parents and community 
activists who led the campaign to create Shuang Wen. ``With this school, 
my hope is that these kids can be comfortable with who they are and 
also be comfortable being American.'' Even so, Shuang Wen met a certain 
amount of opposition in the planning stages, when some non-Chinese 
teachers and residents of the district said the school would be a 
barrier to assimilation. At the moment, all 40 of the children at 
Shuang Wen are of Chinese descent, though fewer than a quarter speak 
Mandarin, the main language of China and Taiwan. Many are fluent in 
Cantonese, which is still the predominant dialect in Chinatown, and 
a few speak no Chinese at all. But school officials hope that as the 
school grows, grade by grade, it will attract a more diverse student 
body _ one that includes children of other ethnic groups. The bulk 
of the regular school day, until 3 p.m., is taught in English and 
run like a typical kindergarten class. They work on the alphabet. 
They read from picture books. They paste leaves onto construction 
paper. They nap. They have lunch. Ms. Leung uses Chinese sparingly, 
when a student doesn't understand an instruction she has given in 
English. The teacher of the other class, Aline Jaquez, doesn't speak 
any Chinese and so relies on hand gestures and actions to communicate 
with her native Chinese speakers. She also relies heavily on two full-time 
volunteers who speak Mandarin and who sometimes help break up the 
school day with short Chinese programs like a puppet show or an art 
project. The core Chinese instruction, however, comes from 3 until 
5:30, from teachers paid with private funds raised mainly from foundations. 
To combat the fatigue that the children naturally feel after a full 
school day, the Chinese teachers emphasize music and movement. One 
day recently, a teacher, Julie Wei, got the children up on their feet, 
punched on the tape player and used grand, exaggerated gestures to 
lead them through a song describing a child's morning regimen. Even 
the children who spoke no Chinese followed along eagerly as they mimed 
and sang about washing their faces, brushing their teeth, strapping 
on their book bags and waving goodbye to Mom and Dad. The children 
have been strategically grouped at tables with at least one student 
fluent in Mandarin and one fluent in English. ``They learn a lot from 
each other because at this age, they like to imitate one another,'' 
Ms. Wei said. ``The best part is that they don't even realize that 
they're teaching each other.'' Lee, a third-generation Chinese-American 
who says he often regrets his own inability to speak Chinese, said 
he and a group of Asian-American educators had talked about starting 
a school like Shuang Wen for nearly 10 years. But it wasn't until 
1996 that they formally proposed it and won a grant from New Visions 
for Public Schools, a foundation that has helped establish more than 
30 alternative public schools since 1992. When designing the school 
day, Shuang Wen's planning committee had a fairly limited number of 
models. San Francisco has three schools that teach Cantonese, and 
there are fewer than 200 Spanish dual-language schools across the 
country, many of which are patterned after Canadian schools that teach 
in French and English. Maria Carlo, a professor at the Harvard Graduate 
School of Education, said the hardest job of any dual-language school 
is finding a way to educate everyone while still meeting the different 
language needs of each child. ``A very delicate balance needs to be 
achieved there in order to make it work,'' she said. Paula Grande 
marvels at how much Chinese her 5-year-old daughter, You Jing Streeter, 
has picked up in just a few short weeks. You Jing is one of two children 
at the school who were adopted from China by American parents; in 
the three years since Ms. Grande and her husband adopted You Jing, 
they have made a concerted effort to bring Chinese culture into their 
family life. Ms. Grande said You Jing was clearly a little frustrated 
after the first day of school because she spoke no Mandarin. But she 
said You Jing now comes home each day repeating Chinese phrases and 
singing songs. ``We took her out of her culture, but we don't want 
her to lose it,'' Ms. Grande said. ``And Shuang Wen, we think, will 
help her be more comfortable in the culture she was born in.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>