<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981013.2000.2026 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
U.S. Envoy Richard Holbrooke today is calling an agreement with Slobodan 
Milosevic a turning point in efforts to end the Kosovo crisis. Milosevic 
has agreed to withdraw Serbian forces from the province where they 
have been cracking down on ethnic Albanian separatists for seven months. 
Two thousand inspectors from the Organization of Security and Cooperation 
in Europe will monitor Serbia's compliance with the accord. Has the 
West brought peace to Kosovo or has Slobodan Milosevic pulled a fast 
one? The World's Andrew North reports. It was in the Balkans that 
U.S. special envoy Richard Holbrooke made his reputation as an international 
statesman with the 1995 Dayton Agreement on Bosnia. But in contrast 
to the fanfare surrounding that accord, Holbrooke was sounding cautious 
about today's deal with Serbian leader, Slobodan Milosevic. As a result 
of over nine days of discussions we have had, we are in a position 
to see a possibility that certain commitments that have been made, 
if they are turned into compliance, can offer us a map towards a lifting 
of the sense of emergency. Holbrooke's caution is warranted according 
to Jim Hooper, Director of the Washington-based Balkan Action Counsel. 
The most positive thing about the agreement is that it is a cease 
fire, but the agreement itself is a setback for NATO and for the stability 
in the Balkans and certainly for the situation in Kosovo. Hooper says 
Milosevic signed on to Holbrooke's proposals because it does not commit 
him to discussing autonomy for Kosovo's ethnic Albanians, which the 
Serbian leader stripped away in 1989. Hooper says the deal reminds 
him of the way the Dayton Agreement let Milosevic off the hook for 
his war atrocities in Bosnia. It gives Mr. Milosevic a get out of 
jail of free card in terms of his own accountability for war crimes 
in Kosovo. Another major difficulty is that there is no real articulation 
of enforcement provisions. American university professor, Paul Williams, 
advised the Bosnian government during the Dayton negotiations three 
years ago. You are going to have two thousand unarmed OSCE monitors 
on the ground, which quite frankly, will report on the humanitarian 
crisis and continuing crimes against humanity, but will have no real 
means of prohibiting these crimes and it will be very similar to the 
unprofor forces in Bosnia which every day you could read the various 
reports of the atrocities and sort of the inaction of the international 
community and finally, when the international community did try to 
take action, these unprofor soldiers were taken hostage. I think you 
are going to see the exact same thing happen here in Kosovo. But not 
all Balkan analysts take such a gloomy view. I think it is the best 
deal under the circumstances. Laura Silva, author of Yugoslavia, Death 
of a Nation. In the short term, it's obviously better to work towards 
a political settlement and to establish peace and hopefully a long-term 
stability in the region rather than have a aerial bombardment which 
won't necessarily accomplish very much in terms of actually achieving 
a settlement. Nonetheless, Silva says the threat of force has to be 
maintained for Holbrooke's deal with Milosevic to hold. But Jim Hooper 
of the Balkan Action Counsel says it is too late. The West has missed 
its chance to force a lasting solution to the Kosovo problem. The 
alternative here would have been for NATO to use its air power in 
order to compel Mr. Milosevic to withdraw Serbian military and police 
forces from Kosovo and then NATO would have told the Kosovo Albanians 
to implement their autonomy, their 1989 autonomy, unilaterally. This 
would not have been independence, but it would have laid the foundation 
for negotiations between Milosevic and the Kosovo Albanians. I think 
that would have changed the situation and, as important, it would 
have restored NATO's credibility. NATO may yet have the chance to 
reverse those doubts if Milosevic fails to show compliance with the 
terms of the agreement within four days. The military alliance is 
prepared to follow through on the activation order it approved last 
night and force the issue with air strikes against Serb targets. The 
fear among many Balkan analysts though is that Milosevic will give 
the impression of compliance and then gradually return to his original 
objective, the partition of Kosovo along ethnic lines. For The World, 
I'm Andrew North. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>