<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981013.2000.1255 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is The World, I'm Tony Kahn. With a Middle East summit session, 
near Washington two days away, Palestinian and Israeli leaders are 
sounding pessimistic. Palestinian President, Yasser Arafat, said today 
there was still a lot to be solved before a deal could be sealed and 
Israeli's Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said there is no chance 
at this stage of a new peace deal. On the West Bank, many Palestinians 
remain frustrated with Israel's continuing control of their movements 
between towns and villages as The World's Richard Myron reports, Israeli 
checkpoints are a constant reminder of the long way both sides have 
to go before they can coexist peacefully. At the checkpoint between 
Jerusalem and the West Bank town of Bethlehem, an Israeli soldier 
with a flack jacket and M16 rifle checks the papers of people crossing 
from the Palestinian side into Israel. Palestinians who live in Jerusalem 
are allowed to cross but many others can't enter. On the Bethlehem 
side of the checkpoint, hundreds of men mill about amid clouds of 
dust. They work as day laborers in Israel. But the Israelis have closed 
the checkpoint because of the Jewish holiday of Succot. Yusov has 
come here from his village close to Bethlehem to try and get to his 
job on a Jerusalem construction site and he is angry at losing yet 
another day's work. This is not a way to live. We have been like this 
for months. There has to be a solution to this. Every time they have 
a festival, we are forced to go on holiday and on our festivals, they 
also close the checkpoint. The Israelis periodically close checkpoints 
citing security concerns, opening them once they consider the danger 
is passed. The Bethlehem checkpoint was reopened today at the end 
of the Jewish holiday. These closures make travel between Palestine-controlled 
towns in the West Bank difficult. This policy began in 1993 following 
suicide bomb attacks in Israel. It was also the year that marked the 
beginning of the peace process. Eitan Felner is the executive director 
of B'Tselem, an Israeli human rights group. The situation has worsened 
since the Oslo agreements. Before 1993, Palestinians were able to 
move more or less freely between Israel and the West Bank. Since then, 
Palestinians only that have permits can do so and the vast majority 
of them do not have permits. And this control of human traffic affects 
every aspect of life from the most mundane to the most essential. 
This hurts the daily life and the daily routine of my work. I remember 
last year I was supposed to go to Nablus to St. Luke's Hospital, I 
had an operating list that morning and I was prevented. Dr. Manduh 
Alaka is one of the most senior Palestinian surgeons in the West Bank. 
Medical Journals are scattered on the back of his car. He works between 
the major hospitals in the Palestinian towns on Nablus and Ramala 
as well as in East Jerusalem. Every day he is forced to go through 
numerous checkpoints on his way to work. Dr. Alaka says that the checkpoints 
have divided Palestinian society allowing the Israelis to control 
the West Bank. This is extremely difficult for people who are from 
East Jerusalem to move around or people from West Bank to go to East 
Jerusalem. And again now it is divided into area A, area B, area C 
and Hebron, Hebron 1, Hebron 2... they keep fragmenting us. But Israel 
says that, under the circumstances, its policy is generous. Monsier 
Fogel is the head of the Israel government press office. We probably 
have the most liberal policy of any other country in the world vis-a-vis, 
a population, a Palestinian population which is basically belligerent. 
Others say that the checkpoints are ineffective. Eitan Felner from 
the human rights group, B'Tselem, says that Israel is manipulating 
legitimate security concerns. Palestinians have become a commodity 
in the hands of the Israeli authorities that could be used for the 
negotiations whenever it is convenient for Israel to show that they 
are giving something to the Palestinian authority in the peace process 
and to show to the international community that then there is the 
closure whenever for internal pressure within Israeli society they 
want to be tough on the Palestinian population, they make more tough 
measures related to the closure. At the Rum checkpoint on the road 
between Jerusalem and Ramala, Israeli soldiers search the trunk of 
a car. Dr. Manduh Alaka observes the scene as he waits in line to 
pass. He feels betrayed by the peace process which has in some ways 
brought him less, not more freedom. Look at the humiliation I feel 
and the anger inside every time that under the banner of peace process, 
now we are living as if in a zoo for somebody who fought for a peace, 
the concept of that, this is very frustrating. As the leaders meet 
later this week in Washington, many Palestinians will be hoping that 
along with the grand rhetoric and the talk of land being handed over, 
their concerns to move freely will also be on the agenda. For The 
World, this is Richard Myron reporting from the West Bank. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>