<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981013.2000.2996 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is the world, I am Tony Kahn in Boston. We return now to today's 
geography quiz location where, instead of the usual cars and trucks, 
the city streets are clogged with thousands of rickshaws causing bumper-to-bumper 
headaches that can last for hours. Despite such chaos, a rickshaw 
is still the best way to get around this Bangladeshi's capital streets, 
especially if you want to visit some of its famous sites including 
the Lalbag Fort an unfinished structure dating from 1678. So, what 
is the name of this Rickshaw capital of the world? Well, here to tell 
us to Tony Wheeler, founder of lonely planet travel guides, himself 
a seasoned rickshaw rider. Mr. Wheeler, where are we? We are in Dhaka 
the capital of Bangladesh. Exactly, and I guess Wheeler is a perfect 
name to have when talking about rickshaws. Why are they so popular 
in Dhaka? I guess it is partly that even though it is a very densely 
populated city, it is reasonably small. It is small enough for rickshaws 
to get around and the other thing rickshaws really need is flat they 
are not designed for hills and Bangladesh as a whole is very flat, 
and Dhaka certainly is extremely flat. In case anybody is walking 
around with the image of this being something that is pulled by a 
person on the ground with stakes or a yolk. This is basically a bicycle 
with dreams of grandeur. Right? I mean, you can almost build one of 
these yourself. They would have started out as a man-pulled device 
and you still in Calcutta in India, you still do find the old man 
pulled rickshaw as it was invented 120-odd years ago. But in most 
cities in Asia where rickshaws still exist, they have become bicycle 
rickshaws. They have really combined the old rickshaw with a bicycle. 
I have been looking at this wonderful book that you came out with, 
Chasing Rickshaws, and one of the things that strikes me so much about 
these rickshaw besides their incredible ubiquity and abundance, is 
the colors, they are beautifully designed by people. I assume that 
means they take an enormous pride in their rickshaw. Yes. They certainly 
do, in fact, we would see rickshaws and say boy, that is a really 
good one and they would say, oh, well that is because it was painted 
by so and so. There are rickshaw artists whose entire occupation is 
devoted to painting and decorating rickshaws. To what extent is the 
rickshaw really the center of their family economy? It's a huge part 
of the economy. They reckon that there is about 300,000 rickshaws 
in Dhaka. So, if you think that they work two shifts, that means that 
there is 600,000 rickshaw riders on top of the riders, there will 
be the owners and the mechanics and the manufacturers and the artists, 
of course, who paint them. So they play a huge part in the economy 
of not only Dhaka but Bangladesh as a whole. Has anybody figured out 
how much this really saves the economy in terms of the things that 
rickshaws do not need? Like gasoline and what not? One of the calculations 
has been that there is more money spent on rickshaw transport every 
day than there is on the national airline. And when you consider the 
Bangladesh Beaman the airline flies all over Asia and flies to Europe 
and so on with modern jetliners. A rickshaw ride only costs twenty 
cents, perhaps. Twenty cents, how far does twenty cents go itself? 
Oh, twenty cents goes quite a long way in Bangladesh. It does? But 
twenty cents will get you a fair way across the city, yes. Is there 
any likelihood that they could catch on anywhere in the United States 
like downtown Manhattan? That's a good thought. Actually, there are 
rickshaws in various places in the United States and also in other 
countries in Europe, for example. But very much of a tourist thing. 
Tony Wheeler is founder of Lonely planet travel guides and his latest 
book is called, Chasing Richshaws. Thanks a lot. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>