<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981013.2000.0372 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is The World, I'm Tony Kahn. The threat of NATO air strikes against 
Serbia has diminished, but not disappeared. Marathon talks between 
U.S. envoy, Richard Holbrooke, and Serbian leader, Slobodan Milosevic, 
have produced a deal announced last night that is designed to end 
the Serb crackdown on ethnic Albanians in Kosovo. Two thousand international 
monitors including U.S. civilians will verify Serbia's compliance 
with the accord. Today, President Clinton outlined the terms of the 
agreement. First, the cessation of hostilities must continue; second, 
the troops present Milosevic recently sent to Kosovo must begin to 
move out and those already there must begin to come to Garrison. Third, 
the international monitors must be allowed to enter and be given full 
freedom of movement. Fourth, humanitarian relief agencies must be 
able to bring help to the hundreds of thousands of displaced persons. 
And fifth, serious autonomy negotiations with the Kosovos must begin 
to go forward. Coming up we'll hear from Brussels, Belgium where NATO 
remains ready to unleash air strikes at Serb targets if Milosevic 
reneges and from Kosovo where news of today's accord was greeted with 
skepticism. But first we go to Belgrade, where as The World's Nedi 
Shebek reports, Slobodan Milosevic has declared the crisis over. After 
days of silence, President Milosevic addressed the nation today. An 
agreement has been reached to resolve the problem of Kosovo through 
peaceful means. The agreement we reached has eliminated the danger 
of a military intervention against our country. In a brief, two minute 
televised statement, Milosevic did his best to look and sound optimistic 
and portrayed the agreement in a glorious light. The agreement is 
completely in accord with the interest of our country, with the interest 
of the Republic of Serbia, and all of its citizens. Other government 
officials echoed Milosevic's assessment promising that no foreign 
power will meddle in Serbia's internal affairs and tell Serbia what 
to do in its sovereign territory. But up until this morning, Milosevic 
maintained that he would never permit foreign observers to monitor 
his actions in Kosovo. Today's speech, according to political analyst, 
Yasmina Telisiovic, represents a policy U-turn for the Serbian leader. 
Actually, it is but, he would not be ready to recognize or to admit 
it immediately, so he will have to play slowly to the public to which 
he said that it is our internal matter and that it will be solved 
within the Yugoslav government. Now he is accepting international 
monitors, how is he going to explain this U-turn to the population? 
I think his propaganda machine is capable of explaining anything to 
this Nation that is so driven out of its mind with all those threats 
from the outside and from the inside that it doesn't think clearly. 
Milosevic's propaganda machine is already in top gear. Stateron radio 
Belgrade sauntered to broadcast telegrams of support for him an hour 
after his statement. This was a letter of support from the speaker 
of the Serbian parliament, who praised Milosevic's statesmanship and 
wisdom, saying Milosevic saved Serbia from a catastrophe. Milospasic, 
military analyst for the Belgrade Independent Weekly Braemae, says 
Milosevic has done it again. Many analysts expected Milosevic to do 
this. Which is shortly to make the situation insufferable, internationalize 
it, and then appear as the savior of the nation. That is what he is 
actually in the process of doing right now. And will he get away with 
it? Of course, he will. Milosevic will not only get away with it, 
Valsic says, he will actually emerge from the crisis stronger. All 
the damage will be transferred to Serbian opposition and, of course, 
with Serb radicals, he has qua partners who have been given, in the 
meantime, the dirty job of prosecuting public-the free media and trying 
to open it's freedom of press, and behave in an extremist and totalitarian 
manner. On the streets of Belgrade, Serbs breathe a sigh of relief 
after learning that the threat of NATO air strikes had diminished, 
but it is too early to celebrate. The difficult task of negotiating 
a political solution for Kosovo lies ahead and the obstacles are enormous. 
But it would appear for now that the process may at least go ahead 
without excessive violence and under international supervision. Reporting 
for The World, this is Nedi Shebek, in Belgrade. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>