<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981013.1700.2697 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The World Health Organization reports strokes affect millions of people 
worldwide each year, with stroke mortality increasing dramatically 
in developing countries. Those who do survive suffer varying degrees 
of mental and physical disability. Jane Hughes reports on some recent 
progress in finding an effective treatment for stroke victims. Strokes 
cause permanent disability and death by cutting off the circulation 
to some brain cells or damaging others. For the first time, a genetically 
engineered medication approved by the United States government can 
save the lives and mobility of stroke victims. It's called TPA, short 
for tissue plasminogen activator. It is a blood clot dissolver that 
must be used during the early onset of the more common type of stroke 
in which clogged arteries block the blood flow to the brain. The new 
medication is not advised for the other type of stroke, which is caused 
by the rupture of a weakened blood vessel in the brain. The type of 
stroke can be determined by a neurological examination in the hospital 
emergency room. Johns Hopkins University neurologist Dr. Christopher 
Early says clinical tests show that TPA can prevent serious brain 
damage in some patients. I think TPA is first and foremost the one 
and only drug available that has proven to be effective in the treatment 
of stroke. There are many alternatives out there which may come online 
in the next five to 10 years. But we have something now which is available, 
which I think is quite effective in treating a relatively small number 
of people at this time, but still effective in that group of people. 
That's the good news. The bad news is that many hospitals aren't yet 
equipped to provide this treatment, and the really bad news is that 
most patients don't recognize symptoms of stroke soon enough to seek 
timely treatment. Because it may be years before researchers develop 
better stroke treatments or even perfect TPA, doctors say people should 
learn the warning signs of stroke and, most important of all, take 
steps to prevent one from occurring in the first place. The National 
Stroke Association estimates that as many as four out of five strokes 
are preventable. Experts say the best ways to reduce the chance of 
stroke are to lower even mildly elevated blood pressure, exercise 
regularly, quit smoking, lose excess weight, limit alcohol consumption, 
lower cholesterol levels and reduce stress. Dr. John Marler of the 
National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke says because 
stroke victims often don't realize they are suffering a brain attack, 
it's important for everyone to acquaint themselves with the symptoms. 
The evidence actually shows that many patients who have a stroke don't 
have full realization of what's going on. After all, it's the brain 
that's injured here, and that's the organ that realizes when something 
is wrong. And we're beginning more to focus on the witnessed stroke 
and trying to get the witness educated as to what's going on here, 
too. If you see someone become paralyzed on one side of their body, 
their face begins drooping, they have difficulty speaking, even though 
they aren't experiencing pain and they may seem more temporarily confused, 
we're trying to learn how to communicate to the public that this is 
a major emergency. This is someone's brain, part of it is possibly 
dying here, and something needs to be done. It has, at least in my 
mind, the significance of a heart attack. Dr. John Marler stresses 
that the two key ways to lower the risk of stroke are to stop smoking 
and control blood pressure. I'm Jane Hughes. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>