<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981013.1700.2156 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When neighbors become enemies, it is often civilians who pay the heaviest 
costs. Former neighbors also wage some of the most brutal wars, as 
history has seen in Ireland, Cyprus, Bosnia and Kosovo. War among 
neighbors -- why do such conflicts start, and how do we stop them? 
That's the subject examined in this rebroadcast of a "Dateline" program 
originally aired in July. Here's Pamela Taylor. Often wars between 
neighbors are waged in the name of religious or ethnic differences. 
But the underlying reasons are usually economic or political by persons 
trying to gain or keep power. The fighting, which erupted in May between 
Ethiopia and Eritrea, shattered what was once East Africa's closest 
and oldest friendship. Even the leaders of the two countries were 
long-time rebel allies, and the economies of Ethiopia and Eritrea 
were closely linked. Now Ethiopia and Eritrea are at war -- bombing 
each other's territory and shelling villages across their dry, rocky 
border. When Eritrean troops crossed the ill-defined border between 
the two countries on May 12, claiming the territory as theirs, Ethiopia 
began expelling many Eritreans and arresting others. VOA correspondent 
Scott Sterns visited a detention camp in central Ethiopia, one that 
had earlier served as a training camp for Marxist dictator Mengistu 
Haile Mariam. He filed this report. The rebel alliance that toppled 
Mr. Mengistu is now at war with itself. Ethiopia and Eritrea fighting 
a border war that's led to the death and detention of former comrades. 
Eritrean Zahai Gabrameko fought for years against Mr. Mengistu when 
the war was over and Eritrea declared its independence, Mr. Zahai 
and his family chose to stay in Ethiopia, where he worked at the ministry 
of health. He was arrested for being an Eritrean spy. Mr. Zahai says 
Ethiopian authorities told him he was helping Eritrea and could no 
longer work at the ministry. He and his son were both sent to this 
camp at Feche about 120 kilometers north of the capital Addis Ababa. 
Mr. Zahai says he's been living peacefully in Ethiopia for years, 
and he does not see why he and his family are suffering when they 
have nothing to do with the fighting in the north. With more than 
300,000 Eritreans living in Ethiopia, fewer than 1,000 have been deported 
and another 1,000 detained. Ethiopia says that shows this is not a 
witch hunt but instead a selective effort to protect itself against 
spying and sabotage. That's little comfort for people like Aman Kagai, 
who's at university in the U.S. state of Texas. He was home on holiday 
last week when he was picked up in the Ethiopian capital. Yes, I left 
this country when I was 1. I came back here after all these years, 
22 years later, for a vacation. And in the case of my dad being rich. 
I've been kept here for no reason. They haven't even asked me anything. 
They say all they were going to do is ask me questions about my dad. 
They haven't, and I've been here almost a week now. Conditions at 
the Feche camp are cramped, but not severe. There's a health clinic, 
exercise grounds and visits from the Red Cross. Camp commandant Mesphin 
says the Eritreans are not prisoners, they're being treated like human 
beings. "They're not our friends, but they're not our enemies either," 
he says. "They're Eritreans, and we have to keep an eye on them. VOA 
correspondent Scott Sterns reporting from central Ethiopia. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>