<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981013.1700.0621 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Amnesty International has called for human rights monitors to be deployed 
in Kosovo alongside cease-fire monitors. The international human rights 
organization said in a statement Tuesday that monitors are needed 
to observe the situation of displaced persons and ensure their safe 
return. Amnesty International says human rights protection and promotion 
must drive all current efforts toward a settlement of the crisis. 
The Amnesty International proposal gets a qualified endorsement from 
Arthur Helthan. He is the director of forced migration projects at 
the Open Society Institute in New York, and Mr. Helthan has seen the 
Kosovo situation firsthand. I would. It very much depends upon the 
composition of the international team that will be deployed to monitor 
compliance, and that certainly should include independent monitors 
of the human rights situation. What's the likelihood that we would 
see those monitors put in at this particular point in time? That we'll 
see President Milosevic agree to such a thing? I think there is some 
likelihood inasmuch as there is leverage at the moment. But you have 
to realize that he was desperate to avoid a substantial military deployment 
in Kosovo, and I think there is leverage at the moment to try to dictate 
the composition of this deployment. Of course, your main concern is 
the displaced people that are there. And I ask you this every time 
we speak of the subject, but do you have a figure at the moment of 
how many people are displaced within Kosovo? There's a wide range 
of estimates. A minimum of 300,000 with 50,000 people being homeless 
all the way up to well over half a million. It's hard to know. It's 
such a dynamic situation. That's one of the reasons why close monitoring 
is needed. What would be done if monitors were to be -- to be sent 
in there to keep an eye on the situation? How would they act? What 
would they do? There has to be a real direct connection between monitoring 
in this situation and political and even, indeed, a security framework 
and response. Because you simply can't have human rights monitoring 
in a vacuum. There has to be a way to ensure that persons who are 
committing human rights violations and grave abuses of humanitarian 
law are brought to account. When we talk about bringing people to 
account, are we also thinking in terms of the tribunal that's been 
looking at war crimes in that part of the world? That has to be part 
of the mix. It will be necessary for the international deployment 
to come up with a real direct sense of accountability so that those 
who transgress these humanitarian norms will be brought to account 
either by the tribunal or in some other fashion. Arthur Helthan, the 
director of forced migration projects at the Open Society Institute 
in New York. And in a related development regarding those tribunals, 
Amnesty International called on Yugoslav authorities to allow the 
international criminal tribunal for the former Yugoslavia full and 
unimpeded access to the country. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>