<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981128.0337 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Threatened by a government counteroffensive, Congolese rebels on Saturday 
appeared to have halted a four-month advance into the heart of Congo 
and instead dug in to brace for air strikes against them. ``We're 
avoiding confrontation to cut losses,'' said rebel Capt. Baudeoin, 
who only gave his first name. ``The enemy is putting pressure on us, 
and we're resisting.'' Zimbabwe, President Laurent Kabila's main ally, 
has deployed troops, tanks, helicopters and jet fighters in eastern 
Congo to aid the Congolese army counteroffensive at Kabalo, a key 
railway junction 300 kilometers (185 miles) south of the eastern rebel 
stronghold at Goma. This is the first time the rebels, backed by Rwanda 
and Uganda, have had to stop their march across the eastern half of 
Congo since the war began Aug. 2. The rebels, disaffected members 
of the government and army, are fighting to topple Kabila, whom they 
charge with the same corruption, nepotism and ethnic intolerance as 
Mobutu Sese Seko, the former Zaire's dictator he ousted in May 1997. 
Rwanda and Uganda complain that Kabila has neglected eastern Congo, 
from where rebels from their countries launch cross-border attacks. 
So far, Kabila has refused to negotiate with the rebels, instead demanding 
that Rwanda and Uganda first withdraw their support for the insurgents. 
Both countries say they will continue fighting as long as Congo remains 
unstable, and accuse Kabila of enlisting among his army's ranks thousands 
of Rwandan and Ugandan rebels. Baudeoin said his troops on Thursday 
forced back government-allied tanks when they tried to take the Nzofu 
Bridge over the Congo River, 14 kilometers (8 miles) west of Kabalo, 
which guards the entrance to the town. He admitted losses among his 
troops, and said Zimbabwean soldiers had also been killed in the fighting. 
He did not say how many died, but said the foreigners had been promptly 
buried, while their identity cards and green and red berets had been 
kept for record. One of the Zimbabwean Ministry of Defense cards carried 
the photo and the name of Godfriy Masamwa, a private. On Friday, Zimbabwean 
MiG-21 fighter jets retaliated by dropping bombs on the abandoned 
hamlets surrounding Kabalo, but caused no casualties. One 50-kilogram 
bomb landed in the sand in between huts made of mud bricks, creating 
a huge crater. Another cluster bomb destroyed railtracks in front 
of the abandoned, white railway building, which has not been in use 
since Kabalo fell to the rebels last month. Most of the population 
has fled into thick tropical forest to avoid almost daily air raids 
since Kabila and his allies, which also include Angola, Namibia and 
Chad, launched their counteroffensive in the east. Rebel commanders 
dismissed the danger posed by the government offensive, saying the 
aircraft were flying too high for fear of being hit by ground fire. 
Bombing runs were too imprecise and insignificant to make a difference, 
he said. Faced with the rainy seasons' muddy roads and swelling lakes 
and rivers, and the threat of air strikes, the rebels have been forced 
to adopt new tactics of moving at night and resting by day, often 
waiting for the rains to stop. ``We had to change our behavior,'' 
Baudeoin said. Army convoys from the airstrip at Nyunzu, bringing 
in fresh supplies of ammunition and weapons to front-line positions 
150 kilometers (90 miles) away, have been avoiding main roads, instead 
inching in dark for hours through narrow bush tracks. During the day, 
soldiers dodge open areas, moving quickly, avoiding forming columns 
across rice fields and looking for cover in banana trees. Baudeoin 
said most of the rebel attacks during the night targeted enemy artillery 
positions they had located during daylight hours and spots where Zimbabwean 
Mi-24 transport helicopters drop off soldiers close to the front-lines. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>