<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981128.0454 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
John Eales kicked four huge penalties, including the matchwinner from 
46 meters three minutes from the end, to guide Australia to a 12-11 
victory over England at Twickenham Saturday. England was leading 11-9 
after Jeremy Guscott's lone try of the match when the home forwards 
were penalized at a ruck and lock forward Eales, who also kicked four 
second half penalties to clinch the Wallabies win against France last 
week, found the distance from almost the half way line. It was a tight 
finish to a closely fought match before 75,000 fans at Twickenham 
in which England performed far better than in their 76-0 loss to the 
Wallabies in Australia in June. A fifth minute penalty by Eales gave 
the Wallabies a 3-0 lead with a huge kick from 44 meters after England 
scrum half Matt Dawson was penalized at a scrum. The lock forward 
should have doubled the lead three minutes later but sliced his kick 
from the left wing. After Paul Grayson had kicked a penalty wide the 
Northampton fly half limped off with a knee injury in the 33rd minute 
and was replaced by Bath's Mike Catt. It was Catt who leveled in the 
final minute of the first half when Patricio Noriega was penalized 
for fighting and the replacement fly half made it 3-3 at the interval. 
He kicked another penalty nine minutes into the second half after 
the Australian forwards were penalized for illegally preventing an 
English try. The Wallabies then produced a spell of pressure that 
failed to produce a try but gained another penalty. Winger Joe Roff 
made a break off a pass by Daniel Herbert to take the Wallabies to 
England's line. Austin Healey stopped the move with a tackle, but 
the Australians maintained the pressure. Noriega halted Jason Leonard 
just short but when England captain Lawrence Dallaglio was penalized 
in a ruck, Eales kicked the penalty to make it 6-6 in the 55th minute. 
He regained the lead with another 40-meter penalty in the 69th minute 
but England then came up with the only try of the game by Guscott 
a minute later. Healey and Catt combined to put fullback Matt Perry 
away through the middle. The ball was laid up and Dawson and Catt 
slipped the ball to Guscott who scored 23rd test try. Catt hooked 
the conversion but England led 11-9 with 10 minutes to go. Lineups: 
England _ Matt Perry; Tony Underwood, Phil de Glanville, Jeremy Guscott, 
Austin Healey; Paul Grayson, Matt Dawson; Darren Garforth, Richard 
Cockerill, Jason Leonard, Martin Johnson, Tim Rodber, Lawrence Dallaglio 
(capt) Richard Hill, Neil Back. Australia _ Chris Latham; Jason Little, 
Daniel Herbert, Nathan Grey, Joe Roff; Stephen Larkham, George Gregan; 
Andrew Blades, Phil Kearns, Particio Noriega, John Eales (capt), Tom 
Bowman, Matt Cockbain, David Wilson, Toutai Kefu. Referee _ Paul Honis, 
New Zealand. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>