<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981128.0320 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Each time the church door swings open, chants and the heavy perfume 
of melting candles spill into the snowy courtyard. A beggar leans 
on a walking stick, reaching out his hand for a few coins. Much of 
life at St. Vladimir's revolves around this courtyard, the center 
of the church's social action campaign. While worshippers bow and 
pray before icons inside, 200 or so down-and-out folks eat in the 
soup kitchen each day. The church outside Moscow also has 30 homeless 
men doing construction work on its buildings. Like other welfare efforts 
in Russia, St. Vladimir's is struggling to cope with the three-month-long 
financial crisis: sharply rising costs and shrinking financial support; 
frozen bank accounts; and the ever-widening ocean of need. But it 
is more seriously hampered by the mistrust most Russians hold for 
charities, which keeps donations low and most charity work small-scale 
and local. ``If a person isn't honest, he assumes no one else is either,'' 
said St. Vladimir's administrator Andrei Fomichev. Charity's bad name 
in Russia dates from Soviet times, when workers had ``contributions'' 
automatically deducted from their wages and put in huge, centralized 
funds. They never saw their money doing any good. ``So Russians don't 
believe in organizations. They believe in helping their friends and 
family, and the occasional bum or babushka on the street,'' said Jenny 
Hodgson, co-director of the British-based Charities Aid Foundation. 
The tradition of giving in Russia was further tarnished by some embezzlement 
scandals in recent years. Some so-called charities seemed more interested 
in the tax breaks on imported humanitarian goods than in distributing 
aid. As a result, just 2 percent of the income for Russian non-governmental 
organizations comes from private contributions, Hodgson said. By contrast, 
individual donations provide 90 percent of U.S. charities' budgets, 
she said. Most of the 50,000 charities active in Russia avoid the 
news media and labor largely in obscurity because of the public mistrust. 
``In Russia, people look askance at charity appeals. They consider 
them some sort of scheme,'' said Svetlana Ivanchenko, a lawyer who 
works at Novy Dom (New Home), an organization that offers job referrals 
and legal and psychological counseling to the homeless. Amid all the 
suspicion, many charities do all they can to avoid even the perception 
of abuse. St. Vladimir's asks donors to directly pay specific bills 
on the church's behalf, or provide tools and machinery that can keep 
its construction and feeding programs going. The private Russian Aid 
Fund has taken a similar approach during its two-year existence, coordinating 
the delivery of more than dlrs 620,000 worth of aid but avoiding any 
contact with donated money, director Lev Ambinder said. The fund was 
born out of the Soviet tradition of letters to the editor highlighting 
corruption, injustice and just plain need. ``With a letter, you could 
get a powerful bureaucrat fired, get someone an apartment, restore 
someone their job if they were fired unfairly,'' said Ambinder, who 
worked as a correspondent for a number of newspapers across Soviet 
Russia. Each month, Ambinder and his assistant pore through hundreds 
of letters in their attic office at the publishing house that puts 
out Domovoy (House-Spirit), a slick monthly magazine aimed at well-off 
women. They choose the most compelling letters, call local welfare 
agencies to verify the contents, and publish about 10 in each issue. 
The letters are written on behalf of individuals or families: a child 
who needs money for a prohibitively expensive operation; a paraplegic 
who wants a computer so he can make a living as a bookkeeper; food 
and clothing for children orphaned by a mine disaster. Ambinder had 
expected that with the economic crisis, ``we would take a serious 
hit and all this would end.'' But while Domovoy is now giving the 
fund just two pages instead of four because of a drop in advertising 
revenues, Ambinder hasn't seen a falloff in contributions. Almost 
all of the donations are made anonymously, he said. That aspect is 
part of Russia's Orthodox Christian tradition. ``According to our 
faith, every act of charity will be blessed by God, and he will forgive 
our sins in return,'' said Father Yevmeny, the priest who heads St. 
Vladimir's homeless program. ``But we also have this understanding: 
If you do a good deed and then tell everyone what you did, the good 
deed evaporates.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>