<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981128.0533 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Alex Corretja saved three match points and overcame an error-filled 
performance by top-ranked Pete Sampras on Saturday to set up a historic 
all-Spanish final at the ATP Tour World Championship against Carlos 
Moya. Corretja, No. 6 in the world, rallied to upset Sampras 4-6, 
6-3, 7-6 (7-3). Sampras, who is assured of holding to No. 1 for a 
record sixth consecutive year, had 50 unforced errors in the match 
that lasted two hours and eight minutes. Corretja had only 19. Moya 
beat Tim Henman 6-4, 3-6, 7-5 earlier Saturday. Sampras hit a sizzling 
backhand to break Corretja's serve for a 3-2 lead. The American fired 
two aces in the next game to ward off two break points and cruised 
through the remainder of the set. But Sampras started making more 
and more uncharacteristic unforced errors and Corretja took advantage 
to break serve for a 3-1 lead in the second. Two consecutive forehand 
errors by Sampras gave the set to Corretja. Corretja began the third 
set by breaking Sampras' serve, only to see Sampras take some risky 
shots to return the favor in the next game. The Spaniard saved three 
match points to send the match into the decisive tiebreaker. All three 
were long rallies and all three went Corretja's way, one on his winner, 
two on errors by Sampras. Sampras dived for a volley on the last one, 
but it went wide. In the tiebreaker, Corretja rolled to a 6-1 lead, 
wasted two match points, but Sampras then sent a backhand return into 
the net. Sampras, the two-time defending champion in the dlrs 3.5 
million tournament, did not drop a set in three round-robin matches. 
He was seeking his fifth title in the event. Sampras accomplished 
his main goal of the year _ holding the No. 1 for the sixth consecutive 
year _ when Marcelo Rios dropped out Thursday because of a back injury. 
That ruined Rios' hopes of challenging Sampras for the No. 1. Moya, 
the French Open champion, turned the match in the middle of the third 
set, when he broke Henman's serve to tie the score at 3-3. ``I played 
one of my best matches on indoor surfaces,'' Moya said, adding that 
this was probably one his best three matches all year. Two Spaniards 
have never played in a final before in this tournament. The last Spanish 
finalist was Manuel Orantes, who also won what was then called the 
Masters in 1976 in Houston. ``I said when I came here that I wanted 
to win this tournament,'' Moya said. ``Nobody believed me. Now it's 
just one step away from me. I hope you realize when I talk, I'm not 
joking at all.'' Although not known for his prowess on indoor courts, 
Moya reached the semifinals of the championship last year in his first 
appearance in the tournament and now has advanced to his first final. 
Ranked No. 4 in the world, Moya broke Henman's service in the seventh 
game and that allowed him to take the first set. Henman, who will 
move up two spots to a career-high ranking of No. 7 in final season 
rankings that come out Monday, broke Moya's serve for the first time 
for a 2-0 lead in the second set. The first Briton to reach the semifinals 
of the event, Henman survived a scare in the seventh game, when he 
saved four break points. He held serve to win the set and tie the 
score. Henman broke Moya's serve again at the start of the decisive 
set. But Moya pulled back in the sixth game and fought off three more 
break points in his next two service games. With Henman serving to 
stay in the match, Moya whipped a backhand passing shot to gain a 
match point. He hit a tremendous return winner past Henman to clinch 
the match after two hours and 20 minutes. ``He definitely raised his 
game in those games that he broke me at 3-2 and at the end,'' Henman 
said. ``He came up with some great shots.'' Moya advanced to his fourth 
final of the year, the first not on clay. He also won the Monte Carlo 
tournament. ``I played amazingly today, I had to take risks. I had 
to hit as hard as I can to pass him,'' Moya said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>