<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981128.0216 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
PARIS (AP) _ U.N. Secretary General Kofi Annan presided a meeting 
of the leaders of the countries at war in the Congo on Saturday in 
an effort to persuade them to renounce violence. The meeting took 
place on the sidelines of a summit of African leaders in Paris that 
focused on security and ways to achieve peace on the continent. Annan 
gathered together Congolese leader Laurent-Desire Kabila, as well 
as the leaders of Uganda and Rwanda, who are supporting rebels waging 
an insurgency in Congo. The heads of Zimbabwe and Burkina Faso also 
took part, the French presidential press service said. The purpose 
of the talks was to try to work out some framework for peace negotiations 
between the warring parties. The war in Congo dominated the final 
day of a Paris summit of African leaders. Annan on Friday had urged 
African leaders - especially those at war in Congo - to renounce violence 
and accept compromise to achieve peace. Speaking to the summit Friday, 
Annan said many African conflicts are ``rooted in a culture of intolerance'' 
and that the Congo conflict poses the continent's greatest challenge. 
French President Jacques Chirac urged African nations to do their 
own peacekeeping - a departure from past practices that put the burden 
on France and other Western nations. Chirac also renewed France's 
call for a regional peace conference in central Africa's Great Lakes 
region. Annan and Chirac spoke at the opening ceremony of the 20th 
French-African summit, where 34 African leaders confronted the issue 
of how to tame wars raging across the continent. All eyes were on 
Kabila, who finally sat down with Ugandan President Yoweri Museveni 
and Pasteur Bizimungu, Rwanda's leader. Kabila's presence in France 
has been the focus of attention following the decision by Britain's 
House of Lords rejecting immunity for former Chilean dictator Augusto 
Pinochet. French Prosecutors, responding to complaints by human rights 
groups, ruled Friday that Kabila could not be pursued for human rights 
violations because he benefits from customary immunity accorded heads 
of state in office. At a state dinner Friday night, Kabila was the 
only African leader Chirac did not publicly greet on the steps of 
the Elysee Palace. Instead, Chirac welcomed the Congolese leader inside, 
far from the cameras. Summit participants said they hoped for progress 
in the Congo crisis. Charles Josselin, France's cooperation minister 
in Africa, said he hoped for a resolution to the conflict in Congo 
in December. Kabila in the past has not been optimistic, saying a 
pullout of Rwandan and Ugandan-backed forces from the Congo was a 
precondition for substantive peace talks. Kabila and the Ugandan president 
are scheduled to hold separate talks Saturday with Chirac. Chirac's 
spokeswoman, Catherine Colonna, said Friday that there had been some 
progress toward a dialogue between Kabila and his adversaries, with 
each of the parties presenting their views. The French president stressed 
the need for Africans to take more responsibility for settling conflicts. 
``Instability is not Africa's fate. It is of course a matter of responsibility 
for Africans themselves,'' Chirac said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>