<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981128.0545 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Palestinians held wide-spread demonstrations, some of which turned 
violent, throughout the West Bank and east Jerusalem Saturday calling 
for the release of relatives and neighbors in Israeli jails. In east 
Jerusalem, Israeli police on horse-back charged a crowd of about 40 
Palestinian demonstrators in an effort to prevent them from marching 
towards Jerusalem's walled Old City. The protesters threw stones and 
empty bottles at police, and police responded with rubber-coated bullets 
and tear gas. Several Palestinians and journalists were injured from 
being clubbed by police. Police officers fired live bullets into the 
air to extricate themselves from a group of demonstrators that surrounded 
them, police spokesman Shmuel Ben-Ruby said. Ben-Ruby said that demonstration 
organizers had refused police requests to apply for a permit. After 
the demonstration, Palestinian youths threw stones at three passenger 
buses in east Jerusalem, lightly wounding one driver, Ben-Ruby said. 
Altogether, nine police officers were lightly injured and 19 Palestinians 
were arrested in east Jerusalem, Ben-Ruby said. In the West Bank city 
of Bethlehem, clashes erupted between Israeli soldiers and about 200 
Palestinians who marched towards an Israeli army outpost and pelted 
soldiers with stones. Troops responded with tear gas and rubber-bullets 
before Palestinian police arrived on the scene and pushed their citizens 
back from the Israeli-controlled area. A group of Palestinians burned 
one Israeli flag. There were no injuries reported. In Hebron, clashes 
broke out between stone-throwing demonstrators and police who responded 
with rubber-coated bullets, Israel radio said. Three demonstrators 
and one policeman were lightly injured, the radio said. In four other 
Palestinian-controlled cities throughout the West Bank, demonstrations 
were peaceful. Protesters called on Israel to set free so-called security 
prisoners, and lambasted the Palestinian leadership for not doing 
enough to secure the release of an estimated 2,500 Palestinians who 
remain in Israeli jails. ``We went out in the past to demonstrate 
against the Israelis to release our sons, but this time its different. 
There is an agreement. We came today to raise our voice to the Palestinian 
Authority to get the agreement implemented,'' said Khalid Abu Mihsin, 
whose son Jamal was sentenced to life in prison in 1993 for being 
part of a terror cell behind the murder of an Israeli. As part of 
the latest Mideast peace accord, Israel agreed to release 750 Palestinians 
in three stages. One week ago, Israel released the first group which 
included 150 common criminals, setting off criticism and disappointment 
from both the Palestinian public and officials who had expected the 
release of Palestinians held for political or militant activities. 
``We didn't spend our time at Wye Plantation discussing the release 
of those car thieves and criminals,'' Palestinian Cabinet Secretary 
Nabil Shaath said late Friday night. ``We discussed the release of 
those who participated in the Palestinian struggle.'' A statement 
released by Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's office Saturday 
said that the Palestinians were trying to create a crisis in the peace 
talks by making new demands to which Israel never agreed. Netanyahu 
said in the statement that no ``artificial crisis'' would change his 
refusal to release prisoners who committed murder or militant acts. 
The prisoner issue is a sensitive one for Palestinians since most 
families have had a brother of father arrested at one time or another 
during the 30 years of Israeli occupation and had hoped the peace 
process with Israel would mean the release of prisoners. A statement 
from Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat's Cabinet, which met until late 
Friday, said the issue of prisoner releases was ``top priority,'' 
and ``will not be subjected to compromise.'' Senior Palestinian negotiator 
Saeb Erekat said Arafat would raise the issue with U.S. President 
Bill Clinton when he goes to Washington next week. At Saturday's demonstrations 
however, held under the banner ``no peace without prisoner release,'' 
most of the anger was lobbed at Arafat's Palestinian Authority and 
in some cases, at Erekat directly. In the city of Nablus, some 250 
Palestinian demonstrators including mothers of prisoners carrying 
photos of their sons, chanted, ``Tell Erekat we are fed up with statements.'' 
Similar protests were held in the Gaza Strip last week and Palestinians 
said weekly demonstrations would grow until all prisoners were released. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>