<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981128.0478 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
South Africa tied New Zealand's record of 17 wins in a row by beating 
Ireland 27-13 Saturday but was given a tough battle by an Irish team 
who were far from outclassed by the world champion. Bobby Skinstad 
crossed for a try and two minutes later set up another for scrum half 
Joost van der Westhuizen early in the second half as the Springboks, 
helped by the accurate kicking of fullback Percy Montgomery, quickly 
turned a 7-6 half time advantage to 24-6. The Irish hit back with 
a Keith Wood try and twice went close to crossing the Springbok line 
again but were kept out by some superb defending. The South Africans 
aim to set a new record of successive victories by beating England 
at Twickenham on Saturday. Already on this tour, they have beaten 
Wales and Scotland and their last defeat was in August last year when 
they went went down 55-35 to New Zealand. The two teams and the 48,000 
fans at Lansdowne Road stood for a minute's silence before the game 
as a mark of a respect to the victims of the bombing at Omagh, Northern 
Ireland, where 29 people were killed in August. Irish fly half Eric 
Elwood missed two straightforward penalties but finally got one right 
from 27 meters to give Ireland a 3-0 lead after 16 minutes. The Springboks 
had barely been out of their own half but broke out to score a a try 
in the 28th minute. Irish winger Justin Bishop was caught in possession 
on the right, winger Pieter Roussow robbed him of the ball, passed 
inside scrum-half style and Johan Erasmus was well placed to dart 
through a huge gap in the Irish defense to run 30 meters for the try. 
Percy Montgomery kicked the conversion and the South Africans led 
7-3. Elwood reduced the lead to a point with a simple 28 meter penalty 
five minutes later and had the chance to give the Irish a half time 
lead in first half injury when the South Africans were guilty of killing 
the play. But his angled kick just missed the right hand post and 
South Africa led 7-6 at the break. Montgomery kicked a close range 
penalty to stretch the lead to 10-6 three minutes into the second 
half before the speedy back rower Skinstad scored his try. After the 
South Africans had won clean ball at a lineout, fly-half Henry Honiball 
sucked in three tacklers with a determined run and Skinstad weaved 
through a gap in the defense for the try. Montgomery's conversion 
made it 17-6. Two minutes later Skinstad's pace got him clear again, 
he passed to Honiball and the ball was switched on to Van der Westhuizen 
who crossed for the try. Montgomery stretched the lead to 24-6 before 
the Irish hit back. Ireland's experienced hooker Wood took a pass 
from scrum half Conor McGuinness, shrugged off tackle from Robbie 
Kempson and barged his way over for his third try in Irish colors. 
Elwood's conversion cut the lead to 24-13 Montgomery's fifth successful 
kick made it 27-13 to complete the record-tying victory for the Springboks. 
Lineups: Ireland _ Conor O'Shea; Justin Bishop, Jonathan Bell, Kevin 
Maggs, Girvan Dempsey; Eric Elwood, Conor McGuinness; Peter Clohessy, 
Keith Wood, Justin, Malcolm O'Kelly, Paddy Johns, Fitzpatrick, Victor 
Costello, Andy Ward, Dion O'Cuinneagain. South Africa _ Percy Montgomery; 
Stefan Terblanche, Andre Snyman, Christian Stewart, Pieter Rossouw; 
Henry Honiball, Joost van der Westhuizen; Adrian Garvey, James Dalton, 
Robbie Kempson, Mark Andrews, Krynauw Otto, Gary Teichmann (capt), 
Bobby Skinstad, Johan Erasmus. Referee _ Clayton Thomas, Wales. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>