<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981128.0130.0051 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
"CNN Headline News." In Atlanta, I'm David Goodnow. Thank you for 
joining us. President Clinton and his family returned a little earlier 
than planned to the White House Friday after spending Thanksgiving 
at camp David. While he was gone, Mr. Clinton's lawyers delivered 
to Capitol Hill answers to 81 questions from the house Judiciary committee. 
John king has more. The president's answers break no major new ground 
in an impeachment debate the White House believes is losing steam. 
In this 24-page response to the house Judiciary committee, the president 
-- acknowledges misleading top aides and the American people about 
his relationship with Monica Lewinsky. Says he cannot recall specifics 
of some conversations critical to the investigation. But the president 
forcefully denies lying under oath, denies asking lewinsky or anyone 
else to lie. And denies obstructing justice. The president was wrapping 
up a round of golf when his answers were delivered to Capitol Hill, 
where there is more and more talk of censure and reprimand instead 
of impeachment. The answers matter because whichever way Congress 
is going to go, there are still certain factual matters that will 
determine whether impeachment is the appropriate remedy or something 
less in the minds of many members. The president told the committee 
-- chairman Henry Hyde wants to complete the inquiry in the next two 
weeks, and republicans were drafting three proposed articles of impeachment 
even before the president submitted his answers. I would doubt that 
his answers are going to sway committee members one way or the other. 
I think that most of the people on the committee pretty much know 
which way they're going to vote at this time. Mr. Clinton's careful 
responses were drafted with more than the impeachment debate in mind. 
The independent counsel says his investigation is nowhere near over. 
You have to be concerned that Ken Starr is the type of person -- he 
is sufficiently single-minded and dedicated to his view of what his 
job is -- that he could very well decide to indict Bill Clinton when 
Bill Clinton is no longer president. Chairman Hyde says the committee 
will carefully review the president's answers. And this won't be the 
last word from the White House. The president's lawyers plan to submit 
a detailed legal brief in the days ahead, making their case against 
impeachment. John king, CNN, the White House. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>