<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981128.1300.1513 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The man who took on the political establishment in Minnesota and won 
faced a different kind of contest last night. Martin Savidge reports. 
To the world, he was Jesse "the body" Ventura, professional wrestler. 
To the people of Minnesota, he is governor-elect Ventura. And peace 
to all, thank you. But to a small group of high school students he 
is known simply as "coach." After delivering a head butt to the world 
of professional politics, Ventura is working on his next upset, hoping 
his Champlain park rebels will serve up defeat to the Woodbury royals 
for the state high school football championship. Well the governor-elect 
doesn't like the numbers. But unlike the last big contest, coach Ventura 
has to watch this one from the sidelines where he's been for the last 
four years. Serving as the team's physical conditioner and chief motivator. 
Using the same plain talk that won him office. I've always told my 
players, I'll never, ever punish you for losing a game. I never will. 
But, if they quit on me, I will punish them beyond belief. Because 
there's a difference between losing and quitting. He just wants us 
to get better and he's doing what he can to help us physically to 
do that. But if you think there's pressure playing for the next governor, 
imagine if it's your job to try and beat him. We don't think about 
the governor. We're thinking about the man in the mirror -- doing 
the best job we can tonight, doing what we have to do to win the ball 
game. As for the fans, politics is one thing and football is -- football. 
I think Woodbury's proving that they're the better team tonight. I 
don't wish any animosity towards Jesse. In this game we're, in this 
game, we're rooting against him, of course. Ventura says he went into 
politics for the same reason he went into coaching, to try to make 
a difference. And when he talks about it, it's hard to tell if he's 
talking about a team that's out to win, or a man who's already won. 
When someone sets a goal and overcomes the obstacles and achieves 
that goal, because that's something you'll carry with you now for 
the rest of your life, that you know you can succeed if you put your 
mind to it. But there was no storybook ending for the wrestler turned 
coach turned governor. Ventura's rebels went down to defeat, 28-7. 
Proving an adage that's as true in football as it is in politics -- 
you win some, you lose some. Martin Savidge, CNN, Minneapolis. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>