<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981128.1000.0598 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Call him "the body," call him "the brain," call him "sir." When Jesse 
"the coach" Ventura wears yet another hat, or should or we say helmet, 
there's no doubt who's in charge. Martin Savidge explains. To the 
world, he was Jesse "the body" Ventura, professional wrestler. To 
the people of Minnesota, he is governor-elect Ventura. And peace to 
all, thank you. But to a small group of high school students he is 
known simply as "coach." After delivering a head butt to the world 
of professional politics, Ventura is working on his next upset, hoping 
his rebels will serve up defeat to the wood bury royals for the state 
high school football championship. The governor-elect doesn't like 
the numbers But unlike the last big contest, coach Ventura has to 
watch this one from the sidelines where he's been for the last four 
years. Serving as the team's physical conditioner and chief motivator. 
Using the sailplane talk that won him office. I've always told my 
players, I'll never, ever punish you for losing a game. I never will. 
But, if they quit on me, I will punish them beyond belief. Because 
there's a difference between losing and quitting. He just wants us 
to get better and he's doing what he can to help us physically to 
do that. But if you think there's pressure playing for the next governor, 
imagine if it's your job to try and beat him. We don't think about 
the governor. We're thinking about the man in the mirror-doing the 
best job we can tonight, doing what we have to do to win the ball 
game As for the fans, politics is one thing and football is -- football. 
I think wood bury's proving they're the better team tonight. I don't 
wish any animosity towards Jesse. In this game, if this game, we're 
rooting against him, of course. Ventura says he went into politics 
for the same reason he went into coaching, to try to make a difference. 
When he talks about it, it's hard to tell if he's talking about a 
team out to win or a man who's already won. Someone sets a goal and 
overcomes the obstacles and achieves that goal, because that's something 
you'll carry with you now for the rest of your life, that you know 
you can succeed if you put your mind to it. But there was no storybook 
ending for the wrestler turned coach turned governor. Ventura's rebels 
went down to defeat. Proving an adage that's as true in football as 
it is in politics -- you win some, you lose some. Martin Savidge, 
CNN, Minneapolis. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>