<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981128.0130.1509 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
British lawmakers are taking the problem of unruly soccer crowds seriously. 
Now, they're getting ready to prevent hooligans from giving Britain 
a bad name overseas. Shiulie ghosh has the story. The scenes which 
brought shame to England during the world cup, french courts were 
filled with hooligans who led the violence. But despite being well 
known to police here, the troublemakers are still free to travel to 
matches abroad. Now, the legislation governing hooliganism is under 
review in a bitter combat with the football thugs. We don't think 
the legislation is tough enough. There is still a minority of thugs 
who are traveling abroad. We want to make it more difficult for them 
to travel abroad so we're going to make it easier for international 
banning orders to be given to them. 29 measures have been put forward 
for consultation. Among them -- new powers to make convicted and unconvicted 
hooligans surrender their passports before international games, a 
new offense to prevent racist chants by individuals. And anti-ticket 
touting laws to cover matches abroad. There will also be tough new 
restrictions on the sale and consumption of alcohol, an undeniable 
factor in many scenes of rioting during the world cup. Today's proposals 
come at a time when football hooliganism is on the increase. These 
are not mindless individuals who don't have jobs but somehow have 
money and a lot of time on their hands. The people have got jobs. 
You know, there's a whole -- I mean, the police can tell you the sort 
of occupations and it covers everything you can think of. The most 
controversial proposal involves banning people from traveling to matches 
abroad even if they haven't been convicted of a Football-related offense. 
Courts could impose an international banning order on suspected troublemakers. 
Critics say this move is an infringement of civil liberties and could 
affect decent fans. The problem is that there are a lot of supporters 
out there who could actually be inconvenienced by this, who probably 
aren't going to cause trouble. It is going to be very, very difficult 
for police to know. A lot of the people who cause trouble abroad do 
so for the first time. The government says today's proposals constitute 
the most far-reaching anti-hooligan package it's ever considered. 
Some of the measures represent fundamental changes in how fans are 
controlled. Its hopes -- new legislation will be if place for Euro 
2000. Shiulie ghosh, itn, in north London. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>