<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981128.1600.0159 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
iraq is claiming vx nerve gas was planted on one of its missile warheads 
after it was taken away for testing by u.n. weapons inspectors. iraq's 
deputy foreign minister has not identified who may have been responsible. 
but he says samples inspectors found last may must have been deliberately 
contaminated. the charge came in letters yesterday that responded 
to u.n. questions about iraq's chemical weapons program. earlier this 
month, iraq agreed to cooperate with u.n. weapons inspectors, thereby 
averting a military strike. that cooperation exists amid continued 
defiant rhetoric from iraqi leaders. ben wedeman reports. a familiar 
song and dance in praise of iraqi president saddam hussein at a ceremony 
celebrating the opening of a park in baghdad, and equally familiar 
words of defiance from iraq's leaders. we continue to fight, to dance, 
to sing and create art in the face of those who want to change iraq 
into a graveyard. said this member of the ruling revolutionary command 
council. in mid-november, iraq reversed its decision to halt cooperation 
with united nations weapons inspectors reportedly just hours before 
the united states was to launch a missile strike on targets in iraq. 
it was a decision iraq said it took in response to appeals from friends, 
and it was a decision iraq may have taken reluctantly. the agreement 
to resume cooperation with unscom cannot achieve any positive result. 
said this man, iraqi vice president. iraq is no longer willing to 
accept the continuing conspiracy against it. in an interview with 
iraqi television, foreign minister mohammed saeed al-sahaf accused 
the weapons commission of being infested with spies. but iraq is more 
than willing to cooperate with other branches of the u.n. on friday, 
iraq submitted part of the distribution plan for the next phase of 
the oil-for-food program to u.n. secretary-general kofi annan. under 
the 2-year-old program overseen by the u.n., iraq is allowed to export 
limited amounts of oil and use the proceeds to import food and medicine 
and also spare parts for its decaying oil industry. after more than 
eight years of sanctions, iraq's petroleum industry is desperately 
in need of a complete overhaul. iraq is barely capable of exporting 
half the amount of oil it's allowed to under the oil-for-food program. 
two weeks ago, iraq averted air strikes by agreeing to cooperate fully 
with the u.n. weapons inspectors and iraq does appear to be cooperating 
on the ground. but statements from iraqi leaders seem to indicate 
that their cooperation has very definite limits. ben wedeman, cnn, 
baghdad. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>