<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981128.1830.1051 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In "focus" this evening -- the FBI's new attitude accepting advice 
and counsel from outsiders who can help them end armed standoffs peaceably. 
Here's NBC's Pete Williams. This is exactly what everyone wants to 
avoid, another disaster like the one at Waco, Texas, five years ago 
-- the deadly end to a standoff between federal law enforcement and 
a religious group called the branch davidians. For seven weeks the 
FBI tried to negotiate a peaceful surrender, spending 215 hours on 
the phone with the group's leader David koresh. At first, agents were 
simply trying to comprehend koresh's intricate philosophy of the apocalypse. 
And when God's thoughts will be revealed in the seven seals, all true 
christians should make that their first and foremost interest. Government 
reviews of what went wrong accused the FBI of a lack of knowledge 
about religious fringe groups. A view one author expressed at congressional 
hearings -- Unfortunately, the federal agents had no religious framework 
or conceptual scheme from which to understand the motivations of their 
captives. But since then, FBI director Louis freeh has been praised 
for changing the way his agents handle standoffs, giving more authority 
to negotiators, and reaching out to people who may understand those 
involved in a standoff. Bringing in, for example, militia figure Bo 
gritz two years ago to talk with the Montana Freemen. It ended peacefully 
without a single shot fired. FBI agents are also working to develop 
more contacts with the nation's religious scholars, hoping they'll 
learn to tell the difference between dangerous cults and peaceful 
ones that simply have unconventional beliefs. Experts in religious 
studies are eager to add their names to the FBI's list of consultants. 
They've made use of other professionals -- sociologists, psychologists, 
psychiatrists, in trying to understand people who seem to be outside 
of the mainstream of American, and even political, religious life. 
Earlier this year, kliever was called in by police in Texas who wanted 
help in dealing with members of a religious sect from Taiwan. They 
expected that God would visit the Dallas suburb of Garland. Neighbors 
were worried, but the group came and went without incident. But how 
to tell when a fringe group will become violent like members of the 
heavan's gate cult who committed mass suicide last year in the apparent 
belief their spirits would be carried off on a passing Comet? And 
will the FBI have to confront groups like that as the new millennium 
approaches at the turn of the century? All the more reason, scholars 
say, for the FBI to learn how religious groups think and talk. Law 
enforcement, I don't think, would want to do something that a Particular 
religious group might view as an omen or as some kind of action that 
fits right in with a particular prophecy that they have. Many religious 
scholars say they're willing to help the FBI by serving, in essence, 
as translators in the hope that during future confrontations, at the 
very least both sides will understand each other. Pete Williams, NBC 
news, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>