<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981128.0088 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Stanley Hill cannot leave soon enough. Hill is the $300,000-a-year 
head of District Council 37, a coalition of union locals representing 
120,000 city workers. Consider those workers unfortunate. Hill, dazzled 
by the friendly treatment he received from one Rudolph Giuliani, stripped 
his workers of their dignity and delivered them like beggars and penitents 
to their boss, the very same Giuliani. If you listen closely you can 
still hear the mayor laughing. ``Stanley acted more like the mayor's 
agent than the workers' representative,'' said Charles Ensley, president 
of a local that represents 14,000 social workers. He was referring 
to the contract negotiated nearly three years ago in which Hill agreed 
with Giuliani that the district council's workers could do without 
raises for a couple of years. He described Hill during that period 
as ``busily ingratiating himself with the mayor,'' and said, ``Stanley 
was more the obsequious, hat-in-hand union leader than the aggressive 
advocate.'' One of the abysmal features of the contract was that it 
opened the door to the widespread use of woefully underpaid welfare 
recipients in municipal jobs traditionally held by union workers. 
But Hill did not just sell his workers out by negotiating an astonishingly 
lousy contract. He then closed his eyes and covered his ears (at the 
very least) as corrupt union leaders rigged the election in which 
the workers tried to vote down the contract. When the results came 
in just about everybody in District Council 37 knew the election had 
been rigged, except Stanley Hill. He says he knew nothing. Ensley 
and others, including James Butler, president of the hospital workers' 
local, were running around the city telling anyone who would listen 
that the election had been hijacked. ``It was just crystal clear what 
had happened with that vote,'' said a local official who was interviewed 
Friday and asked not to be identified. ``It was so apparent. Any thinking 
person would have known that that was not an honest count.'' Among 
those who refused to credit any talk of a stolen election were Stanley 
Hill and Rudolph Giuliani. Giuliani once made a reputation chasing 
the kinds of crooks and scoundrels that control District Council 37. 
Now he eagerly climbs into bed with them. The contract ratified by 
the fraudulent vote set the pattern for agreements with other municipal 
unions and helped Giuliani balance the city's budget. And District 
Council 37 endorsed Giuliani for re-election in 1997. It turns out 
that the fraudulent election is just part of an extensive pattern 
of corruption in District Council 37. Joseph DeCanio, the president 
of a local representing highway laborers, pleaded guilty this month 
to stealing more than $50,000 in a kickback scheme connected to the 
donation of Thanksgiving turkeys to union members. In reporting on 
the guilty plea, The New York Times' Steven Greenhouse cited sources 
who said Manhattan District Attorney Robert Morgenthau is also investigating 
allegations of kickbacks from caterers, law firms and travel agencies, 
and charges that officials flew their girlfriends and other nonunion 
members to labor conventions at union expense. Hill, of course, knew 
nothing of these activities. Last Monday he announced that his two 
top aides and closest personal friends _ Martin Lubin and Mark Shaplo 
_ were resigning because they admitted knowing about the vote fraud. 
But they scrupulously kept that knowledge to themselves, according 
to Hill. You might wonder how a labor leader could continue to get 
more than $300,000 annually in salary and perks while being so out 
of touch with the real world that he fails to get even minimal raises 
for his struggling workers for a couple of years, is completely unaware 
of a fraudulent election that his closest advisers knew about, and 
has absolutely no knowledge of other instances of corruption that 
are threatening to wreck his union. Ignorance doesn't get more blissful 
than that. Now the district attorney is all over the union. Indictments 
are anticipated, and the embarrassed parent of District Council 37, 
the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, 
is considering placing the council into trusteeship. Stanley Hill's 
days are numbered. For city workers, the lower the number the better. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>