<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981128.0036 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Two men approach each other on a street. They quickly realize they 
are on a collision course. The first man, reading the body language 
of the second, steps to the right, then sees that the second man, 
attempting the same maneuver but responding a split second too late, 
has made the same move. The first man tacks the other way, but the 
second man has beat him to it. In an exquisite choreography of misinterpretation, 
the two men run right into each other on an empty sidewalk. A Freudian 
would have no trouble interpreting the event. The two men, although 
they thought they were trying to avoid each other, were driven into 
each other's arms by a subconscious sexual attraction. Non-Freudians, 
however, would recognize the workings of an iron law governing human 
affairs. The law has no name. It could be called the Uncertainty Principle, 
if Heisenberg did not own the trademark. But it needs no name to hold 
sway. Wherever a plan is hatched based on rational expectations of 
other people's expectations, it rears its head, decreeing that the 
very result that the plan is designed to prevent will in fact come 
to pass, quickly and inevitably. Put more scientifically, expectation 
of an expectation alters the expected expectation. Call it the Petard 
Principle. The Petard Principle has been in effect lately. Most recently, 
it put the whammy on the Federal Reserve. The Fed, making a rational 
assessment, judged that a possible slowdown in the economy could be 
averted with a half-point cut in interest rates. Shrewder voices at 
the Fed then attempted to ward off the evil work of the Petard Principle. 
A half-point cut, they argued, would send the message that the Fed 
was deeply concerned about an economic slowdown, causing conditions 
in the financial markets to deteriorate. The Fed settled on a quarter-point 
cut. Markets deteriorated, forcing the Fed to announce a second quarter-point 
cut Oct. 15, and a third cut Nov. 17. Trying to anticipate the Petard 
effect, the Fed faked itself out. The Petard Principle is not an economic 
law. Its ambitions go far beyond that. Consider the release of Bill 
Clinton's videotaped testimony before the grand jury charged with 
looking into the Monica Lewinsky matter. It was generally considered 
to be a dead certainty that once the American people got a look at 
Clinton on the stand, he would be finished. His behavior was advertised 
by unnamed insiders as being ``un-presidential,'' or worse. Television 
viewers expected to see a performance comparable to one of Charles 
Manson's appearances before the California parole board. They didn't 
(although Clinton's eyes did begin spinning in their sockets when 
the word ``cigar'' came up). Skewed expectations produced a skewed 
result. It was the Petard Principle at work again, with an interesting 
twist. Who skewed the expectations? Credulous observers might assume 
that it was the President's enemies who spread the word that a career-ending 
performance was in store. Students of the Petard Principle know that 
savvy presidential advisers would have been working double overtime 
to broadcast the message that Clinton's most shameful hour was at 
hand, thereby leveraging defeat into victory. OK, not victory, but 
at this late date, Clinton and his supporters will settle for low-grade 
embarrassment. Political analysts have sliced, diced and minced the 
results of the Minnesota gubernatorial campaign, desperately trying 
to explain how it is that one of the most enlightened and well-educated 
body of citizens in the United States decided that a professional 
wrestler with a shaved head should manage their affairs. It was the 
Petard Principle. Every voting Minnesotan entered the booth convinced 
that Jesse Ventura was a fringe candidate, and every vote cast for 
Ventura was done in that what-the-heck spirit that keeps so many Vegas 
wedding chapels busy. Every Ventura voter pulled the lever fully confident 
that no more than a handful of his or her fellow Minnesotans were 
doing the same. Surprise! Hollywood, too, wrestles constantly with 
the powerful but sneaky influence of the Petard Principle. Until this 
summer, the wise guys thought they had it beat. Studying audience 
behavior, the studio marketers saw that the mere expectation of a 
film's success could help insure success. By marketing a film as though 
it were destined to gross $80 million its first weekend, they could 
make audiences believe that a film was already a hit, and that they 
had better move fast and get it while it was hot. Like a smart virus, 
the Petard Principle adjusted. The summer of 1998 will be remembered 
as the season when the blockbusters flopped. Nothing could have been 
bigger than ``Godzilla,'' either the film itself, about a beast with 
a foot bigger than Donald Trump's hat size, or its advertising campaign. 
Even so, audiences ran to ``Something About Mary,'' a film that canny 
studio marketers recognized as having megahit potential _ it has taken 
in more than $170 million at the box office so far _ but chose to 
advertise almost as though it were a quirky independent film. Faked 
out by an underplayed ad campaign, filmgoers nourished the illusion 
that buying a ticket to the film made them part of a small, independent-minded 
community making a creative choice. Sort of like those Minnesota voters. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>