<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981128.0057 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Sen. Bob Kerrey, D-Neb., is engaged in the first test of the 2000 
presidential campaign: proving his ability to raise money. Like other 
Democratic and Republican hopefuls, he will have to raise more money 
than ever, at least $22 million, and earlier than ever before. Searching 
for creative ways to get donations much larger than those allowed 
by the strict limits of federal election laws, Kerrey and six other 
presidential aspirants have turned to so-called soft money. To raise 
these large unrestricted contributions from wealthy individuals, corporations 
and labor unions, they are exploiting the less-restrictive political 
donation regulations at the state level, establishing nonprofit organizations 
and setting up political action committees. Soft money is bleeding 
into the presidential campaign earlier than ever before and spreading 
among more potential candidates. And these controversial big donations 
are being solicited directly by the potential candidates for their 
own political committees, while in the past soft money was funneled 
through the national political parties. The Federal Election Campaign 
Act of 1974, passed after Watergate to prohibit large, special-interest 
contributions, limits donations to presidential primary candidates 
to $1,000. But there are many legal ways for aspiring candidates to 
skirt that limit. Kerrey's fund-raising device, for example, is a 
political action committee that is allowed to raise larger soft money 
contributions. Next month, many of Kerrey's most generous financial 
backers plan to gather in Omaha, Neb., at Boys Town, where his political 
action committee, Building America's Conscience and Kids PAC, is sponsoring 
an international economic conference. Most of them have already given 
to this committee, which has raised $1.2 million. Among those expected 
to attend are Kerrey supporters like the Baltimore Orioles owner, 
Peter Angelos, and the Wall Street investor Barry Wigmore, who have 
each already donated $25,000 to the political action committee, established 
in June. They can give these larger sums because Kerrey's committee 
is set up with both federal and non-federal accounts as allowed by 
law. The non-federal account can accept unlimited contributions. In 
fact, the committee has raised almost $800,000 through its non-federal 
account. Without this soft money, it is unlikely that Kerrey or other 
presidential hopefuls considering the race could raise $50,000 a day 
between now and the selection of the first delegates in early 2000. 
This amount is necessary to reach the minimum of $22 million that 
several campaign experts estimate candidates would need to be competitive. 
``It's a staggering sum,'' said Steve Jarding, the senator's national 
political director. ``But Bob believes he could raise the money if 
he ran.'' Until now, the political parties have been the main fund-raising 
vehicles for these large donations. In 1996, soft money contributions 
to the Democratic National Committee became a source of controversy 
when millions of dollars from the party were used to pay for early 
advertising that benefited the Clinton-Gore ticket. Attorney General 
Janet Reno must soon decide whether to ask for an independent counsel 
to investigate the soft money ad campaign. Like Kerrey, at least five 
Republican presidential hopefuls have established state-level political 
committees. Ostensibly, these committees are meant to support local 
candidates. Kerrey, for example, has used his to make campaign donations 
to local Democratic candidates, including $85,000 sent to New Hampshire, 
the site of the first presidential primary. But the state committees 
are also being used by the aspirants to pay for big-ticket items, 
like travel, staff and even more fund raising for their incipient 
national campaigns. And these committees are not the only devices 
the candidates are using to raise unlimited contributions. The wealthy 
publisher Steve Forbes has also established a nonprofit organization, 
Americans for Hope Growth and Opportunity, that is raising unrestricted 
contributions. Forbes, who ran unsuccessfully for the GOP presidential 
nomination in 1996, himself gave $100,000, and the organization has 
raised more than $13 million from 140,000 donors, said Bill Dal Col, 
the group's president. While Dal Col said the organization supported 
issues, not candidates, the issues championed by Americans for Hope 
Growth and Opportunity are the ones Forbes embraced in 1996, including 
tax cuts and school choice. Campaign finance experts say the big presence 
of soft money so early in the presidential election season is further 
evidence of the erosion of the post-Watergate election law reforms. 
Starting in 1988, the two political parties began gutting the federal 
limits by soliciting soft money donations, which are unlimited but 
are supposed to be used only for generic party-building activities. 
This year, both parties used soft money to pay for issue advertising 
in the congressional elections. According to pre-election reports 
filed at the Federal Election Commission, soft money contributions 
to Republican Party committees grew 144 percent over the last midterm 
elections, while Democratic soft money totals increased 84 percent. 
Together, the two parties raked in $173 million in soft money. The 
FEC is currently considering a proposal to ban soft money. Today, 
soft money already is bleeding into the presidential primary contests. 
Because the primaries are front-loaded in 2000, with many big states, 
including California and New York, expected to choose delegates before 
early March, and because the amount of money needed to run is larger 
than ever, ``the pressure will be the most intense to raise money 
before the primary season even begins,'' said Anthony Corrado, a government 
professor at Colby College in Waterville, Maine. That means presidential 
hopefuls are ``raising more money than at a similar point than in 
the 1996 cycle and they are raising much more money that isn't subject 
to federal regulation,'' he added. And funds raised for state political 
action committees or nonprofit organizations are not disclosed to 
the FEC. Terry McAuliffe, a leading Democratic fund-raiser, said the 
schedule of early primaries, including regional contests in the South, 
New England and the Rocky Mountain states, would have a profound effect 
on fund raising in 2000. ``The way this primary schedule has been 
designed there is no presidential fund-raising strategy that allows 
you to raise money in 2000,'' he said in an interview. ``It must all 
be raised in 1999.'' McAuliffe said this would create a more closed 
contest because an outsider candidate would not have time to exploit 
a surprise win to raise money, as George Bush did in 1980 after winning 
the Iowa caucuses. ``I think it's horrible,'' he said. ``Only a few 
people can play this game.'' Money spent during this early stage by 
presidential aspirants does not count against the spending limit set 
for presidential primary candidates who accept federal matching funds. 
In 1996, the amount was $37 million and is expected to be about $45 
million in 2000. Once their candidacy is declared, presidential contenders 
can no longer be affiliated with political action committees and must 
limit their contributions from individuals to $1,000. (Forbes did 
not accept matching funds in 1996 and spent more than $30 million 
of his own money. In 2000, if he runs, Dal Col said Forbes would not 
spend as much of his own money, but would not accept matching funds.) 
Until they become declared candidates, presidential aspirants can 
continue to solicit soft money for their state-level political action 
committees without worrying about complying with more rigid federal 
rules. Most of these committees have been set up in states with the 
least restrictive election laws. Virginia, which permits unlimited 
contributions from both individuals and corporations, has been a popular 
site for political action committees connected to the 2000 presidential 
aspirants. ``Virginia has become the Cayman Islands of presidential 
fund-raising,'' said Larry Makinson, executive director of the Center 
for Responsive Politics, a Washington research group that tracks contributions. 
Five Republicans, former Vice President Dan Quayle, the conservative 
leader Gary Bauer, former Gov. Lamar Alexander of Tennessee, the former 
vice presidential nominee Jack Kemp and Sen. John Ashcroft, R-Mo., 
have political action committees in Virginia. Although the Republican 
leaders have used some of their Virginia money to back local candidates, 
most of it has not not been spent in the Old Dominion. Not all would-be 
2000 candidates have state political action committees. Vice President 
Al Gore and former Democratic Sen. Bill Bradley of New Jersey both 
have only federal PACs. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas has yet to establish 
such a committee. Sen. John Kerry, D-Mass., who has spurned political 
action committee money for most of his career, is considering setting 
up such a committee as he explores whether to run for the Democratic 
presidential nomination. The early front-runners, like the vice president 
and the Texas governor, may not need to use state committees. Both 
have national fund-raising networks and can raise money quickly. Gore 
has been a fund-raising star for the Democratic National Committee. 
Bush will have easy access to wealthy Texas donors and his father's 
old money machine. Last summer, Bush raised more than $1 million in 
Washington for his re-election campaign at a fund-raising dinner organized 
by some of former President Bush's long-time financial supporters. 
Kerrey, who has headed the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee, 
and the House minority leader, Rep. Dick Gephardt, D-Mo., also have 
national fund-raising networks, though theirs are not as formidable 
as Gore's. On the Republican side, Alexander, who pioneered the use 
of state political action committees and soft money and made an unsuccessful 
bid for the GOP nomination in 1996, has proved to be a prodigious 
early fund-raiser. Bauer has raised millions nationally through the 
mail. And Forbes is in a class of his own. Both Alexander and Forbes 
have already spent large sums on issue ads in early primary states 
like New Hampshire. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>