<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981128.0148 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The parent union of District Council 37, New York City's largest municipal 
union, said Saturday that it was placing the council in trusteeship, 
effective Monday, to put an end to a spiraling scandal that has involved 
vote fraud and embezzlement. Gerald McEntee, president of the parent 
union, the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, 
named a trustee to run the council and said that Stanley Hill, the 
council's executive director, was taking a voluntary unpaid leave. 
McEntee's announcement was a deeply embarrassing blow to Hill, who 
worked hard in recent weeks to fend off trusteeship and to demonstrate 
that he was in charge and was setting matters straight. The parent 
union moved after weeks of embarrassing revelations about the district 
council, which represents 120,000 city employees, including social 
workers, engineers, sewage treatment workers, janitors and crossing 
guards. One district council leader has pleaded guilty to embezzlement, 
and another has been expelled after being found to have stolen more 
than $1.7 million. At least 6 of the 23 members on the council's executive 
board are under investigation on allegations of receiving kickbacks, 
while the Manhattan district attorney has subpoenaed records from 
the district council and all 56 of its constituent locals. And last 
week, two of Hill's closest aides resigned after admitting that they 
knew about fraud in the 1996 ratification vote on the union's five-year 
contract, which included a deeply unpopular two-year wage freeze. 
In a news release, McEntee said: ``My first concern is for the hard-working 
members of this union. They deserve an honest, credible union. I pledge 
to the 120,000 members of D.C. 37 that the reputation of this union 
will be restored.'' McEntee named Lee Saunders, one of his top assistants, 
to serve as trustee of the council, which includes 56 union locals. 
In recent days, Hill has praised Saunders for his work as trustee 
of a local representing nearly 25,000 school cafeteria aides and crossing 
guards. Saunders has balanced that local's budget after it fell deeply 
in debt under its president, Charles Hughes, who was expelled last 
June when a union judicial panel found that he had embezzled more 
than $1.7 million. Under the trusteeship, the parent union will run 
the district council's day-to-day business, including grievance hearings, 
negotiations and staffing. According to McEntee's news release, Hill 
will take his unpaid leave, pending the outcome of the parent union's 
investigations. The parent union has hired KPMG Peat Marwick to audit 
the district council's books, and the investigative firm Kroll Associates 
to look into the fraud in the 1996 ratification vote. As the waves 
of scandal lapped ever higher in recent weeks, Hill tried to restore 
some semblance of order. He pushed through constitutional amendments 
to tighten the district council's financial controls. He boasted that 
the district council continued to deliver as many services as ever, 
including grievance procedures, training sessions for shop stewards 
and night college classes for hundreds of members. And he met with 
editorial boards to argue that he should not be blamed for all the 
wrongdoing in the council's 56 largely autonomous locals. ``Yes, this 
is my toughest crisis,'' he said in an interview last week. ``Yes, 
there are some bad eggs. But again, this council is going to survive. 
We are making corrections.'' But his predecessor, Victor Gotbaum, 
widely considered the city's pre-eminent labor leader in his nearly 
25 years at the district council's helm, acknowledged being upset 
by the spiraling scandal. ``People say, `Are you affected by this?''' 
he said. ``I was the head of this council for almost a quarter-century, 
and all this really ticks me off.'' In 1970, Hill was elected president 
of a social workers' local, but when he lost his race for re-election, 
he was appointed to the district council's staff. Gotbaum adopted 
him as a protege and groomed him as a successor, but now Gotbaum talks 
as if his Pygmalion has fallen far short of expectations. Union leaders 
and labor experts point to two major reasons behind the district council's 
crisis. First, the council has an awkward governing structure in which 
many executive board members rely on Hill for their perks, so they 
are loath to ask him tough questions. At the same time, Hill relies 
on a handful of presidents of powerful locals for his re-election, 
so he is reluctant to come down hard on them. Second, many officials 
say Hill is too nice, someone who has a conciliatory management style 
and has taken a hear-no-evil, see-no-evil approach to corruption. 
``It's like the pathway to hell is good intentions,'' Gotbaum said. 
``The pathway to bad leadership is being a nice guy.'' Hill has also 
been criticized for not taking a tough stand on the council's finances 
_ despite the Wall Street boom, its net assets have dropped to $3.5 
million from $22 million in 1994. Council officials say about half 
the decline was caused by new accounting rules. But some union leaders 
point to a general laxness about spending. For instance, the district 
council and its 56 locals sent more than 700 people, at an estimated 
cost of more than $2 million, to the parent union's convention in 
Hawaii this summer. Over the last week, Gotbaum and Charles Ensley, 
president of a local representing 14,000 social workers, have insisted 
that Hill must have either known about or approved the fraud in the 
1996 ratification vote. Both said it was hard to believe that the 
aides who resigned last week _ Hill's associate director and another 
senior official _ would have engaged in vote fraud without Hill's 
approval. ``The parallels to Watergate are very real,'' Ensley said. 
``We continue to stonewall here.'' But Hill insisted that he knew 
nothing about the fraud until The New York Times reported last week 
that the Manhattan district attorney was investigating allegations 
made by a union leader that the ratification vote had been rigged. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>