<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981128.0078 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The questions were delivered in brash and burry Glaswegian tones. 
Who created the television, the telephone, penicillin, the bicycle, 
pneumatic tires, the breech-loading rifle, beta blockers and Oxford 
University? The answer was the same in every case: a Scot. Kenneth 
Gibson, 37, a Scottish Nationalist candidate for a seat in the new 
Scottish Parliament, was exuberantly running through his party's emboldened 
pitch aimed at convincing voters that Scotland is inventive and accomplished 
enough to go it alone. Gibson and his party are campaigning for election 
to the new Scottish Parliament in May on a platform of taking Scotland 
out of the United Kingdom and declaring it a fully independent country. 
The movement is attracting far more support than anyone ever imagined 
it would. The Scottish Nationalist Party has until now been thought 
more relevant to Brigadoon than to Britain. Its leaders, long regarded 
as provincial mischief-makers in kilts, have included Billy Wolfe, 
who was forever breaking into his political speeches to declaim Highland 
poetry, and Winifred Ewing, a tartan eccentric in the European Parliament 
in Strasbourg affectionately nicknamed Madame Ecosse. But now, with 
Alex Salmond, 43, a onetime banker amply endowed with cheeky cultural 
references and sound bites, at their helm, and with new political 
power coming here from the British Parliament in London, the Nationalists 
are seriously challenging the Labor Party's traditional domination 
of Scotland. ``When we achieve independence,'' he likes to say, ``England 
will lose a surly lodger and gain a good neighbor.'' The success of 
the Nationalist upstarts has spread alarm through the corridors of 
10 Downing Street in London, where officials compare the Labor Party's 
performance to a soccer team that takes its eye off the ball for the 
first half and has to mount an aggressive retaliation in the second. 
The coach himself, Prime Minister Tony Blair, has come to Scotland 
twice in recent weeks to warn voters that what the Nationalists are 
championing is not independence but separatism. ``Take my own case,'' 
he told an audience at Strathclyde University in downtown Glasgow. 
``Born in Scotland, lived most of my life in England, of an Irish 
mother and an English father, both raised in Scotland. We are bound 
together. Why set us apart? Why divide even our own families from 
each other? What manner of backward thinking would contemplate such 
a thing?'' What has caused the alarm are poll results this summer 
that showed the Nationalists running 14 percentage points ahead of 
Labor in the elections for the new Parliament. Labor found the timing 
particularly galling. The founding of a new legislature in Scotland, 
part of the ``devolution'' to transfer local powers from London to 
the regions of Britain, was a pledge on which the Labor Party quickly 
delivered after coming to power 18 months ago. In a September 1997 
referendum in Scotland, 74 percent approved the new legislature, which 
will have law-making and taxing powers over strictly domestic matters. 
Labor Party leaders said at the time that they believed that this 
was the best way to end Scots' flirtation with independence. Now they 
are finding that it has had the exact opposite effect. ``They thought 
that people would be so grateful, but when we got a taste of power, 
it only made us want more,'' Gibson said. The surge in sentiment for 
a total break with London also comes at a time when the British government 
has put Scots in some of its most powerful posts. They include Chancellor 
of the Exchequer Gordon Brown; Foreign Secretary Robin Cook; Defense 
Minister George Robertson; Social Security Minister Alistair Darling; 
and Scottish Secretary Donald Dewar. Asked if this were not good reason 
to remain closer to London, Gibson slyly turned the evidence back 
on itself. ``It just proves how capable Scots are,'' he said. In November, 
Labor climbed back into a narrow lead in the polls here, and more 
trips by Blair and his Cabinet members are planned to keep up the 
momentum. Commentators have joined in, roused by the pugnacious tone 
of the debate to assert their belief in Scottish and British compatibility. 
Andrew Neil, editor of The Scotsman and a former editor of The Sunday 
Times in London, wrote an article in The Spectator saying that as 
a Scot who was proud of being British, he felt like a stranger in 
his own land. He complained that with the hardening of the nationalist 
face, anti-English invective had moved from soccer and rugby rivalries 
to bigotry. In several instances in Scotland that caught the attention 
of newspapers published in London, Englishmen won settlements in workplace 
discrimination cases. In one horrific case, an English teen-ager was 
beaten to death by Scottish youths who said they did not like his 
accent. The backlash in England has been fueled by resentment over 
the disproportionately high amount of aid for education, health and 
transportation that Scotland receives. The British government has 
always argued that Scotland's needs are greater because of its remoteness, 
its foul weather and the inhospitable nature of its land. English 
critics can be heard more often these days saying it comes simply 
from Scotland's appetite for state subsidies. Much of the enthusiasm 
for the Nationalists could have to do with the party's attentions 
to local problems at a time when many Labor district councils are 
notorious for corruption and complacency. Gibson conceded the point 
but added, ``We are an independence party, and everyone who votes 
for us knows that.'' He added that if the Nationalists succeeded in 
gaining control of the new Parliament, they would hold a referendum 
on Scottish independence within four years. The country the Nationalists 
envision would be a nation with its own prime minister and government, 
its own diplomats abroad and membership in the European Union and 
the United Nations. But in a recent meeting with Charles, the Prince 
of Wales, Salmond said he would want to maintain a ceremonial link 
with the British monarchy. Labor may have been expecting gratitude 
for having given Scotland its first Parliament in almost 300 years, 
but in Salmond's skillful image manipulation, it became instead the 
party that represents English control. Where Scots once fought the 
English with swords, truncheons and longbows, Salmond, a former oil 
analyst for the Royal Bank of Scotland, goes into battle with a calculator. 
He argues that Scotland has abundant natural resources in oil, gas, 
water and coal, a robust finance and insurance sector, a skilled work 
force and a worldwide reputation in higher education and research. 
The British government may be having some success at stemming the 
Nationalist fervor, but the Scots' blood is still up. The blue-and-white 
Cross of St. Andrew flags that are symbols of nationhood have been 
springing up as abundantly this year as the seasonal heather and gorse. 
Nationalism is not only flying its colors in public; it lurks in the 
private comments and muttered asides of growing numbers of the 5.2 
million people who live in this blustery land. One recent night, a 
small group of visitors went to the roof of the new Museum of Scotland 
under construction in Edinburgh to admire Edinburgh Castle bathed 
in early evening illumination. A Union Jack fluttered and snapped 
in the high wind above its main turret. The stirring sight was interrupted 
by the tour guide, George Dalgleish, a curator. ``We'll haul that 
down fast,'' he said with a Braveheart laugh. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>