<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981128.0065 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Sunday may be the last time this season Vinny Testaverde and the New 
York Jets enjoy a 50-degree game day. But even the onset of December 
may not hurt the Jets who, increasingly, are giving evidence that 
neither bad weather nor a month that has doomed them in the past will 
halt them this season. So the question that coach Bill Parcells wants 
Testaverde to answer is: Are you a weatherproof quarterback? That 
may not be a pressing concern when the Jets face the Carolina Panthers 
at the New Jersey Meadowlands, where it is expected to be sunny. But 
by day's end, the west wind could sweep in, disrupting kickers and 
passers. And then the Jets go into December, with two more games at 
the Meadowlands, another in Buffalo and one in Miami. In at least 
three of those final games, there could be snow. And each should be 
buffeted by wind. ``Some quarterbacks are weatherproof _ that means 
they can play in bad weather,'' Parcells said. He cited Phil Simms 
from the Giants years, as well as the Packers' Brett Favre, the Bills' 
Jim Kelly, the Bears' Jim McMahon. Parcells has never seen Testaverde 
perform in howling winds or swirling snow. What evidence does he have 
that Testaverde won't go cold in December? It has happened to Jets 
quarterbacks before. Remember, if the Jets win Sunday, they will be 
8-4. That was exactly the record they took into last December, but 
they went 1-3 and failed to make the playoffs. And from 1993 through 
1996, the Jets lost 15 straight games in December. Parcells was not 
able to break this cycle of December losses last year. What makes 
him think this year, this quarterback is different? ``I can just tell 
he is,'' Parcells said. ``Vinny throws a tight spiral. I saw him in 
Kansas City,'' he said, referring to a victory four weeks ago on a 
windy, rainy, and overall miserable day. ``Nothing seems to be bothering 
him. He doesn't get up in the morning and say, `Oh, my god.''' In 
Kansas City, Testaverde hit on 20 of 34 passes for 260 yards, connected 
for a game-tying touchdown in the final period. He was intercepted 
once on what Parcells claimed was a faulty route by Keyshawn Johnson. 
The overall record indicates that the 6-foot 5-inch, 235-pound Testaverde 
is, indeed, a good cold-weather quarterback. Since Testaverde escaped 
in 1993 from Tampa Bay, where his statistics are skewed by years of 
playing for a lowly franchise, Testaverde has proven to be an outstanding 
passer in December in cold-weather cities. In his previous five seasons 
with Cleveland/Baltimore, counting only games in December and January 
that were outdoors, he played six times in bad-weather cities. Over 
that span, he completed 63 percent of his passes and tossed 12 touchdowns 
to only 8 interceptions. If Testaverde can approach these figures 
in the coming weeks, then perhaps the last vestige of the problems 
Parcells inherited can be obliterated. When Parcells took over he 
addressed the team's failure to win in the second half, its inability 
to win on the road (or even at home), its penchant for giving up big 
plays and, simply, giving up. That the Jets stumbled last December 
flies in the face of Parcells' coaching record which is remarkable 
in cold-weather. His December (and January) teams have posted a combined 
record of 41-24. Parcells also expects his special teams, which are 
among the best in the league right now, to be even better when the 
weather turns nasty. His only complaint has been with the punt-return 
unit, led by Leon Johnson, which has not broken a big play. It did 
last year. This year Johnson has been sidelined by injury. ``When 
the weather gets cold,'' Parcells said, ``some players don't like 
to tackle. That plays a part on special teams.'' But he is talking 
about opponents that don't enjoy tackling. He believes his players 
do, and he believes they will be even more effective in coming weeks. 
Even the coach's concerns about John Hall and his 68 percent field-goal 
percentage (Parcells wants 75 percent) is tempered by Hall's consistent 
kickoffs into the end zone. And Hall does have an extremely strong 
leg that can neutralize winds. As a result, the Jets' field position 
after kicking off is the best in the American Conference-opponents 
begin their drives backed inside their own 24. For his special teams 
to remain as good as they are, though, Parcells contends the players 
must remain healthy. If they do not, he will be forced to take regulars 
off their starting jobs and put them on the kicking game, or force 
them to split time between the two. That would hurt their effectiveness. 
For now, though, the Jets are remarkably healthy. No one is even on 
the injury last for this game. Last Sunday, only one player was. The 
Panthers, meanwhile, reported 10 players with various problems coming 
into Sunday's game. ``I'd like to know what the Jets' secret is,'' 
said Carolina coach Dom Capers. ``I'm going to look at it in the off 
season.'' EXTRA POINTS _ VINNY TESTAVERDE has successfully converted 
third-down passes 46.9 percent of the time. That is the fourth-best 
record in the league. _ If the Jets make the playoffs, BILL PARCELLS 
will become only the second coach to produce the feat with three different 
clubs. He previously made it with the Giants and Patriots. CHUCK KNOX 
got into the post-season with the Rams, Bills and Seahawks. _ With 
71 yards rushing, CURTIS MARTIN will become the sixth running back 
in history to gain 1,000 yards in his first four seasons. The Lions' 
BARRY SANDERS has done it his first 10 years in the league. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>