<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981128.0240 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
M. Donald Grant, who as chairman of the Mets ordered the controversial 
trade of Tom Seaver in 1977 and whose decision to shun free agents 
at the start of the free-agent era helped send the team on a disastrous 
downward spiral, died at his home in Hobe Sound, Fla., on Saturday. 
He was 94. Grant, a Wall Street stockbroker for Fahnestock and Co., 
was chairman of the Mets' board under Joan Payson, the owner, from 
the team's creation in 1962. He held the position until he was ousted 
after the 1978 season, when he was replaced by Lorinda de Roulet, 
Mrs. Payson's daughter. With Grant as chairman, the Mets won the World 
Series in 1969 and again reached the World Series, but lost, in 1973. 
But he was remembered more for the negative aspects of his tenure 
because they involved the banishment of Seaver and the decline of 
the team on the field and at the gate. Seaver was not only the team's 
No. 1 pitcher, but he was also the player who most strongly represented 
the Mets. Despite Seaver's great success, the Mets became involved 
in a bitter contract dispute with him in 1977, and Grant settled the 
matter by having him traded. It was a low point in the team's history. 
It was before that same season that free agents became part of Major 
League Baseball, but Grant refused to lure top players to Shea Stadium 
by offering lucrative contracts. He said he would put his style of 
conducting baseball business up against that of the teams that pursued 
free agents and proclaimed that his way would prove to be right. He 
took that stance just as the Yankees, the other team in town, aggressively 
sought top free agents. While the Yankees won the World Series in 
1977 and '78, the Mets finished in last place with a total of 130 
victories over the two seasons, compared with 200 for the Yankees. 
Worse, Mets fans resented what they felt was the team's refusal to 
try to field a competitive team and stayed away from Shea in droves. 
``The press made such a martyr of Seaver that it killed me,'' Grant 
said the day he was replaced as chairman. ``I did a good job for a 
long time. We won two pennants and one World Series. Now people say 
I ran the attendance down, but they also forget that I ran it up to 
2.7 million.'' From that figure in 1970, then a Mets record, the attendance 
declined steadily, skidding to barely over 1 million in 1978. After 
another bad season and even worse attendance (788,905) the following 
season, Mrs. de Roulet was forced to sell the team. Even after he 
was no longer chairman, Grant could not avoid suffering blame for 
a negative development. When the football Jets left Shea for the Meadowlands 
in New Jersey in 1983, Grant was cited as a major reason Leon Hess, 
the Jets' owner, was moving his team. Hess particularly resented that 
the Mets, the primary tenant at Shea Stadium, prevented the Jets from 
playing home games until the Mets' season had ended. That stance forced 
the Jets to play their first three or four games on the road. Grant 
is survived by his wife, Alice; two sons, Michael Jr. and Tim; a daughter, 
Patsy Warner; and nine grandchildren. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>