<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981128.0121 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It could have been considered a victory lap, even though it was only 
halfway around the track at Darrell K. Royal-Texas Memorial Stadium, 
and even though it was done from the driver's seat of a black Chevy 
Tahoe. Texas running back Ricky Williams, his head sticking out of 
the truck window, his dreadlocks billowing in the breeze, was all 
smiles on Friday as he waved to the few fans who remained in the stadium 
two hours after he had run his way into National Collegiate Athletic 
Association history. Maybe it was fitting that Williams left the stadium 
in a large four-wheel-drive vehicle. It was merely a continuation 
of an unstoppable theme that Williams had established at the beginning 
of the Longhorns' game against rival Texas A&AMP;M. It was probably 
the only way that Williams would have been able to make his way out 
of the stadium. After running for 259 yards on 44 carries and catching 
five passes for 36 yards, Williams was exhausted. Only two hours after 
breaking Tony Dorsett's 23-year-old Division I-A record for most career 
rushing yards and Napoleon McCallum's Division I-A record for all-purpose 
yards, Williams had planned the perfect celebration: ``I just want 
to go home and take a nap. I'm pretty tired.'' Williams took a low-key 
approach to his accomplishment, although there was quite a bit of 
hubbub surrounding it. Three Heisman Trophy winners, Dorsett, Earl 
Campbell and John David Crow, were in attendance. There was a ceremony 
at midfield at the end of the game and a videotape of highlights from 
Williams' career at Texas. Williams said it was special that Dorsett, 
Campbell, a star at Texas himself, and Crow, a great running back 
at Texas A&AMP;M, were on hand. He said the ceremony was special and 
the videotape was nice, although he couldn't see it because he had 
cameras in his face. But Williams didn't appear bowled over by any 
of it. He was asked if he ever thought when he left San Diego for 
the University of Texas that he would wind up with more than a dozen 
NCAA records, including Dorsett's career rushing mark. ``Never. Never. 
Never. Ever. Never,'' he said. ``My first game I was upset I only 
got 10 carries. In this game, I got 44. I never thought it would be 
like this.'' Dorsett, who has visited with Williams on a few occasions, 
said having Williams break his record was like having his own son 
do it. It was the second rushing record that Dorsett had lost in the 
last month. On Nov. 8, Emmitt Smith broke his Dallas Cowboys rushing 
record. Dorsett was not invited to Texas Stadium to stand on the sideline 
for that occasion. But he was for Williams' special day. Williams 
entered the game needing 63 yards to break Dorsett's mark of 6,082 
set at Pittsburgh in 1976, and when he cracked through the line and 
broke free on a 60-yard touchdown run, Dorsett was jumping up and 
down with excitement. ``I knew the record would stand for a while, 
but I didn't think it would last this long,'' Dorsett said. ``The 
run that he had to break the record was nice, because people will 
always remember him for that. And that showed everything that Ricky 
Williams is all about as a running back _ size, speed and quickness.'' 
Williams described the run as if it were a routine toss sweep that 
went for a first down. ``It was an isolation play to the left,'' he 
said and, then, in reference to to offensive linemen Roger Roesler 
and Octavious Bishop, continued: ``Roger and Big O did a great job 
of opening up the hole. I got a great block downfield from Wane McGarity 
and the rest was easy. I had a smile after I broke that one tackle. 
I knew I had the record and hopefully a touchdown.'' The tough part 
came when he returned to the sideline, out of breath from the long 
run. ``I was exhausted,'' Williams said. ``I came to the side and 
I was mobbed by the whole team. I couldn't breathe and I was trying 
to say help, but I couldn't get anything out. They wouldn't have heard 
me anyway. It's just very special for everyone involved in this program. 
I'm just happy that I can make everyone proud of me.'' Williams shared 
the honors with his mother, Sandy, and two sisters, who have always 
been a part of his career at Texas. Williams, who signed a minor league 
contract with the Philadelphia Phillies in 1995, used some of his 
baseball bonus money to relocate his mother from San Diego to Austin. 
He also paid college tuition for his sisters _ Nisey is a sophomore 
and his twin, Cassie, is a senior, just a semester behind Williams. 
He expects to graduate in the spring with a degree in education. Texas 
Coach Mack Brown expressed his gratitude to Williams when Williams 
decided to forgo the National Football League draft in April and return 
to Texas for his senior season. Brown, who took over a demoralized 
program that had gone 4-7 the year before, needed Williams to help 
him put the football program back on its feet. The coach built an 
offense around Williams and gave the team a rallying point _ make 
Williams a Heisman Trophy winner. It has been a mutually beneficial 
situation. The Longhorns are now 8-3 with one more game to play _ 
probably in the Cotton Bowl _ and Brown should be able to recruit 
some talent. Williams, with his new NCAA records, is in prime position 
for the Heisman Trophy. ``It was worth it the first game I played,'' 
Williams said regarding his decision to return to Texas for his senior 
season. ``It's always been worth it. The team has been great. The 
coaching staff has been great. I've enjoyed myself thoroughly.'' Now 
that Williams has surpassed Dorsett as the leading rusher in Division 
I-A, his place among the best running backs in the game will be debated. 
His rushing total of 6,279 (and counting) puts him ahead of Dorsett, 
Charles White (Southern Cal), Herschel Walker (Georgia) and Archie 
Griffin (Ohio State). His size (6 feet, 225 pounds), speed and power 
put him in the same class as some of the NFL's best today, like Denver's 
Terrell Davis, Tennessee's Eddie George and Detroit's Barry Sanders. 
``Hopefully, I can be considered one of the best,'' Williams said. 
``I've been on a couple of great teams and I've had outstanding offensive 
lines since I've been here, so all the credit should go to them.'' 
Brown said Williams is the best running back he has ever seen and 
believes Williams is indeed the best running back ever in college. 
The Heisman Trophy would at least certify Williams as the best football 
player in college this season. But in his own style, Williams said 
he isn't sweating the balloting. He has other things on his mind. 
``I have finals that week, so I have to study for those,'' Williams 
said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>