<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981128.0025 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Since it was created in 1935, Social Security has been the centerpiece 
of the nation's social contract, an intergenerational commitment to 
provide at least a subsistence income to the most vulnerable of citizens. 
The commitment appears as solid as ever. But with Social Security 
facing long-term financial problems, the means of making good on it 
are now under serious debate for the first time since Franklin D. 
Roosevelt proposed what would become the most enduring of New Deal 
legacies. Ten months after President Clinton said that shoring up 
the system should become the nation's top domestic priority, he and 
congressional leaders will begin examining the options in earnest 
and probing for common ground at a two-day White House conference 
in December, kicking off a process that could as easily end in partisan 
gridlock as in the historic achievement both parties are hoping for. 
Should the country stick with the system it has used for 63 years 
and continue to levy taxes on current workers and their employers 
to pay current retirees? Or, as the time draws near for the vast baby 
boom generation to move onto Social Security, should the nation shift 
to a system under which individuals would invest a portion of their 
payroll taxes in private retirement accounts. It is an issue that 
turns to some extent on the complexities of actuarial tables, benefit 
formulas and other arcana. But in a broader sense it encapsulates 
fundamental tradeoffs: between individual and collective responsibility, 
market forces and government, and maximizing rewards and minimizing 
risks. Indeed, few issues have such a rich ideological backdrop or 
high political stakes, a fact that promises to make the debate over 
Social Security's future particularly contentious. The problem is 
rooted in inexorable demographic change. Because there will be fewer 
workers paying taxes relative to the number of retirees drawing benefits 
once the 76 million baby boomers leave the workforce in coming decades, 
Social Security will take in only enough revenue to pay 75 percent 
of its obligations starting around 2032. Efforts to reach a solution 
are being framed in part by how the world has changed since 1935. 
Life expectancy is shooting up, so most people will spend far longer 
in retirement than anyone envisioned six decades ago. Investing, long 
the province of the elite, is now a routine part of middle-class life. 
Faith in market-based capitalism, which probably hit a nadir around 
the time of Social Security's creation, has long been on the rise, 
tested though it has been by the recent bout of global financial turmoil. 
At the same time, trust that government can deal with the big issues 
has eroded since Vietnam and Watergate. To conservatives, such changes 
are a call to put more responsibility in the hands of individuals 
and an opportunity to put the power of the markets to work for everyone 
through private Social Security accounts. If in the process the country 
scales back the biggest of all government social programs, so much 
the better. ``It's one of the reasons the debate has been so fierce,'' 
said Michael Tanner, the director of health and welfare studies at 
the libertarian Cato Institute. ``There's a recognition, particularly 
on the part of the left, that Social Security and Medicare are the 
last programmatic links between the average citizen and the government.'' 
To liberals, though, the changes that have taken place do not undermine 
the case for a collective approach to income security for the elderly 
and other beneficiaries of Social Security, including disabled workers 
and those left behind when a breadwinner dies. Most individuals, said 
Henry Aaron, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution, do not 
do a very good job of planning for distant or unlikely events like 
retirement or disability. Moreover, he said, since many people are 
already exposed to the risks of big stock market swings through 401(k) 
programs and Individual Retirement Accounts, there is good reason 
to maintain Social Security as a guaranteed benefit in which any investment 
or economic risks _ as well as administrative costs _ are spread across 
the generations and income levels. The wild gyrations in the stock 
market this year underscore the point. ``The reasons that led the 
nation to adopt social insurance are about as strong now as they ever 
were,'' Aaron said. There is some common ground. Many, though not 
all, Democrats support looking to the returns available on Wall Street 
to help plug the hole, just as Republicans do. But rather than resort 
to the wholesale shift into private accounts advocated by Republicans, 
many Democrats want the investing to be done by the government itself, 
using the surplus that will build up for the next 15 years as payroll 
tax receipts exceed what the system pays out in benefits. Indeed, 
nearly every facet of any plan is likely to have as many opponents 
as supporters. Increasing the retirement age to, say, 70, would go 
a long way toward restoring the system's health, but is vehemently 
opposed by organized labor. Eliminating or substantially raising the 
cap on earnings subject to the payroll tax _ currently $68,400 _ would 
solve much of the problem, but would amount to a big tax increase 
on middle-and upper-income people. So it remains unclear whether it 
will be politically feasible to piece together a compromise. ``There 
is a growing understanding that this is a big issue out there,'' said 
Social Security Commissioner Kenneth Apfel, ``but I must say I have 
yet to see any kind of consensus emerge.'' Success will depend to 
some extent on political calculations by both parties. Congressional 
Democrats will have to decide whether to compromise now or delay in 
the hope that they might regain control of the House in 2000. Republicans 
will have to decide whether to make a deal so they can turn attention 
to what they see as a more potent issue, tax cuts. And Clinton, more 
eager than ever after his travails this year to leave a positive legacy, 
will have to decide whether to take a bold stand or work behind the 
scenes to cobble together a one-from-column-A, one-from-column-B solution. 
With more than three decades to go before the problem hits, there 
would not appear to be much urgency. But economists say that every 
year that goes by will make any solution more expensive to taxpayers 
and beneficiaries alike. Perhaps more important, the political and 
economic climate is as favorable now as it is likely to be for years: 
a second-term president who does not have to worry about re-election, 
a big federal budget surplus and a baby boom generation that has a 
stake in keeping the system healthy for another half century. ``We 
need to reach a consensus on needed changes,'' said Michael Boskin, 
who was the Bush administration's chief economist, ``adopt them now 
and phase them in gradually before the demographic transition overwhelms 
us economically and politically.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>