<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981128.0089 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In this century, this city has made more than its share of history 
and seen more than its share of blood. It was here in 1917 that the 
Romanov dynasty fell and the Bolshevik revolution began. The murder 
here in 1934 of a local Communist commissar unleashed Stalin's campaign 
of terror, which sent millions to camps in Siberia and to their deaths. 
And so for many Russians, there was an eerie echo to the shots fired 
in a stairwell off the ice-bound Griboyedova Canal, killing Galina 
Starovoitova, a 52-year-old Russian legislator known for her fierce 
defense of democracy and her down-to-earth common sense. In this hauntingly 
beautiful city, her death marked the end of an illusion that began 
in the 1980s with the democratic movement that she helped found and 
that has struggled to survive ever since, with the crime, corruption 
and economic disarray that followed the collapse of communism. ``What 
do you expect in Russia,'' asked Vladimir, a 47-year-old retired air 
force pilot who declined to give his last name, heading home in winter's 
early darkness. ``This country is not ready for democracy in terms 
of both its historical legacy and the mentality of its people. Some 
mistakenly thought _ `poof' _ they could make this country democratic 
in a week. But it doesn't work that way.'' It is enough to tick off 
a list of the movement's leaders, and note where they are now. Andrei 
Sakharov, the great human rights campaigner, and now Mrs. Starovoitova, 
his close ally, are dead. President Boris Yeltsin, who a decade ago 
was barnstorming the country with a campaign to set Russia free from 
communism, is now a chronic invalid. Anatoly Sobchak, one of the leading 
orators of the democratic movement and St. Petersburg's first elected 
mayor, was voted out of office in 1996 and, facing charges of corruption, 
slipped away to a life of self-imposed exile in Paris. Anatoly Chubais, 
an economic reformer who left Russia's old czarist capital to run 
post-Communist privatization, is now a politically discredited figure, 
blamed for improving the lives of a wealthy few at the expense of 
the numerous poor. In this city of 5 million, which dropped the name 
Leningrad and reverted to its imperial name after communism fell, 
``democrat'' is still not quite the dirty word it has become elsewhere. 
Liberal parties _ whether Mrs. Starovoitova's Democratic Russia, or 
Grigory Yavlinsky's Yabloko _ continue to hold their own, even after 
ceding the local governorship to an old-style apparatchik in 1996. 
The Communist Party has never placed better than fourth in either 
local or national elections here. But few deny that the democrats, 
even when they had power, did little to improve the life of the city 
that Peter the Great decreed into existence, its splendor rising on 
marshes that bury thousands of slaves who died building it. Modern 
St. Petersburg is still dominated by an ailing defense industry. While 
its service sector has surged ahead, its downtown has little of Moscow's 
luster and none of its frantic bustle. A few historical buildings 
are under restoration, but for the most part St. Petersburg's pastel 
palaces now, as before, could use a coat of paint. Most disturbing 
of all, murders here have become commonplace, Mrs. Starovoitova's 
being only the latest and the most shocking. Last year, a top city 
official was killed by a sniper as he drove down Nevsky Prospekt, 
the main street. An aide to the speaker of the Russian Parliament, 
a local Communist deputy, was wounded this fall. Other victims of 
gangland-style killings and beatings have included businessmen, managers 
of the city's port, bankers and an investigative journalist. ``Murder 
has become a way of solving problems,'' said Sergei Kozyrev, a physicist 
and close ally of Mrs. Starovoitova, echoing Stalin's famous phrase: 
``Where there is a man, there's a problem. No man, no problem.'' Such 
lawlessness is not uncommon in the rest of the country, but in this 
graceful city, which prides itself on preserving Russia's cultural 
heritage and the purity of its pre-Communist language, the new reputation 
as a capital of crime sits hard. Dmitri Likhachev, at 91, is Russia's 
most venerated man of letters, a St. Petersburg-based scholar whose 
wisdom is often sought in times of trouble. He looks at the latest 
murder as an example of a moral collapse that occurred during decades 
of Communist rule, but was revealed in full only when that control 
was lifted. What shocks him most, he said in an interview, is the 
modern Russian use of the English word ``killer'' to describe a profession 
like any other. As a young man he spent three and a half years in 
a Soviet labor camp, and he remembers how ordinary thieves would refuse 
to associate with killers, whom they believed to be the lowest of 
the low. ``Now `killer' has become a neutral word,'' he said. ``Those 
who kill consider it a complex and dangerous specialty. That is how 
far our morality has sunk.'' When the Communist system ended, Likhachev 
said, he thought Russians would rediscover their moral compass. ``I 
thought people had stayed the same,'' he said. ``But it turned out 
they were completely different.'' Many democrats agree that they underestimated 
the legacy of 70 years of totalitarian rule, which taught people to 
sacrifice individual responsibility at the altar of an autocratic 
state, to view materialism as the driving force of history and the 
law as a tool of dictators. ``We didn't evaluate the depths of people's 
psychology,'' said Kozyrev, who has grown weary of getting even scientists 
to agree on common goals. ``If people are used to one form of behavior, 
a form of vertical authority, then when someone suddenly comes along 
and changes the signals, replaces one idea with another, they can't 
just adapt overnight. It is not easy to turn a boat around. And this 
is a big boat, and the inertia runs deep.'' Even democrats are hard-pressed 
to defend their record here, although most blame their failures on 
Sobchak. At best he was a sloppy and arrogant administrator, and at 
worst an unabashed opportunist who kept city-owned apartments for 
himself and his friends, and who preferred wining and dining wary 
Western investors to doing the city's business. One of his dreams 
was to turn Russia's northern capital, as St. Petersburg is often 
called, into a financial center. It did not work. ``He thought it 
was enough to go to the West, and ask for money, which would then 
come in by the riverful,'' said Igor Artemyev, a deputy governor and 
member of the Yabloko party. ``But then when the Western investors 
came, they saw that the city was not ready.'' The new administration 
boasts of having put the city's fiscal affairs in order, restructured 
its debt, increased tax collections and cut its deficit. But these 
efforts have been blotted both by the increasingly brazen criminals 
and by the economic slump that hit Russia this year. In a previously 
unpublished interview that ran last week in the newspaper Argumenti 
i Fakti, Mrs. Starovoitova said the term ``democrat'' in Russia had 
lost its value because some had been too quick to sacrifice their 
ideals for political expediency. As she put it: ``The pain, the disappointment, 
the nostalgia for those times brightened by the name of Sakharov and 
by all the hopes we connected with democracy _ I think these feelings 
are due to a combination of objective factors that slowed real reforms, 
and subjective mistakes made by particular people who held the great 
share of power.'' The last phrase was an obvious allusion to Yeltsin. 
To Likhachev, sitting in his office in a Russian cultural center with 
a line of young graduate students waiting outside his door, the democrats' 
record is not a total loss. ``I expected more from the democrats,'' 
he said, ``but most important, they have not given up on freedom of 
speech, freedom of the press, all those freedoms that are now under 
attack. In the schools today, there are some wonderful young people. 
Maybe we have to wait for the generation that grew up under Stalin, 
under Khrushchev, to die. But the most important task is to keep the 
records, the documents and archives so that people know the truth.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>