<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981128.0112 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
George Steinbrenner, Robert Kraft, Billie Jean King and Martin Jacobson 
tucked into full plates last week. Whether or not we join them in 
giving thanks is irrelevant; we don't sit at their tables. Steinbrenner 
was the big turkey, as usual. He's Code Blue wherever he goes, a walking 
car alarm, suddenly looking fuzzier compared to Charles F. Dolan, 
the Cablevision mogul, who may or may not buy the Yankees and hire 
Steinbrenner to run all the New York sports teams. Who would be surprised 
if the deal is dead because the Boss was too pushy? The image of Steinbrenner 
trundling out on the ice to show Wayne Gretzky how to get physical 
makes my knees freeze, so imagine what it does to the stealthy Chuck. 
Dolan wants the Yankees for the same reason that television networks 
want to own their hit shows. It keeps costs way down. This excuse 
is less endearing than wanting to own sports teams so you can strut 
around town, throw luxury sky-box bashes and harangue big guys while 
they are showering. Robert Kraft may be able to do all those things 
in Hartford, a city that seemed more amused than ecstatic last weekend 
when it seemed as though the New England Patriots had chosen it over 
Boston. After all, people in Massachusetts still call people in Connecticut 
``swamp Yankees.'' Yet Bostonians must know something, since they 
originally sent the Patriots packing to Foxboro. The lively mayor 
of Hartford, Michael Peters, quickly dismissed my questions about 
the importance of a football team to a city that had lost much of 
its claim to fame, the insurance industry, and was in danger of even 
losing its ballet company for lack of support. The Patriots would 
merely be ``part of the chemistry of our comeback,'' he said, ``opening 
a PR window for the city.'' He reminded me that Hartford had the Rage 
of the American Basketball League and that the University of Connecticut's 
nationally famous teams would be playing in any new Hartford facility. 
Peters is right on, of course. In the Expansion Era, a pro team can 
no longer bestow major league status on a city merely by moving in. 
But if every other whistle stop has a franchise, you look low rent 
without one. On the other hand, a great college franchise may be a 
better bet. When was the last time a university left town because 
the owner wanted sky-box, food and parking concessions? This was on 
the eve of Billie Jean's 55th birthday last Monday, at a party to 
celebrate the 25th anniversary of her victory over 55-year-old Bobby 
Riggs in ``The Battle of the Sexes,'' a silly event that only helped 
change the course of history. It was the Boston Tea Party of sports. 
Billie Jean's symbolic importance to the passing century is enormous, 
but her playful vision was again on display in a delicious series 
of doubles matches that included Martina, Chrissie, Tracy, Rosie, 
Zina Garrison, Ilana Kloss and the Wendys, Turnbull and Overton. Most 
of them are in their 40s and better than ever to watch as they mugged, 
bantered with the audience and stood at the net hammering volleys 
with amazing ferocity and reflexes. This was Billie Jean's Legends 
Tour, giving the men's ATP doubles championship a night off and proving 
that the humanity of senior tennis is far more fun to watch than the 
technical virtuosity of athletes who have only lived the game. The 
star was Rosie Casals, un-self-consciously overweight, consciously 
overwrought, the Cheech of women's tennis. As wonderful a time as 
I had in Hartford, I did miss the thrilling threepeat of the Martin 
Luther King Jr. High School boys soccer team, whose third straight 
city title capped a third straight season in which it has not lost 
a game _ on the field. Two of King's games were forfeited and Marty 
Jacobson, the coach, was ``suspended indefinitely,'' for what seemed 
like a combination of careless, if not arrogantly unmindful, paperwork, 
and the pathetic pettiness of opposing coaches. The official charges 
were using an overage player and one made ineligible by inadequate 
attendance. Despite the losses, King plowed through the field, beating 
Roosevelt in the final for its 61st straight victory. Jacobson's suspension 
was rescinded last week, thanks to an alert and humane Schools Chancellor, 
Rudy Crew. But this tale twists on; Roosevelt lodged a protest, charging 
that two of the King stars, juniors from Nigeria, Bishop Dike and 
Henry Iwuchukwu, are overage and academically ineligible. Jacobson 
maintains that Iwuchukwu is 17 and Dike turned 18 last month. The 
school has been scrambling to assemble visas, transcripts and birth 
certificates. None of this would be happening if Steinbrenner added 
the Public Schools Athletic League to his Yankee-Knick-Ranger portfolio. 
Who better, this man who once coached Donna Shalala's schoolgirl softball 
team (and well, she has said). I think the Boss owes the city some 
pro bono after it made him world-famous. Imagine him strutting around 
lumpy high school fields, throwing cafeteria bashes, haranguing whining, 
lazy, clock-watching coaches. I'd give thanks for that any season. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>