<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981128.0070 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Standing in front of the full-length mirror, the girl fights back 
tears. Her thighs are too big, her breasts too small and her nose 
bumpy. Or so this 16-year-old thinks, comparing herself with ``Baywatch'' 
babes and Victoria's Secret models. To make matters worse, boys never 
call, and getting undressed for gym is a mortification. But such problems 
have quick fixes, the magazine ads promise. ``If I can look better, 
why not?'' the girl asked during a recent consultation with a plastic 
surgeon. Her parents are living proof, she argued, her mother rejuvenated 
by a face lift and her father's brow smoothed of its furrows. The 
doctor was not persuaded. He said later that he had stalled by scheduling 
another appointment, and that he hoped the Long Island family did 
not look elsewhere in the meantime. The girl's 40-something parents 
are part of a tide of affluent baby boomers who are being tucked, 
peeled and augmented as never before. But it is the teen-age girls 
now flocking to the suites of plastic surgeons from Park Avenue to 
Beverly Hills who pose an ethical problem for doctors who must decide 
whether to operate on patients who are too young to vote, but old 
enough to feel social pressures to be physically perfect. ``We are 
capable of doing awful things to these kids,'' said Dr. Mark Sultan, 
chief of plastic surgery at Beth Israel Medical Center and one of 
two dozen doctors who said they are seeing more teen-agers than ever 
before who are eager to change their looks and willing to go through 
often painful surgery to do so. The surgeon's task, Sultan and others 
said, is to weed out youngsters with true deformities from those responding 
to media messages and peer or parental pressure. ``We have to decide 
what is real, what is imagined and what is exaggerated,'' he said. 
At least 14,000 adolescents nationwide had cosmetic surgery in 1996, 
a slight increase from 1992, when the boom began, according to data 
from the American Society of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgeons. 
In all age groups, 700,000 procedures were done last year, up 70 percent 
in four years. But professionals agree that those numbers are a vast 
understatement, perhaps by as much as half, since they do not include 
the many procedures now done by dermatologists, ophthalmologists, 
ear nose and throat specialists, dentists and others. And the make-overs 
of choice are changing for teen-agers. A generation ago, it was not 
unusual for youngsters to have their noses straightened or ears pinned 
back, procedures that doctors say are appropriate for those with ungainly 
features. But these days, more controversial procedures, like breast 
augmentation, liposuction and tummy tucks, are gaining popularity 
in this impressionable age group. In the New York area, these procedures, 
among two dozen available, range in cost from $25,000 for liposuction 
to $5,000 for a tummy tuck. In 1992, there were 5,519 nose jobs among 
teen-agers, 3,024 ear operations, 978 breast implants, 472 liposuctions 
and no tummy tucks. Four years later, nose jobs were down to 4,313 
and ear pinnings to 2,470. But breast augmentations were up to 1,172, 
liposuctions increased to 788 and tummy tucks to 130. And many more 
adolescents seeking these newer procedures were turned away by doctors 
who say they rarely perform them in anyone under 18. Letting Them 
Wait Can Solve the Problem Stalling is a popular tactic among doctors, 
who count on the fact that teen-agers are by definition mercurial. 
Dr. Christopher Nanni, for one, set out to dissuade an overweight 
girl from Bay Ridge who came to him recently after many failed attempts 
at diet and exercise. She was 16 years old and 5 feet 3 inches tall, 
and weighed 185 pounds. Her mother, divorced and struggling on a secretary's 
salary, was not enthusiastic about either the costs or the risks of 
liposuction. Nanni put the girl on a sensible diet and encouraged 
her mother to buy a treadmill. Come back in a year or two, he told 
them. If liposuction seemed appropriate then, he would do the procedure, 
at a big discount. ``I was kind of disappointed, but it made sense,'' 
the girl said grudgingly, still preferring the quick fix to the ordeal 
of losing weight. Her mother was thrilled. ``As a parent you want 
your children to be happy, so I went along with it,'' she said, describing 
her daughter's misery each time they went shopping or attended a big 
family gathering. But when Nanni resisted, she was relieved. ``I respect 
him immensely for not just taking my money,'' she said. The availability 
of new procedures can be a relief to adolescents overwhelmed by an 
otherwise intractable physical disfigurement. One New Jersey teen-ager, 
5 feet 4 inches tall and weighing 220 pounds, doggedly set out to 
lose 100 pounds, succeeded, and kept the weight off for more than 
a year. Left behind, however, was an apron of excess skin that brought 
her to the office of Dr. Gerald Pitman, who had never before treated 
a girl so young. Impressed by her resolve and her mother's silence 
during their first meeting, signals that the girl was mature and self-motivated, 
Pitman agreed to operate. When the girl was between the ages of 15 
and 18, Pitman did a series of surgeries on her abdomen, thighs, upper 
arms and breasts. ``Not only did he make me look beautiful, he made 
me feel beautiful,'' said the girl, who once wore men's size 38 jeans 
and is now a sleek women's size 6. Like most of the youngsters interviewed, 
she spoke on the condition, set by her parents, that she not be identified. 
The New Jersey girl rarely looks at her ``before'' photos, when she 
had fat rippling from her knees. But she still recalls being ``tortured'' 
by classmates, who called her names and shunned her during games of 
spin the bottle. ``Who would want to be with a fat disgusting girl 
who can't get out of her own way?'' she said now, her hair pulled 
back to reveal fine cheekbones. Pressure From a Parent Must Be Eliminated 
All the doctors interviewed spoke of the need to distinguish a child's 
wishes from a parent's, which often requires chasing the adult from 
the examining room during the initial meeting. Dr. James Baker, a 
surgeon in a suburb of Orlando, Fla., the state that is second to 
California in the number of plastic surgery procedures done each year, 
described one such consultation recently. The mother announced that 
her daughter was miserable about her nose. The girl sat silent, staring 
at the floor. ``Why don't you like your nose?'' the doctor asked the 
child. ``My mother thinks it's too big.'' ``Then why don't we do your 
mother's nose?'' He rejected the case. In extreme situations, doctors 
say, a child-abuse complaint is filed against a parent who insists 
on a needless operation, since no surgery is without medical risk. 
The general surge in cosmetic surgery has its roots in demographics, 
medical technology and health-care economics. As baby boomers hit 
50, they are doing anything and everything to arrest the ravages of 
age. Meanwhile, new procedures are invented and old ones become safer 
and less stigmatized. And plastic surgeons, doing elective procedures 
not covered by insurance, are aggressively marketing themselves: ``No 
Ifs, Ands or Butts; You Can Change Your Bottom Line in Hours.'' Last 
year, 700,000 procedures were done in all age groups, a 70 percent 
increase from 1992. ``This is a huge problem for the public,'' said 
Dr. Jane Petro, a Westchester County plastic surgeon. ``There is enormous 
pressure to do things the patient isn't going to be helped by, because 
someone shows up with a check.'' Consultation with a teen-age patient 
is a distinct art. It generally involves repeat visits, over several 
months, to mitigate impulsiveness. The negatives _ for example, scarring 
and loss of sensation following breast enlargement _ are stressed. 
Sometimes meetings with a therapist are required, especially when 
an eating disorder is suspected. The doctors say they look for red 
flags in body language. Does the child smile? Interact easily with 
the mother? Cringe after disrobing? Does the patient's perception 
of the defect match the evidence in the mirror? Has the youngster, 
or the parent, had repeated plastic surgeries? ``They have to be able 
to tell me what they don't like,'' Baker said. ``And if the answer 
is `I'm just ugly,' that's not good enough.'' At heart, the doctors 
are trying to determine whether the youngster's complaint is a realistic 
cry for help, a frivolous attempt at perfection or a symptom of a 
more serious psychological problem. A 12-year-old stooping from the 
weight of triple-cup breasts, for instance, ``qualifies as a medical 
emergency,'' said Dr. George Beraka, a Park Avenue surgeon. By contrast, 
a girl ``who hates her nose one day and her ears the next,'' he said, 
``maybe needs a psychiatrist.'' Doctors disagree about whether they 
ought to function as therapists as well as surgeons. ``With adolescents, 
their ideas about their bodies change as fast as their bodies do,'' 
said Dr. Nicholas Perricone, a professor of dermatology at Yale University. 
``They are facing so many issues, so many forces from the outside. 
We see more neuroses than psychiatrists.'' Dr. George Brennan, a plastic 
surgeon from Newport Beach, Calif., balks at what seems to him psychobabble. 
``I'm not suggesting you operate on every kid who walks in the door,'' 
he said. ``But it's no different than orthodontia. We didn't do psychotherapy 
before we straightened a teen-ager's teeth.'' Some surgeons regularly 
include psychologists or psychiatrists in their consultations, to 
weed out patients with psychological problems, like distorted body 
images. But even girls without serious mental-health problems are 
often at war with their flesh in many ways. ``The body is a screen 
on which they project negative feelings about themselves,'' said Dr. 
Ann Kearney-Cooke, a Cincinnati psychologist and author of a curriculum 
to teach girls skills that improve body image. ``If they don't know 
how to handle attention from boys, they want a breast reduction. We 
need to spend time teaching them to set boundaries.'' Girls represent 
the majority of cases and the more ambiguous ones. Boys usually want 
their ears pinned back or reduction of enlarged breasts, a condition 
caused by hormone imbalance. The Problems Beyond Body Image Beyond 
body-image issues, some doctors say that refusing plastic surgery 
for the young may toughen them for the stings and disappointments 
that lie ahead. ``To teach them to deal with adversity, they have 
to bump into some things in life,'' said Dr. Susan Craig Scott, a 
plastic surgeon and mother of a teen-age girl. ``There is definitely 
something to be said for learning to deal with the hand life gives 
you.'' Moreover, sometimes with the passage of time a cosmetic-surgery 
patient may realize that the desire for such drastic change was an 
immature mistake. One young woman, for instance, went to Dr. Richard 
Ellenbogen in Los Angeles a few years ago, when she was a teen-ager, 
because she hated her crooked nose, she said. Before she knew it, 
seduced by the glossy brochures in the waiting room, she was on a 
self-improvement treadmill that included surgery on her chin, ears 
and breasts, along with liposuction and hair extensions. Now, just 
a few sobering years later, she sees it was a mistake to ``get so 
caught up in it'' and said she would caution a daughter to think twice. 
``I'd want her not so set on her looks,'' she said. Even when they 
go along with the idea of surgery, many parents try to caution children 
that it is not a panacea. One father in Greenwich, Conn., reluctantly 
let his 10th-grade daughter get a nose job before she left for boarding 
school. Even after the surgery, he still asks himself whether the 
girl's unhappiness was a ``reflection of something deeper.'' ``Did 
she want to change her nose, or did she want to be a different person?'' 
he asked. ``I don't think we'll ever be sure.'' He drummed his concern 
into the girl beforehand. ``He pounded it into my head that I'd still 
be the same person,'' she said. ``If you're a loser on the inside, 
you'll still be a loser on the inside. I just thought I'd be happier, 
that it would make me feel better.'' And what has changed? ``I'm not 
thinking about how I look all the time and looking in the mirror constantly,'' 
she said. ``But I still have the same personality. I'm pretty much 
myself.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>