<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981128.0028 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Once upon a time, 1998 was going to be the year of the electric car. 
In 1990 California announced that 2 percent of the automobiles sold 
in the state by major manufacturers in 1998 would have to be nonpolluting. 
New York and Massachusetts soon followed suit. The electric car was 
hailed as the route to clean air and the antidote to dependence on 
imported oil. Today the electric car seems an idea whose time has 
been put on hold. ``This was the year it was all going to happen,'' 
said Nancy Hazard, of the Northeast Sustainable Energy Association, 
a nonprofit advocacy group in Greenfield, Mass. ``Obviously it is 
not unfolding as they anticipated it to unfold.'' As the last of the 
1998 models leave dealers' lots, very few of them are running on batteries. 
The technology behind electric car improves yearly, but the cars themselves 
fail to attract buyers. Experts say the reason is they are not as 
flexible as gasoline cars, so consumers are not lining up, and policy 
makers have become reconciled to gasoline as engines have become cleaner 
and oil cheaper. But Ms. Hazard and others are still enthusiastic 
about the electric vehicle because technology has created a gasoline-electric 
car, with potentially huge implications for energy use and pollution. 
The nomenclature has changed, too. Specialists once called electric 
vehicles EVs, but they now call them battery electric vehicles, or 
BEVs, to distinguish them from hybrid HEVs, which use internal combustion 
engines to charge the batteries and electric motors to turn the wheels. 
Before this hybrid appeared, something quite unexpected happened to 
the old internal combustion engine. The century-old automotive technology, 
thought by many experts to have reached its limits, adapted. California, 
when it first called for the electric car in 1990, also set standards 
for cleanliness in regular cars; the most stringent was the ``ultra-low 
emission vehicle,'' or ULEV. But the state, the toughest in the nation 
when it came to the environment, underestimated the capacity of auto 
makers to respond. Toyota has plans for a gasoline car that is four 
times cleaner than the ULEV; Honda plans one that is 10 times cleaner. 
This new car, the ``super ultra low emission vehicle,'' quickly acquired 
its inevitable acronym: SULEV. ``California ran out of superlatives, 
so they had to start compounding them,'' said David Hermance, general 
manager in charge of engines at the Toyota Technical Center USA Inc., 
in Gardena, Calif. California recently enabled auto makers to meet 
their LEV quotas with SULEVs instead. Of course, the nonpolluting 
electric car does not emit pollutants itself, but that doesn't mean 
it doesn't contribute to fouling the environment; somewhere out there 
is a plant producing power for charging batteries. California's electric 
power system, though, is very clean, and pollution for charging batteries 
is much lower than for the ULEV. With the introduction of the SULEV, 
the difference grows smaller; the cost is modest. A year ago in Japan, 
Toyota introduced a hybrid car called the Prius, which cost about 
10 percent more than a Corolla and is the same size. Its factories, 
which make 2,000 cars a month, cannot keep up with demand. In 2000 
the Prius will be sold in this country. The Prius, which does not 
idle, has a gas engine to charge its batteries or power its wheels. 
The result is low emissions and fuel economy of 66 miles a gallon. 
Today every other major car company has a hybrid on the drawing boards 
or in research, generally with an internal-combustion engine as an 
auxiliary power unit. And oil is a tough competitor. The Energy Information 
Administration, the government's main energy forecasting group, pointed 
out last week that oil costs $7 a barrel less than it did a year ago. 
Because of the Asian economic meltdown, prices are not expected to 
rise to pre-crisis levels until 2007. The shift away from battery 
electric cars is disappointing to purists and some engineers, partly 
because the vehicles can get their energy from ``clean'' sources like 
the sun as well as from coal, natural gas or oil. But efficiency alone 
is not enough to sell products. Still, mass production of the hybrid 
means further improvements in electric engines, paving the way for 
a pure electric car if better batteries become available. In the meantime, 
Ms. Hazard said, ``more and more, consumers are seeking information 
on environmentally friendly automobiles. ``If the auto companies can 
produce a vehicle which meets their driving needs, they will make 
that green choice,'' she said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>