<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981128.0017 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When Congo's president, Laurent Kabila, got ready for a trip to Europe 
last week, he sent an advance party to Belgium, his first stop, to 
seek assurances that there would be no nasty surprises waiting _ an 
arrest warrant, for example. Kabila, who seized power in a long march 
to Kinshasa in 1997 and who has resisted all international efforts 
to investigate how many lives may have been lost in massacres along 
the way, is now living in the post-Pinochet era. ``Tremble, tyrants!'' 
was the editorial message the Paris newspaper Liberation sent to a 
list of dictators after a panel from Britain's House of Lords, the 
country's highest legal authority, ruled Wednesday that former Chilean 
dictator Augusto Pinochet was not entitled to immunity from arrest 
under a British law protecting former heads of state. Pinochet, 83, 
was in Britain for back surgery when a Spanish judge asked for his 
arrest on charges of mass murder and terrorism. A democratic Chilean 
government, which argues that it has put the Pinochet years behind 
it, is appealing. British Home Secretary Jack Straw has until Dec. 
11 to decide whether to turn the general over. But however the case 
is finally resolved, the arrest of Pinochet and the Lords' ruling 
upholding it may have opened a new era in the practice of international 
human rights law. ``It is a decision without precedent,'' said El 
Mundo, a Spanish newspaper. ``The basis is beginning to be set for 
what can and should be justice without borders.'' The decision falls 
into what had been almost a legal vacuum, making it all the more interesting 
to human rights specialists. International norms have been laid down 
broadly in human rights conventions, but there have been no universally 
agreed definitions and procedures. In the case of Cambodia's Pol Pot, 
for example, there is no unanimity that he could have been prosecuted 
for genocide, though there is wide agreement that a charge of crimes 
against humanity would stand up. What is important in the Pinochet 
precedent, said Jose Miguel Vivanco, director of the Americas division 
of Human Rights Watch, is that a high court has ruled that crimes 
like extrajudicial executions and torture ``do not qualify as legitimate 
acts of a head of state,'' and therefore did not qualify for the immunity 
extended to foreign government leaders in Britain. Vivanco said that 
whether Pinochet is ultimately extradited or not, this case has established 
a principle. Mary Robinson, the U.N. high commissioner for human rights, 
hailed the ruling as one to ``hearten human rights defenders around 
the world.'' No longer can generals and other authoritarians who, 
having spent years persecuting real and imagined enemies, fly off 
with complete assurance of immunity to Europe or the United States 
for shopping or medical treatment. A medical emergency was the reason 
given for allowing Shah Mohammed Riza Pahlevi to enter the United 
States after he was overthrown in Iran. Retirement abroad, even when 
part of a political settlement that rids a country of a dictator, 
may become more problematical for those driven out of their pillaged 
countries. Among retired dictators now living remarkably well somewhere 
else are Idi Amin of Uganda (in Saudi Arabia) and Jean-Claude ``Baby 
Doc'' Duvalier of Haiti (in France). Last week a right-wing French 
politician, criticizing the Pinochet decision, said that half the 
heads of state heading for a French-African summit in Paris this weekend 
``could end up in handcuffs.'' There are some sleeper cases waiting 
to be heard. What if people in East Timor, whose independence drive 
has been brutally repressed by Indonesia, try to nail President Suharto 
next time he travels abroad _ if the Indonesians ever let their ousted 
dictator travel. And Sikhs in Britain, Canada and the United States 
have been waiting for the chance to hold India's Congress Party leaders 
responsible for the massacres of several thousand Sikhs in New Delhi 
and other cities in a few days following the 1984 assassination of 
Prime Minister Indira Gandhi by Sikh bodyguards. More people died 
in that pogrom, Sikh leaders have been saying, than all those killed 
in Chile in 17 years under Pinochet. For human rights groups, there 
is special meaning in the timing of the Pinochet rulings. This year 
the world celebrates the 50th anniversary of the Universal Declaration 
of Human Rights, which Eleanor Roosevelt, among other Americans, was 
instrumental in pushing through the United Nations as the Cold War 
loomed. In general, this has been a remarkable year for human rights, 
despite setbacks in Congo, Kosovo, Algeria and other troubled areas. 
International tribunals for the Balkans and Rwanda have been handing 
down sentences, including the first convictions for rape as a war 
crime. In June, a treaty established the first International Criminal 
Court, a permanent body on call to deal with rogue leaders in a systematic 
way so that a mastermind of death like the late Pol Pot would not 
pose a jurisdictional problem if caught. Still, efforts to subordinate 
national sovereignty to internationalist notions of universal crimes 
are especially tricky for the United States. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>