<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981128.0062 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A crucial step in the evolution of quarterback Kerry Collins came 
when he recently began counseling for alcohol abuse, according to 
several National Football League executives and people close to Collins. 
The quarterback, those people said, is taking drastic steps to change 
his life. Could it be that Collins, just weeks ago the poster boy 
for quitters, is successfully transforming himself and his image from 
immature player to franchise quarterback? Collins declined to be interviewed. 
Leigh Steinberg, his agent, would not discuss specifics of the quarterback's 
private life, but said: ``I will tell you he is addressing any problems 
that he had. He is taking an honest look at his behavior.'' Collins 
has had a rocky professional career. It started with highs like taking 
the Carolina Panthers to the National Football Conference title game 
in only his second season. Then came the lows, such as his use of 
a racial epithet in reference to a black teammate last summer, and 
his quitting on the Panthers last month. After that, Collins was portrayed 
as someone no team could ever rely on. The Panthers cut him, and the 
only team to show serious interest was the New Orleans Saints, who 
signed Collins to a one-year deal. Most teams thought Collins' career 
was basically over. But guess what? He is making a comeback. ``We 
realize it is very early,'' said Saints general manager Bill Kuharich, 
``but Kerry is doing well. We just want him to develop as a person 
and a football player.'' That seems to be happening. Even though the 
Saints were disappointed this month when Collins was arrested on charges 
of driving while intoxicated in North Carolina _ the embarrassing 
arrest led to his decision to get counseling _ he has impressed Saints 
officials and teammates with his professionalism and toughness. Don't 
be surprised if the organization offers Collins a long-term deal before 
he becomes a free agent in February. Saints coaches knew Collins had 
a strong arm, and in two starts since joining the team, he displayed 
that power several times by squeezing passes between two and three 
defenders. But what seemed to surprise some members of the coaching 
staff was his poise under pressure in the pocket. In his first start 
against St. Louis on Nov. 15, Collins completed 13 of 26 passes for 
150 yards. ``I thought it was important to come out and show my heart 
was in it,'' Collins said after that game. ``I wanted to show my teammates 
that they could depend on me.'' Against San Francisco, he completed 
22 of 44 passes for 328 yards. He also ran for a touchdown. ``I'm 
happy with how Kerry is progressing,'' coach Mike Ditka said. The 
Saints believe that after going through players like Billy Joe Hobert, 
Heath Shuler and Danny Wuerffel, Collins could be their franchise 
quarterback. But the question remains: what happened with Collins 
and the Panthers? Some NFL scouts believe Collins never adapted to 
his role as the franchise savior because he hated being in the spotlight. 
With the Saints, he is not asked to win games by himself, and Ditka 
attracts all the cameras and microphones that Collins hates. Collins 
is not the only first-round quarterback in the 1990s to struggle early 
in his career. More and more players are having a difficult time making 
either the physical or mental adjustment to professional football. 
``This is one of the toughest times for a young, top quarterback to 
enter the league,'' said Green Bay general manager Ron Wolf. ``So 
much is asked of him.'' A quarterback drafted to lead a team as a 
rookie 20 years ago, or even 10, did not have to deal with complicated 
zone blitz defenses or the proliferation of news media watching every 
move. Some men crumble under the pressure. The number of blown top 
picks on quarterbacks in the 1990's has been staggering. For every 
good pick like Drew Bledsoe, there are two wasted picks like David 
Klingler. Tommy Maddox, Andre Ware, Todd Marinovich, Rick Mirer, Dan 
McGuire and Shuler were No. 1 picks who failed miserably. To find 
a good example of just how delicate the business of finding a franchise 
quarterback is, one only needs to go back to last year's draft. Indianapolis 
chose Peyton Manning with the first pick, and San Diego selected Ryan 
Leaf with the second. Though Manning has thrown 22 interceptions, 
he has made tremendous progress on the field and apparently has been 
a model citizen off the field as well. Then there is Leaf. He has 
been a disaster. Leaf was benched this month for the career backup 
Craig Whelihan after completing just 4 of 15 pass attempts against 
Denver on Nov. 8. Leaf has a 39.9 quarterback rating, the worst in 
football. He has acted so immaturely off the field _ he threw beer 
on students at a bar during a recent return to the Washington State 
campus and cursed out a reporter last summer _ that Chargers Coach 
June Jones said he has to constantly work with Leaf on his professionalism. 
``The high picks are still young men who get fame and wealth,'' Kuharich 
said. ``Some can handle it, some can't. Peyton Manning can, Ryan Leaf 
can't. Kerry could early on, then he couldn't, and now we think he 
can.'' nn 
</TEXT>
</DOC>