<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981128.0066 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In moves viewed here and by some in Washington as signs of weakness 
rather than strength, President Slobodan Milosevic of Yugoslavia has 
conducted an extraordinary purge of his innermost circle, dismissing 
the leaders of the army, the air force and the intelligence service, 
as well as one of his most trusted political commissars. Few are brave 
enough to say how or when Milosevic, the strongman of Yugoslavia, 
will go. But many officials here and in Washington agree that the 
dismissals represent the beginning of the end. The purge, conducted 
in the wake of Milosevic's agreement on Oct. 13 to pull troops out 
of Kosovo, culminated last week with the dismissal of Gen. Momcilo 
Perisic, the long-serving army chief of staff and an architect of 
the war in Bosnia. In the last month Milosevic has been seen by former 
associates as increasingly insecure, even paranoid, as Kosovo drifts 
from his control, the enfeebled economy gets weaker and he bows to 
the demands of his politically powerful wife, replacing his apparatchiks 
with hers. ``Deep in their minds they know that there will be social 
unrest and they want totally loyal people around them when it happens,'' 
Bratislav Grubacic, the editor of an English-language newsletter for 
diplomats and others in Belgrade, said of Milosevic and his wife, 
Mirjana Markovic. ``He is closing the areas where he doesn't feel 
comfortable _ people in the state apparatus who might eventually become 
disloyal.'' A Washington official who has followed Yugoslavia for 
more than a decade said: ``The regime is brittle. It will crack. It 
will break.'' The dismissals have inspired open talk here of the resemblance 
between the ruling court of Milosevic, his wife and their two wealthy 
children, Marko and Marija, and that of the Ceaucescu family in Romania, 
which was dominated by a husband-and-wife team and collapsed in a 
bloody downfall in 1989. The fall of Milosevic would have important 
consequences for the United States. Milosevic has been treated by 
the Clinton administration as an important keeper of the peace in 
Bosnia, where U.S. troops are based, and as a negotiating partner 
over the future of Kosovo, where the ethnic Albanian majority is seeking 
independence. Milosevic rules from behind closed doors, rarely appearing 
in public and almost never granting interviews, even to Yugoslav state 
news media, which he controls. There has been no official explanation 
of the recent dismissals. The purges began shortly after the departure 
from Belgrade of the U.S. envoy, Richard Holbrooke, who persuaded 
Milosevic to agree to international observers in Kosovo, and were 
preceded by the closing of independent newspapers and academic dismissals 
at Belgrade University. The removal of Perisic on Tuesday was perhaps 
the least surprising, after he publicly criticized Milosevic last 
month for allowing what is left of Yugoslavia to become a pariah state. 
Yugoslavia now consists of two republics: dominant Serbia and smaller 
Montenegro. Perisic, who led the Yugoslav National Army during the 
atrocities in Bosnia, was reported to have opposed the use of his 
soldiers against ethnic Albanian civilians in Kosovo during the summer 
offensive there. His skepticism apparently infuriated Ms. Markovic. 
The agreement on Kosovo between Yugoslavia and NATO was signed by 
Perisic, thus forcing Milosevic to wait a decent interval before getting 
rid of him. What was surprising was Perisic's decision to fight back. 
On Thursday night the general taunted Milosevic with a statement saying 
he had been dismissed illegally and hinting that he was prepared to 
lead Yugoslavia down a different path. Perisic, a native of Montenegro, 
is reported to have the backing of that republic's president, Milo 
Djukanovic, a former Milosevic ally who has turned against him and 
has won U.S. support for his stand. Some opponents of Milosevic, who 
has thrived throughout his 11-year rule by fomenting crises, fear 
that with Kosovo effectively now policed by the West and its ethnic 
Albanian guerrillas lying low in winter snows, he will use the lull 
to provoke a confrontation with Montenegro. Perisic was replaced by 
Gen. Dragoljub Ojdanic, a member of Ms. Markovic's political party 
who was commander of one of the army corps most active in the savage 
1991 fight to wrest the city of Vukovar from the Croatians, officials 
said. The first senior official to be removed was Jovica Stanisic, 
the head of state security services, whom the West considers a clever 
intelligence officer. Stanisic, who knows all the dirty secrets of 
Milosevic's rule, was replaced by a senior police patrol officer, 
Rade Markovic, a loyalist of Ms. Markovic's and a member of her party, 
known as the Yugoslav Left. Markovic is not related to Ms. Markovic. 
Along with Stanisic, a dozen top operational officers of the security 
service were forced into retirement or removed, a move that may undermine 
Milosevic in the longer term, officials said. Milosevic next dismissed 
Milorad Vucelic, the deputy leader of Milosevic's Socialist Party, 
who served as the president's political disciplinarian. To complete 
the list, the head of the air force, Gen. Ljubisa Velickovic, who 
protested Milosevic's agreement to allow NATO surveillance flights 
over Kosovo, was also removed. Milosevic has carried out purges before, 
but never to this extent. And he has never so obviously filled vacancies 
with loyalists of his wife. This round is also different because it 
comes when there is no obvious danger to Milosevic; the Serbian opposition, 
which mounted vast months-long demonstrations two years ago, is weak 
and divided. And for the first time even courtiers of the regime speak 
of it in scathing terms. Slavko Curuvija, the editor in chief of the 
Daily Telegraph and European magazine, which were closed down by the 
government last month, was until recently a confidant of Ms. Markovic. 
But in an interview, he described how he went to see her in October 
to offer a few pessimistic predictions. ``In the next year or next 
two years they will lose power,'' Curuvija said. ``They are making 
a private regime in which nobody who is not a close friend or not 
a bodyguard has important positions in the government.'' He said his 
meeting with Ms. Markovic ended abruptly. ``I told her that everything 
her husband had done was dramatically bad and that he had to do several 
things to save Serbia,'' he said. ``I said: `If you don't stop what's 
going on, the end will be bloody,' and that many people will be killed 
and maybe some will be on hanged on the Terazije,'' a central square 
in Belgrade. Curuvija said the outlook for the regime was very grim 
indeed. ``If you make war in Slovenia, you can step back to Croatia,'' 
he said, referring to Milosevic's first fights within the old Yugoslavia. 
``If you start a war in Montenegro, you can step back to Belgrade. 
When you start a war in Belgrade, you have nowhere to step back to 
except a trench around your house.'' A critical factor governing how 
long the government will survive is the economy, which has been battered 
by sanctions and bans on loans from the World Bank and the International 
Monetary Fund, and continues its relentless decline. But so far Milosevic 
has managed to manipulate the currency so that he can pay about three-quarters 
of the annual state pensions due, and keep the police and army paid. 
And with help from Russia, which provides natural gas even though 
Yugoslavia is late in its payments, and with deals like a recent oil 
purchase from Libya, Milosevic is able to provide energy for the long-suffering 
people. ``Don't underestimate his ability to scrape the bottom for 
economic deals,'' said a Western diplomat. Aleksandar Tijanic, a former 
minister of information, said he believed the government had $1 billion 
to $2 billion stashed abroad that it could draw on. ``It's an enormous 
amount of money in this situation,'' he said. There is considerable 
division among former members of the Milosevic circle and Western 
officials who expect Milosevic to fall about just how he will go. 
``I don't think it will be a palace coup,'' said the Washington official. 
``It's going to be in the streets. It could develop rapidly, something 
we won't anticipate _ say, superinflation should return and dinars 
in the morning can't buy bread in the afternoon.'' In Grubacic's view, 
``No one can see him going from power normally. Something will happen 
next year for sure. Things are going quickly.'' One sign of the times 
is that the new leader of the opposition coalition that organized 
the street demonstrations two years ago is Nebojsa Covic. Back then, 
he was mayor of Belgrade and a close associate of Milosevic. Covic, 
who describes in vivid detail Milosevic's style of scolding underlings, 
including shouting at Covic and calling him a coward, acknowledged 
that the opposition remained weak. But he said that eventually, he 
could not say exactly when, a spark would come from the streets. Then, 
as happened in Romania, it would be a matter of which way the mainstay 
of Milosevic's power, the 90,000-member police force, would go. ``The 
police are more and more willing to go against him every day,'' Covic 
said. ``But they want to make sure they are on the winning side.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>