<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981128.0046 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Turkish novelist Orhan Pamuk remembers that when he was growing 
up in the 1950s and '60s, there was one sure way to end any argument 
about how to do something: ``You just had to say `This is how they 
do it in Europe' and that was final. If things were done a certain 
way in Europe, then by definition that was the right way to do it.'' 
For generations, even for centuries, Turks have debated how to relate 
to Europe and, by extension, the Western world. It was fundamental 
for Mustafa Kemal Ataturk, who founded the Turkish Republic in 1923, 
that Turkey was a European nation and should strive to be ever more 
so. But the marriage of Turkish and European values has not proven 
easy to consummate, and in recent weeks it has been set back again, 
this time by a dispute over the fugitive Kurdish rebel leader Abdullah 
Ocalan. Most Turks consider Ocalan a paragon of evil who combines 
the most despicable qualities of Hitler and Caligula. After he was 
arrested in Italy on Nov. 12, the prospect of him being brought home 
in chains sent Turks into paroxysms of ecstasy. Italians, however, 
refused to extradite him. They said they could not because their constitution 
forbids extraditing anyone to countries that practice the death penalty. 
Several Italian politicians also noted that European accords forbid 
sending criminal suspects to places where they might face torture. 
Armando Cossuta, whose Party of Italian Communists is part of the 
ruling coalition, went so far as to call Ocalan ``the leader of an 
oppressed people.'' Turks were furious, saying Italy was embracing 
terrorism and threatening to punish it with economic boycotts. Their 
outrage may have been justified, but to Europeans it seemed strident 
and immature. ``Any undue pressure on the Italian government, including 
unilateral threats, is inappropriate and must be avoided,'' sniffed 
Austrian Foreign Minister Wolfgang Schuessel. Many Europeans sympathize 
with the Kurds as a stateless people victimized by a succession of 
empires, kingdoms and nations. Some have allowed this sympathy to 
lead them to support for Ocalan's Kurdistan Workers Party, or PKK. 
They see it as a liberation movement, even in light of a report issued 
this month by Human Rights Watch that enumerated 25 massacres it has 
perpetrated since 1992. This romanticism fits not only with Europe's 
image of the Kurds as tragic heroes, but with its image of the Turks, 
who are seen by some as brutes and whose less than sterling human 
rights record tends to confirm the stereotype. Italian Prime Minister 
Massimo D'Alema was probably sincere last week when he urged Turkey 
to ``find a solution to this long and bloody conflict by following 
the examples of Northern Ireland and the Basque country.'' So, no 
doubt, was the chairman of the foreign affairs committee in Germany's 
parliament, Hans-Ulrich Klose, who called Ocalan's capture ``a good 
opportunity for solving the country's problems with the PKK and making 
the necessary reforms in Turkey.'' ``The Turkish government's reaction 
is overblown and takes Turkey very far from its target, Europe,'' 
Klose asserted. But for an array of historical and psychological reasons, 
Turks abhor any suggestion that they should begin a dialogue with 
Kurdish nationalists. Anyone who makes such a suggestion is considered 
abysmally ignorant or worse. Many Turks now see Europe in that category. 
It has been almost exactly a year since the European Union slammed 
its door in Turkey's face by pointedly excluding Turkey from a list 
of 11 possible candidates for membership. In the interim, several 
European leaders have recognized that they may have acted too harshly. 
In November the European Union issued a new report that took a much 
more encouraging tone. ``Turkey is eligible to become a candidate,'' 
Hans van den Broek, the Union's external affairs commissioner, said 
as he issued the report. The Union's representative in Ankara, Karen 
Fogg, called it ``a very positive indication,'' and Turkish Foreign 
Minister Ismail Cem said, ``The EU Commission's definition of Turkey 
as the 12th candidate for full membership has opened the way for improvement 
in bilateral relations.'' The election of a left-leaning government 
in Germany last month seemed to give another boost to Turkey's European 
ambitions. Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder pledged after taking office 
that he would support measures ``bringing Turkey still closer to the 
European Union.'' The Ocalan affair and Turkey's reaction to it, however, 
have confirmed European stereotypes about Turkey as a country that 
has not yet learned the rules of civilized discourse. Even some Turkish 
leaders seemed to acknowledge that Turkey's language might have become 
too strident. President Suleyman Demirel urged Turks to ``be well 
contained and not undermine the country's case.'' Nonetheless, in 
the wake of the collapse of Prime Minister Mesut Yilmaz's government 
Wednesday, politicians will probably crank up their patriotic denunciations 
of Europe with an eye to the forthcoming election campaign. Many Turks, 
including the entire political elite, believe that Ocalan is such 
a hideous war criminal that there can be no debate over the justice 
of Turkey's demand for his extradition. But in Europe, everything 
is supposed to be open to debate. The contrast suggests to some European 
leaders that Turkey is still in the grip of a distinctly un-European 
tradition. ``We had just reached the point of telling Turkey that 
its application to join the EU would be considered on the same basis 
as every other application, and then this happens,'' a European ambassador 
lamented. ``Now there will be a period of silence, at best. Turkey 
is not making it easy for us. They're not helping their own image.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>