<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981128.0132 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There was name-calling and bitter mistrust and times when the two 
sides would sulk in silence. There were concerns about fan alienation 
and irreparable rifts, and moments when the season looked lost. This 
scene does not refer to the National Basketball Association's current 
lockout, but to the labor strife that nearly resulted in the cancellation 
of the National Hockey League's 1994-95 season. In the end, after 
a grueling and emotional 48-hour session to save the season as the 
fail-safe deadline passed, the insults that had been aimed at one 
another for five months were no more fatal than shots fired in a game 
of paint ball. Just colorful rhetoric for the sake of one contentious 
game: labor negotiations. To some in the National Basketball Players 
Association, the course the NHL took in ending its lockout and reaching 
an 11th-hour agreement with its players in January 1995 has provided 
a blueprint for the NBA. ``It's beginning to play out that way,'' 
said one union official, speaking on the condition of anonymity. ``I 
don't think it's a coincidence.'' One main reason for the union's 
suspicion lies in the relationship between NHL commissioner Gary Bettman 
and NBA commissioner David Stern. For years, Stern was Bettman's mentor 
in the NBA. Then Bettman departed the league five years ago with some 
of what he had gleaned from Stern. Suddenly, Bettman was off to put 
the NHL on the pop charts. Two years later, a grim lockout left wounds 
on both sides, but ended under an ultimatum: Get an agreement or else 
the season is canceled. Under that pressure, a deal was struck that 
left both sides relieved, but was viewed to favor the owners. ``The 
owners moved inches, and we moved football fields,'' defenseman Tommy 
Albelin said when the deal was agreed to on the 103rd day of the NHL 
lockout, Jan. 11, 1995. So far, as the NBA lockout moves into its 
152nd day Sunday, Stern has refused to set a deadline, which union 
officials have been asking for in recent weeks in order to know what 
they are up against. While there is no deadline yet, there are notable 
similarities in the issues that faced the NHL and now the NBA. What 
to do with the season? After its lockout ended, the NHL put into motion 
a 48-game reduced schedule and lengthened the regular season. The 
NBA has discussed a similar scenario. How long can the current stalemate 
last? In the NHL, a month of silence passed between a Dec. 6 meeting 
and the ones leading to a settlement in January. The last bargaining 
session in the NBA was 10 days ago, with no new meetings scheduled. 
How do the players feel? As with the NHL, the players in the NBA have 
an attitude reflective of Albelin's. ``Our players feel like we have 
given up too much already,'' said a union spokesman, Dan Wasserman. 
``They keep giving and giving.'' So far, the players have offered 
the following: a decrease in the maximum raise on multiyear contracts 
to 10 percent from 20 percent, a fourth year to the rookie wage scale, 
a luxury tax on superstars making $15 million salaries and an agreement 
on the framework of an escrow plan. But then something happened along 
the way to progress. After a 10-hour session on Nov. 20, a couple 
of days passed and a misunderstanding grew over what was agreed to 
by the union. Suspecting that the union was reneging on its word, 
the league canceled a bargaining session that had been scheduled for 
Saturday. During the past week of discord, the union has insisted 
on its desired percentage of basketball-related revenues. The union 
does not intend to budge off 57 percent, well above the 51.8 percent 
figure that allowed the owners to reopen the collective bargaining 
agreement. ``It's not practical, but that's the position they've taken,'' 
Russ Granik, the deputy commissioner, said Saturday. ``They want at 
least as good a deal as last time. Unfortunately, the way it worked 
out is that the players had too good of a deal.'' Until the league 
sees some hint of flexibility, the stalemate is expected to continue. 
Perhaps the NBA's labor strife will end as it did in the NHL. As January 
came, and a deadline was set, the fear of losing the season began 
to unsettle the players and the owners. That fear motivated them to 
overcome the hostility and get a deal done. If and when a deadline 
is set for the NBA, there is the expectation that a marathon session 
of bargaining will commence. As one union official put it, the waiting 
would be over and the players could find out whether a deal could 
be struck. But any reliance on the NHL blueprint can be perilous. 
What if Stern continues his reluctance to lay down a threat by setting 
a deadline and, without warning, decides to cancel the season? What 
if the owners, some of whom are willing to forgo the season now, are 
not posturing? ``I have no idea what they are waiting for or what 
their strategy is,'' Granik said. ``We're not going to set a deadline 
because that sounds like an ultimatum. Either we will make a deal 
or we won't. Our strategy is very simple: We need a deal that is fair 
to the owners. If we have it, we play basketball. If we don't have 
it, we won't. There's no hocus-pocus. There's no magic to it. We'd 
much prefer to negotiate the deal now rather than later.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>