<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981128.0021 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Last week's $206 billion settlement between the tobacco industry and 
46 states is supposed to put Big Tobacco on the run. The agreement 
requires cigarette makers to compensate states for the medical costs 
of treating smoking-related diseases. It's been hailed as a triumph 
of the public interest over special interests. But a closer look at 
the hard economics behind the agreement reveals something quite different. 
The problem, economists and legal experts who have studied the deal 
say, isn't that the damages won by the states are too small, as leaders 
of the anti-smoking lobby complain. It's that 99 percent of the total 
settlement is really a disguised tax hike. Taxing cigarettes more 
heavily may or may not be a good idea, the critics say, but labeling 
as ``damages'' what is effectively a sales tax is misleading and will 
create a boondoggle for trial lawyers and a windfall for the smaller 
tobacco companies. Under the deal, the Big Four tobacco producers 
will wind up paying direct damages of at most 1 percent of the settlement 
total, or $2.4 billion. That amount, calculated as a proportion of 
the companies' current market value, is to be paid regardless of how 
many packs of cigarettes they sell in the future. The rest of the 
$206 billion will be paid by smokers: Cigarette prices are expected 
to climb by an average of about 35 cents a pack. ``Reasonable people 
can disagree whether increasing the cigarette tax is a good or bad 
idea,'' said Jeremy Bulow, the incoming chief economist of the Federal 
Trade Commission. ``But the reason that the attorneys general don't 
want to call it a tax is so they can claim a political victory.'' 
Clearly, investors thought the deal was worth celebrating. On Nov. 
20, the day the attorneys general announced the settlement, the stock 
of the leading tobacco companies soared. Investors chose to disbelieve 
that an industry with profits of $5 billion a year would be paying 
$8 billion a year in damages for the next 25 years. Instead, the investors 
gave credence to stock analysts who believe that the profits of tobacco 
companies will decline by a maximum of 10 percent. And cigarette producers 
wasted no time in raising prices _ a day after the settlement was 
signed on Monday, two major companies raised prices 45 cents a pack. 
The higher prices represent what is essentially an old-fashioned sales 
tax, the very kind of tax that the Republican Congress shot down a 
few months back as ``big government.'' What makes it a tax? The fact 
that the amount paid is to rise and fall with the number of cigarette 
packs sold. Like many sales taxes, it is borne primarily by the consumer. 
``Every single cigarette tax ever passed has been paid fully by the 
consumer,'' said John Gruber, an economist at the Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology and a former deputy Treasury secretary. ``There's no 
reason to think this will be any different.'' ``If it looks like a 
duck, quacks like a duck . . .,'' Gruber added. ``It's a tax because 
it's a set of payments made by tobacco companies that depend on how 
many packs they sell.'' Still, most economists think it makes sense 
to use taxes to have the price of cigarettes reflect their true social 
cost, though some, like Bulow, have reservations because the taxes 
fall heavily on the poor. And as tobacco companies have known for 
years, the evidence is compelling that raising prices leads some smokers 
to cut back and deters teen-agers from picking up the habit. But by 
disguising a de facto sales tax as damages, the critics maintain, 
the states have agreed to a deal with unintended consequences that 
are just hinted at in the joint news release describing the 100-page 
settlement. By calling taxes damages, the critics say, the states 
wound up agreeing to provisions that Congress would never dream of 
if it passed a tax increase. For example, economists cite the huge 
contingency fees that the 200 or so trial lawyers who helped produce 
the agreement will collect. Under the deal, the lawyers will divide 
$1.25 billion initially and about $500 million a year thereafter. 
That's an $8 billion payout, or 20 times the biggest contingency fee 
ever paid, the $400 million collected by a lawyer in the 1985 Texaco-Pennzoil 
case. Gruber calls the legal fees ``huge, gross and disgusting.'' 
Bulow estimates that had the fees been calculated only on the basis 
of actual damages, each lawyer would receive an average of about $1 
million apiece, versus the $40 million apiece that the lawyers will 
actually collect. ``By calling the settlement `damages' it makes it 
seem reasonable to pay the lawyers a lot,'' said Paul Klemperer, an 
economist at Oxford University. ``If you called it taxes, you wouldn't 
expect to give lawyers a fraction of the tax.'' The lawyers maintain 
they are being paid fairly for taking a huge gamble. But for one thing, 
some states hadn't even got around to filing suits against the tobacco 
companies, so the lawyers in those states haven't done much of anything 
yet. And those lawyers who have put in time did most of their work 
in the past year _ after it became clear that a broad settlement was 
a near-certain bet. A second consequence of calling taxes damages 
is that the deal, far from inflicting pain on all cigarette producers, 
actually enriches a few of them. Take Liggett &AMP; Myers, which until 
recently was valued at about $120 million and which hadn't turned 
a profit in several years. Under the deal, Liggett will actually collect 
an annual subsidy of about $100 million, courtesy of taxpayers. Here's 
how. A tax hike applies to all cigarette producers, big and small, 
current and future. But the states can only collect damages from the 
companies they are suing: in this case, the Big Four: Philip Morris, 
R.J. Reynolds Tobacco, Lorillard Tobacco and Brown &AMP; Williamson 
Tobacco. But by limiting damages to the largest companies, the states 
would be handing smaller tobacco producers like Liggett a cost advantage 
of 35 cents a pack, since the Big Four would have to raise their prices, 
while the little guys would not. Given that it costs just 20 cents 
to manufacture a pack of cigarettes, that's a huge advantage. How 
did the states solve the problem? In effect, they told the small companies 
that if they agreed to be ``taxed'' they would be allowed _ up to 
a limit higher than their current sales _ to keep the revenue they 
collected instead of turning them in to the states. Thus, Liggett 
can match the higher prices charged by the Big Four companies but 
doesn't have to hand over any of the extra income except in the unlikely 
event that its sales exceed 400 million packs, or 125 percent of its 
current sales. Even assuming that Liggett loses some sales when it 
raises its prices, Klemperer said, the subsidy it will collect still 
amounts to $100 million a year, an amount equal to its recent market 
value. Actually, Liggett gained even more from the tobacco agreement. 
Because of agreements reached earlier with some states, Liggett wasn't 
as vulnerable as the other companies to states' threats to pass punitive 
legislation if it failed to climb aboard. To induce Liggett to sign 
on, Philip Morris, eager to dispel the threat of a firm that could 
potentially produce cigarettes at a 35-cent cost advantage, paid three 
times the value of the entire company for 3 of Liggett's 14 brands. 
The contract stipulated that Philip Morris would pay Liggett $150 
million even if the Federal Trade Commission shoots down the deal. 
Ian Ayres, a professor at the Yale Law School, is among those worried 
about the precedent set by the settlement. ``It's scary.'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>