<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981128.0114 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The occasion called for Champagne. Robert Kraft, the owner of the 
New England Patriots, had just agreed to move his football team from 
Massachusetts to Connecticut. The governor there was promising to 
build him a $350-million stadium in Hartford, to guarantee up to $17.5 
million a year in sales of luxury seats, to let him keep all stadium 
profits without paying any rent, even to pick up the tab for the insurance. 
All in all, the experts said, it was one of the richest stadium deals 
any sports mogul had negotiated. But last Sunday, Kraft wasn't celebrating. 
In full-page advertisements in the Boston newspapers, Kraft offered 
a 1,400-word apology. ``Make no mistake,'' he wrote. ``This decision 
was not easy.'' Kraft doesn't just want Connecticut's money. He wants 
to be forgiven for taking it. Perhaps more than any other sports team 
owner in America, Kraft, 57, embodies the opposing impulses _ one 
economic, the other emotional _ that are throwing dozens of cities 
into spasms of subsidized stadium construction and leaving others, 
deserted by their teams, perhaps wishing they had. Like many of his 
peers, particularly in the National Football League, Kraft sought 
the greater revenues that a new stadium would bring from expanded 
luxury seating, concessions and advertising. But unlike many of them, 
Kraft, a native of Boston and loyal season ticketholder before he 
bought the team, resisted using threats to leave his home state as 
a ploy in the negotiations with Massachusetts, even as the talks about 
the state's contribution for a new stadium grew increasingly bitter. 
When he finally acted, it was after five years of struggle with a 
state legislature whose leaders came to consider him little more than 
a ``whiny millionaire'' who simply wanted too big of a government 
handout. In its deal with Kraft, Hartford is buying more than just 
a competitive NFL team and a palatial new sports complex: In Kraft, 
the Connecticut capital is getting someone who is described as a ruthless 
businessman but who also requires his players to make 10 appearances 
a season at local charities and civic groups. He's a man who also 
pays for parks in Israel, library wings in Worcester, and writes half-million-dollar 
checks to his own favorite causes, from the Boys and Girls Clubs of 
Boston to cancer research and domestic-violence prevention. But above 
all, Hartford's newest corporate citizen is a team owner who is deeply 
and openly emotional about his relationship with Patriots fans: Two 
seasons ago, as the team's fortunes soared with a trip to the Super 
Bowl, that bond became an out-and-out lovefest. Before home games, 
Kraft would cruise through the parking lots outside suburban Foxboro 
Stadium in a golf cart, high-fiving tailgaters, unashamedly reveling 
in their affection. And each time the Patriots scored, he would wave 
down from his luxury suite above the 50-yard line, and the crowd would 
roar back. Things have changed in the past week. On Nov. 19, hours 
after he announced his deal in Hartford, a photograph of the absent 
Kraft was flashed on a banquet hall screen as the American Ireland 
Fund honored its largest contributors. The black-tie crowd of 1,500 
booed loudly. Last Monday night, there were few signs of rancor at 
Foxboro during the Patriots' game against the Miami Dolphins, suggesting 
that Patriot fans viewed his decision less harshly than the columnists 
and radio hosts who had demonized him. But Kraft skipped the golf-cart 
ride nonetheless. ``I don't think he'll be ostracized,'' said Stephen 
Tocco, the president of a Boston consulting firm who worked closely 
with Kraft as a top aide to former Gov. William Weld, one of Kraft's 
key allies in trying to get a new stadium. ``But he won't be signing 
many autographs any more. His worst moment is going to be the day 
the trucks leave. But he's got three years to get ready for that day.'' 
Kraft declined repeated requests for an interview. His son, Jonathan, 
the Patriots' vice president, explained that more publicity could 
only jeopardize legislative approval of the stadium deal in Hartford: 
``We want to stay underground for now,'' he said. Clearly, Kraft has 
learned from his battles in Boston. He was often criticized for lashing 
out at his allies when they failed him almost as much as his opponents 
when they rebuffed him. But beneath the surface were old Boston tensions 
seldom discussed openly. ``This town is not impressed with new money,'' 
said one longtime supporter, trying to explain Kraft's troubles. Others, 
including people who know him well, said there was a deeper source 
to the vehemence of opposition to his proposals, suggesting that although 
Kraft, who is Jewish, saw himself as a second-generation Bostonian, 
to the Irish, Italian and Brahmin insiders with whom he was dealing 
he remained an outsider, first and foremost. Kraft spent over a year 
on an ill-fated plan for a stadium in South Boston _ an insular, predominantly 
Irish neighborhood notorious for its battles against school busing 
in the 1970s. Residents, perceiving that he was trying to ram the 
project down their throats, rebelled. ``I don't know if it's anti-Semitism, 
or anti-Kraftism, or anti-footballism, but it's really strange,'' 
Jonathan Kraft told The Boston Globe in February 1997, trying to account 
for the enmity his father had stirred up in South Boston. ``I just 
don't get it.'' Robert Kraft's love of sports began young, but was 
frustrated early on. He grew up in Brookline, a few blocks from the 
old Braves Field, where he sold programs until the baseball team moved 
to Milwaukee in 1953. His father was a dry-goods merchant who was 
better known as a lay leader at an Orthodox synagogue. But the family's 
religious observance interfered with the teen-ager's desire to play 
high school sports, with games on Saturday. He played football for 
the first time as an undergraduate at Columbia University, excelling 
in an intercollegiate league for lightweight athletes. After Harvard 
Business School he married Myra Hiatt, the daughter of a wealthy Worcester 
manufacturer, and soon went to work for his father-in-law. In 1972, 
the year he first bought season tickets to the Patriots, Kraft, then 
31, took control of his father-in-law's packaging corporation, Rand-Whitney, 
and launched International Forest Products, which trades in raw materials 
around the world. Today, the two comprise the largest privately owned 
packaging company in the country and the biggest but least-noticed 
divisions of the Kraft Group, which generates an estimated $500 million 
a year in revenues. Yet, outside the Boston charity-dinner circuit, 
Kraft was still virtually unknown when he bought the Patriots in 1994. 
It was not his first venture into professional sports; he had owned 
the Boston Lobsters, a World Team Tennis franchise, until that league 
folded in 1978. Later, he made passes at the Red Sox and Celtics, 
and twice tried unsuccessfully to buy the Patriots, before seizing 
on an alternate route to control of the team _ becoming its landlord. 
In 1988, he and a Massachusetts shopping mall developer, Stephen Karp, 
bought Foxboro Stadium, the Patriots' current home 30 miles south 
of Boston, at a bankruptcy sale for $25 million. Six years later, 
Kraft, fresh from buying out Karp's interest in the stadium, used 
his control of the Patriots' lease to edge out several rival bidders 
for the team. The closest competition came from a St. Louis businessman 
who offered $200 million and would have moved the team there. Kraft 
paid only $158 million, because he threatened a costly legal battle 
if another buyer tried to break the Foxboro lease. ``That was far 
more than he wanted to pay,'' said Tocco. ``But he really believes 
in Boston and Massachusetts, and the Patriots looked like they were 
leaving. He felt he was doing it as much as a public service as a 
business deal.'' Kraft was hailed as the team's savior. And he cultivated 
the image of a fan's fan, recalling in interviews how he and his sons 
had endured the lean years alongside blue-collar Patriots fans and 
wanted nothing more as owners than to bring a championship home to 
New England. Almost immediately, however, Kraft began pushing for 
a new stadium to replace Foxboro. Meanwhile, Kraft brought his business 
acumen and his history as a football fan to bear in his dealings with 
other NFL owners, earning respect as a consensus builder. And as his 
peers in the NFL accepted publicly financed stadiums _ like Art Modell, 
who moved his Cleveland franchise to Baltimore in exchange for a new 
ball park _ Kraft, who was willing to raise the money for a stadium 
privately, would complain to friends and associates about the ingratitude 
of Massachusetts politicians. ``I was willing to spend hundreds of 
millions of my own money to privately finance a stadium,'' he wrote 
in the newspaper advertisement last Sunday, ``but was never given 
the opportunity.'' His stadium hunt degenerated in Boston beginning 
in late 1995, after the Massachusetts House rejected a proposed domed 
stadium and convention center complex. Kraft came up with a plan to 
build a downtown, open-air stadium without public subsidies. But the 
plan, which relied on one-time fees charged to season ticketholders, 
was overshadowed by a series of political missteps that left even 
Kraft's supporters bemoaning his political naivete and his tendency 
to ignore advice and to turn on his allies. At one point, for example, 
he claimed that the governor at the time, William F. Weld, had guaranteed 
to deliver him a new stadium, saying that promise had ``induced'' 
him to take the risk of buying the Patriots. Yet a seventh grader 
could have told Kraft that such a promise was meaningless without 
the cooperation of the Legislature. In trying for over a year to build 
a stadium in South Boston, associates of Kraft said he made the mistake 
of believing that if he could persuade the community's political leaders 
to accept his plan, residents would follow. But residents bridled 
at that presumption, as much as at the notion of game-day traffic 
jams in their neighborhood. The South Boston plan went down in flames 
and ill will in early 1997. In Massachusetts, Kraft had often expressed 
a wish that a deal could be struck if he got the most powerful politicians 
all in one room. In Connecticut, he was proved right. After a series 
of secret, face-to-face meetings with Gov. John Rowland that began 
in May, the two reached agreement over the weekend of Nov. 14 and 
15. That Monday, Rowland met with all six legislative leaders to gain 
their support, and Kraft came by to answer lawmakers' questions. His 
deal with Connecticut in hand, Kraft immediately set out to persuade 
fans that he had done right by them. In a letter to season ticketholders 
mailed Nov. 19, he noted that they would not have to pay extra fees 
to retain their seats in Hartford, vowed there would be room at the 
new stadium for tailgating, and even promised that the new parking 
lots would empty in less than an hour, a vast improvement over Foxboro. 
But that was not enough for Kraft: On Sunday, in his newspaper ads, 
he defended the move. ``I love Massachusetts'' he wrote. ``It has 
been home to my family all our lives. I wanted nothing more than to 
keep the Patriots here. It was simply impossible to do so and fulfill 
my obligation to continue to put a championship-caliber team on the 
field.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>