<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981128.0117 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Horse packers blazed many of the trails that pierce the dense pine 
forests of the Sierra backcountry, and since early this century they 
have been carrying sightseers and fishermen into the range's high 
reaches. But now packers are locked in a dispute with hikers and environmentalists 
over their access to some of California's best known wilderness areas. 
It may still be trail etiquette for hikers to step aside for horses, 
but backpackers increasingly complain that there are too many commercial 
pack trains in the wilderness areas and that livestock is damaging 
the high-elevation terrain. In recent years, packers say, some hikers 
have begun harassing them, throwing rocks at mules, untying stock 
animals in backcountry areas and one time stretching barbed wire across 
a mountain route. ``One of my best horses got tangled up in it,'' 
said Bill Draves, owner of the Rainbow Pack Station near Bishop. ``How 
long does a person want to deal with that?'' Then late last year the 
U.S. Forest Service released the draft of a management plan for four 
popular wilderness areas in the central Sierra: the John Muir next 
to Mount Whitney, the Ansel Adams, the Dinkey Lakes and the Monarch. 
The plan included restrictions on commercial horse packers that the 
packers said would force them to raise rates or go out of business. 
The response of hiker and environmental groups, though, was that the 
plan did not restrict packers enough. At its heart, it is a cultural 
clash between the traditional values of the cowboy-style packers, 
who operate more than two dozen pack stations in the area, and the 
low-impact philosophies of environmentalists and backpackers, who 
have become more organized in the area as backpackers, rather than 
horse packers, have come to dominate use of the wilderness areas. 
Tom Suk, spokesman for the High Sierra Hikers Association, which formed 
in 1991, said that horse packers harmed backcountry areas by overgrazing, 
taking pack animals into the mountains when the ground is still wet 
from melting snow, and other practices. ``The impacts of stock use 
in fragile alpine and subalpine areas has been well documented,'' 
Suk said. ``Some of the commercial packers show a lot of care for 
the land back there, but some of them don't.'' Horse packers insist 
that they do not harm the backcountry areas where they have operated 
for decades. ``It's not a case that this stuff wears out or is destroyed,'' 
said Bob Tanner, who has owned two pack stations in the Sierra since 
1960. ``That's a huge misunderstanding. You stay in business for 40 
years, you sure don't want to go out and do damage to anything.'' 
The Forest Service regulates access to the wilderness areas by both 
backpackers and commercial horse packers, but the hikers accuse the 
Forest Service of monitoring them much more closely than horse packers. 
Hikers who camp overnight must obtain a backcountry permit through 
a phone reservation system or at a ranger station, and campers without 
a permit are fined. Each of the packers, in contrast, is allowed a 
set number of days to operate in a wilderness, but can determine which 
days and the size of the party, up to 15 people and 25 horses and 
mules (a typical group, packers say, is eight people with 15 head 
of stock). But critics say their permits are not monitored and enforced. 
Horse packers figure prominently in the history of the Sierra and 
the identity of its mountain communities. Several Sierra pack station 
owners have held important county offices, and one, Ike Livermore, 
was director of California's resources agency when Ronald Reagan was 
governor. But their critics contend that over the years the outfitters 
used their political pull to escape regulation by the Forest Service. 
Concern about the Sierra wilderness plan has been so great that agency 
officials extended the comment period and received an estimated 2,000 
comments. Although the Forest Service spent seven years developing 
the plan, almost everyone with an interest in the wilderness areas 
has panned the document, calling it arbitrary, ineffectual and bureaucratically 
obscure. The wilderness coordinator of the Inyo National Forest, Mary 
Beth Hennessy, conceded, ``The plan is inherently confusing about 
what we're trying to accomplish here.'' The complex of adjacent wilderness 
areas covered by the plan stretches into three national forests and 
includes more than 885,000 acres of spectacular landscapes lying between 
Yosemite and Sequoia/Kings Canyon national parks. One, the John Muir 
Wilderness, a more than 580,000-acre site that includes the popular 
Mount Whitney trail, receives the second heaviest use of any Forest 
Service wilderness area. Disputes between horsemen and backpackers 
have erupted in other parts of the country, including the Sawtooth 
National Recreation Area in Idaho. ``We just went through a revision 
of our wilderness plan, and we had quite a row,'' said a Sawtooth 
wilderness ranger, Ed Cannady. ``The single biggest complaint we get 
from users of the backcountry is from backpackers about stock use.'' 
Many of the packers here believe that the unstated goal of at least 
some local Forest Service personnel is to end all stock use in the 
Sierra wildernesses. ``They won't come right out and say they want 
to eliminate it,'' said Larry Knapp, owner of the Yosemite Trails 
Pack Station. ``Instead of doing that, they've slowly manipulated 
the system and closed different areas and meadows.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>