<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981128.0037 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the uneasy calm that has followed President Clinton's decision 
to call off the bombing of Iraq, diplomats watching for Saddam Hussein's 
next move sense something profoundly different in the Iraqi air. While 
clues do not add up to conclusions, some Arab and Western experts 
have seen signs that Saddam is more isolated in his own region than 
at any time since his 1990 invasion of Kuwait, which drove fellow 
Arab nations into backing the U.S.-led coalition in the subsequent 
Persian Gulf war. The chilling of Arab relations with Iraq has diverse 
causes. Contributing to the trend is the finally tangible (however 
slow) progress in peace agreements between Israel and the Palestinians. 
President Clinton's forceful and sustained role in the Wye Plantation 
talks was widely noticed in Arab nations, a Mideast envoy said. Relatively 
small events, like the opening last week of the Palestinians' first 
international airport at Gaza, are ``a tremendous psychological boost'' 
to better feelings about the United States, the diplomat added. Arab 
diplomats say that Iraq appears to be convinced that Syria, an old 
rival, has been lured by Washington into believing that its concerns 
about Israel and its demand for a return of the Golan Heights could 
be dealt with next. The subtext in the message is that Syria would 
do well to distance itself from Baghdad. Similarly, recent U.S. efforts 
to feel out Iran, however tentative and cautious they have been, can 
be interpreted by Iraqis as cover for the Iranians should they choose 
to make trouble for Iraq. Even the collapse of world oil prices to 
the lowest level in a decade plays a part in distancing the Arabs 
and Iranians from Iraq, since other oil producers in the region are 
not eager to see Iraq free to export petroleum at this point _ a principal 
Iraqi aim in seeking a relaxation of United Nations sanctions. Iraq 
produced 3.14 million barrels a day in 1990 under an OPEC quota. Now, 
although under strict U.N. regulation, Iraq has already averaged 2.4 
million barrels a day over the last four months, and exports about 
1.8 millions barrels of it, an Iraqi oil ministry official said last 
week. But exasperation with Saddam's defiance of the United Nations, 
fears that he will bring destabilizing destruction down on the region 
by sooner or later provoking a U.S. attack, and concern for the fate 
of the Iraqi people appear to be turning Arab opinion against him. 
His willingness to push Iraqis into the range of U.S. missiles and 
bombers has also disturbed some U.N. officials. ``The Arab people 
are able to separate their sympathy for Iraqis from their attitudes 
toward Saddam,'' an Arab envoy said. Some diplomats wager that the 
Clinton administration may have sensed this mounting disenchantment 
with Iraq and made it a calculation in two decisions two weeks ago. 
The first was the decision not to alienate Arabs anew by killing Iraqis 
after Saddam appeared ready to capitulate and allow international 
inspectors to work. The second was Clinton's public call to the Iraqi 
opposition to overthrow Saddam. Having to watch his back, is the Iraqi 
president now more vulnerable at home? Western diplomats and officials 
who would like to believe that he is say that, nevertheless, they 
have no strong new evidence that he is in danger. Still, there is 
known to be some dissent within the Iraqi army. ``Soldiers have families 
too and they see what this man is doing to people,'' an exile who 
was afraid to give his name said last week. The question of how secure 
Saddam is arose in new force last week when his second-in-command, 
Izzat Ibrahim, escaped assassination in the southern Shiite city of 
Karbala. In the days that followed, Iraqi newspapers hinted that Iran, 
with its Shiite leadership and a centuries-long enmity with Sunni-led 
Iraq, might have been behind the grenade throwers who tried to kill 
Ibrahim, the president's deputy on the Revolutionary Command Council. 
Iraq had been trying to build better relations and more commercial 
ties with Iran, as it has been doing with Arab nations. The success 
of those ventures appears to be mixed. For several days last week, 
Iraqi leaders and the controlled Iraqi media were pleading openly 
with the Arab world not to abandon Iraq ``and damage the Arab nation.'' 
The call came, diplomats said, as the importance of an Arab warning 
to Saddam several weeks ago began to sink in. On Nov. 12, two days 
before Iraq withdrew its ban on arms inspections, eight Arab nations 
_ Egypt, Saudi Arabia and Syria among them _ said in a public statement 
that resounded around the Middle East that if the Americans struck, 
Saddam would bear the responsibility for exposing the Iraqi people 
to new levels of misery. ``The Arabs have a strange relationship with 
Iraq,'' a Middle Eastern diplomat said. In 1990, after the invasion 
of Kuwait, a summit meeting of Arab leaders in effect gave the go-ahead 
to the U.S.-led coalition to wage war on Iraq. But Arab nations, most 
of which have authoritarian governments that are wary of coups and 
revolutionary movements, have always stopped short (at least publicly) 
of advocating the overthrow of Saddam. The idea of a Western nation, 
the United States or Britain, ousting an Arab leader is inflammatory 
in itself, and stirs up too much history. Last week, however, Egyptian 
President Hosni Mubarak was not afraid to talk about a change of regime 
in Iraq as long as it came from within and not from British and U.S. 
intelligence agencies. ``Let's be realistic,'' Mubarak said in an 
interview with the French newspaper Le Figaro. ``These projects won't 
get anywhere. Anyone who knows Iraq knows that no action will succeed 
if it isn't led from the interior, by people living in Iraq.'' A European 
diplomat said that the world was probably still far from seeing any 
organized resistance emerge in Iraq to topple Saddam, at least not 
in a decisive way. More likely, some Western experts fear, would be 
a messy collapse into brutality _ ``like the end of Ceaucescu in Romania,'' 
a diplomat said. Moreover, there is no orderly succession evident. 
Saddam has allowed no other Iraqi to build a political base. His two 
sons, Uday and Qusay, are by wide agreement despised. Abbas Mehdi, 
an exile who is active in democratic Iraqi dissident movements in 
the United States, said that if Saddam were to die today, naturally 
or violently, ``Within 30 minutes, his sons would be chopped into 
10,000 pieces.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>