<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981128.0051 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Two of the Jewish groups that may play a major role in distributing 
money from the Swiss banks' settlement have had problems in the past 
getting aid quickly to aging Holocaust survivors. In early 1997 one 
group, the World Jewish Restitution Organization, the umbrella organization 
led by Edgar Bronfman Sr., agreed to help distribute a $200 million 
fund set up by Swiss banks and companies. That fund is separate from 
the $1.25 billion settlement reached in August and was intended to 
get money to needy survivors quickly. But 18 months later, survivors 
in the United States are only now about to see money. Those in Israel, 
the country with the largest number of survivors, will wait many months 
more. Officials of the organization and the Israeli government hold 
each other responsible for the delay. Noah Flug, secretary general 
of the group, which is based in Jerusalem, said the delay arose over 
who should oversee the distribution. He blames the Israeli government. 
But Bobby Brown, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's adviser for Diaspora 
affairs, disputed that view, saying that the government insisted on 
being involved because it could safeguard the money far better than 
private groups. A few weeks ago, the two sides settled their differences, 
but Flug estimated that it could still take up to 10 months for qualified 
applicants in Israel to receive money. The second group, the Conference 
on Jewish Material Claims Against Germany, part of the World Jewish 
Restitution Organization, has also faced criticism from survivors 
and others. The group, based in New York, was set up in 1952 to deal 
with postwar reparations by the Germans and has also reclaimed Jewish-owned 
property in the former East Germany. Among other things, it sells 
property for which heirs cannot be traced and uses the money to underwrite 
activities like home care and food packages for aging survivors throughout 
the world. Saul Kagan, its executive director, said he believed that 
the organization could easily incorporate the Swiss funds in its programs. 
``The claims conference has the most direct experience in the allocation 
of funds,'' said Kagan, who has led the group since its founding. 
``That is our mandate. We have no other mandate.'' But others have 
complained that the group is a slow-moving bureaucracy that often 
treats survivors with cool disdain. David Lash, executive director 
of Bet Tzedek Legal Services in Los Angeles, which aids survivors, 
said applicants can wait three years before the claims conference 
rules on whether they are eligible for pensions. ``My concern is that 
my clients are dying during that waiting period,'' Lash said. Holocaust 
survivors or their heirs have also asserted that the claims organization, 
rather than helping them reclaim family-owned property in the former 
East Germany, has tied them up in costly court challenges. And over 
the last year, the group has also been the subject of critical articles 
in The Washington Post and The Jerusalem Report, an Israeli magazine. 
Kagan said he believed that such criticisms were vastly overstated, 
adding that the typical pension request takes 12 to 18 months to review. 
And he said that, whether he likes it or not, his group must follow 
eligibility guidelines that it negotiates with the German government. 
He said he had worked hard to liberalize those restrictions so that 
more survivors can collect. ``A bed of roses was not built into this 
job from day one,'' Kagan said. But Kagan, who plans to retire next 
month, said a few changes had been made recently at the group's New 
York headquarters, where workers, rather than using computers, sort 
through files in boxes and battered green cabinets. Employees have 
also begun taking part in sensitivity training sessions so they can 
deal more responsively with the survivors they were hired to serve. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>