<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981128.0095 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
These scenes are common in the corridors of the National Hockey League 
arenas, the players from the opposing teams chatting briefly after 
games before going their separate ways. But this moment was a little 
special in its freshness as these old companions paused at the fork 
in the road. Brian Leetch and Mike Richter, senior members of the 
New York Rangers, were smiling and shaking hands with Aleksei Kovalev 
backstage Friday night at the Civic Arena. He played with them for 
more than six seasons, before Wednesday's big trade. Now, he was a 
member of the Pittsburgh Penguins, headed to Montreal and a date Saturday 
night with the Canadiens while they went back to New York for a game 
against Nashville on Sunday. ``He's a cheater,'' Richter said, joking 
about Kovalev. After his old friends had left, Kovalev reflected on 
how hockey players move from team to team and sometimes reunite. ``Someday, 
I might come back to New York,'' Kovalev said. ``For now, I'll enjoy 
it here.'' Certainly, he must have enjoyed it Friday night. Playing 
with a variety of linemates, Kovalev assisted on both Penguin goals 
in a 2-2 tie with the Rangers in the first game of the rest of his 
career. The second came with 15 seconds left in regulation time when 
his stickhandling and passing helped Robert Lang beat Richter. Kovalev 
and Petr Nedved were the principals in a multiplayer deal that might 
help both teams. The Rangers got a proven center with a good shot 
and setup skills, filling one of their essential needs. The Penguins 
got the most talented man, an enigmatic right wing whose unrealized 
potential is as enormous and as untapped as any in the business, a 
first-round draft choice from 1991 who was sometimes good but rarely 
great. Richter, speaking seriously, noted: ``You have to give up good 
things to get good things.'' Now, away from New York and its peculiar 
pressures, Kovalev will not command such a bright spotlight. He will 
be the understudy to Jaromir Jagr, another right wing and the captain 
of the team, who thinks Kovalev might benefit from the change in address. 
``They put too much pressure on him, that's for sure,'' Jagr said. 
``I think it's going to be a lot easier in Pittsburgh for him. He's 
probably one of the five most talented guys I've ever seen.'' The 
new surrounding cast also may help Kovalev. In his best season, when 
he helped the Rangers to the 1994 Stanley Cup at the age of 21, Kovalev 
was one of four Russian Rangers. Gradually, the other three were sent 
away. Even around teammates genuinely fond of him, Kovalev seemed 
alone if not aloof. With Pittsburgh, his teammates include four other 
Russians, five players from the Czech Republic, one from Latvia and 
one from Lithuania. Most speak a common language and play a common 
style. ``Jagr is from Czech and some of the Czechs speak Russian,'' 
Kovalev said. It is a credit to Pittsburgh general manager Craig Patrick 
and to his New York counterpart, Neil Smith, that they were willing 
to deal with Atlantic Division and Eastern Conference rivals. Now, 
with 11 NHL defensemen both in New York and with his Hartford farm 
team, Smith has pieces to move in his next deal, the one for the sharpshooter 
to play alongside either Nedved or Wayne Gretzky. As they begin the 
second quarter of the season, the Rangers are near the bottom of the 
division, the conference and the entire league, but they are a work 
in progress, one worth watching. Despite losing the victory, they 
got a tie, finishing a five-game road trip at 1-2-2. They have lost 
but five of their last 17. At least their disappointing finish Friday 
night could be seen in the New York area on cable television. Consider 
the status of their cross-river rivals, the Devils, who lead the division 
and the conference and are near the top of the league. Wednesday night, 
the Devils went into Dallas and fashioned an impressive victory over 
a Stanley Cup contender. But nobody could view it locally because 
their television rights are held by Cablevision, which owns the Rangers 
and owns the rights to all three local hockey teams, both baseball 
teams and both basketball teams. Cablevision refuses to allow more 
than two games to air in the market, and the Islanders got the nod 
instead on Wednesday. Back when there was competition between Cablevision 
and the MSG network, when they were independent of each other, the 
viewers had more choices. As long as he is getting his Cablevision 
money, the Devils' owner, John McMullen, does not publicly protest 
as his team's fans are being short-changed by the company that owns 
Madison Square Garden and his team's biggest rival. If he will not 
act on behalf of the hockey consumer, perhaps the NHL should take 
action before the antitrust odor attracts attention from public authorities 
outside the hockey business. A dog-in-the-manger business plan that 
favors the Rangers and underexposes a top rival in a huge market sets 
a poisonous precedent that is penny-wise for Cablevision and pound-foolish 
for hockey. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>