<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981128.0093 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Gen. Augusto Pinochet, the former Chilean dictator, is only one of 
several former South American strongmen being investigated by a Spanish 
judge for possible extradition to Spain. Another is a retired Argentine 
admiral, Emilio Massera, who was the chief ideologue of the military 
junta that took power in 1976 and also supervisor of the most notorious 
secret detention center in Argentina. Argentine judicial authorities 
placed Massera, 73, under arrest this week after he refused to testify 
about the abduction of children of people who disappeared during the 
military's campaign against leftists. Massera was taken into custody 
Tuesday in a case that has already led to the detention in June of 
a former general, Jorge Rafael Videla, who led the first of three 
military juntas that ruled Argentina between 1976 and 1983. The admiral 
previously served five years of a life sentence for his involvement 
in several kidnappings, tortures and disappearances, until he was 
pardoned by President Carlos Saul Menem in 1990. But Menem's pardon 
of military officers involved in the ``dirty war'' did not cover the 
kidnapping of scores of babies by the military after they were born 
in prison camps. The children were taken away from their mothers at 
birth and then adopted by childless military families. Afterward, 
the mothers typically were dumped alive from navy aircraft into the 
ocean, incinerated, or shot and buried in secret graves, according 
to the testimony of former military officers. The case against Massera 
involves two children born in 1976 in the Navy Mechanics School in 
Buenos Aires, which he supervised as naval commander. One of the children, 
Javier Vildoza, now 20, was raised by one of Massera's chief personal 
assistants, who is now a fugitive. Vildoza's mother, Cecilia Vinas, 
was seized by Argentine security forces in 1978 while she was eight 
months pregnant, and was never seen again. Before his arrest, Massera 
denied any knowledge of the kidnapping of the newborn babies. Baltazar 
Garzon, the Spanish judge whose warrant led to the arrest of Pinochet 
in London six weeks ago, is also investigating Massera's links to 
a Chilean military operation that sought the capture of Chilean exiles 
in Argentina and several other countries and their return to Chile 
for execution. Garzon's investigation is also looking into the participation 
of the militaries of Brazil, Paraguay, Uruguay and Bolivia in the 
Chilean-led program known as Operation Condor. His inquiry has encouraged 
Bolivia's opposition to demand that Bolivian law-enforcement authorities 
investigate the involvement of President Hugo Banzer, who was military 
dictator of the country between 1971 and 1978. Banzer has denied any 
knowledge of Operation Condor, although he reportedly met personally 
with Chilean military authorities to discuss intelligence matters. 
Argentine news organizations have reported that Gen. Domingo Bussi, 
a retired officer who is currently governor of Tucuman province, could 
also be implicated in the Garzon investigation. He has also denied 
involvement in Operation Condor. Menem has strongly backed the Chilean 
government's position that former South American military leaders 
should be tried in their own countries as a matter of sovereignty. 
And he has pledged to resist any efforts to try Argentine military 
officers abroad. When Menem declared an amnesty for Massera and other 
officers eight years ago, he was trying to put an end to periodic 
military revolts. Since then he has cut the military budget, and the 
armed forces now play a much reduced role in Argentine affairs. Menem 
has repeatedly said he will not interfere in the judicial investigation 
of the military kidnappings. After Massera's arrest, he said, ``This 
is a matter solely for the judiciary to decide. The government naturally 
accepts the decision.'' At a ceremony at the Santa Cruz naval base 
on Wednesday, he did not refer directly to the case, but he said: 
``There is no longer any possibility that we will be divided. We have 
suffered the consequences of confrontation and I don't want our country 
ever to return to those days.'' Since his arrest Massera had been 
held in the Campo de Mayo military barracks, which also served as 
a detention center during the so-called Dirty War. But after he suffered 
a heart murmur Thursday, a judge on Saturday allowed him to be transferred 
out of the facility to remain under house arrest. Videla is also awaiting 
trial under house arrest. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>