<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981128.0085 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It started out as little more than a brief spot on the nightly news, 
but the treatment of protesters at an international conference in 
Vancouver last year has turned into a recurring political nightmare 
for Prime Minister Jean Chretien and his government. The latest casualty 
was Solicitor General Andy Scott, Canada's top law enforcement official, 
who resigned last week after he was overheard talking about an investigation 
into the protest with the person sitting next to him on an Air Canada 
flight. Leaders of the opposition in the House of Commons contend 
that Chretien and his closest aides had directed the Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police to be aggressive in keeping protesters away from former 
President Suharto of Indonesia during last year's Asia-Pacific Economic 
Cooperation summit meeting. When protesters refused to leave a roadway 
where Suharto was expected to pass, the Mounties forced them out, 
dousing them with irritating pepper spray. The episode was recorded 
by a news cameraman, and was replayed on the nightly news, but not 
prominently. Little happened until this fall, when reports appeared 
suggesting that Chretien had tried to keep Suharto from being embarrassed 
during the meeting and had ordered the Mounties to control protesters 
aggressively. In the daily question periods in the House of Commons, 
Chretien was repeatedly criticized. He tried to deflect some of the 
criticism by joking that being hit with pepper spray was better than 
being hit with a baseball bat. Few people laughed. A special panel 
was established to look into the actions of the prime minister and 
police. The inquiry panel revealed electronic messages between the 
protesters and Terry Milewski, one of the reporters who covered the 
story for the CBC _ which receives most of its funding from the federal 
government. In the exchanges, Milewski tries to gain the protesters' 
confidence by appearing to be sympathetic. Chretien's office accused 
Milewski of bias and filed a complaint with a news media ombudsman. 
The reporter was taken off the story, and when he wrote about the 
incident for a local newspaper he was temporarily suspended. The inquiry 
itself came to a halt when the government refused to pay lawyers fees 
for the protesters. It was supposed to resume last week, but a judge 
put it off indefinitely while charges of bias against one of the three 
panel members are investigated. While the inquiry was running into 
trouble in Vancouver, an opposition member of Parliament told reporters 
in Ottawa that he was seated near the solicitor general on a flight 
when he overheard him tell another passenger that police would probably 
have to take the blame for what happened in Vancouver. The conversation 
suggested that Scott had prejudged it. The solicitor general's casual 
handling of sensitive matters also raised doubts about his judgment. 
When confronted by reporters, Scott denied everything. He said he 
could not even remember the name of the person sitting next to him. 
But the other passenger was identified as Frederick Toole, a lawyer 
from Scott's home province of New Brunswick. Toole filed an affidavit 
corroborating what the opposition member had said about Scott. Scott 
resigned a few days later. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>