<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981128.0081 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
So the legend goes, 363 nature-loving Bishnoi villagers had their 
heads lopped off in 1730 as they hugged their beloved trees. A local 
maharajah had sent his army to cut timber, and when a woman named 
Amrita Devi stood in their way, soldiers decapitated her and threatened 
to do the same to anyone else so bold. Hundreds of others then embraced 
the trees in a sequence of defiant sacrifice. Until recently, this 
lore was little known outside the sandy scrub of the Rajasthan desert. 
Now, however, the Bishnoi have become national heroes in an ecological 
morality play that pits simple farmers against an Indian movie idol 
loathsomely playing against type. Shortly after midnight on Oct. 1, 
the people of Kankani were awakened by gunshots and, as is their custom, 
bolted out of bed to chase after yet another group of hunters. The 
desert is prime habitat for a small, lithe antelope known as the black 
buck. ``I saw their jeep race by, and my head filled up with anger,'' 
said Prahlad Ram, 68. ``We all began to shout and scramble. They had 
already killed the bucks. These animals are sacred to us, and we consider 
their lives more important than even our own.'' Two villagers on scooters 
got close enough to read the vehicle's license number. They also thought 
they recognized the driver as Salman Khan, a popular young actor who 
had been in the area making one of his mega-action, heavy-carnage 
movies. ``No man, no matter how powerful, should be above the law,'' 
said Choka Ram, 70, another village elder. ``Had we caught him, we 
would have beaten him severely.'' Beating is sometimes the preferred 
Bishnoi method of justice, though authorities have tried to convince 
the Bishnoi that punishment is better left to the courts. This is 
viewed skeptically in villages like Kankani. While the enforcement 
of Indian wildlife laws has been decidedly slack, the prosecution 
of alleged violators very often has been an outright sham. That seemed 
to be the way the Salman Khan case was about to go. The state's chief 
veterinarian did a postmortem examination of two black bucks and found 
the cause of one death to be ``overeating'' while attributing the 
other to a mistimed leap. The Bishnoi were outraged, which is usually 
of little import. This time, however, celebrity and status _ ordinarily 
so useful in pulling strings _ put the accused into a worse bind. 
Newspapers love to write about Khan, and the front-page publicity 
pressured wildlife officials to have the bucks re-examined. After 
further inspection, it was determined not only that the animals had 
suffered fatal bullet wounds but also that the state veterinarian 
was involved in a cover-up and subject to arrest. ``Salman Khan will 
be found guilty, I assure you,'' said M.N. Sonal, deputy chief of 
the wildlife division. ``We have eyewitnesses. We have signed statements.'' 
As details became public, Khan's macho, quick-draw persona, so riveting 
on film, seemed only revolting in real life. He came to symbolize 
the callous rich, people untroubled by conscience, who take pleasure 
in donning night-vision glasses and poaching endangered species like 
the Bengal tiger and Sarus crane. The movie star had been on two hunting 
expeditions the week before, said Sonal, citing witnesses' accounts. 
During one, female co-stars were said to have applauded giddily as 
the actor slit the throat of a wounded chinkara, an Indian gazelle. 
Then, back at the luxury hotel in Jodhpur, Sonal said, Khan awakened 
the kitchen staff, ordering chefs to slake his appetite with the forbidden 
meat. The actor was arrested on Oct. 12 and has steadfastly denied 
all the charges. At an initial hearing he seemed carefree, joking 
with friends and talking on his mobile phone. He did not appear to 
fear the possibility of one to seven years in prison. ``The statements 
made against my client are all open to question,'' said one of Khan's 
lawyers, Jagdeep Dhankar. ``Either they have been made by people also 
accused of crimes with their own offenses to consider, or they have 
been made by the Bishnoi, people whose attraction to wildlife _ even 
worship of it _ twists their thinking.'' In the meantime, as moviegoers 
developed second thoughts about Khan's active trigger finger, the 
Bishnoi, who are primarily grain farmers, were being hailed for the 
harmonious ways of their 500-year-old beliefs. One much-reprinted, 
old and grainy photo showed a Bishnoi woman purportedly breast-feeding 
an orphaned deer. ``Yes, such things have been known to happen,'' 
Prahlad Ram, the village elder, said of the picture. ``Between us 
and the animals there is complete trust. Our teachings tell us that 
we must serve as protectors and nurturers of all living things.'' 
Essentially Hindu, the Bishnoi are followers of Jhambaji, a 15th-century 
guru who honed his wisdom into 29 precepts. In the canon are common 
proscriptions against using intoxicants or eating meat. There are 
also rules commending bathing and meditation, and yet others instilling 
a rare reverence for living things that forbids even the breaking 
of a twig. In Bishnoi villages near Jodhpur, the homes often are red 
brick with ornate doors and grates that display relative prosperity. 
The elders complain that the next generation is insufficiently faithful 
to the 29 rules, but it is the young who are quickest to light out 
after hunters. Two years ago, one youth, Nihal Chand, was shot and 
killed while giving chase. ``He is now among our great martyrs,'' 
said Prahlad Ram. ``He is a true descendant of Amrita Devi and the 
others, who died with their arms around our great friends the trees.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>