<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981128.0044 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A battle is flaring among Jewish humanitarian groups, plaintiffs' 
lawyers and concentration-camp survivors over the $1.25 billion paid 
by Swiss banks to settle Holocaust-related lawsuits, and potentially 
billions more from claims against companies in Germany, Austria and 
other countries. At the core of the dispute is the emotionally charged 
question of how to divide the bulk of that settlement, because only 
a small fraction of it will go to the heirs of Jews who had Swiss 
bank accounts on the eve of World War II and were killed by the Nazis. 
As a result, up to $1 billion may remain. In recent weeks, Jewish 
charitable groups have prepared competing proposals to distribute 
that portion of the fund, plans that could give them a major stake 
in the allocation and bolster their influence in the Jewish world. 
But some lawyers and survivors are arguing that the money should be 
paid directly to those who suffered. The success in the Swiss case 
has also spurred lawyers experienced in large class-action suits to 
pursue a wave of lawsuits against banks and insurers in other European 
countries and against manufacturers like Ford, Volkswagen and Siemens, 
which are accused of profiting from forced labor during World War 
II. Those suits could yield billions of dollars more in settlements 
and tens of millions in lawyers' fees. In recent months, competing 
lawyers from the United States have barnstormed across Europe soliciting 
clients, publicly castigating one another and privately maneuvering 
to oust their adversaries. And the World Jewish Congress, which helped 
instigate the Swiss bank case, recently met with political and corporate 
leaders in Austria and Germany to warn that peace can be purchased 
only through reparations. But as the disputes widen, a campaign once 
fired by moral outrage may be dissolving into a battle over power 
and money. Some now fear that aging survivors with few years left 
could again be victimized, this time by those claiming to fight in 
their names. ``I don't want an industry to be made on the memory of 
victims, particularly because there are so few survivors out there 
who will benefit from it,'' said Abraham Foxman, national director 
of the Anti-Defamation League. Holocaust-related claims are growing 
rapidly. Michael Bazyler, a professor at Whittier Law School in California, 
said that in the five decades before the Swiss settlement in 1996, 
fewer than a dozen such suits had been filed. The number has tripled 
since then, he said. Lawyers pursing the suits say their goal is simple: 
to right historical wrongs and render a final accounting for one of 
humanity's greatest crimes. Implicit in such a reckoning, they say, 
are such difficult questions as who speaks for the millions who perished. 
``These lawsuits will complete a picture of the Holocaust that has 
never before been fully developed about the willing accomplices and 
companies that stood behind the direct participants,'' said Michael 
Hausfeld, a class-action lawyer from Washington who reached a landmark 
$140 million settlement with Texaco in 1996 over racial discrimination. 
The roots of today's tensions go back to 1995, when the World Jewish 
Congress, a New York-based group led by Edgar Bronfman Sr., and Rabbi 
Israel Singer, the group's secretary-general, started the political 
uproar against the Swiss banks. They argued that the banks had failed 
to check properly for accounts opened by Jews who perished in the 
Holocaust, and that the banks might be still holding billions of dollars. 
A year later, suits were filed by competing lawyers. One camp was 
headed by Hausfeld and two other well-known lawyers, Melvyn Weiss 
of New York and Martin Mendelsohn of Washington, who were aligned 
with the Simon Wiesenthal Center in Los Angeles and sought backing 
from other Jewish groups. The other legal camp was led by Edward Fagan, 
a former personal-injury lawyer from New York with a street fighter's 
style who has garnered publicity and criticism for holding vigils 
with Holocaust survivors outside companies that are targets of his 
suits. That group said it represented the views of individual survivors. 
The factions fought furiously. For example, Weiss and his allies, 
who have worked on the Swiss case pro bono, asserted that Fagan's 
group simply wanted to settle the case cheaply so they could collect 
their fees. ``The two teams were spending their time denigrating each 
other, their ability, parentage, ethnic heritage, you name it,'' said 
Burt Neuborne, a professor at New York University Law School who originally 
entered the fray on Fagan's side but has since become aligned with 
Hausfeld's group. The World Jewish Congress also apparently viewed 
the lawyers and groups like the Wiesenthal Center as latecomers to 
its party. Weiss said that when he asked Elan Steinberg, a World Jewish 
Congress official, to join a 1996 meeting of Jewish leaders at the 
offices of his law firm in Manhattan, Steinberg appeared to give the 
group the cold shoulder. ``He said he had come only out of respect,'' 
said Weiss. ``He stood there with his arms folded and waved us off 
as though we were intruding on turf that they had already covered.'' 
But before long, these conflicts were temporarily resolved by others. 
The competing suits were consolidated before Judge Edward Korman of 
U.S. District Court in Brooklyn, and Swiss negotiators eager to resolve 
the legal and political aspects of their quandary insisted that the 
World Jewish Congress take part with plaintiffs' lawyers in settlement 
talks. The result was the $1.25 billion settlement in August, twice 
the sum offered by the Swiss banks just a few months earlier. But 
the alliances of convenience formed during the settlement talks quickly 
frayed, setting the stage for the current battle. One issue was who 
would control the rising number of claims. Singer, who is chief strategist 
at the World Jewish Congress, has said a wave of such claims could 
yield billions in settlement funds. That prospect was not lost on 
the lawyers. By last year, the two legal camps were again filing competing 
suits. And this time, the faction led by Hausfeld and Weiss said they 
would also seek to be paid legal fees, rather than working pro bono. 
In recent months, competing lawyers have crisscrossed Europe and Israel 
to sign up clients. Fagan has recently traveled to Austria, Germany 
and Hungary. And late last month, plaintiffs' lawyers aligned with 
the Wiesenthal Center flew to Paris, where they appeared on a radio 
program to publicize their suit against French banks. The increasing 
invasion by Jewish groups and plaintiffs' lawyers from the United 
States has made some European Jews uncomfortable. And some European 
historians who have worked on slave-labor issues, for example, have 
rebuffed efforts by lawyers from the United States seeking alliances 
with them. The legal fighting has also reached a fevered pitch. Two 
law firms that once sided with Fagan recently broke some of those 
ties and joined with Weiss' group. In court papers filed earlier this 
month, one of the lawyers involved, Robert Lieff, cited a fax in which 
Fagan referred to leaders of the World Jewish Congress as ``pigs,'' 
adding that the lawyer took an equally ``crude and overly competitive'' 
approach to those he perceived ``as competing for glory in Holocaust 
cases.'' Neuborne, the New York University professor, also jumped 
into the fray. In a filing, he stated that he would oppose a large 
award of legal fees to Fagan in the Swiss banks case because he did 
not believe he deserved it. He also said in the same papers that Fagan's 
``property interest'' in Holocaust lawsuits threatened to turn survivors 
into ``chattel to be acquired by entrepreneurial lawyers bent on making 
a profit.'' In his own filing earlier this month, Fagan accused adversaries 
like Lieff and Weiss of scheming, among other things, to steal his 
clients and undermine his lawsuits, in order to gain control of Holocaust 
cases and resulting profits for themselves. In an interview, he also 
said that lawyers like Lieff wanted the backing of major Jewish groups 
as a means of accomplishing that end. ``This is a fight over dead 
people's money, that's what it is,'' Fagan said. ``And I think survivors 
should be the ones making decisions about where their parents' money 
should go.'' While the lawyers bicker, the World Jewish Congress has 
also been seeking a central role in the claims. Steinberg, the executive 
director, said the group had taken that position because the World 
Jewish Restitution Organization, an affiliate, is empowered by the 
Israeli government to represent Jewish interests on Holocaust-related 
matters. That group, like the Congress, is headed by Bronfman and 
Singer. ``Our fundamental principle is that the victimized parties 
are Holocaust survivors and the Jewish people as a whole,'' Steinberg 
said, ``and we have been mandated to represent them.'' Recently, for 
example, Singer met with Chancellor Viktor Klima of Austria at the 
home of a former chancellor, Franz Vranitzky, to discuss possible 
restitution by companies in Austria. Singer also said that he and 
a prominent German Jew, Ignatz Bubis, who is an official of the World 
Jewish Congress, were involved in talks started last month between 
Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder of Germany and top business leaders seeking 
to develop a unified response to dozens of suits. Leaders of the World 
Jewish Restitution Organization also met this month at Bronfman's 
office in Manhattan to discuss another issue: how to distribute the 
Swiss funds. Under a proposal being developed by the group, about 
80 percent of the funds would go to needy survivors, either through 
direct payments or through charitable services by groups like those 
in the World Jewish Restitution Organization, said Bobby Brown, the 
adviser for Diaspora Affairs to Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu 
of Israel. The remaining 20 percent would be marked for Holocaust-related 
educational programs and research. But some survivors and others say 
all the funds left after payments to the heirs of Swiss account holders 
should go directly to survivors. ``This is for the survivors,'' said 
Estelle Sapir, a Holocaust survivor from Far Rockaway, who sued Swiss 
banks on behalf of her father, who died in a Polish camp. ``Not the 
organizations, not the lawyers.'' Weiss said that using criteria like 
financial need may create legal problems because the Swiss suits were 
filed as class actions without regard to financial status. Others, 
like Neuborne, say they worry that creating bureaucracies might delay 
payments to survivors in their last years. Estimates on the number 
of Holocaust survivors vary, but it may be at least 350,000, with 
an average age of 80. Other Jewish groups, like one representing the 
Orthodox Satmar sect in Brooklyn, also expect to make proposals for 
how the money should be spent. In an effort to prevent a long legal 
clash over the issue, those involved in the Swiss bank case asked 
Korman earlier this month to appoint an outside lawyer to review the 
competing proposals when they are submitted to the court in several 
months and to make a recommendation. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>