<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981128.0059 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
One is famous for not being famous _ except among scouts who haunt 
Central Florida and project him as the quarterback for a new millennium. 
Another is a volatile and obsessive winner who has thrown passes 90 
yards in practice with the help of Kansas' prairie winds. There is 
a hard-nosed left-hander who got sick at midfield but made opponents 
feel worse with one comeback victory after another. There is a perennial 
Heisman Trophy hopeful whose candidacy has never quite caught on outside 
central New York. Add a former minor-league baseball player who has 
put the quack back in the Oregon Ducks' attack, and a determined Ohio 
State marksman who has evolved from junior college star to part-timer 
to bona fide pro prospect. And the two juniors: the latest model from 
Washington's quarterback factory, who has already said he will enter 
the National Football League draft, and the legend from the mountains 
of eastern Kentucky who leads a sophisticated, record-setting air 
attack. In total, they are college football's quarterback class of 
1999: Daunte Culpepper of Central Florida, Michael Bishop of Kansas 
State, Cade McNown of UCLA, Donovan McNabb of Syracuse, Akili Smith 
of Oregon, Joe Germaine of Ohio State, Brock Huard of Washington and 
_ if he decides to go pro _ Tim Couch of Kentucky. They are responsible 
for looks of ecstasy on the faces of scouts in film rooms across the 
NFL. They are solace for the quarterback-hungry teams that watched 
helplessly as Peyton Manning and Ryan Leaf went first and second in 
the last draft. They invite comparison to the Class of 1983, when 
six quarterbacks were first-round picks, including two certain Hall 
of Famers in John Elway and Dan Marino and perhaps a third in Jim 
Kelly. And they have inspired more than the usual paranoia among NFL 
scouts and general managers, afraid of tipping their hand about their 
draft plans. Of five scouts and executives interviewed for this article, 
none wanted to be identified and only a few agreed to be quoted. All 
said it was too early to assess the quarterbacks' performances and 
slot them in the draft. They insisted that they needed to see the 
prospects first-hand at all-star games or the NFL combines or private 
workouts. ``Nonetheless, you know this is a very talented and very 
deep group of quarterbacks,'' said one scout for a National Football 
Conference team. ``The potential for a great class is there. But the 
class of 1983 only happened once, and it's unfair to measure these 
guys by that.'' Most of those interviewed projected that two quarterbacks, 
possibly three, would be selected in the first round. They all agreed 
that Culpepper held an edge over the rest. Surprisingly, perhaps, 
most agreed that Couch and Huard should remain in school. Culpepper's 
numbers are what have brought the scouts to Orlando and upstart Central 
Florida, which is in only its third season in Division I-A. Culpepper 
led the Golden Knights to a 9-2 record by passing for 3,690 yards 
and 28 touchdowns and, over four years, a 25-19 record against a schedule 
heavy on strong Southeastern Conference teams. His 73.6 completion 
percentage this season broke Steve Young's 1983 National Collegiate 
Athletic Association record. But these are the numbers that are eye-catching: 
Culpepper is 6 feet 4 inches and 240 pounds, runs the 40-yard dash 
in 4.6 seconds and handles 455 pounds in the squat _ a stellar athlete 
by any measure. The professional talent judges like his mobility _ 
he is only the third college player to throw for 10,000 yards and 
rush for 1,000. Yet they say he does not look to run first. Instead, 
he reads coverages expertly, rarely makes a mistake when changing 
plays at the line of scrimmage and instinctively takes what is given 
to him. The reason he is considered an immediate impact player is 
coaching. First as offensive coordinator, and this year as Central 
Florida's head coach, the former Pittsburgh Steeler backup quarterback 
Mike Kruczek has treated Culpepper to the most advanced tutoring of 
any of the quarterbacks. ``Kruczek has played in our league and is 
a great offensive mind and teacher,'' an NFC general manager said. 
``He has brought Culpepper along further than any of the others.'' 
Of the rest of the senior quarterbacks, Kansas State's Bishop has 
separated himself slightly from the pack. Like Culpepper, he is physically 
blessed. At 6-1 and 210 pounds, he is an electrifying and sturdy open-field 
runner who is equally adept with his cannon of an arm. Within minutes 
against Nebraska, he jetted down the middle for 51 yards on a draw 
play and rocketed a 61-yard pass on a precise timing route. He has 
run for 13 touchdowns and passed for 21 more, and 2,503 yards. Like 
UCLA's McNown, Bishop has a fierce will to win. He is 46-1 as a collegiate 
starter, including two perfect seasons capped by national championships 
at Blinn Junior College to go with this season's 11-0 record heading 
into next Saturday's Big 12 championship game. Scouts admire Bishop 
for carrying a team with little football tradition, but they also 
wonder if his raw competitiveness will slow his development. He initiates 
unnecessary hits at the ends of runs. He berates himself and his teammates. 
Twice in the last two years, Bishop has been told not to talk to reporters 
by his coach, Bill Snyder, who acknowledges frequent conversations 
with his quarterback about keeping his emotion to a controlled rage. 
But Snyder also argues that Bishop is a quick study, that when Snyder 
decided not to redshirt him after he arrived from Blinn, Bishop responded 
by devouring the intricacies of a complicated offense. ``His competitiveness 
makes him the player he is,'' Snyder said. ``But really he's had a 
little more than a year within our system and he's learned so much.'' 
The Bruins' McNown is likely to be the most debated of the quarterbacks. 
He has led UCLA to 20 consecutive victories _ the nation's longest 
current streak _ and recently won the Johnny Unitas Golden Arm Award. 
He also leads this crop in heroics, the most memorable moments coming 
during a 41-38 overtime victory against Oregon that included his midfield 
illness and two 50-plus-yard bombs to end regulation and force overtime. 
``He's magic, a one-man band; he's got the intangibles,'' the NFC 
executive said. ``This year has helped him.'' But there are questions 
about McNown's size and athletic talent. He does not look as big as 
his listed 6-1 and 214 pounds or as strong-armed as the others, even 
though he has thrown for 2,617 yards and 18 touchdowns. He is agile, 
but not a speedster. The same questions were raised about two current 
NFL quarterbacks: Doug Flutie, who practiced his magic in Canada before 
his unlikely comeback this year with the Buffalo Bills, and Jake Plummer, 
who was drafted in the second round and now leads the Arizona Cardinals. 
``He's maybe a third- or little later rounder,'' another NFC general 
manager, whose team is not looking for a quarterback, said of McNown. 
There are also widely varying opinions about Syracuse's McNabb, Oregon's 
Smith and Ohio State's Germaine. Their talents are not as obvious 
as those of the top three quarterbacks; each could become a steal 
in the lower rounds. McNabb and Smith, each 6-3 and 220 pounds, mirror 
each other in athletic ability. McNabb, the Syracuse senior, is more 
experienced and a better runner. This season he has run for 5 touchdowns, 
thrown for 20 against just 4 interceptions and repeatedly shown a 
flair for play-making. Most recently he beat Virginia Tech by rolling 
one way and passing to the opposite corner of the end zone for a touchdown 
on the final play of the game. ``He is an incredible talent with first-round 
ability,'' the general manager said, though he projects McNown two 
rounds lower. The 23-year-old Smith, a refugee from the Pittsburgh 
Pirates organization, is also developing an NFL following. Some see 
a maturity and level of professional experience in the nation's second 
most effective passer that were not easily apparent when he was a 
part-time starter for Oregon last year as a junior. Smith has thrown 
30 touchdowns and is rated higher than McNown in the Pacific-10 Conference 
in every passing category. Like Smith, Ohio State's Germaine came 
from a junior college, shared time as a junior and only this year 
has asserted himself as a top quarterback. At a slight 6 feet 2 inches 
and 205 pounds, he is by far the least imposing of the group, but 
may be among the most accurate. ``He doesn't have the others' tools, 
but he can pass and he's smart,'' the first NFC general manager said. 
``He has been thought to be a step down from the others, but I'm not 
so sure.'' Finally, there are the juniors, Huard and Couch. Huard 
figures he is ready to follow such Huskie quarterbacks as Mark Brunell 
and Chris Chandler into the NFL and has declared for the draft. He 
threw for 1,840 yards and 15 touchdowns despite missing two games 
with a separated shoulder as his young team struggled to a 6-5 record. 
It is a risky decision, according to scouts, especially for a player 
who is coming off a disappointing year. No scouts endorsed an early 
entry for Couch, either, though they recognized his talent and were 
impressed by his gaudy numbers in Kentucky's pass-happy attack: 4,275 
yards and 36 touchdowns. One NFL executive cited the troubled transitions 
of Dave Brown, who left Duke with a year of eligibility remaining, 
and Tommy Maddox, who left UCLA after his sophomore season. The executive 
said that only Bernie Kosar had made the leap successfully. ``History 
says it sets you back,'' he said. ``There's too much to learn. There's 
too many things you need that come only with time.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>