<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981128.0133 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Residential conversion has become the prescription of choice for some 
failing hospitals in Chicago, and now another hospital is taking the 
cure. In the last 10 years, at least four unprofitable hospitals have 
been converted into loft apartments, and several others in prime locations 
were sold and razed as a result of consolidations in the health-care 
field, making way for upscale developments. One of the first hospitals 
in Chicago to be converted to residences was the Manchester Lofts 
in 1990, a renovation of a 110-year-old hospital in the Near West 
Side. Closed for many years, it first became a light manufacturing 
facility and then artists' studios before being renovated into 18 
loft apartments. The latest hospital to undergo such a transformation 
is Chicago Osteopathic Medical Center in the Hyde Park neighborhood 
on the city's South Side. It had belonged to the Nashville-based HCA/Columbia 
health-care chain and was sold as part of the company's reorganization 
plan, said Jeff Prescott, spokesman for the chain. When the $50-million 
transformation is complete sometime next fall, the hospital and its 
grounds will be turned into a residential development with 225 loft 
apartments, 28 town houses and 16 detached houses in a complex to 
be called Renaissance Place. All but one of the 13 hospital buildings 
on Chicago Osteopathic's campus were shuttered when HCA/Columbia began 
searching for a new owner. A clinic continues to operate in the remaining 
one and is not scheduled to close until next summer, when it will 
be demolished as part of the construction plan, said Roger Mankedick, 
executive vice president for sales and marketing for Concord Development 
Corp. of Chicago, which is developing the project with Kenard Corp., 
also of Chicago. Sales and construction are scheduled to begin by 
the end of the year. The loft apartments, which will range in size 
from 800 to 1,400 square feet, will be priced from about $100,000 
to $150,000. Two-bedroom town houses will be priced at about $240,000, 
and the detached homes, which will range in size from 2,400 to 3,000 
square feet and offer three to four bedrooms, will be priced from 
$350,000, said Mankedick. The developers, who paid $5.8 million for 
the property, plan to renovate two of the hospital buildings into 
the lofts. The other buildings, which are not suitable for re-use, 
will be razed to make room for the construction of a two-story parking 
structure, the town-house condominiums and green space, said project 
architect Patrick FitzGerald of FitzGerald Associates in Chicago. 
FitzGerald said many of the hospital buildings were not adaptable 
for residential space because they were below grade or had no windows. 
Others, like an auditorium, were not economically feasible to renovate. 
The two buildings that will be converted into apartments will still 
require substantial demolition. FitzGerald said several additions 
have to be removed. ``Institutional buildings and in particular hospital 
buildings tend to grow over time by additions and remodeling,'' he 
said. ``We thought that by peeling back some of the additions we could 
make the old space new and then by demolishing the others we could 
do the new construction.'' The detached houses will be built on a 
parcel of land two blocks from the main campus, which was also part 
of the hospital property. Mankedick said he expected many of the buyers 
to come from the neighborhood, home to the University of Chicago, 
where there is an abundance of rental apartments and high-priced historic 
homes, but little moderate-cost new construction, Mankedick said. 
The conversion of hospitals into residential developments is happening 
on a case-by-case basis, said J. Philip Lathrop, a health-care consultant 
who is a vice president at Booz Allen &AMP; Hamilton, a management 
consultant firm with an office here. Most health-care companies try 
to sell unprofitable hospitals as a going concern to other operators 
to yield the greatest return. But in Chicago, many of the older hospitals 
are either obsolete or too inappropriately located to be upgraded 
as hospitals. ``Selling to a real estate developer is a default,'' 
Lathrop noted. In the last 10 years, several other Chicago hospitals, 
closed due to declining revenues and too many beds, have been sold 
to residential developers, most of whom buy the properties for their 
land only. For example, Chicago's MCL Cos. razed the former Henrotin 
Hospital on the city's Gold Coast and the former Augustana Hospital 
in Lincoln Park to build upscale condominium apartments and town houses. 
FitzGerald said many developers prefer demolition of the hospital 
buildings over renovation because of the building structure. Hospitals 
typically were built with no thought of adaptive re-use. ``There are 
lots of small rooms with closely spaced columns, which do not allow 
the same degree of flexibility that a large bay structure does,'' 
he said. In addition, the mechanical systems are complex. Piping for 
sterile water, oxygen and communication lines are built into the walls 
and are costly to remove. Interior walls can be as thick as 22 inches 
and require masonry saws to tear down. The demolition costs for converting 
hospitals tend to be significantly higher than any other type of conversion 
for loft space, making the purchase price for the property a key factor 
in the ultimate sales price of the completed units, FitzGerald said. 
One of the developers of Renaissance Place was not deterred by the 
challenge because it was his second conversion of a hospital. The 
first one, called Columbus on the Park, involved the renovation last 
year of St. Francis Xavier Cabrini Hospital near the Chicago campus 
of the University of Illinois on the city's West Side. The nearly 
90-year-old hospital was renovated into 105 loft apartments, and 28 
town houses were built on what had been the hospital parking lot, 
said Harold Lichterman, president of Kenard, the developer. The units, 
priced from $80,000 for a one-bedroom apartment to $350,000 for a 
three-bedroom town house, were sold out in seven months, Lichterman 
said. A spokesman for Catholic Health Partners in Chicago, which sold 
St. Francis Xavier Cabrini Hospital to Kenard, declined to comment 
on the reasons behind the sale. But Anthony Smaniotto, first vice 
president for investment properties at CB Richard Ellis in Chicago, 
who handled the sale for the Missionary Sisters of the Sacred Heart, 
which owned the hospital, said fewer than 40 percent of beds were 
being used at the time of the sale. Kenard, he said, was the only 
developer bidding on the property that did not plan to demolish the 
hospital. Preservation of the hospital building was important to the 
owners because they wanted to leave a legacy of their work in the 
neighborhood. In addition to preserving the hospital building for 
Columbus on the Park, some of the hospital's original ornamentation 
also was kept, including the entrance and several interior hallways 
decorated with glazed clay tile. FitzGerald, who also designed Columbus 
on the Park, said preservation of the St. Francis Xavier Cabrini Hospital 
building was just as important to the developer as it was to the owners. 
``Anyone who lives there knows some of the history of the building,'' 
he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>