<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981128.0155 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It looks as if Attorney General Dennis Vacco lost his re-election 
bid by a margin narrower than the space between riders on a rush-hour 
No. 6 train. Democratic challenger Eliot Spitzer has declared victory, 
and a growing number of Republicans are conceding the contest, albeit 
quietly. But nearly four weeks after the election, the state GOP Chairman 
William Powers is still directing an aggressive effort in court to 
overturn Spitzer's apparent victory, with charges of nefarious doings 
by Democrats. Powers and Vacco, a fellow Republican, could be forgiven 
for clinging to the hope that some stroke of lightning would help 
them overtake Spitzer, but it seems that at this point, the court 
fight is not primarily about changing the outcome. Spitzer leads in 
the counting by 21,000 votes out of 4.2 million cast. If that gap 
of one-half of 1 percent holds, the contest will have been the closest 
statewide race in New York in 40 years. Democrats contend that Powers, 
never one to take losing lightly, wants to cast enough doubt on Spitzer's 
victory to sully his name, a view that even some Republicans subscribe 
to. And officials and strategists in both political camps say that 
Powers is really trying to divert attention from his own mistakes, 
which they say contributed to Vacco's apparent defeat. Powers declined 
to discuss the matter. The Republican Party and the Vacco campaign 
referred calls to Thomas Spargo, the lawyer handling the court case. 
Spargo did not return calls last week. One person close to Powers, 
who spoke on the condition of anonymity, insisted that the lawsuit 
on Vacco's behalf should be taken at face value. ``It's about ensuring 
that this election was legitimate, without fraud,'' he said. Asked 
what evidence of fraud there was, he said, ``We're still looking.'' 
The Democrats have a different view. ``I think Bill Powers wants to 
put up a giant smokescreen to convince everybody upstate that New 
York City cheats,'' said state Sen. Martin Connor of Brooklyn, Spitzer's 
lawyer and leader of the Democratic minority in the Senate. ``He wants 
the upstate voter's memory bank on Eliot Spitzer to say, `Oh yeah, 
that's the guy who won that election that was kind of shady, the one 
that was stolen.' '' Tarring Spitzer's name, the theory goes, may 
weaken him in future elections and reinforces the deep mistrust many 
upstaters, who tend to be Republican, have of overwhelmingly Democratic 
New York City. But none of the Republicans' efforts have significantly 
changed Spitzer's lead. To recap: First, the Republicans went to court, 
claiming that 37,000 phantom votes from New York City had materialized 
in the week after Nov. 3. They have since dropped that claim, conceding 
that the unofficial election night tally was incomplete, as always, 
a situation not unique to the city. The official count, released eight 
days later by the City Board of Elections, was 37,000 votes higher. 
Republican officials then told reporters that the number of absentee 
ballots cast in the city was greater than the number distributed to 
voters. That turned out not to be true. Then, the Republicans' lawyers 
said they had found a 7,000-vote error in the Queens totals. Last 
week, Republican officials who spoke on the condition of anonymity 
said that claim was probably a product of their own counting error 
and they expected it to be dropped when the case returned to State 
Supreme Court in Manhattan on Monday. Meanwhile, the Republican Party 
has challenged the validity of thousands of paper ballots cast in 
heavily Democratic election districts over errors like a signature 
that dips below the line, while in Republican strongholds, the Democrats 
were challenging far fewer ballots. Most recently, Republicans claimed 
that dead people, 1,000 of them, had voted in New York City _ not 
enough to change the outcome, but enough to give the whole campaign 
a shady cast. It turns out that what the Republicans meant was that 
1,000 people remained on the city's voter registration rolls after 
they had died, no great surprise in a city with 4 million registered 
voters. So far, they have not offered evidence that votes were actually 
cast on behalf of the deceased. Among some Republicans, and among 
many politicians outside the party, the prevailing theory about the 
claims of voting irregularities is that Powers badly wants to shift 
the blame away from himself. Republican activists around the state 
grumble that the party ran no get-out-the-vote operation to speak 
of, relying almost entirely on television advertising, and that this 
factor cost Vacco the election. Turnout by Republican voters was lower, 
and by Democrats higher, than in the last few non-presidential elections, 
and it showed in the final results. Among Republican candidates, Gov. 
George Pataki, ahead in public opinion polls by 30 percentage points, 
won by 20 instead. U.S. Sen. Alfonse D'Amato, who seemed to have been 
in a tight battle, lost decisively. And Vacco, who appeared to have 
had a comfortable lead, ended up in a dead heat. ``What we're seeing 
is an orchestrated endeavor to cover the fact that the Republican 
statewide party ran a dismal campaign,'' said Raymond Harding, chairman 
of the Liberal Party, which nominated Spitzer. With Pataki facing 
only feeble opposition, the party's top priority this year was re-electing 
D'Amato. The Republicans adhered to their conventional strategy in 
close midterm elections of striving for a low turnout in urban areas. 
Not only did it not help the senator, but it also probably hurt Vacco. 
In one of those urban areas, in and around the attorney general's 
hometown, Buffalo, he is well known and popular. In 1994, when Vacco 
won office in a race almost as close as this one, turnout in Erie 
County was higher than it was this year, and he carried the county 
by 95,000 votes, more than double his margin there this year. If he 
had won the county this year by the same number of votes he did four 
years ago, he would be drafting a second inaugural speech, not maneuvering 
in court to keep his political career alive. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>