<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981128.0072 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In Arlington, Va., when Lara Tito, a white preschooler, did not get 
into the kindergarten at a popular alternative school, her parents 
joined with two other families and sued the district, challenging 
an admission system that set aside half of the 46 slots for members 
of minorities. In Boston, the parents of Sarah Wessman, a white student 
rejected from the competitive Boston Latin School when several minority 
students with lower test scores were admitted, also went to court. 
Last week, the parents won a ruling giving their daughter a place 
and striking down the racial preferences. In Montgomery County, Md., 
a suburban Washington area known for the success of the voluntary 
desegregation policy it adopted in 1975, school officials face two 
lawsuits, one challenging the admissions policy for a program for 
gifted students, the other challenging the rules that stop children 
from transferring from a school if the departure will hurt the school's 
racial balance. With these cases and others across the country, the 
longstanding debate over affirmative action in education, for years 
centered on universities and professional schools, is shifting down 
to public school districts, where an increasing number of parents 
_ mostly white _ are complaining about policies they say are unfair 
to their children. Nearly a half-century after Brown vs. Board of 
Education, at a time when both the courts and the voters have turned 
against affirmative action, the question of whether the educational 
value of diversity justifies race-conscious policies in public schools 
is an open one, never directly addressed by the U.S. Supreme Court. 
It is becoming a pressing issue, as the desegregation orders imposed 
by the courts decades ago are lifted in more and more areas. In recent 
years, judges have ended desegregation orders in Nashville, Tenn.; 
Oklahoma City; Denver; Wilmington, Del., and Cleveland, ruling that 
the effects of past segregation had been remedied, and no further 
judicial scrutiny was required. School lawyers say there is enormous 
uncertainty about whether those districts _ and hundreds that were 
never under court order but adopted voluntary desegregation plans 
_ can continue race-conscious policies, and, if so, what kind. ``It's 
an issue of great frustration to school boards, because if there can 
be no consideration of race and ethnicity, many schools that have 
worked very hard over the years to become diverse will slide back 
to very segregated patterns,'' said Julie Underwood, general counsel 
of the National School Boards Association. ``Legally, it's very confusing 
now. School districts that have had the court orders lifted really 
don't know if they're going to have to drop the programs that helped 
them desegregate.'' Both at schools that use weighted admissions to 
diversify the student body, and at those, like New York City's Stuyvesant 
High School, that have neither racial preferences nor many African-American 
or Hispanic students, teachers, parents and students are as divided 
over affirmative action as the nation at large, unsure how to balance 
the need for diversity against the goals of fairness and academic 
excellence. Many parents and teachers said the legal battles were 
less a measure of racial attitudes than of the struggle for a good 
education at a time when so many public schools are mediocre, or worse. 
In many communities, desegregation plans included the creation of 
magnet schools, which increase parent choice and attract more applicants 
than can be accommodated _ but rarely a representative share of minority 
families. The federal government provides special financing for such 
schools under guidelines that allow race-conscious policies if they 
are the only means to increase integration and narrowly tailored to 
minimize the burden on other races. To increase diversity without 
invoking lawsuits, many of these magnet schools are broadening the 
factors they consider to include not only race and ethnicity but leadership, 
personal achievement, socioeconomic status and the language spoken 
at home. They are also putting new energy into increasing their applicant 
pool by recruiting in target neighborhoods. The legal parameters of 
race-based policies in those schools, and elite competitive high schools 
like Boston Latin, are likely to be determined in a crop of upcoming 
cases. In Arlington, Va., in what is probably the most closely watched 
case, a U.S. District Court ruling against the Arlington Traditional 
School's admissions policy is being appealed to the 4th U.S. Circuit 
Court of Appeals. Though the original case produced a ruling that 
the school could not set aside places for minorities and the three 
children involved are now first- graders there, a new case was filed 
by a lawyer, the father of one of those children, the following year 
on behalf of two other families after the school adopted a lottery 
system giving extra chances not only to racial minorities but also 
to poor students and those for whom English is a second language. 
The federal judge rejected that, too, but the Justice Department, 
the National School Boards Association and other education groups 
are backing the school district on appeal. In Charlotte, N.C., site 
of the 1971 Supreme Court ruling upholding court-ordered busing, the 
parent of a white girl denied a place at a magnet elementary school 
_ at a time when, her lawyer charges, there were empty seats for black 
students _ filed a lawsuit challenging an admission policy using separate 
lotteries for white and nonwhite children. That complaint has been 
joined to the overall case on whether the original desegregation order 
should be lifted. In Montgomery County, Md., the lawsuit on the transfer 
policy is also being appealed to the 4th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals. 
And in San Francisco, where a longstanding court decree mandates that 
no more than 40 percent of the enrollment of a school be of one ethnic 
group, a Chinese-American parent sued over the admission policy at 
the competitive Lowell High School, where Chinese-Americans had to 
score higher than other ethnic groups to gain admission. The case, 
scheduled for trial next year, seeks to dismantle the entire district's 
desegregation plan. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>