<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981128.0199 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For four years, Donovan McNabb has opened every Syracuse game behind 
center. He has won 35 of them. His arm has pulled back 938 times to 
throw spirals for more than 8,389 yards. Seventy-seven of them have 
found an orange-helmeted receiver who wound up in the end zone. Nineteen 
more times McNabb has found his own way there by foot. With 11 minutes 
11 seconds left Saturday in a 66-13 thrashing of the Miami Hurricanes, 
Syracuse Coach Paul Pasqualoni let his quarterback take leave of an 
adoring crowd of 49,521 at the Carrier Dome for the final time. They 
roared as though they remembered every game, every throw, every touchdown 
of McNabb's glorious career. As he hugged each member of the offense, 
the crowd grew louder. When he stepped up on the bench and raised 
his helmet, they turned it up again. Who needs the Heisman Trophy 
when you're in the beloved company of Jim Brown, Floyd Little and 
the late Ernie Davis? By the time Giovanni DeLoatch picked up Miami 
quarterback Kenny Kelly's fumble and rumbled 28 yards for Syracuse's 
final touchdown, the Orangemen had handed Miami its worst loss since 
1944. They had also insured an invitation to either the Sugar Bowl 
or Orange Bowl and a guaranteed payday of $11 million as part of the 
Bowl Championship Series. For McNabb, it was a fitting end to a stellar 
career. He threw for 80 yards and two touchdowns, ran for 99 and three 
more. It was an emotional McNabb who bounced and twirled his way onto 
the field for one final home game in a glorious four-year career. 
He pounded his chest, blew kisses of appreciation to the crowd and 
then dived into a pile with 12 other seniors who had helped the Orangemen 
go 34-13 and win two Big East titles over four years. Then he and 
the Orangeman (8-3) turned all that energy loose on the Hurricanes. 
Syracuse came into this matchup averaging 40.2 points and 433 yards 
of total offense, but had lost of six of its last seven games with 
the Hurricanes. By halftime, the Orangemen were ahead by 45-7, had 
276 yards of total offense and were well on their way to repeating 
as undisputed Big East champions. The tone was set in a thrilling 
first quarter that featured two sacks, three interceptions, a blocked 
punt, a 50-yard field goal, a 100-yard kickoff return and 31 points. 
Unfortunately for the Hurricanes, Syracuse put up 24 of them. The 
thumping began on the opening drive when, facing third-and-7 on his 
48, McNabb dropped back to pass but was immediately faced with a swarm 
of white jerseys. He stepped up once, twice, then tucked the ball 
under his arm and motored up the middle of the field for 29 yards 
and the first down. On the next play, McNabb triggered the option 
left and flicked the ball to tailback Dee Brown, catapulting him 23 
yards for a touchdown and a 7-0 lead. The next time Syracuse had the 
ball, right tackle Jeff Pilon laid a block on Miami linebacker Michael 
Smith so devastating that it not only helped clear the way for Steve 
Johnson's 16-yard reverse, but also sent Smith's helmet 6 feet into 
the air. When the drive stalled, Nate Trout kicked a career-best 50-yard 
field goal to put Syracuse ahead by 10-0. The Hurricanes, who did 
not convert a first down until the final two minutes of the first 
quarter, helped the Orangemen along. When Andy Crosland dropped back 
to punt on the Miami 10, Vernon Banks burst through the middle untouched. 
He knocked the ball down and the backup fullback Nick Sudano gathered 
it at the 15. It was the 20th turnover the Orangemen had forced this 
season. When McNabb threw an 11-yard touchdown pass to Steve Johnson 
in the right corner of the end zone, Syracuse had scored 118 points 
off turnovers this season. Miami stopped Syracuse's momentum momentarily 
with an eight-play, 45-yard drive, capped by tailback Edgerrin James' 
1-yard plunge. But the beat went on, beginning with the ensuing kickoff. 
Johnson was standing on the goal line when he caught the kickoff and 
loped 100 yards up a huge lane on the left side of the field. He did 
not even feel the breeze of a Hurricane defender as the lead became 
24-7. The Orangemen barely stopped to catch their breath in the second 
quarter. They took just four plays and 1 minute 10 seconds to turn 
Stan Gibbs' interception of a pass by Hurricane quarterback Scott 
Covington into 7 more points; this time McNabb kept from 1 yard out 
for the score. Sensing the game was getting out of hand, Miami Coach 
Butch Davis decided to go for it on fourth-and-8 from Syracuse's 15-yard 
line. Safety Jason Poles knocked down a pass intended for Santana 
Moss, who was open briefly in the end zone. Then, on the 10th play 
of a nearly six-minute drive, McNabb apparently got impatient. He 
turned a quarterback draw that looked like it might lose yardage into 
a nifty 51-yard touchdown run. It began with a barely perceptible 
head fake that sent linebacker Dan Morgan sailing. By the time McNabb 
drove the Orangemen 50 yards and scored his third touchdown of the 
first half, Syracuse's 45th point, the raucous crowd at the Carrier 
Dome was already talking about possible bowl matchups for its Big 
East champions. Syracuse had a date in the Orange or the Sugar against 
either Florida or Notre Dame depending on how the final weeks shook 
out. And McNabb would have one more big game to showcase his extraordinary 
talent. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>