<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981128.0113 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
One hundred years ago, after the conquest of the West, American Indian 
schools were founded to encourage assimilation and stamp out indigenous 
culture. In the second half of this century, American Indian schools 
took the opposite approach, emphasizing their students' heritage. 
Neither approach fostered academic success. Now, one of the most unusual 
boarding schools in the country marries both approaches. Modeled after 
East Coast boarding schools that prepare students for Ivy League colleges, 
the Native American Preparatory School in Rowe, N.M., prepares gifted 
Indian students, most of whom grew up in poverty on reservations, 
to walk in two worlds, tribal and academic. It will graduate its first 
class in June, and has already drawn recruiters from more than 30 
colleges, including Harvard and Cornell. The school's curriculum includes 
American Indian perspectives; half of its faculty members are Indian. 
When 17-year-old Warren Honaberger of Espanola, N.M., studied American 
history, for example, he read not only de Tocqueville but also speeches 
by Indian leaders who influenced American democracy. A senior of Pueblo 
Indian, German and Spanish descent, Warren wears a bracelet he made 
in a Navajo silversmithing class and credits his classmates with introducing 
him to the breadth of Indian cultures. ``That's probably the best 
learning experience I've had,'' he said. To recruit students, the 
school had to overcome a seemingly insurmountable hurdle, the anger 
and distrust of many American Indians who remember boarding schools 
that routinely cut off children's braids and forbade them from speaking 
their own languages. The founder of a typical school, Capt. Richard 
Pratt of the Carlisle Indian School, was quoted as advocating in 1892 
that such schools ``Kill the Indian in him, and save the man.'' Native 
American Prep exists largely because of Richard Ettinger, son of the 
founder of Prentice Hall, who was disappointed not to find American 
Indian classmates at Dartmouth College in the 1940s. He had read Dartmouth's 
charter, which makes a commitment to American Indian education, and 
wanted to know why no Indians were enrolled. To address the problem, 
he first financed college scholarships, but became convinced the solution 
lay in high schools. Native American Prep was founded in 1995 with 
50 students; Ettinger died of lymphoma a year later. Today, the school 
has 74 students from 32 different American Indian tribes and 11 states 
on a picturesque campus, formerly a corporate retreat, in the Pecos 
River Valley. Though most American Indians live in cities, the school 
recruits heavily on reservations because gifted students there have 
fewer academic opportunities, said the admissions director, Christopher 
Johnson, who is of Saginaw, Chippewa and Russian Jewish descent. Creating 
an American Indian curriculum is not easy for a school that must answer 
to parents from many tribes. ``It's not our responsibility to teach 
these teens how to be native,'' said Sven Husaby, the headmaster. 
``That belongs to their families and communities. But it is our responsibility 
to support their native identities, to give a fuller understanding 
of the native world in the United States.'' Given the many indigenous 
cultures in the nation, the inter-tribal school is, in Husaby's words, 
``almost like a Native American United Nations,'' complete with prejudices 
among students about other tribes. Yet, like Warren Honaberger, many 
students hail the diversity of tribes as one of the most important 
components in their education. ``It's sort of hard to get along with 
each other, racist in some ways,'' said Jamie Little Eagle, 15, of 
Rapid City, S.D., who is a member of the Standing Rock Sioux nation. 
Jamie, a sophomore, wants to be a physical therapist for the National 
Basketball Association. ``We have sweats here, and the Navajos join 
us, but the Pueblos are all weird. People make fun of different ways, 
but it's cool because I have friends from all of them.'' The school 
attracts what the former academic head, Clayton Small, calls ``hero 
children'' _ youngsters driven to overcome the widespread poverty 
and substance abuse on their reservations. Small, a Northern Cheyenne 
whose doctorate is in educational leadership, recognizes such children 
easily, because he was one. ``I thought if I did this masquerade dance 
in my family that they would become normal. I became a workaholic, 
but no matter what I achieved my family and my community was pretty 
sick,'' he said. Despite pressure to hire an American Indian as headmaster 
to succeed the founding headmaster, who is returning East to teach, 
the board sought Husaby for his more traditional boarding school background 
_ a 30-year career at the prestigious Putney School in Vermont, the 
last five as headmaster. ``We have to confront some problems that 
every preparatory school confronts,'' said Barbara Ettinger, the board 
president and Richard Ettinger's daughter. ``It's important to have 
a headmaster who has experience.'' The problems cited by Ms. Ettinger 
and others are considerable. The school needs to raise nearly $3 million 
annually, and as yet has no rich alumni or parents. It has high academic 
standards, but many of its students need remedial work to achieve 
them. The school last year received 145 applications for 23 vacancies. 
In a rural area, the school had a telephone system that was inadequate 
for administrative offices, classroom technology and dormitory service 
even before it was knocked out by a lightning bolt last summer. Last 
year especially, attrition was high: The academics are hard, and some 
students find it painful to be away from their families and tribal 
life. Virtually all the students are on scholarship. About 70 percent 
pay the minimum of $900 for the year, based on the school's estimate 
that a normal teen-ager would be eating $100 worth of food a month 
at home. For a few, even that is waived. Academic preparation of American 
Indians is poor, with students receiving the lowest scores in the 
country on standardized tests like the SAT, where they average 950 
out of 1600, according to the school's guidance counselor, Whitney 
Laughlin. Of those who go on to college, more than half drop out the 
first year; only 3 percent finish their degrees. As a result, though 
everyone enters with at least a B average, many come with spotty preparation, 
particularly in math. Husaby is hiring an extra math teacher as part 
of his first-year program to strengthen the academic program so that 
everyone will be ready for college; to professionalize operations, 
and to promote the school's long-term financial stability. The school 
is aggressive about sending students out for experiences with the 
non-native world: a semester in China, a year in Spain, a trip to 
a poetry workshop at Kenyon College in Ohio. ``I don't want their 
first time as a minority to be when they go to college,'' said the 
college counselor, Whitney Laughlin. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>