<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981128.0118 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A potential shortage of tritium, a crucial ingredient of every nuclear 
weapon, has prompted the Department of Energy to consider whether 
to recommend starting one of the department's rare public-works-style 
projects to manufacture more of the radioactive gas. With the department's 
decision due within three weeks, the issue has set off intense lobbying 
by congressional delegations from Alabama, Tennessee, South Carolina 
and Washington state, which are hoping for a share of what could be 
a $9 billion project. Secretary of Energy William Richardson is juggling 
issues of cost, risk and image. The two solutions that may be easiest 
and least expensive are those creating the biggest image problem: 
using a civilian reactor to make tritium _ and breaking a 50-year 
taboo on mixing civilian and military atomic projects _ or buying 
the material from Russia or France. More expensive and technically 
difficult would be to restart a research reactor that runs on plutonium, 
which presents safety questions, or to build a linear accelerator 
100 times more powerful than any yet built in this country. ``I think 
we have dallied long enough on this decision,'' Richardson said in 
remarks to reporters last week after a tour of a partly completed 
Alabama nuclear reactor. The Tennessee Valley Authority gave up on 
the reactor 10 years ago, but the site is now a potential tritium 
factory. Richardson also toured the Savannah River Site, a nuclear 
plant near Aiken, S.C., where an accelerator might go. And on Monday, 
he is due at the TVA's Watts Bar reactor, a power plant where test 
production of tritium is already under way. Another possibility is 
a now-shuttered plutonium-powered reactor at the Energy Department's 
Hanford, Wash., nuclear reservation. Richardson has repeatedly promised 
that politics would not be the basis of a decision. But the issue 
has already been the subject of several votes in Congress and of letters 
from many members urging favorable treatment of their states. The 
Energy Department, and the Atomic Energy Commission before it, was 
once famous for multibillion dollar projects, but since the cancellation 
of the Super Conducting Supercollider in 1993 and the contraction 
of the nuclear weapons production complex in the sunset of the Cold 
War, such projects have become rare. Critics of huge spending on a 
tritium plant argue that the department should put off spending money 
until the future size of America's nuclear arsenal becomes clearer. 
In that, the Energy Department's problem parallels the Pentagon's. 
The Defense Department has to decide on hundreds of millions of dollars 
in investments to maintain some nuclear weapons and launching platforms 
without knowing whether new agreements with the Russians will result 
in the dismantling of those systems in a few years. The Russian parliament 
is scheduled to debate the second round of strategic arms reduction 
talks, known as START II, next month. If it approves the agreement, 
the date by which new tritium will be needed moves to 2011 from 2005 
and the amount required will be cut by one third. Tritium, a form 
of hydrogen, is used to improve the efficiency of fission in uranium 
and plutonium, and is stored as a gas in nuclear weapons for that 
purpose. It decays at 5.5 percent a year and must be replenished. 
The Energy Department's last reactor for producing tritium broke down 
in 1988, and the department says that by 2005 it will not have enough 
tritium to keep all existing weapons functional without dipping into 
a five-year reserve. The time remaining to find a solution is short 
relative to the years needed to build any new tritium plant, and Richardson 
has promised to announce a decision by the end of the year. It is 
already late, in fact, for the accelerator option. An accelerator 
would make tritium by bombarding tungsten with sub-atomic particles. 
Even if that project goes forward as scheduled _ which is unusual 
for first-of-a-kind efforts at the Energy Department _ it will not 
produce tritium until 2007. But even that may not be too late. The 
end of the Cold War has bought the department some time. ``If the 
Cold War had not ended, we'd have run out of tritium long before now,'' 
said Troy Wade, who was the assistant secretary for defense programs 
when the last of the production reactors, at the agency's Savannah 
River Site, broke down. In the interim, the department has cannibalized 
weapons being decommissioned, giving us ``a cushion we could not have 
predicted 10 years ago,'' he said. Other experts say that if further 
arms reduction agreements are reached with Russia, or if the United 
States simply decides it does not need so many nuclear weapons, then 
a new tritium source can wait for years, and the level needed to make 
up for decay _ 2 to 3 kilograms, or up to 6.6 pounds, a year to maintain 
the current arsenal _ could shrink further. But the department is 
planning to produce enough tritium to sustain the current arsenal, 
as specified under the first round of strategic arms reduction talks, 
known as START I. To do so, the department is considering several 
unconventional steps. A previous energy secretary, Hazel O'Leary, 
rejected building a new reactor as too expensive. But in September 
1997, operators loaded 32 ``target'' rods from the Energy Department 
into the core of the TVA's Watts Bar reactor, which has been operating 
steadily since then, its neutrons splitting the lithium metal inside 
the rods into tritium and helium. This spring, when Watts Bar is scheduled 
to shut for refueling, the department will remove the targets and 
recover the tritium. Civilian utilities once avoided military contracts, 
for fear such projects would sour the public on new reactors. Since 
no one expects a utility to order a new reactor in the next few years, 
that objection has died away. But local environmental activists and 
some foreign policy experts object. As the Congressional Budget Office 
pointed out in a recent report, ``For years the United States has 
strongly urged other countries not to put civilian reactors to military 
uses.'' Using already-completed reactors is the least expensive option; 
the Congressional Budget Office said buying ``irradiation services'' 
would cost about $1.1 billion compared with $2.3 billion for helping 
finish the Alabama reactor, Bellefonte, and about $6 billion for the 
accelerator. The accelerator may also pose a higher risk of delays 
and cost overruns. Tritium is also sold commercially for about $30 
million a kilogram (about 2.2 pounds), and some experts have suggested 
buying it from France or Russia. ``There's plenty, and at a relatively 
low price,'' said Richard Garland, a senior fellow for science and 
technology at the Council on Foreign Relations. If bought far in advance, 
he said, the seller would have no leverage over the buyer. But Joan 
B. Rohlfing, a senior adviser to the energy secretary, said that the 
idea, while it had been discussed, was not practical because the tritium 
would have to be bought far in advance of need, and every 12 years, 
half of it disappears through radioactive decay. For the price, she 
said, the Energy Department could develop its own production system. 
Buying tritium from Russia also would doubtless be vigorously opposed 
by many members of the Russian parliament _ which for six years has 
stalled on ratification of the newest arms control treaty _ as dangerous 
and unpatriotic. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>