<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981128.0077 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As the House impeachment inquiry enters its crucial final weeks, Republicans 
and Democrats are jockeying for an advantage that could influence 
President Clinton's fate. What little hope Republicans on the House 
Judiciary Committee had that Clinton would give any ground vanished 
on Friday, when in responses to 81 questions from the committee, the 
president once again insisted _ this time in terse, formal written 
replies _ that he did not lie under oath, tamper with witnesses or 
obstruct justice to conceal his affair with Monica Lewinsky. Republicans 
were not satisfied. ``There's a lot of legal gymnastics in these answers,'' 
said Rep. Asa Hutchinson, an Arkansas Republican on the panel. Beginning 
on Monday, committee Republicans aim to shore up their case against 
Clinton by taking several steps. Committee lawyers will take sworn 
statements from three witnesses about whether they tried to influence 
Kathleen Willey, a former White House volunteer who has said the president 
made an unwanted advance to her just outside the Oval Office in 1993. 
On Tuesday the committee will hold a public hearing on the consequences 
of lying under oath. Nearly a dozen federal judges, retired military 
officers, law professors and convicted perjurers are scheduled to 
testify. The committee's senior staff is drawing up three articles 
of impeachment against the president. The possible counts are perjury, 
obstruction of justice and witness tampering, and abuse of power. 
Republican committee aides say a perjury count has the best shot at 
passing the House, and even that would be on a cliffhanger vote. A 
senior Republican committee aide said on Friday that the panel would 
likely vote to send each count to the House floor separately, rather 
than wrap the articles into one resolution. This was done in 1974, 
when three articles of impeachment against President Richard Nixon 
were reported out of committee on three separate days. After the hearing 
on Tuesday, Republicans may also subpoena one or two more witnesses, 
or additional documents, in an effort to show a wider pattern of abuse 
beyond the Lewinsky case. The committee may also vote to release evidence 
under seal, including a videotape of the deposition Clinton gave on 
Jan. 17 in the sexual misconduct lawsuit by Paula Jones. Transcripts 
of the most damaging portions of the deposition have already been 
made public, Republican aides acknowledge, but some committee officials 
were urging the release of the tape itself. One reason is to rebut 
Clinton's assertion that he could not be held responsible for the 
representation that his lawyer, Robert Bennett, made about Ms. Lewinsky's 
affidavit, because he was not paying close attention. In the deposition, 
Bennett asserted that the affidavit showed that there ``is absolutely 
no sex of any kind in any manner, shape or form with President Clinton.'' 
In his statement before the committee on Oct. 6, David Schippers, 
the Republicans' chief investigative counsel, said that the videotape 
of the deposition shows that the president was ``apparently listening 
intently to the interchange.'' But the last time the Republicans insisted 
on releasing a videotape _ of the president's testimony before the 
federal grand jury in August _ it backfired, fueling public sentiment 
that the inquiry was biased and politically motivated. All this maneuvering 
would set the stage for the inquiry's final two climactic weeks. In 
the week of Dec. 7, Rep. Henry Hyde of Illinois, the Judiciary Committee 
chairman, has invited the president's lawyer, David Kendall, to present 
his case, followed later in the week by presentations from Schippers 
and his Democratic counterpart, Abbe Lowell. By then, draft articles 
of impeachment would be circulating among committee members. The 21 
Republicans and 16 Democrats would meet over two to three days to 
debate and vote on each article, as well as on amendments. Democrats 
are expected to offer a motion to censure the president for misconduct, 
rather than impeach him. If the committee stays on schedule, one or 
more articles of impeachment would go to the House floor for a vote 
in the week of Dec. 14. As committee Republicans try to build support 
for impeachment, the White House and its congressional allies are 
trying to mount support for something less than impeachment, such 
as a resolution of censure. ``There are some Democrats who are against 
impeachment who'd like to go on the record as disapproving the president's 
conduct,'' said Rep. Martin Frost of Texas, the newly chosen third-ranking 
House Democrat. But 100 or so Republicans may vote against censure 
because it is insufficient or unconstitutional, Republican aides say. 
Leading the charge against censure is Rep. Tom DeLay of Texas, the 
House Republican whip. ``The American people need to ask after a censure 
resolution has been passed: What justice has been done?'' DeLay said. 
If impeachment fails on the House floor, DeLay may face strong pressure 
from rank-and-file Republicans, especially moderates, to rebuke the 
president. ``Some moderates just aren't convinced there's an impeachable 
offense,'' said Rep. Curt Weldon, R-Pa., who is undecided on how he 
would vote. ``But they don't want to come away having done nothing.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>