<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981128.0126 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
What do Paavo Nurmi of Finland, Larysa Latynina of the former Soviet 
Union and Mark Spitz and Carl Lewis of the United States have in common? 
Each won a record nine Olympic gold medals during remarkable careers, 
and each is in danger of being surpassed in February 2002. That is 
because the cross-country skier Bjorn Daehlie has concluded that he 
has not yet experienced enough burning in his muscular legs or oxygen 
deprivation in his voluminous lungs in a remarkable competitive career. 
``I must admit that it would be quite nice to pass Carl Lewis,'' the 
31-year-old Norwegian said in a telephone interview earlier this month. 
Daehlie nearly passed out in his last Olympic race: the men's 50-kilometer 
event at the 1998 Winter Games in Nagano, Japan. The instant he crossed 
the finish line, he pitched forward as if he had been hit from behind 
by something blunt and heavy. He had already set a Winter Olympic 
record in Nagano by winning his sixth and seventh gold medals. Now 
he had his eighth, and he was as spent as he had ever been. ``I'm 
sure that was my hardest race ever,'' Daehlie said. ``I saw the gold 
medal going away in the last two kilometers, and it was hard to push 
myself because I was already completely exhausted.'' In the months 
leading up to Nagano, Daehlie talked openly about his plans to retire, 
saying he needed to spend more time with his two young sons, Sivert 
and Sander, and their mother, Vilde. But when he finally felt capable 
of speaking after what could have been his final victory, he hedged 
on quitting. After discussing the idea at length with his family, 
he has stopped bothering to hedge, and the truth is that 31 might 
be old for a running back, but not for a cross-country skier. In the 
1994 Olympics, an Italian, Maurilio De Zolt, won the gold medal in 
the men's relay at age 43. ``The idea of retiring was quite strong 
in me,'' Daehlie said. ``But the problem is, when you have been doing 
this for 10 years, it's a part of your life, part of the way you're 
living. You don't want to stop when you physically feel 100 percent. 
It might seem difficult to understand when you see what skiing requires, 
but I think I have a special connection with this sport. I dream about 
the big events and all the pressure when everyone is trying to be 
really fast. It's quite something to succeed when everyone has the 
same goal.'' Norwegians apparently agree. In a poll conducted last 
month by the newspaper Verdens Gang, readers were asked to name their 
``Norwegian of the 20th century.'' Daehlie came in third behind the 
explorer and humanist Thor Heyerdahl and Norway's first female Prime 
Minister, Gro Harlem Brundtland. In fourth place was Fridtjof Nansen, 
a former Nobel Peace Prize winner and North Pole explorer. Other notables 
were, in sixth, Roald Amundsen, the first man to reach the South Pole 
and, eighth, Edvard Munch, one of the century's foremost painters. 
Munch's most widely known work, ``The Scream,'' is a fine approximation 
of how Daehlie looked at the end of his 50K race in Nagano. ``In Norway, 
there are a lot of children right now who would like to be me; they 
are competing and falling over the finish line,'' Daehlie said wryly. 
Daehlie's professional goal is to compete until the Winter Olympics 
in Salt Lake City in 2002. But he has personal goals as well, and 
so he no longer plans to train with the Norwegian national team in 
the off season. Until this month, he was training on his own near 
his home in Nannestad, and he also no longer intends to compete for 
the overall World Cup title. After the World Cup season begins on 
Monday, he plans to race regularly until Christmas and then peak for 
the world championships in Ramsau, Austria, in February. ``Being out 
with the team for 200 days a year in hotels is a bit problematic for 
being a father,'' Daehlie said. ``So far, it has been going very well, 
and if it works I will keep the same program until Salt Lake.'' It 
was in Salt Lake City that Daehlie won his first World Cup race in 
December 1989, and Daehlie said that the desire to come full circle 
was part of his decision to ski on. So was financial security, and 
Daehlie, unlike many a Norwegian skikonge (ski king) of Olympiads 
past is increasingly secure. He has numerous sponsors and his own 
clothing company, whose outfits the American Nordic team will be wearing 
in 2002. What Daehlie wants is to convert Americans to his sport, 
which is about as popular with spectators in the United States as 
cricket or bullfighting and lacks a worldwide base and talent pool. 
``It's a little hard for me to be famous in America I think, but it 
would be nice to present cross-country skiing in America like Stein 
Eriksen did with Alpine skiing,'' Daehlie said. Eriksen, a fellow 
Norwegian, won the giant slalom at the 1952 Winter Olympics in Oslo 
and three gold medals at the 1954 world championships. He then directed 
ski schools at numerous American resorts, playing a role in popularizing 
skiing with his worldly manner and good looks. Daehlie recognizes 
that the pain etched on his face in mid-effort and the icicles that 
form on his red eyebrows are not necessarily the perfect pitch, but 
he is not really interested in pushing weekend athletes beyond their 
limits. ``What I want is to get more children out of the house and 
out in the forest,'' he said. ``Because in Europe, the people, especially 
the young people are more and more sitting still and watching videos 
or using the Internet. It was quite different 10 or 15 years ago, 
and I am concerned for my sport and the way people are living right 
now. We are not using our bodies the way we should. ``Cross-country 
is maybe the greatest way to work out for people. You know, in the 
United States, the Nordic Track machine is a best seller, and it's 
a machine where you ski in your living room. But the best way of doing 
it is in the nature. You need to breathe the air, see the birds and 
the animals. That way the next generation knows that the meat doesn't 
just come from shops.'' The next generation of Daehlies already knows. 
Sivert, age 4, began competing in cross-country races last winter. 
Sander, not yet 2, was recently given his first pair of skis. There 
are plenty of other Norwegian children receiving the same treatment. 
Daehlie's records could already be in danger, and he has no one to 
blame but himself. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>