<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981012.0480 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Three American researchers won the Nobel Medicine Prize on Monday 
for discovering new properties of nitric oxide, which is key to the 
anti-impotence drug Viagra and has other applications ranging from 
treating heart disease to shock. The prestigious prize went to Robert 
F. Furchgott, Louis J. Ignarro and Ferid Murad. Furchgott, 82, is 
a pharmacologist at the State University of New York in Brooklyn, 
Ignarro, 57, is at University of California-Los Angeles and Murad, 
62, is at the University of Texas Medical School in Houston. The 7.6-million-kronor 
(dlrs 978,000) prize is divided equally among the three winners, who 
worked both independently of each other and sometimes together. The 
researchers' work led to the discovery that the colorless gas acts 
as a messenger that tells blood vessels to relax and widen, which 
lowers blood pressure. Nitric oxide can trigger erection of the penis 
by dilating blood vessels. The wildly popular Viagra is based on this 
effect. The winners' research has sparked studies on a wide range 
of new drugs, including those that can be used in the treatment of 
heart problems and atherosclerosis and shock. ``This is a new general 
principle ... which will help us to develop lots of new medicines, 
for example ones that directly relax or retain tension in muscles, 
as in the new impotence drug, Viagra,'' said Hans Joernvall, professor 
of medical chemistry at the Karolinska Institute. Studies of the gas 
have also shown that white blood cells use it to kill infectious invaders, 
and that it also can defend against tumors. This has led to tests 
to see whether nitric oxide could be used to halt tumor growth. ``It 
was a sensation that this simple common air pollutant ... could exert 
important functions'' in animals and people, said the Karolinska Institute, 
which awards the prize. Their work touches on the personal life of 
Alfred Nobel, the Swedish industrialist and inventor of dynamite who 
established the prizes in his will. In later life, Nobel's physician 
told him to take nitroglycerin _ one of the ingredients in dynamite 
_ to combat heart trouble. ``However, it would take 100 years until 
it was clarified that nitroglycerin acts by releasing nitric oxide 
gas,'' the citation noted. Murad, contacted by the Swedish news agency 
TT, said the announcement was a surprise. ``I can't say I expected 
this,'' he said. Murad said he had been aware of the other two laureates' 
work, but had never done research with them. The prize citation said 
Murad, while at the University of Virginia in 1977, made the discovery 
that nitroglycerin releases nitric oxide and speculated that hormones 
might also act through the gas. In 1980, Furchgott concluded that 
blood vessels dilate because the cells that line produce a signal 
molecule. Ignarro, working on his own and with Furchgott, proved this 
molecule was nitric oxide. Last year, the prize went to Stanley B. 
Prusiner of the University of California at San Francisco for his 
discovery of prions, the rogue proteins identified as causing mad 
cow disease. Winners usually aren't known outside the medical community, 
although the list of laureates contains a few familiar names including 
Ivan Pavlov, tuberculosis pioneer Robert Koch, and DNA researchers 
Francis Crick and James Watson. The medicine prize was the second 
of the six Nobels to be announced this year. Last week, the literature 
prize went to Portuguese novelist Jose Saramago. The physics and chemistry 
prizes will be announced Tuesday, the economics prize on Wednesday 
and the peace prize on Friday. All the announcements are in Stockholm, 
except for the peace prize which is given in Oslo, Norway. The prizes 
are presented on Dec. 10, the anniversary of Nobel's death. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>