<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981012.0802 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
BELGRADE, Yugoslavia (AP) _ NATO positioned itself Monday for airstrikes 
on Yugoslavia, preparing to give a pre-attack ``activation order,'' 
should talks on Kosovo fail between the U.S. envoy and President Slobodan 
Milosevic. Holbrooke briefed NATO Secretary General Javier Solana 
by phone on his latest attempts to persuade Milosevic to abide by 
U.N. Security Council demands in Kosovo, a NATO official, who spoke 
only on condition of anonymity, said. Ambassadors of the 16-member 
NATO were meeting in Brussels and assessing the report from Holbrooke 
on Monday's talks in Belgrade. If the talks failed, the officials 
in Brussels were expected to vote on an ``activation order'' _ the 
last military step before any military strike can be launched. In 
Kuwait, U.S. Defense Secretary William Cohen said the allies were 
moving closer to making a decision. ``Our patience is running out,'' 
he said. The NATO order would transfer command over the airplanes 
and other military hardware needed for an airstrike from member countries 
to Supreme Allied Cmdr. Wesley K. Clark and authorize the deployment 
over Yugoslavia. Clark could then, in consultation with Solana, order 
planes and missiles launched. Holbrooke on Monday resumed talks with 
Milosevic on defusing the Kosovo crisis and avoiding the threatened 
strikes. Their meeting recessed by early afternoon and was to resume 
before evening. Holbrooke and Milosevic have met every day for a week, 
excluding Thursday, when Holbrooke met with U.S. Secretary of State 
Madeleine Albright. Italy on Monday authorized the use of its military 
bases for any NATO raid, while the German government said it intends 
to allow German warplanes to participate in any attack. In Paris, 
French Defense Minister Alain Richard said his country would provide 
about 40 aircraft for possible airstrikes. The foreign presence in 
Kosovo was being reduced in anticipation of NATO action. Most of an 
international diplomats' mission observing events in Kosovo left for 
neighboring Macedonia before midday. Sources at the U.S. Embassy in 
Belgrade said all but 12 foreign staff were being evacuated to Budapest. 
A U.S. State Department advisory urged all Americans to leave Yugoslavia, 
and the U.S. Embassy in Sarajevo asked Americans in the Serb part 
of neighboring Bosnia to evacuate. The German Embassy also closed 
its office in the northwestern Bosnian Serb town of Banja Luka and 
advised other German organizations to leave, an embassy official said. 
The German and British embassies in Belgrade also were closed Monday. 
The Americans and Europeans are demanding that Milosevic halt the 
crackdown he launched Feb. 28 against the separatist Kosovo Liberation 
Army. Kosovo, where 90 percent of the population is ethnic Albanian, 
is a Serbian province in southern Yugoslavia. The major obstacle appeared 
to be Holbrooke's request that Milosevic agree to an expanded international 
monitoring mission in Kosovo to verify compliance with demands of 
the U.N. Security Council. The Belgrade daily Nasa Borba reported 
that Milosevic was reluctantly considering the demand, but there was 
no confirmation. Other Security Council demands include an immediate 
cease-fire, a withdrawal of special troops from Kosovo, letting refugees 
return home and beginning talks with independence-minded ethnic Albanians 
on Kosovo's future. Milosevic's crackdown on the KLA has killed hundreds 
and forced at least 270,000 ethnic Albanians to flee their homes. 
The Pentagon is continuing military preparations if Holbrooke's mission 
fails. Six U.S. B-52 bombers arrived Sunday in Britain and a contingent 
of A-10 antitank planes flew from Germany to Italy. NATO authorities 
also met with Russian representatives at NATO headquarters Monday 
to keep Moscow informed on the military preparations. Russian Foreign 
Minister Igor Ivanov again expressed his country's opposition to any 
NATO strike but said a military response by Moscow to such an attack 
was ``out of the question.'' Ukraine is offering to mediate in the 
Kosovo conflict and has already discussed its offer with Yugoslavia 
and the United States, Foreign Minister Borys Tarasiuk said Monday. 
The positioning of more U.S. planes within range of Yugoslavia and 
preparing them for attacks were clearly designed to convince Milosevic 
of Washington's resolve to force compliance with U.N. demands. Milosevic's 
office said Sunday that all U.N. conditions have been met for a political 
settlement, but Washington disagrees. Efforts to end the crisis intensified 
following allegations that Serb police massacred scores of ethnic 
Albanian refugees. Concern is mounting that winter will bring a humanitarian 
disaster if thousands remain homeless by the first snowfall. The United 
Nations has condemned recent massacres of ethnic Albanians, but has 
not endorsed airstrikes. The U.S. administration believes, however, 
that it does not need a new U.N. resolution for the attacks. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>