<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981012.0537 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Three Americans won a Nobel prize on Monday for discovering that nitric 
oxide acts as a signal for the cardiovascular system, a role that's 
key to the anti-impotence drug Viagra. The finding also has other 
applications ranging from treating heart disease to shock. The Nobel 
Prize in physiology or medicine went to Robert F. Furchgott, Louis 
J. Ignarro and Ferid Murad. Furchgott, 82, is a pharmacologist at 
the State University of New York in Brooklyn, Ignarro, 57, is at University 
of California-Los Angeles and Murad, 62, is at the University of Texas 
Medical School in Houston. The dlrs 978,000 prize is divided equally 
among the three winners. The researchers discovered that nitric oxide 
tells blood vessels to relax and widen, an effect that helps control 
blood pressure. Nitric oxide, a colorless gas, makes blood vessels 
dilate by relaxing the vessels' smooth muscles. It can trigger erection 
of the penis the same way, because the relaxation lets blood flow 
in. The wildly popular Viagra is designed to increase nitric oxide's 
effect. The winners' research has sparked studies on a wide range 
of new drugs, including those that can be used in the treatment of 
atherosclerosis and shock. Studies also show that white blood cells 
use the gas to kill infectious invaders, and to defend against tumors. 
This has led to tests to see whether nitric oxide could be used to 
halt tumor growth. ``It was a sensation that this simple common air 
pollutant ... could exert important functions'' in animals and people, 
said the Karolinska Institute, which awards the prize. Nitric oxide 
is different from nitrous oxide, better known as laughing gas. The 
honored work touches on the personal life of Alfred Nobel, the Swedish 
industrialist and inventor of dynamite who established the prizes 
in his will. In later life, Nobel's physician told him to take nitroglycerin 
_ one of the ingredients in dynamite _ to combat heart trouble. ``However, 
it would take 100 years until it was clarified that nitroglycerin 
acts by releasing nitric oxide gas,'' the citation noted. Monday's 
announcement is ``great news,'' said Dr. Gerald Levey, dean of the 
UCLA School of Medicine. ``We were hoping he (Ignarro) would win it. 
We thought he had a strong chance to win. It's well deserved.'' Murad, 
who worked independently of the other two winners, called the announcement 
``a delightful surprise.'' At first, scientists didn't think nitric 
oxide had so many effects, he said, but ``a lot of researchers have 
now discovered that nitric oxide does so many things and is so important.'' 
Furchgott, reached at his Long Island home, said ``I'm very pleased. 
I truly wasn't sure I'd ever get an award like this. I wasn't sure 
that I deserved it.'' He said he had planned to go to the dentist 
and possibly play golf Monday, but ``I guess that's all changed now. 
I'll be answering calls all day.'' He said he hasn't had enough time 
to think about what he would do with his share of the dlrs 978,000, 
``I just want to get through breakfast. I've been trying to eat it 
for the last 30 minutes.'' The prize citation said Murad, while at 
the University of Virginia in 1977, discovered that nitroglycerin 
and other vessel-dilating compounds release nitric oxide. In 1980, 
Furchgott concluded that blood vessels dilate because cells in their 
inner lining produce a signal molecule. Ignarro, working on his own 
and with Furchgott, proved this molecule was nitric oxide. Last year, 
the prize went to Stanley B. Prusiner of the University of California 
at San Francisco for his discovery of prions, the rogue proteins identified 
as causing mad cow disease and other ailments. Winners usually aren't 
known outside the medical community, although the list of laureates 
contains a few familiar names including Ivan Pavlov, tuberculosis 
pioneer Robert Koch, and DNA researchers Francis Crick and James Watson. 
Generally, they are researchers who have made discoveries that sound 
small on paper but carry large consequences. Among other well-known 
names to receive the prize is David Baltimore, although he shared 
the prize in 1975, long before becoming one of the world's most visible 
AIDS researchers. The medicine prize was the second of the six Nobels 
to be announced this year. Last week, the literature prize went to 
Portuguese novelist Jose Saramago. The physics and chemistry prizes 
will be announced Tuesday, the economics prize on Wednesday and the 
peace prize on Friday. All the announcements are in Stockholm, except 
for the peace prize which is given in Oslo, Norway. The prizes are 
presented on Dec. 10, the anniversary of Nobel's death. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>