<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981012.2100.2873 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> MISCELLANEOUS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When we come back here tonight, our first look this holiday Monday 
evening at the weekly newsmagazines and what they're reporting. Have 
you ever made a long- distance call that was so short, you wish you 
didn't have to pay for it? Hi, it's jodi... and this is Bill! And 
nobody's home! You got that right. Just sign up now, and calls you 
make that are less than 30 seconds are free. So if you make a quick 
call, get an answering machine or a wrong number, at least you won't 
have to pay for it. Hey, don't say a word. I just called to tell you... 
"I love you." I'm deeply touched. Jane? Of course, the reason you 
call long distance is to talk, so when your call lasts longer than 
30 seconds, it's just a dime a minute... plus you'll get short calls 
free. Hey, mom. I use a cup full of this laundry stuff, right? Oh, 
a cap-full. I gotta go. Put time on your side. Get a dime anytime 
and short calls free. And on this holiday Monday night, time for our 
look at the newsmagazines which will be reaching mailboxes and news 
stands by tomorrow. Beginning here with the covers on "U.S. news," 
the trial of Bill Gates. And on to "time," thousand make your kid 
a better student. "Time" teases their impeachment coverage inside. 
And "Newsweek," note the similarity between this couple and the first 
couple. The woman on the right is currently the first lady. That's 
her husband. Children of Watergate impeachment wars, the Clintons 
then and now. Inside "U.S. news," McCain reports for duty -- for the 
record, it's the one with T long nose. "Newsweek" -- where is mail 
order huge? Those who are catalogue crazy in is country are in red. 
Alaska, that may be out of necessity. But it's big in Iowa. Huge in 
New England. They're wild about it in Maine, Connecticut, long island, 
New York, the eastern half of the state of New York. Mall may havens, 
well, the color blue speaks for itself. The American south is the 
place to go to the mall. Including, apparently, everyone, everyone 
in the state of Mississippi. "Newsweek" -- while we're on the founding 
fathers theme, fromthe Sunday "New York Times," there's this one from 
Tony auth, of the "Philadelphia inquirer." When we come back, our 
first look at the Tuesday morning newspaper headlines. He's doing 
O.K. so how long before Max can play again? Well, the vet said Max 
will be back to his old self in a couple of days. Even the interior 
of the Chevy blazer was designed to make you feel at ease. Chevy blazer. 
A little security... in an insecure world. Okay, there we go. Who's 
on the line? My voice is my life. A sore throat? Death. Because I 
talk for a living. I do talk radio. Caller after caller after caller. 
So when I get a sore throat, I count on chloraseptic. Five sprays 
delivers the fastest pain relief possible. Relief that penetrates. 
Relief that's long-lasting. It's a free country but-- oh, please! 
We got a live one. Vicks chloraseptic. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>