<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981012.2100.1807 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As we reported earlier in this broadcast, President Clinton announced 
tonight a deal to prevent a military attack in Kosovo at the same 
time NAto delivered an ultimatum and a deadline for compliance with 
the deal to stop air strikes. The president tonight in New York has 
spoken and said much E same thing. No deal, and the troops come in. 
The Balkans have for years been scribed as a apowder keg waiting to 
explode. And Yugoslavia under Slobodan Milosevic has been described 
in this current crisis in Kosovo at least as the fuse. With the view 
from the ground tonight NBC's Ron Allen is with us via telephone from 
Belgrade. N, how much is known on the ground about the amount of forces 
immediately offshore and deal or no deal and threats or no threats 
from the U.S.? I think a lot is known here. People in this part of 
the world have been watching the situation unfold carefully. They 
are very conscious of the fact that NATO has been making threats for 
a long time. Many here will tell you that they never believe that 
NATO would really carry through its threats. I think now there will 
be a feeling of relief that there is a firm deadline in place, a time 
at which this entire process will end and there will either be a satisfying 
result or not. I think, again, that the difficult part now is compliance, 
getting T@Se 2,000 or so international monitors in to Kosovo, trying 
to raise the confidence level, at insurance level of these hundreds 
and ousands of refugees who have fled their homes so that they'll 
feel safe enough to go back. I think that's still going to be a difficult 
thing to happen. You're talking about a place where people have literally 
left burnt out neighborhoods because the police burned down their 
homes and massacred their neighbors. To overcome that trauma it's 
going to take much more than what we've seen tonight. D the verification 
measures that are still to come in the next few days. NATO is mentioned 
often in the same sentence overseas with the U.S. U speak about confidence 
levels there. Is NatO being viewed these days with suspicion at all 
or at savior? I don't think NatO is seen as savior, at least here. 
I think NATO is seen -- viewed with a lot of skepticism. A lot of 
people feel that what we've seen in the last few hours have happened 
many, many months ago, the Kosovo crisis really got extremely awful 
much earlier this year in February and March. Since that time nearly 
1,000 civilians have been killed, and so many refugees. People here 
wonder why does it take so long before the U.S. and its allies? Yes, 
it is the U.S., the one superpower in the world, the country people 
look to and blame. They wonder why it's taking so long. So while there 
will be some satisfaction with what's happened tonight, I think there 
will still be a lot of disappointment that none of this happened much 
sooner. Ron Allen on the ground for us tonight in Belgrade. Thank 
you very much. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>