<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981012.0397 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The first complaints streamed in a decade ago: A large car-leasing 
company on Long Island called Oxford Resources was habitually overcharging 
customers. Robert Abrams, then the New York Attorney General, accused 
Oxford of deceptive practices, and the company settled in 1990 by 
issuing refunds, paying a $10,000 fine and pledging to change its 
ways. Last year, the current Attorney General, Dennis Vacco, investigated 
10 new complaints about Oxford. This time, the inquiry ended differently. 
Declining to make any allegations, Vacco chose to settle the complaints 
through mediation, and his aides say that as a result, Oxford has 
returned some of the money in dispute. But the company was not forced 
to pay restitution or face other penalties. Yet those were not Vacco's 
only dealings with Oxford. During the investigation, Oxford executives 
and a company subsidiary gave $8,500 to Vacco's re-election campaign, 
according to campaign records. And less than three weeks after Vacco 
closed the investigation on Nov. 4, 1997, his campaign received an 
additional $37,500 from nine Oxford subsidiaries, all on the same 
day. Oxford has close ties to Republican leaders on Long Island, but 
these contributions were far larger than anything the donors had given 
to Vacco or any other candidate for state office in this decade, records 
show. Before 1997, the donors had given a total of $4,750 to Vacco's 
re-election campaign and had not contributed to his 1994 campaign. 
Vacco, a Buffalo-area Republican who is seeking his second term, did 
not respond to several requests for an interview about Oxford, which 
is now owned by Nationsbank of Charlotte, N.C., and called Nationsbank 
Auto Leasing. Vacco is facing Eliot Spitzer, a Democrat who is a former 
state prosecutor, in the Nov. 3 election. The contributions linked 
to Oxford are legal, unless it can be shown that official actions 
were taken explicitly in return for campaign money. Aides to Vacco 
said there was no connection between the donations and the handling 
of the case. Both Vacco's inquiry and the one by his predecessor, 
Abrams, a Democrat, focused on similar accusations: that Oxford was 
assessing excessive charges for damage to vehicles when leases expired. 
And the complaints have continued. In all, Vacco's office received 
48 complaints about the company in 1997, including the 10 that touched 
off his inquiry. This year, with the investigation closed, the office 
has received 45. Asked about those statistics, Vacco's aides acknowledged 
that Oxford had a higher rate of complaints than other car leasing 
companies in the state and that the new complaints differed little 
from the earlier ones. But they said Vacco's investigation had determined 
that Oxford was not breaking the law, so he was limited in the actions 
he could take. To avoid an appearance of impropriety, the attorney 
general has said he has a policy of not accepting contributions from 
companies under investigation by his office. Michael Zabel, a spokesman 
for the Vacco campaign, said the donations linked to Oxford did not 
violate that rule. Zabel noted that the $8,500 given during the investigation 
was from Oxford's chairman, other executives and a subsidiary, not 
from the company itself. He said Vacco's campaign and office did not 
as a rule try to determine whether such related donors were linked 
to companies under scrutiny. ``Obviously, we have no way to check 
the list of all the employees of various corporations, to check for 
the subsidiaries of corporations,'' Zabel said. ``That's not feasible.'' 
The rest of the money, he said, arrived after the investigation. Under 
state law, corporations can give a total of no more than $5,000 annually 
to all state and local candidates and party committees, with few exceptions. 
By donating through its subsidiaries, Oxford was able to get around 
the law, a common strategy that many corporations follow. The Oxford 
subsidiaries have names like Centrex Capital Florida and Linden Tree 
Development, so their ties to the company are not readily apparent. 
Michael Pascucci, Oxford's chairman, did not respond to three telephone 
messages left at his office. Gordon Turner, a spokesman for Nationsbank, 
declined to comment. Christopher McKenna, a spokesman for Vacco, said 
the people who complained about Oxford last year and then went to 
mediation under the auspices of the attorney general's office had 
received money back from the company _ on average, half of the amount 
in dispute. ``This is a tremendous victory for consumers,'' he said. 
But McKenna declined to give more details on the settlements or to 
release the names of customers who complained. Sandy Mindell, an assistant 
attorney general who was one of the officials involved in the 1997 
and 1990 investigations, said Oxford did not receive special treatment 
from Vacco's office. ``There was never any pressure on me,'' Mindell 
said. ``I was not aware of any contributions.'' He said that when 
the office began the investigation in March 1997, it believed that 
Oxford was violating the consumer protection law, which requires auto 
leasing companies to tell customers about their rights in challenging 
charges. But he said the office later determined that its original 
impression was mistaken. All Oxford's new leases are governed by the 
state's 1995 car leasing statute, but to resolve the case, the company 
agreed that leases signed before the law took effect would also be 
subject to it, he said. Without the investigation, customers with 
pre-1995 leases would not have the protections in the statute, which 
include the right to seek an outside arbitrator in disputes, he said. 
The company also agreed that one of its executives would act as Oxford's 
liaison to the attorney general's office. Mindell and McKenna both 
said they did not know why Oxford had a higher level of complaints 
than other auto leasing companies in the state. ``We are troubled 
that they have the large number of complaints that they have,'' McKenna 
said. ``But looking at it carefully and examining what they have done, 
we have not found anything illegal. Maybe people from New Jersey who 
lease these cars happen to complain more. What can we do? We can't 
go after people who are not breaking the law.'' Vacco never publicized 
his inquiry and settlement with Oxford, a national leasing and finance 
company with operations in many states. The Better Business Bureau, 
which provides consumers with information about companies' reputations, 
said it did not know that Oxford had been investigated. Since the 
inquiry ended, the bureau has received roughly 20 complaints about 
Oxford in New York, officials there said. McKenna said he did not 
know why the attorney general had not publicized the Oxford case. 
Like his predecessors, Vacco has enthusiastically promoted many of 
his consumer investigations and settlements. A few months before the 
Oxford case ended, for example, Vacco distributed a news release announcing 
that he had ``put the brakes'' on misleading auto lease advertising 
by BMW of North America. In that instance, the company settled with 
the attorney general by agreeing to pay a $25,000 fine and stop the 
advertising in question. Vacco has contended that his predecessors 
at times created a hostile climate for businesses. He has declared 
that he can act as an effective watchdog for consumers without overregulating 
industry. Since taking office, he has collected nearly $50,000 from 
political action committees representing New York auto dealers, far 
more than any other current candidate for statewide office, including 
Gov. George Pataki, according to campaign records. Pascucci, Oxford's 
chairman, is also the owner of WLNY-TV (Channel 55), a commercial 
TV station on Long Island. He has often contributed to Republican 
candidates on the island, including Sen. Alfonse D'Amato, who is from 
Nassau County. About six weeks after the Oxford settlement in November 
1997, Pascucci contributed $15,000 to a political action committee, 
New York Salute 1998, that is controlled by D'Amato. And earlier this 
year, Pascucci and other executives at Oxford gave a total of $36,000 
to another D'Amato PAC, Renew America. In 1995, Pascucci and other 
Oxford executives gave nearly $40,000 to D'Amato's senate campaign 
committee, records show. Lisette McSoud Mondello, a spokeswoman for 
D'Amato, said the senator was a personal friend of Pascucci but was 
not aware of the settlement. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>