<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981012.0088 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Imagine you are being treated for cancer, a fact known to your Travelers' 
insurance agent from your medical tests and insurance forms. Imagine 
also that you are applying for a mortgage from, say, Citibank, where 
you've banked for years and which has just merged with Travelers Group. 
Despite your excellent credit rating, your mortgage is denied by Citibank 
for reasons that are unclear. Or suppose you've just inherited lots 
of money from a relative's life insurance policy and you put the money 
into your Fleet Bank account. Pretty soon you get a call from a representative 
of Quick &AMP; Reilly, a brokerage firm you have never heard of but 
which is owned by Fleet. The broker is equipped with surprisingly 
detailed knowledge of your financial situation _ along with a few 
ideas about how to invest your windfall. Both situations may be hypothetical 
but they aren't so far-fetched, according to a growing number of bankers, 
lawmakers, banking regulators and consumer advocates worried about 
the potential dark side of the mergers sweeping the financial industry. 
As banks, brokerage firms and insurance companies combine into huge 
new conglomerates, and with legislation before Congress to make such 
mergers even easier, there is increasing concern about the amount 
of personal financial and medical data that can be collected under 
one roof. So far, this privacy debate has centered mainly on the use 
of patients' medical records, especially by health maintenance organizations. 
But a new twist has been added as banks have expanded into businesses 
like securities and insurance sales, both of which involve the collection 
of a wide range of personal information. Just last week, Citicorp 
and Travelers Group completed their $50 billion merger, creating the 
world's largest financial services conglomerate, with 70 million customers. 
The new company, Citigroup, has access to a wealth of customer information, 
including mutual fund accounts, health claims on insurance policies, 
and credit card, mortgage and car loan balances. Many consumer advocates 
are worried that such sensitive data can easily be transferred from 
one part of the company to another and possibly be disclosed to outside 
parties. ``It is very important for banks to realize the challenge 
they face in the privacy area is something new, different and more 
difficult than what they've dealt with before,'' said Acting Comptroller 
of the Currency Julie Williams. ``It's in their self-interest to recognize 
privacy as a customer concern and deal with it successfully or they 
may be subject to more restrictive controls on the ability to use 
this information.'' Nationsbank, which is acquiring BankAmerica Corp., 
has already run into trouble with customer privacy. The company recently 
paid nearly $40 million to settle a class-action suit and end a government 
investigation after more than 18,000 customers, many of them elderly, 
were sold complex derivative securities that were far too risky for 
them. Nationsbank's brokerage arm had used the bank's customer list 
to target people to approach, many of whom mistakenly believed that 
the derivatives were safe and insured. As a result, Nationsbank has 
imposed new limits on the use of private data. ``Talking to a banker 
used to be like going to confession or seeing a psychiatrist _ we 
thought the information was protected,'' said Edmund Mierzwinski, 
executive director of the U.S. Public Interest Group, a nonprofit 
pro-consumer organization. ``But that's no longer the case. These 
mergers are creating bigger data bases with more power.'' Financial 
services companies argue that the ability to swap data between one 
arm and another is a driving force behind many mergers. Banks want 
to broaden their ability to ``cross-market'' credit cards to checking 
deposit customers or sell stocks and bonds to holders of car loans. 
But bankers say they must be careful to balance this desire to sell 
new products against the need to maintain the trust of their customers. 
``We are very concerned,'' said Edward Yingling, executive director 
for government relations at the American Bankers Association. ``The 
key question is, what is the proper balance between appropriate and 
valuable cross-marketing and invasions of privacy? No one believes 
medical records should be used for cross-marketing in ways that would 
be invasive. It's more difficult when financial information can be 
used to show our customers that other products might be very good 
for them. That's what everyone has to wrestle with.'' Current law 
allows bank customers to sign ``opt out'' forms, preventing one part 
of a bank from giving personal information to another. The Comptroller's 
office has found, however, that few banks highlight this option. ``Most 
bank customers can't ever recall seeing anything like this,'' Ms. 
Williams said. As part of its merger application to the Federal Reserve 
Board, Citigroup made a ``Global Privacy Promise,'' which would ``provide 
customers the right to prevent Citigroup from sharing customer information 
with others, including affiliates, for cross-marketing purposes.'' 
Customers will also be given opt-out provisions and Travelers has 
pledged that it will not share the medical or health information of 
its insurance customers ``for marketing purposes.'' Consumer advocates 
like Mierzwinski say such protections should be a matter of law, and 
not established case by case. Sen. Christopher Dodd, D-Conn., has 
been leading a push in Congress for greater financial privacy restrictions. 
``There are hardly any safeguards out there,'' Dodd told the Senate 
Banking Committee last month. ``As each year goes by, the vulnerability 
of the people we represent becomes more exposed. The longer we delay, 
we are exposing millions to unfair access by people who should not 
have access.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>