<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981012.0226 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Romans named it Africa. Not the continent, just one small corner 
of it jutting into the Mediterranean, the country we know today as 
Tunisia. This ancient name merely hints at Tunisia's importance to 
the Roman Empire; proof of it can be seen in the country's many imposing, 
and often well-preserved Roman sites. Less than 100 miles from Sicily 
(and now just an hour's flight from Rome), Tunisia was a granary of 
the empire, its agricultural riches _ olives, grapes and grains _ 
underwriting many elaborate construction projects throughout Tunisia. 
The country's sun-drenched landscape is a mix of crowded souks, richly 
carved mosques, Berber villages, desert expanses, seaside fortresses 
and whitewashed resort hotels. Everywhere there are remnants of Rome: 
villas, temples, baths, theaters, aqueducts and arenas. Many of the 
Roman ruins are in northern Tunisia, a few hours' drive from Tunis, 
the capital. Carthage, Dougga, El Jem and Sbeitla were among the sites 
my husband, Richard, my daughter, Patricia, and I visited on a 10-day 
trip last December. Though the roads are well maintained, we asked 
a Pennsylvania tour company to make arrangements for a car, driver 
and guide to make the sightseeing easier. Our well-informed Tunisian 
guide, Nejib Ben Lazreg, was also an archeologist. Aside from the 
occasional small tour group (usually German), we generally had the 
ruins to ourselves. Tunis, where we began our trip, is a clean, modern 
city, fairly Westernized and user-friendly. For an introduction to 
the Roman sites that were on our itinerary, we visited the Bardo, 
Tunisia's national museum, which has a staggering wealth of Roman 
mosaics. We spent several hours viewing huge panels, including one 
depicting Neptune surrounded by octopus, scorpion fish and all sorts 
of easily identifiable sea creatures. Though most of the exhibits 
were Roman, some rooms had archaic terra-cotta votive offerings from 
Carthage, a site we were especially curious about. This fabled kingdom 
of Dido and Aeneas, of Hannibal and his intrepid elephants _ so vividly 
imagined in Flaubert's ``Salammbo'' _ was the maritime power that 
Rome finally destroyed in the third Punic War in 146 B.C. Was there 
really nothing left of Carthage, as the guidebooks had suggested? 
Sadly, Scipio and his conquering legions did an extremely thorough 
job of destroying Carthage before the Romans started to build their 
own monuments during a period of 500 years. The next day we saw what 
was left of Carthage, which is now a high-rent suburb of Tunis. Lavish 
contemporary villas, including the president's palace, surround several 
sprawling archeological digs. Some columns, bits of pavement, carvings, 
tombs, funerary monuments and terra cotta statues, plus the outlines 
of the ingenious circular Punic harbor _ which sheltered the fleet 
and had an interesting central dry-dock area _ are about all that 
are left of pre-Roman Carthage (814 to 146 B.C.). These meager remains 
are overshadowed by the majesty of Rome. Caesar began rebuilding Carthage 
on the Roman model when he arrived in 46 B.C. after routing his rival 
Pompey's armies. Seeing the vast Antonine baths started by Hadrian 
in 116 and completed by Antonius Pius in 162, we began to grasp the 
scope of the public works. The huge baths, the fourth largest in the 
Roman Empire and the largest outside Rome itself, are spread over 
nine acres running to the edge of the sea, a piece of real estate 
that any modern spa builder would envy. They are reached through an 
alley of tumbled stone remains in the Parc Archeologique des Thermes. 
A single immense granite column, one of eight that originally supported 
the roof, has been re-erected on a concrete plinth, and it soars nearly 
60 feet to the top of its huge Corinthian capital, providing visitors 
with some idea of the original height of the vaulting. But what there 
is left to see of the imperial baths is at the basement level, where 
wood for the furnaces to heat the water was stored and where the water 
was channeled from aqueducts and cisterns to fill the pools. Signs 
and diagrams guided us from the viewing terrace through the maze of 
pillars and vaults in the complex, which was divided into separate 
wings for men and women, with gymnasiums, dressing rooms, steam rooms, 
and warm and cold pools, including one of Olympic proportions. It 
must have been a fabulously restorative place after an evening of 
heavy banqueting. In nearby La Marsa, one of several small Mediterranean 
towns west of Carthage, we stopped for lunch at a seafood restaurant 
called Le Golfe. With its 800-mile coastline, Tunisia is a paradise 
for seafood lovers _ as the Roman mosaic in the Bardo Museum aptly 
suggested _ and though couscous is also ubiquitous, the food is generally 
more diverse and spicier than the cuisine in Morocco. At Le Golfe 
we ordered langoustines; those irresistable briks, the pastry turnovers 
filled with potato and egg, or this time, with shrimp and egg; a grilled 
vegetable salad called mechouia; and grilled daurade, accompanied 
by crisp white wine. On this sunny, somewhat chilly December day we 
decided against a table on the terrace overlooking the Mediterranean, 
and sat in the whitewashed dining room. The ruins of Roman Carthage 
are so scattered that it is difficult to imagine the city's dimensions 
and details. But imagining a city _ in this case, a Roman one _ is 
not difficult at Dougga, known as Thugga in Roman times, a site that 
covers a high wind-swept plateau less than two hours' drive southwest 
of Tunis. Of the estimated 200 Roman cities that were established 
in the northern half of Tunisia, Dougga is the most complete. Just 
enough sensitive restoration suggests the extent of the city. The 
parking lot leads directly to the partly restored theater, built in 
168, which could hold up to 4,000 spectators in semicircular rows 
of limestone seats banked into the hillside. We tried the acoustics 
and discovered that a stage whisper could be heard clearly in the 
cheap seats on top. A paved Roman road runs from the theater through 
the central square. Several temples are clustered around the forum, 
including the Capitoline temple, a well-preserved monument featuring 
a handsome portico of Corinthian columns that was dedicated to Jupiter, 
Juno and Minerva. Strolling along the road we explored the remains 
of a market, the third-century triumphal arch of Alexander Severus, 
several series of barrel-vaulted cisterns from which water flowed 
by gravity, as well as some outlying temples. Dougga had three public 
baths, all to the south, down the hillside from the forum. The Baths 
of Licinius, or Winter Baths, which we reached by a staircase from 
the original entrance, are the most impressive, but the Cyclops Baths, 
so named for the mosaic that can now be seen in the Bardo Museum, 
are notable for the communal latrines. What's left of a number of 
houses can also be seen in this district. At the very edge of the 
city is the splendid Mausoleum of Ateban, a Punic monument built in 
202 B.C. Its three stories are covered with carved reliefs and topped 
with a pyramid. From Dougga we drove another 40 minutes to Bulla Regia. 
Many tour operators and guidebooks suggest that this site, less than 
30 miles from the Algerian border and famous for its two-story villas, 
is too long for a day trip from Tunis. But since we were on the road 
by 8 a.m., we had ample time to visit Dougga and Bulla Regia and return 
to Tunis by 6 p.m. There was also time for a pleasantly fortifying 
lunch of chorba, a spicy tomato and lamb soup thickened with barley; 
roast chicken; and a dessert of baklava, fresh clementines and dates 
in the dining room of the small Hotel Simuthu in Jendouba near Bulla 
Regia. It was not the only time a delicious bowl of chorba anchored 
the lunchtime break. Bulla Regia is only about two miles off the main 
highway. Like most Roman sites it has a small museum of artifacts, 
including sarcophagi and other items found nearby. The dig meanders 
through a scrubby landscape on the opposite side of the road, and 
at first glance seems to be mainly rubble with some vestiges of temples, 
baths, a forum and several early Christian basilicas. That's because 
much of what there is to see is underground. Bulla Regia was one of 
the richest cities in Roman Africa, the home of grain and olive oil 
merchants who built two-story subterranean villas that would be cool 
in summer and warm in winter. Typically, each has a central courtyard 
reached by one or more staircases and surrounded by a series of arched 
underground rooms. There are only vestiges of the upper rooms at ground 
level. Though many of the mosaics that once decorated these houses 
are now in the Bardo Museum, some remain, and they include finely 
detailed and well-preserved hunting scenes, as well as portraits of 
noble women. One depicts the sea full of fish in the House of Fishing, 
another is a maritime scene of Venus and Neptune in the House of Amphitrite. 
The high windows at the lower level allowed for maximum daylight. 
Farther south and nearer the coast, El Jem (also known as Al Jam) 
is worth a visit for its astonishing amphitheater, said to be the 
third largest in the Roman world. The riches of the olive oil trade, 
the oil used in ancient Rome for lamps as well as for cooking, account 
for its grandeur. El Jem was a stop on our five-day driving tour of 
the southern part of the country, heading along the coast before going 
inland to desert areas. Though still surrounded by endless miles of 
olive groves (Tunisia is one of the world's largest producers of olive 
oil), El Jem, at the edge of a dusty small town with the same name, 
appears to be in the middle of nowhere. It was formerly Thysdrus, 
a city of 40,000. The amphitheater, in better shape than the Roman 
Colosseum and considered more advanced in its engineering, is now 
used for a summer music and theater festival. But in Roman times, 
this third century arena, an oval nearly 500 feet long that could 
hold 30,000 spectators on many tiers of seats, is thought to have 
been used for more bloodthirsty events, involving not only gladiatorial 
combat to the death but also throwing prisoners and slaves to the 
lions. We climbed to the upper levels of the amphitheater and wandered 
through the underground passages and vaults, where animals and prisoners 
were kept. Souvenir stands and stores selling crafts and antiques 
fill the plaza around the amphitheater, and small shops sell good 
Tunisian sandwiches of sausages or tuna and harissa, a spicy condiment. 
There is an archeological museum, with a collection featuring mainly 
statuary and coins, a short drive away. We continued to follow the 
trail of olive oil. By the late third century, the power of Thysdrus 
was supplanted by Sufetula, a settlement founded in the first century 
A.D. and also made prosperous by olive oil. Its ruins, crisscrossed 
by a grid of paved streets, now lie on the outskirts of the city of 
Sbeitla. This is the prettiest Roman site, built of rich golden-hued 
stone and nicely maintained with flower beds. The decumanus, the main 
thoroughfare, crosses the forum with its trio of beautiful temples. 
The largest one, dedicated to Jupiter, is flanked by porticoed sanctuaries 
to Juno and Minerva, a departure from the usual practice where a single 
temple in the forum celebrates all three gods. Baths, an amphitheater, 
a theater, cisterns, fountains, an oil press and two triumphal arches 
enrich the site. Here, near the temples, are three early Christian 
basilicas, the Churches of Vitalis, Bellator and Servus, converted 
from Roman buildings. Now only the outlines of the buildings remain, 
with a few columns, mosaics and finely carved baptistries; one of 
white marble resembled an unfolding flower. As at the other sites, 
basic explanations are provided by excellent signs and diagrams in 
French, English and Arabic. We spent the night in a nearby clean but 
drab hotel that is notable only for its view of the sunset over the 
ruins. The restaurant was adequate. Though Sbeitla was briefly the 
capital of Tunisia in the seventh century, it fell to Arab invaders 
in 647. The center of power moved north to Kairouan, the fourth holiest 
Moslem city after Mecca, Medina and Jerusalem, where a forest of columns 
harvested from Roman sites supports the arches of the courtyard and 
the sanctuary of the main mosque. We stopped at Kairouan for several 
hours on our way back to Tunis, a route that is dotted with a number 
of other Roman sites. For a short distance, it runs alongside the 
towering arches of an aqueduct that once extended more than 60 miles 
and supplied water for those grand Antonine baths at Carthage. The 
aqueduct pointed us back in the direction of Carthage and Tunis. In 
Tunisia, all roads lead there. The best times to visit Tunisia are 
spring and fall. Our trip was in December, the rainiest season, especially 
in coastal areas. We had some wet afternoons and evenings, but never 
a steady downpour. Temperatures ranged from the mid-60s to the low 
70s, dropping to the high 40s to low 50s at night. Admission is charged 
at most Roman sites, usually $2 to $4, with $1 extra for taking photos. 
There are no nonstop flights between New York and Tunis, though Tunisair 
is supposed to begin this service before the end of the year. A round-trip 
fare between New York and Tunis with good connections can range from 
$800 to $1,500; the best connections are on Lufthansa (through Frankfurt) 
and Alitalia (through Rome). Round-trip air fare between Rome and 
Tunis, the shortest flight from a major European city (50 minutes), 
ranges from $260 to $400. Some travel companies based in the United 
States can arrange complete custom itineraries in Tunisia. We were 
pleased with Tunis USA, 155 East Lancaster Avenue, Wayne, Pa., 19087; 
(800) 474-5500. Archeological Tours, 271 Madison Avenue, Suite 904, 
New York, N.Y. 10016, (212) 986-3054, offers one Tunisian itinerary 
each year for a group of about 20 people with an archeologist as a 
guide. For information, contact the Tunisia Tourist Office, 1515 Massachusetts 
Avenue NW, Washington, D.C. 20005; (202) 466-2546, fax (202) 466-2553, 
on the Web: www.tunisiaonline.com. Getting Around In general, visitors 
can expect to pay $150 to $250 a day or about $750 a week for a car 
and driver. Hotel concierges may be able to arrange for English-speaking 
drivers or guides. A compact car without air-conditioning can be rented 
from Hertz, Avis or Europcar for about $100 a day, or $500 a week. 
Some of these agencies will also rent cars with drivers. It is a good 
idea to be sure that luggage will not be exposed. The roads are generally 
good, except in the desert, and well-marked with signposts in French 
and Arabic. It is best not to drive after dark. In general, safety 
did not seem to be a problem. But it is necessary to be careful of 
pickpockets, especially in Tunis. Though there are some persistent 
shopkeepers, visitors are rarely hassled in the medinas. Where to 
Stay There are comfortable, fairly modern but charmless hotels in 
the main cities. Hotels carry government ratings in stars, but what 
is a five-star hotel in Tunisia would probably be considered four-star 
elsewhere. In Tunis, the well-situated Africa Meridien, 50 Avenue 
Habib Bourguiba, (216-1) 347-477, is about $130 a night for a double. 
It has air-conditioning and a pool. The International, 49 Avenue Habib 
Bourguiba, (216-1) 331-144, is nearby, with doubles starting at $100 
including breakfast. Most coastal cities like Hammamet and Sousse 
have good resorts, some new, very comfortable and with big pools and 
health clubs. They often arrange day trips to Roman sights with multilingual 
guides. But inland, where many of the Roman sites are, lodging choices 
narrow considerably. In Sbeitla, the Sufetula, opposite the ruins, 
(216-7) 465-074, was clean but drab, and cost $40 a night for a double, 
including breakfast. Where to Eat Tunis is a big, cosmopolitan city 
offering many dining options. In the Medina, Dar el Jeld, 5 Rue Dar 
el Jeld, telephone (216-1) 560-916, is in an elegant converted palace 
with Tunisian specialties. Dinner for two costs around $60, with wine. 
A three-course tourist menu with couscous is $14 a person. A similar 
dining experience in a palatial though somewhat less romantic setting 
but with slightly better food, can be had at Essaraya, 6 Rue Ben Mahmoud, 
(216-1) 563-091, where dinner for two will cost about $60 including 
wine. In the modern city, we enjoyed Le Carthage, 10 Rue Ali Bach 
Hamba, (216-1) 255-614, where excellent fresh fish and a Berber specialty, 
lamb cooked in a clay pot, are served. Dinner for two with wine: about 
$40. In La Marsa, Le Golfe, 5 Rue Larbi Zarrouk, (216-1) 748-219, 
is a pretty seaside place with delicious fresh fish. Dinner for two 
with wine averages $50. For mint tea or Turkish coffee and pastries, 
there are two famous cafes, M'Rabet, Souk el-Trouk, (216-1) 263-681, 
in the Medina in Tunis, and the Cafe des Nattes, on the main square 
in Sidi Bou Said. Near Bulla Regia, we had a nice prix-fixe lunch 
($9) at the Hotel Simuthu in Jendouba, (216-8) 634-043. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>