<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981012.0011 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Dan Reeves returned to Giants Stadium tonight, turning back the clock 
in more ways than one. Reeves' new team, the Atlanta Falcons, looked 
rejuvenated, but the New York Giants and their offense looked worse 
than it has since Reeves's last Giants team in 1996. And when Atlanta's 
wholesale 34-20 dismantling of the Giants was complete, with the booing 
of the home crowd enveloping their final moments on the field, the 
1998 Giants were six games into making the stunning successes of last 
season seem a distant mirage. With a 2-4 record, the Giants trail 
the Dallas Cowboys in the National Football Conference East by two 
games. They are 1-2 at home. There was little the Giants did right 
offensively on Sunday night. Worst of all, Danny Kanell had his second 
straight poor outing. Kanell's protection was shoddy, and he was sacked 
five times, but Kanell also completed just 11 of 21 passes. Most telling, 
he passed for only 100 yards as the Giants rarely even attempted a 
long pass. Kanell's evening included an embarrassing turnover at his 
3-yard line, when Atlanta defensive end Antonio Edwards took the ball 
out of Kanell's hands and scored a touchdown. It was in the second 
half that Atlanta (4-1) suddenly found it easy to move the football 
against the Giants' defense. Gaping holes were opened in the Giants' 
defensive front four, and since the Giants' linebackers were often 
blitzing, it made it easy for the Falcons to run the football. The 
Falcons' first possession was an 11-play drive that took up 6 minutes 
and 21 seconds and ended with a 26-yard field goal by Morten Anderson. 
Later in the third quarter, the Giants' defense began to look unsure 
and weary since the Giants' offense was doing little to give it a 
rest. With 3:28 left in the third, Atlanta wide receiver Terance Mathis 
dashed down the sideline behind Giants cornerback Carleton Gray, who 
was playing because Phillippi Sparks was sidelined with a sore right 
shoulder. Atlanta quarterback Chris Chandler, who would finish the 
game with 266 passing yards on just 14 completions in 27 attempts, 
had no trouble finding Mathis in the open field, Mathis catching the 
ball for a 55-yard touchdown pass that gave Atlanta a 24-13 lead. 
When another Giants three-and-out followed, the Giants' defense, rarely 
off the field in the second half, was overmatched during the Falcons' 
next possession, which ended with another touchdown and a 31-13 Atlanta 
lead. The pivotal play was a 19-yard scramble by Chandler on a third-and-3 
at midfield. As Chandler was being tackled out of bounds by the Giants' 
Percy Ellsworth, Gray was called for a 15-yard unnecessary roughness 
for a hit at the sideline. On the next play, Chandler hit tight end 
Brian Kozlowski, a former Giant, with a 25-yard pass to the Giants' 
1-yard line. Chandler scored two plays later, running untouched into 
the end zone on a bootleg right. Atlanta's Randy Fuller sacked Kanell 
on a cornerback blitz when the Giants got the ball back, forcing a 
fumble that Fuller recovered on the Giants' 15-yard line. It led to 
a 32-yard field goal by Anderson. The Giants back-up quarterback Kent 
Graham replaced Kanell in the final six minutes and scored on a 5-yard 
run with 2 minutes and 44 seconds remaining in the game. The Giants' 
offense, under siege after a dismal performance in last week's defeat 
to the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, got off to a inauspicious start on Sunday 
night when Kanell was sacked on the Giants' first play. The rest of 
this three-play drive was remarkably typical of the Giants' ineffectual 
offense this season. Charles Way picked up 3 yards on second down, 
and then on third-and-16, the Giants got 14 yards on a pass from Kanell 
to Amani Toomer. As bad as the Giants started the game, the Falcons 
somehow started in worse fashion. Their running back Jamal Anderson 
fumbled on Atlanta's first play, and the Giants' Conrad Hamilton recovered 
on the Falcons' 36-yard line. But the Giants once again looked feeble 
on offense, advancing the football just six yards in seven plays. 
Brad Daluiso salvaged something from the turnover, kicking a 46-yard 
field goal into the wind. The Giants led 3-0, but it didn't last long. 
On its second drive, Atlanta went after Giants cornerback Jeremy Lincoln, 
who was playing in the nickel defenses because Sparks was out. Lincoln 
was called for pass interference, a 16-yard penalty that put Atlanta 
inside Giants territory. Two plays later, Falcons' wide receiver Tony 
Martin caught a 36-yard touchdown pass from Chandler. Martin got behind 
Giants safety Tito Wooten on the play, catching the ball just as he 
passed the goal line. It wasn't until the Giants took possession of 
the football with two minutes remaining in the first half that they 
mounted a touchdown drive _ and this was executed with the Giants 
in their two-minute offense. Kanell completed four passes in seven 
plays as the Giants moved to the Atlanta 39-yard line. From there, 
Kanell found David Patten deep downfield behind Falcons' cornerback 
Elijah Williams for a touchdown pass 41 seconds before intermission. 
The score brought the Giants within a point, 14-13. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>