<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981012.0211 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
On Aug. 6, President Clinton issued Executive Order 13096 concerning 
American Indian and Alaska Native Education. The president's initiative 
targets the serious problems plaguing Indian schooling _ dropout rates 
and substance abuse. The first federal-tribal conference on education 
under the executive order opened in Nashville, Tenn., this past weekend. 
The president's initiative not only mandates cooperation among federal 
agencies and dialogue with tribal leaders, it opens an essential pathway 
to the budget process. The nearly half-a-million American Indian students 
from kindergarten through high school have the highest dropout rate 
of any group in the nation. More than 25 percent of the American Indian/Alaska 
Native students who should have graduated in 1992 dropped out of school. 
Approximately 90 percent of Indian students attend public schools. 
Many of the 190 tribal schools across this country are in terrible 
disrepair. And those public schools, which are built on tribal lands, 
have never really addressed the cultural needs of Indian students. 
In the past there has been little cooperation between Head Start programs 
serving Indian children and tribal schools, and less cooperation between 
public schools on tribal land and tribal schools. In the hodgepodge 
of federal, state, and local educational programs, Indian students 
often fall between the cracks. Section 1 of Clinton's order sets the 
goals: ``The federal government has a special, historic responsibility 
for the education of American Indian and Alaska Native students. Improving 
educational achievement and academic progress for American Indian 
and Alaska Native students is vital to the national goal of preparing 
every student for responsible citizenship, continued learning, and 
productive employment.'' The executive order creates a task force 
and sets deadlines. The 17-member task force represents 15 federal 
departments and agencies, including the U.S. Department of Education, 
the Department of the Interior and the Bureau of Indian Affairs, and 
the Department Health and Human Services. It will consult with tribes, 
the National Congress of American Indians, the National Indian Education 
Association and the National Advisory Council on Indian Education. 
By August 2000, the task force must have developed a comprehensive 
federal Indian education policy. Kevin Gover, who has headed the BIA 
for nearly a year, called the executive order an initiative to develop 
a strategy for dealing with educational problems in several areas 
_ ``to reduce the dropout rate and to address some of the social problems 
that are facing Indian children, having to do with drug and alcohol 
abuse and domestic violence. And a third, that's sort of a chicken-and-egg 
proposition _ we want to improve their performance in science, math 
and English.'' Gover explained the importance of presidential executive 
orders: ``What we find in almost any subject area is that there are 
a number of agencies that have resources which can be brought to bear, 
but only rarely does the federal government coordinate its efforts 
so that we combine our resources or unify our approach to particular 
problems. An executive order puts the power of the president behind 
an effort to do that sort of policy or resource coordination. That 
alone often will improve situations even without the expenditure of 
new money. ``When the president says something is a priority, then 
all sorts of doors begin to open. One of the doors we need to really 
kick open is in the budget process. We know we've got over a billion 
dollars of needed construction in the BIA school system. And getting 
the kind of commitment we need at the beginning of the budget process 
from the Office of Management and Budget becomes considerably easier 
when we are able to say `Indian education is a presidential priority.' 
Quite often it has symbolic significance that translates into real 
political clout. ``That's why we're so pleased that the president 
would turn his attention to Indian education.'' The Clinton order 
pushes other federal agencies to recognize their responsibilities 
to the tribes and prods them to make their resources available. Certainly, 
the U.S. Department of Education has a great many more educational 
resources than the BIA. And now those resources can be tapped. Melody 
McCoy, staff attorney for Native American Rights Fund in Boulder, 
Colo., says tribal organizations had worked on the fundamentals of 
this education initiative since 1994. Their recommendations were presented 
to Clinton in March 1997. The executive order adopted much of their 
comprehensive policy statement. ``That's fast, as government action 
goes,'' said McCoy. Tribal control over Indian education is a pivotal 
concept in this initiative, according to McCoy. Public schools on 
Indian reservations need to take into account they are on Indian land 
and be more attuned to tribal culture, mores and social problems, 
she said. The agenda in these schools is not set by Indians and should 
be. Educational goals are imposed from outside tribal culture. McCoy 
sees the executive order as an important step toward improving Indian 
education through Indian leadership. It has long been recognized that 
students of a distinct minority culture suffer when thrust into schools 
which only reflect the values of the majority culture. For them, success 
in school represents a failure of their own community; failure in 
school, however, becomes success in the community and preservation 
of their culture. Tragically, children in such a situation are often 
forced to choose one culture over another. And lose, whichever path 
they pick. This tribal-inspired education initiative was needed a 
hundred years ago. It deserves the full support of Congress, federal 
agencies and the voters. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>