<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981012.0194 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The ``indispensable'' travel dress is headlined in one catalog. Another 
highlights clothes ``designed specifically for the rigors of world 
travel.'' ``Pack with less bulk,'' says the redoubtable L.L. Bean, 
never one to squander syllables. The notion of wardrobes just for 
travel is an offshoot of both the boom in adventure travel _ meaning 
no equipment or time for ironing _ and the airlines' squeeze on suitcase 
space. In the days of the steamer trunk and Railway Express, there 
was no reason to buy something particular for the road: You took everything 
you owned if you liked. Travel clothes, as displayed in catalogs, 
are usually of synthetic fibers, for wrinkle resistance, compressibility 
and rapid drying. Faced with a suitcase stuffed with heavy jeans and 
wool shirts, most natural-fiber fans can make the leap to something 
else, especially the ever-softer microfibers. The new travel clothes 
also have many and sometimes tricky pockets. Often the clothes are 
designed to serve in a number of situations. I took a look at a few 
interesting women's travel garments from five catalogs. (There are, 
of course, similar options for men.) Catalog clothes avoid elements 
requiring precise fit, and thus sizing is vague. Elastic may bridge 
the gap when the nuances of size are reduced to small, medium and 
large. Here are the results of our unscientific test. The clear favorite 
on all counts was an ``indispensable black travel dress,'' from Travelsmith 
in Novato, Calif. This synthetic jersey dress can be ordered with 
long or short sleeves, in a short or long length and with a turtle 
or jewel neckline. The dress, made in the United States, is cut with 
a flared skirt and a relatively low Empire waist. It is made of nylon 
and Lycra; the fibers caught on my fingers but did not bother others. 
The tester, a colleague, who tried on the long (49 inches from the 
back of the neck in regular) and short (36 inches) dresses, both with 
short sleeves, is tall and slender: a chiffon scarf or stole would 
have prepared her well for the theater. She considered the long model 
too long for daytime wear. This slightly clingy fabric is not altogether 
forgiving and requires inconspicuous underwear, although the cut and 
color accommodate a range of shapes and situations. This washable 
dress is a backpacker's lifesaver: the short version, in size small 
(6 to 8), compressed into a roll 6 inches long and 12 inches around, 
about the bulk of two pairs of wool socks, and weighed 11.5 ounces. 
The sizes range from extra small (2-4) to extra large (18-20). The 
6-8 we looked at was cut on the large side. The short version with 
short sleeves costs $89; with a long skirt, $99; with a long skirt, 
long sleeves and a turtle neck, $109. PS: This basic black also comes 
in basic midnight blue and basic chianti. Travelsmith, 60 Leveroni 
Court, Novato, Calif. 94949; (800) 950-1600. From Magellan's in Santa 
Barbara, Calif., came the ``Milano travel outfit,'' a boxy five-button 
jacket to be worn with slacks or a flared skirt. All three items, 
made in the United States, are designed to be roomy. The imported 
fabric, a polyester and viscose blend, is a black-and-white basketweave 
on one side and tiny white dots on black on the other. The jacket, 
with cuffs and slash pockets, is in the basketweave; the fabric is 
reversed for trousers and skirt. All pieces are unlined, to keep bulk 
down, but unfortunately the shoulder pads show if the jacket is taken 
off. The pants have an elastic waist in back and sliding devices on 
the side that ease the fit six inches more. The jacket weighs 13 ounces, 
the pants, 12.5 ounces and the skirt 9.5 ounces. The outfit, although 
somewhat stylish, unhappily was not checked for quality: the zipper 
on the deep passport pocket on the skirt front was sewed _ so it could 
not be unzipped; buttonholes were poorly finished. The jacket, skirt 
and pants come in sizes 4 to 22. The jacket costs $64; the skirt $56 
and the pants $65. Magellan's, 110 West Sola Street, Santa Barbara, 
Calif. 93101; (800) 962-4943. Ex Officio is a Seattle manufacturer, 
in business 12 years, that distributes through outfitting and sports 
supply shops like Paragon in New York and E.M.S. and also through 
some catalogs, including Magellan's. These clothes have a cargo-pants 
air. Ex Officio is the creator of the ``ultimate travel skirt,'' made 
of nylon with a twill weave on the outside. The skirt, made in China, 
is in six gores, and buttons up the front. It has elastic panels in 
the back of the waist, wide belt loops and two deep mesh-fabric pockets 
in the side seams, plus a passport pocket with a Velcro closing, reached 
from inside the waist band. In addition, there is a ``floating pocket,'' 
a waterproof zippered pouch four inches square sewed to a cord clipped 
to a loop sewed into the waistband. This can be tucked into a pocket; 
the theory is that credit cards would thus be easier to get out than 
the passport. The skirt comes in sizes 4 to 18 in dark neutrals: navy, 
dark garnet, pine, brown and khaki. It is long enough to pass muster 
in places where women are supposed to be covered but not dressy enough 
for an elegant evening. It came out of the box a bit wrinkled _ not 
a good sign, although it would probably straighten out if hung up. 
The price is $58. The company sent along a Baja Plus cotton-polyester 
shirt to go with the skirt. It has lots of features for warm-weather 
hiking: a big double pleat in the back, mesh ventilation openings 
on the side, a hidden zip pocket, shoulder patches and lots of Velcro 
_ almost everything but grenade rings. This is marked at $79. Ex Officio, 
1419 Elliott Avenue West, Seattle, Wash. 98119; (800) 644-7303. Coats 
are an inescapable pain in the neck for travelers. Slickers and windbreakers 
are fine for hiking, but usually will not serve if the trip involves 
restaurant meals or the like. We looked at two packable trenchcoats. 
The LL Bean H2Off coat is made of a polyester microfiber that is soft 
and smooth and water-repellent. The long coat has pocket flaps to 
keep water out, raglan sleeves, a cape front and back and no belt. 
The lining is nylon mesh under the cape area, regular nylon down to 
the hem. The coat zips down the front and has snaps on top. The one 
we had was an appealing blue that LL Bean calls mallard. This machine-washable 
coat, made in Thailand, is cut large, weighs 10 ounces and compresses 
into a roll 17{ inches around by 9 inches long. The sizes are small 
to extra-large (6-8 to 18-20); colors are black, red, lilac, mallard 
and light khaki. The price is $129. If packing is not involved, it 
can be bought with a wool lining for $179. LL Bean, Freeport, Maine 
04033; (800) 221-4221. Hammacher Schlemmer sells a coat that is crinkle 
nylon, bears the label of Kenneth Barnard and is made in the Philippines. 
It buttons down the front, has two slash pockets, a buttoned interior 
breast pocket and a half-lining. Packed in a Velcro-closed pouch, 
12 inches by 10 inches, it weighs 6 ounces. This ``generously oversized'' 
coat looks odd when worn: the raglan sleeves drop almost to the waist, 
which tended to make our tester look swamped. It comes in red, tan 
and black and costs $89.95. Hammacher Schlemmer, 9180 Le Saint Drive, 
Fairfield, Ohio 45014; (800) 543-3366. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>