<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981012.0272 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The scene has been played out again and again over the millennia: 
A hungry bird spies a bug and pounces, driving its beak into its hearty 
insect meal. Now, in a twist on this ancient story, scientists are 
training birds to aim at virtual insects, computer-generated fakes 
at the heart of a growing field of ecology. An increasing number of 
such bloodless creatures are being shaped, colored and directed on 
the computer screen as researchers find new ways to explore a wide 
array of questions about why real animals act the way they do. The 
virtual menagerie already in use by biologists includes spiders, flies, 
chickens and fish, variously posed as prey, predators or alluring 
mates. ``What we have here is a virtual ecology,'' said Dr. Alan B. 
Bond, who along with Dr. Alan C. Kamil, a fellow behavioral ecologist 
at the University of Nebraska, carried out a study reported in the 
current issue of the journal Nature. ``The blending of the living 
animal and the computer model allows us to ask questions that were 
inaccessible.'' Bond and Kamil were interested in the longstanding 
question of why members of a single species may have very different 
color patterns. One popular hypothesis was that the variation results 
when predators focus on hunting down the most common type until it 
becomes rare and then switch to hunt whatever has become the common 
type in its place. By doing so, they would prevent any one color type 
from being hunted into oblivion. But the hypothesis has been difficult 
to test. Field studies involved things like leaving out banquets of 
differently colored worms fashioned of pastry and coming back to see 
what the birds had taken. But while researchers saw that the common 
type was favored, they were unable to show that birds actively switched 
their favorite from one type to another as frequencies of different 
types changed. On the computer, however, researchers created a virtual 
population of differently patterned black-and-white winged moths, 
based on the wing pattern of actual underwing moths. The computer 
then drew sample moths from the virtual population and offered them 
to the birds. Pecked moths were considered killed and were removed 
from the population. Researchers saw that the birds tended to attack 
the common types and pass on the uncommon types, just as predicted, 
as different types waxed and waned in frequency. It took researchers 
two months to train each blue jay to recognize on-screen moths as 
food items, but once they did, researchers say the birds went at the 
images with such vigor that they had to place a protective shield 
over the screen to keep the jays from shattering the monitors. Although 
the blue jays were slow to catch on, some animals respond instantly 
to a computer-generated meal. When shown a computer-generated insect, 
toads ``will look at it, hop over to it and actually put their tongue 
on the screen trying to get it,'' said Dr. David Clark, an animal 
behaviorist at Alma College in Michigan who is also doing virtual 
experimentation. A praying mantis, he said, will stalk a virtual fly 
and lunge its legs at it. Clark has also worked with spiders and finds 
that females do their come-hither leg tapping at the sight of virtual 
males performing just the right courtship behaviors. He said he had 
been able to tease apart the important elements of courtship by creating 
male spiders of varying color patterns (something he said would have 
killed real animals if done with paint) and programming them to perform 
combinations of behaviors that no actual spider would ever do. But 
not all animals take to computers so readily. ``I tried showing snakes 
mice walking around on a little screen,'' Clark said. ``I didn't have 
much luck.'' Lizards were similarly unimpressed. Part of the problem, 
researchers said, is that computer monitors are specifically built 
to reproduce the world for the human eye. Bird color vision, for example, 
``is so very different and so much better than ours,'' said Dr. John 
A. Endler, an evolutionary biologist at James Cook University in Australia, 
that using color images may always be an impossibility with them. 
(Researchers on the new study used black and white patterned moths.) 
Exploring the technology and discovering what animals find convincing 
is all part of this new field, just as it was years ago when biologists 
began playing taped recordings of frog, bird and insect songs _ now 
a tried and trusted experimental technique _ to see if animals would 
respond. Bond and Kamil are also using birds known as Clark's nutcrackers 
to study the three-dimensional problem of spatial memory _ that is, 
how a bird remembers where it stored all its bits of food _ a seemingly 
perfect experimental problem to solve using virtual reality. But even 
if the birds are ready, the researchers may not be. After spending 
two months training blue jays to peck a computer screen, Bond realizes 
it would take a tremendous amount of work to train Clark's nutcrackers 
to react naturally to a computer-generated three-dimensional space. 
``I just wouldn't want to think of what you'd have to do to get reliable 
virtual reality with a nutcracker,'' Bond said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>