<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981012.0415 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
On the dance floor, Jose Cancela, a radio executive who left Cuba 
as a child, is shaking a pair of maracas, trying to keep up with the 
rhythm of a song that praises the hot tamales of a cook named Olga. 
Lily Renteria, a Cuban actress who arrived in Miami just over a year 
ago, is dancing next to him with a man who crossed the Florida Strait 
in a raft four years ago. It is dark and smoky on this recent Friday 
night in Cafe Nostalgia, the hottest dance club for Cuban music in 
Miami and, as its name suggest, the perfect place for those who like 
to cultivate their feelings of nostalgia for Cuba or, more specifically, 
for the nights of Havana, which for this crowd are one and the same. 
All night long, black-and-white musical movie clips from the 1950s 
and '60s play on a screen behind the stage. There is Celia Cruz, who 
was young and trim then but who is still singing and now lives in 
New Jersey. There is Beny More, long dead, but his voice strong and 
melodious on film. People sit mesmerized, listening to the music and 
looking at the images of their past. For the younger crowd, or for 
the non-Cubans in the audience, it is not their past they are looking 
at, but that of their parents or their own ideas of what Cuba must 
have been like back when it was fun and Americans liked to travel 
there for their honeymoons. The band plays again, and the music is 
loud but good, very good. Couples bump against one another on the 
tiny dance floor. The door opens a crack and a tall, handsome man 
comes in. An entourage follows. He is Francisco Gatorno, a Cuban actor 
who lives and works in Mexico City and is visiting Miami. He heads 
for the dance floor and taps Ms. Renteria, still dancing, on the shoulder. 
She turns around and jumps to hug him. They have not seen each other 
in five years. ``When I saw him, my mind just went `trah-trah-trah' 
and it went back to Cuba,'' Ms. Renteria said, making a mechanical 
sound as if the wheels of her memory were turning. ``I can't tell 
you how many times that's happened to me here.'' Hovering over them, 
smiling beatifically at the scene as if it were his doing, is Pepe 
Horta, a Cuban government official turned successful businessman. 
Shortly after he left his job in Cuba at the government-controlled 
film institute in 1994 and moved to Miami, Horta opened Cafe Nostalgia, 
the kind of place that seems to exist to make such encounters possible. 
This is a place where on a given night a visitor to the club could 
run into her old high school teacher while, a few feet away on the 
stage, the Hollywood actor Andy Garcia, who was reared in Miami, bangs 
the drums. Ruben Blades has been here and so have Gloria Estefan and 
Bono of the band U2. But it is also the kind of place where grandmothers 
can be seen tapping their fingers to the beat. Horta is not the first 
Miami entrepreneur to profit from his own nostalgia and that of his 
countrymen, but he has managed to turn it into a kind of art. And 
now, with plans to open similar nightclubs in Miami Beach, Madrid 
and Paris, he may be the first to market internationally nostalgia 
for a certain lost moment in history. The longevity of Castro (73 
years old, almost 40 of them in power) and the embargo that the United 
States has kept against Cuba for more than 30 years have made the 
island distant, inaccessible, mysterious. Horta has harnessed the 
allure and offered it in an irresistible combination: film and drinks 
and good music for a hungry crowd of exiles who cannot get enough 
of the country they lost. The seeming contradiction of his new role 
does not escape Horta, who was 6 when Castro came to power. Like most 
other people who remained in Cuba, Horta worked for the government 
all his life until his defection _ the same government that created 
the conditions that fueled the nostalgia in Miami. By the time he 
left Cuba, he was the director of Havana's Film Festival and generally 
considered one of the most powerful men on Havana's artistic scene. 
Now he is the person who has made nostalgia chic. ``People said it 
would not be possible, that Miami is unforgiving, that Cubans here 
don't accept anyone who left after the 1960's,'' said Horta, 45, a 
smart man with a raspy voice and a suave air. ``But here I am. I look 
at what I've done and I'm amazed at myself.'' Horta said he left Cuba 
on an impulse. Because he spent years living in Paris and traveling 
the world representing Cuba's film industry, he said, he had been 
privileged, and practically untouched by politics and the daily difficulties 
of life in Cuba. But everything changed one day at Havana's international 
airport as he waited to board a plane for Mexico on his way to a conference 
in New York. Suddenly, uniformed men ushered him to a room, took his 
passport and went through his belongings. Horta asked them what the 
problem was. They did not say. Eventually, he was allowed to go. By 
then, Horta had made up his mind. The rough treatment had been a warning: 
if he did not leave, he thought, he would be demoted or arrested. 
On arriving in Miami, Horta had to find a job. He said he had taken 
nothing of value from Cuba on that flight to Mexico except dozens 
of reels of old films for a documentary he was to make in Mexico about 
Cuban music. He was feeling nostalgic for his country and his family 
and noticed that everyone in Miami was similarly afflicted. The idea 
for Cafe Nostalgia just occurred to him. A friend lent him $48,000 
and another gave him a few whisky bottles for opening night. At the 
beginning, some people stayed away. Horta had remained in Cuba too 
long, they said. He had been too powerful, too close to the decision 
makers to ignore what was going on, even if he had often been away 
from Cuba. But soon enough, attracted by the music and the buzz and 
the personality of Horta, the distrust collapsed and people flocked 
to Cafe Nostalgia. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>