<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981012.0225 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The sexually transmitted disease chlamydia has become so common among 
teen-age girls in some parts of the United States that doctors have 
begun to recommend that sexually active girls be tested for the disease 
twice a year, instead of once a year, as called for by current medical 
guidelines. ``It doesn't matter how rich or poor you are, or where 
you live,'' said Dr. Penny Hitchcock, chief of the Sexually Transmitted 
Diseases Branch of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases. Just being a sexually active teen-ager, she said, is the 
the greatest risk factor for contracting chlamydia. The Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention estimates that four million cases of 
chlamydial infection occur in the United States each year, making 
it the most common treatable sexually transmitted disease. The infection 
and its complications cost the nation $2.4 billion a year. Researchers 
said that incidence of the disease did not appear to be rising, but 
that increased testing has revealed disturbingly high rates of infection. 
The disease, caused by the bacterium Chlamydia trachomatis, is a leading 
cause of female infertility and of life-threatening complications 
of pregnancy. Some researchers think that untreated chlamydia may 
also cause damage beyond the reproductive system. The bacteria can 
make their way into joints, and a team of researchers led by Dr. Charles 
Henry, an oral surgeon at Boston University, recently suggested that 
Chlamydia trachomatis may play a role in the painful jaw condition, 
temporomandibular joint syndrome, or TMJ. In its early stages, chlamydia 
causes no symptoms in 75 percent of women, who may go untreated, allowing 
the infection to linger and ascend the reproductive tract, where it 
leaves scars. Half of men also remain symptom-free, which helps chlamydia 
spread since people can be infected without knowing it, and pass the 
bacteria along to one sexual partner after another. Chlamydia can 
also infect the throat and be transmitted during oral sex, Dr. Hitchcock 
said. Testing for chlamydia is easier than it used to be. In the past, 
women needed a pelvic examination, but now just a urine sample is 
sufficient. If the result is positive, antibiotics can cure the infection, 
and, if given early, prevent complications. But it is not clear how 
early is early enough, Hitchcock said. In some cases, the bacteria 
move into the reproductive tract within a week. The call for twice-a-year 
testing, by researchers at Johns Hopkins University, is based in part 
on their study of 3,202 girls ages 12 to 19 in Baltimore who went 
to clinics for birth control, pregnancy or sexually transmitted diseases. 
The highest rate of infection, 27.5 percent, occurred in 14-year-olds, 
but older girls also had high rates, near 20 percent. Most of the 
girls in the study were black city dwellers, but the researchers said 
that other studies showed chlamydia to be a serious problem in whites 
and other teen-agers as well, with infection rates over 10 percent 
even in rural areas and suburbs. Especially worrisome was the finding 
that among the girls who tested positive and were treated, more than 
half became infected again within six to seven months. The finding 
helped convince researchers that twice-a-year testing was essential, 
said Dr. Charlotte Gaydos, an author of the study, which was published 
in August in the Journal of the American Medical Association. Hitchcock 
said that testing twice a year was ``a good place to start,'' but 
added, ``I don't know if it's enough.'' But Dr. Helene Gayle, director 
of the National Center for HIV, Sexually Transmitted Diseases and 
Tuberculosis Prevention at the CDC, said that for now, the national 
recommendations would not be changed. She said that once a year was 
still reasonable and testing more often would waste money. But she 
said that regions with high rates could set their own policies on 
testing. Dr. Peter Beilenson, Baltimore's health commissioner, said 
that one reason the infection rate was so high among the youngest 
girls was that they were much less likely than older girls to use 
condoms. He said that many were pressured into having sex by older 
men in circumstances that amounted to statutory rape. But Hitchcock 
warned that condoms might not be the solution. Scientists do not know 
why, but condoms do not work as well against chlamydia as they do 
against other sexually transmitted diseases. A second study by Dr. 
Gaydos and her colleagues, published in September in The New England 
Journal of Medicine, also found high rates of chlamydia in 13,204 
young female military recruits. The highest rate in any age group, 
12.2 percent, occurred in 17-year-olds. The overall rate was 9.2 percent, 
but women from five Southern states _ South Carolina, Georgia, Alabama, 
Louisiana and Mississippi _ had rates of more than 15 percent. Women 
from Washington and Oregon had lower rates, below 5 percent, a difference 
that Dr. Gaydos attributed to more effective screening and treatment 
programs. She and her colleagues noted that neither of their studies 
included men or boys, who must also be treated to help break the cycle 
of infection. But screening programs focus on women and girls, because 
the consequences of infection are known to be severe for them. Less 
is known about complications in boys, but Hitchcock says it is possible 
that a lingering case of chlamydia may also interfere with their fertility 
later in life. Persuading teen-agers to be tested for chlamydia is 
not always easy, Dr. Gaydos said, particularly if they have no symptoms 
and fear their parents' discovering what they have been up to. Hitchcock 
said home testing kits like those used to test for pregnancy were 
being developed, and might help solve that problem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>