<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981012.0196 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
VACATION PLANNING www.sidewalk.com I wanted to plan a three-day weekend, 
and I had heard that Microsoft's Sidewalk, which started in early 
1997, was the place to begin on the Web. It was also the place I ended, 
exploring it on and off over a week. Designed mainly for residents 
of the cities it covers, Sidewalk does not offer airline information 
or online reservations, but it is a blessedly consistent site with 
an excellent search function, handsome despite its many advertisements. 
It's up and running for a dozen places: Boston, Chicago, Denver, Houston, 
Melbourne, New York, San Diego, San Francisco, Seattle, Sydney, Minneapolis/St. 
Paul. And by Thanksgiving, Microsoft says, it will add entertainment 
information, like movie reviews and concert listings, for ``every 
town in America,'' and Zagat restaurant reviews in a total of 40 areas. 
San Francisco, of which I am a native but which I haven't visited 
in years, was appealing. What follows are my choices; yours would 
certainly be different. There were 19 major categories for the City, 
as Northern Californians call it, from Find a Movie to Find a Place 
to Stay. Although the other cities offered similar information, it 
gratified my San Francisco chauvinism to note that Houston and Denver 
had only a dozen options each, and even New York had a mere 16. To 
find a place to stay, you can search for a specific place or pick 
a region _ in Sidewalks, San Francisco includes the East Bay, Napa 
Valley and other areas _ and a special option. I picked San Francisco 
and Historic Interest. That gave me 13 places, divided into bed-and-breakfasts, 
hotels and motels. The Fairmont and Mark Hopkins Intercontinental 
hotels, curiously, were listed as motels. My first choice was a luxury 
hotel, like the Fairmont, but a cooler head usually prevails, so I 
examined the bed-and-breakfasts. For the Red Victorian, in Haight-Ashbury, 
all the essential information was in the first listing, and a click 
away was a short article (``the rooms and decor reflect the Summer 
of Love''). Next, dinner the first night. A button produced the names, 
addresses and phone numbers of 22 restaurants near the B&AMP;B. An 
Asian place, the EOS Restaurant and Wine Bar, sounded promising. After 
spending most of a day flying, getting to and from airports and checking 
in, a restaurant a walk from the hotel is a fine idea. The next night 
we would wander farther afield. I selected Mexican/Southwestern cuisine, 
which San Francisco was noted for when I was growing up there; $15 
to $20 per entree; three stars as a rating, and romantic as the option. 
There were no romantic, medium-priced, excellent Mexican restaurants. 
Maybe I was too choosy. I eased up on the conditions, and was rewarded 
with the names of 58 places. As with the hotels, you can click on 
the name of a restaurant in the brief list, and get a full page of 
information, including a review. For one Mexican place, the Cadillac 
Bar near the Moscone Center, it said ``if Tijuana is your idea of 
Mexico, the place has succeeded.'' Next, some things to do. In the 
Arts and Music section, I picked Poetry/Spoken Word and got the names 
of six events _ readings, live comedy and such _ for the next month 
and half. All of the Sidewalk subcategories operate the same way, 
so once you've found, say, a hotel, you have also learned how to search 
for a restaurant or an art gallery. To find another thing to do, I 
went into Places to Go and was given 14 major categories. I picked 
Culinary Shops/Schools, and was presented with 85 places to shop for, 
eat or learn about food. It was an eclectic list, with Tante Marie's 
Cooking School, the Cellar at Macy's Union Square and to the 24th 
Street Cheese Company all on board. A walk in a park would help after 
eating too much. There were four romantic parks listed, headed by 
the Palace of Fine Arts, which I can attest is romantic, although 
Land's End was the Sidewalk choice. OTHER GUIDES There must be a couple 
of dozen other city guides on the Web. I dipped into several of them, 
but always returned to Sidewalk. You might, however, try Lycos City 
Guide, cityguide.lycos.com, which covers the world in a far more limited 
way, naturally, than Sidewalk covers metropolitan areas; CityInsights, 
www.cityinsights.com, which concentrates on San Francisco, Chicago, 
New York and Boston, but without much in any of them, or USA Citylink, 
www.usacitylink.com, with most of the cities you've ever heard of. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>