<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981012.0010 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Signaling that he had settled on a new line of attack in his re-election 
effort, Sen. Alfonse D'Amato assailed Rep. Charles Schumer again Sunday 
for missing votes in Congress this year, as Schumer campaigned across 
Long Island on his proposal to make college tuition tax deductible. 
In the latest instance of this type of criticism, D'Amato, waiting 
to march up Fifth Avenue in the Hispanic Day Parade, attacked Schumer 
for missing votes, this time on bills of concern to Hispanic voters. 
His remarks marked the latest instance, in speeches and in television 
advertisements, in which D'Amato has criticized Schumer for the same 
shortcoming _ missing votes this session _ but used different examples 
in order to give the attacks fresh currency. ``When people send us 
to Congress, they expect us to work full time,'' D'Amato said, standing 
next to Herman Badillo, the former Democratic congressman who became 
a Republican earlier this year. ``They don't expect us to put politics 
first.'' ``I don't think it's inordinate to say when your opponent 
has missed over 100 votes and key votes, even on the issue of Puerto 
Rican statehood or the plebiscite issue, whether it should be commonwealth 
statehood, when he misses key votes and he's in Washington during 
that, he's absent without leave,'' D'Amato said. As D'Amato marched, 
Schumer, D-Brooklyn, campaigned in the heart of D'Amato's base _ Nassau 
County. He strode down the Long Beach boardwalk where D'Amato is known 
to jog, attracting a largely favorable reception by strollers, power-walkers 
and volleyball players enjoying the warm October weather. At an appearance 
at Adelphi University, Schumer called again for all college tuition 
to be made deductible for families with incomes up to $150,000, and 
he criticized D'Amato for voting to restrict some scholarship benefits 
to college students, ``We're here to show that when it comes to families 
and helping families afford college, Al D'Amato and I are polar opposites,'' 
Schumer said. ``One of my top goals in the Senate _ a goal I've campaigned 
on from the day I announced _ is a goal to make all college tuition 
deductible. On these issues, Al D'Amato opposes me. He's blind to 
the struggle of ordinary families who worry that they won't be able 
to prove a college education for their children.'' D'Amato's focus 
on Schumer's attendance _ including a Spanish-language television 
advertisement that began airing at the weekend, and another news conference 
with D'Amato scheduled for Monday morning _ comes after three weeks 
in which it has seemed that the senator has been grappling to find 
an issue to use against Schumer. D'Amato has variously attacked Schumer 
as liberal, and portrayed him as antagonistic to upstate regions. 
But a series of public opinion polls showed the race in a statistical 
dead heat, with Schumer still viewed favorably by voters. D'Amato's 
aides said that their polling, which they do almost every night, has 
led them to believe that Schumer was being hurt with questions about 
his attendance record, and that they would thus stress it heavily 
for the time being. This is an attack that is often used on sitting 
legislators, who often find themselves torn between their campaign 
and governmental obligations. And because it involves a series of 
votes on different subjects, it is the kind of issue that can be recycled. 
``Get used to it: You're going to be hearing this every day,'' said 
one of D'Amato's aides, speaking on the condition of anonymity. During 
his career, Schumer has had a strong attendance record: 92 percent. 
However, he missed about 100 votes this year, making his attendance 
record 77 percent this year, because he was campaigning. Many of those 
votes were on bills that were passed or rejected by overwhelming margins, 
on amendments, or on technical matters. Schumer brushed off D'Amato's 
attack on Sunday. Schumer noted that there are far more votes in the 
House than in the Senate, many of which are devoted to housekeeping, 
and he asserted that he had been in Washington for key votes when 
he was needed. ``I have been there for 92 percent of the votes over 
the 18 years I've been in Congress,'' he said. ``But when you run 
for the Senate, you have two obligations: One is to be as effective 
a legislator as you can be and second, to let the voters of New York 
know you feel. And I've been carrying both obligations and I think 
I've been carrying them well.'' Referring to D'Amato's voting record, 
Schumer added: ``Sometimes you wish he wouldn't have been there to 
vote.'' Schumer's college tuition plan has been a centerpiece of his 
campaign. D'Amato's spokesman, Robert Bellafiore, said the senator 
had supported some bills in Congress that would provide tax breaks 
for college tuition. ``He's taken no position on this specific proposal,'' 
Bellafiore said. D'Amato marched with Badillo and Mayor Rudolph Giuliani, 
along with a few Hispanic politicians, in the parade. Although parades 
in New York during the campaign season are the kind of events that 
are assured of winning publicity for a candidate, things went a little 
off on Sunday. D'Amato was waiting for the parade to start, posing 
for the photographers and television cameras, when a commotion erupted: 
Antonio Banderas and Melanie Griffith had arrived to lead the march. 
Every camera abandoned the political leaders for the movie stars, 
and stayed with them for the rest of the march. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>