<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981012.0399 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Newly declassified government documents show that the United States 
has relied on weak and unsubstantiated evidence that has never been 
fully investigated to imprison six Iraqi dissidents who worked with 
the CIA against President Saddam Hussein. The six dissidents have 
been jailed for more than a year and a half based on circumstantial 
accusations of espionage that the government has never even tried 
to prove, according to hundreds of pages of declassified FBI interviews 
and reports, as well as formerly secret court testimony. The Iraqis, 
removed in August 1996 by the Clinton administration along with 600 
other CIA-supported dissidents and an additional 5,000 Iraqis and 
Kurds as Hussein's forces attacked opposition groups in northern Iraq, 
have been in legal limbo in an Immigration and Naturalization Service 
center in Los Angeles since early last year. In March they were denied 
asylum and ordered deported in a secret hearing in which they were 
not allowed to see the evidence, hear the testimony or even know the 
charges that were keeping them in prison indefinitely. But their appeal 
has forced the government to declassify much of the evidence in the 
case, and those files show that many of the charges stem from unsubstantiated 
accusations made to the FBI by rival Iraqis combined with other fragmentary 
evidence like family connections to other suspected foreign agents. 
In the documents, the FBI agents who were working on the case acknowledged 
that comprehensive investigations of the accusations were never conducted. 
Testifying against the six, FBI agent John Cosenza said the bureau 
had conducted ``interviews'' in a refugee-processing center on Guam, 
where the men were first held after the evacuation, and had not conducted 
formal investigations of any of the men. The six are Adil Hadi Awadh, 
Ali Yassin Mohammed Karim, Safa Batat, Ali Jahjoh Saleh and Mohammed 
Jassin Tuma. When asked about Batat, Cosenza said he might pose a 
security threat to the United States, but conceded that ``without 
an investigation, I would never say I was certain or uncertain,'' 
according to the documents. Cosenza said the FBI agents on the case 
had received ``source information that, because we didn't have an 
investigation, we were unable to corroborate.'' The FBI turned its 
files over to the Immigration and Naturalization Service, but the 
INS never pursued the tips passed on by the FBI. ``We don't do investigations,'' 
Paul Virtue, the INS general counsel, acknowledged. ``There is a low 
evidentiary threshold for finding whether someone is eligible for 
asylum here. It is wholly unlike a criminal case where the burden 
is on the government to prove someone has committed an offense.'' 
The INS asserts that it has the right to deny the Iraqis asylum without 
the normal due process required under law because they arrived here 
without visas and have never been officially allowed to enter the 
United States. The lawyer for the Iraqis, R. James Woolsey, a former 
director of Central Intelligence, counters that the six men were brought 
to this country in an airlift sponsored by the U.S. government, and 
so should not be treated as if they were illegal immigrants caught 
sneaking across the border. The dissidents came from two crushed CIA-backed 
groups, the Iraqi National Congress and the Iraqi National Accord, 
that had been involved in United States-backed covert action programs. 
The CIA suspected that both groups had been thoroughly penetrated 
by Iraqi double agents, and passed on some evidence against the six 
men to the immigration court that remains classified. But the agency 
never insisted that the FBI and INS conduct thorough investigations 
to determine if they had identified the right suspects. Karim, for 
example, seems to have been a victim of guilt by association. An FBI 
report notes that his cousin, Aras Habib Muhamad Ufayli, who had been 
the chief of intelligence for the Iraqi National Congress, had a ``well-documented 
connection to Iranian intelligence.'' But a Dec. 30, 1996, FBI report 
documenting the connection said that ``no further review by the FBI 
will be conducted'' to determine whether Karim was a spy himself. 
Often, the government simply did not believe the alibis offered by 
the Iraqis, the documents show. To prove that he was a true enemy 
of Hussein, Batat told the FBI that he had been poisoned with thallium, 
a rat poison, by an Iraqi spy, and had been hospitalized in London. 
But FBI agent Thomas Graney testified that Batat's treatment for thallium 
poisoning might have been a sham, and that ``trace information'' provided 
to the FBI suggested that his use of rat poison ``appears to be recreational.'' 
Graney added that ``a number of walk-ins'' in the refugee processing 
camp in Guam had identified Batat as an Iranian agent. Warren Marik, 
a former CIA officer who worked in the agency's covert programs in 
Iraq, warns that the case is certain to damage the CIA's ability to 
recruit foreign agents. ``The lesson of the six,'' Marik said, ``is 
this: if the going gets tough, the friends of the U.S. could well 
end up in a U.S. jail.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>