<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981012.0353 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Japan's Parliament approved landmark banking legislation on Monday 
that will allow the government to nationalize failing banks, and Japan's 
political parties announced that they had reached a new accord to 
provide several hundred billion dollars in new money to try to revive 
the banking system and set the country on a path toward economic health. 
The new accord, reached between Japan's governing Liberal Democratic 
Party and most of the opposition forces, could lead to the injection 
of huge amounts of public money _ more than $400 billion, or four 
times as much as is now available _ into the nation's banks. The Liberal 
Democrats hope that the political alliance holds long enough for them 
to win passage in the Parliament for the new accord by Friday, when 
the current session ends. The possibility of a way out of the financial 
crisis sent stocks surging on Monday, with shares of the nation's 
banks jumping an average of 8 percent. The Nikkei index of 225 shares 
rose 5.24 percent, to 13,555.01, in a big comeback after last week's 
sudden plunge. U.S. markets also rose on optimism about a solution 
to Japan's financial problems. ``They are like the wheels on both 
sides of a car,'' Prime Minister Keizo Obuchi said at a news conference, 
referring to the two pieces of legislation. ``When both of them pass 
the Parliament, it will mean that we can send out a clear and strong 
message to the world that a global depression will absolutely not 
begin in Japan.'' The law enacted by Parliament on Monday allows the 
government to deal with large, failing banks by nationalizing them, 
liquidating them or transforming them into publicly owned ``bridge 
banks,'' which take over the good loans and good borrowers and try 
to collect on the bad loans. It would establish a public institution 
to buy the good assets to resell them later and to collect the bad 
loans in a process also used by the American Resolution Trust Corp., 
which helped clean up the savings and loan crisis in the 1990s. The 
accord announced on Monday night by the political parties, if enacted 
and carried out, would amount to a bold attempt to revive lending 
by cash-strapped banks and thus bolster an economic recovery. With 
Japan's economy in its deepest recession since World War II, the recent 
wild gyrations in the stock market and the recent sudden and sharp 
surge in the yen against the dollar, politicians have become a bit 
jittery that the financial crisis both here and abroad could worsen 
and that the economy could sink even further. In Washington, Clinton 
administration officials said they were encouraged by the new legislation, 
but were still waiting for the Japanese government to carry out the 
steps and deal forcefully with its economic and financial problems. 
The United States has grown increasingly impatient with Japan for 
failing to clean up its banking system and revive its economy. Other 
analysts were also skeptical, partly because Japan has announced agreements 
in the past, only to have them collapse later. One key criticism has 
been the worry that Japan's major banks will not apply for an injection 
of taxpayers' money, particularly if it means they will be punished 
through controls on management or reductions in shareholder capital. 
The Democratic Party, the main opposition to the new accord, has demanded 
that the government force the banks to take public money. Politicians 
did not disclose details of the new accord, but after the Democratic 
Party protested, the Liberal Democrats decided to bolster the amount 
of the bailout. For many, Japan is at a critical juncture. ``If Japan 
is able to adjust, it can become a locomotive to pull Asia out of 
its troubles,'' said Kenneth Courtis, chief economist at Deutsche 
Bank Group Asia Pacific, at a conference on Monday in Singapore. ``Otherwise, 
it could become a Titanic that pulls the rest of Asia under.'' The 
new accordis intended to provide banks with sorely needed new capital. 
Though no amounts were specified, politicians say the accord could 
provide between $435 billion and $520 billion, or about 10 percent 
of annual economic output. The money would not necessarily be spent 
all in one year. International banks could receive taxpayers' money 
if they agree to absorb another failing institution, if there is a 
severe credit contraction or if more capital is needed for a merger. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>