<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981012.0015 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The heart of the Atlanta Braves' batting order finally woke up from 
its National League Championship Series funk. The question now is 
whether it will be too late. Coming into this game, the Braves had 
dropped the first three games of the four-of-seven-game series, in 
large part because their Nos. 3 through 6 hitters _ Chipper Jones, 
Andres Galarraga, Ryan Klesko and Javy Lopez _ had not driven in a 
run. But on Sunday night, before 65,042 screaming fans at a sold-out 
Qualcomm Stadium, the four combined to drive in every run but one 
as the Braves rallied for an 8-3 victory over the San Diego Padres 
to avert a humiliating sweep. The last four runs of the game came 
off the bat of the player who had been the biggest disappointment 
of what was turning into the biggest disappointment of the post-season, 
the Braves themselves. Galarraga, who had been 1 for his previous 
12 in the series, smacked a grand slam off Dan Miceli to cap a six-run 
seventh inning, three batters after Ozzie Guillen, a surprise starter, 
had singled in the go-ahead run off Randy Myers. Guillen's opposite-field 
hit to left had come four batters after Lopez had homered off Joey 
Hamilton to tie the score at 3-3. In the first 34 innings of the series, 
Padre pitchers had held the Braves to five runs. After Galarraga's 
grand slam, the Atlanta batters had bettered that total by one in 
the seventh inning. Before the day began, Jones, Galarraga, Klesko 
and Lopez were a combined 5 for 36 (.139). On Sunday night, the four 
went 5 for 14 with a pair of homers, and gave the Braves hope they 
can get back to Atlanta down 3 games to 2 in the series, if John Smoltz 
can defeat Andy Ashby here on Monday night. ``We feel now that it's 
a two-game series here,'' Atlanta Manager Bobby Cox had said before 
the game. The Braves won the first and are still breathing. But no 
team in baseball history has ever rallied back from a 3-0 post-season 
deficit. At the very least, Sunday night's game justified Cox's decision 
to start Denny Neagle. Neagle had taken exception after Saturday's 
loss when he was asked for the umpteenth time about Cox's choice to 
start him with the Braves facing elimination instead of coming back 
with Smoltz on three days' rest. Neagle had won 16 games this season, 
20 the year before. And even though he had taken a cortisone shot 
in his left shoulder after this season, Neagle was basically saying 
that he merited a crucial start without second guessing. Like his 
more celebrated counterparts in the Braves' rotation, Neagle pitched 
a competent game. But, when Neagle departed after five and two-thirds 
innings trailing by 3-2, the crowd was chanting for a sweep. The Padres 
had scored twice in the third on a run-scoring double from Tony Gwynn 
(who was 5 for 31 in his career against Neagle up to that point) and 
a two-out, run-scoring single from Jim Leyrtiz. But this time, the 
Braves scrapped their way back. Hamilton was throwing the ball as 
hard as 96 miles per hour. But Keith Lockhart belted a triple to right-center 
field on Hamilton's first pitch of the fourth and Jones singled home 
his first run of the series, as the Braves drew within a run. Out 
came Dave Stewart, the San Diego pitching coach. Galarraga then grounded 
into a short-to-second-to-first double play, and Hamilton retired 
Klesko on a grounder to short to end the inning. It was still a one-run 
game entering the sixth when Jones _ who had been 2 for 12 over the 
first three games _ doubled into the right-field corner with two out 
for his second hit of the day. Galarraga worked out a walk. And then 
Klesko singled to left for his first run batted in of the series to 
tie the game at 2-2, although Galarraga was caught in a rundown on 
the play to end the inning. When Leyritz stroked a 1-2 pitch from 
Neagle over the right-center field fence in the bottom of the sixth 
for his seventh career post-season home run, the Padres had a 3-2 
advantage and it looked as if Leyritz would be the hero again. But 
then Lopez knocked a fastball over the fence in right for his first 
rbi of the series to start the seventh. The game was deadlocked at 
3-3. Andruw Jones followed Lopez's homer with an infield single to 
second, and that was all for Hamilton, who gave way to Myers. Earlier 
in the day, San Diego General Manager Kevin Towers had said that he 
acquired Myers from Toronto in a waiver-wire deal Aug. 6 to give the 
Padres a left-handed presence in the bullpen. But many feel Towers 
did so to keep Myers away from the Braves. Whatever the case, Myers 
did more to help the Braves than the Padres on Sunday night. After 
retiring pinch-hitter Gerald Williams on a fly to left center, Myers 
threw an 0-2 wild pitch to pinch-hitter Greg Colbrunn that allowed 
Jones to take second with one out. And even though Caminiti robbed 
Colbrunn of a hit by throwing him out on a hard smash to third, Guillen 
slapped a two-out, run-scoring single to left. Ruben Rivera closed 
his glove too soon trying to field the ball on a hop, enabling Jones 
to beat the throw home, and the Braves had a 4-3 lead, their first 
of the game. Guillen, meanwhile, took second on Rivera's belated throw 
home, then advanced to third when Lockhart beat out an infield hit 
on an 0-2 pitch. Myers then walked Chipper Jones on a full-count pitch 
to load the bases. On came the right-hander Miceli to face Galarraga, 
who drilled a 1-0 pitch 459 feet to deep left-center field for his 
first four runs batted in of the series. As he belted just the sixth 
grand slam in NLCS history, Galarraga yelled something to himself 
as loudly as he could. The Braves had a five-run lead and were on 
their way to their first victory of the series. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>