<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981012.0276 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
William Bergman knew how he wanted to die. ``He wanted to be free 
of pain,'' said his daughter, Beverly, ``and die at home with us.'' 
But when Bergman, an 85-year-old retired railroad detective from Hayward, 
Calif., contracted lung cancer last February, he got only half his 
wish. He died at home, his daughter said, but in miserable pain. To 
experts in end-of-life care, it is a familiar tale: An elderly patient 
dies in intractable pain. But Bergman's daughter has set out to give 
this old story a different ending and in the process has touched off 
an intense debate about how best to improve the treatment of the dying. 
With the help of the Compassion in Dying Federation, an Oregon group 
whose director helped legalize assisted suicide in that state, Ms. 
Bergman filed a complaint to the Medical Board of California, asking 
that her father's doctor be disciplined for failing to prescribe powerful 
narcotics that could have given relief to the dying man. The effort 
was unsuccessful. In August, the board wrote Ms. Bergman that while 
``pain management for your father was indeed inadequate,'' no disciplinary 
action would be taken. Nevertheless, Ms. Bergman's complaint represents 
a new tack in the long-running campaign by patient advocates to improve 
care of the dying. For decades, doctors have worried that they might 
be disciplined, or even face criminal prosecution, for the aggressive 
use of morphine and other narcotics to control pain. Now, some advocates 
are trying to swing the pendulum in the other direction, by pressing 
authorities to punish doctors for not using pain medicine aggressively 
enough. ``It is clear that doctors can get into trouble for overprescribing; 
everybody knows that,'' said Dr. Joanne Lynn, president of Americans 
for Better Care of the Dying, a nonprofit group based in Washington. 
``We need a counterweight that you can also get into trouble for deliberately 
underprescribing.'' Kathryn Tucker, director of legal affairs for 
Compassion in Dying, says doctors must learn ``that there is a professional 
risk if they fail to treat pain adequately.'' But others say it is 
unfair to discipline doctors, many of whom have not been educated 
about how to properly care for patients in pain. ``I find it difficult 
to justify punishing people for doing things that they were not educated 
to do,'' said David Joranson, director of the Pain and Policy Studies 
Group at the University of Wisconsin. So far, complaints to state 
medical boards about undertreatment of pain have been rare, said Dale 
Austin, deputy executive vice president of the Federation of State 
Medical Boards, which represents 69 licensing authorities around the 
nation. But Austin calls it ``an up-and-coming issue.'' In a survey 
conducted last year, Joranson's group found that 8.1 percent of state 
medical board members questioned knew of doctors who had either been 
investigated or disciplined for undertreating pain. That was up from 
5 percent in 1991. It has been more than a year since the Supreme 
Court, in rejecting a constitutional right to die, noted that dying 
patients do have a right to the brand of medicine known as ``palliative 
care,'' which focuses on controlling pain and providing comfort. Many 
doctors and nurses say that patients who contemplate suicide might 
not do so if they were confident their pain would be adequately treated. 
But studies show that patients routinely suffer pain that could be 
relieved, in part because of lingering fears among doctors about the 
consequences of prescribing narcotics too liberally. In an attempt 
to ease those fears, many state licensing authorities have adopted 
new policies on pain management in recent years. California's guidelines, 
revised in 1994, are typical. They say that doctors will not be disciplined 
for prescribing powerful pain medications if they take a proper medical 
history, outline a treatment plan, obtain informed consent from their 
patients, monitor the use of the drugs and keep detailed records. 
In May, the Federation of State Medical Boards published a similar 
set of model rules for its members to follow. Yet just as the medical 
boards have been trying to reassure doctors, Congress has been making 
them uneasy. Both the House and the Senate are considering bills that 
would enable the federal Drug Enforcement Administration to investigate 
doctors who write prescriptions for lethal doses or combinations of 
drugs. The legislation is intended to overturn Oregon's assisted suicide 
law. But it is opposed by a broad coalition of doctors' groups, including 
the American Medical Association, which say the law would have a chilling 
effect on doctors who write legitimate prescriptions for pain medication. 
A similar chilling effect exists in states where doctors must write 
multiple prescriptions for controlled substances on a special pad 
_ one copy for the doctor, one for the pharmacist and one for state 
drug enforcement authorities, who monitor the prescriptions in an 
attempt to curb trafficking in illicit narcotics. When Bergman was 
discharged from the Eden Medical Center in Castro Valley, Calif., 
his internist, Dr. Wing Chin, prescribed Vicodin, an oral analgesic 
that did not fall under the so-called triplicate requirement. Bergman's 
daughter said she asked for something stronger, but, records show, 
Chin said he could not immediately order anything stronger because 
he did not have his triplicate pad with him. Instead, Bergman was 
given an injection of a pain reliever and a skin patch that contained 
a narcotic. Chin declined to be interviewed. But end-of-life care 
experts say the triplicate requirement, recently eliminated in New 
York, often keeps doctors from prescribing the most powerful narcotics. 
``It is a huge deterrent,'' said Lynn. ``You have to use the prescriptions 
in sequence. You can't put a pad in your office and a pad in your 
black bag and a pad in the hospital, and if they are stolen there 
is hell to pay. A lot of times, a doctor will try to substitute a 
less potent drug that doesn't require all this documentation.'' In 
any event, managing pain is a tricky business, and experts say standards 
may vary with each individual case. ``The problem with pain is that 
it is sometimes easy to manage _ and sometimes very difficult,'' said 
Dr. Diane Meier, director of the palliative care program at Mount 
Sinai Medical Center in New York. ``It is easy to say that a doctor 
was incompetent. But that doctor might have been doing the best job 
humanly possible, and still fail.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>