<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981012.0328 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Buoyed by a stronger Japanese yen and expectations of interest rate 
cuts at home and abroad, stock markets rose throughout Asia on Monday 
in what has become a surprisingly vigorous and sustained rally, although 
there is no guarantee that it will last. Hong Kong posted the greatest 
gain, jumping nearly 6 percent, or 483.48 points, to 8,990.27. Since 
last Wednesday, the benchmark Hang Seng index has jumped 19 percent. 
Shares also rose in Bangkok, Thailand; Seoul, South Korea; Kuala Lumpur, 
Malaysia; and Jakarta, Indonesia, although less impressively than 
in Hong Kong. Analysts attributed much of the rally to the stronger 
yen. Its gains have taken the pressure off other Asian currencies, 
particularly the Chinese yuan and the Hong Kong dollar. With a new 
round of devaluations less likely, experts said local investors were 
once again dipping into the stock market. For overseas investors, 
Asia may no longer seem so risky, and may even have a certain appeal, 
given the slowing growth in Europe and the United States, and the 
problems in other emerging markets, like Brazil. ``Asia is still showing 
signs of illness, but we've diagnosed the patient, and we can now 
move forward,'' said Miron Mushkat, the director of strategy at Indocam 
Asia Asset Management in Hong Kong. ``Elsewhere, we're still doing 
the diagnosis.'' For all the robust numbers, analysts caution that 
Hong Kong and other Asian markets still have deep economic problems. 
They said this rally was fragile and could falter quickly _ if, for 
example, the slowdown in the United States and Europe meant fewer 
purchases of Asian goods. ``Bear markets are characterized by extremely 
powerful, short-lived rallies, where the gains are given up later,'' 
said Marc Faber, the head of Marc Faber Ltd., an investment advisory 
firm in Hong Kong. As has so often been the case in this crisis, the 
rest of Asia took its cues on Monday from Japan. Tokyo's stock market 
surged in the afternoon after the upper house of the Japanese Parliament 
approved a plan to tackle that nation's debt-ridden banking system. 
Analysts said that another reason for the bounce was that hedge funds 
and other investors had built up huge short positions in both the 
yen and the Tokyo stock market. When the yen rose against the U.S. 
dollar, these investors began buying shares as a hedge against their 
short positions. Hong Kong's market was also rife with short sellers, 
who are now buying shares to offset those positions. In a short sale, 
an investor borrows shares from a brokerage firm and sells them on 
the open market, with an agreement to repay the loan later with more 
shares, for which he hopes to pay less than he received for the borrowed 
shares. The investor is betting that the market will decline. Although 
Hong Kong's market has turned bullish in the last few trading sessions, 
there is still no shortage of pessimism in this former British colony. 
In a new survey of 150 Hong Kong-based companies, more than half said 
they believed that the economy would get worse before it got better. 
Only 11.9 percent expected an improvement in the next six months, 
according to the survey, which was conducted by The South China Morning 
Post and Nomura International. Those results echo the glum economic 
assessment given by Hong Kong chief executive Tung Chee-hwa in his 
annual policy address last week. Speaking in an interview on Friday, 
Tung said his administration could do little to alleviate the pain 
of the recession or to bring a swift recovery. ``Salaries are being 
adjusted, companies are downsizing and unemployment is going up,'' 
he said. ``So it is a very painful time.'' One broker argued that 
investors should not discount a rally, even if it is not based on 
economic fundamentals. Hong Kong's market is so psychologically driven, 
this broker said, that merely the appearance of better times might 
be enough to set off a more secular recovery. And Tung can take solace 
from something else: The Hong Kong government intervened in a big 
way to prop up the market in August. The action drew fierce criticism 
from investors and regulators around the world. But after gaining 
more than 1,400 points since last Wednesday, Hong Kong is sitting 
on a tidy profit. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>