<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981012.0263 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When one first meets Jeff Getty, 41, at his Japanese-style loft in 
Oakland, Calif., it is hard to think of him as a man who has lived 
with HIV and AIDS for 18 years. Getty gives off an air of vitality. 
His eyes gleam; he is muscular, articulate and energetic. The only 
sign of AIDS is an infusion tube filled with antibiotics sticking 
out of his right arm _ an emergency measure he needs to fend off a 
nasty lung infection. But Getty has learned to live with AIDS, even 
defeating death. Two years ago, Getty made international headlines 
when he persuaded the federal Food and Drug Administration to permit 
him to have an experimental bone marrow transplant from a baboon. 
The graft did not take, but Getty believes that the radiation treatment 
he received as part of the transplant procedure may have extended 
his life, along with a succession of experimental therapies and his 
``warrior'' attitude about the disease. At any rate, his transplant 
was controversial. And the aftermath, surprising. Q. What happens 
to you, Jeff Getty, when you eat a banana in public? A. I can't do 
it. People go ``urk, urk.'' They start laughing uncontrollably, scratching 
their underarms, and making embarrassing jokes like ``How are your 
friends at the zoo?'' After I participated in the experiment, the 
jokes really came hard. It began with gifts of stuffed monkey toys. 
Next, somebody made a tape of songs about monkeys. I got a banana 
holder as a gift. Then, I went on the Tom Snyder show and he tried 
to hand me a banana. There I was, going, ``Tom, don't try to hand 
that to me on camera.'' I thought all the ribbing would eventually 
stop _ especially since the baboon bone marrow graft didn't take. 
But this went on for years. What I suspect it's all about is people 
alleviating their own discomfort with what I've done. Q. And what 
exactly did you do that makes people so uncomfortable that they make 
banana jokes? A. Cross the border of human-centrism. I've come to 
think that when we do cross-species research, the people who participate 
are thought of as not necessarily 100 percent human afterward. There's 
this unconscious sense that the procedure has created something adulterated, 
a human-animal. Q. Are you a human-animal? A. Well, when you take 
baboon bone marrow and put it into somebody, that's a pretty strong 
statement. Bone marrow is the progenitor of all the cells of the body. 
It would follow that many of the cells of the person would become 
baboon cells _ not just the immune cells, but also the red blood cells. 
After the procedure, the question is ``Is the person 100 percent human?'' 
With something as fundamental as a bone marrow transplant, it's questionable. 
Q. Do you feel you are not 100 percent human? A. It's not an issue, 
I feel. My body rejected the bone marrow rather quickly. But most 
people don't know that. To this day, most people think I have baboon 
life within me. You know, when you look at horror movies, you have 
to wonder: Why are they so fascinating, these films about werewolves 
and things that crawled out of the ocean part fish, part human? Human 
culture is full of fascinating mythology about centaurs and werewolves. 
And I have the feeling that what I've done is touch many people's, 
including many scientists', deep unconscious fear that xenografting 
means creating werewolves and monsters. The thing that's so devastating 
because there are so many areas where xenografting is logical and 
necessary _ is that this is a fear that many scientists won't admit 
to. You know, it's not ``scientific'' to be afraid you're making a 
monster. Q. How did you get to the idea of doing a baboon marrow transplant? 
A. I'm a member of ``The Dobson Project,'' a West Coast think tank 
on immunology that was founded by the activist community here. Once 
a year, activists and top immunologists meet for three days and look 
at ways to restore human immune systems. We design new protocols for 
this. The baboon marrow transplant was one. Baboons have a natural 
resistance to HIV. So if one could get a baboon immune system to engraft 
temporarily into a human, the question is: Might it help that human 
being get rid of the virus? Could baboon cells teach human cells how 
to fight the virus? We were hoping to create two immune systems functioning 
side by side, the human and the baboon _ what is called ``a chimera 
immune system.'' This has been done in animals quite a bit in research. 
You can't get one immune system to completely agree that the other 
is self and, thus, will not be rejected. You have to trick them into 
coexisting, side by side, instead of fighting. Q. How was your health 
at the time you wanted the baboon marrow transplant? A. Very, very 
bad. It was December of 1995, my worst year. I was failing all the 
new drugs and was close to death. So I thought, ``What the hell _ 
why not go into an experiment that had a long-shot chance of helping?'' 
Honestly, I didn't expect to survive. Q. Weren't officials of the 
Food and Drug Administration extremely negative about the procedure? 
A. Negative? They put endless obstacles in our way. In the end, we 
were able to mobilize a good part of the activist community and the 
experiment went forward. But interestingly, a lot of the people who 
work in animal husbandry and the veterinary sciences are exposed to 
all kinds of animal diseases and they are not being monitored. Q. 
After the operation, you had lots of communications from the folks 
at the CDC. A. I'll say. Afterward, it seemed to me that the CDC was 
hoping to find a baboon virus in me, that they were even disappointed 
when they didn't. Every time they'd discover a new baboon virus, they'd 
be on the phone saying, ``We want more blood to see if you've got 
this one.'' It was pretty gross sometimes. I felt I was carrying the 
future of cross-species research on my shoulders. As long as they 
didn't find any disease, the research could go forward. But if they 
found something, this very valuable possibility for humans might end. 
Q. There are people who say you're being humano-centric by encouraging 
the use of animals as spare parts for humans. How do you answer them? 
A. Oh, you mean the animal rights people? People for the Ethical Treatment 
of Animals has called for all AIDS research to stop using animals 
_ so it's hard to take them seriously. Act Up, in fact, has demonstrated 
against them. Frankly, if my life is in danger or my child's, and 
a baboon heart would help, I would say, ``Yes, I want to go forward 
with that.'' Q. At present, humans receive heart valves from pigs. 
Why isn't there the same kind of opposition to that? A. Well, pig 
valves are another thing, entirely. They don't carry viruses. And 
even then, I bet that people with pig valves get lots of pig jokes. 
I'm telling you right now: People who have pig valves on their hearts 
don't go around advertising it. And people who get pig brain isolates, 
where they place cells for people with epilepsy and Parkinson's into 
the brain _ you can just imagine what will happen there. They are 
going to be called ``pig-headed.'' And people are going to wonder 
if they are thinking right or thinking like a pig. Listen, if I can't 
eat a banana in public, what's going to happen to people with pig 
implants in their brains? As xenografting continues, we're going to 
see, I think, society having a hard time with it. We're going to see 
irrational fear of animal diseases and the shunning of people who've 
had animal transplants. It's going to be a long time till this procedure 
is as accepted as, let's say, human to human heart transplants have 
become. And think about that, 20 years ago, people were concerned 
about cross-racial organ transplants, and this is a much bigger border. 
And yet all science tells us, we're heading right for it because of 
the shrinking pool of donor organs available for humans and the growing 
technology that makes transplants possible. Q. Any regrets about doing 
the experiment? A. None whatsoever. I want to stand up for this. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>