<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981012.0250 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Many doctors know the story of ``Mr. Wright,'' who was found to have 
cancer and in 1957 was given only days to live. Hospitalized in Long 
Beach, Calif., with tumors the size of oranges, he heard that scientists 
had discovered a horse serum, Krebiozen, that appeared to be effective 
against cancer. He begged to receive it. His physician, Dr. Philip 
West, finally agreed and gave Wright an injection on a Friday afternoon. 
The following Monday, the astonished doctor found his patient out 
of his ``death bed,'' joking with the nurses. The tumors, the doctor 
wrote later, ``had melted like snow balls on a hot stove.'' Two months 
later, Wright read medical reports that the horse serum was a quack 
remedy. He suffered an immediate relapse. ``Don't believe what you 
read in the papers,'' the doctor told Wright. Then he injected him 
with what he said was ``a new super-refined double strength'' version 
of the drug. Actually, it was water, but again, the tumor masses melted. 
Wright was ``the picture of health'' for another two months _ until 
he read a definitive report stating that Krebiozen was worthless. 
He died two days later. Doctors who know this story dismiss it as 
one of those strange tales that medicine cannot explain. The idea 
that a patient's beliefs can make a fatal disease go away is too bizarre. 
But now scientists, as they learn that the placebo effect is even 
more powerful than anyone had been able to demonstrate, are also beginning 
to discover the biological mechanisms that cause it to achieve results 
that border on the miraculous. Using new techniques of brain imagery, 
they are uncovering a host of biological mechanisms that can turn 
a thought, belief or desire into an agent of change in cells, tissues 
and organs. They are learning that much of human perception is based 
not on information flowing into the brain from the outside world but 
what the brain, based on previous experience, expects to happen next. 
Placebos are ``lies that heal,'' said Dr. Anne Harrington, a historian 
of science at Harvard University. A placebo _ the word is Latin for 
``I shall please'' _ is typically a sham treatment that a doctor doles 
out merely to please or placate anxious or persistent patients, she 
said. It looks like an active drug but has no pharmacological properties 
of its own. Until fairly recently, nearly all of medicine was based 
on placebo effects, because doctors had little effective medicine 
to offer. Through the 1940s, American doctors handed out sugar pills 
in various shapes and colors in a deliberate attempt to induce placebo 
responses. Nowadays, doctors have real medicines to fight disease. 
But these treatments have not diminished the power of the placebo. 
Doctors in Texas are conducting a study of arthroscopic knee surgery 
that uses general anesthesia in which patients with sore, worn knees 
are assigned to one of three operations _ scraping out the knee joint, 
washing out the joint or doing nothing. In the ``nothing'' operation, 
doctors anesthetize the patient, make three little cuts in the knee 
as if to insert the usual instruments and then pretend to operate. 
Two years after surgery, patients who underwent the sham surgery reported 
the same amount of relief from pain and swelling as those who had 
had the real operations. A recent review of placebo-controlled studies 
of modern anti-depressant drugs found that placebos and genuine drugs 
worked about as well. ``If you expect to get better, you will,'' said 
Dr. Irving Kirsch, a psychiatrist at the University of Connecticut 
who carried out the review. His findings were met with a great deal 
of skepticism. And a recent study of a baldness remedy found that 
86 percent of men taking it either maintained or showed an increase 
in the amount of hair on their heads. But so did 42 percent of the 
men taking a placebo. Some studies are specifically designed to explore 
the power of placebos rather than drugs. On Coche Island in Venezuela, 
asthmatic children were given a sniff of vanilla along with a squirt 
of medicine from a bronchodilator twice a day. Later, the vanilla 
odor alone increased their lung function, 33 percent as much as did 
the bronchodilator alone. And at Tulane University, Dr. Eileen Palace 
is using a placebo to restore sexual arousal in women who say they 
are nonorgasmic. The women are hooked up to a biofeedback machine 
that they are told measures their vaginal blood flow, an index of 
arousal. Then they are shown sexual stimuli that would arouse most 
women. But the experimenter plays a trick on the women by sending, 
within 30 seconds, a false feedback signal that their vaginal blood 
flow has increased. Almost immediately they then become genuinely 
aroused. Placebos are about 55 percent to 60 percent as effective 
as most active medications like aspirin and codeine for controlling 
pain, Kirsch said. Moreover, placebos that relieve pain can be blocked 
with a drug, naloxone, that also blocks morphine. For a while, many 
scientists thought that placebos might work by releasing the body's 
natural morphinelike substances, called endorphins. But that is not 
the only explanation, he said. While placebos can act globally on 
the body, they can also have extremely specific effects. For example, 
a study was carried out in Japan on 13 people who were extremely allergic 
to poison ivy. Each was rubbed on one arm with a harmless leaf but 
were told it was poison ivy and touched on the other arm with poison 
ivy and told it was harmless. All 13 broke out in rash where the harmless 
leaf contacted their skin. Only two reacted to the poison leaves. 
Studies have shown, time and again, that placebos can work wonders. 
Like ``real drugs,'' they can cause side effects like itching, diarrhea 
and nausea. They can lead to changes in pulse rate, blood pressure, 
electrical skin resistance, gastric function, penis engorgement and 
skin conditions. The question is, why? Explanations of why placebos 
work can be found in a new field of cognitive neuropsychology called 
expectancy theory _ what the brain believes about the immediate future. 
Like classical conditioning theory (Pavlov's dogs salivate at the 
sound of the bell), expectancy involves associative learning. The 
medical treatments you get during your life are conditioning trials, 
Kirsch said. The doctor's white coat, nurse's voice, smell of disinfectant 
or needle prick have acquired meaning through previous learning, producing 
an expectation of relief from symptoms. Each pill, capsule or injection 
is paired with active ingredients, and later, if you get a pill without 
active ingredients, you can still get a therapeutic effect, he said. 
Such conditioning shows how expectations are acquired, Kirsch said. 
But it does not explain the strength and persistence of placebo effects. 
These responses occur almost instantly, with no apparent conscious 
thought, and are therefore wired firmly into the brain, he said. Response 
expectations are strong because the world is filled with ambiguity. 
A long thin object seen in dim light could be a stick or a snake. 
But it may not be safe to take the time to find out. So people evolved 
a mechanism to anticipate what is going to occur. This expectation 
speeds the perceptual processing at the expense of accuracy. As in 
the outside world, people's internal states have inherent ambiguity. 
That is why, when people in an experiment were given a drug that produced 
a surge of adrenaline, they interpreted the feeling as anger, euphoria 
or nothing at all, depending on what they had been told to expect. 
Critics of alternative medicine say its enduring appeal is explained 
by the placebo effect. When conventional therapies fail to help chronic 
or poorly understood conditions, the acupuncturist, homeopathist or 
chiropractor steps into the breach with a potent belief system ready-made 
to help the suffering patient. ``If a guy in a white coat or a guy 
dressed in feathers can induce a patient's immune system to fight 
back, who is to say which is better?'' said Dr. Dan Molerman, a medical 
anthropologist at the University of Michigan at Dearborn. Support 
for the expectancy theory emerged about 10 years ago, when many scientists 
realized how closely the brain, the immune system and the hormone 
production of the endocrine system are linked. Chronic stress sets 
into motion a cascade of biological events involving scores of chemicals 
in the body _ serotonin, cortisol, cytokines, interleukins, tumor 
necrosis factor and so on. Such stress lowers resistance to disease 
and alters gene expression. When people are under stress, wounds tend 
to heal more slowly, latent viruses like herpes erupt and brain cells 
involved in memory formation die off. The precise molecular steps 
underlying all of these changes have been mapped out. But what about 
the opposite? Can a thought or belief produce a chemical cascade that 
leads to healing and wellness? Researchers studying placebos think 
the answer is yes, and they offer several ways it might work: _ A 
placebo might reduce stress, allowing the body to regain some natural, 
optimum level called health. _ Special molecules may exist that help 
carry out placebo responses. For example, a recent study found that 
stressed animals can produce a Valium-like substance in their brains, 
but only if they have some control over the source of the stress. 
People almost certainly have similar brain chemistry. _ Placebos may 
draw their power from the way the brain is organized to act on what 
experience predicts will happen next. Dr. Marcel Kinsbourne, a neuroscientist 
at the New School for Social Research in New York, explains it this 
way: The brain generates two kinds of activation patterns, which arise 
from networks of neurons firing together. One type is set in motion 
by information flowing into the brain from the outside world _ smells, 
tastes, visual images, sounds. At the same time, the cortex draws 
on memories and feelings to generate patterns of brain activity related 
to what is expected to happen. The top-down patterns generated by 
the cortex intersect smoothly with the bottom-up patterns to inform 
us about what is happening, Kinsbourne said. If there is a mismatch, 
the brain tries to sort it out, without necessarily designating one 
set of patterns as more authoritative than another. The expectations 
that result are internally generated brain states that can be as real 
as anything resulting purely from the outside world. For example, 
recent experiments with monkeys show that if they expect a reward 
like a sip of apple juice, cells in their brains fire 20 to 30 seconds 
before they actually receive it. In other words, expectancies are 
embedded in the brain's neurochemistry. ``We are misled by dualism 
or the idea that mind and body are separate,'' said Dr. Howard Fields, 
a neuroscientist at the University of California at San Francisco 
who studies placebo effects. A thought is a set of neurons firing 
which, through complex brain wiring, can activate emotional centers, 
pain pathways, memories, the autonomic nervous system and other parts 
of the nervous system involved in producing physical sensations, he 
said. Morphine will alter brain patterns to reduce pain. So will a 
placebo. Obviously, placebos have limits. Wright's miraculous remission 
aside, most people cannot think, hope or believe their way out of 
cancer or AIDS. As Dr. Howard Spiro, a gastroenterologist at Yale 
University, put it: Some diseases are unleashed with the power of 
a fire hose. Others unfold at a trickle, and perhaps those are the 
ones amenable to placebo effects. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>