<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981012.0249 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With the current political and financial turmoil in the world and 
with the millennium fast approaching, society is being affected in 
countless ways. And fashion, being a reflection of the times, is in 
its own state of unease, searching for a new way of dressing post-minimalism. 
It appears to be particularly true in Italy, where the government 
has just been toppled by a no-confidence vote in Parliament and where 
many designers, too, seem to have lost confidence. The sharp tailoring 
that Italy is known for is no longer the prevailing style, but no 
one has yet come up with a definitive new direction, although several 
have tried with varying degrees of success. Miuccia Prada and Jil 
Sander scored in the way that they put a high fashion gloss on casual 
sports clothes. But the equally influential Tom Ford of Gucci went 
all out for glamour and high spirits with raucous prints and sparkly 
beads. Donatella Versace, too, was in an upbeat mood in the best collection 
she's done on her own since the death of her brother Gianni last year. 
Dark blue drapes on the walls and blue sand on the floor at the company's 
palazzo achieved a perfect foil for the floral and geometric patterns 
in cheery shades of pink, purple and aqua. Kate Moss got into the 
groove by having her long straight hair dyed bright pink for the occasion. 
Printed gauze layered over printed jersey had a soft-focus effect, 
and the pink of a pants suit was a shade pale enough for a baby's 
blanket. There were some long skirts and some extremely short ones, 
often worn with a brief top in a contrasting print. Lace appliqued 
onto felt had an invitingly fuzzy texture, and the house's signature 
chain mail looked new with floral embroidery or a purple orchid printed 
on it. While the clothes were still sensuous, the sharp edges had 
definitely been blunted. Likewise, Giorgio Armani's sharp tailoring 
was nowhere to be seen in the beautiful collection he showed Sunday. 
All structure and inner construction was left on the cutting-room 
floor. The few jackets on the runway hung as limply as sweaters over 
pants or skirts that were veiled in a layer of tulle or chiffon. This 
layering went from day to evening, blurring the difference and contributing 
to the aura of lightness that prevailed. All the evening dresses were 
strapless columns, often with a scarf around the breasts tied in the 
front or back. The dull grays, taupes and blues Armani favors got 
a jolt in the evening segment with a series of pink and orange dresses 
embroidered with flowers, veiled, of course, with a layer of chiffon 
to tone down the color. Chiffon or tulle was also layered over beading 
to dull the sheen. It's a technique many designers are using, and 
it's a very effective form of understatement. Armani is going with 
the flow of fashion but doing it in his own way. Gianfranco Ferre 
is celebrating his 20th year in business by doing exactly what he 
wants, which is to shake up the fashion world. His show on Thursday 
night, to inaugurate his new palazzo in one of the oldest sections 
of town, was an over-the-top extravaganza in which the few wearable 
pieces of clothing were lost amid the frenzy. With towering African 
headdresses and stiletto heels, the models looked eight feet tall, 
a height that exaggerated the effect of designs like leather dresses 
as short as jackets, and skirts made of stiff belt leather merely 
a hand span wide. And then there were cone-shaped skirts, a suit made 
of pieced alligator, silver-studded sheer black minidresses, raffia 
bustiers, and white shirts with tails that swept the floor. But the 
pieces de resistance were ball gowns of great swaths of pink and copper-colored 
taffeta that swirled around the bodies of the models and ended in 
ballooning trains. It was a show that will not soon be forgotten, 
and that is no doubt what Ferre intended. It's difficult to say what 
Karl Lagerfeld intended in the Fendi show with overwide and overlong 
pants that puddled around the models' feet, with long dresses that 
trailed streamers of ribbons, with a row of slits cut into the sides 
of some clothes, and with metallic appliques on a baggy jump suit. 
In any event, a spring show from a house known for its furs is more 
of an amusement than a serious treatise. Angela Missoni, now designing 
for the house her parents built, is developing her own signature, 
with airy knits in stripes and wavy patterns and youthful styles with 
a casual air. The spring clothes are actually more summery looking, 
like what a fashionable woman would wear on a weekend out of the city. 
There are long sleeveless dresses and long skirts or clam diggers 
shown with halters, all in the colors of sand, earth and sky. For 
evening, similar pieces were coated, with a shimmer of clear sequins. 
A young spirit also wafts through the collection of the American designer 
Victor Alfaro, who shows in Milan because an Italian company, Gilmar, 
produces his line. It features variations of cropped T-shirts or camisole 
tops and hip-riding pants or skirts, mainly in white, beige or pale 
yellow. There are also open-weave hand-knit sweaters and sleek leathers, 
and for evening beaded gauze dresses in white or ivory over cashmere 
tube dresses. The luxury of Alfaro's cashmere and silk fabrics and 
the delicacy of the beadwork raise the clothes from ordinary sportswear 
to designer stature, and they fit comfortably into the high-fashion 
scene in Milan. Rebecca Moses is another American who has slipped 
into the Italian scene with ease by concentrating on cashmere and 
silk in sportswear-inspired styles that are beyond trends. Her great 
talent is an eye for color, which for spring includes pale lilac, 
peach, pink and mint alongside white, beige and black. The colors 
are so faded-looking that combining three for a stripe has a subtle 
effect. There are sweaters with short sleeves of crystal-beaded gauze 
and others overlaid with sequined net. Ms. Moses, who has also been 
designing the Genny collection for the last five years, has done her 
last show for the house. Genny has named as her successor Josephus 
Melchior Thimister. Alberta Ferretti gave an injection of youth serum 
to her usually elegant collection by cropping the tops to bare the 
midriff and navel over low-riding pants and skirts. Geometric lines 
or raised seams give a special effect to simple shift dresses and 
narrow skirts that fall several inches below the knee. Embroidery 
or beading is added with a light touch, in the Ferretti style, as 
in a hint of colored embroidery on the hem of underskirts worn with 
sheer white dresses that have rows of tucking. Mila Schon is a venerable 
designer who has enlisted young assistants in the last few seasons 
to rejuvenate her line. For spring, that means slitting the front, 
back or side of shift dresses, and showing white leather dresses with 
raised seams or cutouts in circular patterns. The week of shows in 
Milan may not have resulted in a consensus on where fashion is heading, 
but it certainly spewed out a lot of ideas for people to consider 
as Paris takes over the stage this week. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>