<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981012.0354 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
SARAJEVO, Bosnia-Herzegovina _ NATO forces in Bosnia and Croatia are 
needlessly paying millions of dollars in rent that is winding up in 
the coffers of the governing political parties, say financial experts 
who have studied the two governments. And diplomats say those parties 
are often the principal obstacles to peace. The 1995 Dayton accord, 
which ended the war in Bosnia and authorized NATO's presence, required 
Bosnia and Croatia to provide buildings and land to NATO troops without 
charge. But the United States, Britain, France, Germany and other 
countries may be spending as much as $40 million a year in rent for 
their bases in Bosnia and Croatia, a senior NATO financial officer 
said. The exact figures could not be determined, because many of the 
armies involved refused to disclose how much they pay. In addition, 
NATO financial officers said their records were in disarray. NATO 
officers, defending the payments, said the rent was paid to private 
companies for use of their property. But while many of the companies 
receiving the money portray themselves as privately owned, they appear 
to be government-owned and controlled by political parties. Interviews 
with company and local government officials, as well as financial 
experts working for Western governments in Bosnia and Croatia, indicate 
that much of the money is in fact going to the Bosnian and Croatian 
governments, which funnel it to political parties. Foreign diplomats 
suggested that in Bosnia, the money effectively buys good relations 
between NATO forces and local and national leaders. Almost three years 
after fighting ended, Bosnia continues to be governed by ethnic-based 
parties that effectively dominate three ministates. Croatia is governed 
by a nationalist party that virtually controls Croat-held parts of 
Bosnia. Foreign diplomats say they blame those parties for blocking 
the Western goal of a unified and stable country with effective national 
government. On being told about the payments, the chief international 
civilian official in Bosnia, Carlos Westendorp, said they undermined 
Western efforts. ``How can they pay money to these people when we 
are supposed to be here promoting democracy?'' he asked. Each foreign 
military force in Bosnia pays the costs of maintaining its soldiers 
here, while NATO pays the costs of the large headquarters that directs 
the operation. The British army says it will spend about $16.5 million 
this year to rent its eight bases in Bosnia and Croatia. The U.S. 
Army says it pays rent only for bases on private land. A spokesman 
said the Army had spent ``several million dollars'' for rent during 
the last three years, including about $1.5 million a year for a single 
base in Croatia, but he could not detail all rents paid. The U.S. 
Army insists that great efforts are made to ensure it pays no rent 
to government-controlled companies. But at many places where the United 
States has or had troops, it is not clear the Army has always succeeded. 
A pattern emerged in interviews with local officials, and with managers 
of companies whose property is being used by American troops and other 
NATO forces. It was clear that payments were being made to companies 
that managers admitted are government-owned. For example, the Bosnian 
company that received the most rent from the United States, according 
to Army records, was paid $1.4 million to allow soldiers to put a 
base at its coal processing plant for nine months. The company director, 
Pasaga Muratovic, said the company had always been wholly owned by 
the Bosnian government. Another coal mine operation used for an American 
camp was paid about $744,000, according to the Army. But Sakib Dizdarevic, 
the mine's director, said that it, too, was owned by the Bosnian government, 
and that the payment was nearly three times what the Army reported. 
For most of 1996, the Army base named Pat was located on farmland 
controlled by the most radical Bosnian Serb political party, whose 
founder, the former Bosnian Serb leader, Radovan Karadzic, has been 
indicted on war-crimes charges. Army records show no rental payment 
for the camp, a spokesman said. But the mayor of the nearest town, 
Sekovici, said his office was paid more than $26,000 a month by the 
Army. The money is used for Bosnian Serb government expenses, he said. 
Local farmers said that although the land belonged to them, they received 
none of the rent. The headquarters of the British army in Bosnia is 
in a large, unused sheet-metal factory near the Bosnian Serb-controlled 
town of Banja Luka. The financial director of the factory, Milo Milovanovic, 
said that to qualify for rent, company officials had told British 
officers that the factory was privately owned. However, in an interview 
he conceded that the factory was controlled by Bosnian Serb officials. 
All the directors of the company, he said, are appointed by government 
officials. Milovanovic said the money received for rent was turned 
over to the government for what he described as taxes and insurance. 
He added that although relations between British forces and local 
authorities had been tense initially, matters improved after the British 
agreed to pay rent. ``When they came to this office to talk about 
using our factory,'' Milovanovic said, ``the soldiers were pointing 
guns everywhere. Now they are our friends.'' In the town of Sipovo, 
the deputy mayor, Mile Bosnjak, said earlier this year that all the 
rent paid by British forces for an abandoned textile factory was transferred 
directly from the factory's bank account to the Bosnian Serb government. 
Germany and France also pay rent. A spokesman for the French army 
refused to provide details, while the German army's records showed 
it paid $2.5 million last year to rent warehouses from a Bosnian government 
company in Sarajevo. Rent money from government-controlled businesses 
goes to the political party in control in that area, said foreign 
financial experts studying the Bosnian economy. ``Every important 
manager of these companies is appointed by the political parties,'' 
said Didier Fau, chief of the economic department at Westendorp's 
office. ``They do what they are told. ``There is no accounting, no 
transparency in the companies or the government. There is just control 
by the parties,'' Fau added. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>