<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981012.2000.0375 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In Belgrade today, US Envoy Richard Holbrooke and Serbian leader Slobodan 
Milosevic went toe to toe yet again. And reportedly made some progress 
toward a deal to avert military action over Kosovo. Now Holbrooke 
has arrived in Brussels, Belgium to brief ambassadors of NATO on the 
results of his talks. The United States and its European allies want 
Milosevic to halt his seven-month long crackdown against the separatist 
Kosovo Liberation Army. NATO spokesman Jamie Shay says, the western 
military alliance is eager to hear a briefing from Holbrooke about 
his discussions with Milosevic. I think that through this extremely 
forceful diplomacy that he is conducting in Belgrade at the moment. 
And of course with the Sword of Damocles of NATO airstrikes now very 
much hanging over President Milosevic's head. Milosevic has begun 
to move towards meeting the demands of the international community. 
But obviously what we have to get is not simply a cosmetic solution, 
which will hold up for a couple of weeks until the gaze of the international 
community is averted elsewhere. But a real solution. Should the negotiations 
fail, NATO members are expected to vote for a so-called "activation 
order", the final step before a NATO military strike can be launched. 
We have on the line World reporters, Margaret Evans in Brussels and 
Nenad Shebek in Belgrade. Margaret, what are you hearing about the 
possibility that there might be a deal to avert an airstrike? There 
is in fact an awful lot of speculation about the possibility of a 
deal. People here at NATO headquarters feel that Holbrooke wouldn't 
be coming back to Brussels unless he had something substantive to 
report. There are some rumors that he is going to be asking for a 
24-hour delay in the so-called activation order, that would launch 
the countdown for airstrikes. However it is by no means clear that 
what Holbrooke has will be announced to actually avert that order. 
And some NATO officials here are saying. That as far as they are concerned, 
the so-called activation order should go ahead anyway. That there 
should be the threat of airstrikes anyway, regardless of what Mr. 
Holbrooke reports. Nenad what's the word in Belgrade? Is there the 
feeling that Holbrooke has left with the possibility of a deal of 
some kind, that could avert the airstrikes? Well officially we only 
heard one terse statement. One terse sentence in the form of a statement 
from Mr. Milosevic's office, saying that the talks will continue, 
actually, tomorrow. So Holbrooke is coming back from Brussels. One 
independent radio station here B92, which is very good diplomatic 
source here in Belgrade, says that a deal is in the making in deed. 
That Milosevic has made significant concessions. And that we could 
be facing a deal between Holbrooke and Milosevic, as early as tomorrow. 
And I would agree with Margaret. He wouldn't be going to Brussels 
and then shuttling back to Belgrade unless something was in the making. 
Before we get back to Brussels. Nenad does Holbrooke really need the 
threat of an airstrike to be able to make any more progress with Milosevic, 
should it turn out that there still isn't a sufficient agreement for 
people to rest easy? Well the threat of airstrikes is already there. 
The activation order brings those airstrikes one step closer. And 
they are certainly a more definite warning. There is however a bottom-line 
for Milosevic as well. There is something that he can agree to, and 
then there is something that he can't agree to. We don't know the 
nittie grit of it of the deal or negotiations that have been going 
on. Apparently the two sticking points are one, the number and the 
status of foreign military observers in Kosovo. Apparently there is 
to be a Russian contingent there as a face saving exercise for the 
Serbs. And the second sticking point is full compliance and full cooperation 
with the international tribunal, for war crimes in the former Yugoslavia, 
in the Hague. Apparently the Hague tribunal also wants to get its 
hands on people that have been accused of committing war crimes in 
Kosovo as well. Back in Brussels, Margaret, what is Javier Solana 
the Secretary General of NATO saying? Well, he is of course holding 
off commenting until this extraordinary briefing from Holbrooke. But 
again, his officials and the line coming out of NATO headquarters 
is, whatever Holbrooke has it is going to have to be very, very good 
to actually get NATO to stand down. They were actually on the brink 
of authorizing these airstrikes, when the news broke that Holbrooke 
was coming back. And just picking up on what Nenad said, it is a sticking 
point, the issue of some kind of foreign observer force to monitor 
any deal. It's a sticking point for Milosevic, but it is also a very 
important point for NATO. Because all throughout this period of threatened 
military intervention, they have been saying, that they don't want 
just compliance. They want evidence of irreversible, and verifiable 
compliance. And that means getting some kind of ground force in to 
monitor a pullout. And they are also very anxious to insure that the 
disunity and confusion of last week does not spill over. And that 
if Holbrooke is in fact serious about the possibility of a deal, I 
think there is a feeling that his position can only be strengthened 
if the activation order is given the green light. Because, that again, 
it launches a countdown. There is still a process by which NATO could 
pull back on airstrikes. But it just makes the threat and the pressure 
on Milosevic that much better. In a way, Nenad, it sounds as if Mr. 
Milosevic, who is an expert at being able to go right to the brink 
and then step back, may possibly have won himself some extra time 
here. Maybe even a lot of time. Well, he has in a way painted himself 
into a corner. He has allowed the threats to mount. And just like 
NATO doesn't have all that many options open, it has to act now, decisively. 
Or its credibility will be at stake. So, Milosevic also has to react 
and make some kind of move very shortly. So I don't think this time 
around, he is after buying time. Which is normally his tactic, buying 
time and stalling. He has been doing that for about seven months now. 
It is decision time now, and he has got to make a decision one way 
or another. The World's Margaret Evans in Brussels at NATO headquarters, 
and the World's Nenad Shebek in Belgrade. Thank you both very much. 
Thank you Tony. You're welcome. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>