<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981012.2000.2681 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Time now for the answer to today's Geography Quiz. Remember we were 
looking for the cultural and industrial capitol of Sweden. And while 
this city lost its bid to host the 2004 Summer Olympics, it is hosting 
the first Poetry Olympic this week. Here is the answer to today's 
Geography Quiz is one of the competitors, Bulgarian Slam Poet Christina 
Denetrova, Christina, where are you? I'm in Stockholm. Stockholm, 
Sweden the answer to our quiz today. And the Poetry Olympics kicks 
off today. What's the opening ceremony going to be like, Christina? 
As far as I can guess, everybody is about to say it's. And It won't 
be that official. I mean it has to be interesting somehow. And I'm 
waiting forward to see it, to participate in it. I don't see how it 
can fail to be interesting. I'm fascinated already. What's the space 
in which this is taking place in? I assume you don't have a huge stadium 
yet, where hundreds of thousands are in attendance. Well I guess we're 
not top seniors, so I don't know how many people will turn up there. 
But we're expecting quite an audience. Well what countries are participating 
along with Bulgaria? Bulgaria will be competing with Estonia and Sweden, 
and Finland - So this is - yeah? and USA. Oh, and the USA. Now will 
these be all individual competitions or will there be team competitions 
as well? Some of them will be team competitions. We are competing 
in a team from Bulgaria. There are four of us. But, from the USA, 
the people who will compete are individuals. So, we are not going 
to meet in the same competition. But it will be very interesting for 
me to watch the other participants. What would a team competition 
be like? What events would be put together into one competition? I 
guess the audience will decide who is going to win. Because they will 
vote. And our job is simple, we just read. And then they shall give 
us some numbers and - And they'll actually - -- people from the audience. 
-- they'll actually hold up numbers like cards, the way they do for 
diving competitions, let's say. An 8.7, a 9.2. Yes, yes, just like 
skating. I gather you don't want to give away any of your game plan. 
But, could you give us a sample of what you will be coming forward 
with? Well here I have something in front of me. It's a short one, 
and I think it's good for the radio. I don't know - Terrific. -- I'll 
try it, yes. It's called, "Morning". "A morning is a nice thing, with 
it's gratuitous freshness, and babble of dying stars. The stairwell 
smells of coffee. And behind their doors, the people are weightless. 
At the bus stop they nestle against invisible pillows and hope to 
hear a voice announcing, 'false start, morning is canceled, back to 
bed all of you.'" That's all. Christina, 9.8, 9.8, -- - I loved it. 
Thank you. Best of luck to you. Christina Denetrova is one of the 
participants from the Bulgarian Slam Poetry Team, in the upcoming 
First Poetry Olympics in Stockholm, Sweden. Christina, thank you very 
much. Thank you very much, Tony. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>