<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981012.2000.2027 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The trade sanctions imposed against Iraq after its invasion of Kuwait 
in 1990 have taken a drastic toll. Not so much on their target the 
regime of President Sadaam Hussein As on the Iraqi people. The Oil 
for Food Program implemented two years ago was supposed to alleviate 
the impact of the sanctions, permitting Iraq to sell some oil, with 
part of the proceeds going to purchase food and medicine. But two 
weeks ago the man who headed the program, Dennis Halladay resigned 
in protest against the continuing sanctions against Iraq. He's with 
us now. Mr. Halladay, can you tell us specifically why you left your 
post. Well I had a number of reasons. One of them was very personal, 
I have a 15 year old daughter who I think needs me in New York. And 
I certainly need her. I also have been with the UN for 34 years. But 
most importantly it was necessary I think for me to make a change 
so that I could speak out independently of the United Nations in terms 
of sanctions and their impact. Generally, but specifically in Iraq 
where the impact issue, I think you have just said it, is quite appalling. 
Well you say you left your post so that you could speak freely about 
the program. Now why don't you speak freely about the program to us 
what the problem with it is. What hits you most significantly is, 
I think, the high mortality rate amongst young children under five 
years. This is now running at some 6 or 7 thousand per month. And 
this is due to the collapse of the water and sanitation system, and 
therefore the high incidence of water-born diseases. The collapse 
of the electric power infrastructure, all of which make it difficult 
to provide preventive medical care and to take care of young children. 
And their mothers, the health of whom is also in bad shape. Secondly 
the situation where malnutrition is now running at something like 
30% for young children. And our Oil for Food Program is simply not 
addressing the inadequacy of the diet that the program enforces. You 
are criticizing basically the inability of the UN to follow through 
on what its intention was. But couldn't what you are reporting on 
also be seen just simply as solid proof of the fact that Sadaam Hussein 
is a man who can turn absolutely anything to his own advantage? After 
all his government is not the one thing you are saying that is suffering 
as a result of this. Well whatever the political advantage being taken 
of the situation is, the fact remains. That with sanctions in force 
the government is unable to sell oil at a sufficient level to bring 
in revenue to correct the infrastructural damage and turn around this 
country in terms of health and education and food and other basic 
needs. But, aren't you to some extent playing into the hands of supporters 
of Sadaam Hussein, in criticizing the one agency or institution that 
might in the long run actually be able to do something to get him 
out of power. Well I'm not criticizing the UN per se, I'm criticizing 
I suppose the member states and the Security Council. Which knowingly 
is sustaining a device, i.e. sanctions, which is killing men, women 
and children. And which is creating a situation which is totally counterproductive, 
I think, for everybody. We're not going to get out of the woods by 
keeping Iraq in this situation. Well Mr. Halliday, although the sanctions 
may be causing hardship in Iraq, isn't the reality that they are still 
the only way of containing Hussein's military ambitions. Several experts 
in the past on this show, on the Iraqi regime, have said that if the 
sanctions hadn't been in place the Iraqi leader might have obtained 
a far greater range of weapons by now. And we'd be looking, not just 
simply at the still unresolved problem of chemical weapons, but maybe 
even a nuclear capability. Yeah, one way to control that, of course, 
is to control arms sales. The same countries who are imposing sanctions 
are the ones who produce and sell arms and capacities of the type 
to which you refer. I suppose that would be simplistic thinking, however. 
But I think the role of disarmament and those sanctions, that is something 
beyond my competence. What I am concerned about is economic sanctions 
and the impact they have. And the fact that their must be an alternative 
to economic sanctions which impact so directly on the people of the 
country. I think if that can be changed, and their has to be some 
more focused sanctions dealing with the issues of leadership or armament 
or whatever. I think that's where we need to look for a better approach. 
Thank you Dennis Halladay, the UN's former humanitarian coordinator 
for Iraq, speaking from New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>