<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981012.2000.2997 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is the world, I'm Tony Conn. Until two years ago, Mexico citizens 
living in the United States were not allowed to vote in their country's 
election unless they returned to cast their ballots in person. But 
in 1996, Mexico's Congress changed that, giving Mexicans here the 
right to participate in Mexican elections. Now Mexico's political 
parties are starting to go after the more than 7 million votes north 
of the border. Correspondent Edie Rabinowitz of station WBEZ in Chicago 
reports on how that courtship is proceeding. This past May, Mexico 
City Mayor Juatama Cardinas gave a commencement speech at the University 
of Chicago. If we wanted to present a scenario for the Mexican Twentieth 
Century has been, we would summarize it in a single expression. It 
has been the century of the Mexican revolution. Cardinas' visit to 
Chicago could also be seen as revolutionary. Some say he was unofficially 
kicking off his newest campaign for the Mexican Presidency on US soil. 
In fact during his visit, Cardenis inaugurated the Chicago office 
of the Party of the Democratic Revolution, or PRD. The party has seven 
offices in the United States in places like New York, Las Angeles, 
Washington State, and now the southside Chicago neighborhood known 
as La Vejita. La Vejita is a predominately Mexican-American neighborhood 
with a vibrant main street lined with storefronts. The PRD office 
is below street level, but the party's large sun logo is prominently 
displayed. The office is staffed by volunteers who explain the party's 
mission to anyone who walks in. Cindy Yertados says she volunteers 
to express her discontent with Mexico's ruling party the PRE. But 
Yertado says it can be hard to convince others to become politically 
active. Many of them don't want to get affiliated to the party because 
they have cold feet about political parties in Mexico. Because in 
Mexico they will buy your vote with a sandwich, you know. Because 
people are hungry, they give you a sandwich, and you get a vote. So 
they have cold feet. We don't want to force anybody. There have been 
a lot of people who want to get on our mailing list, and want to know 
what we are doing. Yertados and her fellow volunteers are trying to 
recruit voters like Ava Petis. She's lived in Chicago for 28 years 
but still retains her Mexican citizenship. Petis says she feels connected 
to her homeland even though she has no plans to return. What does 
that have to do with anything. I live here but I have family there. 
I see them as people. Just because I am here doesn't mean I am not 
aware of the problems there. I am aware and I am interested. Recently 
the PRD organized a referendum to protest the Mexican government's 
proposal to bail out the country's banking system. Mexicans abroad 
were invited to vote at PRD offices like the one in Chicago, where 
2000 ballots were collected. The vote of Mexicans living abroad is 
an important one for opposition parties like the PRD. According to 
Frederich Catz a professor of Latin American Studies at the University 
of Chicago. Precisely because they left Mexico many will vote against 
the PRE. In addition, many of the recent immigrants come from the 
poorest segments of the country where the PRD especially is very strong, 
so that the PRD has reason to expect a strong vote in its favor in 
Chicago. But the PRD is not the only Mexican political party looking 
for votes in Chicago. The Conservative National Action Party, or PAN, 
has a Friends of the PAN Chapter here. And a friends of the PRE office 
supporting the ruling party is due to open later this month. Rafael 
Meso who heads the unofficial PRE outfit is glad Mexicans here will 
finally be able to vote in the elections back home. People here send 
money to Mexico. So they are involved in the economic life of the 
country. And they have the right to take part in Mexico's political 
life as well. While Mexicans abroad will officially be allowed to 
vote in the 2000 Presidential Elections, many party activists here 
in Chicago say there are still plenty of logistical problems to iron 
out. Like where people will be able to vote, and what voting method 
to use. But the biggest problem of all may be how to pay for it. Mexico's 
Counsel General in the Midwest, Eddieberto Gallendo is not optimistic. 
We don't have the money that we need for the elections in 2000 year. 
This is the most important problem. Gallendo says absentee voting 
for Mexicans abroad may not happen in the year 2000. And is more realistic 
for the year 2006. But such concerns are not stopping the three biggest 
political parties in Mexico from setting up shop now, just in case. 
For The World, I'm Edie Rabinowitz in Chicago. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>