<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981012.1700.2390 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The president, who has promised to cooperate fully with the impeachment 
inquiry, received the news philosophically. He told reporters at the 
White House on Thursday that the appropriate thing for him now is 
to stay focused on national priorities. This is beyond my scope. I 
have to work on what I can do. What I can do is to do my job for the 
American people. I trust the American people. They almost always get 
it right after 220 years, and I'm working in a way that I hope will 
restore their trust in me by working for the things that our country 
needs. President Clinton said his priorities, including keeping the 
U.S. economy going in the face of global turmoil, require putting 
progress ahead of partisanship. As the Clinton-Lewinsky scandal has 
played out in the headlines around the world, people in other countries 
have watched in puzzlement, especially in France. But one Frenchman 
who knows America well -- Dominique Moize of the French Institute 
of International Relations -- says what the world is watching is American 
democracy in action. He says the United States, more than any other 
country in the world, is ruled by laws and not by men. Even America's 
elected monarchs, as he put it, cannot put themselves above the laws 
which govern ordinary citizens. The majority of the Frenchmen have 
not understood what it was all about. They thought it was about sex, 
and they missed the point about perjury and about can you lie or not 
in front of a Bible? Maybe one of the reason is that in France, the 
equivalent of sex is money. And so, we have money scandal, but we 
don't have sex scandal. Globally speaking, the leaders of the world 
are supporting Clinton because he's a leader. Because in some ways, 
they are defending also their elite status and because they think 
it's better for the stability. And second, it's culturally chic to 
come to the defense of the president because from their point of view, 
what is at stake is the defense of the private sphere, especially 
the private sphere of the powerful. Now, you said that most Frenchmen 
don't understand what America is all about on this issue. Well, I 
think in many ways, it shows the depths and the limits of American 
democracy. The scandal shows that America still takes seriously the 
revolutionary principle of ancient philosophers like Rousseau and 
Montescure. And at the same time, there is a perversion of democracy 
through the excesses of the media, the excesses of the special prosecutor 
and the politicizing of the story by the Congress. It means that the 
most important country in the world at a time of great uncertainty 
will be dominated by a drifting presidency not fully capable of taking 
actions. Because when Clinton will act, people will ask, "Ha, ha, 
he's doing that because he wants to show that he's still in control." 
And he's bombing Kosovo because he doesn't want to face his responsibility 
in front of the Congress. I mean, right now, Clinton is trying to 
convince us that he's in charge. But there will be moments where it 
will be obvious that this is not going to be the case. And we are, 
unfortunately, confronted with unpleasant scenarios if the president 
is facing a very serious impeachment process will be paralysis. If 
the president resigns, it's not good either because what he did could 
not be compared to the Watergate scandal. And if the president goes 
on as if nothing had taken place, that would not be very good either 
for the presidency - though I don't like the idea. But I think if 
the president were to gracefully resign and to be succeeded by the 
vice president, the climate might be cleaner. Dominique Moize, editor 
of Politique Etranger, speaking to us from his home in Paris. The 
long road to impeachment was the subject of today's "Dateline." I'm 
Pamela Taylor. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>