<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981012.1700.2156 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The U.S. House of Representatives, the people's house as it's sometimes 
known, may have voted to begin the impeachment proceedings against 
President Bill Clinton. But it is far from clear whether the American 
public will support an eventual decision to remove Mr. Clinton from 
office. The long road to impeachment is the subject of today's "Dateline." 
Here's Pamela Taylor. For the moment, President Clinton's public approval 
ratings remain high - 60 percent or better in most polls. And Republicans 
realize that for their impeachment drive to succeed, they're going 
to have to win over public opinion. Many analysts, however, say a 
long impeachment process rehashing the now-familiar allegations against 
Mr. Clinton could backfire against the Republicans in this November's 
congressional elections. But most lawmakers, whatever their party, 
are aware of the heavy responsibility awaiting them. They know it's 
only the third time in American history Congress has voted to launch 
impeachment proceedings against a sitting president. And as we hear 
in this report from congressional correspondent Paula Wilson, their 
decision was not taken lightly. As they walked into the House chamber, 
lawmakers knew the legacy of this Congress will be its treatment of 
Bill Clinton. They seemed mindful of history. Some quoted the Founding 
Fathers. "They are watching us," said one congressman, as he pointed 
to a large marble staircase near the House floor. And at the top of 
that staircase is a large painting, a painting by Howard Chandler 
Christie entitled, "The Signing, The Constitution of the United States." 
Florida Republican David Weldon told a story about the man in the 
center of the painting, Benjamin Franklin. It is reported that he 
walked out of the Constitutional Convention and a woman approached 
him and said, "What kind of government have you given us, Mr. Franklin?" 
And his response was, "A republic if you can keep it." On this October 
day, a day when the mood in the House chamber matched the stormy skies 
outside, members talked about their responsibility to the republic. 
There was passion in their voices, sometimes anger, sometimes fear. 
They offered opposing opinions on the threat posed to the nation by 
the president's misbehavior. He broke the law, argued Republicans. 
He lied about an affair, said the Democrats. Judiciary Chairman Henry 
Hyde tried and failed to keep partisan passions in check. All of us 
are pulled in many directions by our political parties, by philosophy 
and friendships. We're pulled by many competing forces. But mostly, 
we're moved by our consciences. We must listen to that still small 
voice that whispers in our ear, "duty, duty, duty." But the strains 
in the House would not be eased. Rather they grew as the day wore 
on. Democrats were frustrated by a lack of debate time and the knowledge 
all attempts to stop the Republicans would fail. Their voices formed 
a chorus of resentment with the deep resonance of New York congressman 
Charles Rangel filling the chamber. He said the plan for an unrestricted 
inquiry is politically motivated. U.S. REPRESENTATIVE CHARLES RANGEL 
The reason for it is because it's the only thing that they have to 
take to the American people before this election. What else are they 
going to take, your legislative record? The resulting vote was as 
partisan as the debate. The Republicans voted as one for an unlimited 
inquiry. Many members looked worn out as they left the House chamber. 
They know the impeachment process is just beginning, and it will be 
their chapter in history. VOA congressional correspondent Paula Wilson. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>