<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981012.1700.2696 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency has ordered 22 states and 
the District of Columbia to cut the use of smog-causing fuels to improve 
the quality of air in the Midwest, the South and the Northeast where 
it's carried by prevailing winds. The regulation sets strict standards 
for nitrogen oxides, the main ingredients in smog. Although cars produce 
some of these pollutants, the EPA says the worst offenders are coal-burning 
plants in the Midwest and Ohio Valley. As VOA's Roseanne Skirbal reports, 
environmentalists are applauding the ruling while the power industry 
plans to challenge it in court. When Environmental Protection Agency 
director Carol Browner announced the EPA decision, she called it an 
historic measure to protect public health. As a result of this action, 
138 million Americans living in the Eastern United States will breathe 
cleaner air. Of these 138 million Americans, 31 million will, for 
the first time, breathe air that meets the nation's new public health 
standards for harmful levels of smog. The EPA plan will cut nitrogen 
oxide emissions by 85 percent, or by more than one million tons a 
year by the year 2003. Frank O'Donnell is president of Clean Air Trust, 
a watchdog environmental organization. He says the EPA regulation 
will force delinquent power plants to modernize. In West Virginia, 
for instance, there is a coal-fired plant called the Sporin plant. 
It was built in 1950 in the middle of the Korean War when Harry Truman 
was president. It emits right now the 32,000 tons of smog-forming 
nitrogen oxides every year, and it's never been modernized for pollution 
controls. And we think that plants like this ought to be modernized. 
The result is going to be cleaner air, not just in the far east, but 
everywhere east of the Mississippi. It's going to mean better air. 
It's going to mean better health for people, fewer asthma attacks 
and better visibility and other environmental benefits. The Midwest 
Ozone Group doesn't see it that way. This ad hoc coalition of electric 
utilities, coal and petroleum companies in the Midwest and Ohio Valley 
advocates local instead of regional controls to achieve air quality 
standards. The group agrees that pollutants travel across state lines 
but not to the extent or distance that the EPA plan attempts to curb. 
David Flannery, a legal adviser with the Midwest Ozone Group, says 
the new ruling will impose massive economic hardship on Midwest power 
plants. It will require literally billions of dollars to be spent 
to retrofit power plants with control devices to remove the nitrogen 
oxide. And the worst of it is that there will be some power plants 
where even expending billions of dollars in capital won't solve the 
problem. And it's the older power plants that don't have enough economic 
life in them to justify that kind of money being expended. And what 
will happen there is those plants will just simply be shut down. And 
what that means is a loss of jobs, especially a loss of jobs in the 
coal mines that are supplying the fuel to those plants. David Flannery 
puts that loss at approximately 11,000 jobs in the state of West Virginia 
alone. He says the regulation is bad rule-making and unfairly targets 
the Midwest. The Midwest Ozone Group plans to appeal the decision 
in court. Frank O'Donnell with Clean Air Trust says that action would 
only serve to delay clean-up. We would obviously prefer that they 
get on with the process of cleaning up the dirty plants and doing 
something with it, rather than wasting rate payers' money on lawsuits 
that ultimately are going to fail. But the Midwest Ozone Group says 
the EPA ignored an alternative plan submitted by Midwest governors 
that would have cut emissions by 65 percent. The EPA is giving the 
states one year to come up with a plan to cut smog levels by 85 percent 
as required by the EPA ruling. I'm Roseanne Skirbal. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>