<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981119.1830.0038 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. To begin this evening with impeachment process and Bill 
Clinton means today, the impeachment process and the independent counsel, 
Kenneth Starr, today for only the third time in the country's history 
the Judiciary committee took up the question of whether the president 
should be impeached. The only witness today was Mr. Starr, who began 
with a lengthy statement on what his investigation had concluded. 
First we go to Washington and ABC's Jackie Judd. Kenneth Starr, the 
witness for the prosecution, calmly and myth otically laid out the 
case against the president, describing a series of premeditated acts 
to conceal his relationship with Monica Lewinsky. The key point about 
the president's conduct is this. On at least six different occasions, 
from December 17, 1997, through August 17, 1998, the president had 
to make a decision. He could choose truth, or he could choose deception. 
On all six occasions, the president chose deception. The first decision, 
said Starr, came when the president called Lewinsky at her Watergate 
apartment in the middle of the night to tell her she would be a witness 
in the Paula Jones case. The president could have told Ms. Lewinsky 
that they must tell the truth under oath. The president could have 
explained that they might face embarrassment but that as a citizen 
and as president, he could not lie under oath and he could not sit 
by while Monica did so. The president did not say anything like that. 
Instead, said Starr, Lewinsky claimed they discussed cover stories 
devised long ago. At that moment, the president's intimate relationship 
with a subordinate employee was transformed it was transformed into 
an unlawful effort to thwart the judicial process. Starr testified 
that Mr. Clinton soon made another critical decision, to make a series 
of false statements when deposed by Jones' lawyers. He testified that 
he could not recall being alone with Ms. Lewinsky. That was untrue. 
He testified that he could not recall ever being in the oval office 
hallway with Ms. Lewinsky, except perhaps when she was delivering 
pizza. That was untrue. He testified that he could not recall gifts 
exchanged between Ms. Lewinsky and him, that was untrue. He testified, 
after a 14-second pause, that he was not sure whether he had ever 
talked to Ms. Lewinsky about the possibility that she might be asked 
to testify in the lawsuit. That was untrue. By contrast, Starr's account 
of Mr. Clinton's lengthy testimony before the grand jury was brief, 
and without of any detail. The president thus denied certain conduct 
with Ms. Lewinsky and devised a variety of tortured and false definitions. 
But Starr defended having asked Mr. Clinton for sexual details about 
his affair with Lewinsky and including them in his referral to Congress. 
The details of the president's relationship with Ms. Lewinsky became 
relevant. Indeed, they became critical in determining whether and 
the extent to which the president made false statements under oath 
and otherwise obstructed justice. Democrats objected when Starr went 
beyond the Lewinsky case. But he actually exonerated the president 
in a number of areas. He testified Mr. Clinton was not involved in 
firing White House travel office employees or in the collection of 
FBI files by two White House aides. And, Starr revealed that last 
year he drafted a referral to Congress about Mr. Clinton's alleged 
involvement in a fraudulent loan given to Susan McDougal. But then 
decided the evidence was not strong enough. And at the end of his 
testimony, with his voice rising, Starr made a final defense of his 
own conduct. I am proud of what we have accomplished. We were assigned 
a difficult job. We have done it to the best of our abilities. We 
tried to be both fair and thorough. Clearly, the independent counsel 
had a huge challenge going into this hearing, to reshape his public 
image and restore credibility to his much maligned investigation. 
But for at least two hours today, Ken Starr was able to focus on what 
he says is the real issue -- the case against the president. Peter? 
Thanks very much. Jackie Judd in Washington. Many Americans have been 
glue glued to the television set all day, in part because this is 
the first time we heard Mr. Starr talk at length and heard the democrats 
and republicans respond. The question for my colleague at the moment, 
George Stephanopoulos, is did it go anywhere? I don't think so. You 
know, Ken Starr made a strong case that the president broke the law, 
but there were no big bombshells. When the hearing opened today, there 
weren't the votes in the house for impeachment. There was not much 
defense of the president from the democrats questioning Mr. Starr. 
Amazing. The democrats don't want to defend what the president did. 
Whatever he did, it doesn't rise to the level of impeachment. Let 
me go to Washington and our legal analyst, Jeffrey Toobin. This is 
about politics, not about the law. But is there any sense in your 
mind, watching this, that the country is any closer to impeachment 
or is it farther away, roughly in the same place? I would say dead 
center from where it was this morning. Today's impact will be more 
personal than political. I think this is the day that Ken Starr began 
to get his reputation back. I think he was fair and persuasive, but 
so were his critics. I think even though star himself may gain some 
of his reputation, the public will probably be dead right where it 
was. Thank you very much. It will be no thanks to the democratic effort 
if Mr. Starr succeeds in getting his reputation back. When we come 
back, we'll have them have a go at him. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>