<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981119.1830.0536 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The independent counsel is such a politicized figure now. It was his 
first chance to lay out his entire case. Many of us knew what was 
coming. There's no question the democrats were laying for him. Here's 
ABC's Linda Douglass. As soon as the hearing began, democrats tried 
to shift the focus to Ken Starr's behavior. The idea of a federally 
paid sex policeman spending millions of dollars to trap an unfaithful 
spouse would he been unthinkable prior to the Starr investigation. 
Democrats on the committee also protested today's rules and demanded 
that President Clinton's lawyers be given more time to question Starr. 
Chairman Henry Hyde said no. You are disrupting the continuity of 
the meeting with these adversarial moves? Disrupting a railroad, that's 
what we are disrupting. Starr remained unflappable, even as the democrats 
jabbed at him with hostile questions about his tactics. The democrats' 
lawyer accused Starr's agents of strong-arming Monica Lewinsky when 
they surrounded her in a hotel restaurant last January. She was scared 
and was crying a lot of the time. When she asked to see her attorney, 
"she would not be able to help herself with her attorney there." She 
was told that she was threatened with going to jail for "27 years." 
She was encouraging others to join her in committing perjury. She 
was as the information came to us, a felon in the middle of committing 
another felony. Democrats questioned Starr's motives. If he found 
no evidence against the president in his earlier investigations, why 
did he wait until today to tell Congress? You tell us that months 
ago you concluded that the president was not involved in the FBI files. 
You've never had any evidence he was involved in the travel office. 
Yet now several weeks after the election is the first time you're 
saying that. Congressman Frank, the reason is because what we provided 
you in the referral is substantial and credible information of possible 
potential offenses. The silence with respect to anything else means 
necessarily that we have not concluded -- In other words, you don't 
have anything to say unless you have something bad to say. Republicans 
sometimes poked fun at the democrats attacks. Judge Starr is one half 
of the unfavorable comments leveled at you were true, you probably 
should be keel-hauled. And even if we could accept for the purpose 
of argument that some of these attacks had some merit, it's obvious 
they do not bear in any way on the reliability or credibility of the 
facts of the case against the president. As for the case against the 
president, republicans said today it is clear cut, a case of lying 
under oath, which they say is impeachable, though the democrats challenged 
Ken Starr all day long, they did not argue with his conclusion that 
the president did lie repeatedly. Thanks very much. Linda Douglass 
on Capitol Hill. We're some time away from the counting of the votes 
on the Judiciary committee which might then lead it to the whole house. 
Cokie, I'm struck on how such an historic occasion as this, there'so 
much political posturing. Indeed. Speeches made all day long by both 
sides. We've seen a little sample of it. Some people used their five 
minutes to make a speech. Nothing different as we heard earlier in 
the program from what they thought going in. I think what we're likely 
to see here is a partisan vote out of this committee. Then it's up 
to the full house and the role that the democrats play and where they 
see their own political fortunes will make a tremendous difference. 
Let me turn to Sam Donaldson. Sam, do you see any difference in the 
relationship tonight between democrats and their president as a result 
of today. Probably not. The democrats are doing what the president 
hoped they would do, attack Ken Starr. That's been the White House 
line. The White House officials here in Washington, Peter, say that 
having watched this today, one, the committee is still unfair in the 
way it's treating the president, two, there's nothing new in what 
Ken Starr reported. Except he now exonerad the president in a number 
of important areas. We're told Mr. Clinton who is in Tokyo, didn't 
watch any of this. He can be excused for that. While all of this was 
going on, it was the dead of night and probably asleep. Thanks very 
much. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>