<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981119.1190 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A Cuban exile group said Thursday it would appeal a Spanish judge's 
refusal to open a probe into allegations of genocide, terrorism and 
torture filed against Cuban leader Fidel Castro. ``We will appeal 
the decision within the statutory three days allowed,'' said lawyer 
Javier Barrilero who represents the Foundation for Human Rights in 
Cuba. Earlier Thursday, National Court Judge Ismael Moreno rejected 
the foundation's petition for an investigation. The judge said the 
suit, filed Nov. 5, referred to common crimes committed outside Spain 
that were not within Spanish jurisdiction. The Cuban petition was 
inspired by National Court probes into human rights abuses in Chile 
and Argentina that developed into an extradition request against former 
Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet, accused of the same three charges. 
On Oct. 30 the National Court gave a green light Moreno's colleague 
Judge Baltasar Garzon to seek Pinochet's trial in Spain on the basis 
of crimes committed during his 1973-1990 regime that it considered 
could be reasonably described as genocide, terrorism and torture. 
Under Spanish law these crimes are not subject to national boundaries. 
According to Barrilero, Moreno's initial rejection of the foundation's 
suit was ``not a surprise.'' ``The case against Castro was inspired 
by the Pinochet case but has since become independent. The road does 
not stop here,'' he said. Barrilero said his clients would take their 
case all the way up the Spanish judicial system, and were studying 
the possibility of involving international courts. Moreno's ruling 
said the petition failed to present credible evidence that Castro, 
and several close associates also named in the suit, had committed 
genocide by attempting to eliminate a group of people. The judge also 
said that none of those named could be accused of terrorism because 
they were all high government officials seeking to bolster rather 
than subvert the state order, the Spanish news agency Europa Press 
reported. Further, Moreno's ruling said that the alleged cases of 
torture were better described as ``degrading treatment,'' the agency 
reported. The Foundation for Human Rights is part of the Cuban-American 
National Foundation, a Miami-based group vehemently opposed to Castro. 
Its Spanish suit was backed with papers detailing the cases of about 
120 people who allegedly suffered torture or other abuses by Castro's 
government, were executed or died while in Cuban jails or in police 
custody. Another 18,000 people were also named, including some from 
North America and Spain, who were allegedly killed or disappeared 
in Cuba since 1959 when Castro took power. The suit also accused Castro's 
brother Raul, Tourism Minister and former army commander Osmani Cienfuegos 
and Carlos Amat, Cuba's ambassador in Geneva and also a former member 
of the military. Immediately after the suit was filed, Spanish Foreign 
Minister Abel Matutes said it could not prosper because Castro holds 
diplomatic immunity as a head of state. Barrilero said these comments 
were ``understandable'' because Matutes was on the point of visiting 
Cuba on an official tour, but were ``legally inappropriate'' given 
the Spanish government's refusal to comment on the Pinochet case. 
Garzon had Pinochet arrested in London on Oct. 16, and the Spanish 
government formally requested his extradition earlier this month but 
has repeatedly insisted that it is a purely legal matter and refused 
to comment. Meanwhile, the possibility that Pinochet could be extradited 
to Spain depends on a decision due Wednesday from Britain's House 
of Lords on whether the aging former dictator is entitled to immunity 
as a former head of state. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>