<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981119.0237 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Israel's Cabinet convened Thursday to review Palestinian compliance 
with the Mideast peace accord and vote on whether to give the green 
light for the first of three troop pullbacks in the West Bank over 
the next 10 weeks. On Wednesday evening, Israeli and Palestinian troop 
commanders met to complete preparations for an Israeli pullout in 
the northern West Bank that is to be carried out by Friday. In the 
first stage, 2 percent of the West Bank, or 110 square kilometers 
(44 square miles), will be transferred from sole Israeli control to 
joint Palestinian jurisdiction. In addition, 7.1 percent of the land, 
or 400 square kilometers (160 square miles), will be moved from joint 
jurisdiction to sole Palestinian control. No army bases or Jewish 
settlements will be dismantled. Instead, Israeli troops will move 
black-and-yellow road markers the size of washing machines to demarcate 
the new lines of division. The first pullback will leave two Jewish 
settlements, Ganim and Kadim, east of the Palestinian town of Jenin, 
surrounded on three sides by Palestinian-controlled areas. One settler, 
Avner Sinwani, said he moved to Ganim, a settlement of 51 families, 
for a peaceful, rural life and would leave if the community turned 
into a fortified enclave with watch towers. ``If we have to stay inside 
a fortress, I don't think anyone will want to stay and raise children 
here,'' Sinwani told Israel radio. Israeli troops began fortifying 
settlements, unloading rolls of barbed wire and cement blocks from 
trucks. At the Psagot settlement near the Palestinian town of Ramallah, 
troops built cement trenches, apparently to be used as firing positions. 
The government has set aside 190 million shekels (dlrs 45 million) 
for reinforcing 18 settlements. Israeli media reports said the United 
States plans to give Israel dlrs 1.2 billion to cover the cost of 
the troop pullback. The grant, which would come in addition to the 
dlrs 3 billion in military and economic aid Israel receives from the 
United States every year, requires congressional approval, the reports 
said. Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's Cabinet has been deeply 
divided over the Wye River peace accord under which Israel is to hand 
over 13 percent of the West Bank by the end of January, in exchange 
for a Palestinian crackdown on Islamic militants. Thursday's Cabinet 
session was expected to be stormy. Hawkish Agriculture Minister Rafael 
Eitan told Israel radio he was considering resigning if the pullback 
was approved Thursday. However, it appeared the Cabinet would back 
the withdrawal. ``It seems that the Palestinians have fulfilled all 
their obligations,'' said Netanyahu's senior adviser, David Bar-Illan. 
Bar-Illan said Israel was still waiting for one clarification concerning 
an anti-incitement law the Palestinians are to pass. ``We assume this 
will be cleared up during the day, and then we will be ready to implement 
the pullback,'' he said. The armed forces chief of staff, Maj. Gen. 
Shaul Mofaz, told the Cabinet that the Palestinians had already arrested 
more fugitives than required, Israel radio said. Palestinian negotiator 
Saeb Erekat said the Palestinians had kept their commitments. ``I 
hope that the Israeli Cabinet will not come up with any excuses today,'' 
he said. In addition to the first troop pullback, Israel was also 
supposed to release 250 Palestinian prisoners by Friday. The Palestinians 
complained that most of those on Israel's list were either laborers 
caught without a work permit in Israel or criminals, rather than security 
prisoners. The dispute has not been settled yet. In a possible new 
dispute, Israel has accelerated the legal process of turning about 
10 percent of the West Bank, or 125,000 acres, into state lands that 
could be used for settlement expansion, the Maariv daily and Israel 
radio said. The land at issue is not privately owned by Palestinians 
and is not farmed. A spokesman for the Israeli military government 
in the West Bank, Lt. Peter Lerner, said the process of turning unclaimed 
lands into state lands has been going on for years. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>