<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981119.1195 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Alexandra Meissnitzer, gaining speed and time at every gate, stormed 
to an overwhelming victory in a women's World Cup giant slalom on 
Thursday. The Austrian, fastest by a mere .15 seconds after the morning 
run, showed total domination in the afternoon to win by a stunning 
2.16 seconds. Meissnitzer, a pal of Olympic gold medalist Picabo Street, 
sounded like her American friend in describing her winning race. ``I 
just decided to, you know, go for it,'' said Meissnitzer, whose effervescent 
personality demolishes the stereotype that Austrians are bleak, austere 
automatons. Her time of 2 minutes, 18.13 seconds left defending World 
Cup giant slalom champion Martina Ertl of Germany far back in second, 
with Liechtenstein's Birgit Heeb gaining her first-ever podium finish 
in 2:20.39. ``I was nervous because it was still snowing when it was 
my turn,'' Ertl said. ``My light was not as good as Meissnitzer. After 
getting a second (after a disappointing 10th in the season opener), 
I'm looking forward to my next race a lot more.'' After a first run 
conducted on the hard snow and brilliant sunshine that are trademarks 
of the Park City Mountain Resort, the top 30 racers who qualified 
for the second run had to fight not only the clock but flat light 
and snow squalls that intensified as the afternoon progressed. The 
flat light, caused by heavy cloud cover that moved in just before 
the afternoon session, made it especially difficult to make the transition 
from the relatively flat upper section to the steep middle pitch. 
Until Ertl and then Meissnitzer came down, Heeb was the only racer 
able to carry enough speed off the middle section to keep from getting 
bogged down on the flats leading to the finish. For a time, she flirted 
with becoming the first Leichtenstein woman to win a race since two-time 
overall champion Hanni Wenzel, now head of the country's ski federation, 
in 1984. ``It (the second run) was more difficult than the first one, 
with the snow falling,'' said Heeb, whose four top-five career finishes 
have come in the United States _ three in Park City. ``I had some 
problems but I still was happy.'' Even Ertl wasn't as good as Heeb 
in the second run, and she lost most of the .86-second margin she 
had on the Liechtensteiner after the first run. Had the second run 
been a few yards longer, she might have failed to grab second. All 
that became moot after Meissnitzer rolled down the mountain. As on 
the first run, when she was fastest as the first racer of the day, 
she was flawless at the top. Where others struggled with the transition 
change from flat to steep, she carved strong turns that only added 
to her speed. By the time she reached the flats, she was ahead by 
almost two seconds and adding to the margin with every gate. When 
she flashed across the finish line, she knew she had won and it was 
only the incredible margin of victory that caused her to throw her 
arms in the air and sink to her knees in the snow. ``I got a little 
better light than the skiers in front of me,'' Meissnitzer said. ``The 
second course was more turny but I decided I couldn't take it safe.'' 
Meissnitzer's fourth career victory and Heeb's first-ever podium overshadowed 
some other starting results. One was turned in by 16-year-old rising 
star Janica Kostelic of Croatia, a stunning fourth and only .37 out 
of the top three. Added to the 12th she had in the season-opening 
race at Solden, Austria three weeks ago, she has branded herself as 
an immediate factor in the battle to rest away Ertl's title. Placing 
a heartening seventh was Austria's 31-year-old former World Cup overall 
champion Anita Wachter, whose career appeared over after a knee injury 
in a crash just before the Olympics last season. Wachter fought back 
through the summer and, displaying the light touch that has been her 
trademark since 1985, appeared to be as good as ever. The United States 
got a boost when Sarah Schleper of Vail, Colorado, considered more 
of a threat in slalom, finished 16th in 2:21.89. Schleper had a start 
number of 39, a disadvantage she overcame by placing 18th in the first 
run. Teammate Alex Shaffer of Aspen, Colorado, who was .01 slower 
than Schleper as the 40th starter, struggled a bit in the afternoon 
but still earned five points by placing 26th in 2:23.52. Canada, like 
the United States, was figured to serve as also-rans in an event expected 
to be the sole domain of Europeans. But Allison Forsyth, who just 
qualified for a second run by placing 29th, improved five spots for 
24th in 2:22.91. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>