<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981119.1153 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Austria's Alexandra Meissnitzer, gaining speed and time at every gate, 
stormed to an overwhelming victory in a women's World Cup giant slalom 
on Thursday. Meissnitzer, fastest by a mere .15 seconds after the 
morning run, showed total domination in the afternoon to win by a 
stunning 2.16 seconds. Her time of 2 minutes, 18.13 seconds left defending 
World Cup giant slalom champion Martina Ertl of Germany far back in 
second, with Liechtenstein's Birgit Heeb gaining her first-ever podium 
finish in 2:20.39. After a first run conducted on the hard snow and 
brilliant sunshine that are trademarks of the Park City Mountain Resort, 
the top 30 racers who qualified for the second run had to fight not 
only the clock but flat light and snow squalls that intensified as 
the afternoon progressed. The flat light, caused by heavy cloud cover 
that moved in just before the afternoon session, made it especially 
difficult to make the transition from the relatively flat upper section 
to the steep middle pitch. Until Ertl and then Meissnitzer came down, 
Heeb was the only racer able to carry enough speed off the middle 
section to keep from getting bogged down on the flats leading to the 
finish. Even Ertl wasn't as good as Heeb in the second run, and she 
lost most of the .86-second margin she had on the Liechtensteiner 
after the first run. Had the second run been a few yards longer, she 
might have failed to grab second. All that became moot after Meissnitzer 
rolled down the mountain. As on the first run, when she was fastest 
as the first racer of the day, she was flawless at the top. Where 
others struggled with the transition change from flat to steep, she 
carved strong turns that only added to her speed. By the time she 
reached the flats, she was ahead by almost two seconds and adding 
to the margin with every gate. When she flashed across the finish 
line, she knew she had won and it was only the incredible margin of 
victory that caused her to throw her arms in the air and sink to her 
knees in the snow. Meissnitzer's fourth career victory and Heeb's 
first-ever podium overshadowed some other starting results. One was 
turned in by 16-year-old rising star Janica Kostelic of Croatia, a 
stunning fourth and only .37 out of the top three. Added to the 12th 
she had in the season-opening race at Solden, Austria three weeks 
ago, she has branded herself as an immediate factor in the battle 
to rest away Ertl's title. Placing a heartening seventh was Austria's 
31-year-old former World Cup overall champion Anita Wachter, whose 
career appeared over after a knee injury in a crash just before the 
Olympics last season. Wachter fought back through the summer and, 
displaying the light touch that has been her trademark since 1985, 
appeared to be as good as ever. The United States got a boost when 
Sarah Schleper of Vail, Colo., considered more of a threat in slalom, 
finished 16th in 2:21.89. Schleper had a start number of 39, a disadvantage 
she overcame by placing 18th in the first run. Teammate Alex Shaffer 
of Aspen, Colo., who was .01 slower than Schleper as the 40th starter, 
struggled a bit in the afternoon but still earned five points by placing 
26th in 2:23.52. Canada, like the United States, was figured to serve 
as also-rans in an event expected to be the sole domain of Europeans. 
But Allison Forsyth, who just qualified for a second run by placing 
29th, improved five spots for 24th in 2:22.91. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>