<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981119.0514 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Clearing the final hurdle to a West Bank troop pullback, Israel's 
Cabinet on Thursday narrowly gave the go-ahead to the first stage 
of the new Mideast peace agreement. It was the first time in nearly 
two years that Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's hard-line government 
handed over territory to Palestinian control. Approval came after 
a series of delays and disputes with the Palestinians. The pullback, 
expected to be completed by Friday, was five days behind the original 
schedule. Palestinian negotiator Saeb Erekat said the two sides have 
been cooperating closely in recent days, after the initial acrimony. 
``We hope the relationship can now improve,'' he said. While the Cabinet 
debated, Israeli officers showed redeployment maps to their Palestinian 
counterparts. Together, the group toured the areas of the northern 
West Bank from which Israeli will withdraw. In the first stage, 2 
percent of the West Bank, or 110 square kilometers (44 square miles), 
will be transferred from sole Israeli control to joint jurisdiction. 
In addition, 7.1 percent of the land, or 400 square kilometers (160 
square miles), will be moved from joint jurisdiction to sole Palestinian 
control. In Qabatiyeh, a town of 17,000, many residents appeared indifferent 
to the prospect of coming under full Palestinian rule. No Palestinian 
flags or posters of Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat decorated the 
streets, as was customary in previous handovers. ``The Palestinian 
Authority does commit certain violations, but it's still better than 
the occupying power (Israel),'' said Ibrahim Zidan, a 36-year-old 
farmer, sitting in an outdoor coffee shop. Fayez Arafat, commander 
of Palestinian forces in the West Bank, said his officers would take 
control of Qabatiyeh and the villages of Tubas, Tamoun and Al-Fara 
over the next three days. No army bases or Jewish settlements will 
be dismantled. Instead, Israeli troops will move black-and-yellow 
road markers the size of washing machines to demarcate the new lines 
of division. The first pullback will leave two Jewish settlements, 
Ganim and Kadim, east of the Palestinian town of Jenin, surrounded 
on three sides by Palestinian-controlled areas. One settler, Avner 
Sinwani, said he moved to Ganim, a settlement of 51 families, for 
a peaceful, rural life and would leave if the community turned into 
a fortified enclave with watch towers. ``If we have to stay inside 
a fortress, I don't think anyone will want to stay and raise children 
here,'' Sinwani told Israel radio. Israeli troops began fortifying 
settlements, unloading rolls of barbed wire and cement blocks from 
flatbed trucks. At the Psagot settlement near the Palestinian town 
of Ramallah, troops built cement trenches, apparently to be used as 
firing positions. The government has set aside 190 million shekels 
(dlrs 45 million) for reinforcing 18 settlements. The United States 
has agreed to help Israel and the Palestinians pay for the cost of 
redeployment and is negotiating the exact amount with the two sides, 
said U.S. Embassy spokesman Larry Schwartz. Such aid would require 
congressional approval. Israeli media said Israel is seeking dlrs 
1.2 billion for the redeployment. Israel's 17-member Cabinet is deeply 
divided over the Wye River peace accord under which Israel is to hand 
over 13 percent of the West Bank by the end of January, in exchange 
for a Palestinian crackdown on Islamic militants. Only Netanyahu and 
six of his ministers voted in favor Thursday, while five voted against 
and three abstained. Two Cabinet members were abroad. In the first 
stage of the accord, Israel also pledged to release 250 Palestinian 
prisoners. The Palestinians said Israel breached its promises by offering 
to free mostly criminals rather than security prisoners. A senior 
Israeli official said the Palestinians would have to accept the Israeli 
decision, and that those whom the Palestinians did not want would 
remain in jail. Israeli Cabinet Secretary Danny Naveh confirmed after 
the Cabinet vote that the Palestinians have met their obligations 
so far. They published a decree against incitement and a decree regarding 
illegal weapons, and also provided a list of 10 Palestinian fugitives 
to be jailed by Thursday. The armed forces chief of staff, Maj. Gen. 
Shaul Mofaz, told the Cabinet that the Palestinians had already arrested 
more fugitives than required, Israel radio said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>