<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981119.1246 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After nearly two years of U.S. prodding and bitter disputes with the 
Palestinians, the Israeli government reluctantly gave the final go-ahead 
Thursday to withdrawing troops from a chunk of the West Bank the size 
of Chicago. The Cabinet narrowly approved the decision, 7-5, with 
three abstentions, after acrimonious debate. It marked a point of 
no return for Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, who since taking 
office in May 1996 had zigzagged on the peace process and now faces 
the loss of support of key allies. In anticipation of winning full 
or partial control of an additional 9.1 percent of the West Bank, 
the Palestinian Authority staged a jubilant parade in the farming 
town of Jenin in the northern West Bank on Thursday. Most of the land 
to be handed over is near Jenin. Hundreds of Palestinian police officers 
in camouflage uniforms, their AK-47 assault rifles hoisted, marched 
in formation through the town's soccer stadium to the cheers of the 
crowd. Tractors draped with Palestinian flags circled the arena. Two 
percent, or 110 sq. kilometers (44 square miles), of the West Bank 
land in the agreement approved Thursday is being transferred from 
sole Israeli control to joint jurisdiction. In addition, 7.1 percent, 
or 400 sq. kilometers (160 square miles), of the land in the deal 
moves from joint jurisdiction to sole Palestinian control. The Palestinians 
already have full control of 3 percent of the West Bank and joint 
jurisdiction over another 24 percent. Unlike earlier pullbacks, this 
one held little promise of drama. No army bases are being dismantled 
and all Israeli and Palestinian troops have to do is move yellow-and-black 
road markers the size of washing machines to road junctions to demarcate 
the new dividing lines. On Thursday night, the cement blocks were 
still lined up behind the barbed wire fence of the Israeli army base 
of Dotan, south of Jenin. On Friday morning, Israeli and Palestinian 
officers were expected to meet to finalize the transfer with a handshake, 
followed by an evacuation of Israeli troops expected to be completed 
in a few hours. To Jewish settlers in the area, the pullback meant 
new anxiety, and some were toying with the idea of returning to Israel. 
``We moved here for peace and quiet, but if we don't feel safe, we 
are wasting our time,'' said Miri Deutsch, 47, a housewife in the 
Ganim settlement of 51 families which after the pullback will be surrounded 
on three sides by Palestinian-controlled areas. In Qabatieh, a town 
of 17,000 Palestinians just south of Jenin, most residents were indifferent 
to the prospect of coming under full Palestinian rule. No Arafat posters 
or Palestinian flags decorated the streets in anticipation. ``The 
Palestinian Authority does commit certain violations, but it's still 
better than the occupying power (Israel),'' said Ibrahim Zidan, a 
36-year-old farmer, sitting in an outdoor coffee shop. Israel's 17-member 
Cabinet just barely approved the first stage of the peace accord under 
which Israel is to hand over 13 percent of the West Bank in three 
stages by the end of January, in exchange for a Palestinian crackdown 
on Islamic militants. Only Netanyahu and six of his ministers backed 
stage one, with five voting against, three abstaining and two abroad. 
Surprisingly, Trade Minister Natan Sharansky, who helped negotiate 
the accord at Wye Plantation in Maryland last month, abstained Thursday, 
saying he felt the Palestinians had not lived up to all their commitments. 
The beginning of the withdrawal was expected to give new impetus to 
government hard-liners to try and topple Netanyahu. ``Early elections 
are in the air,'' said Emanuel Rosen, a political commentator on Israel 
TV's Channel Two. If Netanyahu's coalition unravels, he could be forced 
to new elections. The Labor-led opposition is pledged to back Netanyahu 
on the peace process, but will not necessarily prop up his government 
if hard-liners bolt. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>