<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981119.0860 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
PARIS (AP) - Ice dancers Marina Anissina and Gwendal Peizerat of France 
look to stop a Russian winning streak in Grand Prix figure skating 
series at the Lalique Trophy competition this weekend. The Russians 
are fresh from a sweep of all four events at the Nations Cup in Gelsenkirchen, 
Germany last week. With world champion Alexei Yagudin looking for 
his fifth victory in five weeks and European champion Maria Butyskaya 
wanting to rebound from a poor performance, the singles events have 
Russian favorites. Former world champions Marina Yeltsova and Andrei 
Bushkov are making their first start of the season in the pairs and 
are favored in that event, despite the presence of French skaters 
Sarah Abitbol and Stephane Bernadis. Only in ice dance are the Russians 
vulnerable here where they haven't sent their top skaters. Anissina, 
who was born in Moscow but moved to France six years ago, and Peizerat 
won the bronze medal behind two Russian couples and then took second 
at the world championships. But Olympic champions Pasha Grishuk and 
Yevgeny Platov have split up and Angeleika Krylova and Oleg Ovsiannikov, 
who won in Gelsenkirchen, are not competing in Paris. Anissina and 
Peizerat won Skate American three weeks ago with an top-caliber performance. 
The short programs and original dance are Friday with the free programs 
on Saturday. The Lalique Trophy is the fourth in the International 
Skating Union's that features Olympic-eligible skaters. In Skate America 
and Skate Canada, the Russians had four victories in the eight events. 
They doubled that in Gelsenkirchen. Yagudin was the men's singles 
winner in Germany and showed his first quadruple jump of the season. 
Over the past month he has won two Grand Prix and two Pro-Am compeititons. 
American Michael Weiss is entered and could challenge Yagudin if he 
finally completes his quad. He has been coming close in his last few 
competitions and was second to Yagudin at Skate America. Butyrskaya 
had a disastrous long program in Gelsenkirchen but salvaged third. 
She won Skate America. Yelena Liashenko, who won Skate Canada, and 
American Nicole Bobek are also entered. With Olympic champion Tara 
Lipinski leaving the eligible ranks and world champion Michelle Kwan 
taking the year off from these competiitons, the women's competition 
is still looking for a leader. There have been three Grand Prix meets 
so far with three different women's winners. Winners of the events 
receive dlrs 30,000. The next event is the Cup of Russia in Moscow. 
The series culminates with the March final in Russia, two weeks before 
the world championships in Finland. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>