<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981119.0273 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Israel's Cabinet convened Thursday to review Palestinian compliance 
with the Mideast peace accord and vote on whether to give the green 
light for the first of three troop pullbacks in the West Bank over 
the next 10 weeks. On Wednesday evening, Israeli and Palestinian troop 
commanders met to complete preparations for an Israeli pullout in 
the northern West Bank that is to be carried out by Friday. In the 
first stage, 2 percent of the West Bank, or 110 square kilometers 
(44 square miles), will be transferred from sole Israeli control to 
joint Palestinian jurisdiction. In addition, 7.1 percent of the land, 
or 400 square kilometers (160 square miles), will be moved from joint 
jurisdiction to sole Palestinian control. No army bases or Jewish 
settlements will be dismantled. Instead, Israeli troops will move 
black-and-yellow road markers the size of washing machines to demarcate 
the new lines of division. The first pullback will leave two Jewish 
settlements, Ganim and Kadim, east of the Palestinian town of Jenin, 
surrounded on three sides by Palestinian-controlled areas. One settler, 
Avner Sinwani, said he moved to Ganim, a settlement of 51 families, 
for a peaceful, rural life and would leave if the community turned 
into a fortified enclave with watch towers. ``If we have to stay inside 
a fortress, I don't think anyone will want to stay and raise children 
here,'' Sinwani told Israel radio. Israeli troops began fortifying 
settlements, unloading rolls of barbed wire and cement blocks from 
trucks. At the Psagot settlement near the Palestinian town of Ramallah, 
troops built cement trenches, apparently to be used as firing positions. 
The government has set aside 190 million shekels (dlrs 45 million) 
for reinforcing 18 settlements. Israeli media reports said the United 
States is to give Israel dlrs 1.2 billion to cover the cost of the 
troop pullback. The grant, which would come in addition to the dlrs 
3 billion in military and economic aid Israel receives from the United 
States every year, requires congressional approval, the reports said. 
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's Cabinet has been deeply divided 
over the Wye River peace accord under which Israel is to hand over 
13 percent of the West Bank by the end of January, in exchange for 
a Palestinian crackdown on Islamic militants. Thursday's Cabinet session 
was expected to be stormy. Hawkish Agriculture Minister Rafael Eitan 
told Israel radio he was considering resigning if the pullback was 
approved Thursday. However, it appeared the Cabinet would back the 
withdrawal. ``It seems that the Palestinians have fulfilled all their 
obligations,'' said Netanyahu's senior adviser, David Bar-Illan. Bar-Illan 
said Israel was still waiting for one clarification concerning an 
anti-incitement law the Palestinians are to pass. Tayeb Abdel Rahim, 
the secretary general of the Palestinian Authority, announced later 
Thursday that the decree had been issued. Palestinian officials said 
it would be published Saturday in the Palestinian media. Bar-Illan, 
14th graf pvs 
</TEXT>
</DOC>