<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981119.0819 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Serbia's prime minister accused Kosovo's ethnic Albanians of blocking 
peace efforts Thursday, a day after they failed _ for the 17th time 
_ to attend Serb-proposed talks. Serbian Premier Mirko Marjanovic's 
one-day visit to Kosovo's capital Pristina followed on the heels of 
the Serbian president's Wednesday attempt to chair a meeting boycotted 
by leaders of Kosovo's ethnic Albanian majority. The Serb politicians' 
successive trips to Kosovo were an attempt to try and assert Serbia's 
authority over the southern province, despite continued Western attempts 
to hammer out a peaceful solution. Hundreds have been killed and about 
a quarter of a million people in Kosovo left homeless since Serbs 
cracked down on separatist Albanian rebels in February. Albanian politicians 
refused to attend the talks called by Serb President Milan Milutinovic, 
dismissing them as an act of propaganda and saying a basic agreement 
on the future of the province must come first. In Belgrade Thursday, 
Serbia's ultranationalist vice premier Vojislav Seselj accused the 
U.S. of backing the ethnic Albanian boycott of Serbian Kosovo talks, 
saying the top U.S. mediator Christopher Hill cannot be an active 
participant, but only a guest at any negotiations. The Serb leadership 
has rejected a draft version of a plan proposed by Hill, envisaging 
almost no Serbian control in the province, while leaving it under 
the partial jurisdiction of Yugoslavia. Milutinovic instead offered 
Kosovo self-rule, with its own authorities and police, but under Serb 
rule. Addressing a ceremony held in Pristina Thursday honoring soldiers 
and police officers who participated in the crackdown, Marjanovic 
blamed the Albanians for stalling the peace. He accused the ethnic 
Albanians of ``causing great damage to everybody, including a big 
majority of Albanians who want to live and work in Kosovo with the 
others'' by boycotting the talks and said Serbia's top priority was 
to ``preserve peace and freedom, territorial integrity and sovereignty.'' 
Meanwhile the ethnic Albanian Kosovo Information Center said a 49-year-old 
doctor was killed and his daughter wounded when three masked assailants 
broke into their home in Pec, some 50 kilometers (30 miles) west of 
Pristina. In Belgrade Thursday, the French ambassador to Macedonia 
Jacques Huntzinger, met Milutinovic in an attempt to soften Yugoslavia's 
resistance to a well-armed NATO force to be based in neighboring Macedonia. 
As part of a U.S.-brokered, Oct. 12 peace agreement for Kosovo Yugoslav 
President Slobodan Milosevic agreed to allow 2,000 civilian verifiers 
into Kosovo. The NATO troops are meant to come to the aid of the unarmed 
observers, should they be menaced. But officials from Yugoslavia and 
its dominant republic Serbia say the troops threaten their territory. 
Huntzinger told reporters that high on the agenda in his talks was 
resistance to the NATO deployments. The French diplomat planned to 
return to Skopje, Macedonia, Thursday and travel to Kosovo's capital 
Pristina Saturday to meet ethnic Albanian leaders. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>