<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981119.0130.0027 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
You've read the report and listened to the tapes Thursday you will 
hear from Ken Starr himself as he delivers his litany of allegations 
against the president. The independent counsel is scheduled to be 
the first witness at the house judiciary committee's impeachment hearings. 
CNN has obtained a copy of what he plans to say. He'll tell the committee 
-- candy Crowley looks at who else the committee wants to hear from. 
Even before Ken Starr spoke his first word before the Judiciary committee, 
republicans went after more. They want subpoenas for depositions from 
the president's personal lawyer, bob Bennett, and the president's 
most-trusted adviser, Bruce Lindsey. The White House hit back almost 
immediately. "In an effort to pick a partisan food fight, they are 
reduced to picking up ken Starr's leftovers," said White House spokesman 
Jim Kennedy, "they are even trying to out-Starr Starr by breaching 
the attorney/client privilege." Republicans also want to talk to Nathan 
Landow, a Maryland democrat who has had contacts with this woman, 
Kathleen Willey, who has accused the president of groping her in the 
oval office. And to Willey's lawyer, Daniel Gecker. Democrats will 
object. There will be a fight in committee. Majority republicans are 
expected to prevail. I'm doing everything I can think of to be fair, 
without totally surrendering the fact that we are the majority party 
and in control of the committee. In an exchange of letters written 
in legalize, but seething with anger, White House lawyers sparred 
with the Hyde staff over process. White House counsel Charles ruff 
wrote to Hyde complaining about the fairness of limiting White House 
questions to Starr to 30 minutes. Nonetheless, ruff accepted. David 
Kendall, who has steered the president through this legal quagmire 
for months, will have his first chance to go mano-A-mano with Starr 
in public. More privately, democrats vented over front-page suggestions 
that independent counsel Ken Starr might move to matters beyond Lewinsky. 
"If that's the case," fumed one source, "there will be an absolute 
meltdown, a storm the likes of which Henry Hyde has never seen before. 
"We are not," he said, "going to allow Starr to achieve by innuendo 
what he cannot achieve in court." In public, the rhetoric is only 
slightly less edgy. Well, we will certainly object to it and let the 
American people know that we think it's unfair if he attempts to do 
that. Because it is unfair -- just to come in with a blindside like 
that is not right. I want to stress that I am committed and confident 
that we can finish this by the end of the year with some cooperation 
from the other side and from the White House. Now, to date, we have 
not had any help from the White House. Hyde's mission, not matter 
how sincere, may be impossible. It's questionable whether any proceeding 
at any pace will be fair enough or fast enough for a public that is 
largely fed up, or for democrats, embolden by recent elections. Candy 
Crowley, CNN, Capitol Hill. Stay with Headline News Thursday for frequent 
updates on Ken Starr's testimony. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>