<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981119.2130.1492 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The TV show "Babylon five" is nearing its final chapter, which is 
just fine with its creator. Dennis Michael reports. The place kind 
of grows on you. Yes, it does. The name of the place is "Babylon 5." 
The science fiction TV show is coming to the end of a five-year run 
this month. Having started in precarious syndication, it ended up 
on TNT. But the end of this show is unlike the end of any other. "Babylon 
5" was created as a novel for television. It had a planned five-year 
story line, and the end being shot here was part of the plan when 
the pilot was being made. The great maker of the five-year arc is 
the creator and executive producer j. Michael straczynski. Back five 
years ago, I said we would go the five years, and no one believed 
us. And I explained, no, we're on a mission from God, we're gonna 
do this. So, to have finally reached the end of that story and to 
have the chance to finish it up properly and get off the stage, having 
told our story, a novel for television, I'm very pleased and very 
relieved and very tired. The tired part is easy to understand -- straczynski 
has set an all-time record with "Babylon 5." Out of 110 episodes of 
the show, he singlehandedly wrote 91 of them, along with four TV movies, 
the equivalent of 50 feature films in five years. During the course 
of that five years, he changed lead actors twice and networks once, 
and still ended up where he planned. He calls it "art by accident." 
If an actor breaks a foot, you know, use it in the story. Actor leaves 
the show, use it in the story. Because life is random, if you incorporate 
the randomness of life into a TV series, it lends that show a certain 
verisimilitude. "Oh, this happens in real life." "Babylon 5" bears 
less resemblance to "star trek" or "star wars" than it does to a long 
novel like "war and peace," with its complex politics and murky moral 
and ethical questions. When the "Babylon 5" spin-off "crusade" comes 
to TNT a year or so down the line, things will be a little lighter. 
This series was about sturm und drang and angst and great empires. 
And I want to do something a little more on the fun side, having gone 
through grief for five years. "Babylon 5" will exist on video and 
in reruns for a long time to come, not unlike "the twilight zone" 
or "the prisoner." But for those who have made the five-year journey, 
there's only one question left -- Where does the time go? Dennis Michael, 
"CNN Entertainment News," Hollywood. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>