<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981119.1830.0067 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. For only the third time in history, the house Judiciary 
committee today held hearings on whether the president of the United 
States should be impeached. It's been a long day into the night of 
acrimonious exchanges of legal brief against the president, some levity 
and little new information. All of the principals, from Ken Starr 
through the other lawyers and members of the Judiciary committee, 
were not deterred from the positions they brought to the hearing room 
this morning. We begin tonight with NBC's Lisa Myers. In a day of 
high drama, before a bitterly divided committee, starr calmly, methodically, 
laid out his case, charging the president subverted the legal process, 
misused the powers of his office, and violated his oath to faithfully 
execute the laws. On at least six different occasions, the president 
had to make a decision. He could choose truth, or he could choose 
deception. On all six occasions, the president chose deception. Starr 
listed what he called a series of "calculated, premeditated lies" 
by the president. That was untrue, About whether he talked to Monica 
about her testimony. That was untrue. Or knew she had lied under oath. 
That was untrue. And Starr pointed out that those lies about sex were 
in a case about sexual harassment, in which the president's relationship 
with women at work was relevant. No one is entitled to lie under oath 
simply because he or she does not like the questions. From the outset, 
Starr was under ferocious attack. Democrats called him "obsessed." 
The idea of a federally paid sex policeman spending millions of dollars 
to trap an unfaithful spouse would have been unthinkable prior to 
the Starr investigation. I Revere the law. I am proud of what we accomplished. 
The democrats' lawyer, abbe Lowell, grilled Starr about alleged misconduct 
by prosecutors, including charges they improperly pressured lewinsky 
to cooperate last January. She was scared and was crying a lot of 
the time. When she asked to see her attorney, she was told she would 
not be able to help herself with her attorney there. Surely you don't 
think a witness is going to say, "thank you, law enforcement, for 
finding out that I am in the middle of committing a Felony." Surely, 
you're not going to say -- Starr revealed, that he almost sent the 
house charges last year that Clinton perjured himself in the Whitewater 
investigation, but decided the evidence wasn't strong enough. Today, 
he cleared the president of wrongdoing on two other matters -- the 
firing of White House travel office workers and misuse of FBI files. 
So far, Starr has been unflappible. He admits critics can disagree 
with some of his conclusions. But insists no one has been able to 
challenge the heart of his case -- that the president repeatedly lied 
under oath. Lisa Myers, NBC news, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>