<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981119.1830.0907 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
NBC news "in depth." Tonight, lying under oath and getting caught. 
Just how common is the crime of perjury? Today, in his testimony at 
the house impeachment hearing, Ken Starr made it clear perjury was, 
and still is, a criminal act. In 1790, the first Congress sitting 
in New York, passed a criminal law that banned perjury. A violator 
was subject to three years imprisonment. Today, federal criminal law 
makes perjury a felony punishable by five years imprisonment. But 
just how often does a perjurer end up behind bars, and is there a 
Chance the president could face the same fate? NBC's Pete Williams 
with some answers, "in depth." Anyone who thinks federal prosecutors 
don't go after people who lie about sex doesn't know Dr. Barbara battalino. 
She's serving a six-month sentence of home detention, forced to wear 
an electronic monitor after pleading guilty to lying about an affair 
with a Patient at a veterans hospital in Idaho where she worked as 
a psychiatrist. When first questioned, she denied a relationship with 
the man, Ed Arthur, unaware that he secretly taped their phone conversations 
and complained about her to authorities. I was scared. I was embarrassed. 
I was thinking of my profession, my family. Every year, the federal 
government actually prosecutes an average of 120 cases for lying under 
oath. Some are plea bargained down to perjury from more serious charges, 
but many are for lying alone, even for statements about sex. Like 
the case of Pam Parsons, a college basketball coach in the 1980s. 
A magazine accused her of having an affair with one of her players. 
She sued for libel and swore, under oath, she had no affair with the 
athlete. But when she lost, federal prosecutors charged her with perjury. 
She admitted lying in the libel trial and served four months in prison. 
I took responsibility. I live in peace today because I can be honest 
about something I could not look at at the time. But could President 
Clinton be prosecuted for lying under oath? His defenders insist he 
never actually lied, choosing his words artfully. It depends upon 
what the meaning of the word "is" is. His lawyers point to Supreme 
Court decisions that say a statement does not count as perjury if 
it's technically true, even though it was intended to mislead. That's 
why some legal scholars say they believe even though the president 
tried to mislead his questioners, but didn't actually violate the 
law. Perjury is defined unanimously by the United States Supreme Court 
to allow the very thing that Clinton did. It should not be defined 
that way. It's disgraceful that it is defined that way, but it is 
defined that way. Even so, 115 people are in federal prisons tonight 
for lying under oath. Beyond any impeachment, prosecuting Mr. Clinton 
when his term expires might be a difficult case to prove, but file 
a perjury charge wouldn't be unusual. Pete Williams, NBC news, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>