<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981119.0449 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In some ways, the high-desert region known as the Malheur has never 
had any problem attracting visitors. Hundreds of thousands of them 
gather in the spring and fall along the Pacific Flyway, turning the 
sagebrush country of Oregon's Outback into a Serengeti of sorts, with 
an astounding collection of wildlife: songbirds, sandhill cranes, 
trumpeter swans, pelicans, bufflehead ducks, pronghorn antelopes and 
coyotes. But as the name that French Canadian trappers gave the area 
suggests, many people have found the area less hospitable. Malheur 
(pronounced MAL-yur) means ``misfortune'' in French, and landmarks 
in the vast region _ Starvation Spring, Skull Creek, Lonesome Cliff, 
Deadman's Bedground _ evoke the decided lack of success of those who 
have sought to civilize the area. Still, if this hamlet with a population 
of 9 has any future at all, it most likely lies in tourism. Situated 
in the Malheur National Wildlife Refuge and just up the road from 
the Hart Mountain National Antelope Refuge, Frenchglen is surrounded 
by stark and striking terrain. There is a problem, though, one with 
both comic and troubling undertones that evoke the tensions between 
the ranching-oriented economy of Frenchglen's past and the likely 
direction of its future. People here seem to have a hard time agreeing 
on whether and how to go about marketing the area, and on whom they 
want to come here. The conflict is evident even within Frenchglen's 
tiny business community. ``He appeals to bait fishermen, we appeal 
to fly fishermen,'' said Missy Litchy, who has transformed the local 
general store into an upscale tourist shop and a bed and breakfast, 
in explaining her problems with Josh Warburton, who runs an RV park 
a few miles up the Steens Mountain Road. ``He wanted to have a Coors 
Lite-sponsored hunting contest, and while I wouldn't say I'm adamantly 
opposed to hunting, I'm not really a hunter.'' Besides, Mrs. Litchy 
added, ``Coors Lite in general is not our demographic _ we sell dramatically 
more microbrews than Coors Lite.'' Warburton, a retired district manager 
for the Federal Bureau of Land Management, proudly says there are 
no microbrews for sale at the RV park he calls the Steens Mountain 
Resort. He faults Mrs. Litchy for discontinuing the sale of useful 
things like canned goods, and turning instead to ``curios and jewelry 
and all that kind of stuff.'' ``I think she's kind of got a historical 
museum kind of environment over there,'' Warburton said late in the 
afternoon as the sun set, casting soft colors in the desert sky. ``I 
think a lot of the people who come and stay with her would rather 
not see ranchers at all.'' Ranching is still an important activity 
in the area, although most people here agree that the industry is 
on a long, slow decline, in part because of successful lawsuits by 
conservationists who sought to remove cattle from federal wildlife 
lands. They said the cattle were competing with antelope and other 
animals for forage. In logbooks at the refuges, many visitors have 
noted the change approvingly: ``Looks better without the cows,'' one 
entry reads. Some of the ranchers here literally will not set foot 
in Mrs. Litchey's store, the Mercantile, and unsettling conflicts 
have arisen in the last year that led the school board to cut off 
the water supply to the store and the longtime postmistress to move 
the post office out of the store and into a pink-and-white trailer 
down the street. More tensions arose a few years ago over a scheduling 
conflict in which Mrs. Litchy and her husband had a champagne brunch 
at the same time as Warburton's annual Labor Day pancake breakfast. 
Tensions here are nowhere as pronounced as they were 101 years ago, 
when the rancher who founded Frenchglen took a fatal bullet in the 
forehead from an angry homesteader. But in a town of just nine people, 
those kinds of conflicts can wreak havoc with community good will. 
``The place is changing, the types of tourists have changed,'' says 
Malena Konek, the postmistress, who is also from a ranching family. 
``I think they want to change the way we think and the way we live. 
They have less appreciation for the way of life here.'' But Mrs. Litchy, 
who grew up in the Portland area and bought the store three years 
ago, says many of her customers have a profound regard for the area. 
``They appreciate the wildlife, the astounding beauty,'' Mrs. Litchy 
said. ``Some of the local people, they don't want tourists at all 
_ they abhor tourists, frankly. To them, the tourists that tend to 
come here are urban people by nature, and they see urban people as 
responsible for their plight in terms of environmental regulations, 
stream-quality regulations and so forth.'' With only about 1 percent 
of Oregon's population living in the entire southeastern corner of 
the state, the Malheur may well have room to attract more tourists. 
The annual numbers of visitors counted by the Bureau of Land Management 
to the Steens Mountain area near here has remained steady, from 40,000 
to 50,000, in most of the last dozen years. John Ross, the manager 
of the eight-room Frenchglen Hotel, which was built in 1924, says 
the real issue is not so much in getting people interested in the 
spectacular beauty of the area, but in getting some of the local residents 
to view them in less threatening terms. ``A lot of it is that the 
ranchers are leery of tourists, mainly because they have this feeling 
that they might be hard-core environmentalists,'' Ross said. ``That's 
their big fear. They feel that the tourists are coming here and they're 
all trying to figure out ways to get the cattle off the range.'' The 
conflicts here, in many ways, are simply another example of the ongoing 
clash between the Old West and the New West. Catherine Fine, who has 
lived in or around Frenchglen for nearly all of her 76 years, is friendly 
with just about everyone in town and with the 30 or so people who 
live in the ``suburbs,'' the name jokingly given to the ranching and 
desert area in a roughly 40-mile radius around Frenchglen. But she 
said: ``There are cattle people, and then there is a different breed 
of people. And all I can say is, they really don't see the world the 
same way at all.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>