<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981119.0360 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
From the picture windows of his office atop a commanding hill, Pinchas 
Wallerstein has a sweeping, bird's-eye view of the chiseled limestone 
of Ramallah. But he sits with his back to the Palestinian city, snug 
behind barbed wire in this Jewish settlement. The Palestinians may 
be a fixture on his horizon, he said, but that doesn't mean he wants 
to stare them in the face. Instead, Wallerstein, chairman of the Settlers 
Council, the umbrella organization of the Jewish settlers' movement, 
looks at maps, grids filled with colored splotches delineating the 
shifting boundaries of Jewish and Palestinian areas in the West Bank. 
His days of ideological lecturing against the peace accord are behind 
him, he says. Another Israeli pullback is about to begin, and Wallerstein 
has shifted his concern to roads, power lines, water plants and security 
systems. ``I cannot say I am not frustrated and angry,'' said Wallerstein, 
who traveled to Wye, Md., during the peace talks last month to lobby 
Netanyahu one last time. ``But I'm not a dreamer. I'm a realist. There 
never was any insurance for us. Now I need to help my settlers deal 
with our loss, and help them live a secure and normal life.'' The 
signing of the peace memorandum in Washington last month dropped like 
a missile of doom into Israel's political right wing. It shattered 
alliances, blurring the political identity of a movement built around 
defending the Jewish homeland against territorial compromise. It expanded 
the political center, and transformed those who clung to their right-wing 
ideology into a kind of fringe. What has emerged most powerfully is 
a new pragmatism, which puts the settler movement's guiding ideology 
on the back burner, if not in the waste bin. Prime Minister Benjamin 
Netanyahu, who ran for office as a hard-line ideologue, and Foreign 
Minister Ariel Sharon, the champion of Jewish settlement construction, 
set the course, but the settlers' leadership and even the right-wing 
National Religious Party followed. There is perhaps no clearer sign 
of ideological resignation than the acquiescence of the settlers' 
leaders to the inevitability that land will be returned to the Palestinians. 
But when the National Religious Party, nine members strong, decided 
this week to remain in Netanyahu's governing coalition, its vote against 
the peace agreement turned into little more than a protest. In the 
halls of the Israeli parliament this week, the National Religious 
Party was openly ribbed for turning mainstream by members of the opposition 
Labor Party, who could not help but gloat. One, Dalia Itzik, who wore 
a short, tight, very secular suit, teased Nissan Slomiansky, with 
his rumpled white shirt and knitted yarmulke. ``I guess from now on 
it's better to have a seat in the house than all the land of Israel,'' 
she called out with a broad grin as she sashayed past. All this accommodation 
by right-wing leaders to the land-for-peace plan that sits at the 
heart of the left's platform has sharply divided not only Netanyahu's 
governing coalition but his Likud Party. It threatens to fragment 
the right, prompting more small parties to form, which would endanger 
their electoral chances, just as it did when Yitzhak Rabin was elected 
Prime Minister in 1992. This is part of what makes the leadership 
so pragmatic. Some members of the right have become vehemently uncompromising 
because of deep feelings that they have been betrayed by Netanyahu 
and Sharon. Shortly before the parliament approved the peace plan 
by a significant majority, Netanyahu met with 18 key players, mostly 
from his coalition, in a committee room. The meeting opened with a 
half-hour lambasting of the prime minister by Uzi Landau, a Likud 
member, so insulting it made even Labor members squirm. ``It had that 
feeling of a private quarrel in a family,'' said Yossi Beilin, a Labor 
member who was present. ``It was like two brothers in a fistfight. 
Personally, we felt uncomfortable, like we shouldn't open our mouths. 
Politically, well, if they fight, they are split, and if they are 
split, they are weak _ which is not so bad for us.'' There is no clear 
successor to Netanyahu as the right's leader. A Gallup poll taken 
last week by the newspaper Maariv showed the right wing abandoning 
the prime minister _ with 62 percent in favor of an alternative candidate 
_ but not knowing where to turn. On the other hand, a poll of Jewish 
settlers by Wallerstein's organization found an overwhelming majority 
supporting Netanyahu because there was nowhere else to turn. Nekuda, 
the settlers' magazine, ran a front-page story in the form of a classified 
ad. ``Wanted: a leader,'' it said, ``for the nationalist camp. Necessary 
qualifications: loyalty to the homeland; devotion to the heritage 
of Israel; ability to withstand pressure; follow-through on commitments; 
truth-telling in any weather.'' Wrote Haggai Segel, one of the founders 
of the Ofra settlement, in Nekuda: ``We are worthy of a leader who 
can say `no' to the Americans, and who can protect the Jewish identity 
of the state and its borders. It is fair to assume that such a candidate 
would fail in the next elections, but would eventually win, due to 
the demography of the religious public and what will be disillusionment 
with the peace process.'' This kind of thinking unsettles settlers 
and religious leaders. ``The zealots would bring this government down 
and inflict upon us a left-wing Labor-Meretz combination that would 
be an outright disaster,'' said Transportation Minister Shaul Yahalom, 
a National Religious Party member. ``We must take care not to cut 
off our nose to spite our face.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>