<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981119.0267 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Start with the name Man Ray and you have the crux of Man Ray's working 
method. His given name was Emmanuel Radnitzky. But he cropped it, 
and cropped it well. He didn't become Manny Radnik or Manuel Nitzy. 
He folded and trimmed his name so that the new one would have a shiny 
new meaning, half human, half light. Man Ray cropped with flair, and 
chance had nothing to do with it. Throughout his life, Man Ray (1890-1976), 
who started out as a painter and became famous for his Surrealist 
photographs of fashion, art, women and objects, affected a lazy, devil-may-care 
attitude. He often worked in bed. And like the rest of the Surrealists, 
he admired all the uncanny things that could happen when chance, randomness, 
dreams and the unconscious were given free rein. But Man Ray did not 
practice what Surrealism preached. ``Man Ray: Photography and Its 
Double,'' a surprising and absorbing new exhibition at the International 
Center of Photography Midtown, suggests that Man Ray kept chance on 
a very short leash. While he cultivated the look of chance in his 
work, and even invented stories about the role that chance had played 
in his important discoveries, his actual working method _ shooting 
his subjects from a distance, then carefully cropping the images to 
make them look surreal _ could not have been more calculated. Why 
is this news now? For a long time, Man Ray has been flash-frozen, 
known mostly for the few dozen iconic images that he himself selected 
for his exhibitions and publications. (He was as avid about cropping 
his oeuvre as he was about cropping individual photographs.) But in 
1994, a few years after Juliet Man Ray, the artist's widow, died, 
part of the Man Ray estate _ 12,000 negatives and 5,000 contact sheets 
_ went to the National Museum of Modern Art in Paris. Lucien Treillard, 
Man Ray's personal assistant, added to the windfall by throwing in 
another 1,500 negatives. At long last, scholars had a chance to study 
Man Ray's working method carefully. And what they found turns the 
story of the Surrealist photographer upside down. This exhibition 
of some 240 images, drawn from an exhibition twice that size organized 
at the Georges Pompidou Center in Paris by Emmanuelle de l'Ecotais 
and Alain Sayag, includes many of Man Ray's greatest hits _ his solarization 
of Suzy Solidor, his cameraless Rayographs of indecipherable objects, 
his ``Violon d'Ingres,'' his portraits of Dora Maar, Lee Miller, Kiki 
of Montparnasse, Picasso, Dali and Duchamp. But the real thrill is 
seeing the contact prints with all of Man Ray's foldings and markings. 
Because contact prints are made by placing the photographic paper 
in direct contact with the negative, they show exactly how the photographer 
framed his shot. Man Ray's contact prints prove, Ms. de l'Ecotais 
said, that he never shot his pictures the way he intended them to 
be. Even though Man Ray knew he would end up with a tightly cropped 
shot, he tended to photograph his models from a great distance, often 
including the props they used to hold their poses. Then he indicated 
the final boundaries of each image by aggressively marking his contact 
print with a pencil or red pen or even by folding or cutting it. For 
example, ``The Wasteland,'' one of Man Ray's few landscapes, shows 
some tracks pointlessly running up a hill, the joint of a tree branch 
as it splits from its trunk and the metal frame of an abandoned bed. 
It looks like a ready-made Surrealist shot. But in the contact print, 
you see all the things _ the rest of the tree and a bit of another 
hill _ that make the landscape hang together and look ordinary. And 
you see Man Ray's marks on the contact print delineating how he planned 
to cut them all out. In other words, you see Surrealism in the making. 
From the look of Man Ray's contact prints, the alterations could be 
radical. But in the end the finished works were smooth and seamless. 
A four-breasted torso, which in the exhibition is clearly spliced 
together from two movie stills, turned out smooth, seamless and therefore 
uncanny in the final version (which is not in the exhibition). ``Composition,'' 
a fashion shot from 1936, shows a woman in a ball gown against a pure 
black background standing and looking up at a reflection of herself 
seated. Odd as it is, it has a perfectly untouched look, as if this 
were exactly the way Man Ray found her. Indeed, Man Ray's finished 
works are so finished that they have a glaze of inevitability about 
them. So it is exciting, even touching, to see how they came by their 
surreality. Take Man Ray's most famous photograph, ``Le Violon d'Ingres.'' 
The finished print, which was owned by the Surrealist Andre Breton, 
looks as if Man Ray instantaneously saw the shape of the violin in 
his model's back and simply drew in the f-holes to complete the picture. 
But the outtakes tell a different story. There is a side-view of the 
same model, Kiki, in the same turban and waist-cloth, and there is 
a shot of her with her hands laced on her head. As Ms. de l'Ecotais 
observed, ``It is as if Man Ray said to himself `What am I going to 
do with this great body?''' and then made a methodical tour. And what 
of Man Ray's well-known picture of Lee Miller's head trapped in a 
wire hat? Part of what makes this photograph surreal is the indecipherability 
of that thing on her head. In this show it is no longer indecipherable. 
Among the many contact prints that Man Ray made that day are some 
with a nude Miller wearing the wire contraption on her arm. It is 
clearly a cast. The surrealism of the final photograph depended not 
only on Man Ray's cropping the picture itself, but also on his suppressing 
the pictures that showed the cast on the arm, where it belonged. The 
shooting session for ``Tears'' shows the value of methodically suppressing 
the mundane. This exhibition does not include the well-known print 
that shows only the huge mascara-covered eyes looking upward and the 
huge, round glass tears perched near the nose, but it does include 
some full-face shots taken the same day. The uncropped faces do not 
look surreal, and the glass beads stuck to them do not look like big 
tears. They just look silly. Silly can be good. What this show restores 
is some of the fun that went into making these pictures. Take for 
example the now iconic photograph called ``Prayer.'' It is a woman's 
rump with her feet and hands tucked under her. You would never know 
from looking at this now-mythic shot that it once was part of a playful 
melodramatic sequence showing a woman meeting her lover, then smoking, 
lying down on her stomach, praying and finally being stabbed by her 
jealous husband, played by Man Ray himself. In the final frame, the 
woman's blood, drawn in childish red ink, runs from the puncture wound 
in her chest into a little pool by her side. You want childish? Take 
Man Ray's series of his friend Marcel Duchamp shampooing his hair. 
In 1924, Duchamp decided he wanted to learn more about the mysterious 
laws of chance. So he planned a trip to Monte Carlo to test a scheme 
he devised for winning at roulette. To finance his trip, he issued 
bonds. And for the center of each bond, he needed a picture of himself. 
Man Ray obliged by photographing Duchamp with his hair shampooed into 
a frothy pair of horns. On the bonds, Duchamp looks like the devil 
himself, intent on gambling. But in the original, uncropped contact 
prints, you can see the devil's soapy preparations with his sleeves 
rolled up. One shows Duchamp's hands calmly whipping up the foam to 
get ready for the next shot. Another shows Duchamp before the suds 
had reached their demonic peaks. He looks damp and bedraggled. It 
is clear from these outtakes that the Surrealist touch was a matter 
of careful selection, cropping and working up. Why aren't these outtakes 
better known? Did Man Ray find something shameful about having to 
work so hard to get the effects he wanted? Whatever the reason, he 
suppressed the signs of his work and gave chance and accident all 
the credit for his advances. Take the 1922 image that helped make 
Man Ray a famous portraitist, his picture of Luisa Casati with two 
sets of eyes. In his autobiography, Man Ray attributed the portrait 
to a series of mishaps. He said that when he took this picture, his 
electrical system failed and he was forced to use daylight and a long 
exposure. When he asked his subject to sit still, instead she ``acted 
as if I were doing a movie of her.'' When he developed the negatives 
he found them ``all blurry'' and ``worthless.'' It's a great creation 
story, but, as the curator points out, impossible. The archival picture 
shows two distinct sets of eyes rather than a blur, indicating that 
Man Ray intentionally made a double exposure ``by opening the lens 
twice.'' That was not Man Ray's only tall tale. He attributed his 
1922 discovery of the photogram, which he called a Rayograph, to the 
day that he absent-mindedly placed some objects from the darkroom, 
including a glass funnel and a thermometer, on a piece of unexposed 
photographic paper, which just happened to be sitting in a development 
bath. And he concocted an even more improbable story about his 1929 
discovery of solarization, which involved a mouse running across Lee 
Miller's foot. Over and over again, Man Ray claimed for chance what 
should really have been claimed for hard work. Over and over again, 
he hid his conscious, deliberate methods behind the glaze of a smooth, 
uncanny result. Why? Or to state it another way, if Man Ray cared 
so much about chance, why didn't he rely on it more? Why didn't he 
try to get Surrealist effects straight out of the camera? Perhaps 
it was because he did not agree with Breton's idea that ``Surrealism 
is contained in reality itself.'' In the 1920s, after Man Ray made 
the shift from painting to photography, straight photography was all 
the rage. Photographers were trying to reproduce reality with their 
cameras. Man Ray went the other way. By shooting his subjects from 
a distance and then cropping them down to their final dimensions he 
was, Ms. de l'Ecotais said, ``making a gap between reality and its 
images.'' In other words, he cared less about championing chance than 
fighting against naive realism. And the best way to fight realism 
is not to find the surreal in the real but to refuse to take reality 
straight. ``Man Ray: Photography and Its Double'' remains at the International 
Center of Photography Midtown, 1133 Ave. of the Americas, at 43rd 
Street, through Jan. 24. It is sponsored by Calvin Klein. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>