<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981119.0042 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
By the time the lights went out for the player introductions Wednesday 
night at Alumni Hall, Erick Barkley had been through this routine 
in two exhibition games and the regular-season opener. But as he stood 
on the floor, greeting his teammates, he never stopped moving, jumping 
and fidgeting like a student before an exam. And it was a test, the 
first true one for St. John's as the Red Storm played Massachusetts 
in the second round of the Chase Preseason National Invitation Tournament. 
But if the matchup gave Barkley, the Red Storm's freshman point guard, 
the jitters, it did not shake Tyrone Grant. And in this test, Grant, 
a senior forward, carried the Red Storm. Grant scored 13 points in 
the second half, finishing with 20 points and 17 rebounds, both career 
highs, as he outdueled the heralded frontcourt of the Minutemen to 
lead St. John's to a 73-69 victory. But beyond the points and rebounds, 
it was the steady hand and head of Grant that the Red Storm needed 
on this night. ``We have a young team in class,'' said Grant, the 
captain. ``But they're mature. They've been through tough wars in 
basketball before. I just had to keep them calm.'' And Grant did, 
grabbing rebounds and gently starting the offense or resetting it, 
taking the ball from the frantic teammates and slowing the pace whenever 
the Red Storm began to rattle. Barkley shot 1 for 10 and handed out 
only 1 assist. But he did convert 10 of 14 free throws, including 
5 of 6 in the final 2 minutes, to finish with 12 points. ``It was 
a challenge,'' Grant said. ``I had to play hard for the team to win. 
With the great front-line that UMass has, I had to give it all. My 
teammates felt I was due. In the last game and in the exhibition games 
I was missing a lot of loose balls and easy shots. I was due.'' The 
victory over the Minutemen, ranked No. 24 in The Associated Press 
preseason poll, allowed the Red Storm to advance to the NIT semifinals 
in a bracket that includes Stanford and Missouri. Their next game 
will be next Wednesday at Madison Square Garden. The undersized Red 
Storm, missing center Albert Richardson for most of the night because 
of foul trouble, had to rely on the 6-foot-7-inch Grant to contend 
with a far larger and more established opposing front line. UMass 
center Lari Kentner, a preseason all-American, was frustrated inside 
by a pesky defense. While Richardson got in quick foul trouble, the 
Red Storm was able to contain Kentner with Grant and Ron Artest taking 
turns and receiving help from greedy hands darting in every time Kentner 
received a pass. It was not until 5:04 remained in the first half 
that Kentner scored, converting a short, turnaround jumper, after 
three misses. Kentner finished with 13 points and 7 rebounds. He got 
little help from Ajmal Basit, his frontcourt mate, who fouled out 
with 7:56 to play with 5 points and 7 rebounds. Artest played 39 minutes, 
blocking two shots and coming up with a pair of steals to go along 
with 9 points and 8 rebounds. After trailing by as many as 12 points 
in the first half, the Minutemen closed the gap to 41-37 with 13:38 
to play in the game when Kentner scored over three defenders in the 
lane. When Barkley missed a pair of free throws, it seemed to open 
the door for Massachusetts. But Bootsy Thornton picked off a pass 
to start a 3-on-1 fast break that ended with Grant tipping in a missed 
layup. The tip-in triggered a 9-1 burst that gave St. John's a 50-39 
advantage. With the lead at 50-41, Grant converted a spinning layup, 
drawing the fifth foul on Basit, which he converted for a 3-point 
play. And when UMass Coach Bruiser Flint was whistled for a technical 
while supporting Basit, Grant converted two free throws. ``The thing 
I liked is that this team found a different way to win tonight,'' 
said Coach Mike Jarvis, who is 2-0 in his first season at St. John's. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>