<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981119.0473 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Adopting a middle ground between the industry and consumer groups, 
the federal government Thursday imposed a 5 percent fee on some of 
the money that commercial television broadcasters may someday generate 
from the new digital spectrum. As they slowly convert to digital programming, 
broadcasters hope that viewers will one day be able to use their television 
sets in the same ways they use computers that can gain access to the 
Internet _ doing everything from ordering sports tickets and buying 
clothes to retrieving stock quotes and sending pages of text. It is 
these ancillary services, as well as special subscriptions and pay-per-view 
that the rule adopted Thursday by the Federal Communications Commission 
will tax. Agency officials said that the new rule offered simplicity 
and certainty and would recover for taxpayers part of the commercial 
value of the spectrum. ``These were really tough issues because we 
are being asked to lay the framework for an industry that doesn't 
exist yet,'' said William Kennard, the commission's chairman. ``We 
did not want to create a disincentive for the development of the field. 
We also wanted to do something that was relatively simple'' to administer. 
But the new rule was immediately criticized by the industry, which 
said the fee was too high and would discourage innovation. It was 
also attacked by some consumer groups, which contended that the FCC 
had written the rule so narrowly that it would effectively permit 
the broadcasters to use the spectrum, which is considered a public 
resource, for many commercial purposes without adequately compensating 
the government. In any event, industry executives and analysts said, 
the digital spectrum is in so early a state of development that there 
is little expectation broadcasters will be profiting and paying fees 
in the near term. ``I have yet to hear of any broadcaster who has 
a definite business plan,'' said Dennis Wharton, a spokesman for the 
National Association of Broadcasters. The association had recommended 
that broadcasters pay just 2 percent on gross revenues and said Thursday 
that the lower fee ``would have provided greater incentives for broadcasters 
to offer these types of competitive services.'' All of the nation's 
television stations are in the process of converting their analog 
programming to digital broadcasting as part of a transition that is 
not expected to be completed before 2007. By the end of this month, 
some 42 stations are expected to be transmitting digital signals as 
well as on their analog spectrum. The digital spectrum will produce 
significantly clearer and sharper television pictures. It is also 
expected to enrich the medium by equipping televisions to handle many 
of the same online functions as personal computers do. Consumer groups 
had sought a 10 percent levy on the ancillary uses of the digital 
spectrum. They also wanted to require such fees for programming like 
infomercials, home shopping and direct marketing. The commission rejected 
that proposal after finding that those programs were in line with 
the traditional commercial ventures that are not now taxed on the 
analog broadcast spectrum. ``The commission buckled to the broadcasters 
and will not be giving the public a darned thing,'' said Gigi B. Sohn, 
executive director of the Media Access Project, a law firm that represents 
consumer interests. ``By finding that fees do not apply to home shopping, 
infomercials or direct marketing, they will be applying this fee to 
very few services. The result is that the public will not be compensated 
for giving broadcasters billions of dollars of free public spectrum 
and broadcasters will be unjustly enriched.'' Thursday's rule was 
a byproduct of Congress' overhaul of the nation's telecommunications 
law in 1996. Though the government had traditionally held auctions 
to sell portions of the broadcast spectrum, the new law awarded each 
broadcast station an extra channel to use during the decadelong transition 
to digital television. Following an outcry that the government had 
given away a valuable public resource, Congress instructed the regulators 
to devise new rules and a payment schedule for those broadcasters 
that plan to use the digital spectrum. The commission also proposed 
a rule Thursday that would permit public TV stations to use the digital 
spectrum for advertiser-supported services. The agency asked for comment 
about whether there should be limits on commercial activities by public 
broadcasters. It also asked whether public broadcasters should be 
exempt from the 5 percent fee imposed on the commercial stations. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>