<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981119.0394 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Twelve consumer, environmental and religious organizations asked the 
Consumer Product Safety Commission on Thursday to ban vinyl toys for 
small children, four days after Canadian officials advised parents 
of small children to throw away vinyl teethers and rattles, because 
of possible kidney and liver damage. In addition, 28 members of Congress 
signed a letter to President Clinton asking whether the Commerce Department 
is lobbying to keep European markets open to vinyl toys, and urging 
that the lobbying stop if it was doing so. Several European countries 
have put restrictions on the use of vinyl in toys, partly in response 
to a sustained campaign by Greenpeace. Even though scientists do not 
agree on whether vinyl toys are safe, some toymakers and marketers 
have stopped selling them. Toys R Us said this week it had removed 
toys with vinyl that are intended to be mouthed by infants. But toy 
manufacturers argued that the material was safe. As a practical matter, 
manufacturers said, teethers and some other small objects made by 
injection moulding can be made from vinyl-free plastics; more complex 
shapes, like rubber ducks or teddy bears, cannot. The material at 
issue is polyvinylchloride, or PVC, which is familiar to consumers 
as a material used for pipes and other rigid parts, mixed with a ``plasticizer,'' 
to make it soft. Since the mid-1980s, the industry has used a material 
called DINP, because a material used up to that time, DEHP, was found 
to cause health damage to rodents at high doses. More recent studies 
show that the substitute material produces similar effects in rodents, 
but chemical manufacturers say that the damage occurs by a mechanism 
that is not relevant to humans, and that both materials are safe. 
The CPSC, which brokered the deal in the mid-'80s that ended the use 
of DEHP, said Thursday it was conducting research on how much dose 
a toy could give a child, and reviewing the animal studies that showed 
health damage, and hoped to make an announcement soon. The announcement 
Thursday was made by the National Environmental Trust, whose president, 
Philip Clapp, said it was unacceptable that American parents would 
have to go to a Canadian web site to get authoritative government 
advice on the issue. (Health Canada's advisory is available at www.hcsc.gc.ca/advisory/index.htm). 
And, he said, even steps like the ones taken by the Canadian government 
and Toys R Us were inadequate, because they only covered items that 
were intended to go into a baby's mouth. ``Infants and toddlers don't 
distinguish between toys intended for the mouth and all other toys,'' 
he said. In September, Mattel, Inc., of El Segundo, Calif., said it 
would phase out the plasticizers in teeth toys for children under 
36 months. Thursday the National Environmental Trust listed two of 
its products as having particularly high levels of DINP, but neither 
was covered by the phase out. The toys were the arms of Rugrats Tommy 
Pickles Ice Cream Face doll, and the shoes of Cabbage Patch Kids Starr 
Rosie Doll. Mattel did not respond to a call seeking comment. David 
Miller, a spokesman for the Toy Manufacturers of America, an industry 
trade group based in New York, said that the plasticizers had been 
thoroughly studied, used for years and represented no risk. He said 
the Canadian authorities had grossly overestimated the amount of dose 
a child could get from chewing on such a toy. Asked if the product 
should be banned until proven safe, he said, ``on that logic you can 
rule out half the products sold in the United States today.'' Illustrating 
the uncertainty, Dr. Cathey Falvo, a pediatrician representing Physicians 
for Social Responsibility who spoke Thursday in favor of a ban, said 
that some health effects might not turn up for decades. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>