<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981119.0470 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Microsoft Corp. has kept the price of personal computer software ``significantly'' 
higher than would be expected if the company faced real competition, 
an economic consultant testified Thursday in the Microsoft trial. 
Frederick Warren-Boulton, an economist and government witness, did 
not estimate precisely how much higher Microsoft has kept prices because 
of its monopoly power, but he asserted that it was ``significantly 
above 5 percent.'' In addition, Warren-Boulton said he had been told 
about new data that the Justice Department had recently received from 
Microsoft in response to a subpoena showing that the price the company 
charged computer makers for the Windows operating system had ``increased 
substantially over the last two years.'' Earlier witnesses called 
Microsoft a monopoly and testified that it used its market muscle 
with abandon. But most of them were industry executives who said they 
were victims of anti-competitive behavior by Microsoft. And while 
several mentioned in passing that they thought consumers as well as 
competitors would benefit if Microsoft's power were curbed, Warren-Boulton 
said he had researched the matter in an effort to measure any harm 
to consumers from Microsoft's business tactics. Consumer damage is 
a tricky issue for both sides _ potentially damaging for Microsoft 
but difficult for the government to prove. Several studies have concluded 
that Microsoft has kept software prices higher than they would be 
if there were more competition in the markets that Microsoft dominates. 
For example, two consumer groups, the Consumer Federation of America 
and the Media Access Project, issued a report last month asserting 
that the price of Microsoft's industry-standard Windows operating 
system was more than double what it would be in a competitive market. 
Such studies, however, are inherently speculative, in part because 
they often compare Microsoft's software prices with price trends in 
hardware, which tend toward steady decline. Microsoft counters that 
it is constantly adding new features to its products so that on a 
performance-adjusted basis, the company has kept its software prices 
quite low. Microsoft's economic expert, Richard Schmalensee, a professor 
at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, will testify to that 
effect later in the trial. Warren-Boulton testified that every software 
company has to add new features to remain competitive. The testimony 
of the government's expert witnesses, like Warren-Boulton, is mainly 
to provide context for the case. The government is not contending 
that Microsoft's monopoly in the operating system market is illegal. 
But the government must convince the court that Microsoft is a monopoly 
before it can argue that it is illegally abusing monopoly power. Microsoft 
fiercely denies that it is a monopoly, though more than 90 percent 
of personal computers sold today run its Windows operating system, 
which controls the basic operations of a personal computer. In Thurday's 
cross-examination of Warren-Boulton, Michael Lacovara, a Microsoft 
lawyer, attacked the assertion that Microsoft was a monopoly. His 
questions were designed to get Warren-Boulton to concede that the 
company had to keep coming out with new products and innovations to 
satisfy customers if it was to retain its market share. Throughout 
the company's Redmond, Wash., campus, the belief is that a potentially 
deadly competitor is always just around the corner _ an attitude common 
to many big companies in the computer industry. Warren-Boulton agreed 
that Microsoft had to move fast. But, he added, ``Every monopolist 
faces competition and potential competition.'' Lacovara asked if Linux, 
the free Unix operating system whose core was written by a University 
of Helsinki student eight years ago, did not pose a potential threat 
to Windows because several of Microsoft's chief competitors are writing 
software to run on it. While Linux has several million devotees around 
the world, it holds a minuscule share of the operating-system market, 
and Warren-Boulton fairly laughed at the proposition that it threatened 
Microsoft. ``Whatever role Linux may have, it is not expected to constrain 
the monopoly power of Microsoft,'' he said. ``If you truly believe 
this product is going to constrain Microsoft's market share, then 
run, don't walk, to your broker and sell Microsoft stock short.'' 
Lacovara then asked Warren-Boulton if in January 1995, he would have 
predicted that Netscape Communications might pose a threat to Microsoft. 
The witness responded that at that time, he would not have known what 
Netscape was. At one point in court Thursday, a Justice Department 
lawyer raised the issue of an interview given by Microsoft's chairman, 
Bill Gates, to The Associated Press. Gates was quoted as saying that 
the Justice Department's repeated showing at the trial of excerpts 
from his videotaped deposition last August was ``more about government 
PR than the substance of the case.'' During the deposition, Gates 
said, he was constantly fending off government lawyers who were trying 
to ``put words in my mouth.'' David Boies, the Justice Department's 
lead trial lawyer, said that Gates ``seems to be indicating more and 
more that he wants to come'' to testify at the trial. The government 
could have called Gates as a witness but chose not to do so. Thursday, 
Boies challenged Microsoft's legal team to call Gates as a defense 
witness. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>