<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981119.0372 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Sammy Sosa finally found a way to get ahead of Mark McGwire and stay 
ahead. After losing out to McGwire in the historic race for the home 
run record this past season, Sosa Thursday beat his friendly adversary 
in the race for the National League Most Valuable Player Award. The 
result brought a conclusion to the scintillating competition between 
the two sluggers that raged throughout the summer and captivated the 
American public. In their race to break Roger Maris' record of 61 
homers, Sosa held only two short-lived leads. McGwire, the St. Louis 
first baseman, surpassed Maris first and finished with 70 home runs. 
Sosa, the Chicago Cubs' outfielder, finished with 66. But Sosa was 
a one-sided winner in the balloting released Thursday. He received 
30 first-place votes and a total of 438 points to 2 and 272 for McGwire 
in the voting by a 32-member panel of the Baseball Writers Association. 
Besides being overwhelmingly one-sided, the result helped make history. 
With Juan Gonzalez of Texas having won the American League award a 
day earlier, it marks the first time Latin American players swept 
both MVP awards. In the previous 67 years of the Baseball Writers 
MVP voting, Latin players won eight times. A native and hero of the 
Dominican Republic, Sosa is only the third Latino to win the NL award. 
Roberto Clemente won in 1966 and Orlando Cepeda in 1967. George Bell, 
who was the American League MVP in 1987, had been the only Dominican 
to win an MVP award. The one-sided nature of the vote is not likely 
to defuse the debate that has raged and will continue to rage over 
the appropriate choice for the award. McGwire supporters among fans, 
baseball people and members of the news media believe he was the NL 
MVP because he passed Maris first and finished with more home runs. 
But Sosa supporters argue that there is a difference between player 
of the year, which some concede McGwire might have been, and MVP. 
In other MVP votes, the winner was not necessarily the player with 
the best statistics. The voters clearly sided with the Sosa supporters, 
crediting the Cubs' right fielder for sparking his team to a wild-card 
finish as the second-place team in the NL Central Division. The St. 
Louis Cardinals, McGwire's team, were never in the race despite his 
unprecedented production. The Cubs would have joined the Cardinals 
among the also-rans without Sosa's 66 home runs, major-league-leading 
158 runs batted in and .308 batting average. McGwire drove in 147 
runs, batted .299 and led the majors in walks (162), on-base percentage 
(.470) and slugging percentage (.752). The McGwire-Sosa home run contest 
was credited with reviving interest in major league baseball, which 
had still lagged from the 1994-95 strike. Their joint pursuit of Maris' 
record commanded daily attention throughout the country. Because McGwire 
was the primary focus of that attention, some people felt he should 
be rewarded for his value in helping bring baseball's popularity back. 
But not to be overlooked was Sosa's role in taking the interest to 
an even higher level and in inspiring McGwire to what in August became 
his obviously greater enjoyment of and appreciation for the impact 
he was making on fans everywhere. Throughout their remarkably friendly 
rivalry, Sosa said again and again that McGwire would be the one to 
break the record and hold it at the end of the season. He was right 
on both counts. But Sosa also said he had other priorities _ helping 
the Cubs reach the playoffs and winning the MVP award. He achieved 
both. Sosa, who had never hit more than 40 home runs in a season, 
was placed second on the two ballots on which he was not named first. 
McGwire received 20 votes for second and the remaining 10 votes for 
third through seventh. Moises Alou of Houston, a fellow countryman 
of Sosa, finished third in the balloting with 215 points and was the 
only other player who was named on all 32 ballots. Greg Vaughn of 
San Diego was fourth with 185 points, Craig Biggio of Houston fifth 
with 163 and Andres Galarraga of Atlanta sixth with 147. John Olerud 
and Mike Piazza were the only members of the Mets who received votes. 
Olerud placed 12th with 38 points, Piazza 14th with 15 points. Sosa's 
victory earned him a $250,000 bonus, bringing his 1998 income to $8,325,000. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>