<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981119.0365 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Their mother, whom they called Her Highness, killed herself with the 
``drink of silence,'' a toxic mix of powders that included crushed 
remnants of the family diamonds and pearls. Bereft, the prince and 
princess say, they slept with the corpse on a stone slab, he on one 
side, she on the other. Then they did the embalming themselves, careful 
to keep Her Highness' head on a brocade pillow. The macabre has befallen 
the house of Oudh, creating an eerie tale of people chasing the ghost 
of an old grievance and squandering their lifetimes in the pursuit. 
Oudh (pronounced ah-wud) was a wealthy swath of northern India in 
the time of the maharajas. Its sovereigns traced their bloodlines 
to ancient Persian kings. Their power seeped away under the rule of 
the British, who finally seized the realm in 1856. Some of the royal 
family never gave up their claim on the palaces. Nor did their descendants. 
Best known among the bitter Oudh progeny has been the Begum Wilayat 
Mahal. In 1975, trying to shame the government into returning the 
family's estates, Her Highness moved into a busy New Delhi railroad 
station along with a retinue of 13 ferocious dogs, seven Nepalese 
servants and two of her children. They stayed 10 futile years. What 
finally coaxed them out was the offer of a substitute home, a 14th-century 
hunting lodge built by a Delhi sultan and known as Malcha Mahal. The 
stone monument _ without electricity or water, infested by bats and 
pigeons _ sits on a concealed hill in a woody preserve in the middle 
of the city. It is accessible by a brambly footpath, but with the 
dogs snarling and signs warning that trespassers will be shot, it 
was well suited to become a hermitage, and Her Highness wished this 
so. She had decided that her family's public protest would be replaced 
by lives of secluded misery. Her Highness died five years ago, and 
since then her mournful daughter, Princess Sakina, who is about 40, 
has neither left the grounds nor combed her frayed hair. ``I have 
divined that this world is nothing,'' she said, flipping her hand 
as if to discard all earthly creation. ``Cruel nature takes malicious 
delight in our ruin, so I desire nothing, want nothing. We are now 
the dynasty of the living dead.'' It was late in the afternoon, and 
the princess and her brother, Prince Cyrus Riza, had granted a rare 
audience. This was arranged through an exchange of notes, carried 
up and back the footpath by the family's lone remaining servant, a 
young man dressed in a formal black coat and white turban. The Dobermans 
and Labradors _ now numbering only seven _ were chained, though there 
was no holding back the pigeons. They streaked through the open archways 
of the dreary lodge, further befouling the tattered oriental carpets 
on the stone floors. The princess, gaunt and dark-eyed, was wearing 
a soiled black cape. ``Her Highness remained very restrained with 
us always,'' she said, describing what was a decidedly unusual relationship. 
``We never took meals with her. We would never call her Mother. Here, 
I will show you the bowl she drank from, taking her drink of silence.'' 
The bowl is centered on a table, set up as a shrine along with Her 
Highness' gloves and shawl. As the princess talked, the prince stood 
behind her. He, too, has sunken cheeks and he spoke of the bizarre 
with the same air of poised nobility. Unlike his sister, he ventures 
into the city from time to time and has even been to Europe. He has 
secreted some of the family's final possessions, he said. These are 
sold off to pay for food. ``We are people of nature _ no plastics, 
no politics, no business,'' he said. ``There are those who would like 
to befriend us, and we would accept this, but they would have to be 
people of status and character. We do not open our hearts to just 
anyone.'' Princess Sakina agreed with this, bemoaning what has become 
of the world, lamenting the loss of palaces she never lived in, nostalgic 
for a time a century before her birth. ``We have accepted ruination, 
but we will not accept the demonic democracy of any country that has 
deprived royalty of their proper position,'' she said. These words 
were an echo of her mother's. Her Highness had claimed to be the great-granddaughter 
of Nawab Wajid Ali Shah of Oudh, thought by some to be a poet and 
aesthete, and by others to be a lecherous degenerate. Jawaharlal Nehru, 
India's first prime minister, apparently took some pity on her. According 
to various accounts, he gave her the use of a house in Srinagar, in 
Kashmir. When fire destroyed it in 1971, Her Highness was offered 
a bungalow but felt such accommodations beneath her. Her remonstrance 
led her to the railway station. For 32 months the obstinate woman 
lived on a train platform, later moving to an open portico built as 
a carriage drive for the wealthy. Her beloved dogs discouraged anyone 
who might try to evict her. In 1984, the Indian Home Ministry finally 
interceded, suggesting that ``after repairs'' the derelict Malcha 
Mahal might be a fitting home for the aristocratic squatters. Her 
Highness moved in. The repairs were never done. Malcha Mahal proved 
as difficult a home as the train station. In summers, bats flapped 
overhead and scorpions and snakes crawled inside for the cool shade. 
During monsoons, rains poured through the roof and collected in puddles 
on the uneven floor. Seclusion did not necessarily come with safety. 
One night, intruders poisoned seven of the watchdogs and made off 
with antique bowls and silver goblets kept on an ornately set table. 
``The death of our animals made it hard for Her Highness to bear the 
unbearableness,'' the princess said. ``So much is unbearable.'' Her 
Highness took her own life at age 62. The prince and princess, heirs 
to their mother's obsession, found her limp body on Oct. 12, 1993. 
By their telling, they felt an obligation to embalm Her Highness themselves. 
As the corpse dehydrated, they slept beside her, something they had 
never done while she was alive. The method of embalming was one handed 
down from the time of the pharaohs, Prince Cyrus said. But these esoteric 
techniques, however trusted, would later be deemed a disappointment. 
After a year, the corpse was removed from its crypt and inspected. 
Eternal preservation had not been achieved. A funeral pyre was prepared. 
``Do not use the word `cremation,''' the princess pleaded. ``This 
is too common a term. What we did was confer Her Highness to the pious 
flame.'' The ashes, at least those that did not blow away, were released 
into rivers that flow through the land once known as Oudh. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>