<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981119.0263 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In Walter Salles' ``Central Station,'' a hit at Sundance and the winner 
of top honors at this year's Berlin Film Festival, a cynical, joyless 
woman crosses paths with a lonely young boy. There's plenty of room 
for sentimentality here, but the wonder of Salles' film is all in 
the telling. Beautifully observed and featuring a bravura performance 
by the Brazilian actress Fernanda Montenegro, it gracefully watches 
these oddly paired characters develop a fractious bond that winds 
up profoundly changing both of them. Salles' background as a documentary 
filmmaker also gives this lovely, stirring film a strong sense of 
Brazil's impoverished rural landscape once its principals take to 
the road. Vinicius de Oliveira was a 10-year-old shoeshine boy when 
he encountered Salles at an airport and asked the man to help him 
buy a sandwich. Now he movingly plays the child named Josue who is 
foisted by fate onto this irascible older woman. Ms. Montenegro's 
Dora is a former schoolteacher who earns her living writing letters 
for the illiterate at the Rio de Janeiro railroad station of the title. 
She spends all day listening to the heartfelt thoughts of strangers, 
writes them down and then makes cruel fun of them when she gets home. 
After joking about the letters with her kinder friend Irene (Marilia 
Pera of ``Pixote''), Dora never bothers to mail them. Then a letter 
by Josue's mother permanently alters Dora's world. With suspicious 
little Josue in tow, the mother dictates a beseeching letter to her 
absent husband, then leaves the station and is killed by a bus. Suddenly, 
the boy knows no one and has no place to go. Despite her hardened 
bitterness and obvious loathing for children, Dora grudgingly takes 
him home, where Irene finds Josue adorable and is happy to help him. 
But Dora has other plans; she wants to sell Josue to an adoption racket 
and effectively trade him in for a new television set. This scheme 
subsequently gets Dora into so much trouble that she abruptly decides 
to leave town. And she agrees to take Josue on a wild goose chase 
in search of his father, whom the boy says is a carpenter named Jesus. 
These are the events that send ``Central Station'' off into the countryside, 
and take both these hard-bitten travelers into parts unknown. Salles 
brings great tenderness and surprise to the events that punctuate 
this odyssey, from the boy's drunken outburst on a bus to Dora's shy 
flirtation with a trucker she meets along the way. By the time the 
travelers are caught up in a religious pilgrimage, the film has taken 
on a Felliniesque sense of spiritual discovery just as surely as Ms. 
Montenegro resembles Giulietta Masina in both feistiness and appearance. 
Her performance here is superbly modulated as Dora begins rediscovering 
herself in ways she could never have expected. Though eternally gruff, 
she finds herself regaining a long-lost faith in life and in the very 
humanity she scorned when those letter writers came her way. The film 
eventually views these strangers' faces in the rapt, joyous spirit 
that is the story's greatest reward and that becomes Dora's saving 
grace. And it is the filmmaker's elegant restraint that makes such 
sentiments so deeply felt. Salles directs simply and watchfully, with 
an eye that seems to penetrate all the characters who are encountered 
on Dora's and Josue's journey. His film is also scored with a gentle 
piano melody that heightens its heartfelt embrace of the world that 
``Central Station'' sees. (italics)``Central Station'' is rated R 
(Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It includes 
brief, sudden violence and mild profanity.(end italics) CENTRAL STATION 
Directed by Walter Salles; written (in Portuguese, with English subtitles) 
by Joao Emanuel Carneiro and Marcos Bernstein, based on an original 
idea by Salles; director of photography, Walter Carvalho; edited by 
Isabelle Rathery and Felipe Lacerda; music by Antonio Pinto and Jaques 
Morelembaum; production designers, Cassio Amarante and Carla Caffe; 
produced by Arthur Cohn and Martine de Clermont-Tonnerre; released 
by Sony Pictures Classics. Running time: 115 minutes. This film is 
rated R. WITH: Fernanda Montenegro (Dora), Marilia Pera (Irene), Vinicius 
de Oliveira (Josue), Soia Lira (Ana) and Othon Bastos (Cesar). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>