<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981119.0464 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As the House Judiciary Committee opened impeachment hearings into 
President Clinton on Thursday, one member, Rep. Charles Schumer, D-N.Y., 
found himself in a position to do something unique in U.S. history: 
vote on an impeachment proceeding in committee, on the House floor 
and in the Senate. Schumer is one of three members of the House to 
be elected to the Senate this fall. (Rep. Michael Crapo, R-Idaho, 
and Rep. Jim Bunning, R-Ky., are the others.) But he is the only one 
of the three who sits on the Judiciary Committee, which must decide 
whether to send the matter to the full House. And he is the only one 
of the three who has said that if the House approves an article of 
impeachment against Clinton, he will probably vote on the issue in 
the Senate next year. Crapo is still studying the matter, his aides 
said, while Bunning's office did not return calls seeking comment 
Thursday. Schumer has been a vocal supporter of Clinton, who, along 
with his wife and Vice President Gore, campaigned for him repeatedly 
this fall. Since early October, Schumer has said that Clinton's behavior 
in the Monica Lewinsky scandal did not rise to the level of an impeachable 
offense. But he has said that he will support a lesser punishment, 
like censure. As the Judiciary Committee began its questioning of 
independent counsel Kenneth Starr on Thursday afternoon, Schumer told 
his Republican colleagues that they were losing ``the hearts and minds 
of the American people'' by continuing their investigation into Clinton. 
``Maybe we should hang a sign outside the Judiciary Committee that 
says, `Out to lunch, gone fishing''' Schumer said. ``We were out to 
lunch because we're so far afield of what the American people want 
us to do. We've gone fishing because despite a five-year fishing expedition 
which has yielded nothing more than allegations revolving around a 
tawdry sex scandal, this committee is still trying to bait the hook.'' 
In an interview Thursday evening, Schumer said that if impeachment 
went to the Senate, he was ``leaning toward'' voting because he did 
not want to deprive New Yorkers of a say on a crucial matter. There 
are no Senate rules barring a member from voting twice on a bill of 
impeachment, and the Constitution is silent on the matter. But only 
one senator of the nine who have been in the same situation exercised 
his right to vote twice. ``I've always felt,'' Schumer said, ``the 
founding fathers understood the process would not be entirely a judicial 
one, but a quasi-judicial and a quasi-legislative one, which means 
partly political. On a regular jury, you have substitutes. But you 
don't in the Senate. So if I were to recuse myself in the Senate, 
the voters of New York would have half the representation.'' He added 
that he did not expect the House to vote to impeach Clinton because 
of the Republicans' weak showing in the midterm elections two weeks 
ago and because he thought his colleagues would find the evidence 
``flimsy.'' The House will serve as a grand jury in the proceedings, 
determining whether the charges against the president are serious 
and well-documented enough to warrant a trial. That trial would be 
held in the Senate, where the 100 members would serve as the jury, 
with the power to remove Clinton if they found him guilty. There have 
been only three times that members of Congress have been in a position 
to vote in both houses on the same bill of impeachment, said Donald 
Ritchie, one of the Senate's official historians. All but one of the 
nine senators involved in those three cases gave up their votes in 
the Senate on cases they had considered in the House the year before. 
Ritchie said the only exception was in 1804 in the case of John Pickering, 
a federal judge from New Hampshire who was accused of drunkenness 
and mental instability. Over the objections of Sen. John Quincy Adams 
of Massachusetts, Sen. Samuel Smith of Maryland voted to remove Pickering, 
after having voted the year before to impeach him in the House. Two 
other House members who were elected to the Senate in the same year 
excused themselves from voting in the Senate. In 1933, Rep. John Overton, 
D-La., and Rep. Augustine Lonergan, D-Conn., declined to vote on a 
bill of impeachment against a federal judge, Harold Louderback, because 
they had participated in the House impeachment vote. In the most recent 
case, four Republican members of the House were elected to the Senate 
after the House voted to impeach a federal judge, Alcee Hastings of 
Florida, in 1988. All four _ Trent Lott of Mississippi, Connie Mack 
of Florida, Dan Coats of Indiana and James Jeffords of Vermont _ excused 
themselves from voting in the Senate. Hastings was found guilty by 
the Senate and removed from the bench. He is now a Democratic congressman 
from the Fort Lauderdale area. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>