<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981119.0540 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It's the law of the political jungle: spin or be spun. And throughout 
the 11 months of the Lewinsky investigation, Kenneth Starr's spin 
has been that he has none. He has portrayed himself as the image of 
rectitude, comparing himself to Joe Friday in his devotion to just 
the facts. On Thursday viewers who knew him only as the man with the 
inappropriate grin walking to his car each day finally saw what those 
who have watched him in court had suggested: he can calmly talk circles 
around his questioners. And while that's not a bad quality in a lawyer, 
it makes for bland television, the primary arena in which the impeachment 
process is being played out. Starr's daylong televised testimony before 
the House Judiciary Committee forms a natural bookend to President 
Clinton's four-hour videotaped deposition. It was a battle between 
Clinton, a master of image making, and Starr, whose own supporters 
concede him to be one of the least adept practitioners of the art 
of spin; after all, Joe Friday is a camp figure of fun, and choosing 
him as a role model reveals how out-of-touch the Starr approach to 
public relations has been. Far from abandoning his passive-aggressive 
approach to spin Thursday, Starr emphasized it in his prepared statement. 
``I am not a man of politics, of public relations, or of polls _ which 
I suppose is patently obvious by now,'' he said, reinforcing his image 
as a man of no glitz, yet ignoring some harsh facts. He is, of course, 
caught up in a fierce political and public relations war. As for polls, 
someone must have told him that in the drumbeat leading up to Thursday's 
meeting, commentators were wondering whether his appearance could 
boost his ``single-digit ratings,'' as the catch-phrase for his approval 
numbers became. ``We go to court and not on the talk show circuit,'' 
Starr also said in his statement, though his spokesman, Charles Bakaly 
III, was all over the talk show circuit the night before. During the 
committee meeting, Rep. Zoe Lofgren, D-Calif., reminded Starr that 
he himself had appeared on ``Good Morning America'' that day. It's 
true, of course, that Starr has largely avoided public comments, and 
the flaws in his no-spin spin have been obvious. In the pithy phrase 
of NBC News' Lisa Myers, Starr's task Thursday was to prove that he 
was not ``the sex-crazed, out-of-control prosecutor.'' And though 
no one really expected to see a red tail poking out from beneath the 
witness chair, Starr's opponents probably took heart from the opening 
minutes of the session. While the Democrats complained about the fairness 
of the process, the cameras stayed on Starr, who looked pale, dour, 
close-mouthed, almost spooky in his sternness. That demonic impression 
passed quickly as he read his two-hour statement, repeating his original 
report to the House in an uninflected manner. Even when the language 
gave him an opportunity to create fireworks, he didn't. ``That was 
untrue,'' he said of the president's statements several times, creating 
a refrain. But in Starr's quiet voice it came out sing-songy, not 
commanding or dramatic. (Imagine what a fiery Jesse Jackson or even 
a dignified Henry Hyde might have done with the same chant.) But if 
he didn't do himself much good, Starr did not do himself serious damage, 
either. When it was time for the committee members to question him, 
the meeting came nowhere near the all-but-chair-throwing brawl some 
commentators had predicted. The limit of five minutes for each member's 
questions turned many of the Democrats into speed-talkers. Even the 
most pointed hostile questions (and most were alarmingly unfocused) 
gave Starr a chance to repeat his evidence and conclusions. He politely 
said ``You may disagree'' and ``You may have another judgment'' while 
defending his office, and like a true politician he sometimes answered 
a different question from the one that had been asked. ``Why did your 
office violate the law?'' Rep. Jerrold Nadler, D-N.Y., asked Starr 
about the treatment of Monica Lewinsky when she was first questioned. 
Ms. Lewinsky has said she was discouraged from calling a lawyer; Starr 
said she wasn't. Did anyone expect him to say anything else? Only 
at the end of the day, when Starr was questioned by David Kendall, 
the president's personal lawyer, did the questions become pointed 
enough to challenge Starr's unflappable demeanor and stock responses. 
The prediction that Kendall and Starr would be well-matched legal 
adversaries was the one prediction that turned out to be true. As 
Kendall grilled Starr about matters such as leaks to the media from 
his office and his legal firm's links to the Paula Jones case, Starr 
often responded like a defendent rather than an unflappable witness. 
Their exchange proved that there is still drama left in the impeachment 
inquiry, though it is usually obscured by political posturing. The 
day before, in a statement about the committee process that quickly 
became a favorite sound-bite, Rep. Maxine Waters said, ``If it goes 
on the way it's going now, it will be great theater, but it will have 
nothing to do with a fair process of trying to get the truth.'' It 
was not great theater, and the choice is not either/or, theater or 
fairness. The theatrical component has become inescapable, however 
much Starr pretends to ignore that. What Thursday's largely uneventful 
day proved is that Joe Friday's days as a television hero have passed. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>