<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981119.0420 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A reviewer tends to write as if he's the only member of the audience 
at a musical performance. But, of course, he's not. As Christopher 
Small points out in ``Musicking: The Meanings of Performing and Listening,'' 
a new book that's fantastically useful for anyone who has ever wondered 
why a fan should go to a concert instead of just hearing records at 
home, ``Music is not a thing at all but an activity.'' I couldn't 
agree more. The wonderful thing about so many performances is the 
two-way ritual, which begins as soon as an audience member arrives 
at the theater or club and the musician arrives on stage, and it includes 
everything that happens in the room that evening. Both audience and 
performers, in Small's term, are ``musicking.'' Sometimes, the interaction 
is the show, as it is at the quickly growing number of D.J. performances 
in which a top-name disk jockey spends the evening segueing other 
people's records together, with a few of his own recorded sounds mixed 
in. Other times, the audience offers inspiration or instant criticism. 
And sometimes the scene itself is as much an event as the music. Here, 
then, is a random sampling of recent events in downtown Manhattan 
clubs, with a focus on the audience, the scene, the vibe, the mood 
in the room, rather than on just the music and players. The Basement 
Club At Zinc Bar, on Houston Street, the wine-red space is so small 
_ about the size of a school bus _ that two things are guaranteed: 
The club is always crowded and the music always sounds vivid. Zinc 
is the closest I've come to hearing live music as if it's on headphones, 
though the environment does not feel sealed-off or churchlike. Guitarist 
Ron Affif has begun the first of three sets with his trio at 11 every 
Monday night for nearly three years. I'm sitting at the corner of 
the bar, a foot and a half away from Jeff Watts' crash cymbal; across 
Watts' head and 10 feet on the other side, peering through a wall 
opening that looks as if it once was a window, is the alert face of 
the trumpeter Roy Hargrove, who's there to take in the music. Each 
time I return to Zinc, whose bookings run heavily toward jazz guitarists 
and Brazilian singers, it strikes me that the music feels workshoplike; 
since the crowd is more or less in the musicians' laps and comes to 
socialize, there's a feeling that nothing can go wrong, and this infects 
the performance in all sorts of positive ways. Music loses its shell 
here; it never sounds like what the same musicians play on records. 
There are experiments, too. During one visit, three guitarists take 
the floor at the same time, playing Sonny Rollins' ``Pent-Up House'' 
in three-part harmony. Affif turns toward the musicians to play, as 
if he's rehearsing, not performing. James Genus, the bassist, sits 
down for the sets; Watts, a loud and transfixing drummer, fouls up 
an elaborate fill in an exploded version of the Irving Berlin song 
``Cheek to Cheek,'' but laughs it off, rolling his eyes. The crowd 
_ a mixture of Houston Street habitues and middle-aged music lovers 
who you don't see in other clubs _ talks to the musicians, not just 
in between sets but in between songs as well. The Abstract Vibe At 
Orchard Bar, one of the long, skinny rooms lining Orchard Street on 
the Lower East Side, I'm struck at first by the reverse of the normal 
setup. DJ Firehorse is spinning records a few feet in from the door; 
a line of listeners, snaking toward the back of the bar, stand in 
place, eyes focused nowhere in particular, listening to the music. 
``Stick around,'' says Howard Goldkrand, the organizer of the bar's 
Tuesday night attraction, Abstract Future Lounge. ``I just got back 
from doing a show at the Ludwig Museum in Cologne, and I got a bunch 
of weird records in editions of, like, 200. I'm going to be playing 
them.'' Abstract Future Lounge is one arm of the DJ collective known 
as Cultural Alchemy, dedicated to fomenting all sorts of ambient sound 
experiences all over New York. It offers experimental music that buzzes, 
crackles and yawns, and it converges disparate sounds _ everything 
but proceeding in a straight line of funky beats, though it does some 
of that, too. When one of its events becomes too associated with one 
club, the vibe is gone; Abstract Future Lounge is looking to chase 
the vibe westward, possibly to Tribeca. Though the Orchard Bar is 
crowded, music is a solitary experience here, with the audience focusing 
on the music, not on each other. The Cultural Alchemy DJs take their 
own bass speaker to clubs, and for tonight they have positioned it 
in the back of the bar, where the comfortable chairs are; if you're 
not standing by the bar, listening intently, you're in the back, letting 
the thick bass rattle your sternum. The VIP Room At Life, on Bleecker 
Street, a very different notion of a party is taking place. The main 
dance floor is pounding with strobes and house music. Beyond that 
are a series of crowded lounges, each a little more exclusive than 
the last. But the small VIP room is the highest level. Music is an 
integral part of the experience there, though nobody remembers the 
music. It's a private nook for fashion models; chatting at their tables, 
they display a sense of giddiness, as if they are hiding from the 
world, in a way rarely seen except in the faces of children going 
out to their clubhouse in the backyard after dinner. It's midnight 
on a Tuesday, and the party is just trickling together. The lights 
are on just enough so that the colors of your outfit can be appreciated; 
an empty champagne ice-bucket stands by all of the couches and coffee 
tables that line the walls, and Grandmaster Flash is playing old disco 
records while the guests file in. Nobody takes the tables close to 
the stage. Each table seems to have a male mascot, dressed in Savile 
Row fop clothes or the exaggerated, outdated B-boy chic of Kangol 
hats and warm-up suits. ``Somebody's watching me,'' sings Michael 
Jackson from the turntables, like a sly subtext to the peacocking. 
Grandmaster Flash scratches a record in double-strokes a couple of 
times to jolt the crowd _ chucka chucka _ and something happens, a 
few bodies stir. A few of the most attractive men and women _ none 
of whom seem like couples _ get up to dance in front in tightly controlled 
movements with their arms in the air. They're not more than a few 
feet away from their tables. As she has been doing all night, the 
hostess walks up and down the dance floor, patrolling for unused tables, 
waiting for the call to come from the front door that Naomi or Puff 
has arrived. The red light on her walkie-talkie keeps flickering at 
the side of one's vision like a firefly. Amateur Satire There's an 
impressive buzz around town about karaoke night at the Elbow Room, 
on Bleecker Street in Greenwich Village. It's a new place where baby 
celebrities and rock musicians hang out to be goofy, a post-nightclub 
culture kind of thing. Housed in the old Bleecker Street Cinema, it's 
a high-ceilinged beer hall with the old-pine-and-popcorn smell common 
to Bleecker Street bars. As I walk in, Jake Fogelnest, the former 
host of MTV's ``Squirt TV,'' takes the stage and performs a version 
of Lisa Loeb's ``Stay'' but turns it from a cute wry song into heavy 
rock catharsis, jumping off risers and getting down on his knees. 
What's charming about the crowd is that it politely pays attention 
_ but only as much as the performance merits and no more. Karaoke 
here provokes a deep desire: Performance! In front of the Right People! 
And though many of the performances are flamboyant, involving guitar 
solos on broomsticks and mad screeching, they are easy to ignore. 
The visuals behind the words on screen, often the kind of dull nature 
scenes that pass as segue material in pornography, are astonishingly 
easy to ignore. The master of ceremonies, Russell, a perpetually animated 
funny man, turns out to be more of a star than any of the performers 
I saw in an hour's stretch. Suddenly, a spectator leaps up _ alas, 
it's somebody I know _ and the video jukebox starts Guns 'n' Roses' 
``Welcome to the Jungle.'' The pinnacle of the performance is a mock-sexual 
routine. At the end of this extraordinary display, the atmosphere 
hasn't been altered at all; everyone is thinking about the next performer, 
whom they look at for about 10 seconds before going back to beer and 
conversation. Cuban Catharsis On the night of my visit, the second 
American performance of NG La Banda, which is the best dance band 
in Cuba, if not the world, takes place at S.O.B.'s. It is more than 
usual a Cuban audience; the concert hasn't been publicized, and even 
the New York-based record company that distributes the band's latest 
album hasn't been alerted to it. A row of home-tapers with video cameras 
lines up in front of the stage, and the perimeters of the club are 
alive with couples dancing. The main throng fills the dance floor, 
and choruses are chanted in unison. This is a performance where solos 
are events, not formalities; the band forms columns around the soloist 
and claps in time. It is an intensely social scene, but the music 
strongly dictates when you can talk. Sung verses are chatting moments, 
but when the band's stunning montuno section kicks in, there is nothing 
to do but watch and move. In lightning-fast patter, the bandleader, 
Jose Luis Cortes, looks for audience members from Cuba, Puerto Rico 
and the Dominican Republic. And when the band starts ``Santa Palabra,'' 
a song urging you to throw away bad energy, the crowd follows all 
the body language of the singers. At this point, a blind man, trailed 
by his female companion, circles the floor, shaking his walking stick 
in the air; as everyone gets a glimpse of him, he becomes part of 
the kaleidoscopic performance. A Cubanophile friend turns to me and 
gives the nod. ``Now we're in Havana,'' he says. Only a beloved institution 
can set off an environment this urgently joyous; the members of the 
audience have gone there to be, in the deepest sense, who they are. 
Brazilian Heat Less of a grab-you-by-the-throat experience but equally 
high-spirited is the Monday night scene at Cafe Wha? on Macdougal 
Street. It's Brazil Night, powered by a regular house band of Brazilians 
living in New York. The band backs the singer Vanessa Falabella when 
she's in town; otherwise, the singers include the trombone-playing 
bandleader, Darci, and the singers Barbara Mendes and Marianne Ebert. 
Inhibitions are lost here; the only code is to do what you want to 
do, and there's a lazily licentious feeling in the air. At 1:30, a 
couple snogs passionately in the narrow space between a distinguished-looking 
Brazilian gentleman, sitting at a table, and the short stage. Others 
are dancing, eating, passively watching the show on wall-mounted television 
monitors. Singing backup behind Darci on Carlinhos Brown's spitfire-rapping 
song ``Pandeiro-Deiro,'' Ms. Mendes is thrashing her body, dancing 
harder than a musician ought to on a weekly gig in a small bar. Last-Stop 
Jazz If I'm in the mood to wander about, the last stop of the night 
is often Smalls, on West 10th Street, where the cigarette smoke is 
as condensed as an astronaut's meal, and the lights are so dim that 
being there feels like the first stage of sleep. What keeps drawing 
me back is the old-fashioned sense of correctness that prevails among 
the young jazz performers. The Smalls ethic involves regular microphone 
breaks to identify tunes and musicians, and from these performances 
you can always get a sense of the esthetic ramparts the bandleaders 
are climbing this minute; though more and more, Smalls regulars have 
been signed to major labels, performances at the club never feel tied 
to product. Kurt Rosenwinkel, a guitarist who's soon to issue his 
first record on the Impulse label, has wound up his last set at 2:30. 
There's a sweet, womblike feeling in the place. A few students have 
fallen asleep and lie curled up in corners, while others sit around 
bottles of wine in Eskimo hats and Patagonia jackets. Some watchers 
move forward and talk shop with Rosenwinkel while the drummer, Tim 
Pleasant, meticulously takes apart his drum set. Someone puts a tape 
on the house PA; it's Charlie Parker. Two jazz students to my right 
jerk awake and sing Parker's wild, fragmented solo, then shake their 
heads, laughing. ``Bird played some weird stuff,'' one says. WHO'S 
APPEARING AT THE CLUBS NOW Here is what's playing this weekend at 
the places mentioned in the article on downtown clubs, along with 
some weekly highlights. ZINC BAR, 90 W. Houston St., (212) 477-8337. 
Call the club for this weekend's lineup. THE ORCHARD BAR, 200 Orchard 
St., (212) 673-5350. Friday night at 10; Royal Funk with DJ Wayne. 
Saturday at 10 p.m., DJ Mark; Sunday at 10 p.m., Table Manners, with 
DJs Doomer, Steele and Chicago. No cover, no minimum. LIFE, 158 Bleecker 
St., (212) 420-1999. Friday night from 7 to 11 p.m., swing dance; 
after 10 p.m., DJs Grand Master Flash, Jackie Christi, Mark Ronson 
and Sturt. Saturday at 10:30 p.m., a performance by Manjit, followed 
by appearances by DJs Etienne, Alex Lauterstein, Sear, Mighty Mi and 
Balthazar. THE ELBOW ROOM, 144 Bleecker St., (212) 979-8434. Friday 
night at 9, Under the Sun, Casma Zuma, Splat, Hatch, the Bissbes. 
Saturday: at 8 p.m., Limited Sight Distance; at 9 p.m., More; at 10 
p.m. Verb, at 11 p.m., the Rooftop Cowboys and Equinox. Sunday from 
8 p.m. to midnight, blues jam. Audrey's Karaoke, with Russell Steinberg 
as master of ceremonies, every Wednesday night at 10:30 p.m.; karaoke 
admission, $10. Admission, $8 Friday night and Saturday; free on Sunday. 
S.O.B.'s, 204 Varick St., at Houston Street, (212) 243-4940. Friday 
night: at 8 and 10 p.m., Angela Bofil; at midnight and 2 a.m., Milly 
Quezada merengue band; admission, $20. Saturday: at 8 and 10 p.m., 
Katende, samba band; at midnight and 2 a.m., the Manhattan All-Stars, 
samba; admission, $18. CAFE WHA?, 115 Macdougal St., (212) 254-3706. 
Friday night and Sunday at 9:30 p.m. and Saturday at 9:15 p.m., the 
Wha Band. Cover, $10 Friday night and Saturday, no cover on Sunday; 
no minimum any day. Brazilian Night every Monday at 10; admission, 
$10, no minimum. SMALLS, 183 W. 10th St., (212) 929-7565. Friday night 
and Saturday from 10 p.m. to 2 a.m., Grant Stewart Quartet. Friday 
night, 2 a.m. to 6 a.m., Charles Owens Quartet. Saturday and Sunday, 
6:30 to 9 p.m., Bubba Brooks on Saturday 2 to 6 a.m., the Frank Hewitt 
Sextet. Sunday, 9 to 10 p.m., Frank Hewitt Trio; 10 p.m. to 2 a.m., 
Across Seventh Street Sextet. Sunday, 2 to 6 a.m., Ehud Asherie Trio. 
There is a $10 admission charge to all shows except the Bubba Brooks 
shows, which are free. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>