<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981119.0448 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the first federal appeals court ruling on racial preferences in 
public school admissions, a three-judge panel in Boston on Thursday 
struck down the affirmative-action policy at Boston Latin School, 
the city's most prestigious public high school. The challenge to Boston 
Latin, brought by Henry Robert Wessman, the father of a white student 
who was not admitted, moves the highly charged debate over affirmative 
action in education from the college and professional-school level 
down to the public school systems. Two years ago, in a case involving 
the University of Texas law school, the 5th U.S. Circuit Court of 
Appeals barred the use of race in university admissions. But the constitutionality 
of racial preferences in admissions to prestigious public high schools 
is more complicated _ and more amorphous _ since so many districts, 
like Boston, have been under court order to desegregate. Indeed, many 
districts have created magnet schools specifically to promote integration. 
``The issues are very different in public schools, where every child 
will get a placement, than in the professional school context, where 
a person who doesn't get into law or medical school may not have access 
to that career,'' said Patricia Brannan, a lawyer working on a similar 
case involving a magnet school in Arlington, Va. ``At this point, 
it's not clear exactly what's allowed. There are several cases rattling 
their way through the courts, and I think it's an area where we're 
going to see a lot more court rulings.'' Although Thursday's ruling 
is binding only on Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Rhode Island 
and Puerto Rico, it is likely to draw intense interest in many school 
districts that are race-conscious in admissions to their most competitive 
schools. While most school districts have abandoned strict racial 
quotas, many magnet schools still consider race in their admission 
decisions. Boston Latin selects half its students solely on entrance 
examination scores and grades, and admissions for the other half are 
weighted by race, so that if 27 percent of the remaining qualified 
applicants, those from the top half of their class, are African-American, 
27 percent of those admitted must be African-American. In Thursday's 
2-to-1 decision overturning a May ruling by the district court upholding 
that policy, Judge Bruce Selya of the 1st U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals 
ordered Boston Latin to admit 15-year-old Sarah Wessman, a white student 
who complained that she had been illegally denied admission in favor 
of less qualified minorities. Sarah ranked 91st among the applicants 
for the 1997 ninth-grade class. To fill the first 45 seats, the school 
went through the top 47 students on the list; for the other 45, the 
policy required allocation to 13 blacks, 18 whites, nine Asian-Americans 
and five students of Hispanic descent. ``This puts a further stake 
in the heart of the diversity rationale,'' said Terence Pell, senior 
counsel at Center for Individual Rights in Washington, which brought 
the Texas case. ``People might have thought that if the diversity 
rationale would survive at all it would be in the elementary and secondary 
school context, but the court said, no, the legal standard is the 
same and there is no more compelling interest in racial balancing 
that elementary and secondary level.'' At a press conference Thursday, 
Dr. Elizabeth Reilinger, chair fo the Boston School Committee, said 
that the committee would comply with the decision _ and would schedule 
a special meeting to decide whether to appeal the decision or change 
its policy. ``I haven't read the decision yet, but I'm very concerned 
that it could lead to racial isolation, resegregation and less educational 
opportunity for minority children,'' said Jeff Simering, director 
of legislation at the Council of the Great City Schools, a Washington, 
D.C., organization of the nation's largest urban school districts, 
adding that many of his group's members are still under desegregation 
orders, and using race-conscious policies to integrate their schools. 
In New York City, the four specialized high schools admit students 
strictly on the basis of an entrance test and do not use race as a 
factor. The makeup of the two top schools, Stuyvesant High School 
and Bronx High School of Science, is predominantly Asian and white. 
At Stuyvesant, for example, African-Americans account for 4.1 percent 
of the student body, Hispanics 3.7 percent, 47.7 percent Asian and 
45.5 percent white. In 1974, rioting broke out in Boston when a U.S. 
District Court ordered widespread busing to end segregation of schools. 
The following year, because of the low number of African-American 
students at Boston Latin, the court required the school to set aside 
at least 35 percent of each entering class for African-American and 
Hispanic students, a plan the appeals court affirmed in 1976. Although 
the court removed that mandate in 1987, the Boston schools continued 
that policy until 1995, when it was challenged by Michael McLaughlin, 
the lawyer-father of another rejected white applicant. McLaughlin's 
case was dismissed last year, and his daughter admitted, after the 
city agreed to change from the 35 percent set-aside to the new half-and-half 
approach. McLaughlin, however, sued again, on behalf of Sarah Wessman, 
charging that the new system was still an illegal quota masked by 
``high-minded and amorphous terms'' of diversity and fairness. Selya's 
opinion said the policy making race ``a determining factor in the 
admission of a subset of each year's incoming classes, offend's the 
Constitution's guarantee of equal protection.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>