<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981119.0467 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A company that goes for some time without a chief financial officer 
may be raising a red flag for investors. The average search for a 
chief financial officer takes three to four months, according to Lee 
Pomeroy, a consultant at Egon Zehnder International, an executive 
search firm. A quest that drags on longer than that can indicate that 
things are ``structurally wrong'' within the company, he said. Candidates 
for a corporation's top financial job, of course, may balk for any 
number of reasons. They may be dissatisfied with the compensation, 
the degree of authority or the chain of command. But sometimes the 
issues are ones that also concern investors: management's corporate 
strategy, the abilities of the chief executive or the strength of 
the company's business. That's why some analysts have been looking 
somewhat warily at Electronic Data Systems and Nike, two companies 
that have been without chief financial officers for more than seven 
months. Both companies have struggled as the global financial turmoil 
saps their revenues, and the price of both their stocks have suffered. 
Shares of EDS are down more than 11 percent for the year. Thursday, 
they closed at $38.9375. Class B shares of Nike are up 7 percent for 
the year, but down more than 20 percent since July. They closed at 
$41.8125 Thursday. EDS says its search for a finance chief has been 
put on hold until a new chief executive is found. Nike is now on its 
second search firm for a chief financial officer. Still, while the 
business slowdowns are investors' primary concern, the continued absence 
of finance chiefs does not help foster confidence in the two companies, 
analysts said. Greg Gieber, senior equity analyst at Brown Brothers 
Harriman, said that EDS needed stronger internal financial controls 
and a finance chief who would enact them quickly, enabling the company 
to improve its ability to forecast earnings. ``Some of the earnings 
surprises were surprises to senior management as well,'' Gieber said. 
``One thing I want to hear a CFO saying is, `We now have our internal 
reporting structure under control.''' Such comments reflect the rising 
importance of chief financial officers as their role has grown in 
recent years: they help orchestrate turnarounds of troubled companies, 
identify and negotiate mergers and acquisitions and plan spinoffs. 
``The chief financial officer is the second most important person'' 
in a company, said Randall Peterson, an assistant professor of organizational 
behavior at Cornell University's Johnson Graduate School of Management. 
The chief executive is primarily responsible for setting a company's 
strategic direction, but the chief financial officer is usually responsible 
for the day-to-day financial activities and can play a major role 
in communicating corporate strategies and progress to shareholders, 
said Stephen Gates, a principal researcher for the Conference Board. 
Indeed, a Conference Board study of the stock performance of 300 companies 
in the last three years found that at companies whose stocks outperformed 
those of their rivals the chief financial officer usually spent more 
than 20 percent of his or her time assisting executives with forming 
business strategies. Deborah Hopkins, who was named as the new chief 
financial officer at Boeing Co. on Monday, is a good example of the 
finance chief many companies now seek. Ms. Hopkins, formerly the finance 
chief of European operations for General Motors Corp., has overseen 
risk-management programs and developed programs that aided GM's international 
growth. Prior to that, she helped turn around the troubled Unisys 
Corp. Before Boeing's announcement, Ms. Hopkins had been considered 
a top candidate to fill the post at EDS. As demand for top finance 
executives rises, so does their compensation. Last year, the average 
compensation of chief financial officers, including the value of stock 
options, rose to more than $4 million, up 83 percent from the previous 
year. The star power of some finance chiefs is sometimes illustrated 
by how the market reacts to their departures or arrivals. Jerome B. 
York earned such a strong reputation for his cost-cutting ways as 
chief financial officer of IBM that when he left in September 1995, 
the company's shares tumbled nearly 2 percent in a session in which 
other computer stocks rose. In the case of Nike, the world's largest 
athletic footwear company, Robert Falcone, who had held the post for 
six years, resigned in January. Nike has suffered from declining sales 
in the United States and abroad. Hiring a chief financial officer, 
analysts say, could indicate that Nike is serious about making changes 
and improving its profitability. ``It's a crucial role, especially 
in a turnaround,'' Faye Landes, an analyst at Salomon Smith Barney, 
said. For example, Nike's expenses and inventory controls might get 
more attention from a chief financial officer. ``Many people would 
like Nike to take a very strong look at expenses,'' she said. ``The 
company has always been able to grow into expenses, but it's dealing 
with a much smaller growth rate.'' Many of Nike's problems in recent 
months can be traced to swollen inventory, caused by a sales slowdown 
in Asia and waning popularity of some styles. ``It might also be prudent 
for the company to look at how it forecasts,'' Ms. Landes said. ``They 
forecast better than anybody in the industry, but it might not be 
good enough.'' Jeff Cava, Nike's vice president for global human resources, 
conceded that the search had ``certainly taken longer than we had 
hoped.'' He said that Nike had had the greatest difficulty in attracting 
candidates whose families were willing to relocate to its corporate 
headquarters in Beaverton, Ore. ``We're a special company with a special 
culture and fit is as important as the technical qualifications,'' 
Cava said. ``Our process is probably a little more rigorous.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>