<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981119.0100 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As federal regulators tighten their scrutiny of hedge funds, officials 
say they will likely require the often secretive funds to reveal more 
about how much debt they use and the risks they take with their money. 
Examinations of hedge funds and the banks and brokerage firms that 
deal with them began in September, after Long-Term Capital Management, 
the giant hedge fund based in Greenwich, Conn., was rescued from bankruptcy 
by a consortium of Wall Street banks. The $3.6 billion rescue was 
coordinated by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and raised questions 
about how the failure of a single, unregulated investment company 
could threaten world financial markets. Regulatory agencies, including 
the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Commodity Futures Trading 
Commission and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, are conducting 
separate reviews of brokerage firms, traders and banks that they supervise, 
officials from each of the agencies said Wednesday. Their efforts 
are being coordinated by the President's Working Group on Financial 
Markets, a committee headed by Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin. The 
SEC in recent weeks has reviewed the books of major Wall Street firms 
that had dealings with Long-Term Capital, including Goldman, Sachs 
&AMP; Co., Morgan Stanley Dean Witter and Merrill Lynch &AMP; Co. 
The examinations were intended to learn more about how brokers deal 
with hedge fund clients, said an SEC official who asked not to be 
identified by name. The Fed has also required banks it regulates to 
provide detailed information on their lending to hedge funds. The 
most likely outcome of the scrutiny is that regulators will require 
hedge funds and their lenders to reveal more information, though people 
involved with the working group's discussions say it is still too 
early to say what form those measures will take or whether they will 
be voluntary or mandatory. Government officials involved with the 
working group study said they were unlikely to recommend direct regulation 
of hedge funds themselves. ``More disclosure and reporting is the 
first step,'' said CFTC Chairwoman Brooksley Born in an interview 
Wednesday. ``I have become convinced that that is most necessary.'' 
She said regulators planned to conclude their study of hedge funds 
early next year, though any new regulatory measures to emerge from 
the research would take longer to enact. SEC Chairman Arthur Levitt 
Jr. has said that requiring more disclosure about hedge fund debt 
and risk levels was at the top of the regulators' agenda. Speaking 
to reporters recently, Levitt said he believed that any steps the 
United States took should be agreed to internationally as well. ``To 
be effective, the kind of transparency we're talking about should 
be global,'' he said. Congress has also sought more information about 
hedge funds and how they are supervised. Sen. Richard Lugar, R-Ind., 
chairman of the Senate Agriculture Committee, has called a hearing 
on derivatives next month. The hearing is expected to be the first 
in a series that could determine whether the government should take 
a direct role in overseeing the largely unregulated over-the-counter 
market for derivatives, and, if so, which federal agency should do 
the regulating. Like many hedge funds, Long-Term Capital was a major 
user of derivatives, which are financial instruments that derive their 
value from stocks, bonds or currencies. The fund had derivatives exposure 
that totaled nearly $1.2 trillion, making it one of the largest derivatives 
users in the world. The size of Long-Term Capital's portfolio and 
its near collapse have added urgency to a debate in Washington over 
whether derivatives contracts pose dangers to the financial system. 
The flurry of activity by regulators comes amid questions about what 
kind of disclosure Long-Term Capital made in the past, and whether 
government officials might have taken action earlier to guard against 
the September crisis. Ms. Born confirmed a report in The Washington 
Post on Wednesday that the CFTC received a regular annual statement 
from Long-Term Capital earlier this year. The filing disclosed the 
hedge fund's assets and showed that it had a relatively high debt-to-equity 
ratio of 25 to 1. But she said the filing was the same annual report 
that Long-Term Capital provided its investors and lenders, and that 
it did not in itself raise red flags about the fund's stability. ``The 
annual report showed no indication that it was about to collapse. 
It was successful and it was similar to other hedge funds'' in its 
use of debt, Ms. Born said. She added that by August, when financial 
markets had turned against Long-Term Capital's trading positions, 
its capital had shrunk drastically and the ratio of debt to capital 
increased sharply. But she said, by that time her agency's information 
was outdated. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>