<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981119.0255 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Though ``Enemy of the State'' finds a flimsy excuse for setting one 
scene amid lingerie models, babes have nothing to do with its notion 
of sex appeal. Instead, it's the gigahertz that are hot in a thriller 
that treats technology as its biggest turn-on. High-tech surveillance 
(``Enhance, then forward frame by frame!'') is at the heart of this 
latest splashy collaboration between Tony Scott and Jerry Bruckheimer 
(``Top Gun,'' ``Crimson Tide''), with its premise that privacy is 
imperiled by runaway electronics. In a week that finds the nation 
listening to surreptitiously taped Washington telephone calls, who's 
to say that ``Enemy of the State'' doesn't have a point? This much 
is certain: it has a hurtling pace, nonstop intensity and a stylish, 
appealing performance by Will Smith in his first real starring role. 
And although Scott has done popular culture no great favor by pioneering 
the Simpson-Bruckheimer school of empty but sensation-packed filmmaking, 
he now looks like a veritable Billy Wilder beside latter-day Top Gunners 
like Michael (``Armageddon'') Bay. As a grand old man of the thrill-happy 
genre, Scott gives this film a fine cast, a modicum of wit on the 
run and a reasonably human dimension. As Gene Hackman, playing an 
eccentric technology wiz, finally admits about Smith's lawyer-turned-action 
hero: ``Not too stupid after all.'' Smith plays Robert Clayton Dean, 
an upright and happily married lawyer who winds up, quicker than you 
can say John Grisham, being targeted, chased and spied on by ruthless 
forces within the National Security Agency. Needless to say, the ``huh?'' 
factor is considerable. How exactly does Dean go from peace and quiet 
to a scene in which he must run away from a helicopter, a truck and 
a train simultaneously? The screenplay by David Marconi seems to be 
wired with its own self-destruct mechanism, so that it works within 
the moment but stops making sense the minute you walk out the door. 
``Enemy of the State'' begins with the murder of a congressman (played 
by an unbilled Jason Robards) because he opposes a Telecommunications 
Security and Privacy Act that a certain NSA official (Jon Voight, 
who modeled his appearance here on Robert McNamara) dearly hopes will 
pass. But it happens that a nature photographer (Jason Lee, a star 
of ``Chasing Amy'') is monitoring geese in the very park where the 
killing takes place. The photographer becomes toast as soon as he 
relays this information to someone else by telephone, since there 
are no such things as unmonitored phone conversations or camera-free 
buttonholes in this movie. Incidentally, everyone who makes phone 
calls here tends to be doing at least one other thing _ fiddling with 
a keyboard, peering at a monitor screen, watching television _ simultaneously. 
And information is gathered and processed with dizzying rapidity. 
The real world's hourglass icon, the one that indicates a computer 
is taking its sweet time about something, is nowhere to be seen. In 
what passes for crafty plotting here, Dean happens to be buying holiday 
underwear for his wife (of course it's Christmastime) when the photographer 
bursts onto the scene and hides a copy of his incriminating evidence 
in Dean's shopping bag. Suddenly, a whole nerd squad back at headquarters 
begins studying the configuration of the bag and then monitoring Dean's 
every move. His house is fitted with more bugs than there are in children's 
films this season. There's a sensor in his pants. A special dedicated 
satellite, filmed as if this were ``Star Wars,'' is devoted to chasing 
him. The question of why one little vote in Congress _ or even one 
little murder, in this cutthroat context _ is enough to set off such 
techno-frenzy is one more ``huh?'' along the way. But Scott comes 
up with enough snazzy equipment, wild chases and explosive notions 
(like blowing up the original Dr. Pepper factory in Baltimore) to 
keep the story moving faster than the speed of scrutiny. And he does 
use sharp, video-influenced editing more effectively than most (though 
John Frankenheimer's ``Ronin'' achieved the same high velocity without 
benefit of MTV tricks). The film's juxtapositions, sharp angles, jump 
cuts and aerial surveillance shots (a la the Gulf war) have a rhythm 
that suits the material. And Scott avoids touches of overkill, like 
pumped-up emotional heft or an overlay of musical schmaltz. In addition, 
the filmmakers' claims that actual surveillance capabilities go well 
beyond what is seen here give added interest, not to mention true 
menace, to much of what is seen. Making memorable appearances here 
are Regina King (from ``Jerry Maguire'') as Dean's sturdy wife; Barry 
Pepper, Ian Hart and Jake Busey as young thugs on Dean's trail; Lisa 
Bonet as an ex-girlfriend of Dean's, and Tom Sizemore as a tubby mobster. 
Gabriel Byrne appears in a brief, baffling role. The film's horde 
of foxy screens, transmitters, buttonhole cameras and laptops probably 
deserve an acting credit of their own. (italics)``Enemy of the State'' 
is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). 
It includes mild sexual suggestiveness, occasional violence and one 
major shootout at its finale.(end italics) ENEMY OF THE STATE Directed 
by Tony Scott; written by David Marconi; director of photography, 
Dan Mindel; edited by Chris Lebenzon; music by Trevor Rabin and Harry 
Gregson-Williams; production designer, Benjamin Fernandez; produced 
by Jerry Bruckheimer; released by Touchstone Pictures. Running time: 
128 minutes. This film is rated R. WITH: Will Smith (Robert Clayton 
Dean), Gene Hackman (Brill), Jon Voight (Reynolds), Lisa Bonet (Rachel 
Banks), Regina King (Carla Dean), Ian Hart (Bingham), Jake Busey (Krug), 
Barry Pepper (Pratt), Gabriel Byrne (Brill), Tom Sizemore (Pintero), 
Jason Robards (the congressman) and Jason Lee (Zavitz). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>