<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981119.0553 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Describing the slaying of an abortion doctor in Buffalo last month 
as a ``heinous act of terror,'' Gov. George E. Pataki said Thursday 
that he would introduce state legislation to protect abortion clinics 
from harassment and potential violence. The Republican governor said 
his bill, which would be nearly identical to federal legislation passed 
in 1994, would provide penalties of up to four years in prison for 
anyone who ``intentionally injures, intimidates or interferes'' with 
someone entering an abortion or other health clinic. The legislation 
would also authorize prosecutors to seek civil fines against anyone 
who blocks access to a clinic. The governor's aides said that despite 
the federal law, state legislation would provide a new layer of protection 
for clinics and new penalties for harassers. The governor's announcement 
came in a press release from his office, while Pataki was attending 
the Republican governors' conference in New Orleans. It caught both 
Democrats and Republicans in the New York Legislature by surprise, 
and it drew immediate criticism from anti-abortion groups. Michael 
C. Long, the chairman of the state Conservative Party, described it 
as ``pandering to abortion extremists.'' It was unclear Thursday night 
what the prospects were of the Legislature's passing the proposed 
bill. Starting in 1993, Democrats, who control the state Assembly, 
have passed similar legislation. But leaders in the Republican-controlled 
state Senate, the more conservative of the two houses, were decidedly 
lukewarm to Pataki's proposal Thursday night, saying they would consider 
it only if it was part of legislation covering all types of public 
facilities. ``There are existing laws in place,'' said John McArdle, 
a spokesman for Joseph L. Bruno, the Senate majority leader. ``If 
people are breaking the law and we need to do something, OK, let's 
do it across the board.'' But as a matter of politics, Pataki's decision 
to embrace a bill _ and so explicitly align himself with forces in 
favor of abortion rights _ comes at a time of increasing turmoil for 
Republicans, in New York and nationally, on the abortion rights issue. 
Several political leaders contend that one of the reasons that Sen. 
Alfonse D'Amato lost his bid for a fourth term by a substantial margin 
earlier this month was his opposition to abortion rights. D'Amato's 
advisers said that the killing of Dr. Barnett A. Slepian, who had 
regularly encountered protesters as he went to work at his abortion 
clinic in Buffalo, was devastating to the senator's re-election prospects. 
The original Federal abortion clinic access bill was drafted by the 
man who defeated D'Amato, Rep. Charles E. Schumer of Brooklyn. Pataki's 
bill was drafted in direct response to the killing of Dr. Slepian, 
the governor's advisers said Thursday night. Pataki's announcement 
comes at a time when he has been steadily trying to raise his profile 
as a possible candidate for national office. He has aligned himself 
with moderate members of his party who contend that the Republicans 
can no longer be identified with firm opposition to abortion rights. 
Pataki's advisers said Thursday night that there were no national 
political calculations in introducing the bill, noting that Republican 
Party primaries are dominated by voters who tend to oppose abortion 
rights. Pataki's announcement was greeted warmly by both abortion 
rights advocates and the leader of Assembly Democrats. ``We welcome 
it,'' said Pat Lynch, the spokesman for Sheldon Silver, the Assembly 
speaker. Alexander C. Sanger, president of Planned Parenthood of New 
York City, said he had helped Pataki's advisers draft the bill. ``He's 
showing real moral and political leadership here by saying that violence 
against doctors and women is totally unacceptable in New York States,'' 
Sanger said. But Long, the Conservative Party leader, who has been 
a supporter of Pataki since his first run for governor in 1994, criticized 
Pataki in unusually harsh language. He asserted that such legislation 
interfered with the rights of abortion opponents, whose practices 
include praying and picketing in front of clinics. He also questioned 
the need for a state bill when Federal legislation was already in 
place. ``This is pandering to the worst abortion extremists in our 
society,'' Long said. He also noted that Pataki announced the proposal 
a day after Roman Catholic Bishops meeting in Washington issued a 
statement saying they had an obligation to try to persuade Catholic 
elected officials who support abortion rights to change their position. 
Pataki is Roman Catholic. Zenia Mucha, the governor's spokeswoman, 
declined to comment on Long's criticisms of Pataki. According to figures 
kept by Planned Parenthood, 12 states and the District of Columbia 
have passed their own clinic access laws since Schumer's Federal legislation 
was passed five years ago. Pataki's advisers rejected the contention 
by Long and other opponents of abortion rights that such legislation 
was unnecessary, saying that the federal government could not adequately 
monitor against harassment of clinics across New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>