<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981119.0413 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Clinton administration and the Republican leadership in Congress 
say they are ready to take on the complex and politically sensitive 
job of reshaping the Social Security system for the next century. 
Right now, however, they cannot agree on how to begin, much less on 
the substance of a deal. And their differences about how to attack 
the issue, and who should control the agenda, were on full display 
Thursday at a hearing convened by the House Ways and Means Committee. 
Rep. Bill Archer, R-Texas, the chairman of the committee, said President 
Clinton should make a detailed proposal for how to shore up Social 
Security for the looming retirement of the baby boom generation. Only 
with strong leadership by the president, Archer said, could Congress 
put aside its fear of the political consequences of revamping one 
of the nation's most successful and popular government programs. ``If 
President Clinton believes he can get this done without his leadership 
or without a specific plan, I believe he will be making the biggest 
miscalculation of his presidency,'' Archer said. Just as only President 
Richard M. Nixon, a Republican, could visit China and move toward 
a ``normalization'' of relations, ``you alone as a Democrat can change 
the course of Social Security,'' Archer said in an appeal to Clinton. 
Archer also upbraided the administration for rebuffing his request 
that Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin appear at the hearing and instead 
sending a lower-ranking official, David Wilcox, assistant secretary 
of the Treasury for economic affairs. Rubin's failure to attend, Archer 
said, ``begins the process on the wrong note.'' White House officials 
bristled at Archer's implicit challenge to their political courage. 
But the White House stuck to its position that it would be counterproductive 
for the president to lay out a plan now, saying that anything labeled 
as a Clinton plan would inevitably draw partisan criticism and poison 
the debate before it really got going. Instead, administration officials 
want to develop a bipartisan negotiating process in the hope of drafting 
a proposal that could win support from both parties in Congress. ``It 
has been the president's judgment thus far that for us to put out 
a plan would not have been helpful and could have served to polarize 
the debate,'' Wilcox told the hearing. ``He will continue to review 
on an ongoing basis whether proposing a specific plan would help move 
the process forward.'' Clinton has been meeting regularly with his 
economic advisers in recent weeks to review the complex array of options 
for making sure that Social Security can weather the retirement of 
76 million baby boomers, starting in a little more than a decade. 
Without any changes, the system will run short of the money to pay 
all promised benefits in 2031. Two basic approaches are under consideration. 
One, favored by most but not all Democrats, would keep intact the 
system used since Social Security was created in 1935, under which 
current workers pay the benefits for current retirees through payroll 
taxes. The other, backed by most Republicans, would move toward a 
system in which workers would invest part of their payroll taxes in 
individual accounts to help pay for their own retirements. So far, 
administration officials said, Clinton has not settled on either approach 
or the dozens of variants. The administration plans to see how much 
common ground there might be in a White House conference on the issue 
scheduled for Dec. 8 and 9, which will include a day of closed-door 
negotiations between members of both parties. Archer's statements 
Thursday seemed to reflect mounting Republican frustration with the 
way the president has controlled the Social Security debate so far. 
Clinton's demand at the beginning of the year that Congress set aside 
federal budget surpluses until Social Security has been fixed thwarted 
Republican tax-cutting efforts and gave Democrats a potent issue in 
the congressional election campaigns. Yet the president has held himself 
above the fray as both Democrats and Republicans debated specific 
options that could have painful political repercussions. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>