<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981119.0276 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
THE WATERBOY Adam Sandler, Kathy Bates, Henry Winkler, Jerry Reid, 
Fairuza Balk Directed by Frank Coraci PG-13 91 minutes An extremely 
simple bayou boy of 31, Bobby Boucher ( Sandler) lives with his mama 
(Ms. Bates) and works as ``water distribution engineer'' for a nationally 
ranked college football team. Bobby talks as if he had a Ping-Pong 
ball surgically implanted in his mouth and is interested only in the 
elaborate water buffets (no Gatorade) he sets out along the sidelines. 
The players, abusive imbeciles all, relentlessly make fun of him, 
as does their demagogic coach (Reid), who finally fires him. Mama 
is delighted because that will keep Bobby at home with her and away 
from such influences as sex and education. But the gentle, sensitive 
Bobby remains the idiot savant of water serving. Against Mama's wishes, 
he takes a job at a grubby little school whose team, the Mud Cats, 
have lost 40 straight. There the players are still louts, but the 
long-suffering coach (Winkler) taps the anger in Bobby and turns him 
into a linebacker who makes 20 sacks a game. Soon ESPN takes notice, 
as does a big-hearted and sexy former convict (Ms. Balk), who makes 
the liberation of Bobby her special project. At first Mama reacts 
by grounding her boy, but later, in an epiphany of enlightenment, 
she frees him to do as he wishes. And so it's on to the Bourbon Bowl 
and the inevitable showdown with Bobby's old team. VIOLENCE On the 
field, it's a smash-mouth brand of football. Otherwise none. SEX There 
is some playful nudity and plenty of relatively mild innuendo. PROFANITY 
A moderate amount. For Which Children? AGES 3-7 Written on an infantile 
level, the movie is clear enough in many respects, but it's not for 
small children. AGES 8-10 By this age they are responding to Sandler's 
siren's call. And the film is harmless enough. AGES 11 AND UP ``The 
Waterboy'' has taken in more than $80 million at the box office, helping 
make Sandler one of the hottest film actors. Here is the ultimate 
underdog. Teen-agers especially appreciate Bobby's goofball vulnerability, 
not-so-stupid stupidity and good-natured resilience. THE SIEGE Denzel 
Washington, Bruce Willis, Annette Bening, Tony Shaloub Directed by 
Edward Zwick R 109 minutes A bomb tears apart a bus in lower Manhattan, 
and a larger blast claims many victims in a Broadway theater. A confluence 
of federal agents, squabbling mightily over who has jurisdiction, 
determine it is the work of Arab terrorists. An FBI man, Anthony Hubbard 
(Washington), is nominally in charge of the case, but he is not receiving 
full cooperation from Elise Kraft (Ms. Bening), a shady CIA operative 
and Middle East specialist who has much inside information on terrorist 
cells but isn't sharing it with Hubbard. Then somebody drives a van 
full of explosives into a federal building, killing 600 people. Another 
terrorist with a bomb holds a classroom full of children as hostages. 
The city is in a panic. Hate crimes against Arab-Americans are rising. 
With Hubbard and Kraft not making much headway, it is decided to send 
in the Army and declare martial law. That introduces Maj. Gen. William 
Devereaux ( Willis), who narrows the hunt to 20 individuals among 
the Arab-American community in Brooklyn. The object, as Devereaux 
sees it, is to seal off the borough, ``squeeze it'' and ``be home 
in time for the playoffs.'' Hundreds of innocent Arab-Americans are 
thrown into an internment camp. But the city rebels against the military 
presence. Meanwhile, Hubbard is making some progress on his own. But 
with the general obstructing him at every turn, can he crack the case? 
VIOLENCE Bombings are graphic (in the theater explosion, one woman 
emerges minus an arm), and point-blank shootings rip big holes in 
people. At one point, the general tortures a suspect and executes 
him. That scene is not shown, but the victim screams loudly. SEX Kraft 
makes love to a suspect, with the pair fleetingly shown coupling by 
an infrared surveillance camera. PROFANITY A lot and strong. FOOTNOTE 
In keeping with the World Trade Center and Oklahoma City bombings, 
this kind of scenario plays in our darker imaginings. The ethnic factor 
and questions of civil rights also might have inspired thoughtful 
treatment. Instead, banalities of dialogue and predictability of plot 
reduce the subject to commonplace action fare. For Which Children? 
AGES 10-12 To begin with, the film isn't for any children, but with 
visions of fireballs and Willis, many youngsters could be attracted. 
AGES 13 AND UP They too might be expecting a summer action film, but 
this one is talky, with internecine wrangling _ a tired device to 
begin with in movies of this kind _ so protracted it almost becomes 
parody. I STILL KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER Jennifer Love Hewitt, 
Brandy, Freddie Prinze Jr., Matthew Settle, Mekhi Phifer, Muse Watson 
Directed by Danny Cannon R 96 minutes Last summer, as was related 
in the first movie of the series (same title but delete the ``Still''), 
some graduating high school seniors in a BMW accidentally ran over 
Ben Willis (Watson) and tried to cover up the matter by tossing his 
body into the harbor. However, Willis revived and, understandably 
annoyed, dressed himself in a long slicker and began polishing off 
the young people one by one with a cargo hook. One summer later, only 
Julie (Ms. Hewitt) and Ray (Prinze) survive. Julie's nightmares place 
the man with the hook in every nook and cranny, but it's not until 
a stormy weekend in the Bahamas that she and three friends meet him 
face to face. On with the blood bath. VIOLENCE Willis buries his hook 
into throats and skulls and does in others by alternative means (at 
one point, he tries to grill Julie in a tanning machine). The violence 
is gory and, from about the midway point in the film, so continual 
and predictable that all suspense is lost. SEX Two of Julie's friends 
(Brandy and Phifer) talk about all the sex they're going to have, 
but they never seem to get around to it. PROFANITY A stream. For Which 
Children? AGES 13 AND UP In the recent tradition of the slasher movies 
``Scream'' and `'Scream 2,'' not to mention ``I Know What You Did 
Last Summer,'' this kind of movie is designed for teen-agers. Parents 
should be aware (as if most aren't already). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>