<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981119.0459 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Kenneth Starr on Thursday provided the public with a wide-ranging 
portrait of his four-year, $40 million investigation, announcing that 
he had not found any evidence of impeachable wrongdoing by President 
Clinton on the Whitewater, Filegate and Travelgate matters. Democrats 
on the House Judiciary Committee immediately seized on the disclosure, 
repeatedly challenging Starr, the independent counsel, and wondering, 
as Rep. Barney Frank did, why Starr did not share the good news until 
after the Nov. 3 election. Frank criticized Starr for failing to exonerate 
the president on Filegate and Travelgate in September when he sent 
Congress the 445-page impeachment referral related to Clinton's affair 
with Monica Lewinsky. ``In other words,'' he told Starr, ``you don't 
have anything to say unless you have something bad to say.'' While 
providing committee members with the most comprehensive accounting 
of his office's many-tentacled inquiry, Starr devoted one-fourth of 
his opening statement to matters other than the Lewinsky case. In 
doing so, he announced that late last year he secretly drafted an 
impeachment report for Congress that focused on President Clinton's 
involvement in the Whitewater real estate venture, the prosecutor's 
original investigative mission. But after intense debate within his 
office, Starr said, he decided not to send the Whitewater referral 
to the House of Representatives. He concluded that he could not be 
certain of the truthfulness of two major witnesses, both of whom accused 
the president of criminal wrongdoing but were convicted felons. ``We 
concluded that it would be inconsistent with the statutory standard 
because of the difficulty of establishing the truth with a sufficient 
degree of confidence,'' Starr said. That decision, Starr seemed to 
argue Thursday, was an example of his caution and restraint, a self-portrait 
that is at odds with the Democrats' critical refrain that the independent 
counsel is an overzealous, politically motivated prosecutor obsessed 
with trying to destroy the president. Starr acknowledged that he had 
not found sufficient evidence to accuse the president of criminal 
conduct in the Whitewater matter, even though he insisted that he 
had not concluded his investigation of the matter. He did not address 
whether the role of Hillary Rodham Clinton was still under investigation, 
even though the grand jury in Little Rock., Ark., that was reviewing 
the matter expired last May. Starr also exonerated Clinton of wrongdoing 
in several other continuing investigations, including the dismissal 
of the White House travel office and the administration's improper 
gathering of 900 FBI files on former Republican officials. Gregory 
Craig, special counsel to the president, criticized Starr's statement, 
saying that ``no new evidence'' was offered by the independent counsel. 
``Finally and belatedly, he cleared the president and the first lady 
with respect to two of his investigations,'' Craig said. ``This should 
have been done many, many months ago, if not years ago. But we're 
grateful to learn of the news today.'' Starr clearly had another, 
overarching motive Thursday. He tried to draw parallels between the 
evasions he accused Clinton and the White House of in the Lewinsky 
matter and the roadblocks that his prosecutors had confronted in trying 
to determine whether there had been an effort to obscure the Clintons' 
involvement in the failed Whitewater land deal and its connection 
to the failed Madison Guaranty Savings and Loan Association. ``The 
pattern of obstruction of justice, false statements and misuse of 
executive authority in the Lewinsky investigation did not occur in 
a vacuum,'' Starr said. As an example, Starr cited the missing billing 
records of Mrs. Clinton's law practice, which his office had subpoenaed 
and ``were finally produced under unusual circumstances.'' They were 
found in the residential quarters of the White House. ``After a thorough 
investigation,'' Starr continued, ``we have found no explanation how 
the billing records got where they were or why they were not discovered 
and produced earlier. It remains a mystery to this day.'' Madison 
was run by the Clintons' Whitewater business partners, James McDougal 
and his wife at the time, Susan. Starr's original mandate had been 
to determine whether money from Madison had been used illegally to 
help business and political figures in Arkansas, including Gov. Jim 
Guy Tucker and Clinton at the time he was governor. Starr invested 
months investigating a $300,000 loan that went to what he called Ms. 
McDougal's ``make-believe company.'' Starr said that $50,000 of that 
loan benefited the Whitewater land deal. Both McDougal and Tucker 
were indicted. But in testifying on videotape as a defense witness 
at their trial in 1996, the president said that he did not know about 
the loan to Ms. McDougal, nor had he discussed it with McDougal or 
another Arkansas businessman, David Hale. The president also said 
that he had never received a loan from Madison. ``This was important 
testimony,'' Starr said today. ``Its truth _ or falsity _ went to 
the core issue of our investigation.'' In May 1996, McDougal, Ms. 
McDougal and Tucker were convicted. While Ms. McDougal was later jailed 
for contempt for refusing to answer Starr's questions about the testimony 
the president had given in her trial, both McDougal and Tucker later 
cooperated with Starr's inquiry, and they accused the President of 
having received a loan from Madison. In one of his first meetings 
with prosecutors, McDougal said that Clinton's trial testimony was 
``at variance with the truth,'' Starr said. It was in late 1997 that 
Starr's prosecutors debated whether this evidence justified the sending 
of an impeachment referral to Congress. But Starr said that they had 
not been absolutely confident in the accounts of Hale, who pleaded 
guilty to charges of conspiring to defraud the Small Business Administration, 
and McDougal. And, he said, they still wanted to hear from two other 
witnesses who could either corroborate or contract their accounts: 
Tucker and Ms. McDougal. For the first time, Starr acknowledged that 
Tucker had little knowledge of the loan to Ms. McDougal's company 
and the president's possible role in it. That leaves Ms. McDougal, 
who is still awaiting a trial by Starr's prosecutors next year in 
Little Rock. But Starr again Thursday angrily repeated a longstanding 
complaint that Clinton ``sided with a convicted felon'' _ Ms. McDougal 
_ in an interview after she had been cited for contempt. In that interview, 
on PBS, the president said there was a lot of evidence to support 
Ms. McDougal's criticisms of Starr's tactics. ``So far as we are aware, 
no sitting president has ever publicly indicated his agreement with 
a convicted felon's stated reason for refusing to obey a Federal court 
order to testify,'' Starr said angrily to committee members. Starr 
also said that his investigation was stymied by the lack of cooperation 
of Webster L. Hubbell, who was indicted by Starr for a third time 
last Friday. Without commenting on the indictment, Starr said that 
Hubbell may have additional information about the Whitewater matter. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>