<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981119.0534 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Kenneth Starr's testimony Thursday had two purposes: to restore his 
once shiny professional reputation and to revive an impeachment inquiry 
that has lost momentum. On his reputation, he probably did himself 
some good. On impeachment there were few signs that he moved anyone. 
Personally, Starr, the independent counsel, had the opportunity to 
redeem the prestige he once enjoyed as a persuasive solicitor general 
with sterling legal credentials. For most of the hearing Thursday, 
Starr went out of his way to speak in lawyerly, measured tones. His 
dignified demeanor, which at times bordered on the pedantic, recalled 
the days when he argued the government's cases before the Supreme 
Court in a cutaway coat. Even in a forceful exchange late Thursday 
evening with David E. Kendall, the president's private lawyer, Starr 
raised his voice only to rebut charges that his office had illegally 
leaked grand jury material or mistreated witnesses. His delivery was 
more vigorous, but his words still rolled out as if they were from 
an appellate brief. This Ken Starr was strikingly at odds with the 
caricature the White House and its allies have drawn of an overzealous, 
sex-obsessed prosecutor. Nor did he seem to fit the description hurled 
at him by Rep. John Conyers of Michigan, the ranking Democrat on the 
Judiciary Committee, in the opening minutes of the hearing. Conyers 
lambasted Starr as the ``federally paid sex policeman spending millions 
of dollars to trap an unfaithful spouse.'' Before the hearing, Starr 
had maintained a subdued silence. ``Second to Monica, he's been the 
unheard voice in all of this,'' said Bradford A. Berenson, a Washington 
lawyer who is acquainted with Starr. Berenson and friends said Starr 
had looked forward to the hearing as a ``liberating'' moment, a chance 
to introduce himself to the public and counter what he viewed as an 
unfair White House campaign to demonize him. Starr's personal chore 
of restoring his professional image was difficult enough, but the 
goal set for him by committee Republicans was even harder. They had 
hoped that his testimony would provide fresh grounds and new energy 
to drive President Clinton from office. In this mission, Starr seems 
to have failed. His testimony offered no new evidence of impeachable 
offenses by Clinton and even exonerated him on issues that some Republicans 
had hoped to pursue, such as the firings of White House travel office 
employees and the misuse of FBI files of government employees. His 
long-awaited testimony lacked the electric impact of star witnesses 
at past congressional hearings. John Dean, Oliver North and Clarence 
Thomas were able to shape the public mood with their testimony. Unlike 
North, who arrived in uniform and talked in macho terms about ``being 
the fall guy'' in the Iran-contra scandal, Starr talked about Nexis 
searches and his ``primary factual investigation.'' There were no 
dramatic phrases, such as Thomas' memorable accusation in his Supreme 
Court confirmation hearing that the Senate was conducting ``a high-tech 
lynching.'' ``Ken doesn't talk in sound bites,'' explained Barbara 
Olson, a friend and former prosecutor. At times, Starr gave rambling 
answers that appeared evasive and made for less than riveting television. 
At other points, he offered a stirring defense, denying any personal 
vendetta against the president. Starr said he would prefer to be back 
in private life, but added, ``My duty is to do my duty.'' Starr did 
try to lay out, as clearly and compellingly as possible, the evidence 
and factual basis for his legal findings against the President. He 
also tried to blunt criticism that his impeachment report on the Monica 
Lewinsky matter, which he sent to Congress on Sept. 9, was too graphic, 
too focused on sex. He was at least partly successful. He spent two 
hours offering a highly detailed account of the evidence his investigation 
has uncovered, shifting the emphasis from sex to lying. In the Paula 
Jones sexual misconduct lawsuit, Starr said his evidence suggested 
that President Clinton had been deliberately evasive in his testimony 
in the lawsuit and before Starr's grand jury last summer. Starr also 
outlined evidence of stonewalling and evasion in other branches of 
his investigation, including the Whitewater matter and purported efforts 
by the President's allies to win the silence of Webster L. Hubbell, 
the former Justice Department official, by helping him get lucrative 
retainers after he was forced to resign in disgrace. Last week, Starr 
indicted Hubbell for a third time, and Henry Hyde, the judiciary committee 
chairman, has indicated that the committee will investigate the Hubbell 
matter further. But the evidence Starr recited did not do much to 
move his case beyond perjury, and even some Republicans on the committee 
seemed unconvinced that the President's unsuccessful citing of executive 
privilege or attorney-client privilege amounted to an abuse of power. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>