<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981119.0378 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Politics took a turn to the usual here Thursday as the governing Liberal 
Democratic Party opted for political expedience and agreed to form 
a coalition government with its archenemy, Ichiro Ozawa, and his Liberal 
Party. The alliance will strengthen the governing party's sway in 
Parliament, mollify its restive hard-liners and give it sure support 
in coming budget debates. ``I am happy that we have agreed to work 
together on various policies with strong cooperation in the parliamentary 
session and on the 1999 budget discussion,'' said Prime Minister Keizo 
Obuchi, who signed the deal with Ozawa after three-and-a-half hours 
of talks Thursday. But the agreement falls short of giving the Liberal 
Democrats a majority in the upper house and may drive a wedge between 
the conservative and liberal wings of the party. There was some concern 
that intra-party bickering might further destabilize the already splintered 
Liberal Democrats and divert their attention at a time when the country 
faces the most severe downturn in the economy since World War II. 
``I think this will simply complicate the political decision-making 
process and waste time,'' said Takeshi Sasaki, a political science 
professor at Tokyo University. The currency market, however, took 
the alliance as a sign that government affairs would move more smoothly. 
The yen gained against the dollar immediately after the alliance was 
announced. For Ozawa, the agreement is a stunning coup. A defector 
from the governing party, he was threatened with political obscurity 
after his second attempt to form an opposition party fell apart in 
December. But he has maneuvered his way back into the spotlight and 
into power. ``Ozawa is a player once again,'' said John Neuffer, a 
senior analyst at the Mitsui Marine Research Center. ``The downside 
is that if you look at other parties that have gotten close to the 
LDP in recent years, they've not ended up in the best shape.'' Naoto 
Kan, leader of the Democratic Party, Japan's largest opposition party, 
declared the alliance a mortal blow to the Liberal Party Ozawa headed. 
``This shows the defeat of the Liberal Party,'' he said. But the Liberals 
had little to lose. Widely expected to lose several seats in the next 
election, the fractious party will now gain at least one Cabinet seat 
after the coming special session of Parliament closes in December, 
and the governing party has agreed to adopt many of its policies, 
although not its proposal to suspend the unpopular national sales 
tax. What the Liberal Democrats win from the coalition, other than 
the promise of Liberal Party support in the session of Parliament 
scheduled to begin Nov. 27, is less obvious. The Liberal Democrats 
have been forced to govern by coalition since Ozawa defected in 1993. 
It will now be able to count on 12 more votes in the upper house _ 
although that will still leave it 11 short of a majority _ and an 
additional 35 votes in the lower house, where it already has a majority 
with 262 seats. Beyond additional troops, the coalition will help 
rein in the governing party's unruly right wing, led by Seiroku Kajiyama 
and Shizuka Kamei, who have created a sort of outspoken internal opposition 
in the party by splitting from their factions after Obuchi became 
prime minister in August. The two have been pushing an alliance with 
Ozawa and Komeito, another opposition party backed by a large lay 
Buddhist sect. The governing party agreed to issue 700 billion yen 
($5.8 billion) worth of shopping coupons to win the cooperation of 
Komeito, which has 24 seats in the upper house. Komeito's younger 
members refuse to approve a full-fledged alliance with the Liberal 
Democrats, but the shopping coupon plan is expected to help win their 
support in Parliament if not at the electoral level. But as the coalition 
embraces the right-wing forces, it pushes away other influential party 
members led by Koichi Kato, the former secretary general of the party; 
Taku Yamasaki, the former chairman of the party's Policy Research 
Council, and Junichiro Koizumi, the former minister for health and 
welfare who ran against Obuchi and Kajiyama for prime minister. Before 
he defected from the party, Ozawa was part of a faction opposed to 
the one Kato belongs to. Kato and his allies evidently fear that Obuchi's 
ascent will mean less power for them at a time when Kato is seeking 
a greater leadership role in the party. Indeed, Thursday night Kato 
questioned whether the party's rank and file would support the deal. 
``They should have done it through partywide discussions,'' he said. 
``It was so abrupt.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>