<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981119.0542 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
While London, Paris and Tokyo are often praised for the quality of 
their public transportation systems, a new report suggests that the 
New York region fares surprisingly well in the efficiency of its trains, 
buses and subways when compared with these cities. The report, based 
on a joint three-year study by groups in the four urban areas, concludes 
that these mass transit systems share many common attributes and problems, 
including highly centralized rail networks, growing business centers 
at their urban cores, huge populations of commuters and severe automobile 
congestion. In some respects, mass transit in the New York region 
compares poorly, particularly in the paucity of service to much of 
its suburban ring, which forces suburban residents to rely on cars, 
according to the report. But for New Yorkers who hold to a common 
view that the largest cities of Europe, particularly Paris and London, 
have model mass transit systems, the findings of the four-city study 
may come as a shock. ``One thing it shows is that New York has made 
a good recovery in the last 30 years in the efficiency of its rail 
and subway systems,'' said Bill Shore, a senior associate with the 
Institute of Public Transportation, a New York City research group 
that carried out the New York component of the study. For instance, 
the New York region's commuter trains, including Metro-North, the 
Long Island Rail Road and New Jersey Transit, were found to be more 
punctual than those in the other metropolitan areas. (New York's subways, 
however, proved less punctual.) All three New York regional commuter 
train systems were found to be punctual more than 90 percent of the 
time, while the regional rail network around London, long lauded as 
an icon of efficiency, registered only 88 percent on the punctuality 
scale. The report, released Thursday in the form of a thick compendium 
of charts, numerical rankings and other forms of comparative analysis, 
was the largest study comparing what are perhaps the world's most 
advanced large cities in terms of mass transit, its authors say. The 
other groups participating in the study were the London Research Centre, 
the Institut d'Amenagement et d'Urbanisme de la Region d'Ile-de-France 
of Paris and the Tokyo Institute for Municipal Research, all of which 
received government or philanthropic grants in their own countries. 
(OPTIONAL TRIM) While providing a broad portrait of the vast transportation 
systems in each metropolitan area and the challenges those regions 
face from urban sprawl, air pollution and other problems, the study 
provides many reminders of the differences in how people commute. 
For instance, more than 500,000 people ride motorcycles into Tokyo 
each day, about 5 percent of its commuting population. But the report 
found that only about 10,000 motorcyclists brave the New York area's 
highways each day, so negligible a number that the report called it 
zero percent of the total. According to the study's authors, far more 
important conclusions reveal a combination of similarities in transit 
patterns and huge problems that must be confronted by each metropolitan 
area. (END OPTIONAL TRIM) Among the comparative findings were that 
New York City subways lagged their foreign counterparts in punctuality, 
with 80 percent of the subways arriving close to their scheduled arrival 
time. By that measure, Tokyo's metro system came out on top, with 
97 percent of its trains on time. The report found a big difference 
among the four regions in the breadth of their mass transit networks. 
While the New York City subway system has far more stations than the 
systems in its foreign counterparts, the report found that its suburban 
rail network had far fewer stations than other cities' networks. Shore 
said his group had concluded that the biggest challenge for the New 
York region was finding ways to lure more suburban residents onto 
trains and other forms of public transportation at a time when there 
is little hope that extensive new suburban rail lines will be built. 
Near-term approaches to the problem, he said, may include providing 
better bus connections and more parking at suburban train stations. 
But Shore said the vast scale of the problem is more likely to require 
changes in land-use planning and the rules governing where housing 
and other forms of suburban development are built. The objective, 
he said, should be to confine development to places already served 
by mass transit, instead of extending the limits of suburban sprawl 
farther from existing rail stations or bus lines. ``The only solution 
appears to be in finding a way to better relate housing and jobs to 
existing public transportation,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>