<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981119.0369 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Chiyoko Tanaka works alone in a cypress forest on the edge of Kyoto. 
She weaves decorative fabrics of linen and ramie, ``grinding'' their 
surfaces by hand with stones, bricks and dirt to achieve a timeworn 
appearance. She has, it would appear, not much in common with the 
high-tech Bridgestone Metalpha Corp., a subsidiary of the tire company, 
which produces _ with the aid of robots _ a stainless steel fabric 
called Alphatex. But Ms. Tanaka meets Metalpha in ``Structure and 
Surface: Contemporary Japanese Textiles'' at the Museum of Modern 
Art. The show, organized by MoMA and the St. Louis Art Museum, salutes 
a long-flourishing Japanese textile industry now reinventing itself, 
in the process combining new techniques and materials with ancestral 
traditions. Displaying some 110 works by 29 artists, designers and 
manufacturers, ``Structure and Surface'' is devoted mostly to developments 
over the last five years. Its range of processes, materials and products 
runs from the slick high-fashion fabrics used by the designer Issey 
Miyake to a new knotless mesh created for commercial fishermen by 
Toray, one of the largest textile producers in the world. The organizers, 
Cara McCarty, curator of decorative arts and design at the St. Louis 
museum, and Matilda McQuaid, associate curator in MoMA's department 
of architecture and design, have divided the textiles into six distinct 
but often overlapping categories: transparent, dyed, reflective, printed, 
sculptured and layered. The most imaginative works are found in the 
sections devoted to sculpturing and layering. Turning surfaces into 
intriguing terrains, the designers of these textiles achieve their 
effects by cratering, eroding, wrinkling, rippling, pleating and puckering. 
Heat plays an important role in sculpturing, with many fabrics literally 
baked into their unique shapes. A striking example is Yuh Okano's 
``Epidermis (Ocean)'' (1994), a yellow-green polyester fabric that 
bristles with protuberances suggesting undersea life. ``Epidermis'' 
got that way by means of urea resin beads wrapped in the polyester, 
which was then dyed and heat set before the beads were removed. One 
of the loveliest handmade items is ``Shawl'' (1995), a mini-pleated 
silk wrap painted in a range of warm to cool colors by Jurgen Lehl 
(a German-born fashion designer who settled in Japan in 1971). Its 
complex process involved twisting the silk threads, basting the pleats, 
then setting them with a final steaming. In fact, pleating is the 
salient sculptural technique, ingeniously accomplished by machine 
as well as hand, and resulting in many different types of corrugated 
surface. The Inoue Pleats Company, which brought pleats to Japan on 
a large scale and, along with Issey Miyake, has been one of their 
biggest promoters worldwide, presents 11 examples of its ripply products. 
Among them is ``Wrinkle P'' (1995), an elegant grayish-white crumple 
of polyester whose random folds were obtained by stuffing the fabric 
into a small container, then heating it in a thermosetting machine. 
As for layering, it's an old Japanese tradition, expressed perhaps 
at its fullest in the development of the kimono. During the Heian 
period (794-1185 A.D.) high-ranking women wore 10 or more layers of 
robes, each of a different cut and color that achieved an overall 
harmony. Today one of the biggest designers of layered, three-dimensional 
fabrics for fashion use is the kimono-loving team of Issey Miyake 
and Makiko Minagawa. Their knockout ``Prism Series'' (1997) of coats 
and dresses combines handwork with an industrial carpet-making technique 
known as needle-punching. Layers of material are webbed into a base 
fabric, on which pieces of other cloth such as polyester chiffon are 
superimposed. In the ``transparency'' section, silk, as you'd expect, 
looms large. There are the gossamer creations of Michiko Uehara, a 
weaver from Okinawa, who uses only natural dyes and the thinnest possible 
yarns in her work, which she describes as ``weaving air.'' A lovely 
example is ``Sagen (Grassy Plains)'' (1997), whose lyrical pale greens 
and yellows suggest not only meadow grass but undersea life. In quite 
a different mode is the equally see-through but far more robust contribution 
of the Sakase Adtech Co. of Fukui, which produces technical textiles. 
``Triaxial Fabric'' (1991), is a screenlike cloth of carbon fiber 
made by interlacing three yarns at angles to each other. It can be 
stretched in all directions with no stress at any one point; the structure 
providing strength rather than the yarn. The triaxial weave was developed 
by NASA in the 1960s for aeronautical use. A similar process called 
ra was used in Japan as far back as the 8th century A.D. There's a 
lot to admire in the ``dyed'' category, whose natural colors and mixes 
are derived mostly from plants _ indigo, mangrove, madder, Chinese 
strawberry and other exotica _ sometimes with extraordinary labor. 
The colors reflect the Japanese love of nature in all its manifestations 
_ sea, sky, earth and vegetation _ but the most ubiquitous is indigo, 
the deep blue associated with Japan since introduction of the plant 
from South China in the 8th century. As Ms. McQuaid tells it in her 
catalog introduction, the art of indigo dying had all but disappeared 
until a Tokyo-born artisan, Hiroyki Shindo, revived it almost singlehandedly. 
His toilsome process involves adding lye, wheat bran, sake, lime and 
a microorganism to dried indigo leaves in ceramic pots. Regular stirring, 
heat and a 10-day fermentation period are part of the technique. Shindo's 
most intense use of the dye is in his ``Shindigo Square Series 92-1'' 
(1992). A hanging of five narrow, rough-surfaced hemp panels holds 
a square at its center, whose light borders quickly segue into a deep 
midnight blue, the result of dipping in the dye as many as 50 times. 
Several arresting textiles by Reiko Sudo in the ``printed'' category 
are stamped with patterns made by found objects. In ``Scrapyard (Nail)'' 
(1994), Ms. Sudo places rusty nails atop a dampened rayon fabric to 
make a conventional two-dimensional pattern. Not to be scanted are 
the textiles in the ``reflective'' category, in which a large role 
is played by polyester slit film, metallicized on one side by a vacuum 
deposit of aluminum. Japan is its biggest producer. A couple of stunning 
entries by Junichi Arai employ this lustrous thread with ingenuity. 
It's not easy to take in at one viewing the full impact of this show, 
which seems ambitious to convey in short takes the entire textile 
output of Japan. One problem is the fiber optic lighting, said to 
enhance the colors and textures of the fabrics while preserving them 
from heat damage. But the low illumination level means you have to 
peer very closely at the work. Not a big problem; whatever you do 
or do not know about textiles, this shows plays forcefully on their 
appeal to your senses. ``Structure and Surface: Contemporary Japanese 
Textiles'' remains at the Museum of Modern Art, 11 W. 53rd St., through 
Jan. 26. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>