<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981119.0407 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
American voters can put any citizen in the presidency. But they cannot 
make him a leader, not the kind a free country needs. They cannot 
make him brave and truthful, and straightforward about the country's 
security needs and dangers. They cannot inject him with the political 
and military wisdom to speak to them about these things lucidly, so 
that together president and people can meet the needs fully and face 
the dangers confidently. Truth _ diplomats tend to raise eyebrows, 
but without it democracies stumble, sometimes fall. In the continuous 
crisis with Iraq, which will determine whether unknowably large numbers 
of people live or go gasping to death, one truth is that the decision 
to attack was not forced on President Clinton only last month, as 
the administration tells us, when Saddam Hussein ordered the U.N. 
weapons inspectors out. Ever since he took office six years ago, Clinton 
had the justification to attack Saddam for concealing his weapons 
of mass destruction, and for harassing inspectors day in, day out. 
Justification became duty at least a year ago. And it became the imperative 
100 days before the planned strike and its cancellation. For 9 of 
the last 12 months, Saddam has imposed restrictions on international 
inspections that made them largely ineffective; the U.S. says so itself. 
The inspection teams were not allowed to make ``challenge'' weapons 
inspections _ suddenly visit places not inspected before. Every day 
Saddam's most powerful and trusted secret detachment moved documents 
and weaponry stockpiles of chemical, biological, missile and nuclear 
weaponry out of sites that had been or might be inspected. Then they 
took over houses, mosques, hospitals, farms, any structure in Iraq 
as new hiding places _ a new national concealment accomplished every 
30 days. In the last 100 days Saddam shut down inspection, and on 
Oct. 31 he again ordered the teams out of the country. This time the 
order led to the U.S. decision for a heavy air strike. I do not know 
whether Saddam was tipped off in time to avoid the strike by announcing 
that inspectors could return. But it would be real strange if he was 
not. He has a lot of friends at the U.N. Occasionally they will vote 
for a resolution Saddam does not like. Then France, Russia, China 
and other friends and beneficiaries pick up their full-time job of 
trying to weaken inspection machinery. That is supposed to result 
in clearing Saddam of hiding weaponry, so that business with Baghdad 
can be resumed. Their foreign offices, delegations and diplomats appointed 
to shadow the inspection teams in Iraq are, shall we say, not out 
of touch with Saddam's apparatus. Secretary-General Kofi Annan has 
made his distaste for the inspectors startlingly obvious. Last February 
he signed a sweetheart deal with Saddam. Saddam threw away the deal 
six months later. Annan never had the courage to say oh what a fool 
I was; it might repair his reputation. Saddam may be smart enough 
now to follow the urgent advice of France, China, Russia and the Annan 
bureaucracy _ don't throw inspectors out again and bring on missiles. 
In a year or so we will kill inspection and speed up the end of sanctions 
so we can do business again. Then Saddam will be free to continue 
his weapons programs _ that need not be said. Clinton never found 
time to make a full, detailed speech on Saddam, what his threat was 
and what Americans should do about it. Almost as an afterthought, 
Clinton says he would like to see the end of the Saddam regime and 
will try to speed the day. Not a word does he say that U.S. forces 
would have to give Iraqi resistance protection from the air and probably 
the ground. That is, unless he plans just to watch, as the U.S. and 
U.N. did a few years ago when Saddam slaughtered resistance fighters 
like desert rats. Eliminating Saddam has always been and remains the 
only way to end his threat of war and terrorism with weapons of hell. 
But if Clinton does not, somehow, develop enough presidential backbone 
and honesty to tell Americans, in enough time to get public support, 
how we will rid the world of Saddam, he will deliver the slivered 
but still alive Iraqi resistance to a desert Bay of Pigs, and America 
with them. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>