<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981119.0040 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Ed Manetta looked over a sea of empty seats at Alumni Hall Wednesday 
afternoon and admitted that he felt more at ease than at any time 
in his three-year tenure as St. John's athletic director. In many 
ways, Manetta has been associated with a flurry of decisions that 
have taken St. John's flagship men's basketball program through a 
series of transitions. The high-profile dismissals of Brian Mahoney 
and Fran Fraschilla; televised Midnight Madness, and signing to wear 
a line of Michael Jordan's athletic wear. There were high-profile 
calls to make as St. John's tried to find its equilibrium after Lou 
Carnesecca's retirement in 1992. As he stood in Alumni Hall on Wednesday, 
before St. John's 73-69 victory over UMass, Manetta said he felt that 
the ship was righted, the sun was finally out and the skies were clear. 
The storm had subsided. ``I don't know that the magic ever left,'' 
he said. ``Just that things get cloudy when you face adversity. Sometimes 
the silver lining gets covered by a dark cloud.'' The magic did leave 
St. John's after Carnesecca retired. There was a wit and comfort level 
that comes with age, and with experience, that his successors could 
not duplicate. Brian Mahoney succeeded Carnesecca and was selected 
as Big East coach of the year that season. Then Mahoney signed two 
prized recruits _ Zendon Hamilton and Felipe Lopez _ but the team 
fell far short of expectations. Despite the award, despite the recruits, 
Mahoney never became comfortable in his role as head coach. Carnesecca's 
shoes were simply too big, the task of proving himself, keeping his 
job and communicating with players was too daunting. Manetta, in his 
first year at St. John's, forced Mahoney to resign and hired Fran 
Fraschilla. Fraschilla, fresh from success at Manhattan College, where 
he had taken two teams to the NCAA tournament, leaped at the opportunity 
to be a Big East coach. But his hunger never subsided and he began 
looking for higher ground before his foundation was set at St. John's. 
Fraschilla was asked to leave after his second season, when he seemed 
to be using St. John's as a springboard to a more high-profile job. 
In Mike Jarvis, whom Manetta hired from George Washington University 
before this season, St. John's finally has a coach with the experience 
and vision to help the program turn the tide. Jarvis admits that he 
has dreams of coaching in the National Basketball Association. But 
he seems to know how his role at St. John's fits in with his master 
plan and is in no rush to move. Jarvis spent 17 years as a high school 
coach, and 13 seasons in two college programs before coming to St. 
John's. Now, for the Red Storm, there are signs of stability. ``He's 
very secure,'' Manetta said. ``He's got life experience. He knows 
how to adjust. He's got flexibility.'' Jarvis's first George Washington 
team had gone 1-29 two seasons before he became head coach. In his 
first season with the Colonials in 1990-91, he took them to the Atlantic 
10 final and the NIT. Jarvis has never had a losing record as a coach. 
He speaks in Buddha-like riddles: He tells them that basketball is 
a business, not a fashion. He tells them ``you have to do a lot of 
things before you can be yourself.'' Ron Artest, one of the Red Storm's 
top players, had a stormy relationship with Fraschilla, and he said 
the difference this season is like day and night. ``We're having fun 
and we're more relaxed,'' he said. ``Last year everyone was scared 
and panicky.'' Wednesday, 48 hours after a rout of North Carolina-Asheville 
in the first round of the Preseason National Invitation Tournament, 
everyone was still talking about Monday's magical moment at Alumni 
Hall: a night when Carnesecca made his first appearance at Alumni 
Hall since he retired six seasons ago. During a pause in Monday's 
game, Mahoney, who was an assistant to Ron Rutledge and Carnesecca 
before he took over as head coach, made his first appearance at Alumni 
Hall since he resigned more than two years ago. As if his presence 
was a sign that it was all right to come back, many former players, 
now in the NBA but not playing during the lockout, also returned to 
share in the opening of the regular season: Jayson Williams, Malik 
Sealy, Lopez. John Calapari, the Nets' head coach, was on hand to 
see his former UMass team. There is an air of stability this season 
at St. John's, but the Red Storm is also learning to live in the new 
era of sports where everyone moves, where nothing is secure. How long 
will Jarvis stay? When someone recently asked Jarvis about his tenure 
at St. John's and his NBA plans, the coach responded with a sagelike 
bluntness. ``In life anything can happen,'' he said. ``And in this 
business, there is no such thing as forever.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>