<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981119.0097 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Jacques Medecin, mayor of Nice from 1966 until 1990, when he fled 
to Uruguay in an unsuccessful attempt to avoid prosecution on corruption 
charges that later landed him in jail for nearly two years, died in 
Uruguay on Nov. 17 after several heart attacks, his family said. He 
was 70. Nice, where the conservative Medecin made casinos, business 
leaders and the tourist industry rich but left municipal coffers nearly 
empty, loved him like a godfather and prepared to lay him out in state 
in the City Hall. The city plans to pay for funeral ceremonies and 
arrange a Mass in Ste. Reparate Cathedral on Saturday, Medecin's successor, 
Jacques Peyrat, announced, and even Medecin's left-wing critics raised 
little objection. ``One day in 1938, I decided I would be the mayor 
of Nice, like my father,'' Medecin wrote in a self-exculpatory book. 
``I was 10 years old.'' Between him and his father, Jean, the Medecins 
ruled Nice for 62 years, as naturally as the Grimaldis just down the 
coast ruled Monaco. Jacquou, as people of Nice called him, had been 
an indifferent student and never got the law degree he studied for, 
soaking up a background in politics at home and as a journalist for 
Paris-Presse and the local daily, Nice-Matin, before picking up the 
reins after his father died in December 1965, in the 37th year of 
his reign. Not yet 38, Jacques succeeded his father as mayor early 
the following year, and as member of Parliament in Paris in 1967. 
In 1973 he consolidated power on the Cote d'Azur by becoming president 
of the General Council of the Alpes-Maritimes region. And for most 
of the next 15 years, there seemed little he could do wrong. The Medecin 
method, as it was called, was to spread public money around, lavishly 
_ a few hundred million francs for a convention hall here, a few hundred 
million for a water-purification plant there, a few hundred million 
more for an arts pavilion in the center of town, not forgetting the 
casinos. It was too much for British author Graham Greene, who lived 
in Nice and denounced the mayor in the early 1980s for supposed ties 
with the local mafia. The Nicois did not seem to care: the economy 
was booming and jobs were plentiful. And people loved the way their 
irreverent, bald and mustachioed mayor could thumb his nose at Charles 
de Gaulle, Georges Pompidou and other bigwigs in faraway Paris, exploiting 
impunity conferred on him by his position as head of an independent 
party his father had founded, Entente Republicaine. Supporting the 
anti-Gaullist Valery Giscard d'Estaing for the French presidency in 
1974, Medecin was briefly rewarded two years later by being named 
a junior government minister for tourism, until Prime Minister Raymond 
Barre summarily ejected him from the post in 1978. Still at the height 
of his power in Nice, he was divorced from his first wife, Claude, 
who had been a model for the Jacques Fath fashion house, and in 1979 
married an American 21 years his junior, Ilene Graham, a 31-year-old 
Southern California beauty whose uncle was Max Factor. In 1981 Medecin's 
nemesis, the Socialist Party, came to power nationally with the election 
of President Francois Mitterrand. Soon government tax inspectors and 
independent investigating magistrates began looking into the mayor's 
methods, while he began to take increasingly long trips to Miami and 
Los Angeles. The prosecutors investigated his ties with a French traffic-signal 
company and found that it had paid many of his campaign expenses. 
They discovered that Nice-Opera, which he had set up to finance the 
municipal theater, had also been sending money to his private bank 
accounts in Panama. And they found that municipal contractors had 
been taking paid advertisements out in the mayor's campaign newspaper, 
Action Nice Cote d'Azur. He was only doing what all other French politicians 
had done for years, the Mayor protested, but investigation followed 
investigation, and muck-raking articles about him piled up in left-leaning 
national newspapers like Le Canard Enchaine. ``In the Nice-Opera affair, 
I am guilty of carelessness,'' he later told another French newspaper, 
Le Figaro. ``I paid certain expenses incurred for the city of Nice 
or for promoting it, without proper documentation. But I would like 
to repeat that the amounts drawn from this account never exceeded 
$24,000.'' From the president of the traffic signal company, he admitted, 
he had received $800,000 over four years. But that was before campaign 
financing laws made such payments illegal, he protested, and more 
than a dozen other politicians had received contributions from the 
same company. Prosecutors paid no attention. In Nice the municipal 
debt continued to rise, eventually reaching $900 million, and on Sept. 
15, 1990, Medecin cracked under the pressure while on a city-paid 
promotional trip to Japan. He would not be returning to Nice, after 
all, he announced after boarding an Air France commercial flight to 
Uruguay instead. ``Never will I accept being photographed with my 
wrists in handcuffs on the courthouse stairs,'' he declared. ``That 
would please my enemies and the left too much.'' His second marriage 
had fallen apart, and in Uruguay, where he thought he would be safe 
from extradition to France, he settled in the beach resort of Punta 
del Este, eventually meeting and marrying Berta Bittar, his third 
wife. She survives him, as do two daughters from his first marriage 
and another daughter from his second. In France in 1992, a court convicted 
him of malfeasance, and prosecutors obtained a court order for his 
arrest in Uruguay, where authorities jailed him in November 1993 while 
they debated sending him back to France. A year later, after Uruguayan 
courts ruled against him, he was flown to France to face further trials 
on the Nice-Opera and traffic-signal cases. Released on appeal in 
September 1995 after being convicted of embezzlement and fraud and 
sentenced to three and a half years in prison, Medecin never went 
back to jail again. In January 1996 the appeals court in Grenoble 
upheld the convictions but sentenced him to time already served, and 
Medecin went back to Uruguay. With about $800,000 _ all from the sale 
of family property in France, he insisted _ he invested in real estate 
near Punta del Este, where he was living happily until last Sunday, 
when he was felled by heart attacks. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>