<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981119.0463 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Opening a bitterly partisan House impeachment hearing, Kenneth Starr 
Thursday mounted a vigorous daylong defense of his office and his 
impeachment report to Congress, and said that perjury is an impeachable 
crime no matter what the subject of the lies. In an appearance that 
began the public phase of the nation's third impeachment inquiry into 
a president, the prosecutor who has come to be detested by the American 
public coolly and in a quiet monotone described himself as a fervent 
believer in the law. Starr spoke for hours in a patient voice that 
had rarely been heard in public, replying at length to questions ranging 
from details of the Monica Lewinsky matter to how the investigation 
had changed his personal life. ``I am not a man of politics,'' Starr 
told the 37 members of the House Judiciary Committee. Instead, he 
described himself as a man with ``unyielding faith in our court system 
_ our system of judicial review, the independence of our judges, our 
jury system, the integrity of the oath and the sanctity, yes, the 
sanctity of the judicial process.'' The day began with a quick display 
of the sometimes rancorous partisanship that has come to characterize 
the ideologically polarized committee presiding over the impeachment 
inquiry into President Clinton. On a party line vote, the Republican-controlled 
committee rejected an attempt by Democrats to give the president's 
lawyers two hours to question Starr, who had been granted two hours 
to deliver his opening statement. ``This is a grave disservice at 
a grave constitutional moment,'' said Rep. William Delahunt, D-Mass., 
who had called for more time for Clinton's lawyers. Rep. Henry Hyde, 
the committee chairman, offered Clinton ``unlimited time'' if he ever 
chose to give his version of events to the committee. The conflicting 
strategies of the two parties _ reflected time and again throughout 
the day _ were underscored almost immediately. ``Do we still have 
a government of laws and not of men?'' asked Hyde, R-Ill., as he opened 
the hearing. ``Does the law apply to some people with force and ferocity 
while the powerful are immune? Do we have one set of laws for the 
officer and another for the enlisted?'' Rep. John Conyers, Jr., the 
ranking Democrat, sought to put Starr himself on trial, accusing him 
of crossing the ``line into obsession'' in his four-year investigation 
of Clinton. ``The idea of a federally paid sex policeman spending 
millions of dollars to trap an unfaithful spouse, or to police civil 
litigation would have been unthinkable prior to the Starr investigation,'' 
the Michigan Democrat said. ``Let there be no mistake, it is now acceptable 
in America to investigate a person's private sexual activity.'' Clinton 
and his wife were both out of the country as the Judiciary Committee 
held the first impeachment hearings against a president since the 
Watergate inquiry of Richard M. Nixon 24 years ago. Starr was the 
first witness called before the committee, although Hyde said Thursday 
there would be others. Across the next two weeks, the Republicans 
also plan to take closed-door depositions from four other figures, 
including Robert Bennett, one of Clinton's lawyers and Bruce Lindsey, 
the deputy White House counsel. After Starr's morning statement, the 
White House said he had not shed light on his investigation. ``He 
offered no new evidence, no new information, and no new explanations 
for his tactics,'' said Gregory Craig, a White House special counsel. 
Starr calmly testified and answered sometimes hostile questions across 
a marathon day that began at 10 a.m. and stretched well into the night. 
He rarely seemed rattled, only once or twice became acerbic, and did 
not raise his voice. He defended himself and his office against accusations 
of prosecutorial overkill and he agreed to provide the committee with 
a list of clients from his former law firm. Starr sought to dispel 
the argument that his case against Clinton concerned the president's 
relationship with Ms. Lewinsky rather than the question of whether 
he lied under oath in the sexual harassment case brought by Paula 
Jones and then lied again before a grand jury. ``Sexual harassment 
cases are often he-said-she said disputes,'' Starr said. ``Evidence 
reflecting the behavior of both parties can be critical _ including 
the defendant's relationships with other employees in the workplace,'' 
he said. ``Such questions can be uncomfortable, but they occur every 
day in courts and law offices across the country. Individuals in these 
cases take an oath to tell the truth, the whole truth and nothing 
but the truth. And no one is entitled to lie under oath simply because 
he or she does not like the questions or because he believes the case 
is frivolous or that it is financially motivated or that it is politically 
motivated.'' Twice during his two-hour morning presentation as he 
mentioned his other investigations including Whitewater, Rep. Sheila 
Jackson-Lee, D.-Texas, interrupted to ask that Starr be limited to 
the Lewinsky matter. She was overruled. When Starr had finished, Abbe 
Lowell, the Democrats' senior investigative counsel, cross-examined 
Starr about his ties to lawyers associated with Ms. Jones and about 
his office's early contacts with both Ms. Lewinsky and with Linda 
Tripp, the woman who set off the year-long investigation by bringing 
prosecutors tape-recordings of her conversations with Ms. Lewinsky. 
Lowell contrasted Starr's report with that of the Watergate prosecutor 
Leon Jaworski who had presented Congress with facts but no conclusions. 
Starr replied that he was the first to submit a presidential impeachment 
report under the independent counsel statute, which he felt required 
him to make judgments. ``This is a tool,'' he said of his report. 
``This is only a tool for you to use as you see fit. But I don't think 
it's fair to criticize my office for not following a pattern that 
was not governed by a statute.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>