<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981119.0537 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial for Friday, Nov. 20: On the 
core question of whether President Clinton's misconduct in office 
merits impeachment, the testimony of Kenneth Starr brought more clarity 
than most Americans could have expected. The independent counsel outlined 
his case that Clinton lied under oath, obstructed justice and tampered 
with witnesses, but he brought the House Judiciary Committee no new 
evidence beyond that offered in his Sept. 9 referral. Now, as then, 
that information provides what Rep. Bill McCollum called ``a compelling 
picture'' of a president failing in his sworn duty to see that the 
law is faithfully executed. But now, as then, the correct conclusion 
is that condemnation through formal congressional censure is the proper 
punishment for Clinton, not impeachment by the full House followed 
by the ultimate constitutional penalty of removal from office by the 
Senate. For some time, our position has been that censure of Clinton 
for lying under oath was the correct remedy unless new evidence emerged. 
The logic of that position proceeds from the political consensus of 
the American people and the scale of the offenses, even if every detail 
of Starr's allegations could be proved. This misconduct did not occur 
in the context of national security or the misuse of key agencies. 
It stemmed from personal weaknesses _ Clinton's compulsive risk-taking, 
his disrespect of the high office and historic residence entrusted 
to him, his habitual mendacity _ that no future chief executive is 
likely to emulate. Therefore Clinton deserves to be punished in a 
way that writes his disgrace into the history books and affirms the 
presidency's subservience to and obligations under the rule of law, 
while at the same time sparing the nation the trauma that removal 
of this weak man would impose on the people and the political system. 
Starr hoped to use his testimony to salvage his legal reputation while 
also proving his case that lying in a sexual harassment suit was in 
and of itself grounds for impeachment. His long opening presentation 
was at once an orderly and useful summation of the evidence to date, 
and a devastating admission that he had no additional evidence that 
would strengthen his case. Those who believe, as this page does, that 
new information was needed to raise Clinton's misconduct to the level 
of impeachment heard none on the Monica Lewinsky matter or on earlier 
scandals. Indeed, Starr testified that he could not prove his suspicions 
about President and Mrs. Clinton on Whitewater and that he found no 
offenses by them on Travelgate and Filegate. This deck-clearing exercise 
was useful, but Starr failed to explain why he could not have settled 
those issues months or even years ago. Starr presented himself as 
bound strictly by the law, yet much of his case against Clinton rambled 
far afield. He listed misleading the American people, lying to the 
Cabinet and White House staff, specious use of privilege claims and 
six refusals to testify before the grand jury as part of the enumerated 
charges. These failings are part of the conduct that makes Clinton 
a slippery and unadmirable president. But they are not legally impeachable 
or even prosecutable. The strongest part of Starr's case focused on 
incidents of presidential lying that unfolded after Dec. 5, 1997, 
when Clinton first learned that his paramour would be a witness in 
the Paula Jones case. On six occasions, starting with his Jan. 17, 
1998, deposition and ending with his Aug. 17 grand jury testimony, 
Clinton testified falsely or lied in public about his relationship 
with Ms. Lewinsky. In addition, between Dec. 5 and his Jan. 17 deposition, 
Clinton took a number of potentially illegal actions that Starr said 
were shown by direct testimony or ``circumstantial evidence.'' In 
Starr's account, the president urged Ms. Lewinsky to swear to a false 
affidavit, sought to tamper with the evidence of his gifts to her, 
coached Betty Currie to tailor her testimony to his, and reached out 
to Vernon Jordan and others to get Ms. Lewinsky a job that would keep 
her silent. Starr said Clinton's actions over this ``eight-month journey'' 
amounted to ``witness-tampering, obstruction of justice and the use 
of presidential authority and power in an effort to conceal the truth 
of the relationship and to delay the investigation.'' That is the 
heart of the impeachment case. For our part, we have never been in 
the school that excuses presidential lying if it concerns private 
conduct. We regard lying under oath for any reason as a serious breach 
of presidential responsibility and agree with Starr that much of this 
inquiry was necessitated by White House stonewalling and deception 
on suspect events that started with Whitewater. But we still do not 
see impeachment as the appropriate legal response. That is partly 
for the reasons of legal scale outlined above, and more importantly 
for the final judgment that has now developed in the public and the 
Congress. Even diehard congressional Democrats like Rep. Barney Frank 
want Clinton to be punished. But a substantial majority of the American 
people would not support impeachment or removal on the existing facts, 
and Starr's bottom line Thursday was that he has no more to offer. 
Starr has dark and reasonable suspicions about, say, jobs for silence, 
but he cannot prove them. Those parts that he can prove, such as Clinton's 
blatant lying under oath about sex, will not be supported as grounds 
for impeachment by a majority of the House, even though it is controlled 
by the Republicans. Starr handled himself better than Democrats had 
hoped in responding to charges of collusion with the Jones lawyers, 
the bludgeoning of witnesses and ideological obsessiveness. But serious 
questions remain about his prosecutorial conduct, including his handling 
of Linda Tripp and her tapes. The Republicans, meanwhile, have an 
acute problem. They could probably clear an impeachment recommendation 
on a party-line vote in the Judiciary Committee. But that vote would 
damage their party in the next election and displease their own designated 
speaker, Robert Livingston. Most important, it would not be warranted 
on the evidence presented by Starr. As for the final resolution of 
these matters, the mess does not look so large Friday as it did Thursday. 
Starr's reputation for legal acuity and balanced judgment has been 
seriously damaged. Clinton is probably much nearer the severe censure 
that he deserves for betraying the rule of law. And if the Democrats 
can realize that events have tilted their way and if chairman Henry 
Hyde can keep a lid on his Republican colleagues, the Judiciary Committee 
may be lurching toward a conclusion of an episode that brought down 
a speaker and permanently blotted the president's record. The smart 
parliamentary move and the best outcome for the country would be for 
a senior Republican and a senior Democrat on the Judiciary Committee 
to offer a joint motion recommending a censure resolution to the full 
House. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>