<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981119.0350 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
My wife doesn't stroke my ego the way she did before we were married. 
I told her I was going to play ultimate Frisbee, for the first time 
since college 10 years ago. She said, ``Wait, I wanna buy more life 
insurance first.'' Then she felt bad and offered to help me find my 
moldy old cleats, which hadn't been worn in more than a decade. ``I 
don't need cleats,'' I said. ``This is a mellow game. They even said 
beginners are welcome.'' Fran looked at me with what I'm pretty sure 
was pity and told me to drink plenty of water. Two hours later, I'm 
in Prospect Park in Brooklyn. I'm not quite wheezing yet but my legs 
feel like lead and my man is running away from me with ease. He crosses 
into the end zone and catches the disk with the relaxed air of Michael 
Jordan shooting over, say, a boiled chicken. This guy I'm failing 
to guard is named John, I think. And I'm not sure, but there may be 
two Johns here. Either that or all this panting is making me see double. 
Ultimate is sometimes called Frisbee football, but it's really more 
like soccer, especially from a cardiovascular perspective. It was 
invented by some New Jersey high-school students in 1968 and went 
on to spread through the country and to some extent through the world. 
Official games have seven players on each side on a field that is 
40 by 70 yards, not counting two end zones that are each 25 yards 
deep. The teams line up on opposite goal lines and one throws off 
to the other, as with the kickoff in football. But there the similarity 
to that game ends. Action is continuous. You can't run while holding 
the Frisbee, but you do run around like crazy trying to get open so 
your teammate can throw it to you. If you catch a pass, you stop short, 
pivot on your heel and pass the Frisbee in turn to another player, 
one who is preferably further up the field. Drop the disk (slang for 
Frisbee) or throw an interception and the game continues in reverse: 
while the other team goes on the attack you switch to defense. To 
score, a team has to pass the Frisbee across the goal line. Then finally 
play stops, and the teams return to opposite ends of the field to 
start another point. This is usually a good time for the paramedics 
to come in and tidy up the likes of me. Like other team athletes, 
ultimate players scream. In Prospect Park, one guy is shouting: ``Stack! 
Stack! Stack!'' Then, it's: ``Force home! Force is home!'' and other 
jargon I don't understand. But when my side is on offense, I cut straight 
at the defender, pivot and run full speed back at my teammate holding 
the disk. He gets off a pass and I snag it. Someone calls, ``Good 
cut!'' My defender is a few inches from me, shouting the stall count: 
``Stall one! Stall two! Stall three!'' If I don't get a pass off by 
the time he reaches 10, the Frisbee turns over. I fake right, pass 
left and bury the disk in the grass. ``Don't air bounce!'' someone 
screams. I was trying to throw under the arm of the defender and then 
make the disk curve sharply up into the hands of my teammate. It used 
to work in college. Back then, in the days when my friends and I ruled 
intramural ultimate at our Midwest university. Out on the meadow in 
front of the old library, we'd spend afternoons tossing the disk around. 
It was translucent, and it traced long arcs in the sky, pure as mathematics, 
or blistering straight lines. No football or javelin ever had the 
beauty in flight of a 175-gram ultimate Frisbee. There were a lot 
of ponytail and earring wearers, late sleepers and guitar players 
in that group. On game day we'd show up late, warm up with cigarettes 
and maybe a beer, and win. And we took pleasure in beating the likes 
of the football fraternity. That team would arrive wearing identical 
white T-shirts and prepare with lock-step calisthenics. It was skill 
over strength, physics over physicality, the triumph of the soul over 
mere substance. But the fit inherit the world. In Prospect Park, my 
head feels as heavy as my legs and I've retreated to the grass under 
a shade tree to drink water and watch the game. This is a pretty spot. 
The field is called the Nethermead, and it's a short walk from the 
Third Street entrance on Prospect Park West. The lawn is thick and 
trees are scattered idyllically around the edges. If I do go back 
in the game and the worst does occur, this might do nicely as my final 
resting place. After a couple of hours about 30 players have shown 
up. The game has been going on every Saturday morning, rain, shine 
or snow, for years. They even played in the big blizzard of 1996, 
says Scott Bolden, who is not only tireless on the field but also 
has a sort of world-culture cool going on. He's wearing a striped 
soccerlike jersey, green shorts and wraparound sunglasses. While this 
is a pickup game _ beginners welcome and all that _ he explains to 
me that many of these players also compete on club teams. Competitive 
ultimate is governed by a somewhat anarchic group called the Ultimate 
Players Association. There are men's and women's divisions, with a 
recently begun coed division. College and club leagues are separate; 
the clubs are better. There's no professional play in ultimate and 
neither sponsorships nor any officiating. Just a lot of players who 
can't kick the habit. This is what I love about the game: its classic 
sporting attitude. Baseball was maybe this cool in the 1880s. Sean 
Castellino, chatting on the sidelines, tells me that a couple of Prospect 
Park regulars have been on national championship teams. His own club, 
F Train, is a ``scrub Brooklyn team,'' he says. I saw the team earlier 
in the day practicing on another field. It's a hefty notch below New 
York's best team, the name of which seems to morph from year to year. 
Right now, it's called the Westchester Summer League All-Stars. I 
go back into the game. The problem with my regular have-another-doughnut 
conditioning program is that I can really only play one point before 
I get too tired to run very hard. After that, I resort to a lazy sort 
of ultimate-playing defense off my man, mainly staying far from the 
disk on offense. I retreat to the sidelines again after three points. 
On the other end of the spectrum is Irina Konvickova, who plays hard 
for 90 straight minutes, it seems to me, before reluctantly taking 
a break and letting someone else go in for her. A native of what is 
now the Czech Republic, she hadn't played the game before moving to 
the United States. The sport was played only in Prague and she had 
spent her time competing at the national level in judo. Now, at 28, 
she has been playing three years. She happens to be the only woman 
playing on the field today. She lives in Manhattan and used to play 
at a long-running pickup game in Central Park, but gave it up in favor 
of the games at Prospect Park. She says she finds the level of play 
lower in Central Park, and because more people would show up she didn't 
get to play as much. ``I don't like to sit down,'' she says. ``I like 
to play the whole time.'' A lower level of play? Less time on the 
field? I'm there. The next afternoon, Sunday, I'm in Central Park 
on a field aptly called the Dust Bowl, on the Fifth Avenue side just 
north of 97th Street. So far, the regeneration of the lawn in Central 
Park has missed this spot. Instead of being the worst player on the 
field here I'm just in the bottom 30 percent. Enough players have 
shown up to make three six-person teams. It works like the pool table 
at a bar: you win, you keep the field, except that one team never 
plays more than two games in a row. I play better than I did in Prospect 
Park. I get in on a couple of plays on offense. And on defense, I 
manage to stay close enough to the player I'm guarding to preserve 
my dignity. Once I even jump over him in the end zone to swat away 
the Frisbee and prevent a score. There's some question as to whether 
the play is broken up by me or some low-hanging branches, but heck, 
we get the disk. For me, Central Park will do nicely for now. Still, 
there's got to be a game out there where I can excel. If not, I'm 
going to start my own pickup game. Maybe I'll recruit my daughter's 
friends. They're all in nursery school and some of them are really 
short. It's a week after Central Park and I'm checking out a higher 
level of play, but this time there's not a chance I'll get in a game. 
I've come to the regional club championships of the Ultimate Players 
Association held at the State University College at Purchase, N.Y. 
The Westchester All-Stars are playing today; eventually the team will 
place fourth nationally. So is D.O.G. (for Death or Glory), the Boston 
team that has won the national championship for four years running, 
and will go on to do it again this year. They rose to the pinnacle 
of the game after the breakup of a New York dynasty team, New York, 
New York, which had won five years in a row. Lady Godiva, the best 
women's team in the region and the eventual winner at the nationals, 
is here, too, and steamrollering the competition. A lot of players 
and some spectators have come to Purchase. A lot of dogs are running 
around, too, chasing Frisbees and one another. I sort of feel as if 
I'm at a Grateful Dead concert: the mood is welcoming and unpretentious. 
This makes sense because a critical part of ultimate is the spirit 
of the game. Players make their own calls, and they do it honestly. 
Picks and body contact are not only illegal but also rare and genuinely 
accidental. If these guys had played us in college, they would have 
won easily. Yet no matter how loud the players scream, how hard they 
train or how often they make bruising diving catches it's still recognizably 
the same game I played back on the meadow all those years ago. In 
those days, it seemed as if grace was at my fingertips. I launched 
the disk into space, and there it was: glory. Out on the field in 
Purchase someone from D.O.G. throws a long bomb into the end zone 
and the players sprint toward it. On the sidelines, we all watch as 
the disk floats for long seconds against the sky. It's beautiful. 
WHERE THE DISKS SAIL HIGH IN THE AIR c.1998 N.Y. Times News Service 
Official ultimate Frisbee games have seven players on a side, but 
you can play with fewer. Simply find a field, put out some backpacks 
to mark the corners and you're set. In addition to the pickup games 
in Prospect Park in Brooklyn and in Central Park, there are regular 
games in Eisenhower Park in East Meadow, N.Y.; Brookdale Park in Montclair, 
N.J.; Van Cortlandt Park in the Bronx, and at other locations. Information 
on ultimate Frisbee competition and pickup games, and for the official 
rules is offered on the Web site of the Ultimate Players Association 
at www.ultimate.org and by telephone: (800) 872-4384. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>