<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981119.0075 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This city appears to use more pesticides to kill its rats, roaches 
and other urban pests than the state's major agricultural counties 
use to protect their apples, corn and potatoes from bores and bugs, 
according to a report issued Wednesday by two environmental organizations. 
After examining data collected by the state, the New York Public Interest 
Research Group and Environmental Advocates found that Manhattan ranks 
first in the state in terms of the amount of liquid pesticides used, 
and Brooklyn leads in terms of solid pesticides. ``Enormous amounts 
of pesticides are being used in New York City,'' said Audrey Thier, 
pesticide director for Environmental Advocates. ``More than 90 percent 
of the pesticides are neurotoxic insecticides, which pose a particular 
risk for infants and young children whose immature nervous systems 
are vulnerable to permanent damage.'' The conclusions are based on 
an analysis of data collected by the state in 1997 under a new reporting 
law enacted the year before. The law requires applicators of pesticides 
_ including insecticides, herbicides, rodenticides and fungicides 
_ to report all their applications by ZIP code. Sellers of pesticides 
to farmers had similar requirements. The industry trade group, the 
New York State Professional Applicators Coalition, along with individual 
exterminators and the state itself immediately took issue with the 
report, saying it was fallacious to draw broad conclusions on one 
year's data. ``The people who run the program say it's way too early 
to draw these kind of conclusions,'' said Gary Sheffer, a spokesman 
for the state Environmental Conservation Department, which conducts 
the pesticide reporting program. ``The information will be a lot more 
useful over the next few years.'' But the study's authors defended 
the report, and Ms. Thier of Environmental Advocates said the analysis 
carried the state's raw numbers a step further by breaking down pesticides 
to their active ingredients. For instance, the report found that by 
far the most commonly used active ingredient was chlorpyrifos, which 
is contained in Dursban, the bug-killing product used the most in 
the city. It can cause humans to suffer headaches, fatigue and depression. 
A 1997 report by the federal Environmental Protection Agency termed 
it ``one of the leading causes of acute insecticide poisoning in the 
United States.'' The groups advised takinG a number of steps to better 
protect the public from dangerous pesticides. These include banning 
the most risky pesticides, developing new nontoxic alternatives and 
imposing a new tax on pesticide sales to finance programs to reduce 
pesticide use. Exterminators in the city countered that they were 
performing a critical function and doing it with a carefulness unimaginable 
a decade or two ago. Gil Bloom, the third-generation owner of Standard 
Exterminating Co. in Queens, said his employees now just use a gallon 
or two of herbicide to kill pests in 30 apartments, perhaps a fifth 
what they would have used a decade ago. He also uses boric acid as 
a pesticide base, one of the nontoxic alternatives recommended by 
the environmental groups. Walter Schroeder, executive director of 
the State Professional Applicators Coalition, said the state's numbers 
might be questionable because a number of exterminators in the city 
were confused and gave the state the amount of diluted pesticide, 
instead of the pure amount as requested. He said the state reporting 
rules were issued at the last minute, which added to the confusion. 
``It's not conceivable that Manhattan and Brooklyn could be using 
more than the upstate area,'' he said. Schroeder faulted the Public 
Interest Research Group, which put out the report, for its eagerness 
to ``leap on'' state data that he said must be regarded as preliminary 
at best. He said the damage caused by pests was a much greater problem 
than the judicious use of pesticides, and cited his own exterminating 
career. ``I've been in circumstances where I've cried,'' he said. 
``I've seen cockroaches in a crib.'' Even Dr. Marion Moss, an opponent 
of pesticides who is director of the Pesticide Education Center in 
San Francisco, had trouble believing that city pesticide use dwarfed 
that in rural New York. In a telephone interview, she said agricultural 
use might be understated because the final user is not required to 
report its use, something that the industry has battled as an intrusion 
on privacy. She said that in the United States as a whole more than 
70 percent of pesticide use was agricultural. But she agreed with 
the environmentalists' finding that pesticides were an enormous problem 
in buildings in New York City, where she lived in three apartments 
that were roach-infested. She said she banished them with traps, nontoxic 
poisons and scrupulous housecleaning. ``You don't have to use neurotoxic 
chemicals to kill cockroaches,'' she said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>