<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981119.0529 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The National Basketball Association's labor dispute entered its 143rd 
day Friday. While the league and the players union have broken their 
two-week stalemate and will meet in Manhattan Friday for a bargaining 
session, more than 120 games have already been lost. The earliest 
the season can start is the third week of December. Players' salary 
losses will soon top $300 million, and the owners' losses, through 
gate revenue and local television rights alone, are in the tens of 
millions of dollars. But if you ever wonder why Patrick Ewing is spending 
more time on his cellular phone outside a law office than on the court 
at Madison Square Garden, here is a basic, question-and-answer session 
about what they are fighting for and why. Q. Is the season really 
in jeopardy? A. Perhaps surprisingly to both sides, it actually is. 
Because a month of preparation is needed for training camp and a free-agent 
signing period, the earliest the season could start if a deal was 
struck by Monday is Dec. 22. That would leave each team with fewer 
than 60 regular-season games. If an agreement is not reached by the 
second week of December, the league would be toying with less than 
a 50-game season _ a prospect that could force the owners to declare 
the season lost. Q. What's really holding up the start of the season? 
Money? A. Yes. Money, money, money. The NBA last season took in roughly 
$2 billion in revenue, including everything from television broadcasting 
rights to gate receipts to the sale of merchandise. When you add up 
the salaries paid to players, from Michael Jordan's $33 million to 
Rex Chapman's $272,500, the league's players reaped 57.1 percent of 
that $2 billion. The owners, some of whom are claiming economic hardship 
because of the salaries, want a bigger take of the $2 billion. In 
simplest terms, the lockout continues because the two sides cannot 
agree on what is a fair split. Q. Everyone is saying no one is getting 
anywhere in these negotiations. Has there been progress? A. Actually, 
there has been significant movement on both sides toward managing 
the growth of salaries. Still, each side has a preferred way of achieving 
that end. The players have proposed taxing teams that sign players 
to the most lucrative contracts. The taxes would then be distributed 
to teams around the league that are struggling financially. Right 
now, the players are insisting that the tax apply only to players 
making more than $15 million a year. The owners, saying that such 
a tax would apply only to a handful of players, have laid out a complicated 
plan for imposing specific limits on salaries. They want to hold even 
the league's best players to salaries of between roughly $8 million 
and $12 million. Teams who currently have players earning more than 
the $12 million would be allowed to continuing paying those players 
at those rates until they retired. Both sides have also agreed that 
if either or both of their preferred plans fail to sufficiently contain 
salary growth, they would try another plan. Under that scheme, a certain 
percentage of all player salaries would be put aside at the beginning 
of the season. If by the end of the season total salaries had made 
up too big a slice of the NBA's revenues, the money that had been 
initially set aside would be returned to the owners. Major disagreement 
still exists on when such a payback mechanism would be triggered and 
how much money would ultimately be given back to the owners. The players 
do not want it to be triggered until their salaries have reached 60 
percent of overall revenues; the owners want the triggering figure 
to be 50 percent of revenues. Q. Is that the only money question? 
A. No. While both sides agree there is a need to reduce the gap between 
the money paid to the league's superstars and the money paid to its 
role players and journeymen, they each have different ideas for remedying 
the problem. Right now, the league's minimum salary is $272,500. The 
owners want to set the baseline salary at $250,000, with provisions 
for it to increase during the course of the bargaining agreement. 
In the third year of the agreement, the minimum salary would be $350,000 
for a player with less than six years' experience and would increase 
by $50,000 for each additional year of experience. A player with 10 
years of experience _ say Tyrone Corbin, who earned the $272,500 minimum 
last season for Atlanta _ could not be paid less than $1 million. 
The players want substantially more _ a $500,000 minimum salary, plus 
$100,000 for each additional year of experience above five. They also 
want to alter another special provision that exists in the league. 
Currently, a team can, no more than once every two years, exceed the 
salary cap in order to sign one player. That player _ Rick Fox was 
signed by the Lakers last year under this provision _ cannot earn 
more than $1 million. The players want that figure increased to whatever 
was the average salary paid to players the previous season. Last season 
the average salary was $2.6 million. The owners are proposing a less 
dramatic increase for such players. Q. That's all, right? A. Not quite. 
The owners and players are also trying to come to an agreement on 
how to treat the salaries paid to rookies and younger players. Both 
are concerned about problems made clear in Minnesota's dealings with 
Kevin Garnett, the 21-year-old forward who last season signed a $126 
million deal after just his second season. As well, Denver last season 
found itself forced to trade Antonio McDyess because it could not 
afford to meet his coming salary demands. McDyess had played only 
two full seasons for the Nuggets. The owners, who are unhappy with 
the fact that players can now gain unrestricted free agency after 
only three years in the league, have proposed a plan under which a 
team would be better able to hang on to a young, promising player 
for as long as five years. Teams would retain an option to keep a 
player for a fourth year or let him go, as well as be able to match 
any offer from another team going into the player's fifth year. For 
their part, the players have made a concession. They have told the 
owners they would agree to one of two options: the team would either 
have to commit to keeping a player for a guaranteed fourth year at 
a set salary or simply be allowed to match any offer from another 
team after the player's third year. Q. How long a deal is being discussed 
here? And is there anything to say that another season, sometime soon, 
will not be compromised by further labor disputes? A. The players 
have proposed a deal that would last five years, while the owners 
have proposed a plan that would last six years with an option for 
a seventh year. Neither side has discussed the inclusion of an escape 
clause that would allow for an early revisiting of the agreement, 
and so any deal should mean at least five years of labor peace. Q. 
Who is likely to crack, and why? A. The obvious answer would be the 
players, who will lose an estimated $1.1 billion in salaries if the 
season is killed. Tim Legler, the Washington Wizards guard, became 
the first player to publicly criticize the union, on Thursday in The 
Washington Post. He said the only interests being served were those 
of the most high-salaried superstars. While Legler backed off his 
comments Thursday and said that the owners were to blame for the labor 
problems, there is a feeling of frustration building among the players. 
But much of that frustration is targeted at the owners. So far, in 
fact, the union appears to have held the players in line. Knowing 
many of the league's owners made their money outside of the NBA, players 
have little compassion for teams who claim to have finished in the 
red last season. They do not care that an apathetic public has generalized 
them as greedy. The owners appear just as firm. Four years after a 
World Series was lost to labor strife, most owners believe Major League 
Baseball is destroying itself economically. Throw in the National 
Hockey League's Pittsburgh Penguins recently filing for bankruptcy, 
and some of the worst fears are beginning to surface for small-market 
teams. In spite of the NBA's economic boom, which has produced new 
arenas and unprecedented revenue, the owners feel like befuddled executives 
at MGM Studios in the 1950s; the stars, they feel, are slowly killing 
their cash cow. Q. If they crunch numbers and shake hands Friday, 
why can't they start the season Saturday? A. It's going to take about 
a month to start playing games for several reasons. One, a free-agent 
signing period of about three weeks is needed to fill out rosters. 
The Bulls, for example, have only four players under contract. Two, 
most of these guys are in decent shape but clearly not in NBA-game 
shape. They need an abbreviated training camp and probably at least 
one exhibition game to get their timing back. Three, the league has 
had to give up arena dates because of the uncertainty of the negotiations. 
Finally, lawyers on both sides probably need a week to reduce an agreement 
in principle to writing. And Commissioner David Stern has no intention 
of opening up camp until that happens. Q. Will Michael Jordan play, 
and why? A. Yes, maybe just to get the last word in on Abe Pollin. 
The owner of the Wizards and Jordan clashed behind closed doors several 
weeks ago. If nothing else, Jordan probably wants to detonate for 
60 points against Pollin's team. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>