<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981119.0253 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
``Greetings, from one small and blue'' began the e-mail. One of my 
college friends from California has just gotten online, and a real 
luxury for us is the ability to compare parenting notes every few 
days instead of in scattered phone calls. We've exchanged fears about 
overindulgence, and overindulged our fears. We've talked about how 
expectations of being a mom and wife don't always mesh with reality, 
and how the reality of being a mom and wife often overshadows all 
else, even ourselves. Both of us being only children, we've watched 
as our two offspring navigated sibling rivalry and tried to figure 
out where to step in. She stayed at home with her oldest, who is now 
4, and devoted herself to his care and development. I worked full-time, 
sometimes putting in 60-hour weeks during my son's toddlerhood. We 
both had reasons for our choices, and were careful not to judge the 
other. But there were definitely danger zones in our conversations 
during these years that we stepped around, so as not to fall through. 
Now, both working part-time and having added another baby to the mix, 
we're finding common ground a lot more frequently. And with the convenience 
of e-mail, we can traverse some of that territory together. One of 
the luxuries of our friendship ... one I truly don't deserve ... is 
that she lets me write about her. Whereas most of my friends have 
disclaimers (``What I'm about to tell you is NOT to show up in the 
newspaper, by the way'') Kris has always told me that her life is 
fair game. ``Write about all of it,'' she says. ``That's what writers 
do, isn't it?'' She has been included in several of my columns, daring 
to let me expose her fears and joys and eccentricities. And so, my 
e-mail greeting from one small and blue shall be revealed. Kris, her 
husband, and their oldest son are going to play therapy to try to 
figure out why Dylan has so many temper tantrums (I have changed her 
husband's and son's names, for their privacy.) ``Today was a play 
therapy day. I have not kept a journal in years, but I am starting 
to as of tonight, just to document this whole process. Dylan as a 
little mirror is holding up a reflection of our life that is so alien 
to me. Last week (session one) was just Bill and I and the therapist 
where we spent about two hours describing the situation, etc ... pretty 
generic counseling stuff. ``Today (session two) was just Dylan and 
the therapist playing in the structured playroom for an hour. I waited 
in the waiting room and read magazines while Bill stayed home with 
the baby. I heard lots of laughter come from the room at different 
times, but otherwise I have no idea what they did. When Dylan came 
out an hour later, he was carrying a picture he had drawn. The therapist 
explained that it was for her file, that we couldn't keep it, but 
he wanted to show it to me. On the picture were three big giant smiling 
people with names written underneath them _ Daddy, Dylan, Grandma. 
(I've had counseling classes _ they were in the center of the page, 
large and powerful ... there was some self-esteem going on ... this 
is good right?) But in between Dylan and Daddy, at about one-fourth 
the size of everyone else, with a frown so large it took up half of 
her face AND the only one who was any color at all _ dark blue _ here 
was MOMMY!! I am embarrassed to tell you how much my heart was broken 
by this drawing. I smiled and said that it was nice and thanked the 
therapist and scheduled next week's appointment and walked to the 
car chatting with Dylan (all the while feeling like I was going to 
burst into tears any minute. When I got home and Max was out of view, 
I did burst into tears and could not stop crying. ``Bill, trying to 
comfort me, told me it was silly to let the drawing of a 4-year old 
upset me so ... that it doesn't mean anything. (sure _ he was big 
and white and powerful ... he can talk like that.) I don't know exactly 
what bothered me so. This whole process is emotional. Another thing 
that struck me when I looked at his picture is that this is how I 
see myself, overwhelmed by the constant demands of Dylan, Bill and 
the baby, and not so happy about it. Anyway, I never dreamed that 
seeking help for managing tantrums would lead to such drama. We have 
signed up for an eight-week session ... with next week being Max and 
me playing in the playroom with the therapist. I'm afraid I will do 
everything wrong, and wish I could send the great, powerful Bill instead.'' 
I wrote Kristin back about the time Adam told me he loved his daddy 
differently than he did me, and I said, well, of course, honey, everyone 
loves everyone else differently, and he said, no, I mean, I love daddy 
MORE, and I cried all night with Jim telling ME that it was silly 
to let the passing thoughts of a 4-year-old upset me so. But it doesn't 
feel silly, at the time. I also believe it's the fate of moms, for 
the most part, to be the disciplinarians, the ones who say no all 
the time, the ones who wear their emotions close to the surface, and 
the ones who are not to be mistaken for the Great and Powerful Wizard 
of Oz, the persona daddies get to inhabit. Dylan, I think, isn't showing 
disdain for Kris as much as sympathy: `Hey, mom, I know you have to 
do a lot and put up with a lot and sometimes it makes you unhappy.'' 
And yet, what wouldn't we all give to be the bright, smiling parent 
at the top of the page, paying no attention to the small, uncertain 
parent behind the curtain. (Mary J. Loftus is a New York Times Regional 
Newspapers feature writer. She has master's and specialist degrees 
in marriage and family counseling.) 
</TEXT>
</DOC>