<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981119.0368 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Modern art in the West is inconceivable without the salutatory effects 
of outside influences. African sculpture was basic to the invention 
of Cubism; the woodcuts of Japanese printmakers like Hiroshige, Utamaro 
and Hokusai inspired numerous Impressionists and Post-Impressionists, 
most famously van Gogh. Japanese prints were part of a veritable flash 
fire of Japanese influence that raced through the United States and 
Europe after trade with the West began in the 1860s. Japanese culture 
did not distinguish between art and craft, which guaranteed that numerous 
visual activities felt its heat: painting, printmaking, architecture, 
furniture design, ceramics, silver and metalwork as well as textiles 
and fashion. And the heat persisted from one generation to another: 
for example, from the Esthetic Movement to the Arts and Crafts Movement 
and the architecture of Frank Lloyd Wright. Not surprisingly, Japonism, 
as these cross-fertilizations came to be called, have become a significant 
art historical subject, the focus of numerous books and exhibitions. 
``Japonism in Fashion: Japan Dresses the West,'' at the Brooklyn Museum 
of Art, is the latest such exhibition, and the first to isolate the 
effects of Japanese textiles and garments on European and American 
fashion. This beautiful show, which contains nearly 80 garments and 
spans 120 years, is a collaboration of two world-class textile collections, 
Brooklyn's, which began about 100 years ago, and the Kyoto Costume 
Institute in Japan. Founded in 1978 by Wacoal, a Japanese lingerie 
manufacturer, the institute in Kyoto has amassed substantial holdings 
in European garments from the 18th and 19th centuries, Japanese-influenced 
Western clothes and the work of contemporary Japanese designers. (For 
example, Rei Kawakubo, the force behind Comme des Garcons, has recently 
donated her archive, which includes more than 2,000 garments.) The 
exhibition begins with French and English evening gowns and visiting 
capes and quilted silk dressing gowns made in Japan for export, all 
dating from the last three decades of the 19th century. It ends with 
the Japanese invasion that began in the early 1980s when designers 
like Yohji Yamamoto, Issey Miyake and Ms. Kawakubo took the international 
fashion stage by storm, fusing Eastern and Western traditions, rethinking 
structure, fabric and finish, while transforming the worlds of fashion 
and art into armies of women and men in black. (Mysteriously, the 
final display in the exhibition is ``Draped Female Sculpture,'' a 
wire-mesh sculpture designed by Yamamoto, which indicates that he 
should stick to the art of fashion.) In between are clothes by French 
designers like Paul Poiret and Madeleine Vionnet, whose unstructured 
streamlined garments fomented revolutions of their own in the 1920s, 
and kimono-style coats and dresses from the 1950s and '60s by the 
American designers Bonnie Cashin and Rudi Gernreich. As with many 
exhibitions of Japonism, this one has the feeling of an esthetic love 
affair, of one culture becoming infatuated with and being happily 
seduced by another. Clearly, the Japanese penchant for refinement 
and exquisite craft dovetailed perfectly with the tastes and needs 
of designers making one-of-a-kind dresses for upper-class women. It's 
a romance of several phases. In the beginning it was mostly about 
looks, about surface, primarily the lavishly embroidered silks used 
in the most sumptuous and formal of Japanese kimonos and obis (the 
chunky sashes, often involving trains, that held kimonos closed). 
The two evening gowns in the show's stunning opening display are made 
from such fabrics, cream-colored silks densely embroidered with floral 
and stream motifs in light, hot palettes dominated by orange and gold. 
They flank an actual kimono (from the Philadelphia Museum of Art) 
made from nearly identical fabric. The garment's simple lines enable 
the full glory of the embroidered silk to assert itself. Especially 
when hanging flat on the wall, it has the presence of a painting or 
screen, and it reflects a reverence for crafted objects rarely equaled 
in the West. Of course, with embroidery comes motifs: a range of chrysanthemums, 
butterflies, cherry blossoms, clouds and peacock feathers that reflect 
the Japanese love and ingenious use of natural forms. In the exhibition, 
these designs and patterns become increasingly sophisticated and abstract 
as time passes. One example is a silk tulle evening dress from 1919 
(attributed to Worth) that is covered with exquisite glass paillete 
embroidery organized in ``crest motifs,'' according to the label. 
But what makes the dress so striking is a background pattern that 
suggests raked sand interrupted by wandering streams, or rocks, as 
in a Japanese garden, or a Japanese screen. Nearby, a shiftlike evening 
dress from 1924 by Vionnet is even more subtle: its interlocking blocks 
of silver and gold-colored lame resemble the squares of gold and silver 
leaf often found on screens. This last garment suggests a deepening 
romance: the love of simplicity that balances out the Japanese penchant 
for decorative excess begins to hold sway, altering the infrastructure 
of Western clothing. Intimations of kimonos and obis work their way 
through the garments in the central part of the show, which includes 
the designs of Vionnet, Cashin and Gernreich as well as Mariano Fortuny, 
Alix Gres and the Wiener Werkstaette designer Mathilde Floegel. Don't 
miss the tie-dye horror from 1976 by Serendipity. At this point the 
exhibition is interrupted by a recently added gift shop selling, among 
much else, contemporary kimonos. (It also disfigures the handsome 
staircase carefully preserved in the recent renovation of the museum's 
West Wing.) After this bit of marketing desperation, the show concludes 
with a gallery devoted to the daring work of the Japanese designers 
of the 1980s. If the romance metaphor continues, this is the abandonment 
phase of the seduction. Japanese designers reclaim and brilliantly 
rework their own traditions with more originality than Western designers 
(Vionnet excepted) ever mustered. Miyake is particularly impressive, 
exploiting his ingenious mini-pleats in garments that, when worn, 
seem both fluid and geometric; laid flat, they acquire some of the 
pictorial power of the show's opening kimono. Aside from the gift 
shop, the main complaint about this show concerns what's not here: 
It spreads itself too thin over a vast and fascinating subject and 
sometimes feels like an outline for a larger exhibition, or maybe 
even two. But let's not be ungrateful. This is the Brooklyn Museum's 
first major textile exhibition since 1990, when the city's budget 
crisis forced the museum to lay off the staff of its textile department 
and merge it with the department of decorative arts, and the show 
deserves welcome with open arms. ``Japonism in Fashion: Japan Dresses 
the West,'' is at the Brooklyn Museum of Art, 1000 Eastern Parkway, 
Brooklyn, through Feb. 14. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>