<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981119.0547 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In a marathon appearance that opened the House impeachment hearings 
Thursday, Kenneth Starr sparred into the night with Democrats as he 
defended his four-year investigation of President Clinton. Late in 
the evening Starr faced the president's private lawyer, David Kendall, 
and for the first time the independent counsel showed signs of irritation 
or anger. He heatedly rebuffed Kendall's hostile accusations that 
Starr's office had leaked grand jury information about Clinton. Several 
times, Starr interjected: ``That's unfair.'' The examination by Kendall 
capped a day of bitter partisanship, in which Starr, before a national 
television audience, presented his case against Clinton in both extemporaneous 
and rehearsed answers. Democrats challenged Starr's tactics and his 
judgment, and the motives and fairness of the Republicans who control 
the committee. But for all that, they rarely actually defended Clinton 
directly. Republicans, for their part, praised Starr often and extravagantly. 
Earlier in the day as Starr's appearance marked the beginning of the 
public phase of the nation's third impeachment inquiry, he coolly 
and in a quiet monotone described himself as a fervent believer in 
the law. He spoke for hours in a patient voice that had rarely been 
heard in public, replying at length to questions ranging from details 
of the Lewinsky matter to how the investigation had changed his personal 
life. ``I am not a man of politics,'' Starr told the 37 members of 
the House Judiciary Committee. Instead, he described himself as a 
man with ``unyielding faith in our court system _ our system of judicial 
review, the independence of our judges, our jury system, the integrity 
of the oath and the sanctity, yes, the sanctity of the judicial process.'' 
From the very first moments that the committee went into session to 
begin an impeachment proceeding that has little public support in 
the polls, the party divide was evident. On a party line vote, the 
Republican-controlled committee rejected an effort by Democrats to 
give the president's lawyers two hours to question Starr, who had 
been granted two hours to deliver his opening statement. ``This is 
a grave disservice at a grave constitutional moment,'' said Rep. Bill 
Delahunt, the D.-Mass., who had called for more time for Clinton's 
lawyers. Rep. Henry Hyde, the committee chairman, offered Clinton 
``unlimited time'' in the event he chose to give his version of events 
to the committee. The conflicting strategies of the two parties _ 
reflected time and again during the day _ were underscored almost 
immediately. ``Do we still have a government of laws and not of men?'' 
asked Hyde, R-Ill., as he opened the hearing. ``Does the law apply 
to some people with force and ferocity while the powerful are immune? 
Do we have one set of laws for the officer and another for the enlisted?'' 
Rep. John Conyers Jr., the ranking Democrat on the committee, sought 
to put Starr himself on trial, accusing him of crossing the ``line 
into obsession'' in his investigation of Clinton. ``The idea of a 
federally paid sex policeman spending millions of dollars to trap 
an unfaithful spouse, or to police civil litigation, would have been 
unthinkable prior to the Starr investigation,'' the Michigan Democrat 
said. ``Let there be no mistake, it is now acceptable in America to 
investigate a person's private sexual activity.'' Clinton and his 
wife were both out of the country as the Judiciary Committee held 
the first impeachment hearings against a President since the Watergate 
inquiry of Richard Nixon 24 years ago. Starr was the first witness 
called before the committee, although Hyde said Thursday that there 
would be others. Over the next two weeks, the Republicans also plan 
to take closed-door depositions from four other figures, including 
Robert Bennett, one of Clinton's lawyers and Bruce Lindsey, the deputy 
White House counsel. After Starr's morning statement, the White House 
said he had not shed light on his investigation. ``He offered no new 
evidence, no new information, and no new explanations for his tactics,'' 
said Gregory Craig, a White House special counsel. Starr calmly testified 
and answered sometimes hostile questions throughout a day that began 
at 10 a.m. and stretched well into the night. He rarely seemed rattled, 
and only once or twice became acerbic. He defended himself and his 
office against accusations of prosecutorial overkill, and he agreed 
to provide the committee with a list of clients from his former law 
firm. Starr sought to dispel the argument that his case against Clinton 
concerned the president's relationship with Ms. Lewinsky rather than 
the question of whether he had lied under oath in the sexual harassment 
case brought against him by Paula Jones and then lied before a grand 
jury. ``Sexual harassment cases are often he-said-she said disputes,'' 
Starr said. ``Evidence reflecting the behavior of both parties can 
be critical _ including the defendant's relationships with other employees 
in the workplace. ``Such questions can be uncomfortable, but they 
occur every day in courts and law offices across the country. Individuals 
in these cases take an oath to tell the truth, the whole truth and 
nothing but the truth. And no one is entitled to lie under oath simply 
because he or she does not like the questions or because he believes 
the case is frivolous or that it is financially motivated or that 
it is politically motivated.'' He also sought to dispel the public 
impression that he was responsible for the release of lurid details 
about the president's affair, which were exhaustively documented in 
his report. He said it was the House itself that had decided to make 
his report public. Twice during Starr's two-hour morning presentation, 
as he mentioned his other investigations, including Whitewater, Rep. 
Sheila Jackson-Lee, D.-Texas, interrupted to ask that Starr be limited 
to the Lewinsky matter. She was overruled. When Starr had finished, 
Abbe Lowell, the Democrats' senior investigative counsel, questioned 
Starr about his ties to lawyers associated with Ms. Jones and about 
his office's early contacts with both Ms. Lewinsky and with Linda 
Tripp, the woman who set off the investigation by bringing prosecutors 
tape-recordings of her conversations with Ms. Lewinsky. Lowell contrasted 
Starr's detailed report, which cited 11 possible grounds for impeachment, 
with that of the Watergate prosecutor Leon Jaworski, who had presented 
Congress with facts but no conclusions. Starr replied that he was 
the first to submit a presidential impeachment report under the independent 
counsel statute, and he believed the statute required him to make 
judgments. ``This is a tool,'' he said of his report. ``This is only 
a tool for you to use as you see fit. But I don't think it's fair 
to criticize my office for not following a pattern that was not governed 
by a statute.'' Using Starr's own words for describing the president's 
evasions, Lowell asked whether Starr had presented a ``distorted picture 
of the facts'' in a press release from his office that said Ms. Lewinsky 
had consented to a meeting with FBI agents last January. Citing Ms. 
Lewinsky's testimony, Lowell said the statement did not note that 
the young woman was frightened and crying and that when she asked 
to see her lawyer she was told, ``she would not be able to help herself 
with her attorney there.'' She was, he said, ``threatened with going 
to jail for, quote, 27 years.'' And when she asked to call her mother, 
Jackie Bennett, a Starr deputy said, ``You're 24. You're smart. You're 
old enough. You don't need to call your mommy.'' ``That wasn't in 
your statement to the press that day, was it?'' asked Lowell. Starr, 
drawing laughter, said ``No, it wasn't, Mr. Lowell, and let me explain 
what press statements are designed to do.'' At another point he said, 
``Surely you don't think that a witness is going to say, `Thank you, 
law enforcement for finding out that I'm in the middle of committing 
a felony.''' Later in the evening, under withering questioning from 
Democrats, Starr seemed more defensive about allegations that his 
investigators had threatened one witness, Julia Hiatt Steele _ who 
has contested Kathleen Willey's account of a sexual advance by the 
president _ and said they would examine the legality of her daughter's 
adoption. At one point, he said he would answer a written question. 
At another point he said that if Ms. Steele had a complaint it could 
be resolved in court. Starr also called it a ``misjudgment'' that 
one of his investigators in Arkansas had gone to a high school to 
subpoena the 16-year-old son of a Whitewater defendant. Across the 
afternoon Republicans rose to the defense of Starr. ``What we are 
seeing here is a desperate attempt to get away from the facts of the 
case against the president,'' said Rep. Charles Canaday, R.-Fla. ``Now 
I understand that because I find that the facts are particularly compelling.'' 
Several voiced their sympathy for Starr. ``I commend you for standing 
up to the nonsense,'' said Rep. Bob Barr of Georgia. Democrats showed 
no such sympathy. Rep. Barney Frank of Massachusetts asked the independent 
counsel why he had not told the public before the November election 
that he had found no evidence of impeachable offenses in his other 
inquiries, which ranged from the dismissal of White House Travel Office 
employees to the Whitewater real estate deal in Arkansas. Starr said 
his legal mandate was only to report on evidence of potentially impeachable 
offenses. ``In other words, you don't have anything to say unless 
you have something bad to say,'' Frank retorted. Rep. Robert Inglis, 
R-S.C., gave Starr the opportunity to emphasize that he considered 
perjury an impeachable offense, no matter what the underlying matter. 
``I will say as a former judge, any judge worth his or her judicial 
salt would say `Not in my court. Witnesses tell the truth,'' ' Starr 
said. ``It doesn't matter what the underlying subject matter is. Once 
you're in court, under oath, you tell the truth. That's the way judges 
look at the world, and perhaps that's why no judge being subjected 
to impeachment for perjury, has dared suggest 'Don't worry about it. 
It's not an impeachable offense.' It is.'' Starr also said that Clinton 
could be prosecuted for perjury once he left office. A few members 
of the committee questionned Starr about the facts of his case. Rep. 
Charles Schumer, D-N.Y., questioned Starr's charges of obstruction 
of justice. He noted that the White House had been trying to help 
Ms. Lewinsky find a job for more than a year _ not just after she 
was named as a witness. But Starr said his office had concluded that 
there had been a ``stepping up of the efforts to get her a job, especially 
once the witness list was issued.'' Only once all day did Starr show 
any discomfort with his role, when Rep. Mary Bono, R-Calif., asked 
him sympathetically about the toll his job was taking. ``I would love 
to be back in private life,'' he said and recalled the job offer that 
he once accepted and then turned down to be law dean at Pepperdine 
University in California. ``I would prefer to be almost your constituent,'' 
he told Ms. Bono. ``A little bit farther west.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>