<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981119.0543 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
How about the Los Angeles Patriots? Or the Houston Patriots? Could 
it have happened? Both cities reached deep into their pockets and 
told the Patriots that they had the cash, guaranteed, and were ready 
to build new stadiums. Los Angeles offered $100 million extra, right 
off the top, for the Patriots to move from the New England region. 
But the Patriots will remain the New England Patriots. Out of Foxboro, 
Mass., though. Into downtown Hartford. So, the Patriots players had 
to be informed. And Robert K. Kraft, the owner, did the informing 
on Wednesday afternoon. He met with his team in their Foxboro Stadium 
locker room and brought a fancy illustration of the new stadium. He 
stood among them and told them he wanted the Patriots to remain in 
New England. He told them that moving to Hartford was a good plan 
for the Patriots' future, for the Patriots' fans and for the Patriots' 
players. He said the move would happen no sooner than 2001 and no 
later than 2002. He said the team would likely remain at its current 
complex in Foxboro even through the first season or two in Hartford 
until an office complex and training center could be built, thus commuting 
to Hartford for games. He said they would benefit because there would 
be more money to keep more of them as free agents with the team. More 
money for us! Music to the players. And that was that. For most of 
the Patriots, this was not a big deal. For a few, including quarterback 
Drew Bledsoe, who is building a multimillion-dollar home not far from 
the current stadium, this was a very big deal. But most of the Patriots 
would have loved moving to a larger metropolitan area such as Los 
Angeles. Those in the final year or two of their contracts don't know 
if they will be future Patriots, anyway. Shoot, some said, beginning 
play in Hartford as late as 2002? That is four seasons away! And, 
so, they pressed on. Football players do that. They are more concerned 
with the present, the moment, the here, the now. The game. Being paid. 
Winning. And the Patriots lately have not been winning. That is where 
the players' concern is. A season that began with a 4-1 record, including 
an eye-popping 45-10 victory over the Kansas City Chiefs, has skidded 
to a 5-5 season. Just average. Not what the Patriots expected after 
being in the Super Bowl only a season and a half ago. Not after Bill 
Parcells and Curtis Martin left and Pete Carroll arrived as coach. 
Not after last year's playoff loss at Pittsburgh and then having expectations 
soar again this year. Not this stretch in which the Patriots have 
lost four of five games and two straight. So the focus is on this 
season. How do they regroup? It all started with their nemesis, Parcells. 
His Jets came to town on a Monday night after the Patriots had dusted 
the Chiefs, and everything fell apart for the Patriots. The Jets won 
that game in the late moments in dramatic fashion and then the Patriots 
lost in overtime at Miami. They beat Indianapolis, were then crushed 
at home by Atlanta and then lost by 3 points last week at Buffalo. 
Players were falling to injury in bunches. Receiver Terry Glenn (hamstring). 
Receiver Vincent Brisby (broken finger). Receiver Troy Brown (ankle). 
Linebacker Willie McGinnest (groin). On and on and on, nearly 10 big-name 
players in all. And not just players falling but starters. Playmakers. 
You take 10 starters, playmakers, from the lineup of any National 
Football League team and that team will struggle. And the Patriots 
have not been an exception. The heat has fallen on Carroll. On Bledsoe. 
Coach and quarterback. Slumping football teams always result in a 
glare at those two spots. But there is more. What alarms some within 
the Patriots' locker room even more is the sense that some of those 
injured players possibly could have played the past few weeks and 
did not. Did you just hear the word soft? The players have discussed 
this topic among themselves. There is an old line in football that 
``you can't do anything on the pine,'' meaning the bench. If a player 
is hurt, he is hurt. But inside the Patriots' locker room, some of 
the injured are getting second and third looks from their teammates. 
Get up. Get going. And it is very likely that the Patriots will. Glenn 
_ the key returnee _ and most of the other injured players are expected 
back when New England battles Miami on Monday night. Top to bottom, 
the Patriots are the most talented team in the American Football Conference 
East Division. They have the experience and the ability to string 
together a stretch of victories in their final six games and roll 
into the playoffs as a serious threat to the front-running Denver 
Broncos. Remember, in the season opener, New England rode into Denver 
on Monday night and gave the Broncos some of their best competition 
of the season in a 27-21 Patriots loss. When they earned a trip to 
the Super Bowl less than two years ago, the Patriots started their 
season 0-2 and 3-3. We're moving, the Patriots players were told by 
Kraft. OK, they answered. And then they looked at each other and said, 
``Now, how about getting a move on this season.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>