<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981119.0400 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Elections in New Delhi and three Indian states next week have turned 
into a referendum on the Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata Party, 
which has led India's shaky, 18-party coalition government for the 
last eight months. The campaign, for state-level offices, has been 
dominated by the voters' anger over the rising price of onions and 
other vegetables, an issue that has put the national government on 
the defensive. The Hindu nationalists, who have never before held 
power for a sustained period since India gained its independence 51 
years ago, shocked the world in May when the government they lead 
exploded nuclear devices. But poll takers have found that the nuclear 
tests barely register as an issue with voters, while rising food prices 
are the number one concern for almost two-thirds of them. The opposition 
Congress Party, which has governed India for most of the past half 
century, has seized on the price increases to attack the Hindu nationalists 
for failing to deliver more effective government. They should have 
moved more quickly to halt the export of onions and to remove duties 
on onion imports, Congress officials say. Almost 20 years ago, the 
Congress Party leader at the time, Indira Gandhi, waving garlands 
of onions at political rallies, roared back to power as prime minister 
by campaigning on the rising price of this tasty ingredient of the 
Indian diet. Now another member of the Nehru-Gandhi dynasty, her daughter-in-law 
Sonia Gandhi, is doing it again. At a recent political rally in New 
Delhi in a park named for her assassinated mother-in-law, Sonia Gandhi, 
who is now president of the Congress Party, attacked the Hindu nationalists 
for letting the prices of onions, tomatoes and potatoes soar. While 
she spoke, a giant onion-shaped hot air balloon hovered over the crowd 
of 30,000 people. ``Our sisters cannot run their households,'' she 
declared. Prime Minister Atal Behari Vajpayee, who heads the Bharatiya 
Janata Party, answered the onion charges at rallies here this week, 
but his audiences have been a fraction of the size of Mrs. Gandhi's 
and their responses tepid. He attributed the rising prices to unseasonable 
rains that destroyed a portion of the crops and to the the Congress 
Party's economic policies during their decades in power. Inflation 
has translated into a strong anti-incumbent sentiment in the three 
main battlegrounds of New Delhi, Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh. The 
fourth, Mizoram, is one of India's smallest states. The elections 
are to be held Wednesday. In New Delhi and Rajasthan, strongholds 
of the Hindu nationalists, the Congress Party is gaining ground and 
may win, poll takers say. But in Madhya Pradesh, the incumbent Congress 
government is likely to be ousted, according to a survey of more than 
20,000 voters taken by the agency C-Voter and commissioned by a magazine, 
The Week. The strong possibility that Congress will win in two of 
the three most important elections this year has prompted speculation 
about whether it will try to topple the current national government. 
Vajpayee has charged that the Congress intends to grab power for itself, 
even though it lost the last national election. Mrs. Gandhi said she 
is content to let the Hindu nationalist coalition collapse because 
of its own failures. And there are signs of trouble in the coalition 
on the price rise issue. For example, Mamata Banerjee, who heads a 
regional party based in West Bengal that is allied with the Hindu 
nationalists, this week gave them a four-month ultimatum: improve 
the situation or we will quit the coalition. The rising cost of onions 
has played neatly into the Congress Party's strategy of winning back 
the voter coalition that had enabled it to monopolize the nation's 
politics in the past. At a recent party retreat, Congress rededicated 
itself to championing the poor, the lower castes and religious minorities. 
After Mrs. Gandhi spoke at a rally in a part of New Delhi that is 
pocked by slums, Anil Kumar, 29, who sells fried rice and curried 
chick peas from a pushcart, said he voted for the Bharatiya Janata 
Party in the last election, but would cast his ballot for Congress 
this time. He gave the BJP a chance, he said, and ``they did nothing.'' 
But Congress will have to work hard to win back other voters, who 
remember the corruption scandals and fumbling policies that helped 
bring the party low in the first place. Kuldip Singh, a pump operator 
for the Delhi Municipal Corp., said he remained undecided, even after 
hearing Mrs. Gandhi speak. ``Whether Congress or the BJP wins, the 
poor people will remain poor,'' he said. ``And the prices will remain 
the same.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>