<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981119.0544 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Yankees offered Bernie Williams a five-year, $60 million 
deal within the past week, according to two members of the organization, 
an offer that was rejected, an offer that some in the organization 
said would not be increased. But Yankees general manager Brian Cashman 
has a favorite saying about operating under the guise of owner George 
Steinbrenner: never say never. Steinbrenner met with Williams' agent 
Thursday in Cleveland in the Yankees' first face-to-face negotiation 
for the services of the free-agent center fielder, and there is always 
the chance Steinbrenner could find some common ground. The Yankees, 
however, have made an offer to left fielder Albert Belle _ the specifics 
are not known _ and Cashman continues to negotiate with Belle's agent, 
who is also talking to the Boston Red Sox. Cashman has also expressed 
interest in outfielder Brian Jordan, who met with club officials Wednesday. 
The talks involving Belle and the Yankees and Red Sox, which speedily 
moved along in the last week, could carry over into the beginning 
of next week. Belle must decide by Dec. 2 whether he will sign with 
another team or return to the Chicago White Sox for the final three 
years and $30 million of an existing contract he signed after the 
1996 season. The Yankees seem likely to sign Williams or Belle, but 
would not sign both. Jordan is their third choice, but appears to 
be headed to the Atlanta Braves. Williams' visit with Red Sox officials 
in Boston, initially scheduled for this week, has been put off until 
next week. His agent, Scott Boras, said his meeting with Steinbrenner 
went well, commenting, ``We moved the process along and talked about 
a lot of things.'' The delay will give Williams more time to consider 
the $60 million the Yankees say they dangled _ an offer that is a 
staggering 60 percent greater than the five-year, $37.5 million offer 
made to Williams a year ago. Unless the Yankees have forwarded a more 
sizeable bid on Belle (Cashman is not commenting), the offer to Williams 
is the largest ever made by the team. Yankee officials say the initial 
reaction from Boras and Williams, however, was was not enough. Boras 
reiterated Thursday night that there is a vigorous market for Williams, 
and an executive for another team said Boras maintained to him that 
four teams have strong interest in the center fielder, with contract 
offers of as long as seven and eight years. No team has acknowledged 
making such an offer. The Red Sox, criticized heavily in the wake 
of their decision to end negotiations with the popular first baseman 
Mo Vaughn, may be reluctant to offer Williams more than the five-year, 
$63 million deal they placed before Vaughn. A high-ranking official 
from the Baltimore Orioles said that team was not willing to pay a 
salary of $11 million or $12 million to any player in the foreseeable 
future. The Arizona Diamondbacks, who have agreed to terms on a four-year, 
$32 million deal with Todd Stottlemyre and are deep into the bidding 
for pitcher Randy Johnson, may not be willing to offer Williams the 
sort of package he seeks. Other teams with high payrolls are making 
other deals. The Anaheim Angels are bidding on Vaughn, the Cleveland 
Indians are closing in on a deal for the free-agent second baseman 
Roberto Alomar, the Atlanta Braves are considered the front-runners 
for the outfielder Brian Jordan, the Los Angeles Dodgers want Vaughn 
and/or Johnson, and San Diego officials will fly to Atlanta today 
to forward a megabucks offer to another of Boras' clients, pitcher 
Kevin Brown. Other teams appear to shying away from Williams because 
their own superstars will command huge contract extensions soon: the 
Seattle Mariners must cope with the demands of Ken Griffey Jr. and 
Alex Rodriguez, and Texas is wary of what the cost of the two-time 
most valuable player Juan Gonzalez will be. The market on Williams 
seems to have taken the form of a silent auction. Meanwhile, the Yankees 
move forward and frantically with Belle. They have known that Belle 
wants to become the game's highest-paid player, and presumably are 
dangling a multi-year deal worth between $10 million and $14 million 
a season. In other baseball off-season action: _ The St. Louis Cardinals 
implemented a major restructuring of their team, signing two free 
agents and making a significant trade. They swapped outfielder Ron 
Gant, veteran reliever Jeff Brantley and pitcher Cliff Politte to 
the Philadelphia Phillies for closer Ricky Bottalico and journeyman 
pitcher Garrett Stephenson. With Gant off their payroll and Jordan 
headed elsewhere as a free agent, the Cardinals then turned around 
and signed outfielder Eric Davis to a two-year, $8 million contract. 
The Cardinals bolstered their bullpen by signing the left-handed reliever 
Scott Radinsky to a two-year, $5.5 million contract. _ The Baltimore 
Orioles, scurrying to rebuild what could be one of the league's worst 
offenses next season, are talking to the free-agent second baseman 
Delino DeShields, and Thursday night they became the fourth team to 
play host to Jordan this week. Wednesday night, the Orioles' owner, 
Peter Angelos, dined with first baseman Rafael Palmeiro, a free agent. 
The Orioles have offered Palmeiro a three-year, $22.5 million contract, 
and have expressed a willingness to perhaps add a fourth year, possibly 
in the form of an option. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>