<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981119.0480 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Sanwa Bank Ltd., a Japanese financial giant mired in billions of dollars 
in bad loans, will in the next week announce the sale of a large U.S. 
lending unit to the Fleet Financial Group for about $700 million, 
executives close to the talks said Thursday. The sale price is significantly 
less than the $2 billion that Sanwa originally sought for the unit, 
Sanwa Business Credit, and is a measure of how much the merger environment 
has cooled in recent months. The sale also reflects how Japanese banks, 
dangerously weakened, are continuing to withdraw from the U.S. market. 
Fleet, a Boston concern that is the ninth-largest bank in the country, 
and Sanwa, which is based in Osaka, both declined to comment on the 
transaction. Sanwa and Daiwa Bank Ltd., another large Japanese institution, 
said Thursday that they would both post losses this year and together 
need about $7.4 billion in financial aid from the Japanese government 
to avoid collapsing. The announcements were the first in what is expected 
to be a series of similar statements by Japanese banks confronting 
a stalled economy and huge piles of nonperforming loans. Japan is 
in the middle of its most severe recession in decades, which is likely 
to make it even harder for Japanese businesses, already short of cash, 
to repay loans _ making the outlook for Japanese banks even bleaker. 
Sanwa, which said it needed about $5 billion in government aid, said 
it would report an annual loss this year around $4.2 billion and write 
off $6.6 billion in bad loans _ enormous amounts that would be difficult 
for a bank of almost any size to absorb. Daiwa, Japan's 12th-largest 
bank, is seeking $2.4 billion in government aid and said it expects 
to report a loss of $1.5 billion this year. Sanwa's and Daiwa's financial 
problems are part of a swift and humbling comedown for most Japanese 
banks, which several years ago wielded such financial might that many 
here raised alarms over what they saw as Japan's economic colonization 
of America. It is now clear that the lending and buying spree that 
Japanese banks and businesses engaged in here was part of a speculative 
bubble that has long since burst. Japan, its critics argue, has prolonged 
the economic pain by refusing to tackle its banking problem aggressively. 
Troubles at home have only exacerbated the problems Japanese banks 
face doing business in this country. The Japanese need to borrow from 
other banks to help finance loans here because they have limited deposit 
bases they can tap. But Japanese banks have been forced to pay higher 
interest rates to borrow _ the so-called Japanese premium _ because 
of their weakening positions and lower credit ratings. That has put 
a crimp on their business activities here. Sanwa is not the first 
Japanese bank to sell part of its U.S. operation. Fuji Bank and Sumitomo 
Bank have also unloaded operations in the last year, as Japanese banks 
shuttered offices across the country. Just Thursday, the huge Bank 
of Tokyo-Mitsubishi said it planned to sell $750 million of its $4.38 
billion majority stake in Unionbancal Corp., which will help the money-losing 
Japanese bank raise cash. The sale will cut the Japanese bank's ownership 
in that bank to somewhere between 62 and 70 percent, from 82 percent. 
Sanwa, which said it would cut its work force about 10 percent, or 
1,300 people, over the next two years, said in July that it would 
close Sanwa Securities U.S.A., a dealer in securities issued by the 
United States government. In August, Tokyo barred Sanwa from selling 
mutual funds for a year due to charges that the bank bribed representatives 
of the Finance Ministry and the Bank of Japan for information about 
interest-rate changes and bank inspections. Sanwa still has a presence 
here. Its biggest U.S. unit, and its largest overseas subsidiary, 
is Sanwa Bank California. Sanwa has repeatedly said that the California 
unit, based in Los Angeles with about $8.4 billion in assets, is not 
for sale. But Sanwa Business Credit, a Chicago company that specializes 
in lending to small and mid-sized businesses and has about $6.5 billion 
in assets, will soon be sold to Fleet, possibly as early as Friday. 
Analysts said the Chicago unit has many troubled loans on its books 
and the asking price for the company has come steadily down since 
it was first put on the block about two months ago. Fleet has grown 
from its origins in Rhode Island through a series of acquisitions 
that have included the Bank of New England and Shawmut National. More 
recently, it has purchased the credit card business of Advanta Corp. 
and Quick &AMP; Reilly, a discount stock brokerage firm. Even with 
those acquisitions, analysts believe, Fleet may still not be large 
enough to remain competitive with other leading U.S. banks. Sanwa's 
adviser in the transaction is Merrill Lynch &AMP; Co., and Fleet's 
adviser is Goldman, Sachs &AMP; Co. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>