<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981119.0476 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Israel's chilly trade relationship with Jordan and the Palestinian 
Authority warmed slightly this week as the three neighbors held their 
first face-to-face discussions of import barriers, border customs 
disputes and obstacles to regional investment. ``It makes no sense 
that it is easier for Jordan to sell to France than to the West Bank, 
and easier for Israel to sell to Great Britain than to Jordan,'' U.S. 
Secretary of Commerce William Daley, who convened the three-party 
talks, told a gathering of Palestinian business leaders in the West 
Bank city of Ramallah. From the Jordanian and Palestinian perspective, 
the overarching regional trade issue is Israeli interference with 
the free movement of goods in and out of the West Bank and the Gaza 
Strip. Israel, which conducts about 95 percent of its trade with countries 
outside the Middle East, maintains that time-consuming inspections 
of overland shipments and repeated closings of border crossings are 
necessary precautions against terrorism. The Israelis also point out 
that the Palestinians still tacitly support the boycott of Israeli 
products in Persian Gulf nations and elsewhere in the Arab world. 
In hopes of reinforcing the peace process it brokered, the United 
States has been encouraging cross-border business partnerships as 
a counterweight to opponents of the land-for-security plan. But these 
new private-sector ties must be threaded through a matrix of competing 
property claims, political and cultural antagonisms, differing legal 
systems and unabating security pressures. Trade among the Israelis, 
Jordanians and Palestinians has been stagnant or in decline even as 
Israel's overall foreign trade has soared above $50 billion a year. 
Trade between Jordan and Israel has averaged less than $20 million, 
despite a recent agreement by Israel to streamline border customs 
procedures and import up to 50,000 tons of Jordanian produce duty-free. 
Jordan's trade with the Palestinian West Bank and Gaza is estimated 
at less than $40 million yearly, down from $120 million in the early 
1980s. As State Department convoys sped back and forth this week between 
Israeli and Palestinian peace negotiators, Daley and his aides steered 
their fleet of bulletproof Chevrolet Suburbans to business meetings 
in Jerusalem, the Gaza Strip and both banks of the Jordan River. Instead 
of prisoner releases and troop withdrawals, the Americans' meetings 
centered on customs protocols, rules of origin, nontariff barriers, 
transparent investment regulations and other matters typical of international 
trade talks. In the polarized environment of the Middle East, though, 
such bread-and-butter economic discussion is rarer than cease-fire 
negotiations. The trade ministers of Jordan, Israel and the Palestinian 
Authority met together for the first time _ even though all have often 
complained about regional trade obstacles and professed their desires 
for a joint free trade area. In three hours of informal closed-door 
discussions, the officials debated Palestinian market access and delved 
into such minutiae as rules for package labeling and hours for truck 
crossing on Jordan River bridges. Daley said later that he had been 
struck by the profound ``mistrust among the parties,'' even though 
their discussions were cordial and constructively specific. Mohammed 
Hurani, Jordan's trade minister, noted in the meeting that it was 
his first visit to Jerusalem in three decades _ since Israel annexed 
the formerly Jordanian eastern part of the city. Beyond the central 
dispute over Israeli security procedures, the regional trading relationship 
is riven by other prickly conflicts. Maher al-Masri, the Palestinian 
Authority's top trade official, has strongly protested the Israeli 
export of goods from Jewish settlements in the territories. He has 
succeeded in getting the European Union to deny duty-free access to 
these products unless they are labeled as originating in the West 
Bank, prompting complaints from Israel that Brussels is pre-emptively 
assigning Palestinian sovereignty to lands that remain in dispute. 
Jordan, in the meantime, asked for U.S. support of its pleas to Israel 
to ease access for Jordanian exports to the West Bank and Gaza, and 
Palestinian officials strongly backed Jordan's request. Two days after 
their meeting here, the Israeli trade and industry minister, Natan 
Sharansky, met again with Masri and announced that Israel would soon 
allow more Jordanian goods into Palestinian areas. Yet Palestinians 
note that Jordan imposes strict limits on imports of Palestinian produce, 
their biggest export earner. And there is potential friction between 
the Palestinians and Jordanians, who both hope that the peace process 
will provide unfettered access to the $100 billion Israeli market 
_ often for directly competing agricultural products. The Palestinians, 
while appealing for American intervention with Israel, have some trade 
issues of their own with the United States. Two years ago, Washington 
extended the same duty-free treatment Israeli goods have long enjoyed 
to products from Gaza and the West Bank _ an initiative enthusiastically 
welcomed by Palestinian exporters, who anticipated a breakthrough 
into a huge American market. Yet despite this trade status, Palestinian 
sales to the United States still average a negligible $1 million yearly, 
while imports from the United States barely reach $2 million, Daley 
said. Palestinians blame a pattern of border inspection delays and 
import permit denials by Israel, which controls land, air and sea 
access to the Palestinian market. Some U.S. government trade specialists 
report complaints of Israeli blockage of shipments of consumer goods 
destined for the Palestinians from U.S. multinational subsidiaries 
in the Arab world. A West Bank businessman appealed to Daley to protest 
these practices, not ``as a friend of the Palestinians'' or a promoter 
of the peace process, but as a defender of the ``legitimate commercial 
interests'' of U.S. business. Daley said Washington's view is that 
these trade conflicts can ultimately be resolved only through the 
land-for-security talks between Israel and the Palestinians, which, 
it is hoped, will soon lead to direct new road and air cargo routes 
for trade with the Gaza Strip and the West Bank. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>