<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981119.0401 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For the first time scientists have calculated the devastating toll 
of cigarette smoking in China and declared the country to be on the 
verge of a calamitous epidemic of smoking-related deaths that may 
well kill one in three Chinese men. In a country where 70 percent 
of men smoke, there are now 2,000 smoking-related deaths a day, the 
researchers said. That number will increase to 8,000 a day by the 
middle of the next century unless public health measures are taken. 
``There is an unprecedented epidemic of smoking deaths,'' Dr. Chen 
Zhengming, a Chinese researcher now based at Oxford University, told 
a news conference Thursday in Beijing. ``And China is still in the 
early stages of the epidemic.'' In two papers being published on Saturday 
in the British Medical Journal, researchers from China, Britain and 
the United States draw the outlines of China' emerging epidemic with 
countless statistics. For example: In China, middle-aged smokers are 
three times more likely to get lung cancer than nonsmokers. They are 
twice as likely to die of tuberculosis. Today, more than 12 percent 
of deaths among men are related to smoking and that number is increasing. 
The studies, which involved interviewing more than a million people 
scattered across China, represent an impressive technical achievement 
_ the largest epidemiologic study ever examining the connection between 
cigarettes and death. In the last two years, the Chinese government 
has started to combat what was obviously a huge smoking problem. But 
it is a fledgling effort in a long battle that primarily affects men, 
since very few women in China smoke. The reports' authors, mostly 
doctors from China's prestigious medical academies, hope their bleak 
and specific picture of the devastating effect that cigarettes are 
having in their homeland will energize China's anti-smoking campaign, 
much as the 1964 Surgeon's General's report opened Americans' eyes 
to the hazards. In China, ``Most people don't understand how dangerous 
smoking is,'' said Dr. Yang Guanghua, an associate professor at the 
Chinese Academy of Preventive Medicine and one of the papers' authors. 
``Over 50 percent of Chinese people think smoking does little or no 
harm and over 60 percent don't know it can lead to lung cancer.'' 
Added Chen: ``Policy-makers act on evidence and until now there's 
been no evidence from China.'' In much of China cigarettes are as 
much a tool of social interaction as they are an addiction. The standard 
greeting between men goes like this: ``Smoke?'' offering a pack in 
outstretched hand. The only polite response is to take one, light 
up, draw and only then to start the conversation. Those who demur 
are viewed as slightly odd and lacking social graces. Selling cigarettes 
is a lucrative business in China, which produces more tobacco than 
any other country on earth and where the government owns an estimated 
90 percent of tobacco companies. Cigarette companies are the sponsors 
of many sports events catering to young people, from the Marlboro 
Soccer League to the 555 motocross races. ``It's a problem,'' said 
Chen, with a sigh. The government organizes anti-smoking campaigns, 
bans cigarette advertising and forbids smoking in public places. But 
a study by Dr. Niu Shiru found that once Chinese start smoking, generally 
at about age 20, few ever give up _ except when they fall ill in later 
life with a smoking related illness. Niu, another of the authors of 
the papers, who is vice secretary general of the Chinese Association 
on Smoking and Health, said young people tend to ignore anti-smoking 
campaigns. ``The risks seem too distant,'' he said. In the first of 
the two papers, Dr. Liu Boqi, of China's National Cancer Institute, 
directed a team of 500 workers who fanned out across the country to 
interview the families of 700,000 Chinese who had died in 1990 of 
cancer, lung disease, stroke and heart disease to learn about their 
deceased relative's smoking habits. For a comparison they also studied 
the cases of 2 million people who died of other causes. Overall, the 
researchers found that about 70 percent of the men smoked, a number 
that has remained fairly stable since the 1980s. But the number of 
cigarettes smoked per person has climbed sharply, from four a day 
1980s to 10 in 1992 to 14 in 1995, they said. By contrast, the number 
of women who start smoking has declined to 1 percent from 10 percent 
a decade ago, although the researchers said they were uncertain why 
and cautioned that this number might again rise. The studies found 
that smokers in China are more likely than nonsmokers to die of any 
of a list of diseases, but that those illnesses are somewhat different 
than those experienced by smokers in the West. While American smokers 
are most likely to die from heart attacks, the Chinese are far more 
likely to die from cancer, emphysema or tuberculosis. Smoking kills 
people in China ``by making diseases that are already fairly common, 
somewhat more so,'' the researchers wrote. In the second study, Niu 
and his colleagues interviewed a quarter of a million randomly selected 
men over 40 years of age _ 73 percent of whom were smokers. The researchers 
plan to follow that population for several decades to track the progress 
of the smoking epidemic. This is the first time such an ambitious 
project has been undertaken in China, though extensive studies like 
this one have been done in the United States to learn about heart 
disease and breast cancer. The studies in China were paid for in part 
by the National Institutes of Health in Washington. Dr. Richard Peto 
of Oxford University, probably the world's foremost expert on designing 
large complicated studies on human disease, is a co-author of both 
papers. He said the research constituted the largest study of the 
hazards of tobacco in the world, and the first one in a developing 
country. Similar studies are planned for other developing countries. 
``China now has 340 million men under 30 who smoke,'' said Niu, ``and 
their risk of death due to smoking will soon approach the epidemic 
proportions we have seen in the West.'' He and others noted that China's 
smoking problem is very similar to that experienced in the United 
States and England 40 years ago. It remains to be seen what effect 
the new information will have in a country where the researchers estimate 
that 50 percent of doctors and teachers smoke _ although the medical 
profession is becoming increasingly vocal on the issue. And while 
there is little support for smoking cessation, there is a great concern 
that the next generation not head down the same path as their parents. 
``Teen-age smoking is really a big problem in middle schools and more 
education is needed,'' said Dr. Hu Yiji, chief of the pulmonary department 
at the Beijing Children's Hospital. ``We should not show leaders on 
TV smoking and teachers and doctors should not smoke.'' The new studies 
do not even deal with the health fallout of secondhand smoke, although 
Hu said that his young patients certainly suffered from its effects 
in a country where families live in rather cramped living spaces. 
``Parents tend to worry about air pollution, but it's passive smoking 
that is the big problem,'' he said. ``If a family member smokes _ 
and so many do in China today _ their child is five times more likely 
to have respiratory disease. This is the problem.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>