<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981119.0278 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Sometimes, from some angles, Milwaukee can fool you. Is this Chicago? 
There's the lake: the same immense lake, Lake Michigan, stretching 
to the horizon, bigger than all of Switzerland. There's Wisconsin 
Avenue, the main drag, which crosses the Milwaukee River on a bridge 
that looks a lot like the one that carries Michigan Avenue across 
the Chicago River. Both cities have bold, modern trademark buildings 
with prominent zigzag braces, designed by Skidmore, Owings &AMP; Merrill: 
the Firstar Center in Milwaukee and the John Hancock Center in Chicago. 
Both cities nurture old-country traditions, exuberantly celebrated 
at annual festivals. Both have mastered the Midwestern knack of keeping 
their feet on the ground. But Milwaukee, as its visitors bureau proclaimed 
in an advertising campaign a few years back, is Chicago several million 
people ago. It is less crowded, less clogged with traffic, less expensive. 
``It's a big little town, a real family town,'' said Terry Benske, 
a real estate agent, who makes part of her living selling houses to 
people who move here from Chicago after they marry and have children, 
commuting back to their jobs. On a gloomy day, when the cold, raw 
winds are blowing hard, Milwaukee may indeed provide ``a gray landscape, 
drawn with hard lines and great attention to detail,'' as English 
photographer Cecil Beaton wrote after a 1955 visit. But on a bright 
day with the sun glinting off the lake, downtown is something else 
again, whatever the season, a triumph of civic resuscitation. The 
city has saved the best of its past. ``Those old Germans,'' a Milwaukee 
friend of mine says, ``were too frugal to tear anything down, thank 
God.'' So marvelous Victorian buildings like the Richardsonian Romanesque 
Pfister Hotel and the pseudo-Flemish, flatiron-shaped City Hall, built 
in emulation of guild halls in Belgium, stand amid sober neo-classical 
structures like the headquarters of Northwestern Mutual Life Insurance 
Co.; Art Deco towers like the jaunty Wisconsin Gas Co. building, with 
a neon ``flame'' on top whose color forecasts the weather, and modern 
high-rises by the likes of Chicago's Harry Weese and Helmut Jahn. 
You can see a lot of them from the new Riverwalk, a pleasant introduction 
to the city, if not quite the throbbing crossroads that San Antonio's 
is. From there, it's only a short stroll to Marquette University's 
campus on the western edge of downtown. Lately, Milwaukee has been 
on a building spree. In July, the first phase of the post-modern Midwest 
Express Center, a 667,475-square-foot convention site, opened for 
business. In 2000, Miller Park will open, a new ball park in an old 
idiom, like Baltimore's and Cleveland's, a kind of monument to Bud 
Selig, the former owner of the Milwaukee Brewers, now the commissioner 
of baseball, who waged war with the politicians over financing and 
location. That same year, a $50 million addition to the Milwaukee 
Art Museum is to be unveiled. Overlooking Lake Michigan, designed 
by Santiago Calatrava, a young Spanish architect on the brink of international 
superstar status who has never built anything in the United States, 
it is meant to be a kind of signature structure for the city, comparable 
to Sydney's Opera House. So far, downtown is a happy mix that looks 
neither random nor ``renewed,'' but somehow organic. That, a low crime 
rate and the many comfortable residential neighborhoods, from upper-crust 
Shorewood, north along the lake, to the more proletarian South Side, 
help to earn Milwaukee the prime 20th-century urban encomiums. It 
is a ``livable city,'' people say. ``Manageable.'' Jack L. Goodsitt, 
one of the city's most lovable curmudgeons, complains that Milwaukee 
has been in decline since the 1930s, when George M. Cohan and Helen 
Hayes brought touring companies into downtown theaters, and Eugene's, 
a waterside restaurant, served ``the best food the city has ever seen.'' 
But he moved back after spending four years in Palm Beach. ``Nothing 
ever happens here,'' groused Goodsitt, a lawyer. ``But the one thing 
we have is people. They do read books, they think, they talk. There's 
real intellectual ferment. That matters more than the weather or anything 
else. Palm Beach? All they talk about there is golf and boats.'' Milwaukee's 
shoulders may not be as big as the Windy City's, but it is no 90-pound 
weakling. It is the nation's 17th largest city, with a population 
of 610,000 and an area of 96 square miles, and the four-county metropolitan 
area has a population of 1.4 million. Enough to support the Brewers 
and the basketball Bucks, enough to sustain a venerable cultural tradition, 
and enough to consume Rabelaisian quantities of bratwurst, beer and 
frozen custard. Modern-day Milwaukeeans don't have much time for the 
stereotypical image of their city. They don't think of themselves 
anymore as a beer-'n'-brats, blue-collar bunch, however many sausages 
they might scarf down during a Sunday doubleheader at County Stadium 
(or when they head in their tens of thousands up Interstate 43 to 
Green Bay, a couple of hours north, for a Packers game). Nor do they 
think of themselves as America's pre-eminent German city, even if 
President Clinton brought Germany's then-Chancellor Helmut Kohl to 
town to give him a taste of home. Look at our Polish festival, they 
say, our Irish festival, our Summerfest. Look at Serb Hall, on the 
south side; go on Friday night, for the fish fry. Schlitz, ``the beer 
that made Milwaukee famous,'' is gone, which is hard to believe in 
a city where they used to say that kitchens were built with three 
taps, marked hot, cold and Schlitz. Only the philanthropies of the 
Uihlein family, who brewed it, remain as reminders. Blatz is defunct, 
the grand old brewery recycled now as apartments and offices. Pabst 
lives on solely in the elaborate theater that Capt. Frederick Pabst 
built in 1895. Only Miller Brewing Co. prospers (you can tour the 
brewery on West State Street), joined by a number of thriving micro-breweries, 
notably Sprecher and Lakeside. But everyone knows the big keg now 
is St. Louis, another city with roots in Germany and the headquarters 
of Anheuser-Busch. Most of Milwaukee's famous German restaurants have 
seen better days, though there is nothing faded about Fred Usinger 
Inc., which has been the king of American wurstmachers (sausage-makers) 
since 1880. The 1998 Christmas catalog rests beside me as I write, 
pure balm for the Hun in me: braunschweiger, beerwurst, thueringer, 
weisswurst, yachtwurst (ah, yachtwurst). People here, as in Munich 
or Hamburg, are compulsively orderly; anyone who doesn't keep a neat 
house and a trim lawn is treated as a menace to society. But few speak 
German anymore, though as late as 1885, two of three people who read 
a daily newspaper here read it in that language, not in English. If 
the Milwaukee Germans have assimilated, along with the Boston Irish 
and the Philadelphia Italians, they have left behind a formidable 
legacy; Milwaukee's German-American past has shaped its more cosmopolitan 
present. The city's economy is built upon precision manufacturing, 
a field in which the German and other immigrants brought skills as 
well as Mitteleuropean work habits with them. That tradition lives 
on in industrial companies like Johnson Controls, A.O. Smith, Briggs 
&AMP; Stratton, Harnischfeger and Rockwell Automation (formerly Allen-Bradley), 
all with headquarters in Milwaukee. Harley-Davidson motorcycles are 
made here, Case International tractors in Racine. Many of the immigrants 
carried progressive political ideals in their baggage. Milwaukee elected 
Victor L. Berger, the first socialist to sit in Congress, in 1910 
and again from 1918 to 1926. Daniel Webster Hoan, another Socialist, 
served as the city's mayor for 24 years, and one of its most impressive 
bridges is named for him, although he opposed its construction. Socialist 
ideas had a profound impact on young Golda Mabovitz, whose family 
had immigrated to Milwaukee from the Ukraine. Educated at North Division 
High School and Milwaukee Teachers' Training College, she married 
a sign painter and emigrated to Israel in 1921. As Golda Meir, she 
rose gradually in the Labor Party and served from 1969 to 1974 as 
Israel's fourth premier. Back in Milwaukee, socialism eventually died 
out, to be succeeded by liberalism, its half-brother, as the city's 
creed. For decades, two German-American Democrats held sway here: 
Mayor Henry Maier, who served seven terms, and Rep. Henry Reuss, an 
expert on the banking system. Milwaukee lent strong support as well 
to statewide political powers like the La Follettes and other Progressives, 
and liberal Democrats like Gaylord Nelson and Patrick Lucey. Even 
in a conservative era like the present, the city contributed a thumping 
majority to the recent re-election of Russell Feingold, one of the 
more liberal (and less conventional) members of the Senate, whose 
father was a part-time Progressive organizer. Like many medium-size 
cities with a Germanic heritage, like St. Louis and Cincinnati, Milwaukee 
has a well entrenched musical tradition. But like many cities, Milwaukee 
watched in dismay as the finances of its musical mainstay dried up. 
Starting in the 1980s, season subscriptions to the Milwaukee Symphony 
Orchestra stalled; fund-raising flagged; labor relations soured, so 
much that in January 1994, musicians refused to take the stage. But 
the refurbishing of Uihlein Hall, part of the Marcus Center for the 
Performing Arts, and the appointment in 1996 of Andreas Delfs as musical 
director helped spark a turnaround. German-born, Juilliard-trained, 
Delfs also conducts the Hanover State Opera and Orchestra in the hometown 
of the new German chancellor, Gerhard Schroeder, and Milwaukee classical 
music fans have flocked to his concerts. Accustomed to three sellouts 
a year, the orchestra had 30 last season. The remaining schedule for 
this season includes programs featuring Nadja Salerno-Sonnenberg, 
the violinist; Sabine Meyer, the clarinetist, and Pascal Roge, the 
pianist. Mahler, Mozart and Brahms will get their turns, but there 
are several more venturesome items on the program as well: contemporary 
works by Takemitsu and Corigliano, plus a Howard Hanson symphony and 
large-scale choral works (Mendelssohn's ``Elijah'' in March and Martinu's 
Tocatta in June). Now 66 years old, the Florentine Opera Company, 
which also performs in Uihlein Hall, opened last week with ``Cav'' 
and ``Pag.'' But it, too, is dipping into unfamiliar repertory. In 
February, it will give the American premiere of Lowell Liebermann's 
``Picture of Dorian Gray,'' the first such premiere it has ever presented. 
Based on Oscar Wilde's novel and first performed in Monte Carlo in 
1996, the opera is part of a Wilde boomlet on stage and screen. A 
third Uihlein tenant, the Milwaukee Ballet, has sunk a million dollars 
into a new production of ``The Nutcracker'' for the holiday season, 
a lot for a small regional company. The choreographer is Lisa de Ribere, 
an alumna of both the American Ballet Theater and the New York City 
Ballet. Alfred Lunt, Milwaukee-born, would be pleased with his hometown. 
Four touring Broadway shows will hit town this season, as well as 
five productions by the Skylight Opera Company, including Gilbert 
and Sullivan, Rodgers and Hammerstein and Donizetti's fizzy ``Don 
Pasquale.'' The Pabst Theater; the Milwaukee Repertory, currently 
presenting works by Tennessee Williams, Carlo Goldoni and Steve Martin, 
and First Stage Milwaukee, which commissioned a new play this year 
from the 1992 Pulitzer Prize winner, Robert Schenkkan, all contribute 
to a sparkling cultural scene. Nobody need go to Chicago for brain 
food. Even a slavish devotee of Eero Saarinen and Frank Lloyd Wright 
like myself must admit that neither did his best by Milwaukee. Facing 
an impossible commission to design a combination war memorial and 
art museum, Saarinen built something boxy that has aged poorly, but 
its shortcomings will soon be eased. Attempting to echo the domed 
majesty of Santa Sophia in Istanbul, Wright designed a sky-blue and 
buff-colored flying saucer for the Annunciation Greek Orthodox Church, 
but several of Wright's masterpieces are nearby. The art museum's 
setting smack on the lakeshore, shared by few other Milwaukee buildings, 
is its trump card. That will be re-emphasized by Calatrava's addition, 
south of the Saarinen structure, that recalls both his celebrated 
Alamillo Bridge in Seville, a harp-like span across the Guadalquivir 
River, and his Satolas train station at Lyons airport in France. Here, 
a vaulted, 450-foot-long pavilion, a story and a half tall, with new 
galleries for temporary exhibitions, forms a link to a 90-foot-high 
reception hall, covered by a movable, louvered sun break made of carbon 
fiber. This will be connected to the foot of Wisconsin Avenue, where 
an orange Mark di Suvero sculpture stands by an airy suspension footbridge. 
For someone strolling down Wisconsin toward the lake, the sculpture 
will line up with the bridge and two angled masts: one, 90 feet long, 
atop the reception hall, the other, 200 feet tall, at the end of the 
bridge. Saarinen's building is right angles; Calatrava's, designed 
to complement it, is curves. The Milwaukee Journal Sentinel called 
the plan audacious and congratulated the museum for doing something 
so ``daringly un-Milwaukee.'' During construction, the permanent collection 
remains open. Its strengths, to my eye, are a superb assemblage of 
American folk art, one of the world's leading collections of Haitian 
art and a fabulous group of German Expressionists: Kirchner, Nolde, 
Beckmann et al. (A word of warning: owing to the vagaries of donors' 
wills, the Expressionists are split into two groups on two different 
floors.) A major gift in 1997 brought the museum's holdings of works 
by Georgia O'Keeffe to 21, one of the largest such groups outside 
the museum in New Mexico devoted exclusively to her. The decorative 
arts collection includes a group of objects designed by Prairie School 
architects, not only Wright but others in his circle, including George 
Niedecken and George W. Maher. But to get a fuller picture of Wright's 
genius at work, take a trip to his home, Taliesen, near Spring Green, 
about 110 miles west of Milwaukee, or to Racine, 30 miles south. I 
would choose Racine, not only because it is closer but also because 
you can visit there both the headquarters of S.C. Johnson Co. (guided 
tours on Fridays) and Wingspread, home of Hibbard Johnson, who was 
the company's president (self-guided tours Monday through Friday). 
Both rank among Wright's finest work. The administrative office of 
the Johnson company is an astonishing space, unlike anything built 
before or since, with skylights made of Pyrex tubing and slender dendriform 
supporting columns. Wright called it ``a temple of work, a place you 
will love to be in.'' In the recent Ken Burns television biography, 
Wright's assistant and acolyte, Edgar Tafel, dubbed it the architect's 
``Ninth Symphony,'' and Philip Johnson termed it ``the finest room 
in America.'' No wonder the boss hired Wright for Wingspread, a graceful 
knoll-top house whose wings, to borrow the language of the art historian 
Henry-Russell Hitchcock, ``ride the grassed slopes as if they were 
floating on waves.'' `A BIG LITTLE TOWN' By R.W. APPLE Jr. c.1998 
N.Y. Times News Service Here is information about visiting the Milwaukee 
area: Where to Stay HILTON, 509 W. Wisconsin Ave., (414) 271-7250. 
This 500-room Art Deco monolith started life as the Schroder, then 
became the Marc before joining the Hilton clan. Voted one of the best 
in the chain after a recent renovation (still more rooms are coming), 
it is well situated for conventions and culture. Doubles, $109 to 
$154. METRO, 411 E. Mason St., (414) 272-1937. Brand new, and brilliantly 
designed to evoke France in the 1920s, with unusually handsome chairs, 
rugs and sofas in the lobby. Its 65 suites are also well done, with 
purest cotton sheets on the beds. The cafe has tables outdoors and 
a sinuous, welcoming bar. Doubles, $165 to $225; weekend specials, 
$129. PFISTER, 424 E. Wisconsin Ave., (414) 273-8222. ``Grande dame'' 
is the cliche among older hotels; the Pfister lives up to it. The 
Victorian lobby _ painted ceiling, palm court and paintings of zaftig 
ladies _ bustles all day long, and rooms in the old section, opening 
off blessedly wide corridors, offer every comfort; stay there, if 
you can, rather than in the newer tower. Room rates: Doubles, $244 
to 284 weekdays and $169 to $209 weekends. AMERICAN CLUB, Highland 
Drive, Kohler, (920) 457-8000. Built in 1918 to house immigrant workers 
at the Kohler plumbing-fixture works, this rambling red-brick building 
has been transformed into a quiet, tasteful resort with courtyard 
gardens, good food, two Pete Dye golf courses, indoor tennis, trout 
fishing, pheasant hunting and cross-country skiing. An hour from Milwaukee. 
Doubles, $155 to $190 weekdays and $185 to $220 weekends. Where to 
Eat BARTOLOTTA'S, 7616 W. State St., (414) 771-7910. A plain, vibrant, 
yellow-walled room hung with family photos, this trattoria has good 
blood lines. Paul Bartolotta runs Spiaggia, Chicago's best Italian 
restaurant; here, his sister, Maria, a onetime vocalist with Peter 
Duchin, dispenses Italian comfort food: pasta quills with duck ragu, 
sausage and peppers on polenta. JOHN ERNST, 600 E. Ogden Ave., (414) 
273-1878. Ratzch's has slipped; Mader's caters to tour buses. But 
Ernst's (founded 1878) upholds German-American tradition with Teutonic 
tankards along the walls, mellow Pschorrbrau from Munich on tap and 
proper schnitzel, sauerbraten and bratwurst on the plate. LEON'S, 
3131 S. 27th St., (414) 383-1784. Milwaukee dotes on old-fashioned 
frozen custard. Leon's is the drive-in shrine, turning out a dense, 
eggy, creamy freeze fully worthy of the state that calls itself America's 
Dairyland. Opened in 1942, this neon-clad spot inspired ``Happy Days.'' 
EDDIE MARTINI'S, 8612 Watertown Plank Road, (414) 771-6680. A 1940s 
throwback (``steaks, chops, seafood,'' says the sign outside), Martini's 
is Milwaukee's restaurant du jour, jammed every night. Fine strips 
and porterhouses, sure, but also ono and ahi tuna from the Pacific, 
as well as walleye, the firm, sweet lake fish that has vanished from 
most menus because of dwindling supplies. SANFORD, 1547 N. Jackson 
St., (414) 276-9608. Sandy D'Amato is a cook of rare virtuosity who 
produces a different ethnic menu each night (Hungarian, Greek, Provencal 
. . .) as well as his regular fare. His wife, Angie, presides winningly 
over a dining room that was once his grandfather's and father's grocery 
store. The flavor combinations are spectacular: sweet figs, pungent 
pomegranate sauce, foie gras, squab; grilled shrimp, Thai basil oil, 
peppery curry noodles. THREE BROTHERS, 2414 S. St. Clair St., (414) 
481-7530. Branko Radicevic can be as cranky as his Serbian brethren 
in Belgrade, but he runs a restaurant with very high standards. On 
simple Formica tables in an old Schlitz tavern, he serves succulent 
roast lamb and suckling pig, chicken paprikash and an amazing, discus-sized 
phyllo pie called burek, stuffed with spinach or cheese. Attractions 
THE MILWAUKEE ART MUSEUM, 750 N. Lincoln Memorial Drive, (414) 224-3200. 
More than 20,000 works from ancient to contemporary times. Through 
Jan. 3, ``Covering History: Quilts in Wisconsin.'' Opening Friday, 
``Half Past Autumn: The Art of Gordon Parks,'' a retrospective of 
the 85-year-old artist and photojournalist (through Jan. 10). Hours: 
Sundays, noon to 5; Tuesdays, Wednesdays, Fridays and Saturdays, 10 
a.m. to 5 p.m.; Thursdays, noon to 9. Admission: $5; $3 for students 
and the elderly; children under 13 free. CITY HALL, 200 E. Wells St., 
(414) 286-2150. Built in 1895 by Henry C. Koch &AMP; Co. Open Mondays 
through Fridays, 8 a.m. to 4:45 p.m. Free tours for groups of at least 
10, by appointment only; (414) 286-2266. NORTHWESTERN MUTUAL LIFE 
INSURANCE CO. BUILDING, 720 E. Wisconsin Ave., (414) 271-1444. Completed 
in 1914 by Marshall and Fox of Chicago. Tours can be arranged, 9 to 
11 a.m. and 1 to 3 p.m.; (414) 299-3252. WISCONSIN GAS CO. BUILDING, 
626 E. Wisconsin Ave., (414) 385-7000. An Art Deco building completed 
in 1930 by Eschweiler &AMP; Eschweiler of Milwaukee. There are no 
scheduled tours. Visitors may enter during business hours, Mondays 
thorough Fridays, 8 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Its 21-foot neon illuminated 
flame on the roof changes colors according to coming weather conditions. 
Red means warmer weather ahead, gold signifies colder, and blue means 
no change. A flickering flame means precipitation, either rain or 
snow. MIDWEST EXPRESS CENTER, 400 W. Wisconsin Ave., (414) 908-6000. 
The convention center opened in July. Call ahead to schedule a tour. 
MILLER BREWING CO., 4251 W. State St., (414) 931-2467 or 800 944-5483. 
Open Mondays through Saturdays 10 a.m. to 5:30 p.m. Free tours Mondays 
through Saturdays, 10 a.m. to 3:30 p.m., take visitors through the 
brewhouse, where the first steps of beer making begin, and to the 
cave 62 feet underground that Fredrick Miller used for refrigeration 
from 1855 through 1906. MILWAUKEE SYMPHONY, Marcus Center for the 
Performing Arts, Uihlein Hall, 929 N. Water St., (800) 291-7605. This 
weekend, Richard Einhorn's ``Voices of Light,'' conducted by Andrews 
Sill, accompanies Carl Dreyer's 1929 silent film ``The Passion of 
Joan of Arc.'' Friday night at 7:30; Saturday at 8 p.m. Tickets: $12 
to $48. Anthony Halstead conducts the Milwaukee Symphony in a program 
of Vivaldi, Telemann and Handel, with the guitarist Manuel Barrueco, 
7:30 p.m. on Nov. 27 and Nov. 29, and 8 p.m. on Nov. 28. Tickets: 
$12 to $48. FLORENTINE OPERA COMPANY, Marcus Center for the Performing 
Arts, Uihlein Hall, 929 N. Water St., (414) 273-7206. Resumes performances 
Feb. 5 through 7, with Lowell Liebermann's ``Picture of Dorian Gray.'' 
MILWAUKEE BALLET, Marcus Center for the Performing Arts, Uihlein, 
929 N. Water St., (414) 643-7677. ``The Nutcracker'' will be performed 
Dec. 12 through 30. Performance schedule varies; evening shows at 
7:30 and matinees at 1:30 p.m. Tickets: $12.75 to $46.75. PABST THEATER, 
144 E. Wells St. A new adaptation of ``A Christmas Carol,'' by the 
Milwaukee Repertory, runs from Dec. 4 through 26. Tickets: $8.50 through 
$32; (414) 224-9490. ``Vince,'' a Pabst production of a one-man show 
about Vincent Lombardi, opens Jan. 9; (414) 286-3663. MILWAUKEE REPERTORY, 
108 E. Wells St., (414) 224-9490. At the Powerhouse Theater on the 
second floor, ``Blues for an Alabama Sky,'' by Pearl Cleage, Friday 
night at 8 p.m., Saturday at 4:30 and 8:30 p.m. and Sunday at 2 p.m. 
Tickets: $10 to $32. ``The Last Night of Ballyhoo,'' Dec. 2 to Jan. 
3. At the Stiemke Theater on the first floor, ``The Glass Menagerie,'' 
Friday night at 8 p.m, Saturday at 4:30 and 8:30 p.m. and Sunday at 
2 p.m. Tickets: $17.50 to $25. FIRST STAGE MILWAUKEE, Marcus Center 
for the Performing Arts, Todd Wehr Theater, 929 N. Water St., (414) 
273-7206. ``The Dream Thief'' by Robert Schenkkan, for young audiences, 
8 and older. Friday at 10 a.m. and noon; Saturday and Sunday at 1 
and 3:30 p.m. Tickets: $7.25 to 14.75. S.C. JOHNSON COMPANY BUILDING, 
1525 Howe St., Racine, (414) 260-2154. Visitors need a reservation 
for the free 35-minute architectural tour, held Fridays at 9:15 and 
11 a.m. and 1:15 p.m. and 3 p.m. WINGSPREAD HOUSE, designed by Frank 
Lloyd Wright, 33 East Four Mile Road, Racine, (414) 681-3353. Free 
self-guided tours Mondays through Fridays from 9 a.m. to 4 p.m., when 
conferences are not in session. Call ahead. Getting There From New 
York NORTHWEST AIRLINES, (800) 225-2525. Two direct flights daily 
from La Guardia Airport, at 4 and 7:15 p.m., with a stop in Detroit. 
The 14-day round-trip advance fare with a Saturday stay-over is $222, 
including tax. Depending on availability, $449 round-trip fares can 
be booked at the last minute, but require a Saturday stay-over. Last-minute 
fares are $350 each way plus airport taxes. CONTINENTAL EXPRESS JETS, 
(800) 525-0280. Three direct flights daily from Newark Airport, at 
8:50 a.m., 2:15 p.m. and 6:55 p.m. There are 18 different fares depending 
on availability and departure dates, from $212 round-trip with a 14-day 
advance reservation and Saturday stay-over, to $900 round-trip. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>