<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981119.2000.2026 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Tortillas are in the news today. That's right, tortillas. Now for 
you a tortilla may just be a snack or, if properly prepared an entree 
at a Mexican restaurant. But for millions of Mexicans, tortillas are 
not only a dietary staple but also a part of their history and culture. 
So when the Mexican government announced that it will end tortilla 
subsidies, millions of impoverished citizen began wondering how they 
were going to feed themselves and their families. The World's Frank 
Contreres reports form Mexico City. In every neighborhood all across 
Mexico, in cities and rural areas alike, there are tortillarillas, 
small tortilla factories, like this one in Mexico city. It's called 
Molinaro Semora, and it has been doing business on the same city block 
for 50 years. During that entire time, the government has subsidized 
corn prices to keep tortillas affordable for even the poorest Mexicans. 
Every few minutes huge blobs of corn dough, or Masa are stuffed into 
a squeaky old machine which turns the dough into flat discs, throws 
them onto a hot griddle and cranks out thousands of cooked tortillas 
a day. The smell is deliciously unforgettable. The proud owner of 
Molinaro Semora is Felipe Gallindo. He studied a little history and 
knows that Mexicans have been eating tortillas for more than 5000 
years. It's the national food. Without tortillas the people don't 
eat, that's how it is. It is one of the most important things. We 
don't have tortillas, there is nothing. Most people buy their tortillas 
right before mealtime. All customers standing in line today know the 
government is planning to end its tortilla subsidies, starting next 
January. The government has already raised tortilla prices three times 
this year, which means people are already paying 60 percent more than 
they did last January. The price now stands at three pesos per kilo. 
That's 30 cents for nearly two pounds of tortillas. Sounds pretty 
cheap, right? Well, not according to this customer, 25 year-old dental 
technician Juan Carlos Nevado. Everything rises in price except our 
salaries. It's a situation that really effects the people with families 
who earn the minimum, a situation that is truly alarming and sad. 
The woman right behind him in line, 27 year-old Anna Cappetillo agrees. 
Her husband makes a little over nine dollars a day. And that hardly 
feeds their two children, she says. I only buy a few tortillas daily 
around a half kilo. Sometimes that will last us a about two days. 
I'll eat one, my children will eat about four, but yes, the price 
change hits us hard. The government says it's cutting all unnecessary 
subsidies to help keep the economy going. It plans to let tortilla 
prices fluctuate on the open market. That would save taxpayers at 
least a billion dollars a year. But Collejillo, de Mexico, Economist, 
Jullio Bult Vindick says the subsidies are crucial in a country where 
more than half the people live below the poverty line. It maintained 
the possibility for many families to avoid starvation, to avoid hunger. 
Because average income of Mexican families has been dropping for the 
last 15 years. Private investors, not just in Mexico, but also on 
Wall Street, welcomed the government's decision to end subsidies. 
Mexico's largest corn flour company, Grubo Maissecca, owned at least 
in part by Archer Daniels Midland says the country's economy will 
benefit from free market prices. After the subsidies disappear in 
January, many economists expect tortilla prices to stabilize around 
four pesos per kilo. Critics say that means Mexico's poorest will 
be forced to pay 20 percent of their monthly income for tortillas 
alone. For The World, this is Frank Contreres in Mexico City. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>