<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981119.2000.0612 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Here's a test of whether Japan's ready to transform. Can the country 
adapt its powerful automobile industry to changing times and changing 
markets? The World's Lucy Kraft has found little evidence that it 
can. As car show rooms go, Nissan's flagship in glittering Ginza shopping 
district is the ultimate in prestige. A saleswoman beckons pedestrians 
inside as an electric yellow fair lady Z spins endlessly on a turntable 
inside the picture window. But this season consumers aren't buying. 
On a year on year basis, car and truck sales in Japan have been dropping 
for 19 months straight. And as the auto industry goes, so goes much 
of the nation. If you then think of all of the related industries, 
obviously the steel, rubber, etc., etc., all fits the auto industry 
as inputs, and then the ones, the sales networks, etc. that autos 
go through, it really is a very important industry. Jeff Young is 
an economist with Soloman-Smith-Birney in Tokyo. Certainly until recently 
it has been one of the healthier ones, one of the very few sources 
of growth and profits in the economy. And when that support goes down, 
the secondary effects on the economy will be fairly strong. The plight 
of Japan's auto industry dramatizes the depth of this recession, the 
worst in 50 years. When the downturn began in 1990, the main victims 
were smaller companies, and those involved in real estate. But now, 
with the slump dragging on for its eighth year, even star performers 
like Sony, Hitachi and Toyota have seen their profits slide as anxious 
consumers hold off on new purchases, says economist Young. I would 
characterize it as it's moving up the food chain, from the real estate 
speculators, the very small construction companies up into the household 
names. Downsizing has become a mantra. But even now, as companies 
fight to survive, western style layoffs are still the acceptation. 
Companies are under enormous social pressure to avoid layoffs through 
alternatives, such as offering voluntary early retirement and cutting 
the pay and bonuses of managers. Despite all the difficulties faced 
by the Japanese industry over the last eight years, we have only to 
date, seen one plant closed. And in fact, the auto industry work force 
is only slightly smaller now then it was at the peak of the bubble. 
Steve Usher, an auto analyst with Jardine Fleming Securities says 
it is important to understand the cultural and social context of layoffs 
in Japan. Maintaining the work force, maintaining social stability 
has been paramount, both to decision-makers, and to industrialists 
here in Japan. That is beginning to break down, but I think that that 
explains the history in the industry of holding on to their work force, 
and very reluctantly closing plants and laying off staff. The government 
has proposed adding a record, nearly $200 billion to the budget to 
create jobs, cut taxes, and coach consumers to start buying houses 
and cars again. But most economists say the malaise is so severe, 
a sustained recovery and relief for Japan's embattled carmakers could 
be years away. For The World, this is Lucy Craft, in Tokyo. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>