<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981119.2000.3000 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It will take years, maybe generations for Cambodia to come to grips 
with its history. From 1975 to 1978, the Khmer Rouge killed more than 
one million people. This week a team of UN experts is in Cambodia 
as part of a mission to study the feasibility of bringing leaders 
of the Khmer Rouge to trial. The regime's leader Pol Pot died in April 
of an apparent heart attack. Some members of the Khmer Rouge are still 
at large and could be candidates for prosecution. From Phnom Penh, 
The World's Carolyn Glock sent us this report. In the Pol Pot camp, 
in this a prison, met and tortured a prisoner. After to torture the 
prisoner from here, took them to the killing field and killed them 
there. A guide shows visitors around the buildings of the Tol Sleng 
Genocide Museum. This place used to be a high school before it was 
turned into a torture and detention center, by the Khmer Rouge. Confessions 
extracted here were carefully transcribed. Prisoners were photographed 
and numbered. According to the UN team currently in Cambodia, the 
fact that the Khmer Rouge was so methodical in its documentation could 
prove invaluable in any war crimes trial. One of the team's members, 
Professor Steven Ratner from the University of Texas spoke this week 
at a news conference in Phnom Penh. There is evidence that crimes 
were committed, crimes that meet the definition of certain international 
crimes. But what we cannot say is what state the evidence is in to 
point towards the role of certain individuals. There is a big difference 
between evidence saying that crimes were committed on which the documentation 
center provides us with a treasure trove. And evidence pointing in 
the direction of certain individuals on which we really don't have 
an opinion yet. That's a re-integration ceremony in the former Khmer 
Rouge military stronghold of Anlong Venh earlier this year. Thousands 
of former Guerrillas pledged allegiance to the government in return 
for amnesties. Possible prosecutions of recently defected leaders 
could prove highly controversial and politically destabilizing. Candidates 
for such a trial might include people like Kel Pok a former Khmer 
Rouge commander who scholars believe was implicated in the killings 
of tens of thousands of people in eastern Cambodia. But in a recent 
interview, he evaded issues of accountability. We need national reconciliation 
and an end to the war. I need peace. Some people say, you should stand 
before an international tribunal for your part in the killings. What 
do you say to that? It's up to the government. I'm not guilty. International 
lawyers may decide otherwise. The UN mission is the first attempt 
by the world community to bring to justice those responsible for the 
deaths of more than a million people during the Khmer Rouge reign 
of terror in the late 1970s. Rashun Mullallah, former Chief Justice 
of Mauritius and one of the UN's visiting legal team of experts, believes 
the latest initiative sends out a powerful signal. There is not conflict 
between impunity and national reconciliation. It is very important 
that political leaders, whether past, present or future, should understand 
that the international community will not except a culture of impunity 
for violations of human rights. The team of legal experts will report 
to the United Nations early next year. Even if they do recommend that 
a tribunal or maybe something along the lines of South Africa's Truth 
and Reconciliation Commission is feasible, logistical problems such 
as the apprehension of current and former Khmer Rouge members could 
still mean that it may be many years before any eventual trial takes 
place. For The World, this is Caroline Glock, in Phnom Penh. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>