<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981119.2000.3257 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For our musical closer today, we continue with our series about censorship. 
Even in the United States where freedom of speech is a bedrock of 
the constitution, a form of musical censorship occurs. The World's 
Marco Wehrman illustrates. This album by Marilyn Manson comes with 
a label that has become as well known in the '90s as the "Good Housekeeping 
Seal of Approval" was in the '60s, the "Parental Advisory Explicit 
Content Label". Wall Mart doesn't sell any CDs bearing the black and 
white sticker. Wall Mart says that this is a policy endorsed by its 
millions of customers who now account for more than 10 percent of 
album sales in the United States. Marilyn Manson's CD, Mechanical 
Animals peaked at number one on the Billboard Album chart, despite 
Wall Mart's refusals to sell it. But often times the Parental Advisory 
sticker can put a crimp in sales of a CD. And that's been a concern 
for many rap and hip hop artists whose language can be offensive. 
That's why some change or even delete lyrics in response to the pressure. 
Most singles that come out, particularly on CD, have a radio version. 
Kim Jack Riley is Director of Editorial Projects at The Source, the 
Magazine of hip hop music, culture and politics. Riley says musicians 
now know that they sometimes have to censor themselves. In a radio 
version on a CD, you know the producer who might be working on behalf 
of the marketing arm of the record label had the control. And now 
the artist is getting more involved in that process and just maintaining 
more control. In the CD dance tracks that have become the staple of 
hip hop, it is often hard to hear the four letter words that musicians 
delete for their radio versions. Here's an example. Here's the singer 
Maniffa from the original album version of the track, "Touch it" Okay, 
now here is the radio edit of "Touch It" altered by Maniffa herself.. 
So far self-censorship doesn't seem to have eaten away at the artists' 
integrity, according to Source Magazine's Kim Jack Riley. I think 
that the controversy would come about if that same artist also removed 
those words from perhaps their live act when they are touring in concerts. 
Or if they didn't, also release a, I guess what you would call a, 
"raw version" that was available to adults. But a recent case suggests 
Riley may be exaggerating. Loren Hill gave her song, "Du Wop That 
Thing" the old expletive delete treatment and didn't make a raw version 
available to adults. The results, a huge hit that helped make her 
album, "The Miseducation of Loren Hill" a triple platinum seller. 
Purists may bristle at the self-censorship of Loren Hill and her hip 
hop colleagues. But speaking more as a parent than as an editor with 
the Source Magazine, Kim Jack Riley approves. I really want to emphasize 
that I do endorse freedom of speech, but the people who are developing 
the culture within America really do have to take more seriously their 
responsibility for the products that they are exporting to the rest 
of the world. For The World, this is Marco Wehrman. Loren Hill puts 
the wraps on our show today. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>