<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981119.2000.2585 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
By mid-day tomorrow we should have a pretty good idea of the status 
of a huge tobacco settlement proposed by the states. Tomorrow is the 
deadline for the state attorney's general to sign on to the proposal 
which would resolve all claims against cigarette makers for the cost 
of health care for sick smokers. In return, the nation's four biggest 
tobacco companies would pay out a total of $206 billion over 25 years. 
But don't feel sorry for them, the cigarette business is booming overseas. 
In China, for example, more and more people are lighting up, despite 
research announced today that if current trends continue as many of 
one of every three young Chinese men will eventually die as a result 
of smoking. From Beijing, the BBC's James Miles reports. In a Beijing 
hospital, 46 year-old Joung Shi Jung struggles to blow up a balloon 
to exercise his lungs. His chest is still in pain from an operation 
to remove lung cancer. And in the end, despite encouragement from 
his wife and daughter, he gives up trying. It's too late now for Joung 
to regret his 30 a day smoking habit which he believes came close 
to killing him. LUNG CANCER PATIENT: I'll try to persuade my friends 
to smoke less but whether or not they'll pay any attention will depend 
upon how sensible they are, Because some Chinese are very stupid. 
They think smoking won't do them any harm. They sometimes say, Mao 
Zedong smoked and Deng Xiao Ping smoked, and they lived to a great 
old age. So they think, is lung cancer really caused by smoking, or 
is it just triggered naturally? British and Chinese researchers involved 
in the world's largest ever investigation of smoking related deaths, 
have concluded that one third of all young Chinese men will eventually 
be killed by tobacco. Professor Richard Peter of Oxford University 
worked on the study. In the first 25 years of the next century, there 
is going to be at least 30 million people killed by tobacco in China. 
Now these people already smoke, so unless adult smokers stop, those 
30 million deaths are going to happen. The only two things in the 
world that are big, and getting bigger fast, as causes of death are 
HIV and tobacco. It's just an enormous global problem. And China has 
the biggest problem of anywhere in the world. Out on Beijing streets, 
peddlers sit behind piles of foreign cigarette cartons, selling them 
for far less than they cost in the west. Gregory Tang, an American 
Chinese anti-smoking campaigner asks one of the stall-holders how, 
in a country with seemingly strict controls on tobacco imports, so 
many foreign cigarettes are on sale. The peddler readily responds 
that all the cigarettes are smuggled. Even now at the height of a 
new government campaign against smuggling, contraband cigarettes are 
readily available. Mr. Tang explains why. There are so many people 
in China now who lost a job. So selling cigarettes is a way to make 
a living. OK, so it is a social problem. You cannot say, oh, go home 
and get rid of cigarettes. I don't think this problem is solved easily, 
you see. I think they are beginning, in the last several years to 
know that it is not a good idea to have more smokers coming into the 
teens. But, I don't think, at the highest level in China, we have 
carefully. I think they need a much greater understanding of the evils 
of tobacco. The Chinese government has banned cigarette advertising 
on radio and television as well as smoking in public places. There 
are health warnings, too, on cigarette packets. But the message is 
being ignored. I only just started to smoke three months ago, because 
I'm in a very bad mood. I have nothing to do, you know. Every kinds 
of cigarettes I smoke, American, Chinese, every kind. If I don't smoke, 
no happy. Because I'm alone in the beginning. At a Beijing disco, 
staff stand at the entrance, and hand out free cigarettes of a well-known 
British brand. As cigarette sales slump in the west, tobacco multi-nationals 
now see China as a market of enormous potential. The research published 
today, however, warns that the country faces a catastrophic epidemic 
of tobacco-related deaths. The BBC's James Miles in Beijing. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>