<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981119.2000.1260 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Queen of England lost a centuries old privilege today. From now 
on, if a whale carcass washes up on an English beach, it won't belong 
to her majesty. Under an ancient law, the Queen was able to claim 
the whale tail to provide a bone for her dresses. But that law and 
several other hundred obscure pieces of legislation were abolished 
today. The World's Steven Beard has been crawling through Britain's 
legal undergrowth. This week, the House of Lords, the British equivalent 
of the US Senate solemnly debated whether the speaker, the Lord Chancellor 
should drop his britches, and his tights, his buckled shoes, and his 
full-bottomed wig, his customary regalia when presiding over debates. 
Britain's law and constitution are littered with relics like that. 
And this: A curious edicts enforcing in Birmingham means that a man 
and woman aren't allowed to have sex "on the steps of any church after 
the sun goes down." Presumably this means that it is OK in the daylight. 
Dickon Ross of a magazine called Focus which specializes in rooting 
out little known facts about Britain. He's recently been trolling 
through some old law books on the lookout for oddities, like the 17the-century 
statute on wife beating. It's forbidden but only after at night on 
account of the noise. Also, still in force, a number of laws regulating 
what Britains can eat at Christmas. A lot of these were introduced 
during Cromwell's era who was a little bit of a killjoy perhaps. For 
example, you are not allowed to have more than three courses for your 
Christmas dinner. He considered it just a little bit too much fun 
to have more than that. And he also banned the making and eating of 
Christmas pudding and mince pies on the 25th of December, too. Many 
of the most bizarre laws still on the statute books relate to the 
London Taxi trade. It's still illegal, under an ancient London bylaw 
to shout "Taxi" in the street. There was a time, it seems when that 
was regarded as a nuisance. And until only a few years ago, according 
to lawyer Anthony Rolland passengers could, theoretically have found 
themselves sharing the cab with an unexpected commodity. You had to 
have a bail of hay in the back of the taxi, and this went back to 
the days when all taxis were horse drawn. And they were expected to 
take a certain amount to keep the horse going. Anthony Rolland is 
a member of the British Law Commission's Statute Revision Team. He 
and his colleagues spend hours toiling through history books, transcripts 
of Parliamentary debates and other yellowing manuscripts looking for 
anomalies and compiling huge lists of laws in urgent need of repeal. 
John Saunders head of the revision team, says that it is his job to 
keep the British law neat and tidy. In a way we are a bit like statutory 
refuse collectors, or house clearers. We look at an area of the statute 
book which needs to be sorted out, and we go in, we get together the 
old rubbish, and take it out and remove it. The team has just consigned 
another load of off beat crimes to the dustbin of history. Gone is 
the offense of beating a carpet in the street after in the morning, 
the practice of flying a kite has also been decriminalized. And ships 
sailing in British waters are no longer forbidden from carrying cooking 
pots of an unusual size. But why not leave these funny old relics 
alone. Aren't they just part of British heritage? It's a question 
John Saunders has been asked hundreds of times. It takes no account 
of the needs of the modern statute book user. You have to weave through 
page after page of dead wood. So there is always a balance to be struck 
between the needs of the people that actually use it and the desires 
of those who want the statute book to be some kind of theme park full 
of historical artifacts, which really belong just in the archives. 
Which brings us back to what some critics say is another theme park 
stuffed full with historical artifacts, the House of Lords. And the 
urgent matter of the Lord Chancellor's britches. While the statute 
revision team are at work this week, hacking their way through a thicket 
of antiquated laws, the curious debate over official costumes rumbled 
on. In the end the house decided the Lord Chancellor could appear 
in 20th century dress. Although one disgruntled peer complained, he 
won't command the same respect wearing trousers. For The World, this 
is Steven Beard, in London. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>