<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981119.2000.2282 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Turkish consumers are not buying Italian shoes, or jewelry, or furniture, 
fruits or vegetables. The nation is furious at Rome for its reluctance 
to hand over a Kurdish rebel leader wanted for treason. In fact, Turkey 
has gone so far to say, that if Italy does not extradite Abdullah 
Odjallon, the Italian government will be considered an accomplice 
to mass murder. Yesterday, Rome dismissed Ankara's warning. And the 
rift between the two NATO allies is getting uglier by the minute. 
Allen McCosky of the Washington Institute for Near East Policy has 
been following developments. Abdullah Odjallan's name is virtually 
unknown, here in the United States. Who is he, and why does the US 
care so much about what's happening to him? Well, Abdullah Odjallan 
is the leader of a movement for Kurdish independence within Turkey. 
Since the Kurdish insurgency began, in 1984, roughly 30 to 40,000 
people have been killed. That's of all types: soldiers, civilians, 
PKK fighters. Out of that amount, roughly 5000 are civilians. And 
several of those civilians have been the victims of clear acts of 
terrorism. And the US considers him a terrorist. Does he present a 
threat to the United States, or have his actions just been in Turkey. 
And why does Washington care what's happening to him? Well I think 
Washington cares for two primary reasons. The first, is counter-terrorism. 
Washington sees itself as the leader of international efforts against 
terrorism. It has been Washington's position that terrorism is not 
justified. That political grievances do not justify violence. And 
consequently the PKK, which Washington classifies as a terrorist group 
is a group that should be brought under control. It is extremely rare, 
almost unprecedented in the Middle East, for the leader of a major 
terrorism group to be apprehended. And so this is a tremendous opportunity 
from Washington's point of view, to strike a blow against terrorism, 
by putting on trial the leader of a major terrorist group. Now Italy 
is saying that it cannot constitutionally do what Turkey wants and 
extradite this man back to Turkey because Turkey has the death penalty. 
Does the issue of capital punnishment concern the United States as 
well? I don't think that that is a criterion for extradition, after 
all we have capital punnishment here ourselves, and I believe the 
Italians at least once have refused an extradition request from the 
United States, based on the fact that we have capital punnishment. 
However in Turkey, unlike the United States for that matter, there 
have been no executions for 14 years. And there are some prominent 
jurists in Italy who reportedly believe that on that basis, Odjallan 
could be expedited to Turkey. What of this labeling of Odjallan as 
a terrorist who deserves to be brought to justice. Is that entirely 
a fair assessment in your view, given the fact that their language, 
that their culture have been surpressed for so long in Turkey? As 
the saying goes, one man's terrorist is another man's freedom fighter. 
Yes, I think that's a dangerous thing. I think it is very appropriate 
to classify him as a terrorist. The PKK has carried out a number of 
acts, overtly aimed at civilians. Now that is not to say that every 
action that they carry out is terrorism. Yes, they also use guerrilla 
techniques, and they do take on and attack the Turkish military as 
well. I don't think there is any doubt that terrorism has been one 
of the primary weapons used by the PKK in its fight against Turkey. 
Allen McCosky is Senior Fellow of the Washington Institute for Near 
East Policy, speaking to us from Washington DC. Thank you Mr. McCosky. 
My pleasure. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>