<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981119.2000.0375 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The scene on Capitol Hill today blended constitutional drama and partisan 
politics. Testifying before the House Judiciary Committee, Kenneth 
Starr laid out the evidence that triggered the third presidential 
impeachment inquiry in American history. I want to emphasize that 
our referral never suggests that the relationship between the President 
and Ms. Lewinsky in and of itself could constitute a high crime or 
misdemeanor. Indeed, the referral never passes judgment on the President's 
relationship with Ms. Lewinski. The referral is instead, about obstruction 
of justice, lying under oath, tampering with witnesses, and the misuse 
of power. The target of Starr's investigation and testimony, President 
Bill Clinton was on the other side of the world, beginning a five-day 
visit to Asia. Today he was in Japan casting a vote of confidence 
for the world's second biggest economy. As The World's Andrew North 
reports, the President thinks Tokyo is taking the right steps to end 
its recession. During the past year, Japan has endured a near constant 
refrain from US economic officials, put your economic house in order, 
they've said, and pull yourself out of recession. But on his first 
visit to Japan, in over two years, President Clinton has been trying 
to sound a more encouraging note. I think that the big things that 
have been done here are essentially moving in the right direction, 
the banking reform stimulating the economy. One of those big things 
Mr. Clinton was praising is the mammoth $196 billion package of stimulus 
measures announced by the Japanese government this week. And after 
months of putting up with non-stop US criticism, some Japanese economists 
were enthusiastic about the President's remarks today. He's been very 
generous and very kind as far as wordings are concerned. Usually we 
tended to have a lot of harsh words. Sajiro Takashita, a Japanese 
director of the Investment Bank, Deutch-Morgan-Granfeld. But at the 
same time I think Mr. Clinton also realizes the state that the Japanese 
economy is in. And that is why he is not playing the hard line, like 
a lot of other presidents did. In fact, US economic policy makers 
still harbor doubts as to whether the recent measures taken by the 
Japanese government will finally lift the country out of it's eight-year 
recession. Mr. Clinton, however, took a consistently positive line 
today. And so did his Japanese audience, at a town hall meeting in 
Tokyo, with one exception. How did you apologize to Mrs. Clinton and 
Chelsea? And you know I don't think I would ever be able to forgive 
my husband for doing that, but did they really forgive you, Mr. President? 
Well I did it in a direct and straightforward manner. And I believe 
they did, yes. But, that's really a question you could ask them better 
than me. That was a rare, awkward moment in what has otherwise been 
a smooth presidential trip. The Japanese government is glad to have 
Mr. Clinton in the country, partly because it felt snubbed by his 
decision not to stop over on his way back from China earlier in the 
year. But, while Mr. Clinton's praise for the huge Japanese stimulus 
package has been well received, some analysts fear it is misdirected. 
Deutch-Morgan-Granfeld 's Sijiro Takashita says Japan needs more. 
The size is very important, but again size isn't everything. I think 
what should be in focus is how and where it's being spent. Takashita 
is concerned that the $196 billion will be spent just to prop up the 
old system. He and many other Japanese economists say it should also 
be going to promoting a more flexible work force, and encouraging 
a greater entrepreneurial spirit. But that kind of change in Japan 
may need a lot more than money. For The World, this is Andrew North. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>