<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981119.2000.0829 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Gays in the military are an ongoing controversy in the United States, 
but they are just a fact of life in The Netherlands. In fact, this 
week the Dutch Air Force launched a recruitment campaign in the nation's 
leading magazine for gays. That magazine is the Amsterdam-based Gay 
Krant and its editor-in-chief is Hank Kreul. Mr. Kreul, could you 
describe for us the advertisement? How does the Air Force make its 
pitch? Well, you see a very big cockpit of the F-16 Starfighter. Beside 
the photograph, there is the line, "There are more exciting places 
on earth than just the dark room." Could you explain for us what the 
dark room is? Well, I'm not so familiar with the dark room, but I 
understood that the dark room is a place in some bars in Amsterdam 
and probably elsewhere over where you are where people can meet each 
other. Well as I understand, it is sort of where more intimate activity 
goes on, kind of in the back of the bar. They told me, but to tell 
you the truth, I have never been in a dark room so I really can't 
tell you. Yes, OK, proceed then, the rest of the copy reads, how? 
"Picture your self a place in the cockpit of an F-16, you'll start 
the engine, and a few moments later, you've got 50 million people 
beneath you, from Mastrecht to Danhelder - two cities in The Netherlands 
- we'll take you only seven minutes. Do you know one place that is 
more exciting than a cockpit in the F-16? If you know, please tell 
us, and if you don't you can come over and work with us." And then 
it's signed by the Royal Dutch Air Force of the Netherlands. Wow, 
that's pretty hot stuff! KREUL, Well, not here. To tell the truth 
the Royal Dutch Air Force and the Army and the police in The Netherlands 
were having ads in the Gay Krumb for rather a long time, but now it's 
the first time that they have an ad that is so directly written towards 
gay people. Why is it, that the Air Force, at this point, specifically 
wants to recruit gays and lesbians? Well, as far as I understood, 
they don't find enough pilots for their Starfighters. And they need 
new people, and well, as you know, most of the gay people have very 
good schools. So they can use the gay people in the Army. And they 
have, as far as I am told, very good reserves out of that. So, that 
is why they planned a campaign directly to gay people. Is it seen 
as a case of affirmative action or some might say, positive discrimination. 
Or are they simply recognizing the need to recruit more men and women? 
They just need more men and women, that's the only point. And then 
the strange thing is, when the ad appeared, I got phone calls from 
all over the world, media asking me what was going on in The Netherlands. 
And to tell you the truth, I got no phone calls from one of the media 
in The Netherlands. And it is no big news here in The Netherlands 
that they are doing that. It is big news else where in the world. 
And I think that says something about discrimination toward gay people 
elsewhere in the world, and how liberal the Dutch are. Well, it's 
interesting, because as you probably know, the issue in part here 
in the United States, surrounding homosexuality in the armed forces 
has been that homosexual troops, gay and lesbian troops might be more 
vulnerable for instances to blackmail. Is there no such debate going 
on there in The Netherlands? No. We have had our debate, I think, 
a century ago. But, not right now. No, tell you the truth, as you 
know, the Dutch army works in Bosnia. And at a certain moment, the 
Minster of Defense decided that it was worth sending Playboy magazines 
to all the Dutch troops in Bosnia. And when he was doing so, he also 
called the Gay Krumb -we are not only publisher of the Gay Krumb but 
also another magazine called Nagayzin, with more erotic photographs 
-- and he asked us to send at least two hundred copies of magazines, 
so that he could send that towards gay people in the troops over there 
in Bosnia. So, it is rather normal in The Netherlands then when you 
think of straight people you also think of gay people. Our society 
is a mix of both. I think probably safe to say that those magazines 
would not be included in a care package coming from the United States 
government. No, but they will meet each other over there. Hank Kreul 
is editor in chief of Gay Krumb. The gay newsmagazine in The Netherlands 
is publishing the first ad in the gay press to attract gays and lesbians 
to the military. Thank you very much Mr. Kreul. I appreciate it, by 
by Lisa. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>