<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981119.0500.2389 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The countdown is underway for the launch of the first module of the 
international space station that will be the vanguard of space exploration 
for at least the next decade. NASA's flight director John Curry took 
VOA's Peter Hineline on a tour of the Russian space center known as 
the Sup, mission control for the launch. The is the . It is their 
mission control. They've been controlling the Mir space station out 
of the building over on the other side, still called the Sup. And 
then we've got, obviously, in Houston the equivalent. We have two 
control centers. We've got the shuttle control room and we've also 
got the station control room. The Sup is an almost legendary place 
for space-proud Russians. It is the command center for Mir, the orbiting 
station has kept Russian cosmonauts in space continuousness maze of 
hallways and offices located about an hour's drive from Central Moscow. 
These days, it is alive with activity. But at the same time, it is 
strangely quiet. Technicians hover over computer screens communications 
are whispered into headsets. NASA flight director John Curry explains 
this section of the center, orignally buit to house the Soviet Union's 
short-lived space shuttle program, has been converted to an American 
command center. This is what we call a -- the HSR, the Houston Support 
Room. This is the NASA Op center and in Sup, in mission control center 
Moscow. So it is from this room that we will be monitoring both telemetry 
from the space shuttle and from the -- as well as from the Russian 
piece Czaria. The Czaria launch is the first of nearly 50 planned 
to create the most ambitious space complex ever assembled. The project 
brings together the space programs and traditions of the United States, 
Russia, Canada, Japan and the European space agency. Representatives 
of all the programs met reporters at the Sup hours before lunch to 
hail the dawn of a new age. They glossed over the many cultural differences 
and misunderstandings that have, at times, led to tension and even 
delays in the project. But Russian space agency deputy chief Alexeg 
Krasynov admitted his team of proud professionals has had difficulty 
adjusting to Western ways. Sometimes little things mean a lot. As 
an example, he told reporters, through an interpreter, Russians are 
superstitious about pre-launch publicity. Flight director John Curry 
says for his crew, the pre-launch anticipation is almost unbearable. 
The moment they have been working toward for years is almost at hand. 
So, we're ready. We have simmed for over a mon and a half straight 
now, performed simulations, practices, of the real mission. We're 
ready to go. At the Sup, the countdown clock is ticking off the seconds 
till launch, but silently. The atmosphere is one of quiet confidence. 
This is the eve of a new dawn. Peter Hineline at the Carlyoff Space 
Center outside Moscow. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>