<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981119.0500.1368 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
An American music scholar says he's identified three opera duets that 
were probably written by Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart more than 200 years 
ago. These duets have now had their first American performances. VOA's 
Martin Bush reports from New York. David Bulge startled the music 
world two years ago when he announced that he had discovered three 
unknown operatic duets written by Mozart. According to the musicologist, 
Mozart was one of five composers who contributed arias to the 1790 
comic opera entitled "The Philosopher's Stone," or Vierstein Derveisen. 
All three duets now are credit to Mozart, were recently performed 
by the Boston Baroque Ensemble. One selection is called Nun Levis 
Vagtszen which means "Now Dearest Little Wife." Musicologist David 
Bulge did some painstaking research to verify that this is the music 
of Mozart. You can't be 100 percent sure. I would say it's likely. 
Now Kaunstanzaa, Mozart's widow, mentioned the fact that her husband 
had collaborated with a composer-singer named Benedict Shaq and had 
written small sections in his operas and there are not many of these 
and Vierstein Derveisen is one of these. And she said that three times 
on three different occasions. And there's various other kinds of evidence 
that is brought to bear in my resarch that shows that this is a very 
likely case. And, of course, we have a manuscript in Mozart's own 
hand, showing that he wrote most of this duet. David Bulge came across 
the Mozart material while doing resarch on 18th century fairytale 
operas. In the City and University library of Hamburg, Germany. The 
Mozart manuscripts had been taken from the Hamburg Library by the 
Soviet Army during the Second World War, but will return to Hamburg 
by the Russian city of St. Petersburg in 1996. Mr. Bulge says the 
material he attributes to Mr. Mozart was not identified by russian 
Scholars because they apparently ignored the entire manuscript collection 
taken from Hamburg. Well, I don't think they were looking at the collection. 
They had a huge -- I mean, 2,000 manuscripts sitting in water in the 
basement of the Insitute for Music, Theater and Film. They did not 
look at it very closely. Some people have questioned why a composer 
of Mozart's stature would have contributed his music to an opera jointly 
written by several composers. Musicologist David Bulge explains that 
Mozart had good friends at the Vienna Stereafterveeden and a sister-in-law 
who was its leading soprano. I think it was common in this theater 
Emmanuel Chikanatur ran the theater and he had a troop, a group of 
composers that often collaborated. There's an article in 1794 that 
refers to the Steinderveisen and a few other operas and says, these 
men wrote their operas like one builds a house. And when you don't 
have a lot of time, it's a great way to write an opera. So I think 
it was a practice that was done at this theater. The aria called "Meow, 
Meow" resembles another duet Mozart apparently composed for Versteinderveisen. 
The heroe's wife is unable to speak, only to meow, like a cat, because 
an evil magician has cast a spell on her. David Bulge points out that 
composer Mozart and Lebreta's Chikanatur completed the comic opera 
masterpiece "The Magic Flute" one year after the premier of "The Philosopher's 
Stone." Both operas had almost the same cast. Both had Lebreta as 
based on the same group of fairy tales and, says Mr. Bulge, both have 
multiple parallels in text and music. Martin Bush, VOA News, New York 
</TEXT>
</DOC>