<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981119.0500.0625 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The immediate crisis has faded in the confrontation with Iraq, but 
the signs are clear that international diplomats will be troubled 
by Baghdad again in the future. Though Western military might is standing 
down in light of renewed Iraqi cooperation on weapons inspections, 
the U.S. and Britain are now offering more backing for Iraqi opposition 
groups. British Prime Minister Tony Blair says there is growing political 
opposition to President Sadam Hussein inside Iraq. Mr. Blair says 
Britain will host a meeting of Iraqi opposition groups early next 
week. But will the conflict over weapons inspection be replayed again 
in the future? VOA's Andre Daneshrara spoke with two former U.N. weapons 
inspectors about the crisis in reports from Washington. This is not 
the first time the Iraqi president said he would cooperate fully with 
the U.N. and it is not the first crisis pitting the United Nations 
against Baghdad. Last February, U.N. Secretary General Kofi Annan 
diffused tensions after traveling to Baghdad. Former U.N. Weapons 
Inspector Tim Travan says that while U.S. military strikes have been 
prevented once again, the fundamental reasons for the continuing crisis 
are still there. TIM TRAVAN, FORMER U.N. WEAPONS The U.N., obviously 
supported mainly by the U.S., is still demanding that Iraq get rid 
of all its weapons of mass destruction. And on the other side, you 
have Iraq still not cooperating with the U.N. and they may well be 
saying, right, you could have unfettered access, but they're still 
not offering the information, offering up the material and the equipment 
that needs to be destroyed to the U.N. So, I should expect that this 
crisis will re-emerge in some form or other as soon as the military 
threat in the states diminishes. Mr. Travan says what the current 
crisis has done is to get U.N. inspectors back into Iraq with greater 
support from the Security Council. There clearly is the will within 
the Security Council and particularly with the U.S. and the U.K. to 
force Iraq to comply through military means, if necessary. So now 
UNSCOM is in the position to go ahead and do really intrusive inspections, 
knowing that it has the political and military support of the counsel 
behind it. You'll recall, that back in February, there really wasn't 
the stomach for a military action amongst other members of the counsel. 
So I think perhaps by letting this particular crisis fester for long 
enough, the U.S. allowed the other members of the counsel to get so 
fed up with Iraq that they all acquiesced to the proposal for military 
action. Another former U.N. weapons inspector Colonel Terry Taylor 
says the presences of inspectors in Iraq is essential. He describes 
the resolution of the current crisis as the least-worst outcome. COLONEL 
TERRY TAYLOR, former u.n. There's no good outcome in these circumstances, 
but I think it started to have inspectors on the ground in Iraq, rather 
than not have anybody on the ground and perhaps some way have Iraq 
fenced in and allowed to get on with whatever it wants to do with 
its weapons of mass destruction program, regenerate them and so on 
and hope to, by standing around the outside to somehow contain the 
Iraqi leadership. Colonel Taylor says U.N. inspectors still have a 
lot of work to do, especially dealing with biological weapons. But 
the former weapons inspector says there are other areas UNSCOM must 
inspect. There's more to be found out about the chemical weapons program, 
in particular, in relating to the -- I think it's 4,000 tons of precursor 
chemicals, that's chemicals needed from a manufacturer of VX nerve 
agent, which has not been properly accounted for. And we now know, 
of course, they did weaponize that particular lethal nerve agent. 
A little bit more to be found, think about the nuclear program supplier 
network and certainly more to understand about the missile program 
and, in particular, not all the missiles, SCUD missiles have been 
accounted for. Colonel Terry Taylor says the ongoing struggle between 
Iraq and the United Nations is a test of wills and it is a real challenge 
for the leaders of democratic states. He says UNSCOM's work could 
be done relatively quickly if Iraq genuinely decides to cooperate 
fully. Otherwise, he feels there will be more crisis ahead with more 
threats of military action. ANDRE DENESHRARA, VOA News, Washington. 
And the final note to this story, the chief U.N. arms inspector Richard 
Butler says he's asked Iraq to tell the truth about biological weapons. 
Mr. Butler spoke Wednesday in the city of Philadelphia here in the 
United States. He sent a letter to Iraq's Deputy Prime Minister Tariq 
Aziz saying, in his words, start again, break the habit of a lifetime 
and tell the truth about biological weapons. The chief inspector said 
his team has destroyed a substantial portion of Iraq's illegal missiles 
and chemical weapons, but needs more information in the biological 
area. Of course, U.N. arms inspectors returned the field in Iraq Wednesday 
after a two-week absence. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>