<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981119.0500.0359 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The first of a possible three troop withdraws from the West Bank are 
being discussed by the Israeli Cabinet at this hour. The pull-out 
will be approved if the cabinet is satisfied that the Palestinian 
authority has fulfilled its commitments for providing security, as 
negotiated under the Wye River Peace Accord. Before the meeting began, 
Israel's public security minister said in a radio broadcast that the 
Palestinians had, indeed, achieved that goal. With that finding, VOA's 
David Gullest, in Jerusalem tells us it appears the cabinet will move 
ahead with a troop withdrawal. The Israel's had start a number of 
clarifications from the Palestinians on how they will precisely carry 
out their commitments under the Wye agreement. This includes pledges 
to begin collection of illegal weapons and also an anti-incitement 
decree. In fact, incitement to violence against Israelis would be 
-- would be prohibited by the Palestinian authority. A provision, 
by the way, which has the Palestinian human rights advocates upset 
that this could be a conceivable infringement of human rights. But 
the initial indications are that the Palestinian clarifications are 
going to be adequate to get this cabinet approval. If it happens, 
the Israeli forces will be pulling back late in the day. This very 
day. That's correct. But in the short term, the trust level appears 
to be rising. Palestinian leader Arafat made some public commitments 
earlier this week, saying that all the final status to issues of this 
peace process should be decided at the bargaining table. There have 
been some rather high-profile meetings between senior Israeli and 
Palestinian officials in the last couple of days and these things 
come and go, but the trust level seems to be rather high. Keep in 
mind that last-minute snags are -- have plagued this process from 
the beginning. What exactly is involved in the deployment? Who stands 
to gain and who to lose? Well, there's a considerable amount of territory 
going to be affected. Almost all of it is in the northern part of 
the West Bank around the town of Jenine. The Israelis will be transferring 
two percent of the West Bank. That's about 110 square kilometers to 
joint control. And more significantly, the Israelis will be turning 
over little more than seven percent of the West Bank or about 400 
square kilometers to the sole jurisdiction of the Palestinian authority. 
Now this is -- these are remote areas in the Northern part of the 
West Bank. No significant Arab towns will be transferred from Israel 
or joint authority to sole authority of the Palestinians. However, 
some Israeli settlements in that area will become largely surrounded 
by Palestinian territory. This fact has many of the advocates of the 
settlers very upset and a number of members of Mr. Netanyahu's own 
cabinet are very troubled by the idea that this redeployment will 
leave a number of Israeli settlements nearly isolated or as complete 
islands in Palestinian territory. VOA's David Gullest spoke to us 
from Jerusalem. On Wednesday, Israel and the Palestinians agreed to 
formally reopen talks on a final permanent peace treaty. Those talks 
are to begin next week with a ceremony in Palestinian-ruled territory. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>