<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981119.0500.1659 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> MISCELLANEOUS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Many of our local fm, meow, and medium wave's affiliates are to, meow, 
take a break. This is VOA News Now. You must remember when you were 
a kid and you were going to school, it was always required that you 
take your report card home and have your mom or your dad or somebody 
sign the thing, right? Remember how that was. Always mom, never dad. 
Never dad, always mom. Always know mom was nicer about it. OK. And 
I -- well, I guess you've got kids, too. You've signed a few report 
cards in your time, too, right? Right. Well, the reason they do this, 
of course, in the schools, I dont' know if you know, other countries 
it's done this way, but here it's just to make sure that the parent 
sees your report card and all the rest of this. Well, poor little 
Desire Wilson has run into a bit of problem with this. You know, a 
lot of kids will use an excuse they don't want mom or dad to see the 
report card, oh, I dropped it in the mud on the way home. The dog 
ate it. I mean, who knows. Joey beat me up and took it away from me. 
Joe took it, whatever. Well, Desire' Wilson's exucse is the president 
took it and didn't give it back. Yeah, right, child. She's an elementary 
school student in Oklahoma. So the president was visiting out in her 
town in Tuluqua, Oklahoma. And when she got her chance to meet the 
president and little Desire' said, Mr. President, would you sign my 
postcard and -- I mean, my report card. He smiled and he said, yes, 
he would, one of his -- the secret agent people in his entourage took 
the report card and that's the last little Desire's ever seen of it. 
And now she can get another report card from school. But in the meantime, 
she's been having a tough time getting her teachers to believe that 
the president gave it to her and why is that. Because those teachers 
have heard.... Well, the teachers are saying, sure? They heard too 
many stories along that line. Um-hum. That's right. We've heard this 
one before. But you know, that may be the best one they've ever heard. 
I bet. I bet It's 10 hours, 30 universal time and this is VOA News 
Now. President Clinton begins a shortened trip to Asia that will focus 
on economic and security issues. A special U.S. envoy visited who 
visited North Korea says the two sides are still far apart on American 
demands to inspect a suspected underground nuclear project. Going 
to school on an empty stomach. How much can you learn? These stories, 
plus business news and lots more in our next half hour of VOA News 
Now. Hello, again. I'm Les Carpenter with Charlene Porter and this 
is VOA News now. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>