<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981119.0500.2076 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For only the third time in U.S. history the House Judiciary Committee 
later today will open hearings on the impeachment of the president. 
VOA Correspondent Paula Wolfson reports the only witness on the first 
day will be Independent Counsel Kenneth Starr. Kenneth Starr's prepared 
testimony was made public on the eve of the hearing. It could be the 
spark that sets off a partisan political explosion. The independent 
counsel who has spent four years investigating the president, accuses 
him of a pattern of deceit and abuse of power. His testimony focuses 
largely on Bill Clinton's efforts to conceal his relationship with 
former White House intern Monica Lewinsky. But in a move sure to anger 
congressional democrats, Mr. Starr moves on to other matters not mentioned 
in the report he sent to Congress in September. He plans to tell the 
committee the president's actions in the Lewinsky case must be put 
in context, that they follow other incidents in which Mr. Clinton 
sought to thwart the legal process. Democrats were already planning 
an assault on the independent counsel's findings and investigative 
methods. And there is no doubt they will look at his testimony as 
part of an effort by republicans to broaden their inquiry. Committee 
Chairman Henry Hyde rebuffs the criticism. He says he is doing his 
best to be fair. And if Kenneth Starr has new information, the committee 
should hear it. I don't know what else he might have. You know, every 
day things occur, developments occur. So we want to give him a chance. 
And, of course, this provides us an opportunity and certainly the 
president and the democrats to cross examine him. Mr. Starr will be 
questioned by panel members, by top investigatoros for the republicans 
and democrats and by President Clinton's lawyer David Kendall. The 
President is in Japan and is not expected to see any of the proceedings. 
But before leaving Washington, White House Spokesman Joe Lockhart 
suggested the independent counsel is working in tandem with congressional 
republicans. Although the republicans have talked about being bipartisan 
and the independent counsel has talked about his independence, we 
seem to see a situation now where they're walking in lock-step. Orginally, 
Mr. Starr was expected to be the only witness to appear before the 
committee. But Chairman Hyde now says there are other people who should 
be questioned. They include Bill Clinton's senior adviser and confidant 
Bruce Lindsey and lawyer Robert Bennett, who represented the president 
in the Paula Jones sexual harassment case. The additional witnesses 
will not be asked to testify in public, but will be interviewed behind 
closed doors. Paula Wolfson, VOA News, Capitol Hill. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>