<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981119.0500.3169 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Super Tuesday is a term that used to be known to American politics 
-- a day when a lot of primary elections are held in many states at 
the same time. But now the music industry is adopting that term because 
of what happened this past Tuesday, November 17. On that date, record 
stores throughout the U.S. began selling new CDs by some of America's 
most popular artists. And as VOA's Mary Morningstar reports, the albums 
are expected to be among the most successful of the year. Garth Brooks 
is among the names on the music industry's Super Tuesday list, which 
also includes new releases by such superstars as Mariah Carey, Whitney 
Houston and Jewel. Garth's "Double Live" set contains 25 tracks, spanning 
his live concert career from 1991 to 1998. The CD features his current 
hit, "It's Your Song," a tune dedicated to his mother who recently 
battled throat cancer. It's one of three new singles on "Double Live" 
which also includes such concert favorites as "The Dance," "The Thunder 
Rolls," and a nine-minute version of "Friends in Low Places." Executives 
at Capital Records have shown their confidence in Garth Brooks' "Double 
Live" by shipping about 8 1/2 million copies to U.S. record stores. 
Definintely you feel competition. That's the great thing. People that'll 
come in, you know, hopefully, for one artists' album, while they're 
in there, will pick p other artists album. That's why it's a great 
day for music. Just back from a five-night engagement in Belfast, 
Ireland, Garth Brooks will spend this week in Las Angeles promoting 
the live anthology. On November 17th, he performed a live studio concert 
that aired on closed-circuit television in Walmart department stores 
throughout the country. He'll also host his sixth NBC television special 
and will appear on various talk shows during the next several weeks. 
It's been more than three years since Jewel recorded her multimillion-selling 
debut album, "Pieces of You." But expectations are high for the pop 
singer-songwriter's follow-up CD "Spirit." The new collection blends 
folks, pop and rock styles with lyrics that center on faith, love 
and human experiences. Jewel's promoting her new album "Spirit" with 
television appearances and an on-line Internet chat with fans and 
it's already been announced that she'll grace the cover of "Roling 
Stone" magazine's year-end issue. Pop diva's Mariah Carey and Whitney 
Houston both have new CDs out this week. Mariah's "Number Ones" features 
13 of her number-one hits, plus 4 new songs. Highlights include a 
previously unreleased live version of "Hero" and her duet with Whitney 
Houston, "When You Believe." Arista Records' release of Whitney Houston's 
CD marks her first non-soundtrak album in eight years. She teamed 
with some of today's most respected songwriters and producers, including 
Dian Warren Kenny "Babyface" Edmonds, David Foster and Lauryn Hill. 
Guaranteed to top many music lovers' holiday shopping lists, "My Love 
is Your Love" features guest performances by Faith Evans and Kelly 
Price and brief appearance by Whitney's five-year-old daughter Bobbi 
Kristina . So will all these high-profile releases make the market 
too competitive? "Bill Board" magazine's Melinda Newman doesn't think 
so. No one's record is going to suffer. What's going to happen is 
you might just see the sales spread out. Retail stores in the U.S. 
began tallying sales of the week's new releases on November 17th. 
And one week from now we'll know if they deserve their Super Tuesday 
billing. I'm Mary Morningstar. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>