<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981119.0500.2652 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Today, many Ameircans will mark an over two- decades-old tradition 
by putting away their cigarettes and going nicotine free for a day. 
But as Brian Sislack reports, this year's Great American Smoke-Out 
has anti-smoking activists and the public health community struggling 
to hold on to previous gains. Every November, since the late 1970s, 
the American Cancer Society and other public health groups have encouraged 
smokers to try doing without for a day, in the hope that a 24-hour 
commitment would expand to a lifetime without cigarettes and their 
accompanying risks of cancer, emphazema and heart disease. In many 
respects, the Great American Smoke-Out has been a resoundig success. 
Since 1978, the incidents of cigarette smoking among American adults 
has declined from 36 percent of the adult population down to 25 percent. 
And a certain social stigma has attached to smoking, at least among 
adults. Unfortunately, the news is not so good for our young people. 
DR. GARY JOVINO, CHIEF EPIDEMIOLOGIST, OFFICE ON SMOKING AND health, 
u.s. centers for The trends are going in the wrong direction and if 
current trends continue, then even more of our young people will eventually 
succumb to tobacco and the adverse health consequences that it causes. 
Dr. Gary Jovino is chief epidemiologist at the office on smoking and 
health at the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. He 
cites a recent CDC report on the increased incidents of smoking among 
American teenagers. We saw a 30-percent increase in first smoking 
and a 50-percent increase in the rate of daily smoking since 1988, 
and a 73-percent increase in the number of new daily smokers, aged 
12 to 17 from 1988 to 19986. The culprit, says Dr. Jovino, is the 
increased number of smoking messages aimed at young people by the 
tobacco industry. Cigarette advertising, especially the seductive 
cartoon characters aimed at teens and 20-somethings, would have been 
sharply curtailed by a legal settlement proposed last year between 
the major tobacco firms and the states. The settlement died in the 
U.S. Congress under a barrage of industry lobbying. This past week, 
there was word of another tobacco industry settlement involving an 
initial group of eight states. One which many analysts say, is much 
easier on the industry than the earlier proposal. It, too, would restrict 
advertising aimed at youth. But while it would ban cartoon characters 
of the Joe Camel variety, it would not restrict human corporate symbols. 
Is the return of the Marlboro Man in the forecast? What's more, the 
new settlement, unlike the old one, would allow tobacco companies 
to continue sponsoring sporting events. In response, President Clinton 
announced new legislation for next year to combat teenage smoking. 
The CBC's Dr. Jovino says we should do no less for America's young. 
-- we cite that 1.226 million people under the age of 18 became daily 
smokes in 1996. That's more than 3,000 young people every day. If 
current patterns continue, about 1 in 3 will eventually die from their 
smoking. Getting young people to look beyond the present is often 
difficult. But one of the messages of the Great American Smoke-Out 
is that quitting smoking, while tough, has a pay off that is almost 
immediate. Psychologist Ed Fisher of Washington University in St. 
Louis explains. ED FISHER, PSYCHOLOGIST, washington There are actually 
some health benefits that occur even within the first 24 hours. For 
instance, the risk for sudden cardiac death is decreased within the 
first few hours after the individual is not any longer putting nicotine 
in their body. Dr. Jack Fincham of the Univesity of Kansas School 
of Pharmacy agrees, adding that even if you smoke a long time, your 
odds improve the longer you're off tobacco. DR. JACK FINCHAM, UNIVERSITTY 
OF KANSAS For example, if you're off cigarettes for 15 years, your 
risk is nearly equal to those of someone who has never smoked. And 
that's probably the best possible rationale for quitting. I'm Brian 
Sislack. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>