<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981024.0179 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Three days ahead of its deadline for Slobodan Milosevic to comply 
with Western demands, NATO was sending two top generals to Belgrade 
on Saturday to demand more Kosovo withdrawals by the Yugoslav president. 
The Serbian-led Yugoslav government insists that it is abiding by 
terms of the Oct. 12 agreement to defuse the crisis and blames continued, 
scattered clashes on ethnic Albanian rebels. In a statement published 
Saturday in Kosovo's Albanian-language daily Koha Ditore, the rebels 
said they would take no ``offensive action'' against government forces 
which are leaving the province under terms of the agreement. ``But 
any movement towards (Albanian-populated) villages or our positions 
will force us to self-defend ourselves,'' the rebels said. Gen. Wesley 
Clark, the alliance's supreme military commander, and German Gen. 
Klaus Naumann were expected in Belgrade on Saturday afternoon to seek 
more pullbacks of police units and equipment from the separatist province. 
NATO has given Milosevic until Tuesday to remove the special police 
and military units he sent to Kosovo during his crackdown on ethnic 
Albanian militants, who demand independence for the majority Albanian 
province. NATO likely will set up a base for its air surveillance 
mission over Kosovo near the Macedonian capital of Skopje, Macedonian 
defense minister Lazar Kitanoski said Friday. With Western nations 
only beginning to organize a 2,000-strong group of unarmed monitors 
to verify Yugoslavia's actions in Kosovo, the deadline is widely expected 
to be pushed back for a second time. But no official action by NATO 
is expected until Monday. A NATO official, briefing reporters in Brussels, 
Belgium, on condition of anonymity, said Friday that ``we have seen 
great progress but we are far from adequate compliance.'' Serbian 
Premier Mirko Marjanovic said it was time the West realized that the 
crisis in Kosovo was caused by ``terrorism of Albanian separatists.'' 
While fighting in Kosovo effectively halted in late September, there 
is sporadic gunfire and almost nightly shelling in different locations 
_ evidence the conflict has not ended. Under the agreement, Milosevic 
pledged to withdraw special police and army units sent to the province 
after he launched his crackdown on the KLA Feb. 28. Hundreds of people 
have been killed and an estimated 300,000 driven from their homes. 
Milosevic also agreed to let refugees return home safely and enable 
international relief agencies to bring them aid. He also pledged to 
negotiate with ethnic Albanian leaders on the future of Kosovo, a 
province of the main Yugoslav republic Serbia. Ethnic Albanians make 
up about 90 percent of the province's 2 million inhabitants, and most 
favor independence or self-rule. The KLA issued a statement Friday 
reiterating that it is keeping to a general cease-fire but saying 
it would respond and defend villages if Serb and Yugoslav forces move 
on them. U.S. envoy Christopher Hill was in neighboring Albania to 
brief government officials and urge them to support the U.S.-led peace 
effort. Albania had permitted rebels to set up sanctuaries in the 
north. ``We are looking for full compliance,'' Hill told reporters. 
``We'd like to see full compliance. I don't want to predict when exactly 
we'll see it but we are working very hard to ensure it.'' At the United 
Nations, the Security Council was planning to vote Saturday on a resolution 
endorsing the Kosovo peace accord, despite potential opposition from 
China and Russia over language that would allow NATO to ``take appropriate 
steps.'' to enforce the agreement. The council is under pressure to 
adopt a resolution enshrining the accord so the verifiers can begin 
Kosovo. The American head of the Kosovo ground verification mission, 
William Walker, arrived Friday in Kosovo after meeting Milosevic, 
vowing to improve conditions for refugees and help guarantee success 
of the peace agreement. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>