<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981024.0871 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Security Council demanded Saturday that Yugoslavia abide by an 
accord to end fighting in Kosovo and said action may be needed to 
ensure the safety of international monitors there. Russia and China 
abstained from voting on the resolution, which they said did not authorize 
force to implement the agreement. The United States said NATO still 
retained that right and Britain pledged to use whatever force was 
necessary to protect the unarmed monitors. The resolution, which diplomats 
said was believed to be the first endorsing a NATO operation, was 
adopted 13-0 after eight hours of rare Saturday consultations. It 
endorses the agreement to allow unarmed monitors to patrol Kosovo 
and to let NATO verify from the air that fighting has stopped. Fighting 
between Serb forces and ethnic Albanians _ who make up 90 percent 
of Kosovo's population _ has killed hundreds of people and forced 
around 300,000 from their homes since a Serb crackdown began in February. 
Serbia is the dominant republic in Yugoslavia. Under the Oct. 12 deal 
brokered by U.S. envoy Richard Holbrooke, Yugoslav President Slobodan 
Milosevic agreed to a cease-fire, to withdraw his special police forces 
from the province and to allow a 2,000-strong team from the Organization 
for Security and Cooperation in Europe to verify the agreement. ``No 
one should be in any doubt that we will use to the full our inherent 
right to protect our nationals if they are in danger, and the right 
under this resolution to take action to ensure their safety and freedom 
of movement,'' said British ambassador Jeremy Greenstock, the council 
president. The Security Council was under pressure to adopt a resolution 
enshrining the accord and protecting the verification team. Potential 
troop-contributing nations are concerned about the safety of their 
forces and wanted the council to endorse the plan first, with provisions 
for enforcement. Permanent council members Russia and China were opposed 
to any resolution threatening Serbs and ethnic Albanians with force 
if they don't comply with the agreement, which averted NATO strikes 
on Serb targets. They could have vetoed the resolution. Much of the 
negotiation Saturday was intended to prevent a veto by easing language 
about the threat of force, diplomats said. U.S. Secretary of State 
Madeleine Albright said the threat of force remained. ``We and our 
NATO allies have the authority, the will and the means to take action 
if necessary to ensure full implementation,'' of previous U.N. resolutions 
demanding a cease-fire, she said. China said it abstained from the 
vote because the resolution went beyond what was agreed to between 
Yugoslavia and Holbrooke. Russia said details of the resolution _ 
particularly an expression of deep concern about the recent closure 
of independent media in Yugoslavia _ had no place in the resolution 
endorsing the accord. Deputy U.S. ambassador, Peter Burleigh said 
he regretted deeply that the vote wasn't unanimous and that Russia 
had cited the free media part of the resolution as a reason why it 
abstained. ``I thought we would all agree on the council that a free 
media is essential to the solution to the political problems in Kosovo 
and the evolution toward democracy,'' Burleigh said. He called the 
resolution the ``strongest possible message,'' the council could send 
to Milosevic. Saturday's revised draft deleted reference to international 
organizations taking ``appropriate steps'' to ensure compliance with 
the agreement and instead demanded Yugoslavia implement the accord 
fully and promptly. The draft affirmed that action may be needed to 
protect the monitors. The draft also demanded that both sides in the 
Kosovo dispute cooperate with verifiers and start talks on a political 
solution. Russia has religious and cultural ties to Serbia, the dominate 
republic in Yugoslavia. China is traditionally opposed to any military 
intervention into what it considers an internal matter, fearing a 
precedent could be set for its own disputes with Taiwan and Tibet. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>