<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981024.0834 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Two top NATO generals pressured Yugoslav political and military leaders 
for further withdrawals from Kosovo Saturday, three days short of 
its deadline for Slobodan Milosevic to meet Western demands. Gen. 
Wesley Clark, the alliance's supreme military commander in Europe, 
and German Gen. Klaus Naumann, chairman of the NATO military committee, 
met briefly with the Yugoslav president, before going into talks with 
Gen. Momcilo Perisic, the Yugoslav Army Chief of Staff. Both the Alliance 
and the Yugoslav army remained tight-lipped about the meetings, but 
a diplomatic source speaking on condition of anonymity said that NATO 
wanted to let the Yugoslavs know they must do more in withdrawing 
military and special police units in Kosovo back to their barracks. 
The Alliance has given the Yugoslav president until Tuesday to do 
so. In New York, the U.N. Security Council passed a resolution Saturday 
demanding that Yugoslavia abide by the accord and said action may 
be needed to ensure the safety of international monitors there. After 
nearly eight hours of rare Saturday consultations, a divided council 
adopted a resolution 13-0 to endorse the agreement to allow unarmed 
monitors to patrol Kosovo and NATO to verify from the air that fighting 
has stopped. China and Russia abstained from the vote. The Serbian-led 
Yugoslav government insists that it is abiding by terms of the Oct. 
12 agreement to defuse the crisis and recall the units sent to Kosovo 
during his crackdown on ethnic Albanian militants, who demand independence 
for the majority Albanian province. It blames the Albnaians for the 
continued, scattered clashes. In a statement published Saturday in 
Kosovo's Albanian-language daily Koha Ditore, the rebels said they 
would take no ``offensive action'' against government forces which 
are leaving the province under terms of the agreement. ``But any movement 
towards (Albanian-populated) villages or our positions will force 
us to self-defend ourselves,'' the rebels said. NATO likely will set 
up a base for its air surveillance mission over Kosovo near the Macedonian 
capital of Skopje, Macedonian defense minister Lazar Kitanoski said 
Friday. With Western nations only beginning to organize a 2,000-strong 
group of unarmed monitors to verify Yugoslavia's actions in Kosovo, 
the deadline is widely expected to be pushed back for a second time. 
But no official action by NATO is expected until Monday. While fighting 
in Kosovo effectively halted in late September, there is sporadic 
gunfire and almost nightly shelling in different locations _ evidence 
the conflict has not ended. Under the Oct. 12 agreement, Milosevic 
pledged to withdraw special police and army units sent to the province 
after he launched his crackdown on the KLA Feb. 28. Hundreds of people 
have been killed and an estimated 300,000 driven from their homes. 
Milosevic also agreed to let refugees return home safely and enable 
international relief agencies to bring them aid. He also pledged to 
negotiate with ethnic Albanian leaders on the future of Kosovo, a 
province of the main Yugoslav republic Serbia. Early Saturday, five 
refugees from Prizren in southern Kosovo were seriously wounded when 
Yugoslav border guards opened fire on them while they were crossing 
into neighboring Albania, the Albanian Interior Ministry reported. 
The five _ two old men, two children and a woman _ were airlifted 
from the Albanian border village of Pogaj to Tirana Military Hospital, 
where they were in critical condition late Saturday, said Aratan Bizhga, 
Interior Ministry spokesman. Ethnic Albanians make up about 90 percent 
of the province's 2 million inhabitants, and most favor independence 
or self-rule. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>