<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981024.0194 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For baseball fans, the relationship with their home-team radio broadcasters 
is more than just a summer fling. You get to know them as you would 
neighbors or relatives, for all their charms and foibles. Baseball 
announcers shout at you while riding with you in the car. They laugh 
with you at the picnic table or at the beach. And they whisper to 
you from the pillow in the late innings of West Coast games. Sometimes 
they outlast players and managers, marriages and jobs. The voices 
of the baseball announcers are as constant, in Joni Mitchell's adroit 
phrase, as the hissing of summer lawns. Now that the Yankees have 
finished a remarkable season by winning another World Series, their 
fans will get a four-month respite from John Sterling and Michael 
Kay, who announce their games on WABC-AM in New York. After they presided 
over Friday's ceremony at City Hall, some might welcome the interval. 
But even their harshest critics know that Sterling and Kay have crafted 
a distinctive _ if not always distinguished _ identity alongside their 
team. Radio announcers have habits that annoy you, habits that charm 
you. There is an intimacy about radio broadcasts, far more than with 
television. Even at home, with the television on, it is tempting to 
turn down the sound and click on the radio for the Sterling-Kay take. 
Compare their presentation with the audio of television coverage, 
with its multiple outlets and rotating phalanx of announcers. Television 
coverage lacks the narrative continuity that comes from home-team 
radio broadcasters. With some of the television announcers, even local 
ones like Bobby Murcer, you get the feeling that they don't follow 
the team very closely and don't care to report beyond the obvious. 
With Sterling and Kay, you sense that they have lived with the Bronx 
Bombers from the first tobacco-juice squirt of spring training to 
the final sunflower seed of the World Series. From their tone and 
presentation, it is clear that Sterling and Kay are quite proud of 
their knowledge and their rank. From two-seam fastballs to hokey home 
run calls, they know their stuff and they can talk the talk. They 
can converse for a three-hour game without often stepping on each 
other's words. Bonded in the booth like astronauts in a spacecraft, 
they share the air and alternate seamlessly between roles of play-by-play 
and color commentary. The best of radio's baseball announcers _ Vin 
Scully, Ernie Harwell, Mel Allen _ have been solo pilots, conversing 
only occasionally with sidekicks. Sterling and Kay have a modern feel, 
respecting each other's conversational rhythms, finishing each other's 
thoughts. They don't hesitate to respectfully disagree on strategy 
or opinion. With a deeper voice, a more affected delivery and more 
innings as the lead play-by-play man, Sterling makes the stronger 
impression. But there are times when it seems as if WABC is presenting 
``The John Sterling Show,'' and his special guests tonight are the 
New York Yankees. His signature home run call _ ``It is high, it is 
far, it is gone!'' _ is often annoying even when it is accurate. Perhaps 
Sterling's personality is appropriate for a franchise defined by the 
swagger and bluster of George Steinbrenner. But is the boastful ``THUH-uh-uh 
Yankees win!'' necessary for a classy team that prevails so often? 
Kay, by contrast, plays well off Sterling's bravado. A reporter with 
a common voice who tries more to inform than to entertain, Kay might 
tell you more than you need to know about the manager's pinch-hitting 
options. And he sure can be blunt. Even in the triumphant Game 4 on 
Wednesday night, he noted of Tino Martinez: ``The main reason Tino 
doesn't score is 'cause he's slow.'' His few bits of shtick have worn 
thin, and his home run call of ``See ya!'' comes across as contrived. 
More convincing is Kay's daily reminder: ``You're listening to Yankees 
baseball, and we certainly do thank you for that.'' Kay sounds like 
a local guy enjoying himself by working hard at his dream job and 
getting better every game. Most people in the media business know 
that consumers, and bosses, often confuse the messengers with the 
messages. If the team you cover does well, the audience perceives 
that you have done a better job. It is the good fortune of Sterling 
and Kay that they got to ride in the parade and take bows alongside 
the men who hit, catch and pitch. But it is the good fortune of the 
fans to have them in good and bad seasons, as surrogate eyes and ears. 
This is what radio baseball has always been about. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>