<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981024.0206 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Dr. Mary Steichen Calderone, the grande dame of sex education, died 
Saturday at the Kendal at Longwood nursing home in Kennett Square, 
Pa. She was 94 and had suffered from Alzheimer's disease for the last 
decade. Indefatigable and fired by a zeal for sexual responsibility 
and realism, Dr. Calderone persuaded a recalcitrant American Medical 
Association to let doctors dispense birth control as a matter of course 
to their patients, and she set in motion the means of educating schoolchildren 
about human sexuality. Dr. Calderone did more than any other individual 
to convince both the medical profession and the public that human 
sexuality goes far beyond the sex act. She heralded it as a multifaceted 
and vital part of a healthy life that should not be hidden under a 
shroud of secrecy or limited to erotic expression. One of her favorite 
challenges to young audiences she addressed was to ask for a four-letter 
word ending in ``k'' that meant sexual intercourse. Over a chorus 
of titters, she would give her answer: ``talk.'' Then she would explain, 
``We never talk to each other as nonsexual people.'' Dr. Calderone, 
the daughter of the photographer Edward Steichen, was a woman of many 
talents and diverse interests who did not find her true calling until 
midlife. Following graduation from Vassar College, where she majored 
in chemistry, she decided to go on the stage, but abandoned her acting 
career when she realized she could never be as good as Katherine Cornell. 
At the age of 30, after a failed marriage to a fellow actor, W. Lon 
Martin, and the birth of two daughters, Nell and Linda, she decided 
to go to medical school. She received an M.D. degree in 1939 from 
the University of Rochester and a master's degree in public health 
in 1942 from the Columbia University School of Public Health. While 
at Columbia she met Dr. Frank Calderone, then a district health officer 
on the Lower East Side who would soon become deputy commissioner of 
health for New York City and her second husband. The couple were married 
in 1941. Dr. Calderone served for some years as a school physician 
in Great Neck, N.Y. In 1953 she became medical director of the Planned 
Parenthood Federation of America, where she carried forward Margaret 
Sanger's mission for family planning. In 1964 Dr. Calderone realized 
one of her crowning goals: She convinced the trustees of the American 
Medical Association that the nation's leading organization of physicians 
should disseminate information on reproduction and birth control and 
endorse the prescription of birth control measures to all patients 
who needed them. The trustees' proposal was adopted, helping to move 
birth control into the mainstream of American medicine. Three years 
earlier, as a representative of family planning, she took part in 
the first American Conference on Church and Family run by the National 
Council of Churches. Attended by sociologists, religious leaders, 
educators and public health professionals, the conference highlighted 
the suffering of thousands of people because of ignorance about frigidity, 
impotence, homosexuality and contraception. With five colleagues at 
the conference, Dr. Calderone set up an informal committee to study 
human sexuality. Out of that committee grew Dr. Calderone's signature 
achievement, the co-founding of the Sex Information and Education 
Council of the United States in 1964. Dr. Calderone then resigned 
from Planned Parenthood to turn her attention from reproductive biology 
to education in human sexuality. Better known by its acronym SIECUS, 
the council was created to help teachers, therapists and other professionals 
establish human sexuality as an integral part of health and health 
education. Under her guidance, SIECUS became the moving force for 
education about human sexuality in the schools as well as in the community. 
The organization publishes ``Guidelines for Sexuality Education: Kindergarten 
Through 12th Grade'' and helps schools around the country set up comprehensive 
sex education programs. As the president of SIECUS, Dr. Calderone 
stood out in the 1960s as an innovator, one of a handful of educators, 
scientists and philosophers who were beginning to address the big 
topics of human existence like death and sexuality. She was an unstinting 
advocate for the acceptance of masturbation as a wholesome, normal 
and almost universal practice for people of all ages. Dr. Calderone 
was far more than a female doctor championing a cause. Her theatrical 
training, coupled with her carriage, poise and authoritative voice, 
helped her to get her message across that children are born sexual 
beings and remain so until they die and that people of all ages need 
and deserve a proper sexual education. Dr. Calderone believed sex 
education in the schools should start in kindergarten, and under her 
direction SIECUS helped to set up sex education programs in thousands 
of schools throughout the country. After stepping down from the presidency, 
she joined New York University as an adjunct professor in its program 
on human sexuality. She was active professionally until age 80. Almost 
from birth, Mary Steichen was a natural leader: optimistic, determined, 
resilient and forthright, who from early childhood knew how to speak 
her mind. At age 6, for example, she criticized the sculptor Constantin 
Brancusi, a family friend, for creating ``L'Oiseau d'Or'' with a horizontal 
head, a position that she said would make it impossible for the bird 
to sing. Brancusi's later bird sculptures had more uplifted heads. 
Her imposing appearance combined with her strong personality helped 
her advance her causes and also to defend them against attacks by 
groups like the Christian Crusade, the John Birch Society and Moral 
Majority, who contended that her promotion of sex education in schools 
was encouraging a premature and unhealthy participation in sexual 
experience and usurping the role of parents in guiding their children's 
lives. Her reply was that if parents were doing their job properly 
there would be no need for school-based sex education. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>