<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981024.0117 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial for Sunday, Oct. 5: New York's 
U.S. Senate race this year is one of those rare contests in which 
it is a pleasure to take sides. The incumbent Republican, Alfonse 
D'Amato, is a strong campaigner and a powerful politician who knows 
how to get things done. But his opponent, Rep. Charles Schumer, is 
a more serious lawmaker with more rooted values, sounder policy positions 
and a deeper commitment to the common good. The chunks of pork that 
D'Amato boasts of bringing home are no fair exchange for the damage 
he does with his impulsive style and devotion to special interests. 
New York deserves a senator who will grow in gravitas, not just in 
volume. The state needs a senator who hearkens to the yearnings of 
the average citizen rather than to the demands of contributors and 
his party's ideologues. D'Amato's talent for political pyrotechnics 
has obscured the fact that he is far to the right of the average New 
Yorker on many issues. He supported the disastrous Gingrich-Lott strategy 
of forcing a government shutdown in order to try to blackmail the 
White House into accepting repeal of key parts of the social safety 
net. He sides with the extreme positions of the National Rifle Association 
in opposing gun control. Schumer, in contrast, has been responsible 
for legislation to curb the sale of handguns to criminals and the 
mentally incompetent. D'Amato has consistently voted to deprive women 
of the right to legal abortion, while Schumer was responsible for 
passage of legislation to protect the right of access to abortion 
clinics. D'Amato has an unreliable record when it comes to legislation 
that protects the environment. Schumer's is excellent. D'Amato, a 
successful but greedily unselective fund-raiser, has snubbed the crusade 
for campaign-finance reform by uttering platitudes about fixing the 
system but working behind the scenes to kill the McCain-Feingold reform 
bill. Schumer, although he has been a prodigious fund-raiser himself, 
has been a consistent supporter of bills to control the power of special 
interests in American elections. He was a faithful supporter of campaign 
finance reform not only this year, but also in the past, when Democrats 
were in the majority and his own party leadership was far less enthusiastic 
about talk of change. D'Amato's re-election pitch has always been 
his ability to deliver for New York as ``Senator Pothole.'' Although 
that talent seems to go into higher gear as elections near, he has 
scored some real triumphs in matters like getting the state its fair 
share of transportation funds and securing help for Holocaust victims 
in their fight with Swiss banking authorities. He has sometimes risen 
to the occasion on other fronts, most notably his handling of the 
Senate hearings on Whitewater. But he mainly is a man of the moment, 
who wins skirmishes without holding any greater vision of what the 
fight is for. He picks up cash for individual projects back home, 
but consistently undermines the state's long-term interests in the 
Senate. While other Republicans from the Northeast have fought to 
push their party toward the center, D'Amato buys into the overall 
vision of the Senate leadership, which is anti-urban and focused on 
the economic needs of the South and West. The question before the 
voters, then, is how to use the past of these two men as a guide to 
the future. D'Amato will remain what he has always been, a scrapper 
who brings home at least some of the bacon and from time to time has 
to explain that his latest gaffe was not really intended as a slur 
against ethnic group X or religion Y or constituency group Z. With 
Al D'Amato, what you see is what you get, and what you get is often 
vital, sometimes useful and always unpredictable. But it is not now 
and never will be the kind of balanced leadership that New York ought 
to be supplying to the Senate and the nation. In contrast to D'Amato, 
Schumer has used the 18 years since his election to the House to mature 
from a raw and ambitious young politician to a man with the legislative 
skills, overarching policy interests and demeanor of a high-impact 
senator. Unlike D'Amato, Schumer has not faced questions about relatives 
using his Capitol office for business purposes or endured congressional 
ethics investigations. Voters should not forget that D'Amato has never 
arranged for the Senate Ethics Committee to release his testimony 
during closed hearings on conflict-of-interest charges against him. 
Sealing records and escaping legal sanction are not good enough. New 
York needs a senator of notorious probity, and Schumer fits that bill. 
It is ironic that Schumer, who is one of the most infamous workaholics 
in Congress, has been attacked by D'Amato as a no-show representative. 
The consistent harping on Schumer's attendance record was trivial, 
but it was also a tactically brilliant piece of demagogy that flattened 
the flight path of the Schumer campaign. Instead of building a poll 
lead as he needed to last week, Schumer has been struggling to hold 
his altitude. The political reality is that he can win, but he will 
need a flawless performance on the stump, smart and incessant advertising 
and every available progressive vote to do so. Schumer and the electorate 
will have to beware of last-minute tricks from D'Amato, such as his 
promise in 1992 not to seek re-election this year. One advantage for 
Schumer is that D'Amato's desperate and overreaching charges may tilt 
the advantage back. The D'Amato attempt to capitalize on Schumer's 
missed procedural vote on using the Capitol Rotunda for a Holocaust 
memorial carried the whiff of panic. So, too, did D'Amato's use of 
a vulgar term to describe Schumer and his ridiculing of Rep. Jerrold 
Nadler for being portly. These incidents reminded voters of the cruelty 
and tastelessness that have pocked this Senator's career. At bottom, 
the deal D'Amato offers voters is rough and candid. They have to put 
up with his gaffes, ethical problems and loyalty to an ultraconservative 
agenda because he knows how to play the bureaucracy and the budget 
game to get New York's slice of the pie. But opportunism, however 
skillfully executed, is not leadership appropriate for a state that 
historically has been a national seedbed for talent in both parties. 
Schumer has the capacity to become the kind of senator New York deserves, 
a senator who will engender pride rather than embarrassment, a senator 
who will lead Congress on education, the environment, health care, 
gun control and abortion rights. For all those reasons, we endorse 
Charles Schumer for the U.S. Senate. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>