<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981024.0105 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The federal government is preparing to auction 27,000 acres of public 
land near Las Vegas estimated to be worth $500 million to $1 billion, 
with almost all of the proceeds to stay in Nevada instead of going 
to the Treasury. Like many cities in the West, Las Vegas is surrounded 
by public land managed by the Interior Department. The Bureau of Land 
Management has designated 55,000 acres of desert within a 460-square-mile 
zone around the city for eventual disposal to developers and local 
governments. The government has been reluctant to sell public land 
in the past, because the proceeds went to the Treasury and neither 
the Interior Department nor Nevada gained anything. Previously, the 
government traded developable public land near Las Vegas to developers 
in exchange for environmentally sensitive private lands elsewhere 
in Nevada. But these exchanges have become mired in controversy, with 
federal audits finding that the government received far less than 
equal value in many exchanges. Rep. John Ensign, a Republican, has 
said the government lost nearly $40 million in the last two years 
in land trades with developers. Now, under a bill enacted by Congress 
and signed by President Clinton, the government will sell the public 
land at auction. Eighty-five percent of the proceeds will go to acquire 
environmentally sensitive private land in Nevada and to improve parks 
and recreation areas around Las Vegas, 10 percent to the Southern 
Nevada Water Authority to build drinking-water pipelines, and 5 percent 
to schools in Nevada. The Las Vegas office of the Bureau of Land Management 
is already fielding calls from potential bidders, said a public affairs 
officer, Phillip Guerrero. But the bureau must first consult with 
Clark County and the cities of Las Vegas, North Las Vegas and Henderson 
to determine which lands should be sold and which lands the local 
governments need for roads, flood-control projects, schools, police 
and fire stations and parks. Under the legislation, the airport authority 
in Las Vegas is picking up around 5,000 acres in its noise-abatement 
area at no cost. Local governments can also acquire parks and rights-of-way 
for water, sewage and flood-control projects at no cost. And more 
than 20,000 acres is expected to be sold to local governments for 
only $10 an acre for other purposes. That leaves as much as 27,000 
acres of public land that is expected to be auctioned to developers 
at average prices of $18,000 to $37,000 per acre. The land will be 
sold in parcels of five to 2,500 acres. Each parcel will be offered 
with minimum bids set by a government-approved appraisal. The bill, 
the Southern Nevada Public Lands Management Act, was sponsored by 
Ensign and Sen. Richard Bryan, a Democrat. It passed the House two 
years ago but was held up in the Senate in an effort to press Nevada 
to accept a temporary nuclear-waste storage installation at Yucca 
Mountain, and by concern about setting a precedent for sales of public 
lands surrounding other rapidly growing Western cities. The act raised 
a major policy question, Bryan acknowledged. ``This is groundbreaking 
legislation in that you're allowing the state to keep all the money 
from public lands,'' he said. ``This is not money that goes back to 
Washington and that then has to be appropriated.'' But Bryan said 
the sale was justified because 87 percent of the land in Nevada is 
owned by the federal government. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>