<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981024.0167 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
New York state's black voters are emerging as a critical factor in 
the final-week strategies of both candidates in the U.S. Senate race, 
which is considered so close that it could be decided by a tiny fraction 
of the electorate. For the Democrat, Rep. Charles Schumer, blacks 
represent the most loyal constituency in his political base. In 1992, 
the Democratic Senate candidate, Robert Abrams, received 84 percent 
of the black vote, according to exit polls. For that reason, the state 
Democratic Party and its allies in the labor movement are focusing 
much of their energy on turning out voters in heavily black communities 
like Harlem and central Brooklyn. But for the Republican, Sen. Alfonse 
D'Amato, a large turnout in heavily black districts, still thought 
to be unlikely, could be very damaging if the race remains tight. 
In recent days, D'Amato has been strenuously lobbying black political 
leaders for endorsements that could help him pick up a few votes, 
or more likely, dampen opposition. Among the Democrats, there is deep 
concern that interest in the race among blacks, and indeed all voters, 
remains extremely low. A poor turnout would probably favor D'Amato, 
analysts say, because he is better known and has a core of loyal supporters 
likely to vote on Election Day. To counter such apathy, the Democrats 
are increasingly invoking President Clinton and his conflict with 
the Republican Party over the Monica Lewinsky scandal to generate 
interest among blacks. A consensus of opinion polls shows that, compared 
with any other group, a higher percentage of blacks supports Clinton 
and feels that he has been mistreated by the Republicans. ``For black 
people, this is almost like a presidential election year,'' said Rep. 
Charles Rangel, a Democrat from Manhattan who is a strong defender 
of the president. In recent days, the Democratic Party and local Democratic 
officials have been distributing fliers in heavily black neighborhoods 
that say: ``The Republicans want to impeach our President. Say NO 
and send the Republicans a message.'' Next week, a nonprofit group 
financed by the AFL-CIO, 1199 National Health and Human Service Employees 
Union and other organizations allied with the Democrats will begin 
running advertisements on black and Hispanic-oriented radio stations 
in New York and other large cities around the country offering similar 
messages. In one of those spots, the Rev. Jesse Jackson says the election 
will be viewed as a sign of whether voters support impeaching the 
president. Another spot features Hillary Clinton promoting the Democratic 
agenda on issues like health care and education. The state Democratic 
Party has also assembled a get-out-the-vote operation focusing on 
700 heavily black districts across the state where turnout has been 
historically low. Directed by Kevin Wardally, a Democratic district 
leader in Harlem, the operation uses a ``7-touch'' plan meant to insure 
that every registered voter receives seven contacts from the party, 
through phone calls, personal visits or literature, before Election 
Day. A similar program helped increase black voter turnout by 17 percent 
in more than 800 New Jersey districts in last year's election for 
governor, the Democrats contend. Schumer is also relying on state 
Comptroller H. Carl McCall, a Democrat who is black, to bring out 
black voters for the entire ticket. Some Democrats have raised concerns 
that McCall has no need to campaign hard because he is thought to 
be running well ahead of the Republican, Bruce Blakeman. But McCall's 
aides say he is working hard. And local Democratic officials like 
Assemblyman Herman Farrell, the Manhattan Democratic leader, are distributing 
literature in black districts bearing this message: ``In 1993, they 
said that Mayor David Dinkins didn't have a problem. We didn't vote 
and we got Giuliani.'' The flier concludes, ``Now they say Carl McCall 
doesn't have a problem.'' Saturday, at his weekly rally in his Manhattan 
offices, the Rev. Al Sharpton complained that the candidates for governor 
and Senate were ignoring the black community and doing almost no advertising 
in black media outlets. He said he would hold a candidates' forum 
this week and urged Schumer and D'Amato to attend. But Sharpton, who 
Democrats say has worked closely with D'Amato, saved some of his toughest 
criticisms for the Democrats, attacking them for not using Dinkins 
in campaign commercials. ``I don't understand why you would be disloyal 
to the most loyal voting bloc in the Democratic Party,'' he said. 
``I fear the Democrats are trying to out-conservative the conservatives.'' 
Much as he did in 1992, D'Amato, who is running for his fourth term, 
has tried to focus public attention on his endorsements from a few 
high-profile black leaders, like the Rev. Floyd Flake of Queens. He 
has also aggressively sought the support of the Rev. Calvin Butts 
of Harlem. But Butts said he is remaining neutral because, while D'Amato 
has directed important federal aid to black communities, Schumer has 
been a stronger supporter of civil rights legislation. That aid from 
D'Amato includes sponsoring legislation that required the federal 
government to insure millions of dollars in assets that were lost 
when the Freedom National Bank in Harlem failed in 1990. Butts said 
both candidate have been working overtime to gain support from selected 
black leaders. ``They are, without question, pressing friends and 
associates and community leadership as they understand it for support, 
endorsements, kind words, introductions,'' Butts said. ``And it is 
unrelenting.'' D'Amato is also counting on a number of black Democratic 
officials who have close ties to him, including Rep. Edolphus Towns 
of Brooklyn, to do little or nothing for Schumer. Towns has endorsed 
Schumer and contends he will work for the Democrat. Democrats assert 
that the Republicans' real goal is to discourage turnout by black 
voters. They say that in past elections, the Republicans have used 
their poll watchers at voting stations in black and Hispanic communities 
to intimidate minority voters. The Republicans say those poll watchers 
have helped prevent widespread voting fraud. But many Republican officials 
privately acknowledge that they do not want a strong turnout among 
black voters. That is one reason, they say, that D'Amato has refused 
to criticize Clinton, to take a position on impeachment or to say 
anything that might stir up black voters. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>