<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981024.0069 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Who killed Zorig? From the apartment blocks, offices and countless 
bars of this capital city to the nomadic tents across the endless 
countryside, Mongolians have been obsessed with the question in the 
three weeks since the man known as the father of their democracy was 
stabbed to death by masked attackers. Still unsolved, the killing 
of the 36-year-old Sanjaasuren Zorig occurred in circumstances that 
strongly suggest a political or financial motive: On the day of his 
death, party leaders had agreed to nominate him for prime minister, 
promising to end a three-month standoff that has paralyzed the government. 
And the speculation about why he was killed reveals the lost innocence 
of a country that only in 1990 _ thanks in part to Zorig's leadership 
_ began a peaceful and exuberant transition to free-market democracy 
after 70 years of communism. ``This is the end of the romantic phase 
of Mongolian democracy,'' said Hashbat Hulan, 37, a member of Parliament. 
As in many countries of Eastern Europe and Central Asia that shook 
off the Soviet empire, euphoria has given way to bitter truths and 
not a little disillusionment. It is telling that the first thing everyone 
says about Zorig is that he was honest. Equally telling, as a sign 
of the blend of sparse fact and plentiful fiction that characterizes 
many post-communist societies, the fantastic theories being bruited 
about are seen as entirely plausible. In recent months Zorig had served 
as minister of infrastructure, overseeing multimillion-dollar construction 
contracts. In a painful interview on Thursday his widow, Bulgan, who 
was tied up in the bathroom of their home as her husband was stabbed 
to death, said he had told her of being offered bribes _ of $5,000 
and $50,000, among others. ``Of course he refused,'' said Mrs. Zorig, 
bursting into tears. ``If he had taken these bribes, perhaps he would 
be alive today.'' Others wonder whether he was killed because, if 
he had become prime minister, he might have uncovered cronyism in 
the country's sell-off of state industries, or exposed misuse of foreign 
aid. Or was it the Russian mafia _ a favorite suspect for evils here 
_ fearing that he would interfere with lucrative business interests? 
Of course it might have been a simple robbery gone bad, and the timing 
a bizarre coincidence. But nobody in this country of 2.4 million people 
seems to believe that. Politicians were clearly shaken. ``Why did 
this happen now, just as we were beginning to unify our coalition?'' 
asked Delgermaa, a 39-year-old former law professor who is a member 
of Parliament. ``This was not a coincidence,'' she said. Like many 
Mongolians, Ms. Delgermaa uses one name. One of the country's richest 
capitalists, Jargalsaikhan, spoke out about Zorig's killing last week. 
``He was an honest, principled and educated person,'' he told a local 
newspaper. ``These qualities of his were not liked by some people.'' 
``Lately there are a lot of disputes about how to divide the pie, 
different cases involving money and financial deceit,'' added Jargalsaikhan, 
director of the giant Buyan Co., which trades in cashmere. For the 
last three months the government has been hobbled by an impasse between 
the fractious Democratic Coalition and the president. The coalition 
controls Parliament, and the president is from the opposition Mongolian 
People's Revolutionary Party, the former Communists, who now call 
themselves social democrats. Coalition members had helped vote down 
two of their own prime ministers, in the most recent case largely 
because of an abortive effort to merge a large state bank with a private 
one. The merger, accomplished and then reversed, has been denounced 
as poorly conceived _ and, the opposition asserts, pursued in an illegal 
and corrupt manner. Under the Constitution, the president must be 
consulted before Parliament votes on a new prime minister. The president, 
Natsagiyn Bagabandi, has repeatedly turned down candidates, calling 
them unqualified. Finally, on Oct. 2, the coalition factions found 
common ground, agreeing to nominate Zorig. The president said he had 
been ready to approve the nomination. That night, a masked man and 
woman entered the couple's modest apartment in one of the monotonous 
blocks in central Ulaan Baatar, tied up Ms. Bulgan and ambushed Zorig 
at the door, stabbing him 16 times. Ms. Bulgan said that her husband 
had not indicated any suspicions of danger. In a land where wrestling 
is the national sport and Genghis Khan the revered ancestor, Zorig 
was a gentle hero. Although his grandfather had been killed decades 
earlier by Stalin's henchmen, in the 1980s Zorig, like many Mongolian 
intellectuals, went to university in Moscow, studying Marxist-Leninist 
philosophy. He returned to teach Marxism at a university in Ulaan 
Baatar, but his thoughts had turned to Western ideals. At the end 
of 1989, as democratic movements coursed through the Soviet empire, 
Zorig was one of 13 men who began agitating for Mongolia's freedom. 
In early 1990, as demonstrations blossomed in Ulaan Baatar's giant 
central square, he emerged as the most articulate and respected leader. 
He was not so much an eloquent orator, friends say, as a man of wise 
counsel and a quietly powerful voice of conciliation. On one tense 
day in April 1990, tens of thousands of demonstrators were pressing 
toward soldiers in front of the government House. When Zorig climbed 
onto friends' shoulders and appealed for calm, witnesses recall, the 
entire crowd sat down to show their support for peaceful talks. The 
Communists agreed to write a new, democratic constitution. In the 
country's first real elections, in 1992, the former Communists won 
handily. But the task of beginning to build a market economy took 
a toll, with homeless children taking up residence in Ulaan Baatar's 
sewers, rampant inflation and a growing disparity in incomes. In 1996, 
to its own astonishment, the coalition of new democratic parties found 
itself voted into office. With the support of an array of international 
aid agencies and nongovernmental organizations, the youthful leaders 
vowed to speed up privatization. They also found themselves haggling 
over Cabinet posts and the management of complex financial transactions. 
While the corruption here does not appear to have reached the rapacious 
heights of Russia and some other places, it has stirred resentment 
in a nation with a strong egalitarian tradition. ``This is a very 
small country,'' said Ms. Hulan, the legislator. ``People have eyes 
and ears; they can see how much their leaders are spending, and how 
much they earn in their public jobs.'' She added, ``We entertained 
naive thoughts that Mongolia could escape the pitfalls of all the 
other post-Communist countries that are now submerged in corruption 
and racketeering.'' A small group including Ms. Huran has proposed 
new laws to require that legislators disclose their total earnings 
and campaign donations, and that records of government financial transactions 
be made public. This year, just as Mongolia seemed to be turning the 
corner economically, the country was battered by plummeting global 
prices of copper and cashmere, its main sources of revenue and foreign 
exchange. Between the economic woes and public impatience with the 
government's performance, most politicians here predict that the former 
Communists will regain power in the next general election in 2000. 
In the meantime, Mongolians _ an exceptionally literate and well-informed 
people _ are dismayed by the stalemate. In the warmth of his traditional 
tentlike dwelling, called a ger, Demberelmolom expressed his exasperation 
by reciting a Mongolian saying: ``If the people up high can't stand 
on their feet, the people down below can't find a seat.'' Demberelmolom 
and his wife tend monastery ruins in a mountain valley south of Ulaan 
Baatar. Their theory about Zorig's murder? ``Maybe they were having 
trouble dividing up their pie.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>