<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981024.0044 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Thousands of gay demonstrators scrapped with police officers in midtown 
Manhattan on Monday, protesting the violent death of a young gay man 
in Wyoming. The clash recalled the Stonewall uprising, the brawl between 
homosexuals and policemen outside a Greenwich Village bar that launched 
the gay rights movement in 1969. Many of the people gathered in front 
of the Plaza Hotel last week had marched in Greenwich Village 29 years 
before. Tuesday, a very different expression of the gay rights movement 
was taking place in Washington. In a tense, quarrelsome conference 
call, 22 members of the board of directors of the Human Rights Campaign, 
the most mainstream of American gay organizations, voted to endorse 
Republican Sen. Alfonse D'Amato over Democratic Rep. Charles Schumer 
in New York's U.S. Senate race. This was the same D'Amato who had 
been the target of many of the gay men and women the night before; 
they were outraged by the anti-homosexual positions of many of his 
Republican colleagues, especially his allies in the state Legislature 
who have blocked consideration of a gay rights bill. As discordant 
as they might appear, the events in New York and Washington accurately 
reflected two major forces that have roiled the gay rights movement 
over the decades. This inherently fractious political movement has 
been torn by a struggle between pragmatic homosexuals who seek to 
work with government and more hostile advocates who tend to view government 
as an enemy. In 1969, a group of young, radical New Yorkers formed 
the Gay Liberation Front, pushing aside the staid Mattachine Society, 
whose suit-and-tie leaders had quietly worked with Mayor John Lindsay 
to end entrapment of homosexuals in public bathrooms and police harassment 
of gay bars. Fifteen years later, young protesters picketed the Municipal 
Elections Committee of Los Angeles, the city's pioneer gay political 
action committee, after its leaders, adopting the anti-AIDS position 
of the more conservative forces in local government, called for bathhouses 
to close. The creation of Act Up in 1987 was, from its first demonstration 
in the financial district, a repudiation of established gay rights 
groups from Washington to New York. These days, the Human Rights Campaign 
plays the inside-the-system role. The organization, the first national 
gay political action committee, distinguished itself upon its founding 
in the early 1980's by holding black-tie fund-raisers at the Waldorf-Astoria 
Hotel, though it might be better remembered for the alliance it struck 
with D'Amato. The struggle between defiant advocates and those who 
prefer to compromise has been mirrored in other civil rights movements, 
notably the one for black rights. But the gay rights movement is distinct 
because it is made up of such a diverse universe _ covering all ideologies, 
economic classes and races. Its members share only two traits: sexual 
orientation and, most likely, the experience of discrimination. It 
is not surprising, then, that the movement as a whole has never reached 
a consensus about its mission: An equal rights bill? Admission to 
the military? The right to marry? To be left alone? The tension between 
those who want a place at the table and those who want to throw rocks 
through the window has been one of the few constants. On one side, 
the gathering at the Plaza Hotel, like that at the Stonewall Inn, 
was a spontaneous venting of frustration and a classic display of 
take-it-to-the-streets politics. No major organization put out the 
call for the protest; there was no list of demands, no leader. The 
spark was Matthew Shepard, the 21-year-old University of Wyoming student 
murdered in what authorities described as a bias-related crime. On 
the other side, the Human Rights Campaign is about as establishment 
as politics get in Washington, with an annual budget of $13 million, 
a board of directors and stationery. Vice President Al Gore attends 
its annual dinner, which brings in money for candidates who support 
gay rights measures. And like all establishment homosexual groups 
of the past 30 years, it is focused and pragmatic. Its members practice 
the kind of politics that the street firebrands have either rejected 
or failed to understand, starting with compromise. To many people 
in New York, the notion of a gay rights organization endorsing D'Amato 
may seem astonishing. To the Human Rights Campaign it was the obvious 
decision: D'Amato took its side on many gay rights issues in recent 
years. And in a race involving two candidates with similar records 
on gay issues, the group has a policy of picking the incumbent. This 
determined pragmatism comes at a time when the board has been trying 
to demonstrate to Washington its readiness to work with Republicans. 
The best way to appreciate the divergent views is to consider two 
people who were at the center of both the disturbances at the Stonewall 
and the Plaza Hotel: Andrew Tobias, a financial writer who is a member 
of the Human Rights Campaign board, and Jim Fouratt, a New York record 
producer who protested in front of the Stonewall and in front of the 
Plaza. Tobias, who organized a fund-raiser for Schumer, makes a passionate 
case for Schumer's election. ``I'm terrified of a filibuster-proof 
Senate,'' he said, referring to the possibility that Democrats will 
hold fewer than 40 seats after Nov. 3. ``And I have very strong feelings 
about choice.'' D'Amato, unlike Schumer, opposes abortion. Yet Tobias 
fully supports what his board did. How could the Human Rights Campaign 
hope to convince other Republicans to follow D'Amato's path and defy 
party orthodoxy, he asked, if it turned its back on the senator now? 
It is a nuanced position, he acknowledged, but a rational one. ``Clearly, 
D'Amato, by all of our policies, earned and deserved the endorsement,'' 
he said. That is precisely the kind of argument that has perplexed 
people like Fouratt for years. D'Amato's endorsement was ``shocking,'' 
Fouratt said, nothing more than the latest example of the short-sightedness 
of the ``middle class,'' as he disparagingly calls the establishment 
homosexuals. ``You don't change people's opinions and attitudes by 
power-brokering,'' he said. Fouratt did not say it, but that is about 
the same point he made 28 years ago, when another group of gay activists, 
the Gay Activists Alliance, tried to nudge their new movement into 
the mainstream by lobbying for a gay rights bill in New York City. 
It seems safe to say it is a difference of opinion that is going to 
be troubling this movement for a long time. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>