<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981024.0148 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The setting was bucolic when the high-powered cell phone couple went 
away for the weekend to a little inn in Maine. The inn, said Lisa 
Linden and Lloyd Kaplan, public relations partners in New York, had 
great charm, with a barn and a view and Nubian goats munching on the 
lawn. And, as some other guests were carrying on a rather loud conversation, 
Ms. Linden felt there would be some understanding when her cell phone 
rang during dinner. She stayed on for 45 minutes. Best to skim over 
the humiliating reprimand from the management that followed and focus 
on Ms. Linden's defense. ``I spoke very quietly and I thought it would 
be a brief call, but it was a client in crisis,'' she said. ``You 
can't hang up on a client in crisis, even if the only other sound 
you hear is the goats munching. I certainly apologize to the innkeepers 
for unintentionally violating the calm, but in the late '90s, is speaking 
quietly on a cell phone in a dining room that is noisy a total breach 
of etiquette?'' There are several million cellular phone users in 
the New York City region, according to Bell Atlantic Mobile. Statistics 
on how many are yelling into their phones are unavailable. What is 
known is that the cell phone people are everywhere: carrying on long, 
noisy, intrusive conversations on Metro-North; conducting phone meetings 
in restaurants; dialing up friends when they're sitting behind first 
base at a Yankee game to report they're on television. Those in denial 
often excuse themselves with the big lie of the '90s: I got it for 
the car. The hard-core users, who often feel no need to apologize, 
insist they need the phones for work. So that now in New York, where 
space is shared and where cellular conversations take place in the 
street and the bus and the commuter train and thus often become everyone's 
conversation, a battle of manners is being waged. In one camp are 
people like Ms. Linden, who believe that cell phone conversations 
are no more intrusive than any other conversations. In another are 
people like the management of the Winged Foot Golf Club in Westchester, 
which found cell phones ``extremely disruptive'' and banned them three 
years ago. In yet another camp (this is, after all, New York) are 
the cell phone users we must call the Unrepentant; the people who, 
regardless of regulations, regardless of place, keep calling. ``I 
was checking my voice mail at Winged Foot and was told to put my phone 
away,'' said a sports executive who was a guest and requested anonymity 
because he would like to be a guest again. ``I did it near the clubhouse. 
The key to using a phone on the golf course: make sure you've got 
good shrubbery.'' In a recent survey of 2,000 Long Island Rail Road 
commuters, passengers cited noisy cell phone users as one of their 
major annoyances. To curtail such annoyance, Hampton Jitney riders 
are asked to keep their calls to three minutes, total. Restaurants 
are posting signs asking customers to refrain from using cell phones 
in the dining room. The Unrepentant do not care. Roger Friedman, an 
entertainment reporter attending a United Jewish Appeal benefit honoring 
Ahmet Ertegun, the co-founder of Atlantic Records, was stunned to 
see a guest standing near the honoree take a call. ``He's standing 
with Henry Kissinger, Barbara Walters and Michael Douglas,'' Friedman 
said. ``Who did he think it was going to be?'' Then there was the 
summer stock producer who took calls during auditions at Actors Equity. 
Actors, many of whom had stood in line for three hours for a two-minute 
audition, were enraged. Monitors now ask everyone at auditions to 
turn off their phones. The summer stock producer, when confronted 
privately after auditions were over, could not understand the fuss. 
``He said he got to New York once a year and he had to take care of 
business,'' said Tony Nicosia, the director of the Actors Equity Audition 
and Casting Department. The Cellular Telecommunications Industry Association, 
which is based in Washington, asked the advice columnist Judith Martin, 
who writes under the name Miss Manners, to do an etiquette booklet 
on cell phones five years ago. According to the association's spokesman, 
Tim Ayers, copies are still available. ``I'll be real honest with 
you,'' Ayers said. ``There wasn't much demand.'' Next week, Omnipoint 
Communications, a wireless-telephone company based in New Jersey, 
will be publishing ``Wireless Etiquette: A Guide to the Changing World 
of Instant Communication,'' by Peter Laufer. ``I don't have a reputation 
for decorum,'' Laufer said this week from his home in Sonoma County, 
north of San Francisco. ``But it's clear to me people need a little 
guidance. Like one winter, I'm on the observation deck of the Empire 
State Building. It was gray and cold and really special, the snow 
made it quiet, and some guy was yelling into his cell phone. He seemed 
to be missing the moment.'' Does Laufer believe it is rude to use 
cell phones on the train? ``There are ways to use them and ways not 
to use them,'' Laufer said. ``We need to train ourselves that the 
devices are sensitive enough that there is no need to yell into them. 
We're like our grandmothers using the long distance line; their voices 
go up unnecessarily high and loud.'' New York cell phone users have 
a more subjective definition: bad manners are those things they do 
not do. Marc Roberts, the chairman of World Wide Entertainment and 
Sports Corp., has four phones in his car, a cellular fax and his cell 
phone. Roberts, however, is cognizant of good manners. ``I take the 
phone into restaurants, but I try not to use it when I'm sitting down 
to eat,'' Roberts said. ``My etiquette is, I like to call out, but 
I don't get too many calls coming in because I only give my number 
to a few important people. I never take my phone on the golf course; 
that's where I draw the line. Unless it's a big deal.'' He adds a 
tip for business people. ``I always shut my phone off when I go into 
a meeting. If I'm in a meeting with a guy and I need him more than 
he needs me and he keeps his phone on, he just wants to be rude. I 
go into a meeting with a guy who needs me more than I need him and 
he keeps taking calls, that's just stupid.'' Stanley Bing, who writes 
a column on corporate life for Fortune magazine, gave up his cell 
phone a year ago. ``I was using it heavily, and it was turning me 
into a jerk,'' Bing said. ``I almost grew one of those little ponytails; 
I was aware of the urge to buy overly expensive cigars. I think in 
general it's better for us all if we're not so in touch. I'm seeking 
to attain a status of being marginally out of touch all the time.'' 
Now, while Bing uses a car phone, he is deeply intolerant of cellular 
phones on Metro-North. ``The train is a place where we're all pushed 
together, but it's also a place of great privacy,'' said Bing, who 
lives in New Rochelle, N.Y. ``Anything that intrudes, the person who's 
yelling, `When it hits 28, buy!' is deeply resented. But I don't think 
it's getting worse. I think there are strong moral taboos, that there's 
a hatred that washes over people who attempt an insignificant cellular 
phone conversation which is so severe that's it's a self-policing 
situation.'' A sports executive who commutes from Westchester and 
makes phone calls on the train says he is not the problem. ``I've 
never had anyone other than my wife tell me I'm talking too loud,'' 
the executive said. ``The people who are shunned are the ones making 
those loud personal calls.'' Then again, what constitutes proper behavior 
may be determined by where you live. Alexandra Atkins, an assistant 
at Dan Klores public relations, attended her sister's wedding in Italy 
last June in a villa near Florence. Cell phones rang continually. 
In the middle of the dinner, when the best man was making a toast 
to the groom, the groom's phone rang. ``He answered it,'' said Ms. 
Atkins. ``I'm not kidding, I have a picture. It was his Uncle Fredo 
from wherever, wishing him good luck on his wedding. I don't think 
my sister cared. She was like: `Whatever. I'm married.' My family 
couldn't get over it.'' But there is a reason for cell phone use in 
Italy, Ms. Atkins discovered. Land lines are taxed at 30 percent; 
cell phones are taxed at 10 percent, and people use cell phones in 
their homes. Sybil Adelman, a New York comedy writer, lived for several 
years in Los Angeles, where cell phones first became common. ``I was 
having dinner in L.A. once, there were eight people in a Mexican restaurant 
and each one of them had a cell phone,'' Ms. Adelman said. ``I looked 
at them and thought, `So why did we all have to come here?''' Now 
Ms. Adelman is a convert. Her manners have not always been perfect. 
There was the time during her visit to her son's Quaker school that 
her phone rang during the silent meeting. Still, Ms. Adelman remains 
a fan. ``The best use I had for the phone was when I was at the Javits 
center with my sister-in-law and I lost her,'' Ms. Adelman said. ``I 
picked up the phone and called her.'' She had another success story: 
``My brother told me he was in a theater where a man dropped his cell 
phone before the curtain went up and was frantic. Another guy said, 
`Give me your number; when it rings, we'll find it.' '' A woman visiting 
Ms. Adelman jumps in with her own anecdote: ``I had a friend who was 
hiking in a park in England. He was lost and it was getting dark, 
and he didn't know what to do. So he called his secretary in New York 
and she called some park officials, and they called him and told him 
how to find his way out.'' But not all cell phone stories have happy 
endings. An account executive in her 20s has a cautionary tale. ``A 
girlfriend of mine was out Saturday night with a guy she was dating,'' 
she said. ``They were with a group of people going to a bar, and my 
friend got into one cab and the guy got into another. She called him 
in his cab from her cab and got his voice mail, so she thinks he's 
ditched her. She tells all her girlfriends in the cab what a jerk 
he is. She didn't realize she had left her phone on. He called her 
back and played all seven minutes of it.'' It sounds as if there is 
a lesson in etiquette here. The account executive agrees. ``Everybody 
should make sure the phone is turned off before they start tearing 
into somebody.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>