<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981024.0039 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The images were arresting. There they were, Ariel Sharon, who once 
sent the Israeli military to Beirut for Yasser Arafat's head, and 
Benjamin Netanyahu, who long avoided shaking the man's hand, sitting 
together in Maryland agreeing with the Palestinian leader on land 
and airports and prisoner releases. It is often said that the weakness 
of the 1993 Israeli-Palestinian peace accord worked out in Oslo, Norway, 
was that it was embraced by only half of Israel, the secular liberals 
of European origin, and had never been sold to religious Israelis, 
the poor and those of Middle Eastern origin. Now, three years after 
an Orthodox, Yemenite Israeli student sought to end the peace deal 
by assassinating Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, here were the representatives 
of that other Israel coming to terms with the reality that Oslo had 
created. Yes, they were making it hard with their near walkouts and 
last-minute demands. But that was the way toward real peace: you relinquish 
holy land with a tear in your eye and an ache in your gut, not with 
the detachment of the previous government. Here were negotiators who 
understood the fears as well as the hopes of their people, who could 
build an agreement that might survive those fears. Rabin, the messenger 
of peace, may have died, but his message has survived. Perhaps. But 
the past five years _ since Rabin and Arafat shook hands on the White 
House lawn _ have offered sobering lessons on why optimism has rarely 
held sway in this process since. In contrast to the intimate and personal 
Oslo negotiations, at the Wye Plantation it took the president of 
the United States and the King of Jordan days and nights of prodding 
to produce this next interim step. And its implementation is highly 
complex. Of course, details and implementation posed formidable barriers 
to peace from the start. What is different this time is that the Wye 
agreement comes in the context of difficult experience in making specific 
peace arrangements work. ``Until Netanyahu's election more than two 
years ago, the message from the government was that we have to begin 
a new life with the Palestinians; let's be neighbors,'' said Yoel 
Esteron, managing editor of the Israeli newspaper Haaretz. ``But now 
there is no spirit of reconciliation. What we have is a deal among 
technocrats, a deal with no soul or spirit because there is so little 
good feeling left.'' Gen. Shlomo Gazit, aformer director of Israel's 
military intelligence, put it this way: ``I am very doubtful that 
this is a new beginning. For the process to go on, there must be trust 
and understanding between the two sides and a joint will to move ahead 
to an overall agreement. What happened in recent months does not bring 
us any nearer to that.'' One reason is that the Palestinians and Israelis 
agreed to make peace five years ago but never did much to alter the 
sense they had of each other. Schools on both sides have virtually 
no lessons in the other's history. Maps in Palestinian schools still 
show only the names of Palestinian villages destroyed by Israel, not 
the new Israeli cities. Israeli maps and textbooks make no reference 
to the destroyed Palestinian towns or to the life and culture of Palestinians 
before Zionist immigration in the late 19th century. An official 8th-grade 
textbook from the Palestinian Authority was recently shown to include 
the sentence, ``The prime examples of racial discrimination are Zionism 
and Nazism.'' Last August, Palestinian television was showing footage 
of a summer camp with youngsters training with automatic weapons and 
chanting, ``I foresee my death and I rush toward it!'' and, ``A hero's 
death, the death of a suicide warrior!'' Esteron of Haaretz said that 
even the largely liberal, educated Israeli readers of his newspaper 
seem unmoved by the difficulties that Palestinians suffer as a result 
of Israeli rules and regulations _ checkpoints, bans on home building, 
severe restrictions on trade, industry and movement. ``People look 
at it as if it were somewhere in the Philippines, not right next door,'' 
he said. Each side has tended to consider the Oslo accord a kind of 
apology from the other, an acknowledgment that it had done wrong. 
But each side sees only the other's misdeeds, not its own. And the 
problem that has overwhelmed all others is the enormous imbalance 
_ military, geopolitical and economic _ between Israel and the Palestinians. 
For many Palestinians, Israel is simply a neighborhood outpost of 
the U.S.-dominated global economy. Since the new global system has 
little place in it for land, clan and honor, values upon which Palestinian 
society has long been built, and can be so unforgiving to those not 
part of it, Israel is seen as a threat in the most fundamental way 
to the values of many in the West Bank and Gaza. To many there, Israel 
stands for sexual permissiveness and godlessness, and so the battle 
against it goes beyond a fight over land and sovereignty. The issue 
is, of course, still more complicated. A battle over values exists 
within Israel itself, where a religious-secular divide threatens internal 
politics. Rabin's assassin, Yigal Amir, like many Sephardi and religious 
Israelis, felt that peace was draining the nation of its biblical 
mission and spirit. Now, with Netanyahu and Sharon the advocates of 
peace, the opponents of peace within Israel may feel more and more 
marginalized. But that does not necessarily mean Israelis will see 
Palestinians in a more generous light. Israelis feel that what they 
are giving up is not fully appreciated _ as Netanyahu has said, 1 
percent of the West Bank is the size of Tel Aviv. But even if the 
end of this process includes something that bears the name ``State 
of Palestine,'' as the Palestinians so fervently hope and the majority 
of Israelis now accept, many doubt it will end the century-old Jewish-Arab 
conflict. ``This deal does not change the basic rules of the game,'' 
asserted Meron Benvenisti, a former deputy mayor of Jerusalem and 
advocate of greater Israeli concessions. ``Let's say the Palestinians 
get even 50 percent of the West Bank. ``Think about water resources, 
land development, sewage. Israelis use five times the water of Palestinians. 
What happens when the Palestinians want more? Where will it come from? 
``The Israelis will say: `We gave all we could. No more. The rest 
is ours.' So what the Palestinians will get is exactly what the Israelis 
can live with, peace without any real price. That's why they don't 
care if there is a Palestinian state. That's why even Sharon and Netanyahu 
can accept a state, because of the way they will define it.'' Ali 
Jarbawi, a Palestinian political scientist at Bir Zeit University 
in the West Bank, said he was equally pessimistic. ``I think that 
for Netanyahu this week's deal is the end of the track altogether,'' 
he said. ``He won't give up much more land. And what kind of state 
will we get? There will be cantons with no direct links. It is a gloomy 
prospect for us.'' Daniel Ben-Simon, a political analyst for Haaretz, 
said he believes the new accord will reshape Israeli politics because 
the issue that has defined left and right for so long _ territorial 
concession and a Palestinian state _ will no longer be there. In addition, 
he says that because of the Palestinian question, other Israeli problems, 
like the religious and ethnic divides, have festered. Now they can 
be dealt with and that process will produce an entirely new set of 
parties and coalitions. But Gazit, the former military intelligence 
chief, is far less hopeful. He believes that Sharon and Netanyahu 
have no long-term vision for the Palestinian question. ``There is 
huge writing on the wall,'' he said. ``It shows us that without a 
comprehensive agreement with our neighbors we are doomed ultimately 
to war. I think the politicians see it. But they don't have the courage 
to act on it.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>