<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981024.0195 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Giants will begin negotiations this week to extend the contract 
of middle linebacker Corey Widmer, who can become an unrestricted 
free agent at the end of the season. Similar talks may also ensue 
with defensive end Chad Bratzke, the team's other top player who is 
scheduled for unrestricted free agency. Bratzke is the team's leading 
tackler this year; Widmer trails Bratzke by one tackle. The talks 
with Widmer came about in part because Widmer expressed concern last 
week that he had not been approached in a year when the contracts 
of several other veteran Giants had been renegotiated and extended 
to keep them with the club. ``I really don't know where I fit in on 
the Giants' agenda,'' Widmer, a seven-year veteran and valuable cog 
in the defense, said at his Giants Stadium locker on Thursday. ``I'm 
a bit confused. I've seen them lock up other guys around here. I guess 
I'm not basically in that category. ``I'd like to stay here, but I'm 
a bit curious what they're thinking. You get to a crossroads and the 
timing starts to matter. The closer you get to free agency _ if there 
are two games left in the season _ you start looking at other options.'' 
Told on Friday of Widmer's comments, Giants general manager Ernie 
Accorsi arranged to open contract negotiations with Widmer's agent, 
Frank Bauer. ``We were under the impression that Corey wanted to wait 
until the season was over,'' Accorsi said. ``Since we now understand 
that may not be the case, we'll start now.'' Bauer, who last month 
said he had not heard from the Giants on Widmer's contract status, 
could not be reached for comment. In 1997, the Giants talked of a 
possible renegotiation with Widmer, whose salary will count $1.679 
million against the team's salary cap this year. With the National 
Football League salary cap ever expanding, Widmer can expect a significant 
raise during his next contract, wherever he goes. The Giants are one 
of the few NFL teams under the salary cap, with about $700,000 available 
this year to get a deal started. Any renegotiated contract would be 
structured to credit the bulk of the salary to succeeding years, when 
the league cap will rise significantly. Accorsi said he would be receptive 
to opening talks this week with Widmer and Bratzke, who has returned 
from a serious knee injury last year to play remarkably well. Bratzke's 
six sacks are second on the Giants and he has a team-leading 43 tackles, 
including 31 solo tackles. ``I'd like to stay here,'' said Bratzke, 
a Giant since 1994. ``But it's not up to me. Certainly I'd listen 
to any offer they had. I don't want to lose focus on the season; those 
things can be a distraction.'' Bratzke, whose 1998 salary-cap value 
is $1.434 million, has recently changed agents, going from Frank Murtha 
Jr. to Anthony Agnone. Accorsi said Bratzke has to officially inform 
the team of his agent change before the team can resume talks. Accorsi 
added, however, that he and his predecessor, George Young, had tried 
in the past to extend Bratzke's contract. ``We tried very hard to 
sign him when he was with Frank Murtha,'' Accorsi said. Another priority 
for the Giants is renegotiating the contract of offensive lineman 
Roman Oben. Oben's contract ends this season, too. But because he 
will have played only three years in the league, he would become a 
restricted free agent. The Giants could match any offer Oben received 
from another team, but it is not a situation they relish. The episode 
last winter involving the Jets, the New England Patriots and Curtis 
Martin, who was a restricted free agent, proved that there are ways 
to structure a deal so it is difficult to match. Another prominent 
potential restricted free agent is safety Percy Ellsworth, who has 
recently moved into the starting lineup. There is also the nickel 
linebacker Scott Galyon, who could probably start at weakside linebacker 
for many teams. He could become a restricted free agent along with 
Amani Toomer, the wide receiver who has made great strides this year 
and has caught three touchdown passes. Conrad Hamilton, who has filled 
in ably at cornerback for the injured Jason Sehorn, is also headed 
for the restricted free agent category. Scheduled for unrestricted 
free agency is Gary Brown, the team's current starter at running back. 
Extending the contract of the starting cornerback Phillippi Sparks, 
whose deal expires after the 1999 season, appears to be a part of 
the team's long-range plans as well. Among the Giants who have had 
their contracts reworked and extended this year are the Pro Bowl linebacker 
Jessie Armstead, quarterback Danny Kanell, offensive tackle Scott 
Gragg and defensive tackle Robert Harris. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>