<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981024.0037 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The campaign of 1998 entered an intense final 10-day stretch Saturday 
as Democrats and Republicans turned their energies to vast telephone, 
mailing and advertising drives to prod millions of loyalists to the 
polls. Though many Democrats no longer fear that their candidates 
will be sullied by the White House scandal _ some are even trying 
to turn it to their advantage _ politicians and party officials around 
the United States say their biggest threat is that Republicans are 
tapping into their huge financial advantage to dominate the airwaves 
with commercials. ``They're carpet-bombing right now with negative 
ads in most of the country,'' said Craig Smith, the White House political 
director. ``The amount of money they have is obscene. The question 
becomes: How well are our guys holding up?'' From Senate races in 
California and New York to contests for governor in Maryland and Alabama 
to House matchups in every region, candidates are so evenly matched 
that officials in both parties say the outcomes hinge on a basic tactic: 
persuading their people to vote. That is particularly true given that 
in this time of relative economic contentment, compelling national 
themes have eluded both parties, leaving most candidates clashing 
over local issues and personalities. Unlike the 1996 elections, when 
Speaker Newt Gingrich was the No. 1 villain in Democratic commercials, 
his mug has hardly surfaced in advertisements this year. Yet much 
of the activity is not on the airwaves but on the ground. In probably 
the largest turnout effort of any state, the California Republican 
Party on Saturday began making 3{ million phone calls to reliable 
Republican voters, urging them to vote on Nov. 3. Democrats have begun 
mailing slate cards to 3 million party members in California, urging 
them to vote the party line. The mailings close with a reminder of 
the White House scandal, but with a twist: ``End the Washington witch 
hunt. Vote Democratic. Tell the Republicans to get back to the business 
of running the country!'' Nationally, the parties seem fairly evenly 
matched on the ground because get-out-the-vote efforts by many unions 
have helped the Democrats compensate for the Republicans' financial 
advantage. But the battle over the airwaves is lopsided: Republican 
organizations have collected as much as $300 million in the run-up 
to the elections, edging out Democrats by more than $100 million. 
In the final week, Republicans will channel at least $10 million more 
into advertising than Democrats, according to estimates by officials 
on both sides. Democratic officials said that in some states they 
had so little to spend _ and waited so long to buy time _ that some 
television stations were turning them away because all the advertising 
time had already been bought by Republicans. The financial disparity 
is particularly disconcerting for Democratic challengers for the House, 
who have a much greater struggle raising money than incumbents do. 
By contrast, many Republican challengers for the House who are considered 
long shots are being lavished with resources from the national party. 
``This is an issueless year that has been driven by the good economy 
and the dominance of the Lewinsky scandal,'' said Mitchell Bainwol, 
chief of staff of the Republican National Committee. ``With no other 
issues getting traction, we are left with a very microcampaign in 
the last 10 days, where Republican advantages in dollars, intensity 
and individual candidates will enable us to prevail.'' With the months-long 
distraction of the scandal having faded, at least for now, candidates 
and voters finally seem to be engaging each other. In some ways, the 
dynamic this year is like a British election: It is being fiercely 
fought in only two weeks. Most strategists in both parties agree that 
Republicans will have the upper hand on Election Day. The big question, 
Democrats say, is how successfully they can contain their losses. 
Few analysts are forecasting wild swings in either direction. Most 
Republicans and Democrats predict that Republicans will build on their 
thin 11-seat majority in the House; many say that more likely than 
not, the gains will be no more than a dozen seats. In the Senate, 
Republicans expect to pick up seats, although it is widely viewed 
as an uphill _ though entirely possible _ challenge to win a net gain 
of five seats. That would give Republicans the 60 votes needed to 
cut off filibusters by Democrats. Though there are many competitive 
races for governor, strategists on both sides do not predict much 
shift in the dominance of Republicans, who control 32 governorships 
and could pick up a seat or two more. The overwhelming advantages 
of incumbent Republican governors in Texas, Pennsylvania and Michigan 
_ who have extensive and powerful political organizations _ are expected 
to give an important lift to Republicans in tight House races in those 
states. No matter what happens in other races for governor, Democrats 
will declare a huge victory if polls hold up and Lt. Gov. Gray Davis, 
a Democrat, defeats Dan Lungren for governor in California. The California 
governorship, which Republicans have controlled for 16 years, is the 
biggest prize of the season; the winner will preside over the redrawing 
of the state's congressional boundaries after the 2000 census, affecting 
the composition of 52 House districts. Warming up the audience for 
Davis at an event last week in Riverside, Joe Baca, a Democrat running 
for the state Senate, implored a labor audience to vote for Davis 
for the sake of other candidates on the ticket _ and the party's future. 
``What the other side is trying to do is to keep us from the polls 
and voting,'' Baca said. ``We need him at the top of the ticket. Because 
if we don't have him, what's going to happen to labor?'' But while 
the state's Democratic candidate for governor seems comfortably ahead, 
another Democrat running statewide, Sen. Barbara Boxer, trailed the 
Republican nominee, Matt Fong, in the polls for weeks. By the end 
of last week, polls indicated that she had closed the gap. That underscored 
how contests, at least in this state, seem to be turning on the characteristics 
of individual candidates and not on partisan advantages. ``You're 
going to see a very mixed result on November 3,'' said David Axelrod, 
a veteran Democratic strategist in Chicago. ``And both parties are 
going to have something to crow about.'' Even without national themes, 
the outcome will carry important national implications: It will be 
interpreted as a referendum on whether the nation wants Congress to 
move forward with an impeachment inquiry into President Clinton. For 
months, the prevailing question among politicians was how much the 
scandal would affect the elections. At first, Republicans seized on 
Clinton's affair _ and tried to make character an issue in races around 
the country. Then, after fleeing from the matter for months, some 
Democrats embraced the scandal, asserting that voters would turn against 
the Republican-controlled Congress for approving an open-ended impeachment 
inquiry. Though the events in Washington seem to have heightened partisanship 
on both sides, most candidates in both parties are steering clear 
of the issue. No Republicans are running commercials linking their 
opponents to the scandal; only a few Democrats _ all challengers _ 
are mentioning the impeachment inquiry in their advertisements. On 
Friday, Christine Kehoe, a Democrat from San Diego in an uphill effort 
to oust Rep. Brian Bilbray, a Republican, unveiled a commercial about 
impeachment. ``Partisan bickering _ politicians no longer in touch,'' 
the narrator says. ``Brian Bilbray is doing things the Washington 
way. Bilbray voted for impeachment hearings _ gridlock that could 
drag on for years.'' Only weeks ago, Republicans boasted that Clinton 
was the best thing to happen to them. Indeed, month after month, the 
Lewinsky inquiry obscured the Democrats' efforts to take the offensive 
on the issues. ``We were calling him the motivator-in-chief,'' said 
Mike Madrid, political director of the California Republican Party. 
But, explaining that the outcome here will have little to do with 
Clinton, he added: ``This election is going to come down to three 
things: turnout, turnout and turnout. Whoever gets their base to the 
polls is going to win.'' Art Torres, chairman of California's Democratic 
Party, said he would decide in the next day or two whether to attack 
Republicans for overreaching on impeachment as part of the party's 
telephone efforts to get out the vote. But he said he was inclined 
not to. ``I don't think it's as strong a message as where the Democrats 
stand on issues,'' he said. Even with the mammoth drives, which include 
radio pitches tailored to particular voters like Hispanics or blacks, 
experts predict that turnout will be especially low this year for 
lack of issues that excite voters. The outcome is likely to be decided 
by a small core of people at the extremes of each party who usually 
vote no matter what. ``I believe a lot of these races will be decided 
by 1,000 or 2,000 votes,'' said Rep. Martin Frost of Texas, chairman 
of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee. ``This is the 
ultimate roller coaster; you don't know whether the car is going to 
be up or down on Election Day.'' The voter programs here are being 
mimicked on a smaller scale in districts around the country, like 
in Allentown, Pa., where State Sen. Roy Afflerbach is in fierce competition 
with Patrick Toomey, a restaurant owner, for an open House seat. In 
the past week alone, the Afflerbach campaign has made more than 40,000 
telephone calls through paid and volunteer efforts. Prospective voters 
are reminded that Afflerbach, a Democrat, has a ``patient protection 
plan to rein in the big HMOs and make health care more affordable.'' 
In another competitive House race, in a Florida district that extends 
from Jacksonville to Orlando, Rep. Corrine Brown, a Democrat, has 
sent out campaign mailers that offer voters rides to the polls. The 
turnout efforts by her opponent, Bill Randall, have been more problematic 
because he enraged many black leaders by declaring that he had written 
off black voters and was focusing his attention on white voters. He 
sought to clarify himself by insisting that he was not writing off 
black voters. Ms. Brown is black. Around the country, this much is 
clear: The deluge of commercials in recent days has brought a sharp, 
and decidedly negative, edge to the discourse. Though Republicans 
are not directly mentioning the scandal in their advertisements, they 
are still lambasting the president. Last week, for instance, the Republican 
Party unleashed a 30-second commercial in 39 congressional districts. 
``Remember the double talk?'' the announcer asks. Then, flashing on 
the screen, are snippets of videotape of Clinton offering different 
assessments over time of how long it would take to balance the budget. 
``We should balance the budget ... in seven years ... in 10 years 
... in eight years ... so we're between seven and nine now,'' he says 
in footage that Republicans used for commercials two years ago. Republican 
strategists said the ``double talk'' line was a subtle reminder of 
Clinton's denials of an affair with Monica Lewinsky. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>