<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981024.0151 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
David Cone strolled into the Yankees' clubhouse before Friday's parade 
and saw Darryl Strawberry talking with other teammates, less than 
three weeks after undergoing surgery for the removal of a cancerous 
tumor in his colon. Feelings that Cone has had difficulty containing 
in the last month welled within him again. It was an emotional year 
for the veteran pitcher. He began spring training as an enigma, coming 
off shoulder surgery, manager Joe Torre repeatedly saying he wasn't 
counting on Cone's return until May. Cone's rehabilitation accelerated, 
he started the year in the rotation _ and pitched so poorly in April 
that he had fleeting thoughts of retirement, at the same time his 
mother became ill. But Joan Cone came through surgery for the removal 
of a mass outside her chest cavity, and her son rebounded as well, 
after repositioning himself from the left side to the middle of the 
pitching rubber. By August, the Yankees were already being compared 
to some of the greatest teams of all time and Cone led the majors 
in victories _ before his arm grew tired near year's end and he missed 
several chances to pick up his 20th victory. On the last Saturday 
of the regular season, however, the 35-year-old Cone reached that 
milestone and he could not corral emotions that would overcome him 
repeatedly during the postseason, through Strawberry's illness, after 
the playoffs and World Series, when the enormity of the season _ for 
Cone and for the Yankees _ seemed to strike the pitcher all at once. 
Underneath his sunglasses, he appeared on the verge of tears as he 
spoke to fans at Friday's rally. In early August, Cone agreed to speak 
freely and intermittently with The Times about the Yankees, their 
season and his season, so long as his comments would not be published 
until after the playoffs, win or lose. Some of Cone's comments made 
to groups of reporters during this time are also included. Aug. 11: 
The Yankees are 86-29 and on a pace to win 121 games. Players are 
saying publicly that they aren't thinking about breaking the record 
of 116 games. ``We're all aware of the records, and that creates a 
sense of urgency to it, just to keep grinding it out and push right 
through to the end. I don't think anybody really talks about it on 
a day-to-day basis, and it's not really on the forefront of our minds 
_ but we're very aware of it. That provides extra motivation. Players 
can deny it all they want, that we don't think about the record, that 
we're just worried about the team. But we know what's going on. Things 
are starting to mount up that are just unreal. ``The turning point 
was that last West Coast road trip. The veterans, we pointed to the 
second West Coast swing and thought, that's going to be the tough 
time. If we can get through that second West Coast trip, we've got 
all those home games left and we should be in good shape. It seems 
like we attacked the second West Coast trip, just devoured it, and 
came back on a high. We're riding that wave as we speak. ``There's 
a desperation to win. Part of it is Paul O'Neill and Tino Martinez 
and Derek Jeter, their approach day in and day out. Those guys are 
such grinders. It's almost as if they worry about their own internal 
game and how they feel, and if they don't feel right, they're a little 
off, they're not happy. They have this tremendous ability to block 
out everything else. The kind of game we're playing, who we're playing, 
it doesn't matter. Those guys just want to be locked in when the playoffs 
come. They want to try to push through to the end. ``We're in this 
mode right now _ draw first blood. You look for Chuck Knoblauch and 
Jeter to get on early, and it's nice when O'Neill and Tino get hits 
early, so they don't become frustrated. And if we don't score early, 
the onus goes back to the pitcher: Hold them right there, give us 
another chance. ``There is an advantage to having our record right 
now. Certainly teams that come into Yankee Stadium think about it. 
I've seen certain situations in the middle of games when we start 
to mount a rally, and you can see pitchers panic a little bit. All 
of a sudden we've got a big crooked number on the board, four or five 
runs. ``But there is fear. You saw how Jim Thome got hurt the other 
night and that can really rattle the cage of a team. If something 
happened to Derek or one of our key everyday players, Paul or Bernie 
Williams, anything can happen.'' Aug. 22: The subject is George Steinbrenner, 
the Yankees' principal owner. ``He's got a memory like an elephant. 
He remembers everything. It's an intense team, he's an intense owner.'' 
Cone smiled, in remembering Steinbrenner's response to the dog bite 
Cone suffered in June, a minor injury that forced him to miss a start 
and led to the promotion of pitcher Orlando Hernandez. ``After the 
dog bite, he let me know how he felt, kind of jokingly. His attitude 
was like, What the heck was that _ how did that happen? Whenever he 
saw me, he'd say, How's that dog bite? ``He likes to test you and 
see how you respond, like with Darren Holmes earlier this year. He 
said something about him and Holmes responded the right way _ he stood 
up and he took responsibility for the way he was pitching. He showed 
he could take a shot, not only with the Yankees but New York itself. 
You have to show you can take some criticism.'' Sept. 21: The Yankees 
are sputtering a bit as the playoffs near, playing so poorly in one 
game that manager Joe Torre felt a need to chastise the team after 
a 7-0 loss in Tampa. ``He doesn't display a lot of emotion, so when 
he does, it's very effective. He made sure to go around the room and 
ask for opinions. He'll look at O'Neill and ask, What do you think? 
He'll look at me and say, If you've got something to say, say it now. 
We've really responded to his style, this year is really indicative 
of that. Accept the challenge, prepare, be professional. He commands 
respect, some of it for the type of career he has as a player. It 
helps, too, that he worked in the media, as a broadcaster. He always 
seems to say the right thing to the media. A lot of guys in here say 
they don't read the papers, but they're aware of it _ they don't dwell 
on it or get caught up in it, but Joe just has a knack for saying 
the right thing. Not only in the team meetings, but to the media. 
That's another way to communicate to the players.'' Sept. 27: The 
day after Cone wins his 20th game, his emotions are still simmering 
as he recounts his postgame exchange with catcher Joe Girardi. ``I 
was in the clubhouse when the game ended, and I was doing OK until 
I saw Joe and I saw how much it meant to him, too, after what we went 
through this year. I just lost it, absolutely lost it, and I never 
really did get it back until I got done talking to all of you guys.'' 
Sept. 28: The Yankees are on the eve of the playoffs, and in spite 
of their 114 victories in the regular season, conventional wisdom 
is that they need to win the World Series to validate their record 
and confirm their greatness. ``We're feeling good about things, we're 
playing well, we've won seven straight. I think everyone is extremely 
focused on what we need to do, and this is the most professional, 
focused team I've ever been a part of.'' Name one player you think 
is going to do well in the postseason. ``Scott Brosius. He's got that 
glint in his eye.'' Oct. 1: Torre calls a meeting and informs the 
Yankees that colon cancer has been diagnosed in Darryl Strawberry. 
Cone _ also shaken by the death of his former Kansas City teammate 
Dan Quisenberry, at age 45 of brain cancer _ is devastated, standing 
alone during batting practice, retreating to the stands to speak with 
his father. ``You kind of forget about hanging a slider or the magnitude 
of the game. You really begin to realize what's important when someone's 
health is on the line. These sort of life-and-death situations supersede 
baseball in every way. When you look back at the last couple of days 
and you see what has happened to Dan Quisenberry and his family, it 
shakes you up. ``Darryl is going to have a lot of confusion and he 
is going to be scared. We are all scared. But the prognosis is good. 
From what we hear, there has been early detection and there is an 
excellent chance of full recovery.'' Oct. 12: Cone is preparing to 
pitch Game 6 of the American League Championship Series against Cleveland. 
``It is very good to be in this position after what happened last 
year. I kind of felt like I let our team down last year, when I told 
Joe Torre I was ready to go and in reality, I probably fooled myself. 
This is really the first full year I have had with the Yankees, the 
first time I have gone into the postseason where I have been relatively 
healthy and felt good about it.'' But Cone labors, giving up a grand 
slam to Jim Thome and nearly losing a 6-0 lead. Cone departs with 
the Yankees leading by a run and they go on to clinch the series and 
he is the winning pitcher. Afterward, however, it is apparent in Cone's 
face that he is very unhappy with the way he pitched, the way his 
arm stiffened so quickly in the middle innings. Oct. 20: Cone starts 
Game 3 of the World Series and again, he labors, his arm tires. But 
the Yankees come back and win in the late innings _ Brosius hits a 
three-run homer to propel the Yankees into the lead and to the verge 
of a sweep _ and Cone appears relieved after the game. ``We're on 
the brink of something special. There's going to be a lot of arguments 
historically about where this team fits in. But we've got one more 
game to go. It's the most professional team, the best team in baseball. 
We've won 114 games in the regular season, and I'm very proud to be 
a part of it.'' Oct. 23: Cone stands in front of his locker as the 
Yankees prepare to depart for the parade. ``I had some emotion today 
when I saw Darryl here. I walked in the clubhouse and bam, there he 
is. I knew he'd be here, but to physically see him, it really gets 
you, the whole thing. ``I remember the look on Scott Brosius' face 
after he hit the three-run homer and was rounding the bases in Game 
3, and the look he had on his face when he made the final play _ just 
a genuine, sincere look of emotion on his face. That says it all. 
You feel pretty lucky to be a part of it. ``When you play for a team 
that's better than the sum of its parts and you're part of that equation 
_ it's overwhelming, when you have a team that really buys into that 
philosophy. How do you top it?'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>