<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981024.0108 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Over the last three-and-a-half months, nearly 1,300 prospective jurors 
have filed into court here and answered questions about whether they 
could fairly determine the guilt or innocence of a suspect in a series 
of murders and then possibly sentence him to death. Judge Arthur Pitts 
of Suffolk County Criminal Court announced Friday that 12 jurors and 
11 alternate jurors had finally been chosen to hear the case against 
Robert Shulman, a former postal worker accused of killing three prostitutes. 
It is the first death-penalty case on Long Island in 21 years. Although 
there are always problems in finding jurors who are able to serve 
for many months, there is one additional element that complicates 
the process in capital cases: moral judgment. ``The penalty phase 
involves moral reasoning, which is a much more subjective process 
and entirely different from the factual determination of guilt or 
innocence,'' said Kevin Doyle, the chief of the state's new capital 
defenders office. ``That's why it has taken courts months to pick 
juries in capital murder cases, especially if it's done properly.'' 
The potential jurors for the Shulman jury filled out a 61-page questionnaire 
eliciting their views on everything from lawyers and psychiatrists 
to the death penalty. Under closer questioning from the prosecutor 
in the case, Georgia Tschiember, and Shulman's defense lawyers, Paul 
Gianelli and William Keahon, the questions focused on moral issues 
to determine, among other things, whether a ``death-qualified'' jury 
_ people who say they are able to condemn someone to die _ might be 
inherently conservative in nature. The fear for defense lawyers is 
that such a jury could be more likely not only to convict Shulman, 
but also to sentence him to death, rather than consider the alternative 
of life in prison without the possibility of parole. ``This is an 
issue that, by itself, could become a matter for the appeals court,'' 
said Eric Freedman, a professor at Hofstra Law School who is an expert 
on the death penalty. Freedman said the state's three-year-old death 
penalty law was not based on any existing model approved and tested 
in other states, but was ``written on a blank piece of paper,'' leaving 
many legal questions unanswered. Eventually, he said, these questions 
will have to be answered by the state's highest court, the Court of 
Appeals. The first such test of the law was argued before the appeals 
court on Oct. 13, when lawyers contended that the statute's plea-bargaining 
provisions were unconstitutional because they coerced defendants into 
pleading guilty rather than risk a death sentence. Since the law took 
effect in New York on Sept. 1, 1995, prosecutors throughout the state 
have sought the death penalty in 31 murder cases. (For a defendant 
to be sentenced to death, the jury must reach a unanimous decision 
on both the matter of guilt and penalty. Should they fail to agree 
on the penalty, the statute requires that the decision be made by 
the judge.) So far, two of these cases have gone through both the 
trial and penalty phases, and the defendants have been sentenced. 
In the first case, in June, a jury in Brooklyn sentenced to death 
a former jail guard, Darrel Harris, 40, for fatally shooting three 
people during a robbery at a social club. In July, a jury in Dutchess 
County found Dalkeith McIntosh, a 38-year-old immigrant from Jamaica, 
guilty of murdering his estranged wife and her daughter, but voted 
to send him to prison for life, rather than to death by lethal injection. 
The results of these two cases have only further confounded some experts 
who use demographic information _ including sex, age, race and religion 
_ to study juries in death penalty cases. While these experts expected 
the Dutchess County jury to be more conservative, it decided against 
death. The Brooklyn jury, which was expected to be more liberal, voted 
for the death penalty. In Suffolk County, where juries are regarded 
as generally conservative, lawyers hesitate to pursue a liberal defense, 
knowing that jurors are less likely, for example, to accept an insanity 
defense. Picking a death-penalty jury can place the defense at an 
added disadvantage. For example, Gianelli, one of the defense lawyers, 
found himself arguing to keep a juror who said he was already convinced 
of Shulman's guilt, but would be willing to consider sentencing him 
to life in prison without parole rather than to death. But Richard 
Dieter, executive director of the Death Penalty Information Center 
in Washington, pointed to difficulties in labeling prospective jurors. 
``People have all sorts of shades of views on the death penalty and 
many people don't really know what their moral stance is until they 
actually have to make a real decision,'' he said. Shulman, 44, a former 
postal worker in Hicksville, is accused of bludgeoning five women 
to death and dismembering four of them. He is being tried here for 
the murder of three of the victims whose bodies he discarded in trash 
bins in Suffolk County. He also faces trial for murder in Westchester 
County, where the bodies of the other two women were found. Although 
he has signed a confession to the murders, he has entered a plea of 
not guilty. Pitts instructed all 23 jurors to be in court on Tuesday 
morning for opening arguments in a trial that is expected to last 
as long, if not longer, than the protracted jury selection process. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>