<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981024.0182 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When Phillip Lee complains to friends that his shower leaked or that 
his stove refused to light, he doesn't get much sympathy. Not in New 
York. Not when you have managed to rent a cheap apartment. Envy, yes. 
Sympathy, no. It's hard for him to make people believe that renting 
a two-bedroom apartment for $566.89 a month is not as wonderful as 
it sounds, but he's trying, because he wants people to know what they 
may face if they happen to experience similar good fortune. It all 
started back in June, when he and his fiancee decided to move out 
of an apartment they were sharing with someone else and get a place 
together. He had recently returned to New York City from Ithaca, N.Y., 
where he had studied for a master's degree at Cornell University in 
hotel administration, and he knew what he faced rentwise. He expected 
to pay between $1,200 and $1,400 a month for a studio way east on 
the Upper East Side, an area he likes because he finds it ``a little 
low key, and not as flashy.'' It was convenient for his fiancee, too, 
who was studying interior design after deciding, as he had, that she 
didn't like being a banker. (She didn't want her name used, because 
like him, she is a very private person, but unlike him she is not 
quite so determined to get out the story of ``Life in a Rent-Stabilized 
Dream.'') They did what everyone does, studying the classified ads 
the minute they came out, rushing to open houses where there would 
be a dozen or more other potential applicants. They saw `'easily over 
a hundred'' apartments, he said, trying to find something that suited 
them. ``Having two people involved made it that much more difficult,'' 
Lee said. ``She wanted anything that had character, not a rectangular 
box. She didn't want a railroad. I still don't even know what a railroad 
is.'' They did find a few they liked, but in each case, ``we just 
missed it, or there's 10 people there, and there's always someone 
making more money,'' he said. So they decided to develop their own 
tactics. They compiled a chart listing about 25 companies that managed 
apartments on the Upper East Side, names culled by roaming streets 
they liked. Each day, they called those companies, checking to see 
if any apartments were about to be available. But that route, which 
seemed promising because it would have bypassed a broker's fee, yielded 
nothing. Finally, two weeks before the lease on the apartment they 
were sharing was going to expire, Lee saw a newspaper advertisement 
for a two-bedroom apartment on York Avenue in the 70s for $566.89 
a month. He left a message with the broker who had placed the ad, 
Douglas Hochlerin, on a Saturday, and got a call back Monday telling 
him there would be an open house. They decided to go, even though 
they didn't usually bother looking at apartments listed for less than 
a thousand dollars a month, because such apartments always needed 
so much work. But this one drew them because the rent was so low it 
might be worth making renovations. When they got to the open house, 
on the sixth floor of an old walkup building, they understood why 
the rent was so low. ``It was a dump,'' said Lee, who is now a manager 
at a midtown restaurant. ``You couldn't even walk around. The old 
tenants had left a couch and all their garbage. I think they just 
took their Filofax and left.'' It was so rundown, so crammed with 
an odd variety of things, he said, that it looked as if homeless people 
had camped there. Graffiti covered the walls. But they needed a place, 
and it had plenty of inherent charm. The light was wonderful, streaming 
into a large bedroom from York Avenue. Even the second bedroom and 
the small living room had windows onto a picturesque urbanscape. And 
it wasn't a railroad apartment, laid out in one long line. This time, 
they were the winning candidates. They got the apartment, and they 
were thrilled. They paid their rent, and their $2,500 broker's fee, 
and planned to move in immediately. The lease said the apartment would 
be painted and cleaned, so they knew they didn't have to move out 
the debris themselves. They didn't, but it took two weeks of constant 
requests for the landlord to remove the mess. Finally, when they did 
move in, they were told they couldn't use the shower because it leaked 
into the apartment below, that the stove was broken and that the buzzer 
didn't work. After a brief assessment, Lee decided he didn't want 
to use the shower under any circumstances, at least in the condition 
he found it. The small bathroom, just off the kitchen, had only a 
toilet _ with no sink _ and the shower was just awful. ``It was pretty 
nasty,'' he said. So he found a contractor and decided that it would 
be worth $2,800 to have a new bathroom. In stark contrast to the state 
of the kitchen, where rotting floorboards give way under ripped linoleum, 
the bathroom now has clean beige tile with white grout, a glass door 
to the shower that lets in the light of a window, and classic white 
porcelain fixtures. The renovation was completed on Oct. 15. ``Today 
is my one-month anniversary here,'' Lee said, ``and yesterday was 
my first shower.'' Until the job was done, he had been using a nearby 
health club, where he had taken a one-month trial membership. Next 
is the kitchen, which Lee plans to renovate himself. He will tear 
up the linoleum and plywood, put in a new piece of plywood, and top 
it with stick-on parquet. And they'll buy a new sink. (Although Lee 
says his landlord is aware of the work he has done, Thomas Higgins 
of Higgins &AMP; Trippett, who specializes in real estate litigation, 
cautions that tenants should protect themselves when they do major 
renovations by getting written permission from the landlord. Otherwise, 
Higgins said, a landlord could argue that the lease was violated and 
could move to terminate it.) After a few weeks, the buzzer was fixed, 
and a new metal door was installed, replacing the old wooden one that 
was so rotted it looked as if someone had chewed it on the side. Just 
a few days ago, the landlord supplied a new stove. Getting the repairs 
done took constant pleading and arguing, but now the couple have everything 
they thought they would have the day they moved in. Sometimes the 
disasters were almost comical. They hired a floor refinisher to come 
in and sand the painted floors, to restore them to their natural wood 
color, but the electricity wasn't working. Con Edison insisted it 
was on. The problem turned out to be the limited power going to the 
building. It simply won't accommodate the sanding of floors, so they 
will cover them with sisal. The limited electricity also requires 
adjustments in their daily routines. ``You can't have a hair dryer 
and the TV on together,'' Lee said. An air-conditioner is out of the 
question. ``We turn everything off when we turn the microwave on,'' 
he said. And until their new stove arrived, the microwave was on a 
lot. Lee is well aware that some people's reaction to the hassles 
will be, ``But your rent is only $566 a month.'' But he wants everyone 
to understand the real price. ``You really want to tell people they 
need to understand, you get what you pay for,'' he said. ``Our lives 
have been nonstop chaos and frustration.'' Someday, he hopes, the 
memory of the dirt, the dust and the hassle will be gone and he and 
his fiancee will be able to relax and enjoy the apartment, which they 
really do like. But, he said, ``If I had to do this all over again, 
I would probably pay my $1,300 and move in the next day.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>