<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981024.0096 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The plant was opened in 1977 to refine crude oil into gasoline, but 
when that proved unprofitable, it was converted in 1981 to run on 
molasses, and then in 1987, on grain. Bankruptcy followed. Now, with 
rust on its tanks and pipes and grass growing through the gravel on 
its paths, construction workers are converting it yet again, to make 
fuel alcohol from agricultural garbage. The plant's product, ethanol, 
which can be blended with gasoline to power cars and trucks or used 
on its own to power modified vehicles, has been produced around the 
country for years using corn and wheat and other high-quality, high-cost 
ingredients, but never with economic success. But the new owners of 
the plant here, BC International Corp., with a subsidy from the U.S. 
Energy Department and help from a genetically engineered, patented 
bacterium, hope they are on the cusp of a new era. ``It is a bio-refinery,'' 
said Stephen Gatto, president and chief executive of the company. 
Exactly 25 years after the beginning of the Arab oil embargo, the 
Energy Department believes that Gatto's company may have a way to 
replace crude oil with garbage. BC International will be the first 
to try on a commercial scale. ``The input costs are close to zero,'' 
said Dan Reicher, assistant secretary of energy. ``In some cases they 
are less than zero, because people are paying to get rid of these 
materials.'' And if it works, he said, the technology could also reduce 
the accumulation of gases in the atmosphere that are thought to cause 
climate change, and could lower smog. The plant here in this south-central 
Louisiana town will run on bagasse, a part of the sugar cane plant 
usually considered useless, as well as on rice hulls, a currently 
useless part of the rice plant. Later, it may digest sawdust as well. 
Around the country, energy experts have their eyes on clippings from 
suburban lawns, prairie grasses and other woody materials, as fuel 
for the new process. ``It's a lot cheaper to grow wood and grass than 
corn,'' said John Ferrell, director of the Office of Fuels Development 
at the Energy Department. In the current generation of ethanol plants, 
the fuel is the corn kernel; plants using the new technology could 
digest the cob and the stalk as well, Ferrell said. These materials 
are made of cellulose, which contains large amounts of sugar, the 
basic ingredient required for alcohol production. But the sugar in 
cellulose is in a chemical form that traditional fermentation processes, 
which use yeast, cannot digest. BC's plant uses a bacterium, KO11, 
also used in the pharmaceutical industry, to break down the sugars. 
The natural bacterium on which KO11 is based likes to eat sugars and 
produces a chemical called acetic acid. But then came gene splicing. 
Dr. Lonnie Ingram, a microbiologist at the University of Florida's 
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, borrowed four genes from 
another organism, Zymomonas mobilis, to make the bacterium produce 
alcohol instead. Around the country, researchers are working with 
Z. mobilis to find other approaches, but BC International's will be 
the first commercial plant to make ethanol from woody material. The 
plant will take about 18 months to build and will cost $90 million, 
including $11 million from the Energy Department. Existing ethanol 
plants do little to save energy or reduce carbon build-up in the atmosphere. 
They can use up to seven gallons of oil or its energy equivalent to 
produce eight gallons of ethanol, experts say. The energy is used 
by the coal in power plants and diesel fuel in tractors that plant, 
fertilize and harvest the corn, and in petroleum-based fertilizer. 
But using waste for fuel _ especially waste that might otherwise be 
burned and in the process dump carbon dioxide back into the air _ 
could allow production of seven gallons of ethanol from one gallon 
of oil. And whatever the feedstock, whether trees or grasses, using 
it makes room for new growth, which will draw carbon back out of the 
atmosphere. This would be true, backers point out, wherever ethanol 
from cellulose might catch on, in this country or abroad, especially 
the Third World, where demand for motor fuel is rising. In the United 
States, retail distribution of ethanol in its near-pure form _ a blend 
of 85 percent ethanol and 15 percent unleaded gasoline _ is minuscule. 
But it is more widely distributed as ETBE, a gasoline additive used 
to raise octane and to reduce carbon monoxide emissions. Ford and 
Chrysler expect to turn out hundreds of thousands of vehicles that 
can run on ethanol or gasoline, to take advantage of credits offered 
under the federal fuel economy rules, so a market is growing. The 
stumbling block has been price. To compete, ethanol has to cost about 
one-fourth less than gasoline, because it has less energy per gallon. 
BC International sees an initial niche for ethanol as the basic ingredient 
of ETBE; later, the company says, it could compete with gasoline directly. 
What would help, experts say, is using ingredients that are available 
free, or that others will pay to dispose of. In California, one area 
has banned burning of rice straw because of air pollution, and that 
could be a potential fuel for an ethanol plant, Gatto said. The plant 
here, on the banks of the Mermentau River, is designed to produce 
20 million gallons a year _ less than a pint for every car in America 
_ but several others using cellulose are planned around the country. 
One company, Masada Resource, of Birmingham, Ala., says it will break 
ground next year on a plant in Middletown, N.Y., that will use the 
cellulose in household garbage. In that case, sales of ethanol will 
not turn a profit but will help offset the cost of garbage disposal, 
in a region where a large landfill is scheduled to close soon. It 
will not use KO11, but a different proprietary process for rendering 
the cellulose into digestible form. If the new technology does not 
revolutionize the fuels business, it would not be the first time, 
as the plant here bears witness. ``It all depends on how good these 
bugs are, and what the price of oil is,'' Reicher said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>