<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981024.0288 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
What participants at the Wye River Middle East conference call the 
Long Night _ the all-night stand from Thursday to Friday during which 
an agreement was finally clinched, or almost clinched _ opened with 
the second crisis. That was when President Clinton became so angry 
with the way Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel was treating 
Yasser Arafat, the Palestinian leader, that the president slammed 
down his papers and angrily walked off, exclaiming, ``This is despicable!'' 
Clinton strode down the full length of the large dining room where 
most of the other American, Israeli and Palestinian officials were 
gathered and into the executive dining room where Americans held private 
meetings. ``He made clear that there was one more door,'' a witness 
said, noting that the exit was not final. Netanyahu relented, Clinton 
returned, and the negotiations went into the crucial home stretch. 
``People felt that was a turning point,'' the official recalled. His 
account and those of other members of the American, Israeli and Palestinian 
delegations were pieced together in interviews over the last week. 
The first crisis, they said, had come the day before, on Wednesday, 
when Netanyahu ordered the members of his team to pack their bags 
in protest over what he perceived as an American ultimatum. The third 
and final crisis broke out Friday morning, at the end of the Long 
Night, when everything seemed sealed and ready for signing, when Netanyahu 
suddenly told Clinton that he could not go home without Jonathan Jay 
Pollard, an American convicted of spying for Israel. Clinton said 
``no,'' Netanyahu said ``no deal,'' tempers flared, Netanyahu went 
off for a nap, Clinton paced, and several hours of acute suspense 
ensued before the exhausted negotiators emerged under the sparkling 
chandeliers of the East Room at the White House to sign on the dotted 
line, only minutes before sundown ushered in the Jewish Sabbath. In 
between the crises, according to participants at the Wye talks, was 
a process that began with several days of relative inaction and accelerated 
on Tuesday evening into three days of fierce, often emotional, sometimes 
angry, and almost continuous negotiations. In addition to the moments 
of anger and crisis, there were moments of levity, like Arafat's long 
ride on a bicycle with bodyguards trotting along; flashes of humor, 
like the T-shirts someone printed up comparing the Wye exercise to 
the movie ``Groundhog Day,'' in which every day repeats itself; and 
moments of high drama, most notably the impassioned plea by the ailing 
King Hussein of Jordan, who reminded the participants that there was 
a higher purpose in what they were doing. The conference formally 
opened at the White House on Oct. 15 and moved to the Wye River Conference 
Center in Maryland. For the first several days, the Israelis and Palestinians 
rehearsed the arguments and accusations they had been exchanging futilely 
for 19 months. Two central Israeli players, Defense Minister Yitzhak 
Mordechai and Foreign Minister Ariel Sharon, arrived only on Sunday. 
The Americans listened, seeking to distinguish between what they called 
red lines and pink lines _ between those positions that were hard, 
and those that could be traded. The real action began Tuesday evening. 
After dinner, at about 8 p.m., Clinton gathered Netanyahu and Arafat; 
Samuel R. Berger, the national security adviser; Secretary of State 
Madeleine Albright; Dennis B. Ross, the chief American mediator; Israeli 
Trade and Labor Minister Natan Sharansky, and the Palestinian negotiator 
Abu Mazen, and declared that the time had come to review the critical 
issues and take an inventory. The president took his pad of paper 
and, lawyer-like, grouped all outstanding issues into two columns 
_ Israeli and Palestinian core issues _ and three groups: the easiest, 
the hard, and the hardest, a senior American official recalled. At 
that meeting, Sharansky made an emotional address seeking to explain 
that the Israeli demand for a comprehensive revision of the Palestinian 
National Charter to excise the 26 articles calling for Israel's destruction 
was not a propaganda exercise, but a fundamental insistence that the 
Palestinians make a public demonstration of their acceptance of the 
Jewish state. By all accounts, the speech swayed Clinton and Arafat, 
and eventually resulted in the agreement. Sharansky's speech was one 
of several key interventions by various participants at various times 
that helped shape the deal. Officials also spoke of the crucial role 
played by Mordechai, the most moderate member of Netanyahu's Cabinet, 
in resolving standoffs and in counterbalancing the conservative prime 
minister. Officials said Mordechai was also crucial in drafting the 
complex security arrangements that the Israelis demanded as the major 
condition for relinquishing 13 percent more of the West Bank. At Wye, 
as in the six months preceding the conference, Netanyahu repeatedly 
insisted on ever more specific measures by the Palestinians and, according 
to American officials, it was Mordechai who declared that the security 
forces were satisfied. Wednesday's work began at 2:15 a.m., when Albright 
called Netanyahu to congratulate him on his 49th birthday. ``Is that 
really why you're calling?'' asked an incredulous prime minister. 
That was when the first crisis struck. Evidently sensing that the 
document was a form of American ultimatum, and convinced that it was 
devoid of the concrete security measures that he required, Netanyahu 
ordered his delegation to pack its bags and demanded that the Americans 
provide vans and helicopters for Israel's withdrawal. Aviv Bushinsky, 
Netanyahu's new press spokesman, appeared at the press center two 
miles from the Wye Conference Center and announced the impending Israeli 
departure. When Albright came to the Israeli compound at River House 
at about 4 p.m., the suitcases were standing dramatically on the lawn. 
Clinton canceled his plan to visit Wye that evening, and the Americans 
suspended the talks. Albright was not impressed, and by the time she 
came to the Israeli compound, she was well armed. By then, she had 
learned that after Netanyahu ordered his team to prepare to pull out, 
Mordechai issued his own order to the large security team under his 
authority, telling them to stay put. After that Mordechai went out 
for a jog, and saw Albright's car. They had a chat and kissed each 
other on the cheek. So when Albright met Netanyahu, she told him that 
he was free to leave, but that Israeli security people intended to 
continue their negotiations with or without him. Mordechai and Netanyahu 
then went off for a private ride on a golf cart, and the crisis began 
to defuse. Security experts from all three sides gathered for another 
three hours and concluded the crucial security agreement. At 10 p.m., 
Netanyahu issued a statement declaring that he had received assurances 
enabling him to stay. He sent one of his negotiators, Yitzhak Molcho, 
to apologize to the Americans, and to blame the young and inexperienced 
Bushinsky for the whole episode. Whether the Israelis could have left 
even if they wanted to is not certain. Their pilot reportedly got 
lost en route to Andrews Air Force Base, and the Americans never ordered 
the helicopters they demanded. So dawned Thursday, the longest day. 
The president arrived, American officials recalled, and declared the 
order of the day: ``We are going to stay here until we finish this. 
We are going to finish it today, or we're not going to finish it.'' 
At about 3 p.m., Netanyahu and Arafat were spotted having a direct 
conversation. After about 30 minutes, they sent for Albright to go 
out and ask them to meet, evidently to offset any impression that 
they had become chummy. ``They spent three hours on the hard-core 
issues _ the charter, the arrest of prisoners, weapons,'' an American 
official said. ``The glacier began to break up and they moved off 
maximalist positions. They broke the ice, but they couldn't build 
it. So we came back into it, and the president put down a set of ideas, 
and it came together.'' As the fatigue mounted, Clinton invited Hussein 
to speak to the participants. Arriving in the evening, gaunt and hairless 
after a treatment of chemotherapy for cancer, the king issued his 
memorable address. ``You could hear a pin drop,'' a negotiator recalled. 
``It lifted everyone up and gave some impetus, which lasted, oh, an 
hour or so.'' That was when the second crisis broke. Netanyahu, Arafat 
and Clinton were in a corner of the large dining room finishing the 
prisoner issue, when the prime minister began issuing more demands 
to the Palestinian, until he finally became abrasive. Arafat rose 
up and went to another table. ``That was the key moment,'' a witness 
said. ``Clinton became angry.'' Though Arafat is renowned in the Middle 
East for the tantrums he has thrown at virtually every crucial negotiation, 
at Wye he had decided to be studiously patient and polite. ``He was 
always gracious and accommodating,'' a confounded Israeli reported. 
``He rode his bike, he played the game, he never lost his cool. He 
never threatened to leave.'' One explanation for his behavior was 
his trust in Albright. It was the secretary who regularly briefed 
and reassured Arafat. Another actor who was carefully watched was 
Sharon, who, as he had vowed, never shook Arafat's hand. When they 
were introduced by Netanyahu, the two men acknowledged each other 
with a nod of the head. Sharon, a hardliner, had repeatedly declared 
that he would resist any West Bank withdrawal of more than 6 percent, 
but in the end, participants said, Sharon gave no indication of holding 
Netanyahu back. Negotiations continued on through Thursday night and 
into Friday morning. By 6:30 a.m. they appeared sewn up. Netanyahu 
scheduled a news conference for 9 a.m. at Wye, to be followed by a 
signing ceremony at the White House at noon. Then came the final crisis, 
the ``7 a.m. incident.'' Word had come that the Israel radio had announced 
that Netanyahu would be bringing Pollard home. That would certainly 
be a prize for the prime minister, one that would go a long way to 
offsetting the fury of the right wing. The trouble was that Clinton 
insisted that he never promised to release the spy, only to consider 
the case once again. By all accounts, the president was furious. For 
the next hour and a half, he and Netanyahu talked in private, after 
which the Israeli said he needed a nap. The president paced. The American 
instinct now was to give Netanyahu a chance to back down. He did. 
At noon, Mordechai told the Americans that Netanyahu wanted to meet. 
At 2 p.m., the prime minister agreed to sign without a firm commitment 
about Pollard, and all that remained was the signing. But even as 
he flew in his helicopter to the White House, Clinton sent Albright 
to have one more discussion with Arafat, to make sure the deal was 
secure. In the end, Clinton won plaudits from all sides, his own included, 
for the extraordinary time he invested in Wye, his evenhandedness, 
and the attention to detail that he demonstrated. Arafat was lauded 
for his patience. And despite all the crises that Netanyahu created, 
participants declared that he had made wrenching concessions, and 
that if he was the most demanding, it was because he had the most 
to lose. ``Apart from a moment or two when he stepped over the line, 
the prime minister dealt with the Chairman with respect,'' a senior 
American participant said. ``But he was under a hell of a lot of pressure. 
The portrayal of Bibi'' _ Netanyahu's nickname _ ``as an enfant terrible, 
and Yasser as a Buddha, is just wrong. They were both putting it all 
on the line. And everything mattered. And they used every weapon at 
their disposal, except that the arsenals are different.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>