<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981024.0139 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In recent months, the familiar ritual, sad if no longer much of a 
mystery, began to unfold again for Lawrence Taylor. He regularly refused 
to return telephone calls from friends. Even a call from New York 
Giants owner Wellington Mara went unanswered. Taylor's withdrawal 
included virtually isolating himself inside his $1 million house in 
New Jersey. ``If a guy is holed up in his house,'' Beasley Reece, 
a longtime friend of the former Giant linebacker, said, ``there is 
no telling what happens to him.'' But nearly everyone close to Taylor 
had an idea what might happen, and so there was little surprise among 
his friends when Taylor was arrested on drug charges last week. The 
pattern had played out before, as seemingly inevitable as it was predictable. 
In fact, there was an almost eerie parallel between the latest incident 
and his previous drug arrest in May 1996. In the earlier arrest, Taylor 
was charged with trying to buy $100 of fake crack cocaine from an 
undercover officer in Myrtle Beach, S.C., where Taylor had gone to 
play in a celebrity golf tournament. The latest incident occurred 
after Taylor traveled to St. Petersburg, Fla., to play in a celebrity 
golf tournament. He was arrested in his hotel room at 2 a.m. Monday 
when he allegedly tried to buy $50 worth of crack cocaine from an 
undercover police officer. ``I love him, that's all I can tell you,'' 
Bill Parcells, the former Giants coach, said last week. ``I guess 
I'm just like everybody else. I just hope.'' Hope appears to be facing 
a tough fight, for friends say Taylor may be at one of the lowest 
points in a life of remarkable athletic achievement and much personal 
recklessness. Friends and former teammates portray Taylor as on the 
verge of bankruptcy and in the grips of a longstanding drug addiction. 
Taylor, who was suspended a decade ago by the National Football League 
for drug use, could wind up in prison as a result of his latest arrest. 
Already, according to Giants officials who spoke on the condition 
of anonymity, the team has paid for two trips to drug rehabilitation 
for Taylor. Leonard Marshall, a friend and former teammate, said he 
and others fear that Taylor may ultimately harm himself seriously. 
``I worry about that very much,'' said Marshall. ``I think it is a 
real possibility.'' Another close friend, who asked not to be identified, 
said: ``I wake up every morning, reading the papers, wondering when 
I'm going to read about Lawrence either hurt or worse, either by his 
own hand or because he did too many drugs. I love him and I worry 
about him. I worry about his future.'' The reason for Taylor's latest 
descent into trouble could be that the strain of his glorious yet 
irresponsible life and career is again taking its toll. It has before. 
Taylor, 39, has been arrested three times since retiring at the end 
of the 1993 season. He has pleaded guilty to filing a false income-tax 
return, been issued three traffic summonses by New Jersey state troopers 
for leaving the scene of an accident, had his driver's license suspended 
because of outstanding parking tickets in Newark and been questioned 
by a state grand jury investigating organized crime. After the arrest 
in Myrtle Beach, he told a reporter: ``My whole world seems like it's 
in the toilet. Well, it's going to be in the toilet now. . . . I ought 
to kill myself.'' Taylor did not go to jail because he received 60 
hours of community service and submitted to drug counseling and random 
drug testing. But the Florida arrest could mean a court-ordered stay 
at a drug-rehabilitation clinic or worse. ``It may come down to either 
doing that or Lawrence going to jail,'' said Thomas Melani, Taylor's 
lawyer. In some ways, Taylor is not unique. There are a legion of 
former N.F.L. players who have experienced difficulty handling the 
adjustment from star athlete to private citizen once their playing 
days are over. Mark Gastineau, the former defensive end for the Jets, 
pleaded guilty to assault charges last week, as well. The bigger the 
star, sometimes the bigger the crash. Some of Taylor's biggest troubles 
stem from his obligations to his children and former wife. Melani 
said Taylor pays about $100,000 a year in alimony and child-support 
payments for three children he fathered with his ex-wife, Linda Taylor, 
as well as another son. But Melani said Taylor makes only $50,000 
to $100,000 a year, mainly from selling memorabilia on home-shopping 
channels, from making personal appearances and from revenue generated 
from his part-ownership of Container Packaging Corporation, a small 
company in Paterson, N.J. Because of his financial problems, Taylor 
may be forced to sell his home in Upper Saddle River, N.J. Taylor 
has lived there for more than a decade. ``He is not keen on the idea 
of declaring bankruptcy,'' Melani said. ``But it is an option he is 
exploring right now. He may not have a choice.'' That Taylor, who 
declined to be interviewed when reached by telephone at his home, 
is in financial trouble is all the more regrettable, some say, in 
light of his considerable generosity. One former teammate said Taylor, 
over the course of his 13-year career with the Giants, gave a total 
of almost $1 million to Giants players in need. But while Taylor is 
apt to give help, he often refuses to accept it. ``It's difficult 
to engage Lawrence now,'' said Marshall, who is president of Pro Star 
Athletic, a sports apparel company. ``One minute, he's the greatest 
thing since sliced bread. The next minute, he's completely different, 
he wants to have nothing to do with you. He's Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde.'' 
Parcells said many others had tried to assist the man generally regarded 
as among the greatest defensive players ever. ``I don't think you 
can enumerate the names or the list of people that have tried,'' Parcells 
said. Some have met with modest success. Within the past six months, 
Taylor was hired by the owner of an insurance-brokerage firm in Manhattan, 
who idolized Taylor. Taylor worked there in public relations for several 
months, and the owner, who asked not to be identified, said Taylor 
was a model worker. He plans to hire Taylor again. Other friends have 
not been as lucky reaching Taylor. A former teammate of Taylor's recently 
attempted to get him a job in a sports-business company. He also tried 
to arrange a meeting between Taylor and Lem Burnham, who directs the 
NFL's player-assistance program. Taylor responded by swearing. ``I'm 
LT,'' the former teammate recalled Taylor saying defiantly. ``In order 
for Lawrence to get it all back together,'' Marshall said, ``he needs 
some life-threatening experience to bring him back to us, back to 
his roots. When he comes back, his friends will be waiting.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>