<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981009.2000.2026 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Clinton today welcomed Germanys' chancellor elect Gerhardt 
Schroeder to the White House. And from all accounts, the two saw eye 
to eye on a variety of issues, including the need to authorize NATO 
military force against Kosovo. The President had a fine friendship 
with Schroeder's predecessor, Helmut Kohl, who was chancellor for 
16 years. For this week's chat with Washington-based foreign correspondent, 
we talked with Ingoff Karnal, the Washington bureau chief of German 
broadcasting, and Patrick Sabatea of the Paris newspaper "Liberaceon". 
Ingoff Karnal expects that President Clinton and Gerhardt Schroeder 
will get along just fine. That's what everybody hopes in Germany and 
in my opinion, there's no doubt that both politicians will get along 
very well. They are from the baby boomer generation. They are the 
same age. They hold liberal positions as far as domestic as well as 
international politics are concerned. And so I'm really am very hopeful 
that Gerhardt Schroeder and Bill Clinton will get along very well. 
Let's look specifically at some of the issues over which they might 
conceivably be divided. One of them is Kosovo. What is Mr. Schroeder's 
position liable to be about that and what is he going to be hoping 
he can get from Mr. Clinton? Well, I think it is rather the other 
way around. That Bill Clinton hopes to get Gerhardt Schroeder onboard 
as far as Kosovo's concerned and the social Democrats in Germany are 
ready to participate if there is some kind of military action over 
the next few days or weeks in Kosovo. The problem may arise with the 
Green party, the future coalition partners of the social democrats 
because the green party wants no force without a mandate by the United 
Nations. If NATO goes it alone, so they say it's a dangerous precedent 
that could jeopardize international stability. So Yahcha Fitzka, the 
guy accompanying Gerhardt Schroeder in Washington right now is the 
one who has to be persuaded by Bill Clinton to get onboard in Kosovo. 
And Patrick Sabatea, the Germans have this movement called the Third 
Way but in France, I gather, this term has a very different and a 
very sinister connotation doesn't it? At least from my generation, 
which is postwar generation, when we hear about the Third Way, that 
used to refer to, you know, fascism which was a "Third Way" to between 
communism and liberalism. And so these--quote word is not really very 
used in France and French socialist or the Green party do not really 
use that word very much. the chancellor-to-be, Gerhardt Schroeder, 
has met with the present president of the United States but not necessarily 
the future president of United States. Is that something that concerns 
your readers? How long Bill Clinton is going to be around? I think 
the population in Germany and our audience is very much concerned 
over things going on in Washington right now as far as the president' 
s sexual affairs are concerned. On the other hand, almost nobody in 
Germany can understand that there might be an impeachment procedure 
against the president. People in Germany find that, OK he did some 
immoral things, but what is going on in Washington right now within 
the Congress and as far as the independent counsel Kenneth Starr is 
concerned that it's overreaching. Patrick, how do you read about this 
to your readers? Do you have to explain the system again to them? 
It's not the Napoleonic legal system, it's the American legal system. 
Absolutely. Each time we -- I mean it's a very, very different and 
unusual political and judicial system and one has to explain not only 
what the impeachment is, and in particular the fact that what has 
been voted on now is an inquiry on impeachment and that it's not -- 
doesn't mean that they have voted for the throwing out of a president. 
And the whole concept also of high crimes and misdemeanors, the whole 
legal system inherited from English common law is of course quite 
different from what we're used to. And the French are quite at a loss 
following this. Ingoll Karnal is the bureau chief of German Broadcasting 
and Patrick Sabatea writes for the Paris newspaper Liberaceon. Thank 
you both very much. Thank you. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>