<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981009.2000.3182 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Nine years ago, Cole Porter's music got the Red Hot treatment and 
the first album to be released by the New York-based Red Hot organization. 
The proceeds of Red Hot and Blue went to AIDS organizations around 
THE WORLD. Now since then, the red hot organization has been releasing 
similarly eclectic albums for the same cause. This week the Gershwin 
Tribute, Red Hot and Rhapsody became the 12th such album, but you've 
probably never heard the 11th. At least, not until now. THE WORLD's 
Marco Worman tells us why. On the Sonora, Red Hot in Lisbon came out 
this past Spring showcasing Portuguese talent and songwriting. Red 
Hot in Lisbon became an enormous success in Portugal as well as in 
Italy, France and Germany. But here in the states, the Red Hot organization 
hasn't found a distributor for the album. Brazilian Baco Dranoff, 
project coordinator for the Red Hot organization says he's been disappointed 
but not surprised by the lack of enthusiasm among those in the American 
music industry. They really push pop music and English language pop 
music is really the music business and unfortunately I believe it's 
too linked to sales numbers and they have to keep the structure growing, 
so you know, it's easier may be to export U.S. and UK music to the 
planet then to really start developing an act from Brazil, from Senegal 
or from Cape Verde or something like that. It's still a very, very 
niche market and that's reflected on Red Hot from Lisbon. David Byrne 
who used to front for Talking Heads and Brazilian Gatano Valoso share 
lead vocals on this track from Red Hot in Lisbon. It's called Marco 
de Canavatious. Most of the artist on Red Hot in Lisbon are of Portuguese 
or Brazilian origin. However the albums producer Baco Dranoff did 
tap the services of K.D. Lang to sing a classic Portuguese fado ballad. 
That song that she recorded is from 1910. was a classic Portuguese 
guitarist and that was her rehearsed and you know, they went sort 
of went line by line. And he really coached her. It was amazing because 
the emotion was there, you know. Portuguese people were enchanted 
to see how can this lady, you know Canadian, sing a fado that is such 
a deep, soulful kind of music. And she really did an amazing job. 
The Red Hot organization says it's close to striking a deal to get 
Red Hot in Lisbon distributed in the United States. For THE WORLD, 
this is Marco Worman. Music from K. D. Lang brings our show to a close. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>