<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981231.1830.1224 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> MISCELLANEOUS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When we come back, 365 amazing ys in 5 1/2 minutes. Omnd a therapeutic 
shampoo, neutrogena T/gel... would come out #1. T/gel works on all 
three itchy, flaky scalp conditions. Neutrogena T/gel: we're finally 
winning! Today, more people are quitting smoking than ever, and a 
lot of them are doing it with nicoderm cq. Cq's got the 3 steps, the 
gradual step down method doctors prefer to help get you free. So how 
many have quit with nicoderm cq? Why, we'd have to build the biggest 
stadium in America just to hold them all. Remember now, new year's 
day. Quit with nicoderm cq. We're saving a seat for you. Finally tonight, 
if years can be summarized in a sentence, we'd like to put an exclamation 
point on 1998. There was turmoil, tragedy and triumph. Rest a moment, 
and remember. I have ordered a strong series of air strikes against 
Iraq. The vast majority of targets have been outside of Baghdad. Do 
not threaten anyone an you will not be hit. We declared we will not 
compromise. He called his attackers agents of satan. The Pentagon 
says the bombing campaign has done substantial damage. We are the 
victims of a crisis in Washington. Stunning allegations out of Washington 
involving President Clinton and a Young intern. I did not have sex 
with that woman. Use of secret audio tapes. I never expected to feel 
this way about him. We want all the truth -- Indeed I did have a relationship 
with Ms. Lewinsky that was not appropriate. I don't think there's 
a fancy way to say I have sinned. The world has had access to the 
most intimate details of the president's and Ms. Lewinsky's behavior. 
The president tried repeatedly to thwart the legal process. Equal 
justice under the law. That's what we're fighting for. William Jefferson, 
Clinton, president of the United States, is impeached. The public 
consequences of my actions are in the hands of the American people 
and their representatives in the Congress. Early this morning, two 
U.S. embassies in east Africa were the target of bombs. There will 
be no sanctuary for terrorists. In Afghanistan and Sudan. The nuclear 
jeanny has again escaped. Two more nuclear blasts in India. Conducted 
another nuclear test -- A nation in crisis, terrible violence in the 
street. The Suharto era was over. Catholics and their adversary99 
adversaries have agreed to make peace. Israel and the Palestinians 
had been achieved. . Dr. Jack Kevorkian is charged with murdering 
one of his patients. The issue has to be raised to the level where 
it is finally decided. The most far-reaching anti-tobacco Bill went 
down in flames. Children will die young. President Clinton and Paula 
Jones reached a settlement today. The democrats pick up seats in the 
House of Representatives. Before the week was out. Newt Gingrich was 
gone. The incoming speaker of the house announces he will resign. 
The Microsoft case and how it may affect one of America's most important 
industries. Viagra, one of the fastest selling pills in the history 
of medicine. And it's a great drug. Global economic anxiety. Tens 
of millions of Russians are just not getting paid. This was a horrible 
day on Wall Street, second biggest point drop ever. It was a spectacular 
rally. Another record day. This time the market was going up. Wall 
Street likes big mergers. Corporate America is on course to make 1998 
the worst year for layoffs in a Decade. Killing among ethnic Serbians 
and Albanians has already begun. Devastating bomb attack in northern 
Ireland. Swissair flight 111, 229 people dead. The deadly shooting 
spree appeared to have been well planned. Kids shooting kids. A new 
school, a familiar scene. A young man walked in and waumly started 
shooting. Two Capitol Hill policemen were killed. T firestorm terrorized 
central Florida. The ice storm is one of the worst anyone can remember. 
Hurricane Mitch has more than lived up to its early -- Homes and lives 
swept away what witnesses said seemed like in instant. And liftoff 
of "discovery" with a crew of six astronaut heroes and an american 
legend. It's the home run race that has led the nation. Baseball has 
been very, very good to me. Oh, make me over I'm all I want to be 
Taco bell. Time to start clothing that new year's baby. That is our 
report on "World News Tonight." I'm Kevin Newman. For all of us at 
ABC News, be safe, and have a very happy new year. Good night. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>