<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981231.0150 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Europe's dream of monetary union becomes reality Thursday when 11 
nations irrevocably lock their currencies together to form the euro 
and create an economic giant whose boundaries stretch from beyond 
the Arctic Circle to the shores of the Mediterranean. The euro's birth 
is being hailed as a historic turning point in international finance 
and is arguably the greatest single step in the drive to create a 
united Europe from the ruins of World War II. ``This Dec. 31, 1998, 
will be one of the great dates in the history of the 20th century,'' 
French Finance Minister Dominique Strauss-Kahn, told France Info radio. 
``It's the beginning of a new era.'' On what Europeans are calling 
``E-day,'' economic and finance ministers from the 11 nations will 
huddle at European Union headquarters to agree to the rates at which 
German marks, Italian lire and the rest are absorbed into euro. Strauss-Kahn 
said the euro would likely be worth 6.56 to 6.57 French francs. There 
will be solemn speeches and champagne, then schoolchildren will release 
thousands of blue balloons bearing the ``e'' symbol which may soon 
become as familiar as the dollar sign. The euro will formally come 
into existence at midnight on New Year's Eve. It will be worth about 
dlrs 1.17. As the euro-balloons float into the skies above Brussels, 
employees at banks, stock exchanges and other financial institutions 
around Europe will start a race-against-time to adapt computer systems 
and convert countless financial holdings _ from Dutch government bonds, 
to Italian shares and Finnish bank accounts _ into euros before markets 
reopen Monday after the long holiday weekend. ``It is a major logistical 
effort. We have catering facilities. We have booked hundreds of hotel 
rooms. We have hired mini buses,'' said Vendeline Von Bredow, euro 
project manager at Merrill Lynch. After Thursday, the old currencies 
will no longer be traded in foreign exchange markets around the world. 
Stocks and bonds will be quoted in euros. The euro will increasingly 
be used for bank transactions, business deals and public finances. 
The European Central Bank will set a common interest rate of 3 percent 
for all 11 nations. For the first time in decades the U.S. dollar 
will have a rival as the world's reference currency. Euro cash will 
only be issued to replace the old coins and banknotes in early 2002. 
Until then, the euro will only be used for non-cash transactions. 
Consumers will see prices marked in euros making it easier to shop 
across frontiers and they'll be able to buy in euros using checks 
or credit cards. But they'll still have to change money for cross-border 
cash purchases. Citizens will start to see euro figures alongside 
national currencies on pay checks, phone bills and bank statements. 
On Wednesday, winners of the French and Irish national lotteries will 
have their prizes announced in euros. French Riviera flower sellers, 
Belgian supermarkets and trendy Viennese cafes where among businesses 
who jumped the gun and began posting euro prices before the official 
launch. In the Eurotempo store selling souvenirs in the shadow of 
the EU's Brussels headquarters, there was a brisk trade in pocket 
calculators programed to convert to and from euros. ``It's a real 
success, people have been buying up dozens at a time to offer as gifts,'' 
said sales assistant Isabel Fernandez. The store's shelves also contained 
neckties and alarm clocks adorned with the euro symbol, and chocolate 
euro coins. Plans to forge a common European currency date back to 
the 1960s, but only after then German Chancellor Helmut Kohl and late 
French President Francois Mitterrand threw their weight behind the 
project in the late 1980s did Economic and Monetary Union, or EMU, 
take flight. Supporters say euro-zone's 290 million people will give 
European companies a huge, secure home market like that of their American 
rivals. Exchange-rate costs and currency fluctuations within the euro 
zone will disappear. Germany, France, Italy, Spain, the Netherlands, 
Belgium, Austria, Portugal, Finland, Ireland and Luxembourg will join 
the euro, hoping their combined economic weight will give Europe a 
greater voice in world affairs. For some, the price to pay was too 
great. Britain, Denmark and Sweden opted out of the euro because of 
public anxiety that dropping the national currency means giving up 
too much independence. Greece failed to meet economic conditions for 
joining but hopes to be in by 2001. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>