<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981231.0507 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The United Nations has started evacuating its staff from Huambo, Angola's 
second-largest city, after a rebel artillery barrage that killed at 
least eight people and wounded at least 20 civilians. A diplomat, 
speaking Thursday on condition of anonymity, declined to say how many 
U.N. staff were in the central highland city where fighting between 
the army and UNITA rebels has escalated in recent days. The International 
Red Cross said 20 wounded civilians were admitted to the Huambo hospital 
after Wednesday's hour-long bombardment by UNITA's long-range artillery. 
A private radio station, Luanda Antena Comercial, said 12 people died 
in the barrage. Another private station, Radio Eclesia, said eight 
people were killed. Before the civil war resumed on Dec. 4, Huambo 
had a population of about 300,000, but tens of thousands of refugees 
fleeing fighting in the countryside have converged on the city in 
recent weeks and reportedly are living in makeshift conditions. Huambo 
lies about 480 kilometers (300 miles) southeast of the capital, Luanda. 
Fighting also has focused on the nearby city of Kuito. A U.N.-chartered 
cargo plane crashed near Huambo on Saturday with eight U.N. peacekeepers 
and six others on board. The cause of the crash, as the plane passed 
over the war zone, is not known. The United Nations Observer Mission, 
in Angola to oversee implementation of the country's collapsed 1994 
peace accord, still has not received guarantees of safe passage from 
the warring factions to send a rescue team to the crash site, U.N. 
spokesman Hamadoun Toure said. UNITA Secretary-general Paulo Lukamba 
Gato said he had received no request from the United Nations to allow 
the deployment of a rescue team. ``There's a low-intensity war all 
over the country and a high-intensity war around Huambo and Kuito. 
But there'll be a crescendo in the next few days,'' Gato said in a 
telephone interview from Bailundo, UNITA's central highland base. 
He declined to elaborate. Gato complained that the U.N. envoy to Angola, 
Issa Diallo, had failed in his task of bringing the two sides together 
because he had not held direct talks with UNITA leader Jonas Savimbi 
for months. ``The United Nations can't even stop the government's 
war machine. But we'll do that, that's our problem,'' Gato said. With 
the resumption of the civil war, the United Nations is faced with 
the decision of whether to pull out some 1,000 troops in its observer 
mission when its mandate expires on Jan. 15. The U.N. Security Council 
has blamed UNITA, a Portuguese acronym for the National Union for 
the Total Independence of Angola, for the return to war. UNITA refused 
to yield control of areas under its control and maintained a hidden 
army, according to the United Nations. The fighting renewed when government 
troops tried to take the strongholds by force and were beaten back. 
Earlier this week, Angolan President Jose Eduardo dos Santos ruled 
out talks with UNITA on ending the fighting, and said Savimbi was 
a liar for faking compliance with the 1994 peace pact. The country 
has been ravaged by conflict since gaining independence from Portugal 
in 1975. A 1991 peace deal collapsed the following year when UNITA 
rejected its defeat in the country's first democratic elections. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>