<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981231.0743 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Paul Tergat of Kenya took advantage of an injured and absent Ronaldo 
da Costa, grabbing the lead midway and easily winning his third St. 
Silvester on Thursday. The 29-year old Tergat moved to the front after 
a pair of little known Brazilians set the early pace and completed 
the 15 kilometers (9.3 miles) in 44 minutes, 47 seconds for a top 
prize of 10,000 reals (dlrs 8,350). Earlier, Olivera Jevtic of Slovakia 
beat two-time and defending champion Martha Tenorio of Ecuador by 
20 seconds to win the women's division. With Brazil's da Costa, who 
earlier this year set the world marathon record, out due to a sprained 
ankle, Tergat _ who had won the traditional year-end race in 1995 
and 1996 _ coasted to a 18-second victory over South Africa's Henkrick 
Ramaala, who finished second. Kenya's Elijah Kiptarebi Lagat was third 
in the international field of 12,000, finishing three seconds behind 
Ramaala in 45:08. Silvio Guerra of Ecuador was fourth 45:17, 12 seconds 
ahead of a third Kenyan, John Gwako. Defending champion Emerson Iser 
Bem of Brazil was sixth in 45:37. Shortly after the start, little 
known Brazilian Ailton Senna moved out front and stayed there for 
5 kilometers until he dropped out visibly exhausted. Countryman Manoel 
de Jesus Teixiera took his place in front for several minutes before 
Tergat, Ramaalla and Lagat easily overtook him. The three shared the 
lead for about 5 kilometers, when Tergat pulled ahead and held the 
lead to the finish. Thousands of spectators lined the course of skyscraper-lined 
avenues and through narrow, twisting streets of downtown Sao Paulo. 
Some broke through police lines to run alongside the athletes but 
were quickly chased away by police on motorcycles. In the women's 
race, Jevtic took the lead for good with 3 kilometers to go and slowly 
consolidated her lead to the finish. The 21-year-old European completed 
the race in 51 minutes, 35 seconds, with Tenorio followed by Kenya's 
Jane Wanjiku Ngotho, 67 seconds behind the winner. Erika Alejandro 
Olivera de la Fuente of Chile was fourth in 53:33, 23 seconds ahead 
of Brazil's Cleuza Maria Irineu. Shortly after the race, a panting 
and heavily perspiring Jevtic grinned broadly and threw kisses to 
the crowd, ``I am very pleased and I expect to come back next year,'' 
Jevtic said. Brazil's Marizete de Paula Rezende shot ahead when the 
race began under partly cloudy skies and a temperature of 38 degrees 
Celsius (100 Fahrenheit). The relatively unknown Resende staying out 
front for the first 2 kilometers, but then was overtaken by a group 
including Jevtic, Tenorio and Ngotho. For several kilometers, the 
trio ran together and quickly placed more than 40 meters between themselves 
and their nearest rivals. By the 10th kilometer, it became clear that 
one of the three would win. The race is named after St. Silvester, 
the Roman Catholic saint whose feast day is celebrated Dec.31. It 
was first run in 1924 and was the brainchild of Casper Libero, founder 
of the Gazeta Esportiva newspaper - the event's main sponsor. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>