<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981231.0363 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Rushden and Diamonds don't make jewelry. Yet, if the non-league club 
manages to beat mighty Leeds United in the FA Cup on Saturday, English 
soccer will have found some new gems. Such is the magic of the 127-year-old, 
knock-out competition, that Rushden has the chance to upset one of 
the strongest teams in the land at its 6,500-capacity stadium at the 
little town of Irthlingborough in central England. With 64 teams left 
in the competition, some of the 20 powerhouses of the Premier League 
do battle with the minnows in the third round this weekend. And while 
Manchester United and Middlesbrough meet in front of 55,000 fans at 
Old Trafford in a high-powered all Premier League confrontation on 
Sunday, there will be just as much passion at Nene Park. That's where 
Leeds, fifth in the top flight, visits Brian Talbot's Rushden and 
Diamonds of the Vauxhall Conference. Brian Talbot. Remember him? A 
former England international, he made FA Cup history by becoming the 
first man this century to play for two different winning teams in 
successive years with Ipswich in 1978 and Arsenal in '79. Now he coaches 
Rushden and Diamonds and stresses that his main task is to get the 
team promoted into the main Football League. ``But this game with 
Leeds is a lovely distraction,'' said Talbot, who played alongside 
Leeds manager David O'Leary in Arsenal's 1979 FA Cup winning lineup. 
``It doesn't get much more enjoyable or exciting than this.'' Other 
highlights of the third round are two intriguing matchups of the Premier 
League and Division Two. Defending champion Arsenal has a tricky away 
game at high-riding Preston on Monday. Kevin Keegan's Fulham, riding 
high atop division two, visits one of his former clubs, Southampton, 
on Saturday. Tottenham hosts division one Watford, now run by former 
England manager Graham Taylor, and Terry Venables' Crystal Palace 
goes to Ruud Gullit's Newcastle. Aston Villa, top of the Premier League, 
hosts Hull City, which is last in division three and likely to stay 
there. In another meeting of Premier League teams, Blackburn, unbeaten 
in five games under new manager Brian Kidd, hosts Charlton, which 
has lost its last seven. Like Leeds, some of the big names have to 
travel to grounds they haven't visited for a while. Chelsea, second 
in the Premier League and also the European Cup Winners Cup holder, 
should have too much firepower for division two Oldham. Liverpool 
should easily advance past Port Vale of division one despite having 
to go to Vale Park. Derby County goes to struggling division two Plymouth 
and Everton visits Bristol City of division one while the remaining 
Premier League clubs have home games. Nottingham Forest welcomes Portsmouth, 
Sheffield Wednesday receives another division one club, Norwich, and 
Leicester hosts a Birmingham team which has scored 11 goals in its 
last two league games on the road. Manchester City, a Premier League 
club three seasons ago and now playing division two soccer for the 
first time in its history, has a tough game at Wimbledon. Coventry 
hosts division two Macclesfield, and West Ham welcomes division three 
Swansea. In Scotland, Glasgow rivals Rangers and Celtic meet for the 
third time this season, this time at Ibrox on Sunday. Rangers hold 
a six-point lead over second-place Kilmarnock, with defending titlist 
Celtic 10 points behind in third. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>