<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981231.0553 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Meeting in the last hours of 1998, Ukraine's parliament on Thursday 
squeezed out a narrow majority for approval of the next year's budget. 
After nearly 20 attempts were stymied by the Communist-led opposition, 
the 450-seat Verkhovna Rada voted 226-2 to approve the budget. The 
rest of the deputies refused to cast votes. The budget provides for 
revenues of 23.89 billion hryvna (dlrs 6.8 billion) and a deficit 
of 1.24 billion hryvna (dlrs 354 million), or 1 percent of gross domestic 
product. About half of the deficit, or 630 million hryvna (dlrs 180 
million), is to be covered by foreign loans, while the remaining 610 
million hryvna (dlrs 174 million) will be drawn from internal sources, 
such as printing new government bonds. Communists and their supporters, 
who occupy more than one-third of seats in Ukraine's legislature, 
repeatedly refused to approve the budget, demanding that the government 
allocate more funds for payment of overdue wages and pensions. Some 
of them changed their stance only after the Cabinet agreed to allocate 
part of the funds earmarked for payment of 1999 debt obligations to 
finance education and health care. Thursday's debate followed several 
clashes between the government and leftist lawmakers in previous weeks, 
with the two sides insisting on sharply different budget targets and 
failing to reach a compromise each time. However, Cabinet officials 
pleaded with the lawmakers not to raise the proposed revenue target, 
citing chronically poor revenue collection and forecasts that Ukraine's 
economy would shrink 1 percent next year. The government raised only 
63 percent of planned annual revenues in the first 11 months of 1998, 
while its debt in back wages and pensions has grown steadily to reach 
more than 3 billion hryvna (dlrs 875 million), according to official 
statistics. Ukraine's government has consistently failed to implement 
economic reforms since the country gained independence in 1991, bringing 
on a protracted economic decline and growing foreign and domestic 
debts. The 1999 budget envisages nearly a fifth of projected revenues 
for debt payments, and the Cabinet has long insisted on making the 
budget deficit as low as possible, citing scarce opportunities to 
draw more loans to cover it. Ukraine needs a well-balanced and low-deficit 
budget to present to the International Monetary Fund so that it can 
resume payments on a suspended dlrs 2.2 billion loan. Many analysts 
say that without foreign aid, the former Soviet republic would hardly 
be able to meet its 1999 debt obligations since the government cannot 
raise the required money from domestic sources. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>