<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981231.0738 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The luggage carried by a porter into the elevator of an Aden hotel 
was enough to remind Laurence Whitehouse of the tragedy that had suddenly 
overturned his life. ``That's my wife's,'' the tearful British teacher 
said, pointing to a bag. His wife Margaret was one of four hostages 
who died as Yemeni troops tried to rescue 16 Western hostages _ 12 
Britons, two Americans and two Australians _ from Islamic militant 
kidnappers. Whitehouse and nine other former hostages who survived 
the drama without wounds tried to put their lives together Thursday. 
They collected their belongings, and those of dead loved ones, in 
the hotel lobby. Then they flew from southern Yemen to San`a, the 
capital in the north, where they were to spend a night before flying 
out of the country Friday for Europe. The bodies of the slain hostages 
were due to be flown to Britain on Friday. The dead were identified 
as Ruth Williamson, 34, Peter Rowe, a 60-year-old lecturer at the 
University of Durham, and Margaret Whitehouse _ all Britons _ and 
Australian Andrew Thirsk, 35, from Sydney. Two wounded hostages, an 
unidentified American woman with a pelvis wound and Claire Marston, 
Rowe's wife who was shot in the shoulder, remained in hospital in 
Aden Thursday night. Before leaving Aden, each hostage was interviewed 
by Yemeni security officials for their account of the killings. Some 
former hostages already have disputed the government's statement that 
the security forces intervened after the kidnappers began killing 
their captives. Eric Firkins of Croydon, England, says the kidnappers 
were leading the hostages to a mountain hideout when they heard gunfire. 
``The army approached us and the nearer they got, the more tense the 
situation in our group became,'' said another former hostage, Brian 
Smith of Peterborough, England. He said the shooting then started 
in earnest, with bullets whizzing over their heads and shells crashing 
against surrounding mountains or exploding in the air. The former 
hostages said they were forced to stand with their hands in the air 
to shield the gunmen. When the hostages staggered back, the kidnappers 
shot two of them in revenge. Whitehouse recalled how his wife Margaret 
dropped to her knees to try to help the wounded Australian Andrew 
Thirsk. He said a militant tried to use her as a shield. But she resisted, 
continuing to kneel beside Thirsk. ``Then a bullet caught her in the 
leg,'' Whitehouse said. ``I tried to move her, but another kidnapper 
clung on to me and kept the machine gun dug into my neck. Then I saw 
a bullet hit Margaret in the head. She was dead the instant it hit 
her. She never stood a chance. ``They wouldn't let me go to her and 
she just lay there, bleeding in the dirt,'' Whitehouse said. Before 
the shooting began, the kidnappers had moved the hostages in two groups. 
Freed hostages from neither group have accused the militants of killing 
people before the firing started. However, Interior Minister Hussein 
Mohammed Arab insisted at a news conference in San`a Thursday that 
it was the kidnappers' killing of the hostages that forced the security 
forces to intervene. Arab said the kidnappers had given government 
negotiators one hour to meet their demands and then threatened to 
start killing the hostages. Troops heard that the killing had begun 
from a Yemeni driver who was held with the hostages but escaped, he 
said. ``The troops heard gunfire and intervened swiftly to save the 
hostages,'' he said. Arab also said the group to which the kidnappers 
belonged, Islamic Jihad, was planning to bomb the British Consulate 
in Aden, a camp of American military experts, Aden International Airport, 
the offices of the United Nations, churches and hotels. Yemeni officials 
have said the kidnappers had demanded the release of two Islamic Jihad 
leaders and had said they were retaliating for the recent U.S. and 
British airstrikes on Iraq. The leaders had been seized in a crackdown 
on Islamic vigilantes. Tribesmen have kidnapped scores of foreigners 
in the past to win economic concessions from the government, but they 
have usually freed them safely. This was the first time foreigners 
had been abducted by Islamic militants. Four Germans kidnapped by 
Yemeni tribesmen on Dec. 7 were set free unharmed on Wednesday. Germany 
diplomats said the former hostages arrived in San`a early Thursday 
and were scheduled to fly home on Friday. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>