<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981231.0169 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Jailed former No. 2 Malaysian leader Anwar Ibrahim on Thursday pleaded 
with the judge in his sex and corruption trial to give his lawyers 
more time to study complex DNA evidence against him. A state DNA expert 
on Wednesday positively identified Anwar's DNA from semen stains on 
a mattress that he allegedly used for sexual trysts with male and 
female partners. Prosecutors are trying to prove ex-deputy prime minister 
Anwar had sex with the wife of his former secretary, sodomized his 
family driver and abused his powers to try to cover up sexual trysts. 
Trial Judge Augustine Paul earlier in the week rejected a defense 
request to allow testimony from its own DNA experts. Anwar, in a written 
statement to Paul, asked that his attorneys be given until Jan. 7 
to cross-examine state DNA expert Lim Kong Boon. ``Having regard to 
the very political nature of this prosecution case against me and 
the importance to the defense of the evidence in question, I feel 
that the experts to advise the defense should truly be independent 
and be known to be specialists in the field of DNA profiling,'' Anwar 
said in his statement. In response, Paul ruled Thursday that the cross-examination 
of the state's DNA expert witness be put off until all other people 
on the prosecution's list have taken the witness stand. Anwar's team 
plan to fly in foreign DNA experts to brief them on how to conduct 
their cross-examination of Lim. ``I would ask that this request be 
considered sympathetically and that it be granted in the interest 
of justice,'' Anwar said. Though Paul granted the request for more 
time, he refused to allow the defense's own DNA expert to sit in court 
and advise Anwar's lawyers on how to grill Lim. ``The matter is well 
within your competence,'' Paul told Anwar's so-called dream team of 
nine prominent defense lawyers. ``If you read books, they will give 
you the legal aspects on how you can go about attacking a DNA expert.'' 
Earlier Thursday, Lim explained in excruciating detail how he came 
to his conclusion that the stains on the mattress were those of Anwar, 
Shamsidar Taharin, his secretary's wife, and those of another unidentified 
woman and man. The mattress was seized by police in July from an apartment 
in a Kuala Lumpur allegedly used by Anwar. Lim, speaking in highly 
technical English and using diagrams that he referred to with a laser 
pointer, prompted yawns from some observers and a flurry of activity 
from local Chinese-language newspaper reporters as they flipped through 
English-Chinese dictionaries. After an hour of explanation from Lim, 
the judge turned to the defense team and quipped: ``So, it is quite 
easy to understand, isn't it? You don't need an expert with you when 
it's made so easy to understand.'' Before the proceedings began, Anwar's 
wife, Azizah Ismail, presented him with a large Hari Raya card from 
his supporters. Hari Raya is the celebration that takes place at the 
end of the Muslim fasting month of Ramadan. Anwar was fired by Prime 
Minister Mahathir Mohamad on Sept. 2 after Mahathir deemed him morally 
unfit to lead the country. He was arrested on Sept. 20 and badly beaten 
while in police custody, causing an outcry over his treatment. He 
is on trial for abuse of power and will be tried separately on charges 
of engaging in illegal sex acts, including sodomy. Anwar has denied 
all the accusations against him, saying they were fabricated as part 
of a government conspiracy to undermine his challenge to Mahathir's 
17-year rule. Paul also rejected on Thursday a defense request to 
recall to the witness stand Dr. Halim Haji Manzar. The state pathologist 
wrote a medical report detailing the injuries Anwar sustained while 
in police custody. ``I'm afraid I'm unable to agree to the request 
on the simple reason that the report is not relevant to this case,'' 
Paul said before adjourning for the holiday weekend and wishing everyone 
a happy New Year. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>