<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981231.0756 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Partygoers took to the streets in Europe's capitals Thursday night 
to welcome the last year of the second millennium, Asia greeted 1999 
with fireworks and temple bells. Pope John Paul II reminded Roman 
Catholics to prepare for Christianity's millennium jubilee only a 
year away. And in many countries, leaders spoke to their countrymen 
and women of hope for a better future. In Edinburgh, Scotland, where 
New Year's is called Hogmany, the biggest celebration of the year, 
bands played in the park, fireworks filled the sky over Edinburgh 
castle with colored lights, and a former post office building became 
a massive warehouse party. Cardiff, the Welsh capital started a three-day 
Celtic celebration, reviving the tradition of giving gifts at New 
Year's, and throwing in a funfair, a lantern procession, live bands 
and fireworks. In London, music thumped out of brightly lighted pubs, 
and revelers headed for Trafalgar Square. Police have been trying 
to discourage the traditional gathering of thousands at the square, 
because of the potential for injuries in such large, boisterous crowds, 
but still the most ebullient gather there. At Times Square, New York's 
own traditional gathering place, the city went big, bright and brash, 
with a 16-foot-tall roving Father Time puppet, 15,000-balloon release 
and a spotlight said to be visible from Mars. An open air party at 
Berlin's Brandenburg Gate offered about 100 entertainers and a midnight 
fireworks show. Things were a little quieter in Frankfurt, headquarters 
of the new European Central Bank, which will set monetary policy from 
the stroke of midnight for 11 nations sharing a single currency. Late 
into the eveningm, lights shone from the windows of bank skyscrapers 
as employees worked to refigure computer records, but firecrackers 
popped and fizzed in the streets. In taped messages, some of the world's 
political leaders urged their peoples to end sectarian strike, and 
to have hope in the future. In his last New Year's message before 
leaving office, President Nelson Mandela on Thursday challenged South 
Africans to continue working together to solve the problems of poverty 
and corruption, legacies of the apartheid decades. ``The New Year 
will bring many changes,'' Mandela said in the four-minute broadcast 
message. ``They will depend on our working together to realize our 
dream.'' In a message broadcast across nine time zones, Russia's President 
Boris Yeltsin called on Russians to meet 1999 with optimism and pride 
in their country. ``What can I say: The year was difficult for the 
country, for many of you, and for me, too. But New Year's Eve is always 
about new hopes, new dreams, new plans,'' Yeltsin said, according 
to a transcript released by the Interfax news agency. In Dublin, Irish 
Prime Minister Bertie Ahern spoke of the Good Friday peace agreement 
in British-ruled Northern Ireland. ``The fantastic support of people 
.. for an agreed Ireland of dialogue, mutual respect and common endeavor 
is the surest guarantee yet that we will succeed in making this an 
island of peace and prosperity for all - especially for our children,'' 
Ahern said. A continent away, and hours earlier, much of Asia welcomed 
the Year of the Rabbit. In central Tokyo, crowds thronged Zojoji temple 
just before midnight, waiting for a Buddhist monk to strike the temple 
bell 108 times to dispel the evils of the past year and usher in good 
luck for the new year. Tokyo's department stores were well stocked 
with calendars, cards and knickknacks bearing rabbit images. Millions 
of Australians bid farewell to 1998 by watching a U.S. dlrs 1.2 million 
fireworks extravaganza that bathed the harborside Sydney Opera House 
in pulses of green, red and blue light. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>