<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981231.1830.0700 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
NBC news "in depth" tonight -- the military and the millennium bug. 
You'll be hearing a lot about the so-called "Y2K" computer problem, 
the potential computer glitch that could cause havoc at the turn of 
the century when the year becomes 2000. It's estimated that bringing 
the world's computers up to date could cost from $1 trillion to $2 
trillion. For the military, the cost of not acting could be catastrophic. 
NBC's Jim Miklaszewski tonight, "in depth." Everything in America's 
military arsenal, whether it shoots, floats, flies or marches, depends 
on computers. But a once in a century computer glitch, known in the 
Pentagon as the "Millennium bomb," could bring this mighty war machine 
to a halt. If we left things as they are right now, the military would 
effectively shut down. Shut down, because computers wouldn't be able 
to operate. Most computers use only the last two digits of the calendar 
year, so when the year 2000 rolls around, they'll read "00" and think 
it's 1900. In high-risk military operations, that could be deadly. 
Somewhere, someplace, there will be people who die as a result of 
the Y2K problem. The scope of the Pentagon's problem is mind-boggling. 
25,000 separate computer systems could be affected. We're doing our 
best, but there are going to be some nasty surprises, because the 
problem is so big. Aircraft and ships could be sent off course, cruise 
missiles may not find their targets, satellite data could be lost. 
A top priority -- fixing the computers that control nuclear weapons. 
We will be able to control our nuclear weapon. So at the stroke of 
2000, nuclear weapons aren't --? They're not going to be launching 
or anything of that sort. But what about other nuclear powers? Deep 
beneath a Colorado mountain, the north American air defense command 
stands watch against a missile attack. The Pentagon wants to share 
this early warning information with Russia and china, because if their 
computers go blank at midnight 2000, they could think they're under 
nuclear attack. Because of anxieties about the possibilities of a 
sneak attack, forces could be ordered to a higher state of alert level 
that could lead to accidental war. The Pentagon will spend at least 
$4 billion to defuse the millennium bomb, and officials here are confident 
they'll do it. But critics claim they started too late and all the 
fixes won't be done in time. The cost of failure could be much higher. 
If the Pentagon needed any reminder, it is the 28 American soldiers 
killed by an Iraqi Scud during the gulf war. The patriot anti-missile 
battery that might have saved them failed, in part, because it's computer 
clocks were out of sync. Something America's military leaders are 
determined to never let happen again. Jim Miklaszewski, NBC news, 
the Pentagon. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>