<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981231.1830.1282 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is our last broadcast of 1998, time for a long look back at the 
extraordinary year that draws to a close tonight. All the losses and 
gains, the tragedies, the travesties and the history that was made. 
Here now, in what will be our final report of the year, produced by 
Susan holey with the help of Stephanie dowling, a look at how 1998 
played out across the screen and around the world. Happy new year. 
Three, two, one. And liftoff of "discovery" with a crew of six astronaut 
heroes and one american legend. Godspeed, John Glenn. One of the toughest 
construction projects ever is under way, the international space station. 
The El Nino storms show no sign of letting up. The heat wave in Texas 
is now blamed for at least 100 deaths. I've had enough of it, though 
I'll tell you. San Juan, ground zero. The central American death toll 
could go as high as 13,000. These people really have nothing. Now 
they've lost everything that they ever had. I never knew anybody on 
that plane. I've never met them, but I'll never forget them. Most 
people are resigned that their loved ones are with their God and their 
maker. Any investor in there for the short term, get out today. The 
economy is booming. Bill Gates is worth nearly $38 billion. The White 
House is clearly worried about the spillover from Asia's financial 
crisis. The Russian economy is in meltdown. There is a tremendous 
hope that we really can cure cancer in our generation. I just want 
a lifetime supply. And it's a great drug, okay? A lot of strange things 
have been happening. A wild ride for Picabo street. We can find bigger 
bugs to come here and fight. ow! This is amazing! This is for all 
the fat girls! I'll see you on the beach. Maybe it is time to go sailing. 
We'll be out in a year. And then we'll be back. Softly I will leave 
you soft I heard a bunch of shots and people were falling. The 15-year-old 
opened fire in the school cafeteria. The shots were fired in the United 
States capitol this afternoon. It's just not safe anywhere. Our forces 
targeted one of the most active terrorist bases in the world. U.S. 
officials now fear nuclear tests could lead to a doomsday domino effect. 
U.S. Marine corps major Scott Ritter resigns. The killing hasn't stopped 
in central Kosovo. It hit with an unbelievable force. This will not 
work unless we extend the hand of friendship to those who were once 
foes. The arrival of Pope John Paul in Havana late this afternoon, 
and then the unexpected. Reports of a new sex scandal involving President 
Clinton. I did not have sexual relations with that woman. Monica! 
How's it gonna be This vast right-wing conspiracy. I'm not going to 
parse a statement. Parse a statement. My next move is to get off this 
podium as quick as possible. I misled people, including even my wife. 
I'm you. It depends upon what the meaning of the word "is" is. I have 
sinned. Who will save your soul Nobody saw anything. So nobody could 
know. i do. The American public sent some very strong messages. We 
have to go national on NBC right now. Boys ought to pick up their 
marble, go home and find another game in town. Rarely in history have 
there been two events of such magnitude unfolding simultaneously. 
The only way we stop this insanity is through the force of our own 
will. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>