<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981231.0324 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The South Korean government signed an agreement Thursday to sell a 
controlling stake in Korea First Bank to a consortium led by GE Capital, 
the world's largest nonbank financial services company, and Newbridge 
Capital, a buyout fund backed by the financier David Bonderman's Texas 
Pacific Group. Coming 15 months after the government nationalized 
Korea First, the agreement sets the pace and could well establish 
a blueprint for other Asian countries, including Japan, Thailand and 
Indonesia, that are struggling to shore up their financial systems 
in the midst of one of the deepest economic downturns since World 
War II. The purchase price was not disclosed, and a spokeswoman for 
the Financial Supervisory Commission, the government watchdog agency 
for the banking system watchdog, said the price and many other important 
details were not final. Should the deal be concluded _ and several 
agreements between foreign investors and Korean companies have already 
fallen apart _ it would be significant in a couple of respects. First, 
it is the clearest vote of confidence that the government of President 
Kim Dae-jung has received from a foreign investor since the Asian 
economic crisis took hold here last year. It also marks the start 
of the final phase of government efforts to overhaul South Korea's 
debt-laden financial system, underscoring the swiftness with which 
Kim and his economic team have moved to repair parts of the economy. 
``It's quite an achievement for the Korean government and for Morgan 
Stanley to attract such high-quality bidders into the Korean market,'' 
said Wilbur Ross, senior managing director at Rothschild, who is an 
adviser to the Halla group, a large Korean conglomerate undergoing 
a painful reorganization, and to the Chohung Bank, another troubled 
South Korean bank. ``I think it's another sign that the Korean economy 
is getting fixed.'' Morgan Stanley Dean Witter was retained by the 
government to sell Korea First and Seoul Bank, another nationalized 
bank. Bankers involved in the discussions said Thursday that the government 
was seeking at least $2 billion for a portion of the 93.8 percent 
stake it acquired in August 1997 when it recapitalized Korea First 
by nationalizing it after two large corporate bankruptcies effectively 
made it insolvent. The selling point of the consortium's bid was apparently 
its willingness to take only a 51 percent stake. The other bidder, 
HSBC Holdings PLC, parent of the Hongkong and Shanghai Bank, wanted 
a much bigger stake, as large as 80 percent, according to one person 
close to the discussions. But the government wanted to hang on to 
more of its stake than that. Presumably, if a buyer succeeds in turning 
Korea First around, its shares will be worth more in the future, and 
that would help the government recover a bigger portion of the 1.5 
trillion won of tax money _ currently almost $1.25 billion _ that 
it used to recapitalize the bank. At the end of June, Korea First's 
capital-adequacy ratio stood at 7.78 percent, up from a negative 2.7 
percent at the end of 1997. The Bank for International Settlements, 
which sets guidelines for international banking supervision, has established 
8 percent as the minimum standard for a bank's capital adequacy _ 
the percentage of the institution's assets held as reserve capital. 
But after June, the government was forced to give Korea First a second 
capital injection, in part because of severity of the economic crisis. 
Korea First now has 3 trillion won in nonperforming loans _ almost 
$2.5 billion at today's exchange rate _ and the government has pledged 
to buy back any more loans that go bad in the first year after the 
consortium's purchase. ``The sale of Korea First Bank will help the 
country to bolster its financial industry by acquiring advanced financial 
technologies,'' Lee Hun Jai, head of the Financial Supervisory Commission, 
said at a news conference Thursday in Seoul. No doubt some analysts 
will contend that a deal with HSBC would have better served the government's 
goals. HSBC is one of Asia's few remaining banking powerhouses, and 
its involvement in the restoration of the South Korean banking system 
would have been reassuring to many investors. But GE Capital is also 
adept at financial management, and HSBC may end up owning part of 
Seoul Bank, which the government has also nationalized and promised 
to sell by Jan. 31. In addition, by selling to the GE Capital consortium, 
the government may be hoping to mute criticism that it is selling 
Korean assets to foreigners in a fire sale. Were HSBC to buy the bank, 
it would forever become part of HSBC. But because GE Capital and Newbridge 
are financial buyers rather than strategic ones, the bank may again 
return to Korean hands through a sale of stock or some other exit 
strategy that allows them to gain a hefty return on their investment. 
Newbridge's main strategy is to buy into distressed companies in the 
hope of turning them around and reselling them at a profit. For GE 
Capital, a General Electric Co. unit, the agreement represents another 
step in its expansion across Asia since the economic crisis began 
in Thailand in the summer of 1997. And for Newbridge, the deal puts 
its name in the spotlight. The relatively little-known fund has been 
on an Asian shopping spree, buying an electronics business from Astra 
Indonesia and Haitai Beverage from the bankrupt Haitai Group of South 
Korea. This deal will significantly raise its visibility. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>