<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981231.0319 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
One is an Argentine-born preacher who appeals to both Hispanic and 
Anglo audiences. Another is a young megachurch pastor in Southern 
California who peppers his sermons with quotes from Hollywood stars 
and sports idols. A third is an African American equally beloved by 
convicts and unhappy homemakers. And then there are two of the Rev. 
Billy Graham's children. Ever since the colonial era, the United States 
has had a pre-eminent preacher who played an unofficial role as national 
evangelist, preaching a simple message of repentance and salvation 
and drawing vast crowds in the process. For the last 50 years, that 
role has been filled by the Rev. Billy Graham. But at the turn of 
the century, with Graham now 80, the question arises who, if anyone, 
can take his place. Graham revolutionized revival evangelism, using 
every available technology from lapel microphones to television and 
radio to satellite links. He preached a straightforward Gospel message 
that appealed to Christians of every denomination. When other evangelists 
sullied their names in scandal, Graham's stayed clean. While others 
joined political wars, he ministered to every president from Eisenhower 
to Clinton. Many scholars and observers of American evangelism predict 
that no single preacher now on the scene has the universal appeal 
of Graham, who rose to prominence when a stadium crusade was like 
Barnum and Bailey coming to town. Today, stadium evangelists compete 
for attention with televangelists, with self-help gurus and motivational 
speakers who blend religion and psychology, and with powerful pastors 
who draw thousands to weekly services in their megachurches. ``Billy 
Graham is not an official position in the Christian church that must 
be filled. It's not an office,'' said William Martin, a professor 
of sociology at Rice University and author of ``A Prophet With Honor'' 
(William Morrow, 1991), a biography of Graham. But others survey the 
field and conclude that it may be only a matter of time before one 
candidate, through charisma, organization and the ability to capture 
the popular imagination, catapults to prominence. ``In every generation 
there is somebody who emerges as what I call the point man,'' said 
Stephen F. Olford, a British evangelist whose fervent speaking style 
inspired Graham 53 years ago, and who now trains new preachers at 
the Stephen Olford Center for Biblical Preaching in Memphis, Tenn. 
Keith J. Hardman, a professor of religion and philosophy at Ursinus 
College in Collegeville, Pa., said, ``It's very true that Christians 
generally seem to have room for one extremely prominent person at 
a time.'' In more than a dozen interviews with scholars, theologians, 
religious historians and evangelical leaders, a handful of evangelists 
were consistently mentioned as possible successors to Graham. The 
five most frequently mentioned evangelists who are drawing large crowds 
are: Luis Palau, Franklin Graham, Anne Graham Lotz, Greg Laurie and 
Bishop T.D. Jakes. Like Billy Graham, all five travel widely preaching 
the Bible to large crowds in stadiums and conference centers. Two 
have their own churches, the others are itinerant preachers. All attract 
Christians of many denominations. All use an emotional ``altar call'' 
in which new believers step forward to declare their ``decision for 
Christ.'' All use media including television and radio, books, CDs 
or web sites. All have refrained from trying to mobilize their flocks 
for political candidates or causes. Luis Palau may be the most prominent 
evangelist in the United States after Graham, although he built his 
reputation at mass events in other parts of the world, particularly 
Latin America, where he is still best known. A Hispanic American raised 
in Argentina, he speaks impeccable English and has a crossover appeal 
that draws multiethnic audiences. His Luis Palau Evangelistic Association 
in Portland, Ore., organized in 1978, estimates that he has spoken 
before 12 million people in 67 nations. ``To me, the most difficult 
countries of the world to communicate the Gospel, and feel you've 
gotten past the facade, are the Western nations,'' Palau said, in 
an interview. ``I think western Europe is probably the most difficult 
because of the cynicism and, frankly, the atheism.'' Palau, 64, is 
a native of Argentina whose parents converted from Roman Catholicism 
to evangelical Protestantism. He attended an English-language boarding 
school, was born again at age 12 and worked for a bank as a young 
man. At 18, he heard a radio broadcast of the Rev. Billy Graham and 
decided that some day he too would be an evangelist speaking to stadiums 
full of people. He moved to the United States in 1960, attended Bible 
college and became an American citizen. Like Graham's organization, 
Palau's association is run by an independent board of directors and 
stages ``crusades'' only when invited to a city by its churches, which 
then collaborate with him. Palau hews to an ambitious schedule. In 
1999, he said, he will preach at events in Turkey, Mexico, Great Britain, 
France, India, Latvia, Argentina and Chile. He will devote the month 
of April to preaching in Maine, with three or four days in Lawrence, 
Mass., doing a ``Hispanic-only crusade'' for that city's large Hispanic 
population. But Palau does not rely entirely on mass events. He has 
written 43 books. He produces three short daily radio programs, two 
in Spanish, one in English, that together are heard in 22 countries. 
His weekly cable television program airs across the country. His crusades 
are saturation efforts, buttressed with nightly hourlong television 
programs and daily luncheons to which business and civic leaders are 
invited. ``Wherever there's a measure of sophistication, where people 
feel I'm above being emotionally rattled in a rally, they will come 
to luncheons,'' Palau said. Palau, at ease and animated on stage, 
often peppers his preaching with references to contemporary culture 
and societal problems like divorce and teen suicide. In one appearance 
last year in Rapid City, Palau read aloud from a page of singles advertisements, 
drawing hoots at the consistent requirements for good looks. ``If 
that's the way we choose a spouse, no wonder there is such trouble,'' 
he said. Franklin Graham, in a telephone interview in December, said 
he had just returned from Central America, where the relief organization 
he runs, Samaritan's Purse, pledged to build houses for families displaced 
during Hurricane Mitch. ``We're going to do all our work through the 
churches,'' said Graham, oldest son of the Rev. Billy Graham. His 
involvement with Samaritan's Purse _ whose budget next year will be 
$79 million and which has taken him to some of the world's most sorely 
afflicted areas _ echoes the work of his maternal grandfather, Dr. 
Nelson Bell, a medical missionary in China. But Graham has drawn more 
attention for his rise within his father's organization, the Billy 
Graham Evangelistic Association. In 1995, its directors elevated Franklin 
Graham to first vice chairman, and designated him his father's eventual 
successor as chairman and chief executive. The decision has bestowed 
a prominence and an expectation on Graham, 46, that few might once 
have anticipated. The fourth of Billy Graham's five children, he was, 
by his own telling, a somewhat wayward youth, a heavy smoker and a 
none-too-attentive student who preferred hunting to books. He became 
a born-again Christian several days after his 22nd birthday in July 
1974, when Billy Graham took him to lunch, told his son he sensed 
a spiritual struggle within the young man and said he was praying 
for him. It has only been since 1989 that Franklin Graham has began 
to preach at mass events arranged by his father's organization. But 
although the younger Graham bears a strong physical resemblance to 
his father, there are clear differences between the two. The son, 
a business major in college, has not attempted to be a pastor to the 
politically powerful. He favors jeans over suits, and has been photographed 
astride his motorcycle. Married with four children, he lives on a 
quiet back road near Boone, N.C. Whereas Billy Graham calls his mass 
meetings ``crusades,'' Franklin has christened his own events ``festivals'' 
_ with plenty of contemporary-sounding Christian music _ a more secular 
term to appeal to a wide audience of potential converts. This past 
year, the association held such events in seven cities, in Australia, 
Peru and the United States. (Next year, he will preach in Bolivia, 
Canada, Jamaica and Scotland, as well as the United States.) ``I try 
to speak no more than 15 to 20 minutes, so that people will hear you 
and listen to you,'' he said. ``I just realize that to convey the 
truth of the Gospel, you don't have to take a lot of time.'' In his 
preaching, he moves quickly to his point: no salvation apart from 
Jesus Christ. His gestures sometimes reflect his father's, like pointing 
with an index finger and raising a Bible in his hand. Experts are 
cautious in assessing how effective he is. ``People want to see how 
does Franklin stack up against his father,'' said Martin, the author. 
``I think they're generally pleased with what they see. But that doesn't 
mean he will draw crowds for 20 years.'' Franklin Graham said, ``I 
aspire to wanting to be faithful to God and his leading in my life. 
But I'm not my father and I have no intention of trying to be Billy 
Graham, because I can't be Billy Graham. But at the same time, I feel 
God has called me to preach.'' Anne Graham Lotz, one of the Rev. Billy 
Graham's three daughters, calls herself a Bible teacher, and has said 
she had no ambition to be an evangelist in the style of her father. 
But the former full-time homemaker and mother of three adult children 
has accepted invitations to speak before large groups around the world 
and in the United States. A few years ago, on a visit to southern 
India, she found herself taken to a soccer stadium full of thousands 
of expectant people and asked to give an evangelistic message like 
Billy Graham does. Although Mrs. Lotz told her hosts that was not 
what she did, she stepped into the pulpit and preached. ``I was sitting 
there thinking, I'm an American housewife, I don't belong here,'' 
she recalled. ``But I just stepped aside and let God take over. And 
it's amazing what he can do.'' For years, Mrs. Lotz, 50, lived a quiet 
life. A tall, slender woman who has Graham's wide-set eyes and prominent 
nose, she married Daniel Lotz, a Raleigh, N.C., dentist, when she 
was 18. She says that the marriage went through a difficult period 
several years later when she questioned whether she still loved her 
husband. She said she then turned to prayer and Bible study, which 
helped restore her marriage. Mrs. Lotz volunteered to lead a women's 
Bible study group in 1976, which proved highly popular, drawing hundreds 
of women each time she offered it. In 1988, feeling called to something 
larger, she began AnGeL Ministries (the name incorporates her initials), 
to allow her to travel and preach worldwide. What she does, she said, 
is try to relate the Bible to how people live: ``I take a passage 
of scripture, then try to explain it and apply it to their lives in 
such a way that the scripture is dominant.'' She speaks in venues 
large and small, from stadiums to college classes, and is in such 
demand that she says she can accept only about one of every 20 invitations 
she receives. Mrs. Lotz, who is not an ordained minister, has occasionally 
encountered resistance among conservative evangelicals opposed to 
women preaching. A few years ago, some ministers at a conference turned 
their backs to her. But her abilities as a speaker and Bible teacher 
have also won her praise. ``A lot of times,'' she said, ``I've had 
a pastor come up to me, and he's said all of his life he believed 
a woman couldn't do what I just did.'' Olford, who runs the school 
for training evangelists in Memphis, said Mrs. Lotz received more 
applause than her father at two evangelism conferences in Europe. 
``She knows the Bible backwards and forwards,'' he said. ``She has 
a tremendous gift of communication, and a dignity and presence which 
is most impressive.'' In preaching, she, too, has inherited some of 
her father's gestures, like his emphatic, two-handed, chopping motions. 
And like her father and her brother Franklin, she gives an ``altar 
call'' after she preaches, inviting people to come forward and declare 
their faith in Christ, an approach she acknowledged was unusual for 
a woman speaker. ``But I resist people pressing me into my father's 
mold,'' she said. ``I would love to be like him in the preaching. 
But my gift is a little different.'' When he goes to the beach in 
his native southern California, the Rev. Greg Laurie, 46, sometimes 
carries a volume of biblical exegesis by the 19th century Baptist 
scholar C.H. Spurgeon along with a ``People'' magazine. But Laurie, 
a pastor who spends several weekends a year as a stadium evangelist, 
said he wants to find ways to frame a biblical message in terms the 
average American can grasp. ``My challenge is to speak in common English, 
and use terms and expressions that people will understand,'' he said. 
``That's why I try to stay current with our culture, so I can be understandable 
to people.'' For nearly a decade, Laurie, pastor of Harvest Christian 
Fellowship in Riverside, Calif., has run Harvest Crusades, preaching 
half a dozen three- and four-day weekends each year in stadiums from 
Honolulu to Rochester, N.Y. He began his efforts at the suggestion 
of a mentor, the Rev. Chuck Smith, pastor of Calvary Chapel in Costa 
Mesa, Calif., a church that grew out of the ``Jesus Movement'' among 
young people in the early 1970's. As a high school student, Laurie 
became a born-again Christian after hearing a minister from Smith's 
church. Calvary Chapel has spawned something like a denomination, 
a loose association of hundreds of new congregations, Laurie's among 
them. A Laurie event typically lasts 90 minutes. Bands play rock or 
pop tunes with Christian lyrics and he gives a sermon, appealing in 
a conversational style to his listeners to accept Jesus as their savior. 
As he preaches, Laurie cites quotations from movie stars and athletes 
that he culls from popular magazines in the hope that they will help 
him make his point about the need to rely on God. He tries to keep 
his sermons simple, but to raise big questions. ``What is the meaning 
of life? What happens after I die? Why am I here? Whatever my text 
is, I'll get around to those things,'' he said. ``Of course, the heartbeat 
of the Gospel is the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ, and you 
have to get around to that.'' Only recently has Laurie begun to reach 
beyond his regional base in the Southwest, so he is not as well known 
as some other evangelists. Keith J. Hardman, a professor of religion 
and philosophy at Ursinus College in Collegeville, Pa., and the author 
of a biography of the 19th century revivalist Charles G. Finney, attended 
a Harvest event for young people this fall. Laurie preached a ``standard 
evangelistic message, but very much youth-oriented,'' he said. Laurie's 
hobbies would appear to enhance that appeal. Married with two sons, 
he has been photographed in evangelical magazines riding his Harley-Davidson. 
A native of Orange County, he also surfs. Asked about his future in 
an interview, Laurie, who serves on the board of the Billy Graham 
Evangelistic Association, said that in a conversation with Graham 
recently, ``he mentioned to me that he would like to see me go into 
full-time crusade evangelism.'' Laurie said that does not mean he 
is thinking about leaving his church. ``I always shy away from any 
illusion that I could take his mantle,'' he said. ``It would take 
100 men to take his mantle.'' Bishop T.D. Jakes Sr., 41, began preaching 
full-time 16 years ago in his native Charleston, W.Va. But he became 
more visible nationally in the mid-1990's, after his sermons began 
being broadcast on a religious cable network and Black Entertainment 
Television, and after he moved his ministry to Dallas. Jakes, who 
is married and the father of five children, is senior pastor of the 
Potter's House, an independent church that draws several thousand 
people. A Pentecostal minister, he is not well known among experts 
who follow rising evangelists, but he has developed a grass-roots 
following, enough to propel some of his books onto the bestseller 
list of the Christian Booksellers Association. Jakes has become known 
especially for speaking about how God can help people overcome personal 
pain, and has developed a conference for women called ``Woman, Thou 
Art Loosed,'' whose title comes from words spoken by Jesus in the 
Gospel of Luke as he heals a woman. ``What started out many years 
as a group of women in a Bible class went to 52,000 women in the Georgia 
Dome last year,'' Jakes said, in an interview. In terms of reaching 
people with a Gospel message, he said, ``In this no-holds-barred generation 
in which we live today, the message doesn't change, but perhaps the 
method will. I think we're talking more openly today about pain and 
dysfunction than the previous generation did.'' Jakes has also developed 
a seminar for men; his major meetings are broadcast by satellite into 
prisons, he said. His ministry has also drawn the attention of the 
secular world. Last March, Texas Gov. George W. Bush and Dallas Mayor 
Ron Kirk spoke at a groundbreaking ceremony as Jakes' church began 
work on a social services center for poor people, to be called the 
City of Refuge. In September, Jakes was invited to a breakfast for 
clergy members at the White House, at which President Clinton confessed 
to having sinned in his relationship with Monica S. Lewinsky. A broad-shouldered, 
bespectacled man with a neatly trimmed goatee, Jakes strides the blue-carpeted 
stage at Potter's House, preaching before a sanctuary that seats 5,000. 
Taking a Bible verse and discussing how it might be directly applied 
to the life of his congregants, he begins his sermons almost like 
a lecture, using both index fingers to emphasize a point. But his 
delivery gradually builds in force, prompting members of his racially 
mixed congregation to respond vigorously. Some raise their hands, 
some applaud and some stand and shout amen. ``I'm telling you that 
today's problem is preparing you for tomorrow's promise,''' Jakes 
told his congregants in a sermon in November, focusing on God's enabling 
people to endure tough times. Later that month, preaching on God's 
sovereignty, he said, ``There is nothing that he doesn't have control 
over.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>