<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981231.0272 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
To a movie critic, the holiday season now ending might be summed up 
in a single Shakespearean phrase: ``the winter of our discontent.'' 
Two of the season's finest films, ``Affliction'' and ``A Simple Plan,'' 
both set in rural small-town America, are draped in snow. Both are 
bleak, devastating meditations on human frailty, and yes, discontent. 
The treacherous landscapes in which they are set make their desperate 
characters seem all the more weak and fallible. Speaking of discontent, 
Hollywood has come up sadly short this season in releasing movies 
that combine mass appeal with high artistic merit. End-of-the-year 
crowd-pleasers like ``Stepmom,'' ``Patch Adams,'' and ``You've Got 
Mail'' are no match against ``Titanic,'' ``Good Will Hunting'' and 
``As Good as It Gets,'' the previous holiday season's prestige blockbusters. 
In 1998, American films aspiring to any kind of seriousness seemed 
to fall into two polarized categories: mushy mainstream fare that 
soft-pedaled the darker side of life, and bitterly caustic independent 
films that broke new ground in exploring that darker side. Even Hollywood's 
more high-minded movies tended to come sugarcoated with phony uplift. 
The most aggressively mystical of these films _ ``What Dreams May 
Come,'' ``Simon Birch'' and the dismal three-hour funeral known as 
``Meet Joe Black'' _ were hopelessly mired in pretentious New Age 
hooey. Mind you, there's nothing intrinsically wrong with a little 
mystical uplift in movies. It just has to be convincing. But the kind 
of hope these movies offered _ for eternal life; eternal love; cut-rate, 
all-purpose redemption _ was contaminated by a cynical Hollywood marketing 
mentality that left you feeling queasy. On the independent side, films 
like ``Happiness,'' ``Your Friends and Neighbors'' and ``Affliction'' 
went out of their way to keep the sugar bowl at arm's length. If the 
commercial impact of these movies proved negligible, artistically 
they had the status of tiny poisoned arrows aimed at the Goliath of 
mainstream schmaltz. As dark as they may be, such movies seemed to 
be the only hope in 1998 for the future of an American cinema propped 
up on the four pillars of feel-good sentimentality, teen-age gross-out 
comedies, children's animation and violent action-adventure. For audiences 
in search of holiday movies that refuse to climb those pillars, here 
are 10 films currently playing that are worth a look. They are listed 
in order of preference, with special attention given to worthy, underrated 
acting performances. `Affliction' Paul Schrader's adaptation of Russell 
Banks' novel about a policeman losing his emotional grip in a small 
New Hampshire town is remarkably faithful to the book. And Nick Nolte, 
giving the screen performance of his career, registers every harrowing 
jolt as his character becomes increasingly fixated on the notion that 
a hunting accident was actually a murder. James Coburn is a scary 
revelation as Nolte's drunken, violently abusive father whose lifelong 
fury hasn't been dampened by age. We carry our demons with us all 
our lives, the movie suggests. Worse, if we foist those demons on 
our children, sooner or later there will be hell to pay. PLUSES: Nolte's 
and Coburn's remarkable performances make you feel the murderous, 
blood-surging anger passed down from a violent father to a son. The 
shimmering dark-blue scenes of cars on snow-covered roads create a 
chilly mood of profound, almost majestic loneliness and gloom that 
is subtly underlined by Michael Brook's music. Mary Beth Hurt, as 
Nolte's battle-weary ex-wife, and Sissy Spacek, as his loyal girlfriend, 
are memorable as careworn, everyday women gamely trying to make do. 
MINUSES: There is no sugarcoating on this sadly truthful vision of 
troubled ordinary New Englanders. The film is starkly tragic. The 
one grating element is a stiff voice-over narration by Willem Dafoe, 
who plays Nolte's younger brother. The bond between these two is never 
made entirely credible. `Hilary and Jackie' The true story of the 
relationship between the renowned cellist Jacqueline du Pre, who died 
of multiple sclerosis, and her slightly older sister, Hilary, a flute 
prodigy who never made it in the classical music world, explores sibling 
rivalry, love and family loyalty with remarkable subtlety and insight. 
PLUSES: Emily Watson is incandescent and a little scary as Jacqueline, 
a needy, willful genius and star who grows up love-starved and having 
no sense of boundaries. Jacqueline takes what she needs (if she doesn't 
get it, she throws a tantrum), and if that includes borrowing her 
sister's husband, so be it. Such monstrous demands seem entirely believable 
within the context of a relationship that is so close the sisters 
can read each other's minds. The movie is beautifully structured and 
edited, and its delicate use of Jacqueline's signature piece, Elgar's 
Cello Concerto in E minor, suffuses the film with a quiet melancholy. 
MINUSES: The film is a little too patly framed around sentimental 
opening and closing sequences of the sisters as children playing games 
on the beach. `Shakespeare in Love' A genuinely witty, grown-up comedy 
with crowd-pleasing potential is almost unheard of these days. That's 
why ``Shakespeare in Love,'' which playfully imagines a passionate 
love affair that prompted William Shakespeare to write ``Romeo and 
Juliet,'' is so welcome. The movie is directed by John Madden like 
a raucous Shakespearean comedy. And the screenplay by Marc Norman 
and Tom Stoppard finds a seamless balance between Elizabethan and 
contemporary locutions. PLUSES: Literary wit (some of it concerning 
Shakespeare's relationship with Christopher Marlowe) abounds. Joseph 
Fiennes and Gwyneth Paltrow, as Young Will Shakespeare and his inamorata, 
Viola de Lesseps (who is betrothed to another), have a frisky romantic 
chemistry. The screenplay neatly folds elements of ``Twelfth Night'' 
and other Shakespeare comedies into its farcical plot. Judi Dench, 
so memorable as Queen Victoria in ``Mrs. Brown,'' outdoes herself 
as a different queen, Elizabeth, who is portrayed as the ne plus ultra 
of imperious gamesmanship. MINUSES: For all its cleverness, ``Shakespeare 
in Love'' isn't wildly funny. It's a movie to make you smile more 
than laugh out loud. And Fiennes' Shakespeare, although charming, 
seems awfully lightweight for the Bard of Avon. `A Simple Plan' Sam 
Raimi directed this relentlessly taut thriller about three men from 
the same small town who discover a bag containing $4 million in cash 
in a crashed airplane in the woods and decide to tell no one and divide 
the money. Almost immediately, simmering tensions among them erupt, 
revealing class differences and a painful sibling rivalry. As their 
greed and paranoia escalate, so does their capacity for violence. 
PLUSES: Scott B. Smith's screenplay, based on his novel, has the force 
of a very contemporary and very savage moral fable. Faced with the 
prospect of instant wealth, Bill Paxton, a middle-class, college-educated 
Nice Guy, and his wife (a wonderful Bridget Fonda) quickly turn into 
scheming monsters. Billy Bob Thornton, as Paxton's jittery, uneducated, 
barely socialized older brother, steals the movie in a performance 
that is alternately creepy and heart-rending. Ms. Fonda makes the 
metamorphosis of her character from cuddlesome homebody to scheming 
small-town Lady Macbeth chillingly convincing. The movie reminds you 
of the awful things that can happen when ordinary people catch the 
scent of money. MINUSES: Beneath its immaculately snowy surface, the 
movie is really just a thriller. When you consider it afterward, several 
major plot developments stretch credibility to the breaking point. 
`A Civil Action' ``A Civil Action'' is proof that yes, Hollywood can 
on occasion turn out a star vehicle that defies easy formula and that 
doesn't revolve around a cardboard hero. John Travolta dares to be 
unsympathetic in this true story of an arrogant, greedy Boston lawyer 
who loses everything (and bankrupts his law partners) in his fanatical 
quest to win a lawsuit against two corporations whose dumping of toxic 
wastes may be responsible for a cluster of leukemia deaths. PLUSES: 
If it was Nick Nolte'syear, it was also John Travolta's. Coming on 
top of his bravura impersonation of a Bill Clinton-like president 
in ``Primary Colors,'' Travolta's portrayal of a smug, strutting legal 
eagle in ``A Civil Action'' is a reminder that Travolta is one megastar 
who can really act. Robert Duvall, as his insidiously canny legal 
opponent, delivered yet another performance worthy of Oscar consideration. 
Steven Zaillian's screenplay and direction succeed admirably in clarifying 
complex issues and legal strategies without becoming simple-minded. 
MINUSES: If the movie is impressively workmanlike, it has no poetry 
or inner light. We don't get a deeper sense of any of the characters 
beyond their corporate and boardroom stratagems. `Hurlyburly' David 
Rabe's powerful screen adaptation of his '80s play about drug-taking 
bachelor swingers in the middle echelons of Hollywood is as corrosive 
a study of male bonding and one-upsmanship as you could hope to find. 
Sean Penn is a self-destructive casting director raging at the void 
and Kevin Spacey is his cold smoothie housemate in their chilly Hollywood 
Hills bachelor pad. Chazz Palminteri and Garry Shandling are their 
scuzzy friends, and Meg Ryan, Robin Wright Penn and Anna Paquin are 
the women they use as pawns. PLUSES: ``Hurlyburly'' has the most brilliant 
ensemble acting of any 1998 film. Penn eviscerates his soul in a stunning 
performance filled with tears, vomit and mucous (from all the coke-snorting). 
Palminteri is wonderful as a stupid, violent lug with delusions of 
talent, and Shandling is bloodcurdling as a sleazeball who gives away 
women as presents. MINUSES: The coked-up world portrayed in the movie 
feels a little dated. And after a while, the close-up spectacle of 
people almost continuously drunk and stoned becomes wearisome. Rabe's 
dialogue is bitterly funny, but you never forget that it is stage 
dialogue. `The General' The title character of John Boorman's black-and-white 
film, the notorious Irish gangster Martin Cahill (nicknamed ``the 
General'') who was shot by the Provisional IRA in 1994, is so robust 
he almost bursts out of the screen. Beautifully photographed, the 
movie is a full-scale, remarkably evenhanded portrait of a complicated, 
charismatic bully and thief whose criminal career was a lifelong cat-and-mouse 
game with the police. PLUSES: Brendan Gleeson's rollicking depiction 
of canny-eyed, doughy-faced Cahill, who was always shielding his face 
with his hands in public, is one of the most brilliantly acted portraits 
of a compulsive hell raiser ever filmed. The performance reminds you 
that some people are constitutionally born to be rebels. Jon Voight 
is equally fine as the policeman who makes catching Cahill a careerlong 
quest. The heist sequences are expertly choreographed. MINUSES: This 
detailed biography is what it is: a close-up portrait of an Irish 
celebrity criminal. Its resonance doesn't extend any further. The 
actors' thick Irish accents make some of the dialogue unintelligible 
to American ears. `The Thin Red Line' Terrence Malick's return to 
moviemaking is a visually gorgeous, nearly three-hour cinematic poem, 
loosely based on James Jones' novel about the battle of Guadalcanal. 
Delivered by an all-star cast, the characterizations, such as they 
are, accumulate into a collage of voices meditating on how fighting 
in a war inevitably changes and darkens a soldier's view of humanity. 
PLUSES: The ravishing cinematography portrays a Melanesian island 
as a latter-day Eden despoiled by marauding armies. Individual set 
pieces stand out, especially a scene of anguished, weeping Japanese 
prisoners of war, and Nick Nolte's brief but incendiary turn as the 
ferocious battalion commander. Sean Penn, Elias Koteas, Woody Harrelson, 
John Savage and John Travolta make the most of their very brief appearances, 
while James Caviezel's philosophical Pvt. Witt conjures up memories 
of Montgomery Clift in ``From Here to Eternity.'' Hans Zimmer's beautiful 
minimalist romantic music underscores the film's overall mood of abstracted 
melancholy. MINUSES: In nearly three hours, no fully rounded characters 
emerge. After a devastating, brilliantly staged battle sequence at 
the center of the film, the movie loses momentum and turns into a 
meandering fragmentary series of poetic afterthoughts as the soldiers, 
each lost in his private world, wandering the island. At a certain 
point, the dreaminess gives way to tedium. `The Hi-Lo Country' The 
British director Stephen Frears' ambitious stab at a classic western 
suggests an uneasy hybrid of ``Red River,'' ``The Last Picture Show'' 
and ``Giant.'' Based on a novel by Max Evans and set in the late 1940s, 
the film tells the story of a rootin'-tootin' cowboy (Woody Harrelson) 
and his shy best friend (Billy Crudup) who both love the same unworthy 
woman (Patricia Arquette). PLUSES: Harrelson as Big Boy, one of the 
last of the free-spirited cowboys as big business begins to ruthlessly 
assimilate small cattle ranches, is a dangerous live wire. The movie's 
period color (it's set in northeastern New Mexico) is accentuated 
by an evocative late-'40s country-and-western soundtrack. MINUSES: 
The film devotes far too much time to a romantic triangle and not 
enough to the social climate and ranching culture, which it begins 
to explore but then drops. As the married local siren who drives men 
crazy, Ms. Arquette looks terrific but has no animal magnetism. `Down 
in the Delta' The directorial debut of the poet Maya Angelou is the 
story of an inner-city Chicago family that is saved from disintegration 
when its stern but loving matriarch (Mary Alice) sends her daughter 
(Alfre Woodard) and two grandchildren to her brother's spacious rural 
homestead in the Mississippi delta. PLUSES: Mary Alice and Al Freeman 
Jr., who play the wise old grandmother and her equally strong and 
wise brother, give penetrating performances full of sorrow and wisdom. 
And Esther Rolle, who died in November, is touching as the brother's 
wife afflicted with Alzheimer's disease. MINUSES: The story is unabashedly 
sentimental, and the characters' troubles are softened. Their profound 
healing once they leave the city comes too quickly and easily for 
much dramatic tension to build. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>