<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981231.0288 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
They had to struggle a bit to open some recalcitrant bottles of champagne, 
but finance ministers from 11 countries celebrated New Year's Eve 
Thursday by launching the euro as the continent's new unified currency. 
In the last step after years of preparation, the countries locked 
in the exchange rates of their individual currencies to the euro, 
thereby setting the value at which the euro will begin trading when 
financial markets open around the world on Monday. Based on these 
rates, the euro will be worth about $1.17. In technical terms, the 
action taken Thursday was perfunctory and anti-climactic _ nothing 
more than plugging in numbers according to a formula. But in political 
and economic terms, it represented the culmination of a effort first 
conceived in the 1950s as a means of unifying Europe and preventing 
another world war. ``We stand at the dawn of a new era in the integration 
of Europe,'' said Rudolf Edlinger, Austria's finance minister and 
chairman of the meeting here. ``Forty years of inexorable striving 
toward integration has been crowned by the realization of economic 
and monetary union.'' The fixing of exchange rates also kicked off 
a frenzied scramble by banks, stock exchanges and securities traders 
across Europe to adapt their computer systems between now and Monday 
morning. And despite the celebrations, there were clear signs of continuing 
divisions over both economic policy and the levers of power. German 
officials demanded that the European Central Bank, which is now the 
equivalent of the U.S. Federal Reserve Board, use monetary policy 
to help boost employment and not focus simply on fighting inflation 
_ a demand that has already created deep animosity among other countries' 
central bankers. Even though euro notes and coins will not enter circulation 
until Jan. 1, 2002, European banks and stock exchanges are now required 
to carry out all non-cash transactions in euros. In London's financial 
center, more than 30,000 people will be working through the weekend 
to reprogram computers and trading systems on the basis of the currency 
values agreed upon Thursday. Across Europe, banks are converting their 
systems to offer euro-denominated bank accounts immediately for any 
customers who want them. Though national currencies like the German 
mark and French franc will remain in circulation until July 1, 2002, 
they will trade in lockstep with the euro until they are phased out 
entirely. The action taken Thursday was necessary to set the relative 
values of participating countries' individual currencies before the 
euro enters world financial markets. However, the values have been 
more or less established for some time, because the monetary policies 
of the countries have been yoked together since last spring. As a 
practical matter, exchange rates among European currencies have varied 
little for more than a year. ``In the end, it turned out to be almost 
a formality, different from what many of us expected just a year ago,'' 
remarked Wim Duisenberg, the Dutch president of the European Central 
Bank. To liven things up a bit, European officials capped off their 
formal action Thursday by launching hundreds of balloons here with 
blue and yellow euro markings. Finance ministers also posed for pictures 
popping the ritual bottles of champagne, though some of the bottles 
proved so balky that several finance ministers turned red in the face 
as they wrestled with the corks. Champagne aside, most of those here 
Thursday focused their attention on the great distance they had come 
and to predict that Europe that would be bigger, stronger, more prosperous 
and more peaceful as a result of the single currency. ``Europe will 
now have the wherewithal to direct its own future,'' said Jacques 
Santer, president of the European Commission. ``The euro is not an 
end in itself. It is an instrument for economic development, social 
development. And now it is up to us to use this instrument.'' Dominique 
Strauss-Kahn, France's finance minister, said: ``Today is clearly 
a historic day for the European enterprise. Europe will be strong, 
stronger than in the past, because it will speak with a single monetary 
voice.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>