<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981231.0331 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial on Friday, Jan. 1: It seems 
only fair to begin 1999 by taking a strong stand on whether we endorse 
holding a big millennial celebration next Dec. 31, or playing down 
the event. So far the countdown has not produced much more than a 
catchy name for consumer products and a list of the century's greatest 
books that ranks the Studs Lonigan trilogy above everything written 
by Joseph Conrad. Purists claim that next New Year's Eve will not 
begin a new millennium anyway, since mankind will not have actually 
lived through a thousand-year cycle until midnight on Dec. 31, 2000. 
Millennium-phobes argue that the whole event has an air of cultural 
and religious chauvinism, and that the celebration of the 2,000th 
anniversary of Jesus Christ's birth might be an event of more interest 
to Christians than Muslims, Buddhists or Jews. But if you want to 
get technical, we actually passed the 2,000th anniversary of Christ's 
nativity around 1995. The gap arises from an error in computation 
made by Dionysius Exiguus, a sixth-century monk who preferred the 
more humble name ``Dennis the Small.'' Dennis' real aim was to standardize 
the liturgical calendar, and in the process he created the system 
of counting years we use today, starting from the year he calculated 
Jesus was born. But we know now that Dennis was off by more than four 
years. Herod, who was ruler of Judea when Christ was born, died in 
4 B.C., and Jesus' own unrecorded birth must have happened a year 
or two earlier. Dennis was probably distracted by his main concern, 
which was resolving a complicated, bitter and longstanding dispute 
about when to celebrate Easter. He lived in a time when people fought 
about calendric issues with great passion but little information, 
a combination that remains troublesome to this day. But his creation, 
however faulty, has endured and been adopted as a secular measurement 
of enormous power and utility. It has become the standard measure 
of time for nations that privately prefer to calculate the years differently. 
Next year will be 4698 in China, 1421 on the Islamic calendar, 5761 
in Israel and 2390 to the Zoroastrians in India. But the people in 
Shanghai, Bombay, Tel Aviv and Tehran will also know that it will 
be 2000 for the purposes of business, international relations and 
worrying about the Y2K computer crisis. In the upcoming year, that 
fact will be the jumping off point for a big planetary party, commemorated 
by everything from U.N. documents to the marketing of millennial cheese 
products. Historians differ, by the way, on how the Western world 
celebrated the last millennium, but chances are that the reports of 
hysteria and anticipation of the end of the world were overstated 
by later writers who felt that was the way the medieval mind ought 
to have responded to the sight of all those zeros. The zeros, however, 
were only being used by people in places like India and the Arab world, 
who were utterly indifferent to the turnings of a calendar adopted 
by the Synod of Whitby, which accepted Dennis' recommendation for 
numbering the years in 664. When the year 1000 rolled around in Christian 
Europe, the few people who had calendars were counting with Roman 
numerals, and for them, 1000 just meant the year ``M'' _ a tidy but 
somehow less threatening concept. The year M was greeted in some places 
on Dec. 25. But others _ following another of Dennis' recommendations 
_ celebrated the turn of the year on March 25, the feast of Jesus' 
conception. Spain and Portugal did celebrate the New Year on Jan. 
1, but they were still counting the years from the date of the Roman 
conquest of the Iberian peninsula. Even areas that shared a common 
calendar often did not have enough common culture to take note of 
any events that happened more than a few miles down the road. People's 
lives were for the most part defined by the forests that covered most 
of the continent, by terrors of the road and the inability to conceive 
of a world that stretched beyond their own pastures. Travelers who 
wandered about without armed escort were regarded as deserving whatever 
dreadful fate befell them. A monk who got lost on his way to Chartres 
at the turn of the millennium recalled having to cross a bridge after 
sundown by crawling over the shield his guard placed to cover the 
holes in front of him. From a Western perspective, it was in every 
way a time of groping in the dark. A scholar could yearn to read a 
certain book without ever learning that it was available in a nearby 
monastery. A peasant could pass life without meeting a stranger. People 
had little sense of belonging to a nation, a culture or any secular 
group larger than the men and women they could see around them. In 
China, Constantinople, Baghdad and Ghana, the citizens were leading 
different and often more sophisticated lives. But almost no one in 
Europe could conceive of their existence, let alone bridge the gulfs 
of ignorance, race and religious hostility that separated them. A 
thousand years later, we understand that there are other folks with 
widely different histories and viewpoints sharing our planet, and 
that, like it or not, their needs must be taken into consideration. 
Cynics, pedants and otherwise unclassifiable grumps may rightly say 
that next New Year's Eve, we will be celebrating nothing more than 
the 2,000th anniversary of the point at which we first began counting 
_ five years too late, thanks to Dennis. But the arbitrariness that 
some may denigrate makes the occasion more universal in its humanness. 
The things that bind us, however artificial, are worth noting and 
making a fuss over. For if we cannot always see into each other's 
souls, we have at least agreed on what time it is, down to the last 
millisecond. We all march forward, from history into the future, and 
we measure the passage by a common system. That is a beginning worth 
celebrating, an excuse for us all to look back and consider what our 
trip over the last thousand years has meant. It is the context in 
which the hubbub over the millennium makes perfect sense to us. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>