<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981231.0017 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Bill Snyder and his Kansas State Wildcats broke the cardinal rule 
of the bowl season. They came to a game they didn't want to play in 
and didn't feel guilty about it until the last 12 minutes. By then 
it was too late to stave off an upset. Their punishment? A 37-34 loss 
to Purdue, an unranked, mid-level Big Ten team, in the Alamo Bowl 
on Tuesday night. Kansas State was the nation's third-best team, according 
to the Bowl Championship Series ranking. But after 60 minutes of indifferent 
football, they returned to Kansas the same way the Tin Man entered 
Oz: looking for a heart. The Wildcats were once an undefeated team 
on the precipice of a national championship. They lost a heartbreaker 
in double overtime to Texas A&AMP;M in the Big 12 championship game, 
pouted about being snubbed by the New Year's Day bowl games and now 
can't even call themselves the Alamo Bowl champions. ``When we go 
to bowl games, you better show up because we are going to have some 
fun,'' Purdue linebacker Tom Vaughn said of the Boilermakers, who 
won their second consecutive Alamo Bowl. The Wildcats' tumble should 
be a warning to Ohio State, UCLA and Florida, highly rated teams that 
head into the New Year's games with something other than playing their 
best on their minds. The Buckeyes want to ignore an inexcusable home 
loss to a nonbowl team, Michigan State, which knocked them out of 
the championship game picture. Instead, they will hope that Florida 
State wins ugly over Tennessee in the Fiesta Bowl's championship game, 
while they roll over Texas A&AMP;M in the Sugar Bowl and ride the 
victory from No.3 to No.1 in the Associated Press news media poll. 
Like Kansas State, UCLA may experience a hangover from losing its 
national title hopes on the final game of the season against Miami. 
And Florida could have been in the Fiesta if it had beaten Florida 
State. Instead, the Gators have two losses and a short trip to south 
Florida for the Orange Bowl against a three-loss Syracuse team. Each 
coach and player, however, may be wise to pop a tape into the VCR 
and watch Kansas State quarterback Michael Bishop give his post-game 
interview. Was he embarrassed by losing to an unranked team? Especially 
after the Wildcats had whined about being snubbed by all the major 
bowls? ``We're not embarrassed,'' Bishop said. ``We got beat by a 
good team. Why would we be embarrassed? We came out to play. We put 
points on the board. We just didn't come out on top. There's no reason 
to be embarrassed.'' But there really was. The Wildcats (11-2) didn't 
come here to play. They barely went through the motions in falling 
behind by 17-7 in the first half. They made only four first downs, 
gained 63 total yards, turned the ball over four times, had a field 
goal blocked and had seven penalties. The Boilermakers (9-4) may have 
had less talent, but they honored their contract with the 60,780 people 
on hand with hard-hitting effort. Their sophomore quarterback, Drew 
Brees, turned in four quarters of grit; he was rewarded when he drove 
the Boilermakers 80 yards in the final minute and found Isaac Jones 
for the 24-yard game-winning touchdown. Brees's numbers didn't reflect 
his will: 25 of 53 for 230 yards and 3 touchdowns. The usually mercurial 
Bishop's did. He was 9 of 24 passing for 182 yards and threw more 
interceptions (4) than touchdowns (3). He gained only 7 yards rushing 
on 20 carries. He fumbled. He muffed a handoff exchange, which led 
to another Purdue touchdown. His two fourth-quarter touchdown passes 
could not make up for what his lackadaisical play had already done. 
On Tuesday night, there were no tears from Snyder and his players, 
as there had been after the loss to Texas A&AMP;M. The coach, who 
uses two tones, guarded and irritated, chose the latter. When asked 
if his team had played as if it wanted to be in the Alamo Bowl, he 
paused and stared. ``Yes,'' he said tersely, then looked away. There 
was one Wildcat, however, who wanted to explain what really happened. 
Wide receiver Darnell McDonald capped a brilliant college career with 
5 catches for 124 yards and 2 touchdowns _ including an 88-yarder 
in the fourth quarter that almost saved his team. ``We totally sat 
down in the first half,'' he said. ``Did we want to be here? It was 
mixed. But we did go out on the field to win the game and play well. 
But maybe then it was too late.'' The Buckeyes, the Bruins and the 
Gators should know that. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>