<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981231.0256 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Since Franco Zeffirelli's elephantine new staging of ``La Traviata'' 
opened at the Metropolitan Opera at the end of November, new singers 
have taken over all the principal roles. Normally, the assumption 
is that the original singers have moved on to other projects, but 
in this case it seems likely that some of them were simply lost in 
the scenery and may not be heard from again. A singer who wanted to 
hide out for a while, in fact, could hardly do better than to get 
a role in this staging. The first opportunity to slip out of sight 
occurs during the opening party scene, which is so busy and overpopulated 
that one has to expend considerable effort to keep Violetta and Alfredo 
in view. This is clearly a brilliant if belated popular culture reference, 
a kind of double, operatic ``Where's Waldo?'' And it does no good 
to find Violetta and assume that Alfredo is nearby, since Zeffirelli 
sometimes has them exchange their intimacies from opposite sides of 
a crowded drawing room. For someone unable to avoid the limelight 
at the first party, the one in the second act is foolproof. Scarlet, 
lacey drops, decorated with flower patterns, hang from the ceiling 
but are soon withdrawn to show balloons, streamers and other baroquery, 
not to mention the streams of glitter that rain down on the revelers. 
If circuses had bordello tents, they would probably look like this. 
Granted, setting this on a huge staircase might seem peculiar, but 
perhaps Zeffirelli was paying homage to the Met's about to be retired 
``Il Trovatore'' production, in which the gypsy camp is set on a similar 
staircase, except in high-gloss ebony rather than the wood hues of 
this production. Within that homage, naturally, is a touch of Zeffirellian 
one-upsmanship: If gyspies can dance on steps, he may have reasoned, 
so can toreadors, cows and bulls. And so they do. At any rate, one 
could field a football team, convene a Beatles reunion or even stage 
an opera amid all this imagery and activity, and no one would be the 
wiser. In fairness, Zeffirelli did clear the decks for the most emotionally 
charged scenes, and the new principals bring interesting and mostly 
satisfying voices, as well as some thoughtful interpretive turns, 
to the endeavor. Ainhoa Arteta, a soprano from the Basque region of 
Spain, is a captivating, complex Violetta, and would undoubtedly be 
even more affecting in an intimate theater. The salient feature of 
her portrayal is her use of a sweet, velvety pianissimo that conveys 
Violetta's doubts and fears in the first act, the pain that underlies 
her resolution in the scene with the elder Germont and her fragility 
at the end. Ms. Arteta has the high notes and agility for the role 
as well, and although it took her a few moments to find a comfortable 
level _ understandably, given the ruckus around her _ she has the 
power to project into the hall. Her one weakness was diction: Her 
words were often too soft-edged to be comprehensible. Marcello Giordani, 
a tenor who has grown considerably since he made his Met debut a few 
years ago, has become a superb Alfredo. His timbre is fresh and bright, 
and his phrasing and coloration have an appealing flexibility and 
musicality. There were moments on Wednesday evening when his way with 
the musical line called to mind a young Placido Domingo. Vladimir 
Chernov, having recovered from the illness that kept him out of the 
first cast, joins the production as Germont. Oddly, his baritone seemed 
more lightweight than is usual for him, or typical for Germont. But 
he brought a calm dignity to the role that served it well, and like 
Ms. Arteta and Giordani, he shaped his lines with a persuasive subtlety. 
Scott Bergeson, a conductor heard regularly at the New York City Opera, 
made his house debut. He paced the work comfortably, made the string 
lines in the first- and third-act preludes as haunting as they can 
be, and accompanied Violetta's more introspective arias with considerable 
warmth. The orchestra played beautifully for him. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>