<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981231.0383 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
THE PRINCE OF EGYPT With the voices of Amick Byram, Ralph Fiennes, 
Jeff Goldblum, Michelle Pfeiffer, Danny Glover, Sandra Bullock, many 
others. Directed by Brenda Chapman, Steve Hickner and Simon Wells. 
PG. 93 minutes. A decidedly unsunny tale, Dreamworks' animated biblical 
epic is an abbreviated version of the Book of Exodus. Set afloat in 
a basket, the Hebrew baby Moses survives perilous waters and washes 
up at the Egyptian royal court, where he is taken in and raised as 
the brother of Ramses, the future pharaoh. A rambunctious youth who 
believes he is Egyptian, Moses anticipates a life of high position 
until he is made aware of his true origin. Resistant at first, he 
comes to abhor the Hebrews' captivity at the hands of the Egyptians. 
Encountering God in the burning bush, he fearfully accepts the command 
to lead his people to freedom. One by one, from frogs to pestilence, 
the plagues bend but fail to break the Egyptian hold on their slave 
laborers. Finally, the slaughter of the firstborn convinces Ramses 
to let the Hebrews leave. And that, of course, sets the stage for 
the flight, pursuit by the Egyptians and the parting of the waters. 
VIOLENCE The animators are working with an extremely violent story, 
which they soften with brief montages and other pictorial allusions 
to brutality, plagues and mass murder. (The killing of the firstborn, 
for instance, is a whirling spectral presence.) Nevertheless, the 
violence is inescapable. SEX None. PROFANITY None. For Which Children? 
AGES 3-5 The film tries hard to entertain, but obviously this isn't 
a merry tale for the little ones. Many of them simply wouldn't understand. 
AGES 6-8 It depends on the child. With parental guidance beforehand, 
they could well get into step with the film. AGES 9-12 This is a good 
age. Many children will find the film exciting visually and narratively. 
AGES 13 AND UP Teen-agers may scoff but they, too, could well be caught 
up. MIGHTY JOE YOUNG Charlize Theron, Bill Paxton, Rade Sherbedgia, 
Regina King, Peter Firth. Directed by Ron Underwood. PG. 114 minutes. 
In the misty Tanzanian high country, a little girl named Jill witnesses 
the murder of her mother, a Jane Goodall-type researcher, by Strasser 
(Sherbedgia), a poacher who has also just blasted a mother gorilla 
so he can cart off Joe, her valuable baby. Joe eludes him. Twelve 
years later, he stands 15 feet high, weighs 2,000 pounds and needs 
inordinate quantities of foliage to stay fed and hidden away from 
promoters who would make a latter-day mini-King Kong of him. Ever 
by his side, Jill (Ms. Theron), now a willowy young woman (and a foxy 
one considering all the years she has spent entirely in the jungle), 
keeps him sequestered and humored with games of hide-and-seek. But 
this being a remake of Ernest B. Schoedsack's 1949 film, Joe, who's 
really a sweet lug at heart, is destined for the bright lights. A 
well-meaning zoologist (Paxton) persuades Jill to pack Joe off to 
Los Angeles for a supposedly protected existence in a game preserve. 
Still bent on appropriating the gorilla for himself, Strasser follows 
and purposely riles him up. After scattering the well-heeled assemblage 
at a charity event, Joe takes to the streets for a halfhearted rampage. 
Later he redeems himself by rescuing a child, but maybe Los Angeles 
wasn't such a good idea after all. An admiring public takes up a collection 
to set Joe up properly back home. VIOLENCE The killing of Joe's mother 
and Jill's will scare many small children, an odd thing to do in a 
movie whose principal audience is the very young. Strasser is graphically 
the worse for wear after Joe flings him onto some power lines, but 
while other mayhem yields injuries, nothing is visibly too serious. 
SEX Jill and the zoologist haltingly try a kiss or two. PROFANITY 
None. For Which Children? AGES 3-5 They will love Joe, who's just 
a little kid himself. With parental pointers, they should also basically 
understand what is going on. With the exception of matricide and Joe's 
outbursts, which are messy but not all that menacing, the film rigorously 
stays as cuddly as possible. AGES 6-9 This is a good age, provided 
attention is paid to children's reactions and questions. AGES 10-12 
The 10-year-olds may still be in the fold, but by age 11 many viewers 
will find the film too gooey. PATCH ADAMS Robin Williams, Daniel London, 
Monica Potter, Philip Seymour Hoffman, Bob Gunton, Harve Presnell. 
Directed by Tom Shadyac. PG-13. 110 minutes. After having himself 
committed for suicidal urges, Hunter ``Patch'' Adams (Williams) discovers 
that his suppressed proclivities for clowning and good cheer have 
a miraculously salutary effect on himself and other patients. And 
so it's on to medical school, where Patch, blessed with a brilliant 
mind to go with his new faith in mirth, determines to build a medical 
practice based on warm, personal attention to patients. Considering 
that a dangerously seditious pipe dream, the medical school does all 
it can to restrict Patch to the straight and narrow. In response, 
he continually has the teaching hospital in an uproar with his antics 
and sets up a rural hospice, called the Gesundheit Institute, where 
the downtrodden ill, meaning primarily those with no health insurance, 
can receive treatment and succor. In a succession of highs and lows, 
Patch and the medical school coexist uneasily until a fellow student 
and love interest (Ms. Potter) is killed by a disturbed man who is 
being helped by the institute. For a while that rocks Patch's faith, 
but soon he is back to his outrageous stunts and railings against 
the establishment. Finally, there is graduation and, this being a 
film based on a true story, a postscript stating that the real-life 
Patch Adams went on to treat 15,000 patients without charge. Take 
that, you HMOs. VIOLENCE Patch's colleague is killed by a shotgun 
blast, but it happens off-screen. SEX None, but there is some bawdy 
humor. PROFANITY A lot of crudities and gross-out joking involving 
masturbation, gynecologists, proctology and similar topics. For Which 
Children? AGES 3-7 The film is inappropriate for young children, and 
despite Williams' clowning it would bore them to tears. AGES 8-12 
Williams makes funny faces and wears an enema bulb on his nose, but 
this film is essentially a protracted and at times mawkishly preachy 
plea for better medical treatment. As such, it may bore many young 
children. AGES 13 AND UP The film's sentimentality, which is cloying 
at times, and Patch's zeal may annoy some teen-agers, but others will 
enjoy the film. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>