<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981231.0224 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Once upon a time in this country, there were more artists than art 
historians. In fact, there was only one real specimen of the now ubiquitous 
breed, William Dunlap (1766-1839), a man-about-culture who was also 
a painter. His two-volume ``History of the Rise and Progress of the 
Arts of Design in the United States,'' published in 1834, is a chatty 
but far from naive rundown of American art from its inception to Dunlap's 
own day, and it established his reputation as the father of American 
art history. Like Giorgio Vasari in 16th-century Italy, Dunlap was 
very much a participant in his scene, chronicling the lives of contemporary 
and earlier artists, architects, sculptors, printmakers and such with 
pondered and sometimes pungent opinions. Not unduly modest, he devoted 
no less than three chapters to himself, and he was high on Benjamin 
West (with whom he had studied in Britain), Washington Allston, Thomas 
Cole and Gilbert Stuart. He also included artists whose names today 
evoke a blank stare, and those he didn't like, among them his contemporary 
Charles Willson Peale (1741-1827), whose work he brushed off with 
``will soon be forgotten.'' The latest early-American show at Hirschl 
&AMP; Adler Galleries, longtime specialists in Yankee art, is a salute 
to Dunlap and his book. ``The American Vasari: William Dunlap and 
His World'' includes more than 60 paintings, prints, drawings, sculptures 
and engravings by artists who made it into Dunlap's tome. The show 
runs through Feb. 15. The names range from the ornithologist John 
James Audubon (``How much science gains by increasing the picture 
of a bird beyond that size necessary to display all the parts distinctly, 
is with me questionable,'' Dunlap wrote) to Robert Walter Weir (1803-1899), 
a drawing instructor at West Point lauded by Dunlap but whose painting 
``Niagara Falls'' (1856) adds nothing to nature's artistry. Still, 
``The American Vasari'' is a bright idea for a show, and it offers 
a robust selection from the gallery's remarkable inventory of early-American 
treasures (with a few loans sprinkled in). Portraits are the emphasis, 
as they were in Dunlap's time. Among the most interesting is one by 
Edward Savage (1761-1817) of Jedidiah Morse and his son, Samuel F.B. 
Morse, from around 1794. It shows the future scientist and painter, 
with whom Dunlap helped found the insurgent National Academy of Design 
in 1826, as a fat-faced little boy at the side of his father, a Yale-educated 
geographer and Congregational minister wearing black clerical garb 
and an expression of high moral purpose. In sharp contrast to this 
austere rendering is the lah-di-dah likeness of Elizabeth Eliot Burr 
(1798) by Ralph Earl (1751-1801): a Connecticut grande dame sitting 
in sumptuous surroundings, dressed in a gown of gleaming white satin 
and holding a chain attached to a pet squirrel. Another standout portrait 
is of Rajah Rommahon Roy (1833), by Rembrandt Peale (1778-1860), the 
son of Charles Willson Peale. Roy was a Hindu reformist and linguist 
who founded the Theistic Church in India, and in his last years he 
was an envoy to Britain. Peale's masterly portrait, in exotic high 
colors, shows Roy wearing a turban and a salmon-colored shirt, his 
fleshy but appealing face in mellow repose. A small but jaunty head-and-shoulders 
self-portrait of Dunlap shows him in a dressy white cravat and dark 
coat. He gazes straight at the viewer and he doesn't hide his out-of-commission 
right eye, blinded in a childhood accident. Even so, he looks every 
inch the cosmopolitan that he was, a friend of James Fenimore Cooper, 
Washington Irving and William Cullen Bryant and a polymath who, besides 
being an artist and art historian, also wrote plays, diaries, a history 
of the theater and another of New York State. But the show is by no 
means all portraits; there are landscapes, still lifes, genre scenes, 
miniatures, historical paintings, architectural views and even a pair 
of precise watercolor plans (1806) for an underwater cannon by the 
steamboat pioneer Robert Fulton (1765-1815). ``As a painter, Fulton 
does not rank high,'' Dunlap wrote, but went on to praise him as ``a 
kind father, a fast friend, an enlightened philosopher and a good 
republican.'' Among landscapists, Dunlap particularly favored Cole 
(1801-1848), a founder of the Hudson River School, who is represented 
here by a glowing golden idyll, ``The Old Mill at Sunset'' (1844). 
Cole was ``discovered'' in 1825 by Dunlap and two friends, the painters 
John Trumbull and Asher B. Durand (at that time more noted as an engraver 
than a painter). Trumbull saw Cole's paintings in the window of a 
Manhattan bookstore, bought one, then took Dunlap and Durand to view 
them. ``I remember the sensitive and amiable painter, then seen by 
me for the first time,'' Dunlap recalled, ``standing in presence of 
the three above-mentioned, like a schoolboy in presence of the trustees, 
and looking an image of diffidence before men, neither of whom could 
produce a rival to the works he offered for the paltry price of $25 
each.'' Works by Durand and Trumbull also appear in the show. Durand's 
opus is a peaceful cliche of a landscape, dating from 1860 to 1870, 
and Trumbull's is a Rubens-influenced grisaille drawing of a female 
nude, made around 1795. In the still life offerings, nothing quite 
comes up to Raphaelle Peale's study of an ear of corn and a cantaloupe 
half (1813), an austere but brilliantly rendered observation of these 
edibles that has the character of a fine portrait. As for the genre 
department, there is the beguiling ``What Have I Forgot?'' (1862) 
by William Sidney Mount (1807-1869), depicting a boy in a rustic yard 
carrying a packed basket. (Dunlap predicted Mount would go far.) Somewhere 
between genre and landscape is the jolly winter scene ``Sleigh Ride'' 
(1838), by the Philadelphian Thomas Birch (1779-1851), surprising 
in that Birch's specialty was marine painting. Many of the artists 
in this show were far more significant, as artists, than Dunlap. But 
as a keeper of the flame, he knew that posterity needed him. His goal, 
he wrote humbly, was to provide ``many valuable facts, which would 
otherwise have been lost; and to leave information respecting those 
professors of the arts who have failed, as well as those who have 
attained to honorable distinction.'' Agree with his judgments or not, 
that's exactly what he did. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>