<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981231.0268 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Borders bookstore here stands four stories tall, with such vast 
space devoted to words, chilled chardonnay and house blend coffee 
that at least one British author felt the acute need to retreat to 
the new gleaming rest rooms for refuge from a panic attack. The superstore, 
in London's busiest shopping district on Oxford Street, is part of 
the grand strategy of Borders Group to expand its reach outside of 
the United States, a feat no other major bookseller in the world has 
tried. In the last two years, Borders, based in Ann Arbor, Mich., 
has opened a total of five stores in Britain, Australia and Singapore 
to headlines declaring a ``U.S. Invasion'' and a ``War of Words.'' 
In the coming year, the bookstore chain, the second-biggest in the 
United States, has plans to open as many as 10 more stores in English-speaking 
countries. It also appears to be nearing a deal to buy a stake of 
nearly 20 percent in Paper Chase, a chain of14 stationery stores in 
Britain. While its fierce American rivals, Barnes &AMP; Noble and 
Amazon.com, battle over the so-far unprofitable spoils of the Internet, 
Borders is investing in terra firma. But the expansion has raised 
questions over whether the chain has moved too slowly to invest in 
the electronic commerce of books, which with software, are the most 
popular products sold on the Internet. Borders shares, which hit a 
52-week high of $41.75 in July, have fallen since in part because 
of a perception that it was not enthusiastic enough about Internet 
commerce. (On Thursday, the stock closed at $24.9375, down 20.36 percent 
for the year.) ``It's not that Border's stock is doing all that poorly, 
it's just that the company is not enjoying the Internet lift that 
goes to the first mover and then to a prominent second competitor, 
but after that trails off conspicuously,'' said Mary A. Tolan, global 
managing partner for the retail operating unit of Andersen Consulting. 
``However, Borders is pursuing international expansion more aggressively 
than its competitors. Once investors get as excited about global expansion 
as they are about the internet Borders will be much better positioned.'' 
Since his arrival in November, the new chief executive, Philip M. 
Pfeffer has said that the company should probably do more to promote 
its current Internet activities, noting that Borders upgraded its 
Web site in December and plans further improvements in January. But 
Pfeffer said that the company was committed to adding 40 more superstores 
in the United States next year and expects to speed up its international 
growth because sales at ``some of these stores have been remarkable.'' 
Although he declined to reveal the revenues of the new international 
stores, Pfeffer said that three of the international stores rank among 
the top five performers of all its nearly 250 superstores. That is 
not unexpected given that Borders has started its new stores in heavily 
trafficked areas.(Its other British stores are in Glasgow and in Brighton.) 
Its cafe is open for business at 8 a.m. and serves a menu of sandwiches 
to lunchtime clientele. At night, a pianist plays a baby grand for 
cafe drinkers mixing latte and literature. For the store's opening 
in August, Stephen King made his first personal appearance in England 
in 17 years to promote his novel ``Bag of Bones,'' an event so crowded 
that autograph seekers were limited to 1,000 ticket holders. Anne 
Rice paid a visit, and so did the Scottish author of ``Trainspotting,'' 
Irvine Welsh, who read from his latest novel, ``Filth.'' A British 
rock singer, Julian Cope, came to the store, signing three autographs 
to promote his new book, ``The Modern Antiquarian,'' before locking 
himself in the men's rest room, with an attack of agoraphobia, a fear 
of public spaces. ``Accessible sophistication,'' is the image that 
Borders is trying to promote in Britain, said Philip Downer, the chief 
of operations for Borders Ltd., the British subsidiary, who added 
that style means that in the children's section, ``we actively encourage 
children to trash the place.'' To achieve that style, the British 
and American managers of the international stores have strived to 
mesh two cultures and corporate styles. In the fall of 1997, Borders 
spent an estimated $65 million to acquire Books Etc., a chain of more 
than 20 London bookstores started by Richard Joseph, who is now chief 
executive of the Borders bookstores in Britain. On the advice of the 
British employees, Borders brightened the lighting, created larger 
signs to direct customers, and painted the walls in bolder colors 
of yellow and red. British employees adopted the more relaxed dress 
of the American managers. It was Borders' goal to acquire a company 
that could give it the cultural knowledge to enter into a foreign 
market where its buyers could recognize, for instance, the appeal 
of ``Bluff Your Way at Cricket.'' Such knowledge is vital in a market 
with such keen competitors as W.H. Smith and Waterstone's, which earlier 
this year merged with another rival, Dillons, to form the HMV Media 
Group and the country's largest bookstore chain. Shortly before Borders' 
grand opening in London, Waterstone's announced that it would open 
a bigger store a few doors away that features 165,000 titles. Since 
then the battle has intensified with Waterstone declaration that it 
planned to open a seven-story bookstore in a former department store 
in London. The British market became attractive in part to price-conscious 
American booksellers in part in 1995, when an industry agreement that 
barred retailers from selling books at discounts was eliminated. Borders 
also entered Singapore because of liberal copyright laws, which allowed 
it to ship in book inventory from the United States, eliminating the 
major costs of setting up local distribution. ``The next phase would 
be to go into non-English speaking countries _ a large cosmopolitan 
country with a large population of English speakers,'' said Vincent 
Altruda, the president of Borders' international stores division. 
Started as a used bookstore in Michigan in 1971, the Borders chain 
is feeling the limits of its domestic borders in the United States, 
where analysts have been predicting for some time that the expanding 
market of superstores could reach saturation after 2000. The chain 
started its own electronic Web site this spring in third place after 
Amazon.com and Barnes &AMP; Noble, making it an expensive prospect 
to catch up with the leaders. ``If they succeed internationally, they 
can say we generated higher returns than Barnes &AMP; Noble generated 
on line, but it's so early that you can't say with any certainty that 
they can be successful overseas,'' said Craig Bibb, managing partner 
at Jasper Funds in New York. ``Maybe if they pull it off, they'll 
have the last laugh. I think you can see from the stock price that 
it's hurt them. They placed their bet and they said it's going to 
be international.'' Danielle Turnof Fox, an analyst with J.P. Morgan 
Securities, said the company could still prove its mettle. ``Because 
of Border's strong track record the company has a lot of residual 
good will on Wall Street,'' she said. ``If the company has strong 
holiday sales, is able to reassure investors that its growth rate 
is sustainable at around 20 percent and takes a more aggressive stance 
on the Internet, I think we could see the stock recover further.'' 
In Britain there has been speculation that Borders' pioneering trail 
will be followed by the leading American bookseller, Barnes &AMP; 
Noble. One publisher said that Barnes &AMP; Noble's representatives 
had approached some of the major British publishers for advice and 
also had called Books Etc., which ultimately was acquired by Borders. 
``We have so many stores to open here in the United States, we just 
can't seem to make sense enough of a market for us to want to jump 
out,'' said Leonard Riggio, the chief executive of Barnes &AMP; Noble. 
``We look at it from time to time and we may jump in, but I don't 
think there's going to be any global push for typical bookstores. 
But you can never say never. Wouldn't it be nice to have a great American 
bookstore in Paris?'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>