<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981231.0349 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A few days before the referendum two weeks ago on this island's political 
status, Filiberto Ojeda-Rios, a radical Puerto Rican nationalist, 
denounced the vote as illegitimate and called for a boycott. Last 
summer, during a strike by workers protesting the sale of the government-owned 
Puerto Rico Telephone Co., he sided with the strikers and attacked 
the privatization policies of the governor. Ojeda-Rios usually issues 
his pronouncements through written releases to the news media, although 
he has also recorded statements that were later played for crowds. 
And in July, for a centennial commemoration of the United States' 
invasion of Puerto Rico in the Spanish-American War, he even produced 
a videotape. ``He looked like a statesman,'' said Dr. Hector Luis 
Pesquera, a physician and independence-movement leader who saw it. 
Ojeda-Rios' ubiquity would not be particularly remarkable were he 
not a federal fugitive in a highly publicized case: the armed robbery 
of $7 million from the Wells Fargo depot in Hartford, Conn., by militant 
Puerto Rican nationalists in September 1983. The FBI is expected to 
announce soon that it has raised the reward _ to $500,000 from $150,000 
_ for information leading to Ojeda-Rios' arrest, a response to renewed 
violent activity this year by the small clandestine group he leads, 
the Boricua Popular Army, better known as Los Macheteros: the Machete 
Wielders. ``He represents a tremendous threat to law enforcement,'' 
said Marlene Hunter, assistant special agent in charge of the FBI 
office here. ``He's quite intelligent, and a lot of people in his 
organization are educated and quite capable of using their talents 
to achieve the many things that are needed in Puerto Rico, and yet 
they have chosen to rob banks, place bombs and shoot it out with officers.'' 
Ojeda-Rios does indeed subscribe to violence. Los Macheteros, which 
he helped organize after working with similar underground groups, 
has claimed responsibility for the Wells Fargo robbery and, in the 
1970s and '80s, for a series of spectacular assaults, among them the 
blowing up of several planes at a Puerto Rico Air National Guard base, 
an ambush of a Navy bus that left two sailors dead, and rocket attacks 
on two federal buildings here, one of which houses the FBI. It was 
during the investigation of the rocket attacks that the bureau learned 
of Los Macheteros' involvement in the Wells Fargo robbery and, in 
1985, traced Ojeda-Rios to a safe house in the eastern part of the 
island, where he was arrested. He spent three years in prison awaiting 
trial, was then freed with his trial still pending and, in September 
1990, jumped bond. He has been a wanted man ever since, frequently 
communicating with the outside world and never denying a role in the 
robbery. Having eluded federal agents for eight years on an island 
only 100 miles by 35 miles in area, Ojeda-Rios, who is believed to 
be 65 to 68 years old, has developed the appeal of a David fighting 
a Goliath. He is often compared to Tono Bicicleta, a killer and rapist 
who, with the help of the populace, evaded arrest in Puerto Rico's 
mountains for 14 years, mocking the authorities throughout, until 
he was killed by the police in 1995. Unlike Tono Bicicleta, though, 
Ojeda-Rios is regarded by many Puerto Ricans as a defender of political 
principles. Federal officials say that he has undoubtedly counted 
on help to avoid capture and that despite the reward, investigators 
have hardly been showered with leads. ``People are almost happy that 
he hasn't been caught, because he is perceived as ours and as someone 
who turned out to be smarter than the Feds,'' said Daisy Sanchez, 
a television reporter here who interviewed him shortly after he had 
gone underground. ``It is obvious that there is no revolutionary movement 
here and that he is in the minority. But that doesn't mean he doesn't 
count on support to protect him.'' In addition, Ms. Hunter, the FBI 
agent, cited Ojeda-Rios' resourcefulness. She called him ``a master 
of disguises'' who was accustomed to a clandestine life and was ``well 
able to survive in very harsh conditions.'' Even before his arrest 
for the Wells Fargo robbery, Ojeda-Rios had lived underground for 
15 years, pursued because of the earlier attacks launched by Los Macheteros 
and similar groups. Once, Ms. Hunter said, he was found living in 
a cave in the island's northwest. He is even believed to have traveled 
to the mainland and back since 1990, when he was last seen. ``He may 
be in a condo yesterday, in the mountains the next day and in New 
York the next,'' Ms. Hunter said. Ojeda-Rios' career as a revolutionary 
had an unlikely beginning. After entering college here at the age 
of 15, he became a trumpet player in salsa bands that still remember 
him as a gifted musician. He moved to New York City as a teen-ager, 
married and in the early 1960s left with his family for Cuba, where, 
federal officials say, he was trained by the Castro government to 
spy for it in Puerto Rico. The Cubans, the officials say, later provided 
aid to Los Macheteros. Ms. Hunter, who has worked on the Wells Fargo 
case since the beginning, said there was evidence that $2.5 million 
of the loot had gone to Cuba. Of the $7 million taken by the robbers, 
she said, investigators have recovered only $85,000, in a series of 
arrests in 1985. Ojeda-Rios was indicted with 19 other suspects. In 
1992, two years after he removed an electronic monitor and vanished 
on the island while free on bond, he was convicted in absentia in 
Connecticut and sentenced to 55 years in prison. There were a total 
of 12 convictions in the case, and charges against five other suspects 
were dropped. In addition, three of those indicted were never arrested. 
One of these was Victor Gerena, a Wells Fargo employee who remains 
on the FBI's list of the top 10 fugitives. While his three fellow 
fugitives have not been heard from since the robbery, Ojeda-Rios hardly 
keeps quiet. His audiotapes are routinely sent to pro-independence 
rallies, and his ``communiques'' to the media, left at drop-off points 
or sometimes mailed, are now almost expected in the event of a major 
news occurrence. And at least three times in the last eight years 
he has given interviews to reporters, who have been blindfolded and 
taken by car to his hideout. Luis Penchi, a radio reporter and talk-show 
host who was the last to interview him, five months ago, says he regards 
his pursuers as ``inept.'' Although Los Macheteros had been largely 
dormant since Ojeda-Rios' disappearance, they resumed their violent 
activity this year, in attacks that were small, virtually symbolic. 
Most recently, this summer, they claimed responsibility for two attacks 
on branches of Banco Popular, a member of the consortium buying a 
controlling stake in the government-owned telephone company. Los Macheteros 
said the attacks _ a pipe bomb shattered windows in one, and someone 
fired two bullets through a branch's main door in the other _ were 
meant to prevent the sale of ``a national patrimony.'' Although Puerto 
Rico's political leaders, including Gov. Pedro Rossello, call Ojeda-Rios 
isolated and express doubt that his group has many active adherents, 
he has found sympathy within an island of 3.8 million people, who, 
although U.S. citizens, have a sense of their own distinct nationhood 
and who, while overwhelmingly rejecting independence at the polls, 
often view as noble the efforts of those who seek it. Most people 
in the independence movement do not advocate armed struggle, and federal 
officials say militant Puerto Rican groups have become less of a threat 
since the 1980s. But radical nationalists like Ojeda-Rios are far 
from shunned. Some advocates of independence say Los Macheteros have 
helped bring attention to the movement, and defend the group's violence 
as a legitimate weapon of national resistance. Many ``independentistas'' 
regard those convicted of crimes in pursuit of independence as political 
prisoners. In his latest interview, with Penchi, the radio reporter, 
Ojeda-Rios denied that any of the Wells Fargo money had gone to Cuba 
and said it had all been spent on his clandestine army. He also said 
that he had never left the island while at large and that his greatest 
sacrifice since vanishing was his inability to speak with with his 
four children, whom, he said somewhat vaguely, he seeks to protect 
by refusing to communicate with them. The FBI is not moved. ``He's 
a bank robber and a criminal,'' Ms. Hunter said. ``We don't excuse 
things because of people's motivation.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>