<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981231.0243 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In terms of material things, there's no place like New York and no 
time like the Christmas holidays. The rituals of buying, giving and 
getting are pronounced here, and phase two _ returning, exchanging 
and sale-hopping _ can be even more intense. Add to this the ground 
movement of people heading for the city's major blockbuster art exhibitions 
in their final days, and you've got object-oriented human gridlock 
of unparalleled proportions. Right now it feels as if the whole world 
is here on a class trip. If your eyes need respite from looking at 
things with price tags or you simply want an aesthetic experience 
that doesn't threaten life and limb, there's hope. Even at this time 
of year, the city is rife with relatively quiet, empty places to contemplate 
outstanding works of art and related visual phenomena, places slightly 
or way off the beaten path _ be they the less popular galleries of 
the Metropolitan Museum of Art or the Brooklyn Museum of Art, the 
city's only indoor Earthwork (Walter De Maria's ``New York Earth Room'' 
in SoHo) or the great scale model of New York City at the Queens Museum 
of Art. Here is a series of mini-pilgrimages to overlooked or out-of-the-way 
places or objects, a kind of spa tour for the eyes and soul. Most 
of the sights are worlds unto themselves, little universes that the 
viewer can inhabit physically or mentally. Several are small enclosed 
spaces dense with some form of artistry that envelop the visitor like 
a mud bath or a sauna. Others are single objects, usually exquisite 
and small, that encourage fantasy and projection and whose benefits 
resemble those of a skilled scalp massage. The tour moves through 
space and time, and so through quite a bit of New York history. Not 
every stop offers a pedigreed masterpiece or even an artwork, although 
many do. Others contain glimpses of material culture, anonymously 
made functional objects with fascinating histories of their own. And 
this is merely a sampling; there are hundreds of candidates for this 
tour. When it comes to viewing opportunities that cost next to nothing, 
New York truly is the city that never stops giving. The Cloisters 
Start with a topographical and cultural high point: the Cloisters, 
a branch of the Metropolitan dedicated to the art and architecture 
of Europe of the Middle Ages that is in Fort Tryon Park, near Manhattan's 
northern tip. It's easier to get to than anyone remembers. Take the 
A subway to 190th Street and go upstairs to Fort Washington Avenue, 
on an elevator that is something of an environmental artwork itself 
because the man who operates it regularly has lined it with images 
of kittens. From there either take the M-4 bus to its last stop, the 
Cloisters' front door, or enjoy the 10- to 15-minute walk through 
the park. Cobbled together from the ruins of several French Romanesque 
and Gothic churches, the Cloisters may be New York City's premier 
world removed. Its very structure is an architectural history lesson. 
Its contents survey medieval art forms from stone-carving all the 
way up the chart of refinement. (Note the columns in the 11th-century 
Cloister of St.-Guilhem-le-Desert, carved to resemble flowing water.) 
Quite a bit off the chart is the Reliquary Gallery on the building's 
lower level: a glowing treasure box of illuminated manuscripts, silver 
and gold liturgical vessels and, perhaps best of all, a rotating selection 
of nearly two dozen ivories dating from the 9th to the 14th centuries. 
These tiny carvings bristle with religious fervor, elaborate narratives 
and formal inventiveness. Several of the earliest and most striking 
small Carolingian plaques that were the chief form of sculptural expression 
during the time of Charlemagne reflect the classical revival that 
he initiated after 800. The classical concerns for creating a strong 
spatial reality and using flowing drapery to achieve a naturalistic 
sense of the body are especially evident in the figures and castle 
in ``Plaque With Emmaus Scenes.'' The plaque's outer border of flattened 
flower and bird forms reflects the persistence of barbaric anti-classical 
tendencies that Charlemagne sought to eliminate. The largest and most 
famous of the ivories is, of course, the 12th-century altar cross 
that may have come from the Abbey of Bury St. Edmunds in eastern England. 
Its medallions and terminals represent scenes from the sacrifice of 
Christ with breathtaking delicacy, but the most memorable form to 
contemporary eyes may be the cross itself. Marked with the nail holes 
of Jesus' missing body, it doubles as a tree of life. Its rounded 
trunk is regularly punctuated with bilateral buds ready to send branches 
(and Christianity) out in every direction. The back of the cross portrays 
one means of dissemination: carvings of 18 prophets holding texts 
form a sinuous spiral, suggestive of growth. Noteworthy among the 
other wonders here is the ``Monkey Cup,'' an enamel vessel from 15th-century 
Burgundy. Its lush blue exterior is an orderly riot of mischievous 
monkeys, their sleeping human prey and curling vines; its interior, 
a surrealistic hunting scene dominated by clumps of golden trees on 
mesalike hills. The label spells out an illustrious provenance: Piero 
de Medici, the Earls of Arundel and J.P. Morgan. Museum of the City 
of New York It seems appropriate to follow the sweeping, historically 
rich other-worldliness of the Cloisters with the diminutive, personal 
escapism of Carrie Stettheimer's doll house in the Toys Gallery of 
the Museum of the City of New York. From the late 1920s to the early 
1940s, the three Stettheimer sisters presided over one of New York's 
most sparkling cultural salons, playing hostess to everyone who was 
anyone, especially where art was concerned. While Florine made fanciful 
group portraits of their circle and Ettie sometimes wrote about them, 
Carrie worked most of her life creating a doll-house homage to the 
Stettheimer residence, which overlooked Bryant Park. The result, a 
lavish little mansion shown on the verge of a Christmas soiree, is 
an early example of assemblage art rich with wry commentary. It employs 
such modern art techniques as photo collage (the foyer) and cut-paper 
collage (the child's bedroom). It contrasts decorating and artistic 
styles: the formal Louis XIV salon against the red-trimmed, proto-Vreeland 
sitting room; the traditional chintz guest bedroom (inhabited in this 
instance by dolls of Alice B. Toklas and Gertrude Stein) against the 
high-ceilinged central gallery with miniature modern artworks by such 
Stettheimer regulars as Marcel Duchamp and Gaston Lachaise. Along 
with Edward Steichen, Pavel Tchelitchew, Baroness de Meyer, Virgil 
Thomson and Henry McBride, these artists are represented by dolls 
made in the 1970s by a curator at the museum who was completely in 
sync with the Stettheimers' sensibility. Metropolitan Museum of Art 
The Metropolitan Museum may be breaking attendance records at the 
moment, but it's still the league leader when it comes to reasonably 
deserted corners. Outstanding among these in terms of aesthetic intimacy 
and visual-pounds-per-inch may be the tiny, piercingly exquisite ``Gubbio 
Studiolo,'' the 12-by-17-foot 15th-century Italian wood intarsia room 
that was originally commissioned by Duke Federico de Montefeltro. 
Acquired by the Met in 1939 and displayed until 1967, it underwent 
a meticulous 10-year restoration and was finally reinstalled in 1996. 
A fusion of the arts of painting and cabinet-making executed in a 
palette of contrasting woods, this extraordinary chamber is in many 
ways a portrait of the duke. Here he could contemplate pictorial symbols 
of his military prowess (armor, helmet and dagger), his intellectual 
interests (musical instruments, books by Euclid, drafting tools) and 
his responsibilities (writing box and quill). These objects sometimes 
overflow their niches, spilling onto the benches lining the paneled 
and coffered room. As interesting as their elaborate iconography is 
the sheer bravura. Every form in sight is a triumph of trompe l'oeil 
illusion that is continually contradicted by the declarative artifice 
and flatness of the means of illusion, which is wood and only wood. 
For aesthetic intimacy on a grand scale at the Met, there's the 17,000-square-foot 
Henry R. Luce Center for the Study of American Art, which celebrated 
it 10th anniversary last month. Filled with row upon row of tall glass 
vitrines, the center is a library of Americana from Colonial times 
to the present. Its shelves are dense with displays of silver, glass, 
pewter, china, Redware pottery, stoneware, second-tier paintings in 
the museum's collection and, most of all, furniture. These objects 
speak volumes. If you doubt that each era has a period look that reflects 
something of its soul, browse here. The course of American history, 
power and taste will not just flash before your eyes; it will be reiterated 
again and again, in medium after medium. Whitney Museum of American 
Art The Whitney might seem too small to have much that is untraveled 
or overlooked. Still, one can usually snatch a few moments of peace 
communing with Charles Simonds' 1981 ``Dwelling'' in the museum's 
stairwell. This unobtrusive permanent installation is a tiny adobe 
ruin nestled in swelling hills of red clay not unlike those that Georgia 
O'Keeffe liked to paint in New Mexico. Even people who know this sweet 
little sculpture, which evokes the American continent's first settlers, 
may not realize that it has two other parts. From the window on the 
landing just below ``Dwelling,'' a similar ruin can be seen, nestled 
on the window ledge of a building across the street. Above, on the 
corner of the roof, a terra cotta bird keeps watch over the two tiny 
sites. A second hideaway here is the small gallery devoted to the 
art of Alexander Calder, tucked beneath the museum's new fifth-floor 
permanent collection galleries. This room surveys the several sides 
of brilliant, playful genius. His early wire masterpieces are here, 
``The Brass Family'' of seven balancing acrobats and the ``Circus'' 
with its assembled acts. Sounds of the artist animating the ``Circus'' 
(on film) regularly fill the space. And there are several examples 
of the stabiles, mobiles and constellations of his maturity, their 
loyalties strictly divided between the forms of the real world and 
the pure abstractions of art and engineering. New-York Historical 
Society If you can't get into the Museum of Natural History, which 
can be like bedlam at this time of year, try the New-York Historical 
Society just across the street. It has a wonderful hands-on children's 
gallery that takes New York City's history and architecture as its 
subject. Until Jan. 10, a corridor gallery on the ground floor is 
devoted to the work _ primarily the large, ethereal, exquisitely detailed 
drawings _ of George B. Post, a prominent 19th-century architect whose 
existing designs include the New York Stock Exchange, City College, 
the Williamsburg Savings Bank and the Brooklyn Historical Society. 
But the permanent attractions here are two small galleries on the 
society's second floor outfitted with molding, a fireplace and a robustly 
Victorian carpet to approximate the painting gallery of Luman Reed. 
During the 1830s, this New York businessman and picture lover opened 
his collection, installed on the third floor of his house at 13 Greenwich 
St., to the public. Reed collected European paintings, but his historical 
significance lies in his support of living American painters, notably 
Thomas Cole, founder of the Hudson River School. The centerpiece of 
Reed's holdings, a large chunk of which his heirs gave to the society 
in the 1850s, is Cole's ``Course of Empire,'' a five-painting allegory 
that the collector commissioned in 1835. Here the panoramic images 
are grouped around the fireplace, covering most of one wall. At once 
campy and impassioned, these paintings trace the rise and fall of 
an eclectic ancient civilization (Rome, Athens, Pergamum). It seems 
loosely based on Poussin and Claude with turbulent weather reminiscent 
of Turner stirred in at the climax _ an invasion of bloodthirsty Viking-like 
barbarians. Despite the pictorial fireworks and straining for universal 
truths, Cole's passage from pastoral paradise to pastoral ruin may 
tell a simpler, more personal tale: that his own art returned inevitably 
to the natural landscape for its strength and inspiration. Museum 
of American Folk Art Even the tiny Museum of American Folk Art, whose 
temporary home is little more than a glorified lobby, has a wonderful 
work of art that is easily overlooked: a radiant mural tenderly extracted 
from a New Hampshire house that is the backdrop in a vitrine for other 
objects. Painted in the first quarter of the 19th century and attributed 
to someone known only as the ``Bear and Pears artist,'' it deserves 
a wall of its own. It depicts a tropical fantasy of coconut trees 
and undulating hills against a yellow sky, detailed with elephants 
and a row of red inhabitants. Museum of Modern Art The modern is not 
the quietest place at this time of year, but grading on a curve, its 
design galleries qualify as relatively underpopulated. One of the 
most absorbing works here is the scale model of Frank Lloyd Wright's 
house ``Fallingwater,'' cantilevered daringly over a burbling stream 
of textured plastic. Even when you're grown up, there's an inexplicable 
thrill in being larger than buildings. Models grant a degree of visual 
possession that real buildings rarely permit, enabling us to see their 
artistry in sharper outline. We appreciate instantly the dovetailing 
of ``Fallingwater'' with its rocky site, the economy of its materials 
(concrete, stone, metal, glass) and the sculptural brilliance of its 
structure. It simply projects from the rocks like a series of attenuated 
bureau drawers opening at right angles. Morgan Library If the handsome 
exhibition of master drawings from the Pushkin and Hermitage Museums, 
which closes on Sunday, is overcrowded, you might head for J.P. Morgan's 
brocade-lined study, left pretty much as it was in the days when the 
financier kept the global economy in balance. The West Room, as it 
is called, is definitely another world, a period room of the first 
order and as much a self-portrait as Montefeltro's ``Studiolo.'' Although 
there are things to be seen here, the most interesting works _ a scattering 
of medieval objects _ are hard to see. There's also a lovely Perugino 
in one corner, and stern cameo portraits of Martin Luther and his 
wife by Lucas Cranach on a table. But it is the overall effect that 
remains most powerful. The need for focused, drop-dead beauty can 
be satisfied by returning to the landing just outside the study's 
door to study the imposing ``Stavelot Triptych'' from 12th-century 
Byzantium, glowing with images in enamel on gold and encrusted jewels. 
Dia Center for the Arts Walter De Maria's ``New York Earth Room'' 
is also an enclosed world, as muffled and insulated as Morgan's study, 
but by entirely different means. De Maria's domesticated earthwork, 
made in 1977 and opened to the public in 1980, is simply this: a large 
SoHo loft filled to the window sills with black earth, 140 tons of 
it. It is an outstanding example of the dematerialization of the art 
object and the rise of installation or environmental works that dominated 
the art of the late 1960s and early '70s. But its has roots deeper 
in the past; its power lies in both its absurdity and its familiarity. 
It is an instance of surrealist contrast and displacement taken to 
extremes, Meret Oppenheim's fur-lined teacup multiplied to the nth 
power: The shock of the dark rough soil surrounded by smooth white 
walls in the middle of Manhattan is still delicious, after all these 
years. Yet it is also a piece of land, silent, solid, indifferent 
to the human presence, even if man-made, and profoundly comforting. 
Brooklyn Museum of Art One of the quietest galleries in the Brooklyn 
Museum of Art is hiding in plain sight: It's the Great Hall devoted 
to American Indian and pre-Columbian art and art of the Pacific islands, 
which nearly every visitor to the museum passes through on the way 
to the back elevators, the cafe, the cafeteria or the spiffy new galleries 
of African art. The gallery, refurbished in 1965, is dim and dusty 
in spots, but it contains some of the museum's greatest works, including 
a powerful little Olmec figure in deep green jade who holds a small 
scowling version of himself in his stiffly outstretched hands, and 
the cotton and wool mantle known as the ``Paracas Textile,'' a masterpiece 
of the Paracas/Nasca civilization of southern Peru (300 B.C.-A.D. 
200), whose needle-knit borders are populated by a pantheon of extravagantly 
costumed and masked figures. The displays contain clusters of wonderful 
things: Pomo baskets, fierce New Ireland masks, feathered headdresses 
from the Amazon and Ecuador. And there are isolated objects of supreme 
beauty: a white and black Zuni ceremonial bowl with a pair of kissing 
serpents circling its belly and a stepped lip that echoes the profile; 
and a Northwest Indian clapper shaped like a halibut but animated 
by a haunting human face. Queens Museum of Art It makes sense to end 
a condensed tour of some of New York's less obvious treasures with 
a compressed vision of the city itself. The only place for this is 
the ``New York City Panorama,'' a scale model in an enormous gallery 
at the Queens Museum of Art in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park. Refurbished 
and updated four years ago, it accounts for every structure in New 
York City as of 1994. This Lilliputian metropolis can be circumnavigated 
on a sleek unobtrusive balcony that is floored in glass when necessary, 
over the outer reaches of the outer boroughs. Every few minutes the 
overhead lights go down and day changes to night. Of course the model 
pales next to the real thing. Its night view is particularly dim compared 
with the blazing holiday radiance that stretches before the eye during 
a night landing at La Guardia Airport. But one of the great privileges 
of living in New York City is the exhilaration of flying over it to 
come home. The panorama allows you to relive that experience at your 
own pace, with all kinds of unscheduled stops and pauses. You can 
even retrace the points on this tour, starting with the Cloisters, 
a small, cruciform structure surrounded by green perched over Manhattan's 
northern gate. BROOKLYN MUSEUM OF ART, 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect 
Park, Brooklyn, (718) 638-5000. Hours: Wednesdays through Fridays, 
10 a.m. to 5 p.m.; Saturdays, 11 a.m. to 6 p.m. (until 11 p.m. on 
the first Saturday of the month); Sundays, 11 a.m. to 6 p.m.; closed 
Jan. 1. Admission: $4; $2 for students; $1.50 for the elderly; free 
for children under 12. THE CLOISTERS, Fort Tryon Park, (212) 923-3700. 
Hours: Tuesdays through Sundays, 9:30 a.m. to 4:45 p.m.; closed Jan. 
1. Admission: $8; $4 for students and the elderly. DIA CENTER FOR 
THE ARTS, 548 West 22nd St., (212) 989-5566. Hours: Thursdays through 
Sundays, noon to 6 p.m.; closed Jan. 1. Admission: $4; $2 for students 
and the elderly; free for children under 10. METROPOLITAN MUSEUM OF 
ART, Fifth Avenue at 82nd Street, (212) 535-7710 Hours: Sundays and 
Tuesdays through Thursdays, 9:30 a.m. to 5:30 p.m.; Fridays and Saturdays, 
to 9 p.m.; closed Jan. 1. Suggested admission: $8 for adults; $4 for 
students and the elderly. MUSEUM OF AMERICAN FOLK ART, 2 Lincoln Square, 
at 66th Street, (212) 595-9533. Hours: Tuesdays through Sundays, 11:30 
a.m. to 7:30 p.m.; closed Jan. 1. Suggested admission: $3. MUSEUM 
OF THE CITY OF NEW YORK, 1220 Fifth Ave., at 103rd Street, (212) 534-1672. 
Hours: Tuesdays, 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. for registered groups only; Wednesdays 
through Saturdays, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.; Sundays, noon to 5 p.m.; closed 
Jan. 1. Suggested admission: $5; $4 for the elderly, students and 
children; $10 for families. MUSEUM OF MODERN ART, 11 West 53rd St., 
(212) 708-9400. Hours: Thursdays and Saturdays through Tuesdays, 10:30 
a.m. to 6 p.m.; Fridays, to 8:30 p.m. Admission; $9.50; $6.50 for 
students and the elderly. NEW-YORK HISTORICAL SOCIETY, 2 West 77th 
St., (212) 873-3400. Hours: Tuesdays through Sundays, 11 a.m. to 5 
p.m.; closed Jan. 1. Admission: $5; $3 for students and the elderly; 
free for children under 12. PIERPONT MORGAN LIBRARY, 29 East 36th 
St., (212) 685-0610. Hours: Tuesdays through Thursdays, 10:30 a.m. 
to 5 p.m.; Fridays 10:30 a.m. to 8 p.m.; Saturdays, 10:30 a.m. to 
6 p.m.; Sundays, noon to 6 p.m.; closed Jan. 1. Admission: $7; $5 
for students and the elderly. QUEENS MUSEUM OF ART, New York City 
Building, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Queens, (718) 592-9700. Hours: 
Wednesdays through Fridays, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.; Saturdays and Sundays, 
noon to 5 p.m.; closed Jan. 1. Admission: $4; $2 for students and 
the elderly. WHITNEY MUSEUM OF AMERICAN ART, 945 Madison Ave., at 
75th Street, (212) 570-3600. Hours: Wednesdays and Fridays through 
Sundays, 11 a.m. to 6 p.m., Thursdays to 8 p.m.; closed Jan. 1. Admission: 
$9; $7 for students and the elderly. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>