<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981231.0269 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In June 1865, Charles Dickens was traveling to London when his train 
derailed, leaving his car dangling off a bridge 10 feet above a riverbed. 
Dickens helped rescue the two women with whom he had been vacationing 
and whose connection to him he did not want revealed: his lover, the 
young actress Ellen Ternan, and her accommodating mother. After hours 
of helping attend to the wreck's victims, some seriously hurt and 
others dead, he climbed back into his compartment to rescue the manuscript 
he carried with him, a chapter of his novel in progress, ``Our Mutual 
Friend.'' As he wrote in a postscript to the book, his characters 
``were much soiled, but otherwise unhurt'' by the experience. For 
Dickens, the aftershocks were more lingering. Several years later, 
he still experienced ``sudden vague rushes of terror,'' as he put 
it. Add to that the deaths of friends and his sometimes precarious 
health in middle age, and you have a picture of the distressed state 
of mind in which he wrote that novel, among his darkest, least sentimental 
and most difficult to bring to the screen. Around 800 pages long, 
it includes dozens of characters and two major entangled plots concerning 
unsuitable romances, savage social hypocrisy and the effect of money 
on human nature. Yet this unlikely candidate has become a vividly 
populated, visually beautiful, altogether engaging series on Masterpiece 
Theater. (The three-part series on PBS begins Sunday and continues 
Monday and Tuesday.) In six leisurely hours, the series pares the 
novel down significantly yet intelligently, and creates an upstairs-downstairs 
world so thoroughly realized that viewers may be reluctant to let 
it go. ``Our Mutual Friend'' was the last novel Dickens completed 
(he left ``The Mystery of Edwin Drood'' half-finished when he died 
in 1870, at 57), and the series captures its mature vision. In this 
shadowy story, the redemption of misguided characters must literally 
break through a cloud of dust. Dust and the river are the novel's 
overwhelming images, and episode one begins with a stunning vision 
of the Thames, a fantasy of moonlight shimmering on midnight blue 
that evokes Turner and Whistler. In this romantic setting, a man named 
Gaffer Hexam (David Schofield) trolls for drowned bodies whose pockets 
he can pick. The scene instantly sets up the discordance of Dickens' 
world, in which the visible trappings never provide reliable clues 
to behavior. With Hexam is his daughter, Lizzie (Keeley Hawes), a 
young woman repulsed by his actions yet kind to him as only a Dickens 
heroine can be. She is naturally good-hearted and clear-sighted, yet 
in this unflinching story, even she is not a piece of spun sugar. 
Ms. Hawes (seen recently as the well-bred Victorian heroine in ``The 
Cater Street Hangman'') conveys all of Lizzie's confusion as she makes 
moral and social choices about her future. Though it takes a while 
for the plot to unfold, in true Dickens fashion each scene is intriguing 
in itself. From the river, the setting moves to a party given by the 
social climbing Veneerings, and the palette bursts into bright colors. 
Throughout, Lizzie and the lower classes are shot in dingy brown; 
the middle and upper classes wear colorful costumes, in crystalline 
sunshine or by golden candlelight. Mortimer Lightwood, a lawyer, is 
entertaining the Veneering party with the tale of an old gent named 
Harmon, who ``made his money in dust.'' The garbage mounds, or ``dust 
heaps,'' of Dickens' day were in fact lucrative recycling businesses. 
From mountains of trash, material was retrieved to make soap and bricks; 
among the refuse, jewels and other valuables could be scavenged. On 
screen, the Harmon dust heaps resemble a mining town, with shacks 
in the shadows of black mounds and workers in rags sifting through 
dirt. The mean-spirited Harmon has willed his fortune to his son, 
John, on the condition that he marry Bella Wilfer (Anna Friel), a 
clerk's daughter John has never met. Just as Mortimer concludes this 
story, he receives word that Gaffer Hexam has fished John Harmon's 
body from the Thames. From then on, the Hexam and Harmon plots, as 
well as the upper and lower classes, become hopelessly, wonderfully 
tangled. In the most compelling part of the story, Mortimer's friend 
Eugene Wrayburn falls in love with Lizzie. Paul McGann (``Withnail 
&AMP; I'') brings immense appeal to Eugene, a handsome man possessed 
of languorous charm, a drooping mustache and the credo ``so easily 
bored.'' He is indolent and self-dramatizing yet has inner resources 
we somehow believe in. The Harmon fortune passes to his loyal servants, 
and Mrs. Boffin. As the Boffins, Peter Vaughan and Pam Ferris make 
it clear why the plump, good-natured couple are among Dickens' most 
delightful creations, keeping their common sense as they become accustomed 
to their fancy clothes. The Boffins generously take Bella into their 
grand new home. Pretty and strong-minded, she is ingenuously honest 
in admitting, ``I love money.'' When a man called John Rokesmith (Steven 
Mackintosh) decides to lodge at the Wilfers and work as Boffin's secretary, 
Boffin tells Bella: ``We seem to have a mutual friend. Bit of a mystery 
man, my dear.'' The mystery is cleared up for us, though not for the 
characters, at the end of Part I. John's voice-over and flashback 
are similar to the novel's interior monologue; as in the book, this 
is compelling information that comes in the story's one structurally 
awkward episode. By eliminating much of Dickens' satirical asides 
about bourgeois society, the series puts the emphasis on the absorbing, 
subtly acted romances of Eugene and Lizzie, John and Bella. Yet the 
screen version preserves the core of Dickens' social commentary, for 
these loves are always set in the context of the caste system that 
forbids them. Misguided love leads to some of the most dazzling set 
pieces. Bradley Headstone (David Morrissey) is a schoolmaster who 
teaches Lizzie's younger brother; we begin to see just how tightly 
wound Headstone is when he proposes to Lizzie in a cemetery, explosively 
blaming her for his obsession with her. Eugene is equally, though 
more gently, obsessed. He helps educate Lizzie yet recognizes the 
unbridgeable social distance between them. They meet in a meadow and 
later he walks alone, expressing out loud a dilemma any gentleman 
of his era would find heart wrenching: ``Out of the question to leave 
her, out of the question to marry her.'' And John, a mere secretary, 
is rebuked by Bella for constantly watching her. Love or money? A 
good heart or social status? The characters in ``Our Mutual Friend'' 
fluctuate wildly between these poles. In this tale, trash becomes 
money, and money becomes prestige, as the foul dust heap that created 
the Harmon fortune is turned into the coin of admittance to society. 
But in Dickens' complex world, poverty does not automatically equal 
goodness; goodness is a matter of what one does, and how one reacts, 
to wealth. There are plenty of eccentric Dickens characters in this 
series, including Silas Wegg, a one-legged blackmailer, and Jenny 
Wren, who sews dresses for dolls. There are the deliciously vile Lammles, 
each marrying the other for money only to find on their wedding day 
that they are both penniless. Yet Riah, a good Jew written to compensate 
for the stereotype of Fagin in ``Oliver Twist,'' has so small a role 
that his presence here is confusing (he befriends Lizzie). And Dickens' 
fans may be startled at the absence of Podsnap, the embodiment of 
small-minded, bourgeois selfishness to whom Dickens gave a chapter 
and a term, ``Podsnappery.'' Near the end, a dramatic attack leaves 
Eugene for dead. And though it wouldn't be Dickens without a sunny 
ending of some sort, there is not a touch of false sentiment in this 
hugely entertaining, tough-minded tale. After a dismal television 
season, ``Our Mutual Friend'' starts the new year on a high note that 
will be hard to match. PRODUCTION NOTES: `MASTERPIECE THEATER' `Charles 
Dickens' `Our Mutual Friend' ' PBS, Sunday night at 9 (Channel 13 
in New York) A three-part adaptation of Charles Dickens' last completed 
novel, to be shown on three consecutive evenings ending Tuesday. A 
production of BBC America and WGBH/Boston. Screenplay by Sandy Welch 
and directed by Julian Farino. Catherine Wearing, producer; Phillippa 
Giles and Michael Wearing, executive producers. Rebecca Eaton, series 
executive producer; Russell Baker, host. WITH: Paul McGann (Eugene 
Wrayburn), Anna Friel (Bella Wilfer), David Morrissey (Bradley Headstone), 
Steven Mackintosh (John Rokesmith and John Harmon), Keeley Hawes (Lizzie 
Hexam), Peter Vaughan ( Boffin), Pam Ferris (Mrs. Boffin), Kenneth 
Cranham (Silas Wegg), Katy Murphy (Jenny Wren), Dominic Mafham (Mortimer 
Lightwood), Anthony Calf (Alfred Lammle), Doon Mackichan (Sophronia 
Lammle), Cyril Shaps (Riah), David Schofield (Gaffer Hexam), Kenneth 
Cranham (Silas Wegg), Katy Murphy (Jenny Wren), Michael Culkin ( Veneering) 
and Rose English (Mrs. Veneering). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>