<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981231.0372 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Anita Hoffman, who aided and abetted her Yippie husband, Abbie Hoffman, 
in his anti-establishment protests and pranks and then sustained him 
through her letters during his years as a fugitive, died on Sunday 
at the age of 56. She had been suffering from breast cancer. Mrs. 
Hoffman had lived in Petaluma, Calif., where she sold rare books. 
Until shortly before her death she continued to advise actively on 
the production of ``Steal This Movie,'' a film produced by Robert 
Greenwald that is scheduled for release next summer. It is based on 
letters she had exchanged with her husband during the six years that 
he was sought by the FBI on charges of selling cocaine. The exchanges 
appeared in a book, ``To America With Love: Letters from the Underground,'' 
not long before Hoffman committed suicide at 52 in 1989. After the 
founder of the Yippie movement jumped bail in 1974, Mrs. Hoffman and 
her son, america, who was deliberately named with a lower case a, 
became the objects of constant FBI surveillance. For his part, Hoffman 
traveled in the United States and Europe and eventually settled with 
his companion, Johanna Lawrenson, in a remote hamlet in New York near 
the Thousand Islands, where under the name of Barry Freed he became 
an ecological activist campaigning to protect the St. Lawrence River. 
Fully aware of his relationship with Ms. Lawrenson, his wife wrote 
regularly and supportively, at one point helping him to find a psychiatrist 
to treat him for what was later described as schizophrenia and manic 
depression. The couple divorced after Hoffman surfaced in 1980 and 
served a short prison term, but Greenwald, who is also the director 
of the film, said, ``They always remained good and close friends, 
even after the romance had ended.'' They had met on Manhattan's Lower 
East Side in 1967. She, then still Anita Kushner, recently had received 
a master's degree in psychology and he was operating Liberty House, 
a store that sold the produce of rural blacks in Mississippi. Like 
him she had been active in civil rights groups and was thinking of 
ways to engage the hippies that were flocking to the Lower East Side 
in antiwar protest. As Abbie Hoffman was to write in his book, ``Soon 
to Be a Major Motion Picture,'' they had much in common. ``If I had 
been born a woman, I would have been Anita. Sometimes couples take 
50 years of living together to look and act alike; we began right 
off. The first night we spent together we fell in love. She was a 
born rascal.'' She reportedly helped plan and certainly witnessed 
her husband's first major piece of guerrilla theater when he and a 
group of blithe spirits burned money at the New York Stock Exchange. 
She was also with her husband during the huge antiwar protest in Washington 
in 1967 when Yippie formations encircled the Pentagon in an effort 
to levitate the building with incantations. She was with him in Chicago 
when street battles with police officers led to Hoffman's arrest and 
trial in the Chicago Seven Conspiracy trial. At one point Mrs. Hoffman 
went to Algeria to meet with Eldridge Cleaver in an attempt to forge 
a coalition between the anarchic Yippies and the militant Black Panthers. 
According to Marty Jezer, the author of a recent biography of Abbie 
Hoffman, she was shocked by Cleaver's misogynist behavior and fled 
his residence through a window. In 1971, she had a son. As many Americans, 
they notified the White House and duly received pro forma congratulations 
from the Nixons, a fact they gleefully announced through the press, 
even showing off the letter after the White House spokesman had denied 
the claim. From 1974 on, after Hoffman fled trial on drug charges, 
his wife raised their son on her own, leading a less prominent life. 
After working as an organizer of welfare recipients, she moved to 
the West Coast where she read scripts for Hollywood producers. In 
1970 she had written a novel about radicals of the period, called 
Trashing, using the pen name Ann Fettaman. She is survived by her 
son, an electrician who lives in North Carolina; her sister, Truusje 
Kushner, of the Los Angeles area, and her mother, Leah Kushner, of 
Laguna Hills, Calif. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>