<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981231.0327 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Twenty years ago, when he was chancellor of West Germany, Helmut Schmidt 
thought there would be a single European currency by the early 1980s. 
Instead, he is still carrying around six different kinds of money 
in his briefcase. ``I always have the German mark, English pounds, 
French francs, Swiss francs and Italian lire, plus American dollars, 
but I always end up just using credit cards,'' laughed Schmidt, who 
travels frequently as a publisher of the weekly newspaper Die Zeit. 
But as of January, he can write checks in euros, the common currency 
that 11 countries in the European Union are introducing, almost two 
decades later than he and other European leaders had planned. And 
three years from now, he will finally be able to put euro notes in 
his briefcase. The euro's launching is a particular point of pride 
for Schmidt and two other prominent European leaders, Valery Giscard 
d'Estaing, once president of France, and Sir Edward Heath, the former 
prime minister of Britain. The three men took some of the earliest 
steps toward a single currency, in the 1970s, and kept promoting the 
idea even when it lost its luster. ``It should have happened a lot 
earlier,'' said Schmidt, 80. Indeed, it could have, agreed Sir Edward, 
82, who negotiated the 1972 treaty that took Britain into the European 
Economic Community when he was prime minister. Later that year, he 
and other European leaders endorsed a plan devised by Pierre Werner, 
then the prime minister of Luxembourg, for a common European currency 
to combat the monetary instability caused by the collapse of the Bretton 
Woods system, which had been based on the dollar. ``We hoped then 
to have it done by 1980,'' he said, but the sharp rise in oil prices 
in 1973 derailed the project. Giscard d'Estaing, now 72, and Schmidt, 
friends from the days when both served as finance ministers, tried 
to get monetary union back on the rails over drinks in Schmidt's lakeside 
cottage north of here in 1978. They persuaded fellow European leaders 
to establish something called the European Currency Unit, expecting 
it to become coin of the European realm by the early 1980s, but it 
failed to speed the process. ``The delay was unnecessarily long,'' 
Giscard d'Estaing said in an interview in the French Parliament, ``and 
without wanting to be too severe, I think it was caused by indifference 
and to some extent lack of financial literacy on the part of the European 
leaders of the early 1980s. They did not ascribe the same importance 
to it as we did, and maybe they were hesitant to get into the technical 
details, so the system went into a kind of hibernation from 1981 to 
1988.'' Then, with the collapse of communism in 1989, French President 
Francois Mitterrand and German Chancellor Helmut Kohl pushed harder 
for the common currency again, partly to bind a reunited Germany more 
firmly into a new single European market. But even then, Prime Minister 
Margaret Thatcher and her successor, John Major, kept Britain out. 
And, Schmidt said, ``the central bank officials in the other countries 
did not want to lose their power so they invented a thousand conditions, 
but in the end the idea finally prevailed.'' ``If they'd only listened 
to us'' was the common refrain in separate interviews recently with 
these fathers of the euro as they fretted impatiently for the long-awaited 
birth. To listen to them now, a common currency, strengthening the 
unified market that came into its own in 1993 when the last customs 
and tariff barriers fell in the European Union, will finally give 
Europe the opportunity to become a global power. Heath harrumphed 
all reservations aside in an interview in his London pied-a-terre, 
near Eaton Square. ``There's no single market in the world without 
a single currency, not in Japan and certainly not in the United States,'' 
he said. ``Imagine what the United States would be now if each of 
the 50 states had its own currency!'' With new confidence in the stability 
of the economic and monetary policy of Europe, according to the these 
most enthusiastic of the euro's cheerleaders, dynamic growth could 
finally cure the Continent's chronic unemployment problem. And investors 
around the world, they say, may welcome a strong new currency that 
can diversify portfolios. That could weaken the dollar and force up 
interest rates in the United States, they concede, but they shrug 
that off almost as easily as most presidents since Richard M. Nixon 
have shrugged off the effects of U.S. monetary policy on smaller currencies. 
``America and Europe will continue to need each other into the 21st 
century,'' Schmidt said, ``but it remains to be seen whether the euro 
is good for the United States. Some governments will shift dollar-denominated 
assets into euro-denominated ones, which means the U.S. Treasury might 
have to pay higher interest rates to attract investors.'' Giscard 
d'Estaing, though, wishes the euro were not quite so strong at the 
start. ``The dollar at the moment is a little too weak,'' he said. 
``I have the feeling the American economy is slowing down a bit, and 
that the American authorities accept that. There will be a dynamic 
between the euro's spontaneous tendency to strengthen, and a monetary 
policy for the euro that will try to contain that tendency.'' The 
difference in views reflects longstanding divergence in German and 
French attitudes toward money. For Germany, a strong mark was a symbol 
a defeated nation could take pride in after the war, a fact Giscard 
d'Estaing said he had felt obliged to take into account when he and 
Schmidt devised their 1978 plan. ``For the Germans, the idea of abandoning 
the Deutsche mark, losing it, and entrusting it to a bank controlled 
by governments they did not feel as much confidence in as in their 
own independent central bank, was impossible,'' Giscard d'Estaing 
said. ``So independence for the European central bank was an essential 
core idea. ``The ease with which the Germans have accepted the end 
of the mark surprised me, and I think it surprised them too. The strict 
criteria, the requirement to cut budget deficits, the independence 
of the central bank in the plan, all had the merit of reassuring the 
Germans.'' The idea of a strong central bank found its way into the 
treaty that spelled out the final plan for the euro more than a decade 
later, though not quite the way Sir Edward would have preferred. Britain, 
alas, will not use the euro, at least at the start. ``Under our original 
plan, the City of London would have been the center of the whole deal,'' 
he said. Instead, he added, ``it all went to Frankfurt,'' where the 
new European Central Bank is located. All three leaders, with vivid 
memories of what World War II did to their countries, said they hoped 
monetary union would force the members of the European Union still 
closer, encouraging them to share sovereignty in foreign, military 
and domestic policies, not just economics. Schmidt, a junior officer 
in the Wehrmacht during the war, looked out of his corner office high 
over prosperous Hamburg, a city rebuilt on postwar trade with Britain 
and France, and remembered seeing it as a vast expanse of rubble and 
flames strewn with bodies after a huge raid by British and U.S. bombers 
in July 1943. ``I'll never forget it,'' he said. He and Giscard d'Estaing, 
who joined the French Resistance as a boy, were on opposite sides 
then, and both said French reconciliation with Germany is at the heart 
of modern Europe. ``I want the euro to be an instrument in the federative 
approach to Europe,'' Giscard d'Estaing said. ``The word `federative' 
is a French 18th-century word Montesquieu used. It means sharing power 
or competence.'' That is not the same at all, he added, as the English 
word ``federal,'' as in the ``federal European superstate'' so dreaded 
by Lady Thatcher. Schmidt said it was nonsense to think that a common 
currency would fail without a federal European state. ``Before 1914 
Europeans had one currency: gold,'' he said. ``Parities were fixed 
and did not change, and all countries followed the constraints that 
the system entailed.'' Heath, who fought Germans as a British artillery 
officer during the war, thinks his country's reserve is a historical 
mistake. ``I was the only one bold enough to do it,'' he huffed. British 
financial and stock markets, like the Continent's, will start dealing 
in euros in January, even though Prime Minister Tony Blair's Labor 
government, like its Conservative predecessor, wants to see how the 
euro works before Britain decides whether to give up the pound. Giscard 
d'Estaing said he thought the British attitude was entirely reasonable, 
but Heath disagreed. ``Ever since the 1950s, Britain has stood aside 
while all the European arrangements were made, so we had no influence 
on them, and then we decided to come in later,'' Heath lamented. Britain 
first started negotiations for European membership in 1961, but France's 
autocratic president, Charles de Gaulle, vetoed it two years later. 
His successor, Georges Pompidou, relented in 1972. ``Now we're back 
on the old path,'' said Heath. A previous engagement, he said, would 
keep him from coming to Hamburg on Jan. 6 for a delayed celebration 
of Schmidt's 80th birthday, which was Dec. 23. But Giscard d'Estaing 
said he would be there. ``We'll celebrate the arrival of the euro 
together,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>