<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981231.0311 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The e-mail messages arrived first in a trickle, then in a flood. Students 
at Pennsylvania State University were contacting their president, 
Graham Spanier, with a desperate plea in the fall semester: Create 
more classes in ballroom dancing. Nearly 1,500 undergraduates were 
languishing on dance-class waiting lists; on Friday nights, the ballroom 
dance club was overwhelmed trying to teach hundreds how to cha-cha 
and fox trot. After an emergency meeting in November, Spanier announced 
that in January, the number of ballroom dance classes at Penn State 
would rise to 48 from eight, increasing the number of slots to 1,440 
from 240. ``We are in a society that is increasingly impersonal and 
there is a need for a way to meet one another, to touch without immediate 
sex,'' said Spanier, a sociologist with a scholarly interest in interpersonal 
relations, in explaining why he moved with such speed. ``Ballroom 
dancing offers that.'' Across the United States, at Yale and Arizona 
State Universities, at the University of Wisconsin and San Diego State 
University, partner dancing, both traditional ballroom and swing, 
is sweeping campuses. Kay Teague, vice president of the youth college 
network of the U.S. Amateur Ballroom Dancers Association, said the 
rise was so sudden and so fierce that it was not yet possible to know 
the exact numbers. ``Put it this way,'' Ms. Teague said, ``five years 
ago there were dozens of schools with hundreds of students doing ballroom 
dance. Today there are hundreds of schools with thousands and thousands 
of dancers. In the Washington, D.C., area alone we have gone from 
one school, Catholic University, with 20 to 30 dancers to five schools 
with 2,000 dancers.'' And while fads, fed by trend setters on the 
two coasts and popular movies, are nothing new on campuses, scholars 
say that in the era of AIDS, this is a phenomenon worthy of a close 
look. ``We may be moving back to the medieval notion of romance, love 
that is unrequited,'' suggested Geoffrey Godbey, professor of leisure 
studies at Penn State. ``These dances provide sensuality and imagination. 
But, like Web pornography or phone sex, they are safe.'' It is the 
structured nature of the male-female relationship in ballroom dancing, 
the courting rituals and prescribed steps that have drawn the attention 
of analysts. They also note other aspects: the strenuousness of the 
dances for a generation that knows the importance of exercise, and 
the desire by some for social graces to serve as a divider in a country 
where class distinctions are blurred. Noncredit etiquette courses 
are also on the rise on some campuses. Finally, college officials 
say, anything that competes with binge drinking, the current plague 
of college campuses, should be encouraged. ``I see it as a kind of 
continuation of kids' soccer leagues, increasingly structured social 
interaction,'' said Craig Bradley, dean of student affairs at Bowdoin 
College in Maine, which is also experiencing a surge in ballroom and 
swing dancing. ``During the first year in college it is so important 
to feel like you belong, have a group,'' Bradley said. ``If it isn't 
happening, drinking fills that void. The conventions around dating 
fell away in recent decades. I have students come in and say they 
want intimate relations but don't know how to get there. Ballroom 
dancing is one answer.'' The trend also seems to be a middle-class 
revenge against the formlessness of popular dance that began in the 
early 1960s when Chubby Checker's twist sent partner dancing packing. 
Dancing, for millenniums a form of social glue, deteriorated in the 
1960s into group chaos against a background of loud, pulsating rhythms 
and nervous two-step hugging to slower songs. As Laura Kelso, an 18-year-old 
Penn State freshman from Greensburg, Pa., put it in describing her 
interest in the new swing dance club here, ``Dancing in high school 
was either flailing around or slow dances without steps. People need 
some kind of structure, some form of socialization.'' In the Penn 
State ballroom dance classes, held in several large gymnasiums with 
pale green walls, exposed pipes and worn wooden floors, that is precisely 
what may be observed. There are no smart-alecks here, said Elizabeth 
Hanley, the teacher with nearly four decades of experience. Here are 
tomorrow's stalwarts in all forms, the smoothly decorous, the knobby-jointed 
and the floppy-footed, content to be addressed as ``ladies and gentlemen.'' 
``It is always good to know how to dance,'' said Jeffrey Ellis, a 
rangy 22-year-old from Pittsburgh just finishing an accounting degree. 
His skilled dance partner, Cara Chieffallo, also a 22-year-old future 
accountant from Pittsburgh and a natural with the tango, added, ``I 
always like a guy who knows how to dance.'' The course they are in, 
which fulfills their physical education requirement, is taught by 
Ms. Hanley and her husband, Patrick Kolivosky. Together, they say, 
they teach not only dance but also posture, grace and self-confidence. 
``If you stand up straight like that here on the dance floor, why 
not hold that posture for your next job interview?'' Kolivosky said. 
The specifics of the course involve moves like the fox trot Westchester 
step: basic box, quarter turns, lady's turn, dip and two turns, Bolero 
break, weave and conversation pivot. The other dances include the 
waltz, polka, tango and swing. The current generation of swing dance 
has much international influence, especially Latin American. The international 
element seems especially significant on some campuses. At Ohio State 
University, for example, the dance club, which two years ago drew 
about 100 students each week and now draws about 300, is heavily Asian 
and Asian-American. ``This is a structured, legitimate way for young 
people to meet, and that can be especially important for foreigners,'' 
said Dr. Robert Rodgers, the club's adviser and a professor of education 
and psychology. Gail Stentiford, assistant director for recreation 
at New York University, said ballroom and swing dance had so taken 
over her program that she had to cancel a rock 'n' roll dance class 
for lack of interest. Ms. Stentiford, too, noticed the interest among 
foreign students. ``It's a wonderful melting pot,'' she said, ``with 
different cultures bringing different techniques to the floor.'' Ms. 
Stentiford said she was struck by the contrast with the 1960s. ``Safe 
sex has translated for many today into no sex,'' she said. ``I'm a 
creature of the 1960s, the days of free love, and, let me tell you, 
these kids are scared. But these dances can be very sensuous, and 
they become physical with one another in a nonsexual way that is romantic, 
a throwback to the 1930s. We're going back to courtly love. We have 
to because of AIDS.'' ``In the '60s,'' Ms. Stentiford continued, ``dancing 
became strange with everyone looking at themselves in the mirror saying, 
`Aren't I sexy?' ``Today, with ballroom dancing, it is like each person 
is the frame of the other's picture. One creates a space, and the 
other goes in and out. It's a whole other world but it's beautiful.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>