<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981231.0374 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Police and fire investigators Thursday safely removed an assortment 
of bomb-making materials, including 250 pounds of the type of fertilizer 
used in the Oklahoma City bombing, from a Pacific Gas and Electric 
Co. service center and took an employee of the company into custody. 
Police spokesman Sherman Ackerson said that the man, 44, who works 
out of the service center in the city's Mission district, told investigators 
about a storage facility a few blocks away, where they found more 
bomb-making materials. The materials were removed, but the officer 
would not specify what they were. The man's home also was searched, 
but Ackerson said he did not know the results of that search. Police 
did not release the name of the suspect. ``He obviously has a lot 
of charges hanging over his head,'' Ackerson said. ``But we cannot 
speculate as to why he was in possession of these materials.'' He 
said police had no other suspects. The substances found at the service 
center included five 50-pound bags of ammonium nitrate _ the fertilizer 
that was combined with fuel oil to make the 4,800-pound bomb that 
killed 168 people in the Oklahoma City Federal Building in 1995 _ 
and a 33-gallon drum of calcium nitrate. At least one book about bomb-making 
was also found at the scene, Ackerson said. He said the materials 
were discovered when an employee noticed a puddle of water on a basement 
floor. An inspector traced the water to an employee locker on the 
first floor of the building. Inside the locker were the bags of ammonium 
nitrate, leaking because they had been frozen and were thawing. Neither 
the police nor the company would say whether the locker belongs to 
the suspect. The utility company employees notified firefighters stationed 
across the street, who in turn alerted the police department. The 
FBI and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms also joined the 
investigation, and bomb-sniffing dogs were brought in. In a larger 
locker on the second floor, police found broken flares, fuses, blasting 
caps, the calcium nitrate and information on how to make bombs. Ackerson 
said the frozen material was a concern because bomb makers sometimes 
mix chemicals, then freeze the potentially dangerous mixtures to stabilize 
them. Pacific Gas and Electric spokesman Scott Blakey said the facility 
houses 115 employees. Police evacuated the two-story building, as 
well as 120 employees from a neighboring Pacific Gas building. By 
midafternoon Thursday the employees had returned to work, and the 
fire department's hazardous material crew prepared to remove the chemicals 
from the site. Blakey said he had no information connecting the discovery 
of the materials to any threats against the company. He also said 
that all employees are required to wear photo identification cards, 
and that other security measures are in place. The company has been 
the target of saboteurs in the past. In October 1997, a third of San 
Francisco suffered a power outage after someone deliberately turned 
dozens of knobs on a bank of controls at an electrical substation. 
Investigators said in a subsequent investigation that the vandal would 
have needed to be familiar with the facility's operation. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>