<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981231.0316 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Two months after a hurricane mauled this country, it is still unclear 
how many Hondurans died in the storm, but the government has been 
forced to retreat from its earlier conclusion that at least 7,000 
people perished. Officials here acknowledge that their initial death 
tolls, gathered from panicked local officials in the chaotic days 
just after the storm passed, were riddled with inaccuracies. In some 
cases, local officials assumed that hundreds had died because entire 
neighborhoods had been destroyed, but later learned that the vast 
majority of villagers in those places had sought higher ground and 
had survived. In early December, the government cut its official death 
toll from the storm by close to a quarter _ from 7,007 down to 5,657 
_ and suspended the governor of Santa Barbara Province for allegedly 
inflating the casualty numbers in that state. The accuracy of even 
the smaller figure is in doubt, however, because it includes at least 
2,600 deaths reported by distraught family members but never confirmed, 
said the man in charge of the government's numbers, Arturo Corrales. 
Even the 3,000 confirmed deaths were not based on a body count. The 
hurricane moved across Honduras in late October and early November, 
dumping record amounts of rain as it disintegrated and causing widespread 
flooding across the country. Though the winds quickly abated, floods 
and landslides wiped away parts of many towns and villages and severed 
communications and wrecked the road network. With journalists raising 
questions about the death toll and with international donors pumping 
hundreds of millions of dollars in disaster relief into Honduras, 
President Carlos Flores has ordered a review of all damages attributed 
to the storm. Problems with counting the victims of natural disasters 
are common in Third World countries, where many local officials are 
poorly trained and illiterate. More than 250 medical and engineering 
students have been enlisted for the review and are being trained to 
conduct a survey in the worst-hit towns. With help from United Nations 
human rights workers and equipment provided by the United States, 
the students are fanning out in small groups to try to compile accurate 
assessments not only of deaths but also of damage to crops, roads 
and bridges, officials said. Flores has promised that they will complete 
the survey and that the government will produce an accurate count 
by mid-January. In mid-December, the mayors of small towns and villages 
were called to emergency meetings in regional capitals to discuss 
the death toll. The government has ordered these officials to compile 
new lists of the dead and missing, complete with identification numbers 
and names. ``We want to straighten the numbers out because there is 
no excuse not to have the right numbers anymore,'' said Col. Jorge 
Andino Almendares, who is overseeing the government relief operation 
in the northeastern part of the country, one of the hardest-hit areas, 
after meeting Dec. 16 with more than 40 local mayors in San Pedro 
Sula. ``Today we asked for the names of the dead. It has to go down 
to the village level.'' But even in the absence of a complete study, 
it has become clear that the initial estimates of the dead were not 
supported by a count of bodies. In the municipality of El Progreso, 
for instance, in Yoro Province, local officials at first reported 
that at least 100 people had died in floods and landslides in their 
jurisdiction, which includes about 54 villages along the Ulua River. 
That figure is still being used in the official tally for the northern 
region that military officials are keeping at the disaster relief 
headquarters in San Pedro Sula. But in recent interviews, disaster 
officials in El Progreso conceded that the figure had been just a 
rough estimate. They said they had confirmed 17 deaths at the most 
_ 9 members of one family who were buried on a remote hillside in 
the town of Las Minas and 8 people drowned in various places in the 
district. ``It's a lie,'' Oscar Ardon, the president of the federation 
of local village leaders in the region, said of the 100 figure. Janet 
Caseres, director of the local community development office in El 
Progreso, explained that in the early days of the storm, officials 
assumed that almost everyone reported missing was dead. ``We have 
at least 105 missing people,'' she said. ``But we don't know if they 
are in some other place or they are buried here.'' Mrs. Caseres said 
that many parts of the El Progreso district are still cut off because 
of impassable roads and that it was possible the death toll would 
rise again before all was said and done. Nelly Soliman de Anariva, 
the president of the emergency committee in El Progreso, insisted 
that at least 27 deaths had been confirmed and that 63 more people 
were missing, though she could not explain the discrepancy between 
her numbers and those provided by the group of village leaders. ``We 
are now starting a program to find out how many deaths there were 
by village,'' she said. ``The exact figure is not known at this time.'' 
Just south of El Progreso, in the hamlet of Guacamaya, early unconfirmed 
reports were that at least 70 people had died when a third of the 
community, about 82 houses, was buried in mud and sand during a flood. 
But the residents of the destroyed section of the village appeared 
a day later, said the local community leader, Juan Garcia. ``When 
I saw the destruction, I thought everyone was dead,'' Garcia said, 
though he denied ever reporting to his superiors that 70 people had 
died. ``It was terrible. I knew that if they hadn't gone to the hills, 
they were dead.'' ``It's a miracle that we didn't have any deaths 
here,'' he added. ``I can't really explain it.'' In one village in 
Santa Barbara, the mayor reported just after the storm that dozens 
of people had died, after seeing that an entire section of the town 
had been washed away, but most of the residents returned a day later. 
It turned out there were no deaths at all in the village, officials 
in the national capital now say. The appointed governor of Santa Barbara, 
Lucila Esperanza Barahona de Castro, was suspended in early December 
after investigators could verify only about 282 of the 1,159 deaths 
she reported in the province. Corrales, an engineer who was drafted 
by the government just after the storm to compile figures, said from 
the beginning that statisticians in Tegucigalpa, the national capital, 
had trouble checking the accuracy of the information that was coming 
in from remote regions. Roads were out. Telephone lines were down. 
And many of the figures for dead and missing, he said, were being 
compiled by untrained community leaders in small villages. Many of 
the reports arrived in suspiciously round numbers _ 100 here, 900 
there. ``You have to understand we were dealing with people who can't 
read or write,'' he said in an interview in mid-December. ``We decided 
every piece of information was better than nothing,'' he added, referring 
to the initial estimates. Corrales also said there appeared to be 
a big overlap between the figures for those counted as missing and 
the dead. In some cases, the numbers submitted were identical. He 
said he had directed the staff of engineers digesting the numbers 
to assume that all the dead were also being counted as missing, usually 
the larger number. In each case, they added the figures together and 
divided by two to get what they thought was an accurate estimate of 
the dead. Using this method, he said, the death toll at one point 
in the days just after the hurricane rose to almost 8,000, though 
the government never put out a figure of more than 7,000. The death 
toll was always based on reported deaths, Corrales said, not on body 
counts. But as missing people began to appear in the days after the 
storm subsided, many did not report to the local authorities, so that 
information was never passed along to the capital, he said. At present, 
Corrales said, the government has about 3,000 people reported dead 
by credible authorities like a mayor, a local official or a police 
officer. In some cases, the bodies were found, but in many cases the 
bodies were either washed out to sea or buried in mud from flooding 
or landslides. About 2,600 more people have been reported dead by 
family members or untrained local officials. But he said that in addition 
to the 5,600 the government believes have died, at least 8,000 people 
have been reported missing. He said he believed that when the final 
study was done, the death toll would be fairly close to the 7,000 
figure his office put out earlier. He acknowledged, however, that 
a complete study was needed to resolve the inaccuracies. ``It's my 
responsibility,'' Corrales said. ``I'm pretty sure the numbers are 
not going to change.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>