<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981231.0416 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
They are as different as the games they play. They sit side by side 
on the motor coach rumbling down the Garden State Parkway, the 75-year-old 
widower who travels here to shoot craps all night, up to five times 
a week, and the 53-year-old woman with a Jamaican accent who dabbles 
in slots a few times a year on days off from her job sorting medical 
records at a local hospital. There is Molly Kessert, 72, who likes 
to view her weekly trips to the jacks-or-better video poker machines 
as sport rather than addiction. And Annette Topolanski, 52, who plays 
pai gow poker because it's slow, taking all afternoon to drain her 
pockets. And then there's Nick. He is on the bus four times a week 
from his home in Bensonhurst, Brooklyn, to the poker room at the Taj 
Mahal, which feels like a private club as Scott, the dealer, shakes 
his hand, and Larry, the waiter, slaps his back. ``I like to play, 
win or lose,'' said Nick, a 59-year-old divorced man on disability 
who spoke on the condition that his last name not be used. ``It doesn't 
make any difference. The reason is to kill time.'' These are the day-trippers, 
lured by freebies and shuttled en masse down the asphalt ribbons of 
New Jersey's highways, where three similar buses filled with similar 
people crashed in separate accidents over the last week, killing eight 
and injuring dozens more. All three crashes are still being investigated. 
Some driven by addiction, others by boredom, one in three visitors 
to Atlantic City arrives this way, with an average of 1,114 buses 
pouring into the resort daily, ferrying a total of 9,492,238 passengers 
through November 1998. Most are ``line buses,'' like this one, which 
snakes through immigrant neighborhoods in Brooklyn, picking up people 
like Nick at bagel joints, smoke shops and candy stores before the 
morning commute and dropping them off way after dark. With a scarce 
local population nearby but the big cities of New York, Philadelphia, 
Baltimore and Washington all a day-trip away, Atlantic City relies 
more on the bus business than any other casino market. At the Taj, 
the stable of bus bays looks like the Port Authority terminal in Manhattan 
as the coaches line up nose to nose and a ``greeter'' from the casino 
hops aboard to give each passenger coupons, chips or coins. ``It's 
the mainstay, it's the basic market, it's America,'' said William 
Thompson, an economics professor who studies gambling at the University 
of Nevada. ``Some of them become addicted, but I think they become 
addicted more to the bus ride and the socialization. It beats sitting 
at home and watching `Oprah.''' The casino-bus concept dates to 1957, 
when William Harrah arranged charters to Reno from 31 cities in California 
and Nevada. But it has been perfected in Atlantic City, where gambling 
was legalized in 1978 and casinos compete fiercely for the bus market, 
offering passengers free food, free taffy, even free money to get 
them to stop at their door first. Nosher, a grimy convenience store 
at the corner of 82nd Street and Flatlands Avenue in Brooklyn, offers 
tickets for at least a dozen different buses a day. On SGS Tours Bus 
No. 853 on Wednesday, riders paid $22 round trip and could choose 
between getting off at the Sands, where they received $20, and the 
Taj Mahal, where they got $17. (Sometimes people take the $20 from 
the Sands and walk the seven blocks to the fancier Taj.) The drive 
each way, including half a dozen stops for pickups and drop-offs, 
took about three and a half hours; players got seven hours in the 
casino. With tolls and gasoline, it is cheaper to ride the bus from 
New York to Atlantic City than to drive. Consider cataracts, which 
inhibit night driving, and speeding tickets, and the bus sounds convenient 
to would-be gamblers, especially the older ones. They even show movies 
on board. (On Wednesday, it was Ricki Lake in ``Mrs. Winterbourne'' 
on the way down and Robin Williams in ``The Birdcage'' for the trip 
home.) ``I used to drive, but I have a little heart condition, so 
I don't put stress on myself,'' said Sam Denino, who makes the trip 
about twice a month with his wife of 47 years, Millie. ``You're at 
an age, you're over 60, you've got to get out of the house. You need 
a diversion. I can only garden so much. I can only fix the house so 
much.'' Elderly retirees fill most of the seats on the Atlantic City 
buses. At 2 p.m. at the Taj, there is a line of older women waiting 
at the water fountain to take their pills. For lonely widows, the 
trips provide a much-needed day out, often including a walk in the 
fresh air of the Boardwalk. But what starts as an innocent hobby can 
easily become an addictive, savings-draining habit. The crapshooter 
on Bus 853 spoke only on the condition that he not be named, and the 
embarrassment is not surprising. The 75-year-old widower started playing 
dice when Las Vegas first opened in the 1940s, once came home with 
$15,000 in his pocket and gifts for everybody. On Wednesday, he was 
up $1,000 at one point, but went home $1,100 in the hole. He goes 
to Atlantic City a couple of times a month with the ``kids'' _ he 
has four children, 10 grandchildren and two great-grandchildren _ 
or his buddies from the Knights of Columbus. In between, he goes alone, 
on the bus, sometimes every single day. ``My trouble is I don't get 
up and walk away,'' he admitted. ``I used to go to shows. I used to 
sleep overnight. Now, I get a room _ I don't sleep anyway. I'm downstairs 
playing while everyone else is up there.'' Mrs. Kessert is much more 
upbeat about the situation, but she knows that she, too, may have 
a problem. In the morning on the ride down, she talks of video poker 
as therapy _ stimulating, a little like playing bridge as you decide 
what to keep and what to toss. In the casino, as she pumps the quarters 
into the machine and punches the bright red ``payout'' button with 
gusto every time she gets two pairs, Mrs. Kessert is resigned to the 
monotony. ``Sometimes, you have to get up,'' she said as five hopelessly 
unmatched cards flashed onto the video screen. Then, three kings! 
Fifteen quarters jangled out. ``Sometimes,'' she added, ``it doesn't 
pay to get up.'' Later, after a meal of Maryland crab cakes, a baked 
potato and soup, complimentary because of her volume of play, Mrs. 
Kessert makes her way back to the bus, her bag $250 lighter, her smile 
only slightly so. ``I used to come every week,'' she sighed. ``Maybe 
I'll take intermission one week. I think I am addicted. If I don't 
go that week, I don't feel good.'' But for every Molly Kessert there 
is a Jim Lunenfeld, who talks more of the buffet at the Sands, where 
he can pile Peking duck, orecchiette and mac-and-cheese on the same 
plate, than of the gaming tables. Lunenfeld, a teacher who visits 
the homes of emotionally and physically troubled students, is here 
with his 21-year-old son, Joel. They ate at the Sands, took a long 
walk on the Boardwalk, and each dropped $20 on the slots. Lunenfeld's 
friend, Peter Cruciata, also a teacher, lost $40 during about four 
hours playing poker. ``It's a one-day vacation, the cheapest one-day 
vacation you can have,'' said Cruciata, who learned to play poker 
in his native Italy at age 5, using buttons instead of chips. ``Most 
of all, I play for fun. I don't bet my paycheck. I'm able to be objective: 
OK, I'm down $50, kiss goodbye to the machine, kiss goodbye to the 
table. We don't have to lose it all.'' Two sisters, Sylvia Anderson, 
43, and Faye Glynn, 48, left their husbands at home and took the bus 
to Atlantic City for an overnight getaway. They played cards with 
each other in the hotel room, but, in the casino, dared only the machines. 
``This is a nice little time for me to relax,'' Mrs. Anderson, who 
is a secretary for a dean at Brooklyn College, explained on the way 
home. ``It's hectic at school. When I go home, it's hectic. I need 
to relax. ``When you win money,'' she said, ``then you really relax.'' 
Bus 853 was eerily empty Wednesday, with just a dozen of the 57 seats 
filled on the way to Atlantic City and four more on the way back to 
Brooklyn. Passengers and the veteran driver, Milton Hobbs, and company 
representatives figured it was partly because of the coming New Year's 
Eve holiday, a big night in casinos everywhere, and partly because 
of the grim weather forecast. But they knew, also, that the news of 
the accidents had most likely kept many away. The deadly crash happened 
on Christmas Eve, when a bus run by the same company, SGS Tours, spun 
out of control and tumbled down an embankment, throwing passengers 
through the window. The driver has told police that he swerved to 
avoid an icy patch, and investigators are also looking into mechanical 
problems with the bus and whether the driver was speeding. The other 
two accidents came as a frightening coincidence, but were much less 
severe. A busload of 30 people from Chinatown on their way home from 
a concert by a Hong Kong entertainer ran into a tree last Sunday morning; 
the next day, a bus carrying 27 people to the casinos crashed into 
a bridge abutment off the Garden State Parkway. ``God should watch 
us,'' Mrs. Kessert said, to nobody in particular, as she got on the 
bus at about 8 Wednesday morning at a Manhattan Bagel in Canarsie, 
Brooklyn. As they cruised home, Denino pointed out the exit where 
the bus in the fatal crash went down a week before. Hobbs, the driver 
_ who has been ferrying busloads to Atlantic City since the casinos 
opened two decades ago _ made an announcement over the public address 
system wishing the injured, and the relatives of the dead, a peaceful 
New Year in their time of sadness. In the darkness, the strangers 
sat side by side, nodding agreement and offering condolences. Then, 
impromptu, they fell silent for a moment. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>