<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981231.0365 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The finance industry had a turbulent year, with sharp swings in stock 
and bond markets and the spreading global financial crisis threatening 
America's long bull market. But in the end, major U.S. investment 
banks did more business and earned more money than ever, and the hierarchy 
of Wall Street banks remained as solid as the limestone portico of 
the New York Stock Exchange. A robust first six months of the year 
and a racing finish compensated for the near shut-down of financial 
markets in the July-September quarter, according to statistics released 
Thursday by Securities Data Co. Investment banks underwrote $1.82 
trillion in new stocks and bonds, an increase of about 40 percent 
over 1997. The underwriting docket was heavily skewed toward bonds 
this year, which rose 44 percent as companies and government agencies 
took advantage of record low interest rates. U.S. stocks sales slumped 
almost 10 percent, with the market drying up in the second half of 
the year. The ardor among companies worldwide to acquire one another 
grew to unprecedented levels. Investment banks advised companies on 
mergers and acquisition deals valued at $2.5 trillion, up by almost 
half from 1997. Overall, despite the shock induced by Russia's financial 
meltdown in August, many Wall Street firms are on course to earn as 
much or more than they did last year, which set records for most firms. 
Bankers say they are now hopeful that the late summer scare _ and 
the layoffs that followed _ were more an aberration than a foreshadowing 
of tough times. But the optimism is subdued. ``We dodged a bullet,'' 
said Jeffrey Weiss, a managing director and the global head of fixed-income 
syndication at Lehman Brothers. ``But there are still some unresolved 
issues in the world _ Brazil, Asia and Russia. Everyone is starting 
off a bit more cautious than we were last year.'' The year's turmoil 
did not rock the rankings of top investment banks. Merrill Lynch &AMP; 
Co., Morgan Stanley Dean Witter &AMP; Co., Goldman Sachs &AMP; Co., 
Citigroup's Salomon Smith Barney and Lehman Brothers earned the most 
fees and underwrote the most stocks and bonds, as they did in the 
previous year. But Merrill, Morgan and Goldman dominated the most 
lucrative investment banking businesses, including initial public 
offerings of stock and advising on mergers. One half of all first-time 
stock offerings by American companies last year were brought to market 
by Morgan, Merrill or Goldman. Even more impressive, those three investment 
banks advised one side or the other in nine out of every 10 worldwide 
mergers and acquisitions by dollar value. ``The top three are continuing 
to pull away and gain market share,'' said Raphael Soifer, brokerage 
industry analyst for Brown Brothers Harriman. ``In tougher times, 
clients tend to gravitate to the bigger firms. That makes it tougher 
for their competitors to break into the super bulge bracket category.'' 
Still, there were some warning signs even for the biggest firms. Investment 
banks continue to see their overall profit margins shrink. The fees 
they disclosed totaled $8.8 billion for the year, but the pace of 
increase, at 2.5 percent, slipped well behind the growth in underwriting. 
That reflects the running battle among banks to be part of big underwriting 
deals, with competition for market share sometimes eating into profits. 
Indeed, the quarterly rankings of investment banks, known in the industry 
as the league tables, can be misleading. Bankers acknowledge privately 
that they lose money underwriting half to as much as two-thirds of 
the high-grade bonds they work on. They justify these loss leaders 
as good advertising and as a way to please big clients. Similarly, 
many of the top merger advisory deals require relatively little work 
and generate small fees, but can propel advisers high up the league 
tables. Merrill Lynch retained its title as the high-volume underwriter 
of stock and bonds, increasing its total market share to almost 17 
percent from 16 percent the year before with $356 billion in sales. 
Salomon Smith Barney arranged $249 billion for second place, buoyed 
in part by WorldCom Inc.'s $6 billion bond sale, the world's largest. 
Merrill held its top spot despite falling into the red in the third 
quarter, largely because it suffered losses in emerging markets and 
trading bonds. As a result, Merrill laid off nearly 5 percent of its 
work force. In mergers, Goldman dominated the advisory business worldwide 
_ and substantially increased its market share. Goldman advised on 
$960 billion in deals, or about 38 percent of all those announced. 
Merrill beat out Morgan Stanley, last year's number two, for the second 
spot. Merrill advised companies involved in 26 percent of all announced 
deals. Morgan Stanley had a role in just under 26 percent. The market 
for initial public offerings cooled dramatically this year, a direct 
result of global financial turmoil. The number of new companies brought 
to market in the United States fell to 372 from 630, and the value 
of those deals declined by about 15 percent from the year-ago levels. 
The tougher market _ which hit technology and health-care companies 
especially hard _ dislodged Goldman from its pedestal as the largest 
underwriter of new issues. Morgan Stanley took top billing, with a 
21 percent market share. Morgan underwrote Conoco Inc.'s $4.4 billion 
public offering. Merrill was close behind and Goldman was third. Other 
major firms solidified their leads in niche markets. Lehman, for example, 
has a commanding market share in mortgage- and asset-backed securities. 
It increased its slice of that market to 15 percent this year from 
12.7 percent last year. Donaldson, Lufkin &AMP; Jenrette did likewise 
in the market for high-yield bonds, also known as junk bonds, which 
are considered the most lucrative fixed-income business. The firm 
increased its share of that market to nearly 15 percent from 12 percent 
a year ago. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>