<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981231.2000.2537 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
All through the year, we've been struck by how many stories set overseas 
could be taken place right here in the United States. Just the dateline 
and couple of names and you could be listening to a report from around 
the block. This next story is an example. It might remind you of any 
number of stories about Native Americans seeking the return of their 
ancestors remains from museums and universities, but the dateline 
here is Helsinki and the indigenous people pressing for the return 
of their ancestors remains are the Sami of Finland. The BBC's Martin 
Stock prepared our story. Both themes are there and we have several 
long bonds and also the hip bone. There's a small bag where we have 
tiny little bones. In this large cabinet in Helsinki University in 
Finland, Dr. Helenor Rantor is looking through hundreds of boxes of 
human remains. She and a colleague, Professor Mekal Protarios, are 
responsible for deciding this collection's fate. There are 1200 skulls 
here alone. They're mostly Finnish, but there are also the skeletal 
remains of 150 indigenous Sami people who lived in the 18th Century 
in Finnish Lapland. Those bones, they belong to our people and we 
know this and really do not understand very well the reason that they 
even were brought from here. So, we think that we have the right to 
get them back. Dr. Ikio is the leader of the Sami Parliament in Finland. 
Most of the Sami bones were taken in the 1930's from an abandoned 
graveyard on Ineri in Lapland. The collectors had authority from the 
government in Helsinki, but no approval from local Sami people. They 
dug up the bones anyway. Now, Peca Ikio says it's time that they were 
returned. There's something missing if the sacred places are empty, 
if the graveyards are empty, if the bodies or bones, skeletons have 
been removed from our graveyards. The culture is not a whole entity 
if the sole important thing is missing like bones and skeletons. Most 
Sami people today are Lutherans. It's likely those taken from their 
graves were, too. But, Peca Ikio says many Sami people still hold 
some of the ancient shaman beliefs about the afterlife. Sami people 
taught that the spirit of that person may be wonders. It can be wondering 
inside of a fish, or inside a bird, or inside a bear, or in whatsoever 
animal, but the remains stay well left in the sacred place. So, by 
taking these remains out of the.. So, the spirit could never find 
its proper place and so the spirit should be condemn to wonder forever. 
The University at Helsinki says it's prepared to return the Sami bones, 
but first it wants to fully catalog the collections. Helenor Rentor, 
who's helping organize the bones, is a forensic scientist, and says 
this collection still has great scientific and historic potential. 
Bones can tell a lot. They can tell about diseases. They can about 
what these people- I mean if they were starving or anything like that. 
What kind of diet they had and the question is whether we can listen 
to them. Professor Protarios is reluctant to see the Sami bones reburied, 
but prepared to accept the decision of the Sami people. He believes 
they should be kept together as collection for the Sami people. The 
alternative is obviously not to rebury the skeletons, to create a 
dignified collection that might be available to future generations, 
especially generations of the Sami themselves who may find an osteric 
sense of group and history and perhaps a dignity increases. That they 
actually want evidence of their physical properties and relationships 
in history. For The World, this is Martin Stock. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>