<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981231.2000.0636 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
China today blasted a congressional report that concluded that high 
technology deals with Beijing have damaged US national security. China's 
foreign minister spokesman called the study "groundless and irresponsible". 
Congress began it's inquiry six months ago, but the story began in 
1995 and '96 when Chinese rockets carrying US made satellite exploded. 
The Chinese government began an investigation and it listed the help 
of the two American companies who made the satellites, Hughes Electronics 
and Loreal Space and Communications. Allegations arose that while 
helping China troubleshoot the problem, the two companies transferred 
sensitive technology to the Chinese government. Yesterday's congressional 
report charges that such cooperation has compromise American military 
secrets. The White House has yet to see the report, but as The World's 
Jeb Sharp explains the administration is taking the matter seriously. 
Administrations officials say the United States hasn't authorize the 
transfer of any military technology to China since the Tinnamen Square 
crack down of 1989. They insists any transgression of US policy happened 
without their knowledge. There's a variety of opinions about the kind 
of threat China poses for the United States. James Movenan of the 
Rand Corporation believes China's a long way from being able to put 
whatever that is gained to military use, but that could change. We 
may be talking 20 to 25 years out. There are fundamental structural 
conflicts between the United States and China that cannot simply be 
resolved by having summits. At a certain level as Chinese power expands, 
they see their position in Asia as a zero sum game with us to the 
extent to which their regional presence grows it will have to be at 
our expense, so there's a point of conflict. And the clearest example 
of that is Taiwan. But, Movenan worries that despite the important 
information contained in the congressional report it could end up 
as more ammunition in Washington's current political battle. I'm not 
sanguine about the national security problems posed by Chinese acquisitions 
of high technology in the United States. But my fear is that these 
allegations will not be dealt with seriously and soberly, but instead 
will become political hand grenades for lobbying at the executive 
branch. Other experts are less worried about the reports effect on 
domestic politics than it's effect on US/China relations. Dates Gayle 
of the Brookings Institution worries about its effect on trade with 
China. He says it naive to think the United States can completely 
seal off its military know-how from Beijing. Simply because increasingly 
militarily relevant technology is drawn from openly traded, legitimately 
traded commercial technologies. And so as this trend increases and 
as globalization becomes more and more a fact of international trading 
life, then these types of problems of technology transfer, which may 
be sensitive in a military respect, but are nevertheless legitimately 
commercially traded, will become more and more of a problem. Gayle 
favors stricter export controls, but he thinks it's even more important 
to improve intelligence and monitoring capabilities, so the United 
States can track how China is using the technology. That way trade 
ties can remain strong, but any misuse of technology could be punished. 
As one senior US government official points out there are no black 
and white answers here. Almost any truck, telephone, computer, or 
satellite could be put to military use. The question is will it be. 
For The World, I'm Jeb Sharp. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>