<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981231.2000.2898 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
I'm Lisa Mullins. One of the delights American music lovers have treasured 
in 1998 was the wealth of Cuban styles that have made it to this country. 
Much of it was traditional music the Cubans have enjoyed for generations, 
but that politics had kept from American ears. The World's Marco Wordman 
met one of the keepers of the Cuban flame, who's fiery music became 
available in the United States just this year. Down in Cuba the name 
Isaac Overdo was to the Trace guitar and song-writing what Louis Armstrong 
was to the trumpet and Jazz singing. This number, "Tal Jose" is one 
of the late Isaac Overdo's composition performed here by his son. 
That's Isaac Overdo's son, Gieberto, better known as "Poppy". He's 
carrying on the family tradition of the Trace, a three-stringed guitar 
in which each string is doubled, and the song an Afro-Cuban style 
who rhythm is the most influential element of Latin American dance 
music. To attend a Poppy Overdo concert is to be transported to another 
time before political embargoes of Cuba, before Cuban cigars became 
sexy. But, the passing of time has also seen Poppy Overdo's own music 
evolve. Let me explain, before I play what I perform these days I 
was playing other things. I mean I will always play with an ensemble, 
like Concerto Bolero and my father's group Estranga Colata, but in 
the early days the song, the roots music we continue to play was much 
more acoustic more stripped down. In my group, when I use horns abase, 
but we're careful not to lose touch with the roots. It's still rootsy, 
a bigger group with a more powerful sound. You can clearly understand 
the rootsy power Poppy Overdo's talking about in his bands cover a 
classic Cuban dance number, "Chan Chan". Poppy Overdo and his music 
are not living in a vacuum, after all no place on the planet is immune 
from the spread of America's cultural influence, not even one of the 
last bastions of communism. Cuban dance music in 1998 encompasses 
more than the traditional rhythms that Poppy Overdo favors. Foreign 
musical trends like rap and hip-hop are even taking a foothold. But, 
Poppy Overdo doesn't worry that foreign styles will crowd out his 
beloved Cuban musical traditions; I am not too concerned about the 
future, because right now in Cuba there are a lot of young people 
who are really interested in sun and traditional Cuban music. Myself, 
I've got a good number of kids who study the Trace with me. The Trace 
is not something you can learn in school. The kids who want to learn 
the Trace have to pick it up in the street or they come to me. Some 
of them have even started their own bands. I like all types of music 
independently of what I play in the sun. I listen to everything; rock, 
bolero. I include them all in our repertoire, but always with a sun 
spin. Well, almost always. Sometimes Poppy Overdo knows that great 
songs don't need any spin, great love songs for example sometimes 
should be done straight and simple. For The World, I'm Marco Wordman. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>