<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981231.2000.0855 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
All systems are go for the launch. Now, it's just a matter of getting 
the weather to cooperate. No, this isn't a Space Shuttle launch for 
Cape Canaveral, but a balloon launch from the Australian Outback. 
A US/Australian team is ready to try for the first time ever a non-stop 
balloon flight around the world. The team's bid comes just days after 
a failed attempt by millionaire Steve Fossett and Richard Branson 
and Pare Linstem of Sweden. But, co-pilot Bob Martin, of Albuquerque, 
New Mexico, says this journey will be different from the previous 
ones. All of the teams who have tried so far have used balloons in 
the lower atmosphere, the troposphere. And our slight is different 
from all of them in that while they all fly at less than 40,000 feet, 
we fly at about 125,00 to 130,000 feet above the earth, right at the 
top of the atmosphere, above about 99.7 percent of the atmosphere. 
And it's a region where the air at this time of year flows very smoothly 
at about 90 knots and carries one around the world in about 16, 17 
days. And so, is that preferable? In what ways is it preferable to 
what other cruise have done? Well, the other cruise while they are 
using jet streams to navigate around the world which are tricky to 
get on and stay on, as we've seen in all the cases to date. Also, 
you have to fight the weather down there, as we have seen in Steve 
Fossett's most recent attempt where he got caught on the top of a 
thunderstorm. We fly well above all of that kind of meteorology and 
we think that's one of the most distinct advantages of our particular 
strategy. Are there disadvantages as well? Yes, the disadvantage is 
obviously include that you're traveling at the edge of outer space 
and it's an extremely hostile environment where temperatures at night 
can down approaching 100 degrees below zero and in the day time can 
exceed 200 degrees above zero on the outside of the aircraft Fahrenheit. 
And so, it's an extreme environment, near vacuum conditions. If you 
were not inside the aircraft or in a space suit, it would be fatal. 
Gosh, that sounds very daunting, Bob Martin. Does that have any kind 
of effect on your mental outlook as you approach this trip? Well, 
I think the opportunity to test the vehicle as well as we have has 
given us great confidence in it. We took it to the NASA Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory in Pasadena and actually have already flown the vehicle 
to that altitude and cycled it through those temperatures and run 
it through those pressures in an unmanned configuration to where we're 
pretty confident in it. And yes, it's kind of daunting to think about 
the fact that it's extremely hostile outside, but also I have to admit 
I'm looking forward to the opportunity to view the Earth from that 
vantage point. The black of space being up above us and then blending 
smoothly into the blue aura of the atmosphere just above the curvature 
of the Earth and that's another thing we'll see at our altitude will 
be a very distinct curvature of the Earth. And the stars will be out 
in broad daylight. So, things like that should make it quite interesting. 
Sounds fabulous. Bob Martin, thank you and best of luck. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>