<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981231.2000.2276 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is not a Happy New Years Eve for some former dictators. General 
Augusto Pinochet for example is spending the holiday under police 
guard in a mansion near London. Chile's ex-leader is waiting to learn 
whether he will be extradited to Spain to face trial on charges of 
torture and genocide during his rule. Ever since Pinochet's arrest 
in October, other former strong man have been watching out fearing 
legal retribution from their former subjects. The World's Boris Maximoff 
has taken notice. It seems that of late being a president, or a dictator, 
a strong man, a colleague, or a secretary general, in short being 
a top banana is becoming a bit of a risky business. The world is full 
of former leaders trying to escape prison extradition, bankruptcy, 
or worse. So many have faced the court of law and other are likely 
to. Manuel Noriega, Augusto Pinochet, Jean-Bodel Bocasta, Eric Honica, 
Carlos Selenas, Tono Jeskof, the list goes on and on and it's going 
to get longer. The baiters and hounders of leaders and ex-leaders 
seem to be acquiring quite an appetite for this kind of thing. That's 
all well and good. Let's remove the bad guys and dance in the streets 
while it's happening. The question of course is what next? Brining 
them to justice is a very messy affair. For one thing, it could destabilize 
the country as some Chileans fear. For another, it may not work anyway. 
Former East German Leader Eric Honica escaped banishment and ran away. 
Yes, to Chile. Under what law should they be tried, in which country, 
etc., etc.. Nothing but hassle. And in this day and age of budgetary 
constraints who is going to pay for all of this? But, if trials are 
such headache, what should be done? Surely, we cannot allow the guilty 
to walk free and the sinners to go unpunished. Well, here's a suggestion. 
Create a theme park or a reservation for the bad guys to retire to. 
Of course, not in the south of France or Florida, that would be too 
easy and there are enough attractions there anyway. How about a few 
square miles of some scrubland in let's say Oklahoma. Sentence them 
and start shipping dictators there. Let them live in their own house 
on the prairie and do what they like as long as they stay put. It 
wouldn't cost a penny. Let them pay from their own Swiss bank accounts. 
And of course, we would charge admission, provide free parking, hot 
dog stands the works. Just think about it. It could not only entertaining, 
but also educational. Instead of a fence around the place, we could 
reconstruct an exact replica of the Berlin Wall complete with watch 
towers, observation post, and minefields of course. School children 
who never heard of the Cold War or of any foreign country, let alone 
a foreign dictator could be basting ascend the watch towers and see 
a living, breathing South American general or the butcher of Klopen 
or some other such figure. History would come alive for them. Dictators 
would be happy. After all, it ain't prison. There opponents would 
be happy. After all, it ain't exactly freedom either. And if one wants 
to punish the bad guys a bit more, how about making sure that their 
television sets receive only "The Little House On The Prairie" endlessly. 
The local community would be happy, all this money from tourist and 
dictator spectators. Beautiful. Simple beautiful. Any takers? We're 
always takers for the commentaries of Boris Maximoff which are a regular 
feature of the World. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>