<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981231.2000.0363 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is The World. I'm Lisa Mullins. An orchestra played "Ode to Joy", 
champagne corks popped, and thousands of blue and yellow balloons 
went flying into the clear blue skies over Brussels, Belgium today. 
The cause for all the celebration was not the New Year, but the new 
currency. The euro was formally launched today when the 11 countries 
taking part locked in their exchange rates to the new single European 
currency. It's being called one of the most momentous events in European 
history. To explain what this all means for us non-Europeans and indeed 
what it means at all, here's the World's Steven Beard in London. Happy 
New Euro, Steven. Happy New Year, Lisa. Well, what happened today 
was the 11 participating countries in this project; including Germany, 
Spain, France, Italy, locked their currencies together and merged 
them into just one, the euro. But, this is a curious animal, this 
euro, it only exists in electronic form. For three years, it will 
only be available in financial markets and in non-cash transactions. 
In the meantime, the people in these 11 countries will have to use 
their old currencies. So, why are they doing it this way with the 
kind of a virtual currency going into effect, but not really going 
into effect? Why have they decided to ease in the euro? The official 
reason is it's going to take three years to print all the necessary 
euro notes and mint all the necessary euro coins, 50 billion notes 
and 13 billion coins. And it's also suggested that by phasing the 
euro in, the citizens that will have to use it will get use to it 
and they won't get ripped-off by unscrupulous traders. Cynics, however, 
are saying that this is an escape hatch. This by retaining all those 
different individual currencies, the countries are in effect are retaining 
the option to pull out if the thing goes disastrously wrong. And is 
that a real option, Steven? I mean this is not a trial balloon. The 
euro is actually becoming a reality at this point, but is there a 
possibility that if it is disastrous that it could be over before 
it officially really begins? There is an enormous amount of political 
momentum and political will behind this and one suspects that whatever 
happens, they're going to hang on to the euro. But let me parochial 
for minute, Steven, and tell us what the euro's going to mean for 
Americans? According to some, it's going to be good for the US. Enthusiast 
for the single currency, like Graham Bishop of Brokers Sun And Smith 
Barney, he says that the euro's going to be good for Europe and therefore 
it obviously will be of enormous benefit for the United States, too. 
It is certainly to the advantage of the US if Europe is a more vibrant 
economy and more open economy. Many US companies do a lot of trade 
here and their ability to trade exporting to the US will be enhanced 
by Europe's single market, improved by the single currency. But Steven, 
we know that's certainly not the only view. There are some who are 
a lot more skeptical, aren't they? Yes, indeed. And some even suggest 
the whole purpose of this whole project is to undermine the United 
States to challenge the international currency status of the dollar. 
Lord Tabot, a very well-known British euro skeptic, says that he's 
very suspicious of the motives of the Europeans who are pushing the 
euro project. You will find that many of them are moved by a deep 
anti-Americanism and a deep desire to create in Europe a super power 
to rival America to develop armed forces and capabilities to balance 
the United States. Well, that almost sounds like a declaration of 
war, Steven Beard. Do you think it's going to be something of a battle 
for Americans and maybe in particular American tourist who understand 
what's going on with the euro? It could be very good American tourists. 
As they as they don't need to spend any cash. If they want to travel 
around these 11 countries armed only with their credit cards or with 
traveler checks, it's going to be very much cheaper for them, because 
they will only have to pay in the one currency. They're not going 
to spend money changing into 11 different currencies. In actuality 
though, those people who do travel abroad really don't have to worry 
about the euro for a couple of more years, yet and they should probably 
hang our to their francs and Deutsche marks and lira. They should, 
except they should obviously make sure they've used them up before 
July 2002, because at that point all those currencies; the franc, 
the poseta, the Deutsche mark, the lira, they will disappear for good. 
Well, thank you very much. And once again, Happy New Year! The World's 
Steven Beard in London. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>