<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981231.2000.2005 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When President Clinton toured six African nations last spring, part 
of his mission was frankly PR for the continent. Instead of constant 
images of famine, war, and human rights abuse, Mr. Clinton hoped Americans 
would associate Africa with lucrative investment opportunities and 
a new generation of leadership. But, nine months after the president's 
return, there is war in Congo, Angola, and Sierra Leone, and economic 
downturns practically everywhere else. The World's Andrew North considers 
US relations with Africa then and now. When President Clinton touched 
down in Guyana last March at the start of his tour, he raised the 
prospect of a new dawn in the relations between the United States 
and the 53 nations that make up Africa. I want to listen and to learn. 
I want to build a future partnership between our two people and I 
want to introduce the people of the United States through my trip 
to the new face of Africa. And later on in the trip, the president 
promised words would be turned into deeds. Americans of both political 
parties what to increase trade and investment in Africa. We have an 
African Growth And Opportunity Act now before Congress. Both parties 
leadership are supporting it. By opening markets and building businesses 
and creating jobs, we can help and strengthen each other. Nine months 
later though, it's hard to tell if those promises have really been 
turned in action. The one thing that African Growth And Opportunity 
Act, aimed at promoting business ties, has not been passed by Congress. 
More over, the face of Africa that most Americans see in the media 
remains primarily one of famine and war. The Democratic Republic of 
Congo is currently gripped by civil war. And fighting continues to 
ravage seven other African states. But, there's no sign that the United 
States is prepared to considered a Kosovo style intervention to bring 
these conflicts to an end. But, the picture is not all negative. A 
growing number of Americans are connecting with a more positive side 
of Africa. A track from the new album by Senegal's Baba Mo, who along 
with other African musicians has enjoyed another good year of sales 
in America. And although President Clinton's planned legislation for 
Africa may not be on the statute books, some say there's definitely 
a new tune being played by his administration since his March Africa 
tour. In terms of US policy, I think the president has galvanized 
the US bureaucracy. Herman Cohen, assistant secretary of state for 
Africa in the Bush administrations, speaking from Kenshasa in the 
Democratic Republic of Congo where he's on a business trip. So, you 
see agriculture people, commerce people, telecommunications, transportations, 
they're all visiting Africa now saying well, let's follow the presidents 
orders and do more to promote US business here. And I think this will 
start to show fruits within the next year or so. Those results are 
already becoming apparent according to Chito Rugu, a Houston-based 
Nigerian businessman who was in Africa in March with President Clinton's 
delegation. There have been an enhancing of our bilateral trade relations 
between African countries and the United States. The volume of trade 
has increased. One of Rugu's ventures is a Web site covering US and 
African news. And it's seen a large increase in traffic this year. 
But while he's pleased with the way US policy on Africa is going, 
Rugu still has long wish list for the new year. He's pushing for Congress 
to pass the Africa Growth and Opportunities Act and wants the White 
House to promote high technology investment in Africa. Herman Cohen 
also has New Year's list that administration will reverse its current 
standback attitude to Africa's many conflicts. I think this is rather 
short-sighted, because the Africans need assistance and I think the 
Americans have a lot more capacity to mediate in these conflicts then 
they say. And I would like to see them do more. After all, why is 
Africa less important than Kosovo and yet the United States is doing 
so much in Kosovo and so little Africa in terms of conflict resolution. 
I consider that almost discrimination. For the World, this is Andrew 
North. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>