<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981231.2000.1175 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The past year saw the Internet grow still more in ways that couldn't 
have been seen even a few short years ago. And example, in 1998, women 
and health professionals in remote parts of South Asia, Latin America, 
and West Africa, began using a new online forum for women's health 
which originates here in the United States. The Harvard School of 
Public Health created the interactive site to encourage discussion 
about women's issues ranging from contraception to reproduction to 
AIDS. Aren Helpin is the project manager for the Global Reproductive 
Health Forum and Raid Azubi is the project coordinator. Azubi says 
that the reproductive health issues facing women in such places as 
South Asia differ from those in other regions. They deal, for instance, 
with sex trafficking and prostitution. Another side of the West Africa 
Project may be dealing HIV, AIDS, or female genital mutilation with 
a different issue. So basically, the projects have autonomy in prioritizing 
the issues that they would like to deal with simply because it region 
has its particular set of issues that is more important to it than 
other issues that may be important in other regions. So, even if there 
is a site, the content of which is being decided by local women for 
instance in West Africa.. yes. There are still controversial issues; 
such as female genital mutilation. How do you go about addressing 
something like that? And making sure that the information will get 
through and will be received by those you're targeting? Well, the 
medium is conducive for discussing such information. It's simply because 
it's-it provides a space where a woman from a variety of disciplines 
and backgrounds can come together and express not necessarily, you 
know, express their different points of view about the issue. And 
Aren, when you dealt with issues; such as abortion or such as contraception, 
what particular countries did you have to be aware of the sensitivities 
for? I think the way we've dealt mostly as Raid said by insuring that 
there's actually some sort of a democratic form where there are both 
sides of the abortion debate. We have both pro-life and pro-choice 
links on our site. And to use this medium to do that rather than to 
say we have one stance and here's what we want you to do. And I think 
that's mostly how we've been negotiating these difficult questions. 
Well, what were their main concerns on that end? Primarily, and this 
is sort of a technical questions, but you pay for e-mail by the amount. 
And so, people really can't afford to just get 30 messages a day, 
so you can't just have a very active list. You really have to at some 
point select what's going to be posted and what's going to be the 
counter-discussion. And we found that people tend to be really very 
interested in getting information, you know, when are conferences, 
what was the latest finding on something, what are the potential problems 
with some new contraceptive or new sterilization technique. People 
want that sort of very like specified information and we found that 
it really helps when people once the system is up that people within 
the area are actually posting it. And the social issues that you specially 
had to heed to, what were they? Some of the social concerns coming 
from there. You know, issues of sexuality and for instance reproductive 
health that target teens are very sensitive and complex issues and 
controversial even in the United States. One of the main goals of 
this project is generate material regarding, you know, different reproductive 
health issues targeting different people from different age groups 
from all over the world. And most probably they will deal with sensitive 
issues. Obviously, cultural sensitive will be an issue and will be 
kept in mind. Since this is an interactive site, what are you learning 
about the concerns of woman in various parts of the world who are 
using it? Perhaps is there anything you've been surprised about in 
terms of the issues that they have decided to talk about in Africa, 
in parts of Southeast Asia? I know longer need to classify sex trafficking 
in South Asia the same I think about prostitution say or sex work 
in the United States and you realize that there's a whole different 
way of approaching these problems and you recognize all the other 
complicated issues that surround them when you're talking about in 
South Asia, you know, how vested the police and state institutions 
are in helping maintain or profit from this trade. You recognize how 
people are both using the money that they receive from their daughters 
being sex trafficked to help them in really impoverish situations, 
but also how women themselves are not just passive sort of objectives 
that are sold, but also have to negotiate and deal with the situation. 
And I think that that's a critical thing to understand. Aren Helpin 
and Raid Azubi of the Global Reproductive Health Forum based at the 
Harvard School of Public Health. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>