<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981231.0500.2677 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Cod has been a mainstay of New England fisheries for decades, but 
as fish populations continue to fall, regulators have been forced 
to tighten controls on when and where the boats may fish. A new cutback 
has sparked angry protests from fishermen despite scientific arguments 
that there are few other options. Nancy Cohen reports from Gloucester, 
Massachusetts. Fishery scientists reporting to the New England Fisheries 
Management Council say the numbers of both juvenile cod and sexually 
mature cod fish are at record lows. Things are so bad the council 
has approved a series of fishing closures for this winter. Yet many 
in shore fishermen say they're landing lots of cod. Paul Cohen is 
president of the Gulf of Maine Fishermen's Alliance. As he sits in 
his boat in Gloucester Harbor, he explains he has trouble staying 
below the daily cod catch limit. We feel there are a lot more cod 
fish out there than the government feels there are. Scientists and 
regulators say that's because small boat fishermen who have to stick 
close to shore because of their size are working in areas where the 
last of the cod fish are schooling. Tom Hill is a marine surveyor 
and a member of the New England Fisheries Management Council. There 
are clear aggregations of cod fish in areas but the general landings 
of cod fish in the geographic range of the fishery is down severely. 
There are some stocks of fish that are doing OK, but the picture for 
Gulf of Maine cod is bleak. Hill says one reason they're in such bad 
shape is the council has listened too much to the fishing industry. 
We have tried to accommodate the industry's concerns relative to the 
social and economic impacts. As a result of addressing those concerns, 
in my opinion, we have not implemented sufficient measures that have 
fixed the decline of the population of cod fish in the Gulf of Maine. 
Hill's view won out last week in a meeting attended by hundreds of 
fishermen. The New England Fisheries Management Council voted to take 
hard measures. They closed down in shore waters from February through 
the end of April in areas where spawning cod congregate. This left 
captains of smaller vessels pleading with the council to give them 
some place to fish. Forty-four-year-old Joe Orlando, who like many 
other fishermen is restricted to 88 fishing days a year saved up his 
days at sea for winter fishing when prices are higher. He explained 
this to council chair Joe Brinkaleoni. I took five months off the 
fishery. Now you're telling me I can go for another three or four 
months? It's really unfair Joe. Is there a closer area that you can 
still continue to fish without targeting cod fish? We're not doing 
this to be the hard guys and put people out of business. We're doing 
it to protect cod, which is what you all want, too. We're not talking 
about just cod fish, OK. We're talking about just going fishing, Joe. 
That's my point. That's what I'm trying to ask you right now. Is there 
another alternative that will still allow you to fish but not target 
cod fish? You see my dilemma? Am I the only one? Our dilemma? Our 
dilemma. That's right. It's all of our dilemmas. In the last minutes 
of the meeting, the closures were approved and the room erupted. You're 
away from me and my family and everybody in here. We work our asses 
off and you take it from us. Some fishermen may choose to fish further 
out to sea in unsafe waters. Some will take jobs on shore or try lobstering, 
and others will go bankrupt. A fishing closure is painful, says Peter 
Shelly of the Conservative Law Foundation, but he says it's the best 
chance for the cod fish. It causes a lot of pain but it also increases 
the chance of a quick rebuild of the fishery. What I don't know at 
this point in time is who's going to be left, you know, if this fishery 
ever starts becoming productive again. The Fisheries Council has asked 
the U.S. Secretary of Commerce to come up with some funding to help 
out fishermen. In January, council members meet again to approve new 
fishing rules that begin May 1st. I'm Nancy Cohen in Gloucester, Massachusetts. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>