<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981231.0500.2377 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
China says its economy grew by 7.8 percent in 1998, a full percentage 
point less than 1997's rate. That's slightly lower than its 8 percent 
target. Although China manage to weather the regional financial crisis 
better than its neighbors, VOA correspondent Roger Wilkison reports 
its economy is beset by some very bad underlying problems. When he 
took office last March, Chinese Premier Zhu Rongji vowed to overhaul 
shaky state-owned enterprises and downsize his country's entrenched 
bureaucracy over a three year period. He also made plans to fuel slumping 
domestic demand. But the economy's first half results were below expectations. 
Gross domestic product reached only seven percent, and Mr. Zhu said 
China needed eight percent to absorb the millions of workers that 
were laid off by his restructuring of the creaky state sector. The 
answer was a $1 trillion spending spree to upgrade infrastructure 
such as highways, railways, and power grids. The pump priming appears 
to have worked. The government announced that fourth quarter growth 
totaled nine percent pushing the figure for the entire year within 
a whisper of the target. Still, some analysts say the numbers are 
too good to be true and that local officials may be inflating the 
figures to please Beijing. Bob Brodwood, who heads political and economic 
risk consultancies in Hong Kong says the growth figure should be taken 
with a grain of salt. I think Zhu Rongji himself said earlier this 
month that a lot of the officials in the provinces are delivering 
numbers they think the central government wants to hear because that's 
their promotion and their careers are going to be based on. Besides, 
I don't think credible. The government says that officials found guilty 
of fudging figures will be fined. But western diplomats in Beijing 
say the legitimacy of China's Communist government depends on continuing 
economic growth. They say the authorities have been worried that missing 
the target could trigger a loss of confidence in the economy and possibly 
ignite social unrest. Analyst Ken Davis of the Economist Intelligence 
Unit in Hong Kong says the fear of instability motivated Mr. Zhu to 
slow down his ambitious reform plan. What this basically does is to 
reverse the reform temporarily so the way that Zhu Rongji would no 
doubt look at it would think that this is one step backward so we 
have to have two steps forward. Consultant Bob Brodwood likens the 
government's need to undertake reform and maintain stability to a 
high wire balancing act. I don't think that the government is at all 
back tracking on reforms. I think that it recognizes that the initial 
time frame was unrealistic and that to keep the need of maintaining 
social stability will require the implementation to go at a pragmatic 
manner. Analyst say the reason for sluggish domestic demand is that 
Chinese consumers are skittish about spending at a time when many 
of them could lose their jobs. The retail price index was down this 
year by more than 2-1/2 percent, putting China in a deflationary mode. 
Meanwhile, as the Economist Intelligence Unit Ken Davis notes, state-owned 
enterprises keep churning out products that few people will buy. You've 
actually got to increase the rest of the consumer goods which is going 
to further increase different trade and depressed prices. So you've 
got huge increase of supply although there's no competent increase 
in demand. Mr. Davis says the state banks already plagued by bad debts, 
have stepped up lending to inefficient state-owned companies to keep 
them in operation. Meanwhile, nonstate enterprises that offer the 
best hope of employment to millions of laid of state workers are thwarted 
by the high cost of funds. Government officials say they realize spending 
on infrastructure is not feasible over a long period of time. They 
say the key to future growth lies in stimulating domestic demand because 
exports and foreign investment have slowed. But consultant Bob Brodwood 
says China is still in better shape than its Asian neighbors. More 
direct investments going to China than the rest of Southeast Asia 
combined. Exports have slowed down, but no more so than other Asian 
countries. China's still competitive. In that sense, everyone's hurting 
in the regional crisis, but China's hurting a little bit less than 
the rest and that's a good sign. Chinese officials say the growth 
target for 1999 will be set by the National People's Congress in March. 
Roger Wilkison, VOA News, Beijing. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>