<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981231.1600.2364 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The man in charge of the oil for food program resigned his post in 
August in disgust with what he calls international complicity in the 
deaths of half a million Iraqi children. Dennis Halladay says he saw 
too much suffering to agree with politicians who say sanctions are 
a necessary price to bring Saddam Hussein to heel. There's nothing 
that can justify the deliberate killing of children under any circumstances. 
I mean, the fact that we're all perhaps frustrated with President 
Saddam Hussein and his reluctance to cooperate, but to put the blame 
on him I think is really simplistic. We can't justify I think what 
we're doing simply because he's a difficult character, we don't like 
him. That is really not a good excuse. There has to be some other 
way of dealing with him. But to knowingly extend these sanctions, 
knowing the killing of children, that is something that I find grossly 
unacceptable. It's just a huge moral issue here that I think is impossible 
to deal with. And I think there's a legal issue because these sanctions 
are, simply speaking, outside international law. There was no intention 
the Security Council would be in power to declare this sort of damage, 
in effect a declaration of war you might say, on the people of Iraq, 
who, of course are innocent, particular the children. And punishing 
them for the crimes of Saddam Hussein is, you know, I think not acceptable 
to most people. Do you understand or sympathize in any way with the 
dilemma that the international community finds itself in when dealing 
with Hussein, and what do you think it should do? Yeah, of course, 
I am frustrated. I mean, I was frustrated as the head of that program. 
And Saddam Hussein and the leadership there is under tremendous pressure 
from a more radical right in any rank who is demanding more violent 
response, complete breakdown of relations with the United Nations. 
They have no tolerance for the compromises that Saddam Hussein has 
made, and he, in fact, in that context of the Ba'ath Party and the 
changing role of the next generation of leadership is a moderate. 
He appears to be a moderate of the. Did what you saw in Iraq have 
anything to do with your leaving as U.N. coordinator? Was it just 
something that you no longer could participate in? I felt that I didn't 
wish to continue to be a party to the United Nations presence, which 
represented sanctions of both malnutrition and child mortality. I 
just found it incompatible with what I've done for the United Nations 
for over 30 years with he spirit of the charter, declaration of human 
rights and so on. It was a very uncomfortable position to be in, and 
I'm deeply concerned of the credibility of the United Nations as a 
benign force in the world who have been damaged and will continue 
to be damaged because of the Iraqi sanctions regime, which is unique 
and uniquely appalling. There's nothing else quite like it ever. I 
read in the "Washington Post" that a visit to a hospital where you 
were bringing Christmas gifts I think it was to four children, and 
how that is illustrative of just how serious this problem is. Well, 
I think, you know, everybody tends to get taken to visit the Saddam 
Hussein Medical Center in Baghdad, which has a large pediatric hospital 
there, and one visits children who are under normal circumstances 
could be healed, and that includes of course those with some sophisticated 
problems like leukemia, but I did come across a ward of four small 
children, two girls at eight or nine, and a little boy of 12, and 
a child, a little - a girl child of about three or four. And when 
I went back on Christmas Eve to visit these four children with a friend 
from the United Nations, we found that two of the four children were 
already dead. But that is just indicative I think of the agony that 
the doctors in Iraq face every day. Dennis Halladay, former humanitarian 
coordinator in Baghdad, thank you so much for talking to us. Thank 
you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>