<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981231.1600.0608 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the past year in Africa, there were terrorist attacks on two U.S. 
embassies - in Nairobi, Kenya and Dar es Salaam, Tanzania - which 
killed hundreds of people and injured thousands more. Sonya Lawrence 
Green reports from Nairobi, since then, survivors have been trying 
to rebuild their lives. In an instant, one explosive, terrifying in 
stand last August 7th, the lives of thousands of people in Nairobi 
and Dar es Salaam were changed forever by terrorist bombings at the 
U.S. embassies there. Shortly after the blast, ambassador to Kenya, 
Prudent Bushnell who was injured, soberly summed up what had happened. 
Yesterday morning at about, literally thousands of people came face 
to face with evil, and the result is broken hearts, shattered lives, 
shock, dismay, anger, and most of all, incredible sorrow. I can only 
hope that out of the depths of sorrow that so many, many people around 
the world are feeling that some seed, rich little seed is going to 
grow that will help all of us human beings stop it, just stop hurting 
each other like this. While teams of investigators sifted through 
the rubble, scores of victims sifted through their broken lives. The 
blast killed 11 Tanzanians and injured 70 more. In Kenya, 213 died, 
including 12 Americans, while thousands more were injured, many blinded 
or crippled for life. Donald Sibialo was driving past the Nairobi 
embassy that fateful day and lost both of his eyes. He is now learning 
how to cope at a center for the blind in Machakos town 30 kilometers 
southeast of the capital. What I'm learning there almost three subjects. 
One is mobility. That's how to learn how to walk using a walking stick 
because now this is my eyes. Two, I'm learning some independent living 
skills like maybe - OK, when I go back to the house, I can be able 
at least to make a few things for myself like cooking, ironing, washing 
my clothes, sometimes cleaning the house. And I'm also learning Braille, 
how to write using my fingers. And right now, I think I'm able to 
communicate by writing though reading is a bit of a problem. Mr. Sibialo 
story is just one of many. The terrorist bombings left behind all 
sorts of long-term problems. Children were orphaned, family breadwinners 
were suddenly gone, and survivors were left to cope with a host of 
problems. A national bomb blast disaster fund was created in Kenya 
which attracted more than $4 million in donations. Fund chairman Charles 
Injunjo presided over several ceremonies to distribute the aid money. 
Today, the committee is paying out 245 injury claims of which 45 major 
and the rest are minor injuries. This classification has been done 
by doctors. Further payment will now be made on weekly basis on injuries 
we have received 2,514 claims. We have 850 claims classified as serious 
injuries and 1,654 classified as minor injuries. But Mr. Injunjo admitted 
there were problems distributing the money. Some widows of bomb victims 
were being harassed by relatives demanding a share of the cash. He 
said a handful of cases were still in dispute. President Bill Clinton 
also approved $40 million to help Kenyans rebuild. A large section 
of downtown Nairobi was shaken by the blast. Windows were shattered, 
shops were closed, jobs lost. Several local groups and charities stepped 
forward to help Kenyans heal their physical and psychic wounds. But 
as the year wore on, the aid has dwindled. Constance Zambouie Matinda 
lost her husband in the Nairobi blast. She says when her food rations 
from the Red Cross eventually run out, she's not sure what she will 
do to support her five children. It is a dilemma that many of the 
bomb victims families will have to face in the new year. Sonya Lawrence 
Green for VOA News, Nairobi. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>