<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981231.0500.2218 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A new report on world population trends says 65 countries are on track 
to double their populations in the next 30 years, although global 
population growth is slowing down somewhat. The number of people in 
13 of those countries should nearly triple by the year 2050. The Washington-based 
Population Institute released its annual world population overview 
this week and VOA's Challis McDonough has details. The Population 
Institute says most countries in Europe and the Western Hemisphere 
have stabilized their population growth. Institute director Renner 
Fornos says developing nations account for 97 percent of the world's 
growth. Though there is some cause for rejoicing, there is even greater 
cause for alarm. Yes, the affluent world is declining in its population 
numbers, and the most desperate nations of the world continue to seem 
to be increasing. Mr. Fornos says 13 nations, all but three of them 
in Africa, are on track to triple or nearly triple their populations 
in the next 30 years. One, Liberia, is expected to nearly quadruple 
its number of people. Mr. Fornos says rapid population growth strains 
the resources of poor nations often causing or intensifying shortages 
of food and water. Slowing down population growth is a requirement 
that we must all address because there are no alternative humanitarian 
solutions to the problem. But the population researcher says the overall 
population growth rate has slowed. Earlier this decade, the number 
of people in the world was growing by 100 million a year. Now it's 
only growing by 80 million. Mr. Fornos says faster than expected adoption 
of contraceptives is one reason for the decline. He also says more 
girls are staying in school longer, and a girl with an eighth education 
is half as likely to get pregnant as one without. But Mr. Fornos says 
the single biggest factor in the decline is not any improvement in 
family planning. It's an increase in the death rate. When we looked 
at the causes for the decline in the nine countries that dropped in 
their fertility in the last year, most of them are due to parasitic 
and infectious diseases taking their toll on the population. The Population 
Institute president praised some countries like Indonesia and Brazil 
for their aggressive family planning programs. He says they are likely 
to drop lower on the list of most populist nations by the year 2050. 
Challis McDonough, VOA News, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>