<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981231.1600.0416 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Russia's Central Bank, meanwhile, will begin setting an exchange rate 
for the euro and the Russia ruble on the first day of the new year. 
But as Moscow correspondent Peter Heinline reports, it will be sometime 
before the new currency makes a dent in Russia's dollar-driven economy. 
The European Union is easily Russia's main trading partner. Germany 
alone does more business with Russia than any country outside the 
E.U. But the U.S. dollar is far and away the currency of choice in 
Moscow. The U.S. Treasury Department says there are more dollars in 
Russia than in any other country outside the United States, 80 percent 
of them in one hundred dollar bills. So while Russia's Central Bank 
and the Moscow interbank currency exchange is set for immediate ruble-euro 
trading, the attitude among Russians is decidedly wait and see. David 
John of the Moscow office of the Price Waterhouse accounting firm 
says the euro's initial impact in Russia will be small. The economy 
here revolves around the ruble and the dollar, and I'm not sure that 
the introduction of the euro certainly in the short term will have 
very much impact. The dollar is the second currency of Russia. Another 
financial analyst, Ekaterina Manofayova of Moscow's MFK Renaissance 
Investment House says the euro is being greeted here with some suspicion. 
The euro would have to establish itself as a very strong currency 
in which lots of trade takes place. And not only Russia would need 
to accept it as the benchmark as Russia accepts dollar as benchmark 
right now, but the whole world would prefer euro to the dollar. And 
I guess on that base point, Russia could be tied, as you said to Europe. 
Ms. Manofayova says financial turmoil and failure to institute free 
market reforms will greatly diminish Russia's ability to benefit from 
the euro. I would rather say that Russia would be able to benefit 
from the introduction of the single European currency. It would be 
able to open itself to them, world trade, and to the competitive world, 
economic environment. Other experts say Russia's growing reliance 
on the European Union for goods and financial support means the euro 
could soon become a force to be reckoned with. A senior Russian Central 
Bank official recently noted 50 percent of all western trade is with 
E.U. countries and 40 percent of Russia's debt is in European currencies. 
At the same time, however, the dollar is used for 80 percent of all 
trade transactions, and dollars account for 90 percent of Russia's 
hard currency reserves. That is not likely to change anytime soon. 
As one western analyst remarked, nobody yet understands what kind 
of security you have when you buy euros. Peter Heinline, VOA News, 
Moscow. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>