<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981231.0500.0797 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
While many Americans have been taking time off to celebrate the holiday 
season, congressional leaders have been busy preparing for the impeachment 
trial of President Clinton. There are no decisions yet on how to proceed. 
VOA's David Swan reports. Mr. Clinton was impeached December 19th 
by the U.S. House of Representatives on charges of perjury and obstruction 
of justice in the Monica Lewinsky scandal. Mr. Clinton has now admitted 
he had an improper relationship with the former White House intern 
but denies he perjured himself or blocked a formal investigation of 
any possible wrongdoing. The next step in the political process is 
a Senate trial. According to a tentative scenario drawn up by Senate 
Majority Leader Trent Lott, the nation's second trial of a president 
could begin and end within weeks. House Republican managers will act 
as prosecutors in the trial, would formally deliver and read the two 
articles of impeachment on Thursday, January 7th, the same day Supreme 
Court Chief Justice William Rehnquist would swear in all senators 
as jurors. The actual trial would start Monday, January 11th, Mr. 
Lott suggested could finish in as little as two weeks by Friday, the 
22nd. While the Senate schedule is by no means firm, the prospect 
of a speedy trial should be good news for the White House and its 
Democratic allies who worry about long, messy proceedings. But problems 
are brewing among the majority Republicans. Senator Lott wants to 
conduct the case against Mr. Clinton solely on written evidence and 
oral arguments without calling any witnesses. That brings him into 
conflict with House members handling the case who say the need witnesses 
in order to present the matter fully and properly. Congressman Bill 
McCollum says the demand of an actual trial are different from those 
of the House impeachment debate. But if you had a Senate trial, that's 
what it would be, and therefore, it seems to me that at least some 
of these witnesses you would want to have live and you'd want to have 
cross-examined because that all goes into credibility. The potential 
witnesses could include key figures in the scandal: Monica Lewinsky, 
President Clinton's secretary, Betty Currie, and his longtime adviser, 
Vernon Jordan. They have already given grand jury testimony in the 
investigation of the president by independent counsel Kenneth Starr. 
However, those statements were given behind closed doors, not in public 
in the Senate chamber. Even as lawmakers wrangle over rules and procedures, 
it remains unlikely that President Clinton will be convicted and removed 
from office. That would require a bipartisan, two-thirds majority 
vote, and Republicans hold just 55 of the 100 Senate seats. Democrats 
who were nearly unanimous in opposition to impeachment and the upcoming 
trial, have been pushing to censure or reprimand Mr. Clinton instead. 
But a number of Republicans oppose that idea, saying the Senate has 
a duty to hear and vote on the evidence. Ohio Senator Mike DeWine 
has flatly declared he will vote against a censure motion whether 
presented before, during, or after a trial. It leaves no one happy. 
It leaves issues unresolved. It leaves both sides the ability to go 
back out the next day and claim that the process didn't work for them, 
and they'll do it. You know they'll do it. And it has the down side, 
I think, of weakening the institution of the presidency of the United 
States, and I have no intention of being a part of that. All sides 
now seem to accept that a trial will begin, but many questions about 
how long it may last and what form it might take will not be answered 
until senators return to Washington next week. David Swan, VOA News, 
Capitol Hill. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>