<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981231.1600.2151 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Tensions remain high in Iraq following confrontations between allied 
war planes and Iraqi forces in Iraq's no-fly zone. At the same time, 
there are increased calls in the United Nations to lift the economic 
embargo on Baghdad. Critics say the embargo has not affected Saddam 
Hussein, only the people of Iraq, especially the children. Iraq's 
children is the subject of today's Dateline. Here's Pamela Taylor. 
There's a growing consensus among U.N. members to lift the 8-1/2 year 
old economic embargo on Iraq. Many countries say the combination of 
sanctions and air strikes have had no effect on Saddam Hussein, while 
bringing untold hardship to the people of Iraq. This despite an 18-month-old 
modification of the sanctions to allow Iraq to sell oil in exchange 
for food and medicine. Two Iraqis who now live outside Washington 
D.C. talked with VOA correspondent Ed Warner about how the oil for 
food program has done little to alleviate conditions in Iraq. Ayad 
Handani, an engineer with the utility company in Virginia, left Iraq 
30 years ago when it was prospering. When he returned after sanctions 
were imposed, he could hardly believe his eyes. Everything seemed 
in a state of decay, gray, and gloomy, with a dispirited people who 
could not understand why they were being punished for the actions 
of their leader. Mr. Handani was especially concerned for the children. 
Every day, my parents used to leave the trash outside of the house 
and I always found the trash torn up, and I never could understand 
why. One day, I said, I want to see if there's a dog or something 
coming and tearing up this. And the amazing part, I saw kids going 
from house to house opening up the trash and collecting it in their 
back. The children recovered bits of bread and vegetables from the 
trash but were bewildered when Mr. Handani offered them candy. They 
had never seen it before. Sally Karagali an Iraqi-American law school 
student at the University of Virginia, has family members in Iraq. 
Her aunt, chief inspector of Baghdad hospitals, told her most medical 
equipment is obsolete. Since computer parts are not allowed into the 
country, a doctor cannot take a simple X-ray. Operations are performed 
without anesthesia. There is little medicine, and even aspirin is 
unavailable. Sally Karagali's brother is a dentist who has had an 
ear infection for three years. Since there is no penicillin in Baghdad, 
she sent him some only to have it stolen. He gets little relief from 
the pain. When the wind is right, says Sally Karagali, a powerful 
stench envelops Baghdad. They're not able to import chlorine because 
of the chemicals ban, so they have very little to treat the sewage 
system with, plus it's constantly breaking down because the sewage 
system is one of the things that was attacked during the Gulf War, 
was actually bombed. And sometimes it affects the drinking water. 
Sally Karagali says the continued U.S. bombing following the Gulf 
War is producing a generation of shell shocked, listless children 
who see no point in going to school. All that is left is faith, the 
consolation of religion. That faith is deepening, says Mr. Handani, 
and the mosques are overflowing. In reaction to the sanctions, he 
believes or fears Islamism may prove more dangerous to the West than 
Saddam Hussein. Correspondent Ed Warner in Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>