<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981231.1600.2694 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The world's preeminent scientific journal has announced its breakthroughs 
of 1998. The top honor goes to two international teams of researchers 
who independently found that the universe is expanding at a breathtaking 
rate. VOA science correspondent Jessica Burman reports. Every year, 
the journal "Science" unveils a list of advances that in the editor's 
view have profoundly changed the practice or interpretation of science 
or its implications for society. And this year's selection showcases 
research that you've heard a little bit about already that suggests 
our universe is expanding and at an ever greater rate, that is the 
expansion is accelerating. Floyd Bloom is editor in chief of "Science." 
Dr. Bloom says no one knows why the universe is expanding at a faster 
and faster rate, but he notes the data collected by the two teams 
of astrophysicists suggests there is more energy in outer space than 
previously thought, and this energy is driving our galaxy and others 
further and further apart. Understanding the nature of this is going 
to challenge our understanding of all of the particles that we thought 
we knew about and all of the forms of physical energies that we thought 
we knew about. So these surprising and outstanding results allowed 
our editors to reach a unanimous choice this should be selected as 
the breakthrough of the year for 1998. In 1917, the man considered 
the father of physics, Albert Einstein, first proposed the universe 
was expanding, but he then rejected the notion. Twelve years later, 
in 1929, the theory would catch on with astronomer Edwin Hubble's 
cosmic observations. What has not been known until now was whether 
gravity would slow down or eventually stop the expansion, maybe even 
force the universe to collapse on itself, or whether unknown forces 
would continue to yank on the cosmos. Ten years ago when cosmologists 
saw Perlmutter began the project that led to this year's discovery, 
he hoped to find out how much the expansion had slowed down due to 
gravity's pull. He led a team at the University of California at Berkeley 
that began studying the faint light emitted by dying stars known as 
super novas. Professor Perlmutter explains that as the universe expands, 
the light from distant super novas takes longer to reach the Earth. 
Astronomers can tell from the color of the light how much the universe 
is expanding. Last year, the first photographic data came in. To Professor 
Perlmutter's amazement, instead of showing an aging universe sputtering 
to a halt, the photos revealed a vital cosmos expanding and picking 
up speed with each passing millennium. The bottom line is that we 
found something that is a very strange phenomenon for physics. And 
if our results hold up to our final stages of questioning and all 
the checks for loopholes, then the universe is accelerating and it's 
likely never to stop, never collapse, never to come to an end. Similar 
findings about the universe have been made by a team of cosmologists 
in Australia. Other top advances listed by "Science" magazine in 1998 
include research into the molecular mechanisms of a 24-hour Circadian 
clock, which regulates the daily rhythm of everything from bacteria 
to humans; the development of a number of anti-cancer drugs and the 
complete genetic mapping of the round worm, the first animal to have 
the location and chemical structure of all of its genes identified. 
Jessica Burman, VOA News, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>