<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981231.0500.3197 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In a world of rap and rhythm and blues, 1998 was the year of the teenage 
female stars and handful of mega producers and songwriters who dominated 
the charts. VOA's Bernie Bernard gives us the word on rappers and 
R&B crooners who made their mark during the past year. 1998 was the 
year of the teen rhythm and blues divas. A pair of million selling 
solo artists, Brandy and Monica, teamed up for "The Boy is Mine," 
which spent 13 weeks at the number one spot on "Billboard" magazine's 
hot 100 and sold more than two million copies. Both had successful 
albums on their own this year, with Brandy releasing "Never Say Never," 
her first studio collection in three years. Monica, who was named 
the top solo female artist of the year by "Billboard" explains the 
media's role in reporting an alleged feud with her partner Brandy. 
It's fun to them now. It's like enjoyable. And we did a song where 
it's like a feud over a guy, but you never pay attention to the fact 
that we blame the guy in the end. You never pay attention to the part 
where we come together and we catch him in the act. You never pay 
attention to that part because nobody cares about that part. They 
like the part where we're fighting. Other team divas who scored big 
in 1998 are Alia, Inojay, and Maya. This year saw three mega producers, 
artists, and songwriters dominate the charts: Baby Face, Puff Daddy, 
and R. Kelly. R. Kelly and Celine Dion collaborated for the hit "I'm 
Your Angel" written by Kelly, while his double CD said "R" should 
be a strong chart contender into 1999. Fugee's member Wycliff Jean 
also proved to be a hit producer this year. His band mate, Praas scored 
on the charts as well, but the Fugee who really made her mark was 
singer Laurin Hill, debuting at number one. Her album, "The Miseducation 
of Laurin Hill," spent four weeks at the top and earned the title 
of top R&B Album of the Year. And made her one of the highest selling 
female artists of 1998. K.C. and JoJo of the Band Jodasee also took 
time out for their duet album. Both the Fugees and Jodasee assure 
fans they haven't broken up but just wanted to take time for separate 
solo projects. According to "Billboard," Usher was named Artist of 
the Year, Top Hot 100 artist, and Top R&B Artist for 1998. The tunes, 
"You Make Me Wanna," "Nice and Slow," and the title track to his album, 
"My Way" all made the year-end top 20. Album sales for Usher exceeded 
the four million mark. The artist says he's ready to conquer some 
new territory. He's already landed a role in the film, "The Faculty." 
Acting is definitely something that I want to do in the years of my 
career. You know, I mean I want to eventually get off into all different 
types of - all different aspects of the business end, you know, eventually 
get over into acting. Maybe Usher can take a few lessons from Will 
Smith, who proved he could spend time on the music charts as well 
as on Hollywood movie sets. Known for his blockbuster screen roles 
in "Independence Day" and "Men in Black," Smith had a hit with his 
"Big Willy Style" album yielding tunes like "Gettin' Jiggy Widdit", 
"Just the Two of Us," and his end of the year winner, "Miami." Rap 
and hip-hop stayed alive and well in 1998 with J.Z., Master P, and 
Mace leading the way. Mace was named Hot Rap Artist of the Year. Master 
P and J.Z. debuted at number one on the pop albums chart, while J.Z.'s 
"Volume 2, Hard Knock Life" spend five weeks there, the longest time 
any rap collection stayed at the top of the albums chart. A trio from 
Minneapolis called "Next" made the charts four times this year. "Billboard" 
magazine named them the top R&B group, top new group and awarded them 
the top single of the year for this hit tune, "Too Close." Those are 
the year's headliners in rap and R&B. I'm Bernie Bernard. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>