<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981231.1600.1353 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
1998 marked several important anniversaries in America's northern 
most state of Alaska. The state celebrated the centennial of the 1898 
Yukon gold rush. A train borne of the gold rush also celebrated its 
100th year and is still chugging along today, carrying tourists where 
miners once scaled the mountain passes. And 30 years ago, an enormous 
oil field was discovered in Perdo Bay on the Arctic Ocean. That discovery 
led to the 1300 kilometer trans Alaskan pipeline system, which would 
change the landscape and the economy of Alaska forever. Robin Rupley 
reports. It was one of the most ambitious construction projects of 
the 20the century: building a pipeline to transport billions of gallons 
of oil from Alaska's north slope through some of the state's most 
rugged terrain, to the country's southern most ice free port of Valdez. 
No one had built a pipeline of that size in the Arctic before. Roger 
Stager is a representative of Alaska Pipeline Service Company, a conglomerate 
of seven oil companies which run and operate the pipeline. He says 
in 1968, the first big hurdle was getting permission to build the 
pipeline at all. Approval is not without great difficult. It literally 
took an act of Congress to build this pipeline even though it is privately 
owned, privately operated, privately managed. It took an act of Congress 
to build it. That's because it runs over great portions of federal 
land. That land included three mountain ranges, over 800 streams, 
and the vast frozen tundra that covers 4/5ths of the state. Roads 
and bridges had to built where there were none before. To be the least 
environmentally disruptive, 75 percent of the more than 500,000 tons 
of steel pipe used in the pipeline was built on supports above the 
ground. That protected the tundra's delicate permafrost, the frozen 
foundation of rock and soil from the heat of the oil, and allowed 
caribou to pass under the pipeline on their traditional migration 
routes. Current weather at Shandovar, temperature is zero, winds are 
calm. The visibility is 15 miles. Road conditions... By the mid-1970s, 
word spread around the world that there was plenty of well-paying 
work to be done on the Alaska pipeline. Twenty-nine construction camps 
were built along the pipeline route, some of which housed over 3,000 
employees. This former pipeline worker recalled his dangerous duty 
on the steep mountain passes. Snow, rain, anything, anything you can 
imagine. Thawing of the ground, come after you. Every day, you had 
the danger of rocks. top getting loose and coming down on you. It's 
the most dangerous job I've ever seen. Before we got these stirrups 
made up, we had to hang by our safety belt. That's all you had to 
hold you. And I felt like I was trying to wash the windows on the 
Empire State Building. Now more than 20 years after its completion, 
the Trans-Alaskan pipeline system has been largely deemed a success 
for its environmentally safe construction and its contribution to 
the state's economy. Alaska Corporation's Roger Stager. Well, I think 
after 20 years, Alaskans have accepted the pipeline as simply part 
of the background culture within the state of Alaska. I think the 
initial fears which probably were excessive are now understood. There 
is a risk to any type of development anywhere. In general, I think 
most Alaskans like the oil industry, like the presence of the oil 
industry. They certainly like the economics of the oil industry and 
the jobs that it brings. To celebrate the 20th anniversary of the 
completion of the Trans-Alaskan pipeline, in 1997, Alaska Corporation 
collaborated with the Smithsonian Institution for a special exhibition 
called Oil from the Arctic, The Building of the Trans-Alaskan Pipeline. 
Photographs, pieces of pipe, and other artifacts were flown to Washington 
D.C. for the event. Now those same artifacts are being shipped back 
to Alaska to the Anchorage Museum of History and Art, where they will 
be part of the museum's permanent exhibition. This is Robin Rupley. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>