<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981231.0500.1347 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A 15-year-old Hollywood adventure gets an update from Walt Disney 
pictures with computerized special effects to bring its oversized 
star to life on the big screen. The film is at North American theaters 
for the year-end holiday season, and Alan Silverman in Los Angeles 
has a look at the new version of "Mighty Joe Young." We are very happy 
and proud to introduce to you Mighty Joe... Joe is giant gorilla five 
meters tall, who's lived a peaceful life of seclusion in an African 
forest where his friend and protector is a beautiful young woman named 
Jill. Hey, big guy. How are you, huh? What were you doing stomping 
around looking for trouble yesterday, huh? You're not supposed to 
let people see you, remember? Years earlier, both Jill and Joe were 
orphaned on the same day, the victims of vicious poachers. Trying 
to keep then baby Joe from being shot, Jill's mother, a wildlife researcher, 
stepped into the line of fire that had already claimed Joe's mother. 
Their idyllic existence is interrupted when Joe is accidentally discovered 
by American conservationist Greg, who convinces Jill that Joe will 
be safer at a California nature preserve. Here is where he lives. 
The people I work for can take care of Joe. They have the facilities, 
the preserve, a place where he'll be free. But things go terribly 
wrong and Joe finds himself on the run from not only the poachers 
who want to kill him, but also the L.A. Police, who see him as a rampaging 
monster. In a final act of self-sacrifice, the great animal shows 
he has a truly gentle heart. The new "Mighty Joe Young" is directed 
by Ron Underwood. I loved the original film, so I wanted to be very 
respectful of the spirit of that film. Everybody would like a friend 
like Joe, and so I wanted to present that to audiences today. The 
original "Might Joe," like "King Kong" before him, was a creation 
of stop motion photography, using a miniature model changed ever so 
slightly for each frame to give the illusion of motion. It was state-of-the-art 
for 1949 and earned an Academy Award for the special effect. Oscar-winning 
creature creator Rick Baker brings the 1998 version to life through 
a combination of computerized digital effects, life-sized animatronic 
models operated by puppeteers, and a man in a monkey suit. Baker, 
who helped design and in fact himself wore the monkey suit in the 
1976 remake of "King Kong" thinks "Mighty Joe" is his most realistic 
screen ape. Back in "King Kong" days, I really wanted basically to 
build what I built for Joe, but they didn't want it. You know, they 
wanted more of a Hollywood gorilla that was more human, you know. 
And that's why I found it very disappointing. That's, again, one of 
the reasons I wanted to do "Joe" is 'cause it was the other giant 
gorilla movie, and I thought they would let me do this one right. 
He's playing with you hide and seek. You found me. Good thing Joe 
didn't want to play doctor. South Africa born Charlise Theron stars 
as Jill. You want to play? You ready? This is the first time that 
I wanted to do a character, to play a character because of - it was 
just so reminiscent of my own life, relationships that I had with 
animals that had such an impact on my life growing up as an only child 
with parents around, a road construction company, and the only way 
I could entertain myself was through having relationships the way 
Jill had a relationship with Joe with animals. All I had to do was 
to remember, you know, everything from ages four through 11, 12 years 
old. That was my life. Hey, can you get him to put me down? Joe, drop 
him. Bill Paxton of "Twister" and "Titanic" fame co-stars as the conservationist 
who becomes Joe's American champion. Other people still say in Guyzamo 
is just a legend. I say legends live forever. "The Mighty Joe Young" 
music is by James Horner, composer of the Oscar-winning "Titanic" 
score. Alan Silverman for the Voice of America in Hollywood. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>