<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981013.1830.0062 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. We begin tonight with a crisis averted a war of avoided, 
between the NATO alliance led by the United States and the former 
Yugoslavia, led by the Serb dictator, Slobodan Milosevic. There will 
be no NATO air strikes against the Serbs this week. The Serbian leader 
has pledged to remove his soldiers from the province of Kosovo and 
allow 250,000 refugees to return to their homes. Whether a victory 
or a defeat, depends on where you are. The Serbian leader is telling 
his people that he has saved Kosovo from NATO attack. We begin in 
the Serbian capital with ABC's Mike Lee. The Serb leader, Slobodan 
Milosevic, gave in only after NATO air strikes seemed imminent. Despite 
that, he went on national TV and declared the agreement a victory 
for Serbs. "Dear citizens," he said, "this agreement definitely eliminates 
all possibilities of military action against our country." But the 
man who brokered today's agreement, American envoy Richard Holbrooke, 
says the Serbs aren't off the hook yet, that the NAto strike threat 
remains and that Serbs have until Friday night to begin doing what 
they've promised. It's compliance that matters. If this is the road 
path to the end of the emergency, and I hope it is, then we will feel 
we earned our pay this week. As for the deal -- the Serbs must permit 
ethnic Albanian refugees to return to their homes. They must allow 
2,000 unarmed observers to verify the agreement on the ground. And 
they must allow NAto planes, carrying no bombs, to monitor the pullback 
from the air. Finally, the Serbs agree to restore some form of local 
self-rule to ethnic Albanians, who make up 90% of the population of 
Kosovo. In Kosovo today, these ethnic Albanian refugees say they will 
not return to their villages until they can be 100% sure that Serb 
forces have gone and will never come back. But the refugees may not 
feel completely safe for a while. It will take at least a month for 
those international observers to even begin the work on the ground 
in Kosovo. Mike Lee, ABC News, Belgrade. It depends on where you are, 
as Richard Holbrooke said, it's a little early to say triumph. If 
anyone knows wiggle room, it's Mr. Milosevic. Another look at the 
deal by our national correspondent in Washington, John McWethy. Central 
to the agreement, and perhaps its greatest weakness, is the 2,000-person 
civilian monitoring force that does not yet exist. This will be an 
international group of people who are experienced, hopefully, in this 
kind of work. Even Sandy Berger seemed skeptical that this kind of 
work could be done by the OSCE, the 54-nation "organization for the 
security and cooperation in Europe." In the past, the OSCE has provided 
people to monitor elections. The job in Kosovo requires many more 
people, and will be vastly more complex and dangerous. They will be 
armed with only clipboards, pencils and cameras. Now we're talking 
about the equivalent of a peacemaking force without arms, without 
training and with a very uncertain organization. Assuming such a group 
of civilians can bembled, the question is who will protect them? U.S. 
officials say there will have to be a rapid reaction force of several 
thousand soldiers standing by. To avoid upsetting Congress, the emphasis 
will be on recruiting troops from several NATO countries, not just 
the U.S. they would be kept out of harm's way by basing either in 
a neighboring country like Macedonia or aboard a ship. At the moment, 
NAto has just one tool to force the Serbs to back down -- the threat 
of air strikes. So Milosevic complies -- for now. But it took four 
months to get to this point. The question is whether NATO can stay 
focused for the long haul. John McWethy, ABC News, the Pentagon. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>