<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981013.1830.1132 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Tonight, we're gonna take another "closer look" at managed care -- 
our series, "the HMO nation." Tonight, call it the fear of abandonment. 
About 6 million elderly and disabled Americans receive Medicare benefits 
through managed care. Medicare is the coveted health care safety net 
that's been in place since the 1960's. This year, more than 400,000 
people on Medicare are being abandoned by their HMOs because the HMOs 
say they are unaffordable. The elderly, unaffordable? It wasn't supposed 
to be this way. Here's ABC's John Cochran. In a quiet neighborhood 
in Wilmington, otto and lolo heidlinger feel as if they've been hit 
by a bombshell. They're going out of the golden choice, too. They 
recently read in the local newspaper that their HMO is dropping Medicare 
patients. So what do they give us as an alternative? As of now, the 
only alternative is return to the old-style Medicare program run by 
the government, which provides none of the extras so many older people 
want, especially prescription drugs. The heidlingers have survived 
cancer and Nazi Germany, but they say they don't know how they will 
survive without their HMO. God forbid a severe situation arises. We 
wouldn't know where to take the money from. With the limited income, 
what are we going to do? I mean, at the age of 88 and 78, I don't 
think we can go out and take jobs again. The heidlingers say all their 
friends are worried. When you go to the doctor's and you're sitting 
in the waiting room, do other elderly people worry about the HMOs 
pulling out of town? Yes, oh, yes. That's all they talk about. It's 
the sole conversation. Soon, many more elderly Americans could lose 
their HMOs. HMOs admit they have underestimated the cost of caring 
for the elderly. Because it will get much worse next year. The situation 
will be exacerbated. When HMOs asked the government for permission 
to charge beneficiaries a little more, here's what President Clinton 
said last Friday. We told them no deal. Privately, senior administration 
officials tell ABC News that in the end the only solution may be to 
raise premiums or spend some of the budget surplus on Medicare. And 
that sends the problem back from places like this, Wilmington, to 
Washington. There, 30 years after establishing Medicare, the politicians 
must decide whether it's time to make a serious effort to provide 
services, like prescription drugs, not even mentioned in the original 
legislation. For the heidlingers and hundreds of thousands just like 
them, it's an easy call. Just do it. John Cochran, ABC News, Wilmington, 
Delaware. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>