<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981013.0267 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Three scientists working at universities in the United States on Tuesday 
won the Nobel Physics Prize for discovering that electrons on under 
certain circumstances can form new kinds of particles. The prize went 
to Robert C. Laughlin of the United States, Horst L. Stoermer of Germany 
and Daniel C. Tsui, a China-born American citizen. The citation from 
the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences said they discovered that electrons 
acting together in strong magnetic fields can form new types of particles 
that carry charges that are fractions of electron charges. Laughlin 
is at Stanford University, Stoermer (pronounced STER-mer) currently 
is at Columbia University in New York City and Tsui (TSOO-ee) teaches 
at Princeton University. The citation said their work led to ``yet 
another breakthrough in our understanding of quantum physics and to 
the development of new theoretical concepts of significance in many 
branches of modern physics.'' The 7.6-million-kronor (dlrs 978,000) 
prize will be divided equally among the three. Last year's physics 
laureates, Claude Cohen-Tannoudji of France and William Phillips and 
Steven Chu of the United States, were honored for developing ways 
of trapping atoms of gas and cooling them to within a millionth of 
a degree of absolute zero. The work led to developing extraordinarily 
accurate atomic clocks. Previous atomic clocks weren't exactly sloppy, 
being accurate to about one second in 32 million years _ but the improvements 
made possible a clock that loses just one second every 3 billion years. 
It also led to the creation of an entirely new form of matter, achieving 
what Albert Einstein had postulated was possible some 70 years earlier. 
The 1997 chemistry winners, American Paul D. Boyer, John E. Walker 
of Britain and Jens C. Skou of Denmark, discovered aspects of how 
the body's cells store and use energy, a fundamental process that 
affects everything from the building of bones to the transmission 
of nerve impulses. On Monday, the medicine prize was given to three 
Americans _ Robert Furchgott, Louis Ignarro and Ferid Murad _ for 
their work on discovering properties of nitric oxide, a common air 
pollutant but also a life-saver because of its capacity to dilate 
blood vessels. Furchgott, 82, is a pharmacologist at the State University 
of New York Health Science Center at Brooklyn; Ignarro, 57, is at 
the University of California at Los Angeles; and Murad, 62, is at 
the University of Texas Medical School in Houston. Their finding helped 
lead to the discovery of the anti-impotence drug Viagra and could 
also pay off in new treatments for heart disease, cancer and septic 
shock. The literature prize was awarded last Thursday to Portuguese 
novelist Jose Saramago. The economics prize winner is to be named 
on Wednesday and the peace prize on Friday. All the prizes are announced 
in Stockholm, except for the peace prize which is given in Oslo, Norway. 
The prizes are presented on Dec. 10, the anniversary of the death 
of Alfred Nobel, the Swedish industrialist and inventor of dynamite 
who established the prizes in his will. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>