<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981013.0885 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A U.S. envoy on Tuesday proclaimed a breakthrough in efforts to end 
the Kosovo crisis. But with NATO planes still poised to strike, he 
warned President Slobodan Milosevic must prove his commitment to peace. 
``We are not out of the emergency yet,'' said Richard Holbrooke after 
wrapping up week-long talks with Milosevic. ``We hope that this will 
mark a turning point ... but the truth is not in what I am saying 
here today, the truth is in compliance.'' In Brussels, Belgium, NATO 
officials said the threat of airstrikes remained in place to pressure 
the Yugoslav leader to honor international demands on Kosovo. They 
said the strikes could be called off or activated any time after Friday, 
the deadline for Milosevic's compliance. Threatened by airstrikes, 
Milosevic agreed Monday to withdraw his forces from Kosovo, begin 
peace negotiations with separatist ethnic Albanians and allow some 
2,000 international observers into the troubled Serb province. If 
honored, the commitments should end a seven-month crackdown against 
Kosovo Albanian militants in the southern Serbian province which killed 
hundreds _ most of them civilians _ and left up to 300,000 others 
displaced. In a rare televised address, the first since the 1995 Dayton 
Agreements that ended the Bosnian war, Milosevic sought to portray 
the agreements as a victory, saying they ``avert the danger of a military 
intervention against our country.'' ``The agreements ... are entirely 
in accordance with the interests of our country,'' he added, citing 
``enormous pressures that we have been exposed to.'' Since the crackdown 
began Feb. 28, Milosevic has insisted the crisis was an internal matter 
in which foreign powers should play no role. The crackdown was aimed 
at the rebel Kosovo Liberation Army fighting to wrest Kosovo away 
from Serbia. But the collateral damage, death and destruction affecting 
civilians _ led to growing international concern that culminated in 
the NATO threat. Milosevic said in his statement that the international 
verification mission, to be led by the Organization for Security and 
Cooperation in Europe, ``will eliminate false, untrue and malicious 
reports about the situation in Kosovo.'' The OSCE mission is in fact 
expected to act as a brake to further bloodshed and pressure authorities 
to honor Milosevic's commitments. Tuesday's developments capped a 
dramatic series of developments which moved from diplomatic pressure 
to NATO officially moving to the verge of airstrikes and U.S. President 
Bill Clinton announcing key concessions by Milosevic. International 
leaders stepped up efforts to resolve the crisis because of fears 
that thousands of homeless refugees would die if they could not return 
to their homes by the time winter sets in. But for some Kosovo refugees 
it might be too late. Besart Buqa died Tuesday in Kosovo, only five 
weeks old, after spending the entire life of five miserable weeks 
as a refugee, living under plastic sheets and make-up tents. His mother 
and father say they were too afraid of Serb forces to return home 
in Budakovo, 40 kilometers (25 miles) southwest of Pristina. In the 
Kosovo capital, Pristina, the political representative of the Kosovo 
Liberation Army, Adem Demaci, said he was disappointed that the verification 
forces in Kosovo would be unarmed. And in Geneva, Switzerland, other 
KLA representatives said nothing short of independence was acceptable. 
Another ethnic Albanian politician, Fehmi Agani, welcomed the agreement, 
but warned ``there should be no illusions that the problem is solved.'' 
Agani is an aide to Ibrahim Rugova, the Kosovo Albanian leader supported 
by the United States and its allies in his search for a non-violent 
solution to the Kosovo crisis. Holbrooke said most important was to 
give a boost to the ``political process that gives the people of Kosovo 
autonomy, self-determination,'' under a still to be agreed on timetable. 
Holbrooke said the key to the accord was Milosevic's decision to allow 
a 2,000-member ``verification mission'' and to permit aerial verification 
by non-combat aircraft that could begin as soon as the end of the 
week. Polish Foreign Minister Bronislaw Geremek, head of the OSCE, 
will soon come to Yugoslavia to sign the mission agreement. NATO's 
commander, Gen. Wesley Clark, and Secretary-General Javier Solana 
will also arrive to sign the aerial mission. ``They are not monitors, 
not observers,'' Holbrooke said. ``They are compliance verifiers.'' 
In addition, political negotiations with the ethnic Albanians will 
continue in Kosovo, led by Christopher Hill, the U.S. ambassador to 
Macedonia. The ethnic Albanians, who form 90 percent of Kosovo's 2 
million-strong population, have insisted on independence rather than 
regaining the autonomy Milosevic stripped in 1989. But international 
leaders oppose Kosovo independence, fearing that could lead to further 
instability in the tense Balkans. In Brussels, NATO sources, speaking 
on condition of anonymity, said Milosevic must take four steps: withdraw 
special troops from Kosovo immediately, sign an agreement with the 
OSCE on the verification mission, sign an agreement with NATO on the 
airborne reconnaissance and hammer out a ``framework agreement'' by 
November outlining future talks with ethnic Albanians. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>