<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981013.0567 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Three scientists working at universities in the United States on Tuesday 
won the Nobel Physics Prize for discovering that electrons on under 
certain circumstances can form new kinds of particles. Two other researchers 
at American institutions won the Nobel Chemistry Prize, announced 
later in the day. The physics prize went to Robert C. Laughlin of 
the United States, Horst L. Stoermer of Germany and Daniel C. Tsui, 
a China-born American citizen. The chemistry prize was won by Walter 
Kohn of the University of California-Santa Barbara and John Pople, 
a British citizen teaching at Northwestern. Like many of the Nobel 
science prizes, this year's physics award is for work that is in the 
rarefied atmosphere of high theory but that deals with fundamental 
questions. ``The reason this is important is it has to do with big 
issues, why the universe is the way it is,'' Laughlin, 47, of Stanford 
University, told The AP by phone as he was having coffee with his 
wife at home. Stoermer (pronounced STER-mer), 49, currently is at 
Columbia University in New York City and Tsui (TSOO-ee), 59, teaches 
at Princeton University. The prize-winning work was done together 
by Tsui and Stoermer and elaborated by Laughlin. The chemistry award 
is for work in the area of quantum chemistry, for ``pioneering contributions 
in developing methods that can be used for theoretical studies of 
the properties of molecules and the chemical processes in which they 
are involved.'' Quantum chemistry allows researchers to study substances 
that are difficult to produce in the laboratory and thus has a wide 
range of applications such as studying interstellar matter and how 
pollutants such as freon react with the ozone layer. According to 
the physics citation, the three laureates discovered a new form of 
``quantum fluid,'' which are fluids such as liquid helium that have 
certain properties in common such as superfluidity. What makes these 
fluids important for researchers is that ``events in a drop of quantum 
fluid can afford more profound insights into the general inner structure 
and dynamics of matter,'' the academy said. It is ``yet another breakthrough 
in our understanding of quantum physics and to the development of 
new theoretical concepts of significance in many branches of modern 
physics,'' the citation said. The chemistry and physics prizes each 
are worth 7.6 million kronor (dlrs 978,000) and will be divided equally 
among their respective winners. Mats Jonson, a physics professor at 
Sweden's respected Chalmers Institute of Technology, said the physics 
laureates' work could be important in the development of smaller electronic 
components and could lead to improving computer memories. The prize-winning 
work was done in the early 1980s. Since then, the development of sophisticated 
microelectonics has allowed other researchers to confirm the work's 
validity, in experiments that the Academy likened to ``measuring the 
sound of individual hailstones during a hailstorm.'' Last year's physics 
laureates, Claude Cohen-Tannoudji of France and William Phillips and 
Steven Chu of the United States, were honored for developing ways 
of trapping atoms of gas and cooling them to within a millionth of 
a degree of absolute zero. The work led to developing extraordinarily 
accurate atomic clocks. Previous atomic clocks weren't exactly sloppy, 
being accurate to about one second in 32 million years _ but the improvements 
made possible a clock that loses just one second every 3 billion years. 
The 1997 chemistry winners, American Paul D. Boyer, John E. Walker 
of Britain and Jens C. Skou of Denmark, discovered aspects of how 
the body's cells store and use energy, a fundamental process that 
affects everything from the building of bones to the transmission 
of nerve impulses. On Monday, the medicine prize was given to three 
Americans _ Robert Furchgott, Louis Ignarro and Ferid Murad _ for 
their work on discovering properties of nitric oxide, a common air 
pollutant but also a life-saver because of its capacity to dilate 
blood vessels. Their finding helped lead to the discovery of the anti-impotence 
drug Viagra and could also pay off in new treatments for heart disease, 
cancer and septic shock. The literature prize was awarded last Thursday 
to Portuguese novelist Jose Saramago. The economics prize winner is 
to be named on Wednesday and the peace prize on Friday. All the prizes 
are announced in Stockholm, except for the peace prize which is given 
in Oslo, Norway. The prizes are presented on Dec. 10, the anniversary 
of the death of Alfred Nobel, the Swedish industrialist and inventor 
of dynamite who established the prizes in his will. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>