<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981013.0844 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Five scientists at universities in the United States won the Nobel 
Prizes in physics and chemistry Tuesday for work exploring the inner 
structure of matter. Their research has far-reaching implications, 
from a new generation of microelectronics to understanding the destruction 
of Earth's ozone layer. Three physicists will share the prize for 
discovering how electrons can change behavior, work that could lead 
to further advances in microelectronics. And two researchers were 
named co-winners of the chemistry prize for theoretical research into 
the quantum properties of molecules. In each case, the winners will 
share the 7.6-million-kronor (dlrs 978,000) prizes. The chemistry 
award went to Walter Kohn of the University of California-Santa Barbara 
and John Pople of Northwestern University. Kohn, 75, was born in Vienna, 
Austria. He has taught at U.S. institutions since 1950, and at Santa 
Barbara since 1979. Kohn was cited for development of density-functional 
theory in the 1960s. It simplifies the mathematical description of 
the bonding between atoms that make up molecules. His approach makes 
calculations according to an average number of electrons located in 
any point, rather than trying to establish the motion of each electron 
in every atom in a molecule. This reliable model has enabled scientists 
to study large molecules that previously were too complex and unwieldy 
to understand. Pople, 72, is a British citizen. He joined the faculty 
at Canegie-Mellon University in 1964 before relocating to Northwestern 
in 1986. Pople was cited for developing computer techniques to test 
the chemical structure and details of matter. The resulting computer 
program is used by thousands of universities and companies worldwide. 
In the 1990s, he has refined the program to include Kohn's density-functional 
theory. His approach allows scientists to create computer models of 
chemical reactions that are difficult or impossible to recreate in 
the laboratory. It has a wide range of applications, from studying 
interstellar matter based on telescope measurements of its chemical 
signatures and how pollutants such as freon react with the ozone layer. 
In medicine, researchers use Pople's quantum chemistry methods to 
simulate the effects of proposed drugs to fight HIV infection. The 
laureates in physics are Robert B. Laughlin of the United States, 
Horst L. Stoermer of Germany and Daniel C. Tsui, a native of China 
who is now an American citizen. They discovered that ordinary electrons 
acting together in strong magnetic fields and very low temperatures 
can condense into new types of composite subatomic particles that 
function as a fluid, the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences said. Subsequently, 
other researchers confirmed their experiments and directly observed 
these new composites, known as quasiparticles. ``Usually in physics, 
you break things into smaller and smaller pieces,'' said Stoermer. 
''But here ... the big electrons stay perfectly intact, yet they create 
smaller units that look like electrons that have a charge that is 
one-third or one-fifth or one-seventh of an electron and (yet) doesn't 
break apart.'' Laughlin works at Stanford University, Stoermer is 
at Columbia University and Tsui teaches at Princeton University. The 
award recognizes work Tsui and Stoermer did together in 1982. Laughlin 
elaborated on the work the next year. Laughlin, 47, who did his graduate 
studies at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, got the news in 
the middle of the night. ``The reason why this is important is that 
it has to do with why the universe is the way it is,'' he said today. 
``You can chop (the universe) to pieces or learn how all the pieces 
work together. This is a triumph of the second.'' According to the 
citation, the three men discovered a new form of ``quantum fluid'' 
_ fluids such as liquid helium that have certain properties in common, 
such as superfluidity, or the absence of energy resistance at ultra-low 
temperatures. What makes these fluids important for researchers is 
that they can reveal more about the inner structure and dynamics of 
matter. It is ``yet another breakthrough in our understanding of quantum 
physics and to the development of new theoretical concepts of significance 
in many branches of modern physics,'' the academy said. Mats Jonson, 
a physics professor at Sweden's respected Chalmers Institute of Technology, 
said the laureates' work could be important in the development of 
smaller electronic components and could lead to improving computer 
memories by manipulating electrons in this altered state. The development 
of microelectronics has allowed other researchers to confirm the work's 
validity in experiments the academy likened to ``measuring the sound 
of individual hailstones during a hailstorm.'' On Monday, the medicine 
prize was given to three Americans _ Robert Furchgott, Louis Ignarro 
and Ferid Murad _ for discovering properties of nitric oxide, a common 
air pollutant but also a life-saver because of its capacity to dilate 
blood vessels. Their finding helped lead to the discovery of the anti-impotence 
drug Viagra. The literature prize was awarded Thursday to Portuguese 
novelist Jose Saramago. The economics prize winner is to be named 
on Wednesday and the peace prize on Friday. All the prizes are announced 
in Stockholm, except for the peace prize which is given in Oslo, Norway. 
The prizes are presented on Dec. 10, the anniversary of the death 
of Alfred Nobel, the Swedish industrialist and inventor of dynamite 
who established the prizes in his will. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>