<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981013.1600.1510 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Well! Jack Benny ruled the airwaves in the '30s and '40s with his 
hugely popular radio program. And now, a violin-playing comedian is 
bringing the legendary comic to life for a new generation. Gloria 
Hillard has the story. There was something about character actor Eddie 
Carroll. I don't know, something about the voice, the mannerisms. 
And as far as Rochester's concerned, you can never ever count on him. 
One moment, you're talking to Carroll, and the next -- You're so good, 
you see. And you're wonderful the way you set me up. For 15 years, 
Carroll has been touring the country in his one-man tribute to Jack 
Benny, whose career spanned 45 years in radio, films and television. 
Just unwrap it because I have to change the card. I can't help it, 
I have to change the card. Now unwrap it. It's a beautiful package. 
I can't help it. Carroll had always been a fan of the comedian, and 
in 1974, even worked on one of his TV specials. And he was the dearest, 
sweetest man in the world. But his career as Jack Benny, well, that 
was launched in a moment of serendipity, I guess. In 1983, he was 
working on a movie, and in response to a tense moment on the set, 
he -- Just out of things that people do, just to be silly, I said, 
"oh, for heaven's sakes, Rochester. This is my big moment, and you're 
ruining it for me again." And I just carried on, being silly. Well, 
it got a big laugh. So the director came up to me after and he said, 
"you know, it's interesting, Eddie," he said, "you not only sound 
like him, you start to look like him." The director told him a producer 
in New York was looking for an actor to play Benny on the stage. He 
got the role. I watched every video, I worked on his walk, his attitude, 
mannerisms, listened to the radio shows constantly to get his speech, 
his rhythm, because he was the master of timing. But you know something, 
Gloria? The most difficult part of this whole thing was learning to 
play the violin. Gee, that's so good. I don't even want to do any 
more. In his show, Carroll brings to the stage Benny's life story 
and signature comedy. So, between cheapskate and 39 and vanity, these 
were all things that we recognize in ourselves and almost everybody 
we know. So Benny was brilliant. Carroll admits he doesn't know where 
it comes from, but others have asked if he feels the presence of the 
late comedian. Listen, it would be wonderful. I mean, this is a -- 
he was a wonderful human being, loved by everybody. So, that's nice 
company. So we bid good-bye to Eddie Carroll -- we think. "And listen, 
the next time we got together, I'll buy lunch." Sure. "yes. Have a 
wonderful day." Gloria Hillard, "CNN Entertainment News," Los Angeles. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>