<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981013.2130.1488 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Sitcoms that shock audiences with their language and subject matter 
are becoming popular with viewers today. Michael Okwu reports on one 
such TV offering. It was the mood -- The slaves haven't been emancipated 
yet. Get your feet off the table, Pfeiffer. The casual one liners 
-- With you at the helm, I better brush up on my cotton-picking skills. 
Delivered from a reprised Lincoln White House that raised the ire 
of protesters -- Advertisers have to go! And raises the question -- 
how could the producers of "the secret diary of Desmond Pfeiffer," 
a sitcom airing on upn whose prime time audience is 45% black -- how 
could they conceive to air a pilot that, to many, was at the least 
insensitive and at worst, racist? Hello, you're in America! You're 
seeing a loosening of censorship constraints on the networks. With 
every season, it goes farther and farther. And it's because they're 
losing audience. Compared to last year, 1.7 million fewer homes are 
reportedly tuned into the networks. And as the competition has intensified, 
analysts we spoke to agree. A whole new media culture has emerged 
-- one that's much more aggressively edgy and much less politically 
correct in television and in film. You're seeing the networks being 
influenced by "there's something about Mary," by "south park," by 
these things that are becoming huge phenomenons because they are shocking. 
We had a period in the early '70s with some of Norman lear's shows 
like "all in the family," where a lot of serious issues were talked 
about and they were joked about. But there was always an undercurrent 
of seriousness. Those days may be gone. Upn is even trying to parlay 
critical distaste into ratings success. And why not? Critics say the 
bar has been lowered. This decade, audiences have become accustomed 
to seeing what some civil rights leaders believe were Negative black 
stereotypes in a rash of new black sitcoms. Some helped the fledgling 
WB and upn networks secure niches, even though they were roundly panned 
by critics. I think any "oppressed group," we develop a kind of ethnic 
humor, and we make fun of ourselves. Susan fales-hill is co-creator 
of "linc's" on showtime. I do think that we, as African-Americans, 
sometimes send mixed messages. And we can sometimes be accused of 
doing the most denigrating work about ourselves. There's something 
in the air where everyone is just -- feels like they can go for it. 
I mean, just look at what's going on in the White House. I mean, they're 
talking about semen stains on CNN every day, so why not push the envelope 
at the sitcom? Still, its star insists it's just a political satire 
-- the troubling show was the one on the streets. You know, it's just 
a lot people serving themselves and using this as a platform. I mean, 
I can't be mad at them. They want to be on TV just like me. Michael 
Okwu, "CNN Entertainment News," New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>