<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981013.2100.2406 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
While not quite the gulf war or war of the worlds, if you were in 
Charleston, South Carolina, during a particular September weekend 
you might have found yourself right in the middle of a full-blown 
military exercise. It would have been hard to miss. Helicopter begunships 
over head, river borne commandos, an armored column clanking past 
a pizza huts. All part of a new program called urban warrior, designed 
to help the Marine corps fight the wars of the future. Here is NBC 
news correspondent Jim miklaszweski. Kill. It first battalion Marines, 
battle tested and tough. They fought in desert storm, Somalia, and 
gave their lives in Beirut. They train in Panama, Norway, and yet 
the Marines think they're not quite prepared for the wars of the future. 
We don't train for the way we're going to fight. We know our enemy 
is not going to be that state-supported, uniformed, platform to platform 
war like in desert storm. He's going to blend into the city. Professionals 
soldiers believe desert storm was the last battle of its kind, a setpiece 
open campaign where the American military had an overwhelming advantage. 
But the world's population is crowding into urban areas, and the Marines 
think they have seen the future, another hellhole like Somalia. You 
run into an awful lot of casualties fighting in an urban environment. 
If you are going to have to fight in an urban environment in the future, 
it makes sense to gure out how to protect the force in that mix. So 
how do you learn to fight in skyscapers and sewers. So early hier 
this year a group of Marines troupped into Chicago. On this windy 
may morning the city became the back drop for something the Marines 
have never done before -- turn a living, breathing city into a laboratory 
for combat training. If I've got to go from this side of the street 
to the other, there's a lot of open area where somebody could shoot 
me from. If you and I were standing on this corner and somebody went 
by us on this, if he wr Manning a checkpoint, we would never notice 
if they had gone by. Lessons learned, but not mission accomplished. 
Throughout the suller, the Marines put the lessons of Chicago into 
practice at a mock city in North Carolina. They're trying to deal 
with a complex array of new challenges. Civilians, both friendly and 
hostile. go hom! We're faced with civilians running around and basically 
you're going to have shooting on one block, maybe handing ouse rice 
on the third and a full-blown threat on the third. That's the philosophy 
and what we'rerying to prepare for. But there is no substitute for 
the real thing. In September, the Marines staged say full-dress mock 
invasion of the citadel in income South Carolina. This was real tough, 
while real life continued on around them. The invasion began before 
dawn at a local yacht club. Con tinge entd of British and Dutch commandos 
slipped ashore. We will more a short distance to secure a landing 
zone to allow the assault force to come in. Miles away, a rifle company 
apreparing for the worst. We were sent in to take out a terrorist 
organization making chemical and biological agents, eliminate the 
threat, volcano any American citizen or friendlies, A third force 
rolled in from the north. We think the threat is going to be in the 
urban environment and the odds are that the serious kind of things 
we're going to wind up dealing with in there may well resolve around 
chemical and biological weapons. Although only an exercise, when the 
raid began it looked and sounded like the real thing. Once we hit 
the deck, we had an objective, the field pdhouse where the terrorists 
were. We had it isolated already with support from the U.K. company. 
There was a brief fire fight, three enemy were neutralized. We moved 
on to security alz. There are a couple terrorists in there, maybe 
civilians and possibly chemical war fare inside. Once the building 
was isolated, we hit the objective. We eliminated all terrorists in 
there, collected the hoftagtse, flex cuffed them and prepared them 
for evacuation. I would say definitely successful. We accomplishedthe 
mission and got all our people out with minimal loss. At the end of 
the day, Marines say nothing is better eparation for urban combat 
than urban training. Disruptive? Absolutely. Stly? Perhaps. But Marines 
say it is the battle field of the future and they intend to be ready. 
Next, a massive sea borne assault on San Francisco next month. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>