<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981013.2100.1143 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For those who need a reminder this is the 1976 version of both the 
White House press room and the man at the podium, Ron nessen, ladies 
and gentlemen. The then new White House -- sorry we had to do that 
to you but we also want to be -- -- there is, with Stewart Eizenstat 
standing behind him, domestic policy advisor at the time, the young 
Jody Powell. By the way, as we said, lived with governor Carter on 
the road. Not an overstatement. There were days, as long as we're 
talking about how politics have changed, were there not, Jody, when 
you guys all about shared a motel room? Well, we did share a motel 
room. Anything you want to talk about? The president says he used 
to throw pillows at me to make me stop snoring. Ron nessen, we just 
saw the departure of Mike McCurry and almost the defy -- deification 
of Mike McCurry, who left receiving generally high marks and left 
recusing himself from conversations where he didn't want to know too 
much. He didn't want to have to lie to the press corps. How has this 
job changed since you walked away from that podium? I think crurm 
Mike McCurry did a good job, a sense of humor, which helped him. He 
had a thick skin, which you need. I didn't have it in those days, 
unfortunately. I had a lot of hair but not much skin. The way the 
job has changed, first, there are so many more reporters covering 
the White House. When I was a correspondent, there were so few reporters 
and only three networks then. The daily briefing was held around the 
press secretary's desk in his office. Now there are many more news 
outlets, much greater comptirks which leads to some of the excesses 
you have seen in the coverage. And you've got 24-hour news, which 
is really the major difference. There is no front page, no lead story. 
It just goes on all the time. There is no way to gauge what is more 
and less important. When I was at NBC we worked all Y to get ready 
for the Huntley-Brinkley report and if it was the lead story on there, 
you knew it was important. But with 24-hour news you're watching the 
news gathering ocess, not finished, packaged stories. And Jody Powell, 
the current president could not be in more trouble by now. And when 
you look at the these two on paper, two white, religious southern 
M, democrats, and yet they are not close. In fact there have been 
comments on background that they are far from close. Why is that? 
Let me correct one misapprehension, that despite common knowledge 
to the contrary, all southerners are not Kin to one another, all aren't 
married to sisters and cousins, so southerners have the right to be 
different and hold different views too. Also I want to pick up on 
something Ron said, when with you asked about the wise men walking 
down to Pennsylvania avenue. I think it's important to underscore 
the fact that not only can't that happen but it absolutely should 
not happen so long as the people who elect a president, this or any 
other president, want hinl to stay in office. For it to happen absent 
a desire on the part of the public, we're talking about not wise men 
but a coup and I think that's important. Also I do disagree with Ron 
on this one small point, that I think the public has reached a consensus. 
That may change but the public view of all this has been remarkably 
consistent for the past eight or nine months. They keep looking at 
it and being told about it, and saying yes, we understand, but we 
want this president to say in -- say office, let's move on. That may 
change but eight or nine months is pretty close to a consensus. The 
headline here tonight, Jody Powell can still duck a question. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>