<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981013.1830.0822 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
NBC news "in depth" -- tonight, a gathering of true believers. By 
the tens of thousands, they came to rural Georgia, home to a woman 
who claims to see visions and receive messages from the virgin Mary. 
Apparitions or visions of Mary have been reported as far back as the 
third century, but only a few have been declared authentic by the 
Catholic church, including sightings in guadalupe, Mexico, Lourdes, 
France, and fatima, Portugal. Now "in depth," the town of Conyers, 
Georgia, where NBC's fredricka Whitfield joins us live. For the last 
time, Nancy fowler says she is relayed what he called messages from 
Mary. And tens of thousands were here to witness it. Today, outside 
this small farm house in Conyers, Georgia, the power of faith, where 
up to 100,000 people come to hear the religious message delivered 
by Nancy fowler and what she says are her visions of Mary, the mother 
of Jesus. Mary is right there. In that window right there. I think 
it's Jesus working through Nancy. The 50-year-old fowler, a homemaker 
and former nurse, says on the 13th day of each month, for eight years, 
she's gone into her so-called "apparition room," to receive a vision 
of the virgin Mary a holy message. And then pass it on. Pray against 
the evils of this age. Only this time, fowler says, it's her last 
public pronouncement. She claims the virgin Mary won't appear to her 
again. We will not be permitted to see our lady this way again until 
we are in heaven. Fowler, who's moving to Florida next month, says 
she first saw the virgin Mary on her property here in 1990. She's 
welcomed the sick, the strong, anyone, she says, of faith. I think 
something supernatural is happening. It's this woman's 15th visit. 
I look down in the chain in my roscy. It turned gold. They are believers 
in God and in fowler. She says he was a typical Catholic mother when 
she begone experiencing visions. At first, friends and family thought 
she was crazy. How can you say no to God? After going with her visions, 
he won following even in Australia. She is blessed. But the church 
isn't so sure. Spokesman monsignor Peter dora -- These parties try 
to convince the church and the world that this is authentic. But still, 
in Conyers, it's not about evidence or proof, it's about the faith, 
a belief in Nancy fowler and her visions. It's been said fowler has 
never profited from her visions. She plans to publish those messages 
on the Internet. tom? Thank you very much. Fredricka Whitfield tonight 
in Georgia. What's behind this phenomenon? What causes an average 
person to become, in effect, a pilgrim, traveling the back roads of 
America for a glimpse of the Divine? We put that question to Dr. Carl 
raschke, professor of religious studies at the University of Denver. 
Dr. raschke tonight, "in his own words." I think this is part of the 
whole phenomenon of millennial madness, people are believing in strange 
and wondrous things as we get closer to the year 2000. Generally, 
the people tend to be Catholic, they tend not to be conservative Catholic, 
but what I would call more liberal Catholics with new age leanings. 
They're looking for healing. They're looking for miracles. They're 
looking for guidance. They're looking for love. This has more the 
kind of feel to me of a kind of new-age Woodstock, sort of phenomenon. 
These are not weird cultic wackos at all. These are your average suburban 
housewife or businessman. We can't say this is a cult, though there 
are obviously spiritual counterfeits where somebody could be deluded, 
and the Catholic church has very often come up with ways for smoking 
those people out. This is not the first religious example of millennial 
madness. And I think we're going to see more of these kind of events 
beginning to accelerate and gain currency in the next two years. Professor 
Carl raschke, "in his own words." 
</TEXT>
</DOC>