<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981013.0315 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A new study has found a substantial discrepancy between the number 
of cancers detected during life and those found in autopsies. Despite 
advances in medical technology, the disparity between the diagnosis 
of cancer before and after death was 44 percent, similar to that found 
in studies conducted in earlier decades, said the authors. The study, 
which involved 1,105 autopsies performed over the 10-year period from 
1986 to 1995 at the Medical Center of Louisiana in New Orleans, found 
that 100 patients had developed 111 cancers that doctors had either 
not detected or misdiagnosed. In 54 of the 100 patients, the cancer 
had spread. In 57 of the patients, the cancer was the most probable 
cause of death, the authors reported Tuesday in the Journal of the 
American Medical Association. Even in an era of CAT scan X-rays and 
other high technology medicine, autopsies remain extremely important 
because doctors sometimes do not detect cancers and other conditions 
during life. Thus, a recent decline in autopsy rates could be adversely 
affecting the quality of health care. Long known as Charity Hospital, 
the Medical Center of Louisiana serves a mainly indigent population, 
which may not be receiving adequate health care. The hospital is also 
a top-level trauma center. Thus, cancers and other chronic conditions 
could have been masked by other more acute problems, Dr. Elizabeth 
Burton and her co-authors wrote. One in five of the deceased, who 
ranged in age from 4 to 92 years, had cancers at the time of autopsy. 
But the report did not address the extent of medical care they received 
during life. Nevertheless, the authors wrote, ``The number of inaccurate 
clinical diagnoses (attributed to both malignancies and all other 
causes) remains alarmingly high.'' In an interview, Dr. Burton said 
she did not know how representative her study was of patients who 
are currently now being treated in other types of hospitals. For several 
reasons, a number of medical leaders have deplored the plummeting 
of autopsy rates in American hospitals in recent years. Rates are 
now about 5 percent in many community hospitals compared to 50 percent 
in the 1960s. Dr. Lars Erik Bottiger , a former editor of the Journal 
of International Medicine, said in a recent interview in Stockholm 
that autopsy rates have declined in Sweden and many other countries 
with little agreement as to why. Doctors and hospital officials have 
speculated that autopsies are now too costly and an unnecessary diagnostic 
tool in this era of high-technology medicine. But the New Orleans 
study provides additional evidence to the contrary. At 24 percent, 
the autopsy rate in the study was higher than the national rate, largely 
because of an affiliation with the coroner's office, which has powers 
to perform an autopsy even if a family does not give consent. The 
rate would have been 10 percent without the coroner's affiliation, 
the authors said, and ``a significant number of clinically undiagnosed 
malignancies may not have been recorded.'' A principal reason autopsies 
are performed is to inform family members about the accuracy of the 
diagnosis in the deceased and the quality of that patient's care. 
However, Dr. Burton said it was not the practice of the pathologists 
who performed the autopsies to call families of the deceased to provide 
them with the findings, though the families could seek the autopsy 
findings on their own or through their doctors. Dr. Burton also said 
she did not know how many of the families learned about the undetected 
or misdiagnosed cancers. ``Do we directly call the families and give 
them the results? No, we do not,'' Dr. Burton said. ``Do we notify 
the attending physician?'' Dr. Burton said. ``We are doing everything 
within our power to do that now.'' She added that she did not know 
if the pathologists who performed the autopsies were notifying the 
attending physicians in the decade-long period of the study. Dr. Burton 
said she would not know whether any malpractice cases or disciplinary 
actions had been taken as a result of the undetected or misdiagnosed 
cancers. Autopsies still are the most important means of determining 
whether a death is due to homicide or natural causes. They also serve 
many additional purposes. Among them, the pathology findings can help 
monitor the effectiveness of drug therapies and surgical techniques, 
and they are an important teaching tool for medical students and doctors. 
Autopsies help monitor public health by identifying new diseases and 
changes in ones long recognized. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>