<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981013.0403 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial on Wednesday, Oct. 14: Peace 
and reconciliation are not coming to Kosovo, but at least the displacement 
and killing of civilians may abate under an agreement reached with 
Slobodan Milosevic. The deal, arranged by Richard Holbrooke, the American 
envoy, can save lives if it is vigorously enforced by the United States 
and its European allies. Faced with the threat of NATO air strikes, 
Milosevic agreed to observe a cease-fire, withdraw many of his brutal 
special forces from Kosovo and allow unarmed observers and NATO overflights 
to monitor the agreement. If honored by Serbian forces, which will 
be difficult to assure, these steps can allow tens of thousands of 
ethnic Albanians now hiding in the forests and hills to return to 
their villages. With Serbian guns silent, international agencies can 
provide food and other aid desperately needed as winter approaches. 
That was Washington's main objective, and the justification for authorizing 
NATO military action if Milosevic persisted with his terror campaign 
in Kosovo. Achieving that goal without bombing would be a diplomatic 
victory. Milosevic has often broken his commitments. In this case, 
his assent to NATO monitoring flights over Serbia can help provide 
the means for early detection and swift retaliation for any Serbian 
violations of the accord. The murderous police forces that he will 
be permitted to keep in Kosovo must not be allowed to leave their 
barracks. In the absence of intermediate mechanisms to enforce the 
accord, NATO must remain ready to conduct air strikes if Milosevic 
breaks the agreement. NATO vigilance will also be required because 
the 2,000 ground observers assembled to check Serbian compliance will 
be provided by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe. 
The group, which includes nearly all European countries, lacks the 
unity and spine to deal effectively with the Serbs, and commands no 
military forces. It is also regrettable that Milosevic refuses to 
recognize the jurisdiction of the war crimes tribunal seeking to investigate 
possible crimes by Serbian forces, which could deter further atrocities. 
The Holbrooke agreement rightly does not try to settle the question 
of Kosovo's political future, which will require complex negotiations. 
Washington and its allies will need to find ways short of military 
action to press Milosevic to restore the large degree of autonomy 
the province enjoyed before his assault on its people began in 1989. 
Milosevic is incorrigible, and Washington has gained only a respite 
from his abuse and atrocities. Even as he retreats in Kosovo, his 
men have threatened the lives of independent journalists, scholars 
and politicians in Serbia who question his autocratic rule. But the 
killing and intimidation may stop in Kosovo _ at least for now. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>