<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981013.0150 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Comfort food _ that buzz phrase embracing all the bland, soft satisfactions 
of childhood eating _ doesn't quite have the cachet now that it did 
a few years ago, when restaurants everywhere were trying to outdo 
each other in the evocation of home and hearth. But somehow, one of 
those quintessentially comforting foods, mashed potatoes, has not 
only held on in popularity, but also managed to ease right into the 
turbulent mainstream of today's creative cookery. Mashed potatoes, 
it turns out, can do or be anything: they form the basis for foods 
as varied as pancakes, noodles and tortes; they serve as a platform 
for that seared fish fillet pinned with a spring of herbs; they morph 
from Cajun to Mediterranean, and they even find their way into desserts. 
And while some of today's adaptations are just as comforting as ever, 
others can be unsettling. They are a blank canvas, waiting to be embellished 
with a chef's truffles, goat cheese, garlic or wasabi. Stefano Battistini, 
at Fresco in midtown, offers at least five kinds of mashed potatoes, 
including parsnip and white truffle with quail eggs. A restaurant 
in Chicago, the Mashed Potato Club, offers more than 100 possible 
toppings for mashed potatoes, including anchovies, pickled beets, 
jalapenos, granola and peanut butter. ``When we first opened we had 
plain mashed potatoes with or without gravy,'' said Greg Kovach, the 
owner, who picked the name because he always served mashed potatoes 
when he entertained at home and his friends insisted he feature them 
on the menu. ``Then people kept requesting toppings, so we kept adding 
them to the list,'' he said. (Of course, Joel Robuchon didn't need 
jalapenos or granola. He made his reputation, at his Michelin three-star 
restaurant in Paris, now closed, with a sublime, unadorned _ but indecently 
buttered _ potato puree.) Still, the inclination toward variation 
has traditional roots. Boosting mashed potatoes with distinctive flavors 
or using their pliant texture to enhance other foods is common in 
many cuisines. They are used to temper salt cod for Mediterranean 
baccala and fish roe for Greek taramosalata. They provide the crust, 
traced with a fork perhaps to create crispy little ridges, for an 
English shepherd's pie. Rolled in crumbs, small cylinders or balls, 
they can be deep-fried as croquettes. And when mixed with flour, mashed 
potatoes can be turned into pastalike Italian gnocchi, often colored 
and seasoned with spinach as they are at Osteria del Circo in midtown. 
Tradition is also important at Sonora, a new restaurant on East 39th 
Street, where Rafael Palomino mixes mashed potatoes with black beans. 
``It's a variation on a winter dish we eat at home in Colombia, made 
with red beans,'' he said. Thinned down, mashed potatoes become a 
hot or cold soup _ think vichyssoise _ and even a creamy yet creamless 
sauce. In Tunisia, they cushion the runny egg in the fried pastry 
turnover called brik. New England cooks know that mashed potatoes 
in the batter guarantee tender doughnuts. And mashed potatoes are 
inextricably joined with sausages in England for bangers and mash. 
Two weeks ago in Rome, at Bramante, a stylish restaurant near the 
Piazza Navona, a ``tortino di patate,'' a kind of mashed potato pie 
studded with bits of mortadella and topped with bread crumbs, was 
an excellent first course. The tortino turned out to be just mashed 
potatoes _ they had formed their own crisp, pastrylike crust during 
baking. Was it a coincidence that this little restaurant also serves 
wonderful meatloaf? But there's no reason to abandon the plain mashed 
potatoes of every childhood in America. Though I use mashed potatoes 
to prepare dishes like baccala, when I serve mashed potatoes at home, 
whether for a family meal or a formal dinner party, they are usually 
plain, with just some pureed garlic perhaps. And I do it the old-fashioned 
way, using a heavy old-fashioned potato ricer with its extra-fine 
screen that I found for $1 at a yard sale many years ago. In my mother's 
kitchen, mashed potatoes bound fish cakes and, with the addition of 
flour and eggs, became little Austrian noodles. Occasionally, she 
would wrap the same dough around small purple plums to make dumplings 
called zwetschken knoedel, which she boiled and served rolled in buttered, 
sugared bread crumbs seasoned with cinnamon. This was one of my father's 
favorite dishes, and it had to be eaten with all the care one takes 
with chicken Kiev lest the plum juices squirt all over the place when 
the dumpling is cut. Dumplings like these are now being served at 
the Monkey Bar, whose pastry chef, Anna Elisabeth Altenburg, is a 
native of Salzburg, Austria. She serves them with a Concord grape 
and plum sauce. The menu calls them Austrian plum dumplings, not even 
giving a hint of mashed potatoes. If there's a season for mashed potatoes, 
it's starting now, and not because this year's crop was just harvested. 
Thanksgiving is just around the corner. And the commonplace, everyday 
mashed potato pulls off yet another wonderful trick: call on it to 
be festive and, sure enough, it will be. POTATO TORTE Adapted from 
Bramante Restaurant, Rome Time: 1{ hours 2\ pounds Idaho potatoes, 
peeled and quartered Salt 1{ tablespoons butter 3 ounces Parmigiano-Reggiano, 
finely grated 3 ounces mortadella, sliced thin and minced 2 eggs, 
lightly beaten 2 to 3 tablespoons milk Generous pinch freshly grated 
nutmeg Freshly ground black pepper to taste 2 tablespoons plain bread 
crumbs. 1. Place potatoes in a pot of salted water, bring to a boil 
and cook until tender, about 20 minutes. Drain, and mash in a mixing 
bowl. 2. Preheat oven to 400 degrees. Butter an 8- or 9-inch baking 
pan at least 1{ inches deep, preferably a springform or other loose-bottomed 
pan. Line the bottom with parchment paper, and heavily butter paper 
with about { tablespoon of butter. 3. Add the cheese, mortadella, 
eggs, 2 tablespoons of the milk, nutmeg and salt and pepper to taste 
to the potatoes, and mix well. The potatoes should be smooth and thick, 
but not stiff. Add a little more milk if necessary. Spread potatoes 
in baking dish and smooth the top. Sprinkle with breadcrumbs, and 
dot with bits of the remaining tablespoon of butter. 4. Bake about 
35 minutes, until the bread crumbs are golden. Remove from oven and 
set aside for 10 minutes. Remove the sides of the baking pan, cut 
into wedges or squares and serve, taking care to lift the pieces off 
the parchment. Yield: 6 servings. WHIPPED POTATOES WITH BLACK BEANS 
Adapted from ``Bistro Latino'' by Rafael Palomino Time: 45 minutes 
4 large Idaho potatoes, peeled and quartered 6 cups chicken stock 
or lightly salted water 1 large garlic clove, peeled { teaspoon olive 
oil Salt 1 tablespoon soft unsalted butter { cup heavy cream, at room 
temperature 11/3 cups freshly cooked or canned black beans, rinsed 
and drained { tablespoon finely chopped cilantro { cup cooked corn 
kernels, optional. 1. Preheat oven to 350 degrees. Place potatoes 
in a large pot, add stock or salted water, cover and bring to a boil. 
Cook until very soft, 20 to 30 minutes. 2. Meanwhile, place garlic 
on a piece of foil, moisten with oil and loosely wrap it. Place it 
in oven for 15 minutes. 3. When potatoes are soft, drain and return 
them to the pot to mash by hand or place them in an electric mixer. 
Add salt to taste, the roasted garlic, the butter, cream and black 
beans. Beat ingredients together. 4. Adjust seasonings, and gently 
reheat the potatoes before serving. Garnish each portion with cilantro 
and, if desired, a scattering of corn. Yield: 6 to 8 servings. POTATO 
CREPES MERE BLANC Adapted from ``A French Chef Cooks at Home'' by 
Jacques Pepin Time: 1{ hours, plus overnight chilling 1 pound boiling 
potatoes, scrubbed 1{ tablespoons flour Salt to taste [ teaspoon freshly 
ground white pepper 3 eggs 1/3 cup heavy cream 1 to 2 tablespoons 
milk, optional 8 tablespoons unsalted butter Sour cream or creme fraiche 
and caviar, or sugar and jam, optional, for serving. 1. Place potatoes 
in a pot of cold water, bring to a boil and cook gently until they 
are tender, 35 to 40 minutes. Drain, then peel and finely mash the 
potatoes in a mixing bowl. You should have about 1{ cups potato puree. 
2. Add flour and salt and pepper, then beat in the eggs one at a time. 
Add the cream, mix until smooth, cover and refrigerate overnight. 
3. The next day the mixture should have the consistency of Russian 
dressing. If it is too thick, thin it with a tablespoon or two of 
milk. Check seasonings. 4. Preheat oven to 200 degrees. Place 1{ tablespoons 
of the butter in a large, heavy skillet over medium heat. When the 
butter turns a light amber, drop about 1{ tablespoons of the batter 
in the skillet, allowing it to spread by itself. You should be able 
to fry 3 pancakes at a time, allowing enough space between them so 
they have a nice round shape. They should be about 3{ inches in diameter. 
Cook about a minute on the first side, flip them over and cook about 
30 seconds longer. Remove from the pan, and place on a heatproof platter 
in the oven to keep warm. Continue adding butter to the pan and frying 
the rest of the batter. 5. Serve the crepes warm as a side dish, or 
topped with caviar and sour cream or creme fraiche or, for dessert, 
with jam and a sprinkling of sugar. Yield: 18 to 20 crepes, 6 servings. 
POTATO NOODLES Time: 1{ hours 1 large baking potato, peeled and cut 
in chunks 1 large egg, lightly beaten Salt to taste 2/3 to } cup flour 
3 tablespoons unsalted butter 1 large onion, peeled and sliced \ cup 
plain bread crumbs. 1. Place potato in a pot of water, and boil until 
tender, about 20 minutes. Drain, and mash it fine; then, allow puree 
to cool to room temperature. 2. Stir in the egg and salt and enough 
flour to make a soft dough that is not sticky. 3. Transfer dough to 
a floured board, and knead lightly for a minute or two. Roll or pat 
into a rectangle about 8 by 12 inches and \ inch thick. Cut the dough 
into strips \ inch wide, and cut the strips in 1-inch lengths. 4. 
Melt butter in a skillet, add onion and saute over medium heat until 
it is tender and golden. Stir in the bread crumbs. Remove from heat. 
5. Bring a large pot of salted water to a boil, drop in the noodles 
and boil about 3 minutes, until they rise to the surface. Drain thoroughly. 
Briefly reheat the onion mixture, add the noodles to the skillet, 
toss gently and serve. Yield: 4 servings. SKORDALA Adapted from Estiatorio 
Milos Time: 1 hour 5 medium-small Idaho potatoes, about 1{ pounds 
7 medium-size cloves garlic 1/3 cup extra virgin olive oil 2 tablespoons 
fresh lemon juice Coarse salt { cup fish stock, made by boiling \ 
pound desalinated salt cod, or commercial fish stock Parsley for garnish. 
1. Place potatoes in a pot, cover with water and boil gently until 
they are barely cooked, 15 to 20 minutes. They should still be a bit 
firm in the center. When cool, peel them. 2. While potatoes are cooking, 
pound garlic in a mortar with 2 tablespoons of the olive oil, 2 teaspoons 
of the lemon juice and a pinch of salt, to form a paste. Transfer 
the mixture to a heavy mixing bowl or a food processor. Add 2 of the 
potatoes, and mash them with the garlic mixture along with some more 
of the olive oil, lemon juice and salt, and some of the fish stock. 
Continue adding the ingredients to make a smooth, creamy mixture. 
Season to taste with salt. 3. Transfer to a shallow dish, and garnish 
with parsley. Serve with bread for dipping. Yield: 6 servings. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>