<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981013.0336 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A series of psychological evaluations of Mike Tyson conducted two 
weeks ago at Massachusetts General Hospital reports that the former 
heavyweight boxing champion suffers from depression, anger, low self-esteem, 
irritability, and that he has trouble controlling his impulses. But 
it also concludes that he is mentally fit to return to the ring. The 
report also said that Tyson should have ``weekly, if not more frequent, 
psychotherapy sessions'' to help deal with his emotional problems. 
``It is the opinion of the evaluation team that Mr. Tyson is mentally 
fit to return to boxing, to comply with the rules and regulations, 
and to do so without repetition of the events of June 28, 1997,'' 
Dr. Ronald Schouten, the director of Law and Psychiatry Service at 
Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston, wrote in the report to the 
Nevada State Athletic Commission. ``While we take note of the impulsivity, 
emotional problems, and cognitive problems outlined above, it is our 
opinion that none of these, alone or in combination, render Mr. Tyson 
mentally unfit in this regard.'' Schouten's mention of the events 
of June 28, 1997 was a reference to the title bout between Tyson and 
Evander Holyfield, when Tyson bit his opponent's ears and was disqualified. 
Shortly afterward, the Nevada commission revoked his license and fined 
him $3 million. Following a hearing to regain his license on Sept. 
19, the commission asked Tyson to undergo psychological testing before 
it agreed to take up his application again. Tyson and his lawyers 
fought to have the psychological evaluation kept private, but the 
commission said it had to release the report under the state's open 
records law. Last Friday, the Nevada State Supreme Court ruled against 
Tyson. Weighing the risk of embarrassment from the public disclosure 
of his private psychological tests against his need to regain his 
boxing license, Tyson signed a waiver to release the report and turned 
it over to the commission, which released it Tuesday morning. The 
boxer will appear for a public hearing in Las Vegas, Nev., on Oct. 
19 to answer any questions the five members of the commission have 
for him. The questions are expected to include many about a traffic 
accident in Gaithersburg, Md., in August in which Tyson is alleged 
to have punched one man and kicked another in the groin. The two men 
have filed criminal assault charges against Tyson and the case is 
scheduled for trial on the same day that Tyson will appear before 
the Nevada commission. On the advice of his lawyer, Tyson would not 
answer questions about the incident during his last hearing. But he 
is expected to address the matter at the next one. The report, which 
includes the evaluations of six different doctors who conducted a 
battery of neurological and psychological tests over a five-day period 
from Sept. 21-26, reveals sensitive personal information on Tyson's 
life history, and his behavior. It is the kind of information that 
would never be revealed publicly, because it would fall under doctor-patient 
confidentiality rules. ``If you've read the report, you know why we 
fought so hard to keep it from being released to the public,'' said 
James Jimmerson, Tyson's Las Vegas- based lawyer. ``It's kind of a 
moot point now, but he certainly wasn't desirous of this type of information 
being made public. He wasn't concerned about himself. He was more 
concerned that his children would have to go to school and be subjected 
to comments about information in the report.'' The report states that 
Tyson, 32, had been prescribed Zoloft, an anti-depressant, for the 
past month, but the drug had no benefit or side-effects for him. It 
also says that Tyson was embarrassed, angry and felt humiliated about 
having to undergo the evaluations, because he thought everyone would 
think he was ``a psycho.'' But all the psychologists involved said 
that Tyson willingly cooperated with the testing. Tyson got angry 
with one of his evaluators, Dr. Thomas Deter, on one occasion when 
Deter asked him about taking a test that required reading. ``He became 
much less engaged in the interview, and at one point he expressed 
deep feelings of anger directed at me and the evaluation process,'' 
Deter wrote in his report. ``He quickly assured me that he had no 
intention to act on these feelings.'' Deter's summary said that it 
would have been helpful in making the evaluation if he had had access 
to Tyson's school and prison records ``which document learning or 
behavioral problems.'' Still, Deter found that Tyson demonstrated 
``executive control deficits. Individuals with this neurobehavioral 
profile often have difficulties with impulse control, inhibition of 
behavior, judgment, and rapid decision making. If his mood can be 
adequately managed, he will likely have better control over these 
neurobehavioral deficits. With deterioration in his mood, he is likely 
to be more susceptible to acting on impulse and showing poor judgment.'' 
Deter said he could not predict whether Tyson ``will lose control 
of his behavior in a future boxing match. He exhibits neurobehavioral 
and emotional deficits that make him susceptible to this, but are 
by no means predictive of it.'' Deter recommended that Tyson continue 
psychotherapy sessions weekly, if not more frequently, to handle his 
emotional problems. A psychological test conducted by Dr. David Medoff 
found that Tyson does not have ``the presence of any major mental 
illness or personality disorder.'' The evaluation also found that 
Tyson is ``angry and irritable and that he is cautious, and even suspicious, 
of others' motives at times. As is the case with most people, there 
will be instances in which he becomes increasingly angry and frustrated, 
and the potential for the direct expression of this anger, and lapses 
in self-control, may occur. There will also be circumstances in which 
Mr. Tyson will be fully able to manage his emotions without acting 
upon them.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>