<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981013.0431 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
City officials last month began allowing developers around the city's 
upstate reservoirs to install septic systems on steeply sloping hills, 
drawing the concern of federal officials and environmentalists, who 
fear that the practice could pollute the city's water supply. The 
new policy, which is a shift from more stringent rules the city had 
put in place in March, has prompted a coalition of environmental groups 
to prepare to file a lawsuit Wednesday against the city in state Supreme 
Court in Manhattan. The rules on septic tanks are the latest front 
in the long-running battle over how to protect the city's drinking 
water from pollution without throttling development in the upstate 
counties where the reservoirs are. The new policy comes 20 months 
after the city reached a hard-fought agreement with the upstate communities 
intended to protect the watershed and forestall the need for the city 
to build a huge filtration plant to meet federal clean water standards. 
In the lawsuit, the environmental groups contend that the looser rules 
on septic tanks were adopted with no public debate or review of environmental 
impact, violating city and state laws. They say it will raise the 
risk that bacteria-laden waste water from septic systems and muddy 
runoff from erosion could taint the reservoirs, and that the rule 
will allow development to accelerate in fast-growing areas like northern 
Westchester and Putnam counties, where most level ground has been 
developed and proposals for subdivisions are moving up the slopes. 
Septic fields on steep slopes tend to fail more frequently than those 
on more level ground, technical experts for the environmental groups 
said. But city environmental officials said their policy is in line 
with longstanding state health guidelines and protects the water without 
stepping on the rights of the growing communities around the reservoirs. 
``We wouldn't permit a sanitary system to be installed if we felt 
there was any negative impact whatsoever on our water quality,'' said 
Joel Miele, New York City commissioner of environmental protection. 
Those assurances have not allayed the concerns of Federal environmental 
officials, however. In a letter last month to Miele, Jeanne Fox, the 
regional chief of the Environmental Protection Agency, complained 
that the city switched to the new standard without informing the EPA 
and other parties that signed the broad agreement in 1997 on how to 
protect the reservoirs. The new city policy says that septic fields 
can be built around the reservoirs on slopes of up to 20 percent _ 
where the ground drops 20 feet every 100 horizontal feet _ if truckloads 
of fill are used to reduce the slope to a gentler 15 percent. The 
new policy reversed a decision by the city last March to forbid any 
septic-field construction on slopes draining into the reservoirs where 
the land drops more than 15 feet every 100 feet, a 15 percent grade. 
``EPA strongly supports the plain reading of the state's septic design 
standards,'' Ms. Fox wrote to Miele, ``which state that `slopes greater 
than 15 percent are unacceptable.' They also state that `the natural 
surface shall not be significantly disturbed.''' She added, ``It is 
prudent environmental policy to minimize as much as possible any factor 
that might add to the risk of failure of newly installed septic systems.'' 
New York's far-flung network of reservoirs has provided the city with 
clean water without the need of filtration for more than a century, 
but encroaching development has forced the construction of an $800 
million filtration plant for the most degraded reservoirs, in the 
crowded suburbs east of the Hudson River. With the signing of the 
accord, the EPA dropped a threat to force New York City to build a 
$6 billion filtration plant for its cleanest reservoirs, in the Catskills 
and the Delaware River Valley. Miele said the city chose to mesh its 
policy on septic systems with the state policy because anything stricter 
would almost certainly result in a raft of lawsuits from developers. 
He added that the city, in its agreement with the watershed communities, 
had agreed it ``would not unnecessarily impinge on development without 
a reason for it.'' He said that the city had seen no evidence that 
septic systems on filled slopes with a 15 percent grade were any less 
effective than those on a natural slope of the same angle. ``If we 
had a reason for it, I'd fight tooth and nail,'' he said. ``But I 
don't see it.'' Representatives of several of the groups initiating 
the lawsuit argued that the new policy adds to the pollution threat 
in many ways. Septic systems on steeper slopes have a greater tendency 
to fail, and excavating or dumping fill on a slope can cause erosion 
and reduce the filtering properties of the landscape, said Robert 
F. Kennedy Jr., a lawyer representing Riverkeeper, the Natural Resources 
Defense Council, and eight other petitioners. ``We just don't understand 
why the agency charged with protecting public health would deliberately 
weaken rules designed to protect the reservoirs,'' Kennedy said Tuesday. 
``The true justification for the rule change does not appear to be 
good science, but pressure from the construction and real estate industry 
in the watershed.'' Around 25 percent of all applications for septic 
systems in Putnam County are on slopes greater than 15 percent, said 
Richard Knabel, a geologist at Westchester Community College, in Valhalla, 
N.Y., who submitted an affidavit in support of the suit. He said the 
hilltops in the county are covered by a thin layer of soils left behind 
by glaciers that vary from gravel to impermeable clay, creating uneven 
conditions that often thwart the best intentions of sanitary engineers. 
``You try to put a septic system in those situations and the liquids 
go sideways,'' he said, resulting in uncleaned waste water surfacing 
and flowing downhill. Edward Heelan, the president of Heelan Realty 
&AMP; Development Corp., which controls 10,000 acres in Putnam and 
northern Westchester, said the environmentalists were less concerned 
with pollution than with bringing construction to a halt in the region. 
He said that strict limits won by environmentalists on construction 
of sewage plants and on control of runoff from rainstorms had already 
stopped large-scale commercial development. ``Now they're going after 
shutting down individual housing development,'' Heelan said. ``It's 
a further confiscation of people's property rights.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>