<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981013.0408 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In an aggressive push to enforce greater Republican loyalty among 
Washington lobbying groups, Rep. Tom DeLay, R-Texas, has urged the 
Electronic Industries Alliance to reconsider its hiring of a Democrat 
to serve as president. DeLay, the majority whip, raised his displeasure 
over the hiring of Dave McCurdy, a former Democratic representative 
from Oklahoma, by the electronics industry trade group with House 
Speaker Newt Gingrich, R-Ga., and again at a meeting of the House 
Republican leadership last Friday, two Republican aides said. McCurdy's 
hiring also peeved several other Republican leaders, including Majority 
Leader Dick Armey of Texas and Rep. John Linder, the Georgian who 
heads the National Republican Congressional Committee, said the two 
aides and Roll Call, the Capitol Hill newspaper, which first reported 
on the issue. McCurdy lost a Senate race four years ago and has since 
been a lobbyist for clients in the electronics industry. In recent 
days, Linder and other Republican leaders contacted members of the 
trade group's board in an effort to pressure the group, which represents 
2,100 electronics companies, into rejected McCurdy as its incoming 
president. Mark Rosenker, the group's vice president for public affairs, 
said McCurdy was selected after a five-month search by a professional 
executive search firm. The selection was announced last week, after 
the group interviewed many candidates, including incumbent members 
of Congress from both parties, Rosenker said. ``To hire a Democrat 
to represent this group before a current Republican majority and what 
is certain to be a larger majority is not a shrewd business decision,'' 
said Michael Scanlon, an aide to DeLay. But Rep. John Boehner of Ohio, 
who has been the House leadership's liaison to lobbying groups in 
Washington, was furious over DeLay's tactics with the electronics 
association, a Republican aide said. Boehner has been a leader in 
efforts to pressure such lobbying groups to hire Republicans. Boehner's 
dispute with DeLay over McCurdy was seen as fresh evidence by some 
Republicans of heightened tensions within the GOP House leadership 
ranks. While a few member companies have expressed concerns over the 
Republican antipathy over McCurdy's hiring, Rosenker said his trade 
association would not reconsider its offer for a job that pays a generous 
six-figure salary and involves far more than lobbying. ``Our president 
serves as a spokesman for a $500 billion industry,'' said Rosenker, 
a Republican who once worked for President Gerald Ford. ``We believe 
that Dave McCurdy will be a very articulate and effective spokesman.'' 
The group's former president, who served for 21 years, was a registered 
independent, Rosenker said, adding, ``We've had a wonderful relationship 
with Congress during that whole time with both sides of the aisle 
and both Republican and Democratic administrations.'' Members of the 
electronics group were gathered in Phoenix for their annual fall conference, 
where McCurdy made his first speech as its president Tuesday without 
mentioning the dispute over his hiring. Some members of the group 
were concerned that DeLay and other Republican leaders might block 
approval of intellectual property legislation, one member said. But 
the bill passed the House Tuesday. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>