<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981013.0379 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For nearly a century, the U.S. military has used the jungle terrain 
surrounding the Panama Canal as a testing ground for explosives and 
chemical weapons. Now, a little more than a year before those ranges 
must be handed back to Panama, Washington is balking at cleaning up 
some of the most hazardous of the ordnance its troops are leaving 
behind. The deadly debris consists mostly of bombs and other unexploded 
munitions that for decades were tested at three ranges near the west 
bank of the canal. But the dangerous materials either tested or stored 
here also include lethal nerve gases, mustard and phosgene gases dating 
back to World War II, biological agents and, for a short time earlier 
this decade, depleted uranium projectiles. The United States, which 
engineered Panama's secession from Colombia in 1903 in order to build 
the canal, is required to give up all its military bases here by Dec. 
31, 1999. With that deadline fast approaching, though, Washington 
and Panama are locked in an apparently intractable dispute over to 
what extent the United States must clean up its mess. The issue was 
supposed to have been settled by the Panama Canal Treaties, which 
were signed in 1977 and require the United States to pay for any environmental 
cleanup. But faced with a task more complicated and expensive than 
anticipated, U.S. military officials now contend that the treaties 
in fact exempt them from carrying out the comprehensive cleanup Panama 
demands. The treaties oblige the United States ``to take all measures 
to insure insofar as may be practicable that every hazard to human 
life, health and safety is removed'' from all areas being returned 
to Panama. The treaties also require the United States to ``gather 
and provide information concerning environmental hazards caused by 
its activities in Panama'' and to ``provide compensation for irremediable 
environmental damage.'' Panamanian officials say that since 1979, 
when formal sovereignty over the former Canal Zone was transferred 
from the United States to Panama, at least 21 people have been killed 
by U.S. ordnance left on the ranges. The Pentagon contests that figure, 
saying its records indicate only seven people, all of them scrap dealers 
digging for metal in off-limits areas, have died. W. Lewis Amselem, 
the U.S. co-chairman of a joint working group set up to deal with 
range issues, acknowledged in September that ``a small part of the 
reverted areas will not be available for unrestricted use.'' That 
land may amount to perhaps as much as 7,500 acres, or 2 percent of 
the territory being handed over. But he and other U.S. officials argue 
that every ``practicable'' step to restore the ranges is already being 
taken and say they simply cannot do what Panama wants. ``The issue 
is not time and it is not money,'' Col. David Hunt, the chief treaty 
implementation officer for the U.S. Southern Command said in an interview 
in Panama. ``The issue is the technology available to do the job safely 
while protecting the environment.'' Panama disputes that interpretation, 
pointing to successful environmental restoration efforts in other 
parts of the world, including the United States itself. The cleanup 
operation here may be proving more costly and time-consuming than 
initially expected, Panamanian officials maintain, but that does not 
exempt Washington from its treaty obligations. ``We believe that the 
only criterion that should prevail is the technical feasibility of 
a cleanup,'' said Jorge Ritter, who is both minister of foreign affairs 
and minister of canal affairs in the Panamanian government, in an 
interview. ``There should not be an economic limitation for the United 
States to clean up so small an area in relation to those it has used 
on its own territory and elsewhere.'' Panama also complains of what 
it describes as the unwillingness of U.S. officials to provide information 
on what types of tests were conducted at what sites and on what dates. 
That information is needed, they say, not only to assure that the 
cleanup is comprehensive but also to dispel Panamanian suspicions 
that defoliants like Agent Orange were also secretly tested here in 
the 1960s before their use in Vietnam. To Pentagon planners, the extensive 
U.S. military presence here and Panama's tropical climate made the 
Canal Zone and its environs an ideal testing ground for all sorts 
of conventional, chemical and even biological weapons. The United 
States still operates a Tropical Test Center here and as recently 
as 1993 conducted experiments with the deadly herbicides tebuthiuron, 
glyphosate and hexazinone to determine their efficiency in coca eradication 
in antidrug efforts in South America. ``They have been telling us 
they will be making information available for as long as I can remember,'' 
said Rodrigo Noriega, a Panamanian Foreign Ministry official. ``I 
asked for a precise list of sites early in 1997, but we still have 
not been given meaningful information regarding chemical and other 
testing activities.'' Panama's concerns about the ordnance problem 
are shared by Rick Stauber, once an instructor at the Army's bomb 
disposal school, who initially was contracted by the U.S. military 
to assess the extent of the damage. But Stauber later became a consultant 
to the Panamanian government after, he said in a recent interview, 
the Pentagon pressed him to limit the scope of his investigation and 
then rejected his findings. ``As I did my investigation and developed 
my report, I was finding things that were, to say the least, a little 
disturbing,'' Stauber said. ``The problem was that the recipient of 
the report was not eager to see what I was uncovering. There were 
a lot more problems than they wanted to admit to and I opened a can 
of worms.'' U.S. officials deny Stauber's contention that ``a lot 
of information in my report was changed and set in a biased situation'' 
so it would conform to their own pre-established conclusions. But 
they acknowledge that it has been, as a senior U.S. official put it, 
``painfully slow and frustrating getting cooperation'' from U.S. military 
authorities, whose interest in Panama seems to be waning as the date 
of their withdrawal approaches. The situation is further complicated 
by the fact that some chemical weapons tests and exercises took place 
outside the Canal Zone, most notably in four major installations the 
Panamanian government made available during World War II. Information 
about those areas, which were returned to Panama after the war, is 
especially scarce. Panama has never had a registry of the chemical 
tests conducted on its territory, Ritter said, ``so we need to be 
clearly informed by the United States about the testing of chemical 
weapons in Panama.'' While the canal treaties do not obligate the 
United States to clean up areas outside the former Canal Zone, another 
treaty does. Both the United States and Panama have joined the international 
Chemical Weapons Convention, which requires them to halt the manufacture 
and use of all chemical weapons and to destroy their remaining stockpiles. 
One section of that pact states that when materials found in one country 
are determined to have come from another, the original user-country 
is required to clean up the site. Hunt argued that for environmental 
reasons Panama would be wise to leave alone the jungle and watershed 
areas it is pressing the United States to repair, since any tampering 
``will affect the canal, rainfall and temperatures.'' He and other 
U.S. officials also maintained that whatever chemical weapons may 
have been buried, sunk or lost in Panama no longer pose a danger because 
they have dissipated. Stauber disagrees. ``The idea of a limited shelf 
life is nothing but a red herring and a direct contradiction of the 
truth,'' he said. ``As long as field munitions are in a container, 
they are still as good today as 50 or 60 years ago.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>