<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981013.0192 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It's not a restaurant. It's not a grocery store. It's Eatzi's Market 
&AMP; Bakery, the food store that ate Dallas. Now, in the boldest 
out-of-town incursion since George Steinbrenner bought the Yankees, 
it has planted its cowboy boots right in Macy's basement. There's 
nothing shy about Eatzi's, which opens its doors to New Yorkers on 
Friday. As stunned shoppers in Dallas, Houston and Atlanta already 
know, and as Long Islanders who frequent the Carle Place Shopping 
Center near Old Westbury are learning, Eatzi's means high energy and 
high volume (in both senses of the word). It's a prepared-food store 
in which dozens of chefs, working in open kitchens, turn out hundreds 
of dishes every day, with Puccini arias blasting away in the background. 
The Macy's opening is a high-stakes gamble for Eatzi's. Less than 
three years after opening its first store in Dallas, it is occupying 
17,000 square feet in the dead center of Manhattan, the most competitive, 
demanding food city in the United States, where the locals think they 
know a thing or two about quality takeout food already. In the land 
of Zabar's, Balducci's and Dean &AMP; DeLuca, does an upstart like 
Eatzi's stand a fighting chance? Even Eatzi's executives admit that 
they would not have taken on Manhattan without the Macy's sponsorship, 
but Eatzi's is not going empty-handed to the party. Industry analysts 
credit Eatzi's with being the one company that seems to have figured 
out how to make quality take-home food and sell it at an affordable 
price. That puts it in an excellent position to make a killing in 
the fast-growing takeout market, now worth about $60 billion, analysts 
say, with the potential to double in size over the next seven or eight 
years. But Eatzi's is also the sort of place some New Yorkers love 
to hate _ the heavy corporate hand reaching into what had been, often 
as not, a charming mom-and-pop industry. Maybe that's why the cuteness 
factor at Eatzi's is high. When bread comes out of the oven, jolly 
bakers shout, ``Hot bread, fresh out of the oven.'' When roasted chickens 
emerge from their trial by fire, a team of chefs welcome them with 
a chant: ``Wood-fired roasted chicken, fresh out of the oven. So tender, 
so juicy, so succulent, and oh, so golden brown.'' Amid the bustle, 
yielding right of way to platter-bearing chefs, shoppers do what Eatzi's 
was designed for them to do: put together a completely prepared restaurant-quality 
meal at a price of about $7. The pickings go beyond a roast chicken 
with two vegetables. At Macy's, 100 chefs and bakers will turn out 
1,800 prepared items every day, from baguettes ($1.99) and individual 
creme brulees ($2.49) to braised broccoli rape and cannellini beans 
($6.99). The prices are market-driven, said Eatzi's spokeswoman Carol 
Cobbler. For example, an 18-ounce meat loaf that costs $6.49 on Long 
Island will be $6.99 in Manhattan. As they move from station to station 
(14 in all), customers can build salads at three price points ($5.49, 
$5.79, $6.49), put together their own Oriental noodle soups, take 
away pasta salads and entrees, or cruise the refrigerated shelves 
for box lunches, sushi meals and frozen foods. Add the chips, sodas, 
salad dressings, jams and condiments, and Eatzi's offers 4,500 items. 
In its other sites, Eatzi's has flourished because it offers a solution 
to a problem: how to put together a reasonably priced, good-tasting 
meal without actually cooking. ``The public is looking for some control 
over where and when they eat,'' said Philip Romano, a consultant who 
developed the Eatzi's concept for Brinker International Inc., the 
Dallas-based company that operates casual dining chains like Chili's 
Grill &AMP; Bar. ``They like restaurant food, but it's not been available 
on their terms.'' Fast foods offer convenience and price but fall 
short on quality. Top-end stores like Dean &AMP; DeLuca and Zabar's 
have the quality, but middle-class shoppers would run the risk of 
credit-card meltdown assembling a dinner for four. Eatzi's is taking 
dead aim at the broad middle, and in a restaurant-mad, takeout-crazy 
city like New York, it may have found its richest target. ``To go 
out to eat to avoid cooking at home is overkill,'' said Eatzi's president 
F. Lane Cardwell Jr. ``It's an hour-and-a-half solution to an hour-and-a-half 
problem. We're trying to give a 15- or 20-minute solution.'' Eatzi's, 
as Cardwell is fond of saying, wants to be your refrigerator. After 
the first Eatzi's opened in Dallas in January 1996 _ and customers 
figured out how to use the store, and stopped calling to make reservations 
_ it took off. An average of 2,500 people pass through the store each 
day. Last year, it rang up sales of about $14 million. In Manhattan, 
the learning curve is likely to be flat. ``In New York, it's easy 
to understand,'' said Steven Kent, a restaurant analyst at Goldman, 
Sachs. ``You can say, `It's almost like Balducci's or Zabar's.' Here, 
a gigantic supermarket is a novelty.'' With a touch of understatement, 
Romano said, ``Dallas surprised us.'' Brinker, whose 806 restaurants 
generated sales of $1.6 billion last year, is not a company that rushes 
into things, and it had planned to observe the Dallas experiment for 
a year. Dallas forced the company's hand. Four months after Eatzi's 
opened, Brinker began looking for new locations. It branched out to 
Houston's Galleria, and then to Atlanta before creeping north to Long 
Island and Manhattan, looking for neighborhoods that Romano calls 
``slam-dunk locations.'' Next stop, Rockville, Md., in January. Manhattan 
was not part of the plan. ``Believe me, it takes courage to come to 
Manhattan if you're from Dallas,'' Cardwell said. ``We would not have 
come if it were not for Macy's.'' Macy's, in the midst of a $150 million 
makeover, was looking for a tenant who would bring new life to Macy's 
Cellar, created nearly 25 years ago from what had been the store's 
bargain basement. ``When Ed Finkelstein opened it, Macy's placed a 
great emphasis on the cellar, but as time went by, the food business 
was becoming more difficult for us to master,'' said Kathy Kramer, 
Macy's vice president for leased operations, referring to Edward Finkelstein, 
the store's former chairman. Neal Goldberg, its senior vice president 
and general manager, put it more bluntly. ``We didn't know how to 
run food well,'' he said. The deal is a trade-off. Macy's gambles 
on a start-up operation with no name recognition in Manhattan. Eatzi's 
submits to the discipline of living under someone else's roof in order 
to gain access to the 30,000 customers who pass through Macy's every 
day, and to the 100,000 pedestrians who traverse 34th Street each 
day. To snare the sidewalk traffic, Macy's has set up a bank of video 
monitors in a 34th Street window that lets passers-by see the Eatzi's 
chefs and bakers at work one floor below the street. Eatzi's will 
also get its own entrance on 34th Street in the middle of the block, 
so it will be able to serve breakfast foods starting at 7 a.m. and 
to stay open until 10 p.m. But it has had to deviate from its formula 
by installing tables and seats for 170 diners. Tables and chairs say 
``restaurant''; Eatzi's desperately wants to avoid that association, 
just as it makes a point not to have shopping carts, which say ``grocery 
store.'' To put some more New York into it, Eatzi's revised its offerings 
after sending its food team to the city. ``We did a complete eat-fest, 
shopping the markets, eating at top restaurants,'' said Michael Spinelli, 
Eatzi's executive chef at Macy's, who formerly worked as an executive 
sous-chef at the Marriott Marquis in midtown. He and John D'Amelio, 
Eatzi's corporate executive chef, added a lot of Italian food, like 
braciola, polenta and a revised meatball recipe borrowed from D'Amelio's 
grandmother. To compete with New York's soup business, Eatzi's created 
Italian lentil soup, and a soup that incorporates roasted poblano 
peppers and New York state cheddar. With an eye to New York's Asian 
restaurants, the chefs came up with a noodle-bowl station. They added 
pastrami and corned beef to the sandwich board, and also fancy offerings 
like roasted pork with onion, garlic, Boursin cheese and arugula on 
ciabatta bread. It's possible that New Yorkers will look at Eatzi's 
and say, ``Been there, done that,'' that they will hear the singing 
chefs, roll their eyes, and say, ``PLEASE.'' Brinker executives are 
betting that the neighborhood office workers, the human tidal wave 
that moves to and from Pennsylvania Station and the captive audience 
of Macy's shoppers will see Eatzi's as the answer to their prayers. 
They're also betting that New Yorkers, familiar with Grace's Marketplace, 
Citarella and Balducci's, will get the concept faster than any other 
market. That's the gamble. Both sides, pressed up against the gaming 
table, are looking anxiously to see how the dice tumble. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>