<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981013.0260 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Two years after overturning an anti-gay rights amendment to the Colorado 
constitution, the Supreme Court on Tuesday left intact a similar measure 
barring protective legislation for gay people in Cincinnati. The court 
refused to hear a challenge to the Cincinnati charter amendment, which 
voters adopted in 1993 and which a federal appeals court found last 
year to be constitutional. On the surface, the justices' action sent 
a confusing signal about whether the court still meant what it said, 
by a 6-3 majority in the Colorado case, about the Constitution not 
permitting gay people to be stripped of legal protection and made 
``strangers to the law.'' However, although the court's disposition 
of the Cincinnati case Tuesday was evidently unanimous, three justices 
took the unusual step of explaining the action in a separate statement 
that put the case in a different and less suggestive light. While 
the three _ Justices John Paul Stevens, David H. Souter and Ruth Bader 
Ginsburg _ spoke only for themselves, they offered a rare window into 
the court's internal deliberations over whether to take up a new case, 
deliberations that usually end only with a published order of ``granted'' 
or ``denied.'' In this case, the three justices said, the actual meaning 
of the Cincinnati amendment was sufficiently ambiguous, and sufficiently 
different from the Colorado amendment struck down in Romer vs. Evans, 
as to make the case at this point a poor vehicle for a Supreme Court 
decision. The justices noted that in upholding the measure last year, 
the 6th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals had interpreted it as barring 
only ``special protection'' for gay men and lesbians, as opposed to 
taking the more sweeping step of depriving gay people of the general 
anti-discrimination protections available to other groups. In the 
Colorado case, by contrast, the Supreme Court said the state's Amendment 
2 could fairly be read as depriving gay men and lesbians ``even of 
the protection of general laws,'' amounting to ``a denial of equal 
protection of the laws in the most literal sense.'' While the gay 
rights groups challenging the Cincinnati amendment insisted that it 
was essentially identical to the Colorado provision, the 6th Circuit 
found otherwise. In its 1997 decision, the appeals court, which sits 
in Cincinnati, said there was a ``stark contrast'' between the two 
provisions, with the Colorado provision having excluded gay people 
``from the protection of every Colorado state law'' while Cincinnati's 
charter amendment ``merely prevented homosexuals, as homosexuals, 
from obtaining special privileges and preferences,'' such as affirmative 
action. In their statement Tuesday, Stevens, Souter and Ginsburg said 
the dispute over what the Cincinnati amendment actually means ``counsels 
against granting the petition.'' They said that ``this court does 
not normally make an independent examination of state law questions 
that have been resolved by a court of appeals,'' adding that the denial 
of review should not be taken as an indication of the court's views 
on the underlying issues. The case was Equality Foundation of Greater 
Cincinnati vs. City of Cincinnati, No. 97-1795. Suzanne Goldberg, 
a lawyer with the Lambda Legal Defense and Education fund, a gay rights 
group that challenged both the Colorado and Cincinnati amendments, 
said Tuesday that the Supreme Court's action cast no doubt on the 
nondiscrimination principle the court adopted in the Colorado decision 
of two years ago. However, she said in an interview, her group would 
monitor the situation in Cincinnati to make sure that the amendment, 
known locally as Issue 3, was indeed as ``meaningless'' as the 6th 
Circuit opinion found it to be. ``This is not the end of the battle 
over Issue 3,'' she said. The Cincinnati charter amendment was adopted 
after a campaign by a group called Equal Rights, Not Special Rights. 
That group's lawyer, Michael Carvin, said in an interview Tuesday 
that he interpreted the court as sending a signal that while under 
the rule of the Colorado case, states cannot bar gay rights legislation 
at the state level, localities can do so. ``Local citizen initiatives 
can overturn gay rights laws even if states cannot,'' he said, adding 
that the action Tuesday demonstrated that ``the court will not extend 
Romer vs. Evans to the facts of this case.'' While the litigation 
that led to Tuesday's case challenged the amendment on its face, rather 
than in any particular application, specific cases could come up next, 
she said. One Cincinnati ordinance, enacted before the voters adopted 
Issue 3, prohibits discrimination in city employment on the basis 
of race, sex, religion, disability, national origin and sexual orientation. 
If a gay city employee challenges an adverse employment action as 
discriminatory, the Ohio state courts will have to decide whether 
Issue 3 is as narrowly drawn as the 6th Circuit found it to be. If 
the 6th Circuit was right, Issue 3 would be irrelevant to the operation 
of a general anti-discrimination law, which would continue to protect 
gay people on the same basis as other protected groups. But if Issue 
3, properly interpreted, does carve gay people out from such generally 
worded protection, then a new case would move back up through the 
courts with the amendment in a different light. Neither the court's 
action Tuesday nor the Cincinnati dispute bears on the further, and 
distinct, question of whether sexual orientation should be included 
as a protected category in hate-crimes legislation. Such laws are 
newly in the spotlight following the recent slaying of a gay college 
student in Wyoming. While 40 states have some form of hate crimes 
legislation, only 21 include crimes based on sexual orientation. Cincinnati 
voters adopted Issue 3 by a margin of 62 percent to 38 percent. It 
is entitled: ``No special class status may be granted based upon sexual 
orientation, conduct or relationships.'' It is the only such provision 
currently on the books anywhere in the country, according to Ms. Goldberg, 
the co-author of a newly published book on the Colorado case called 
``Strangers to the Law'' (University of Michigan Press, 1998). Issue 
3 provides that the city, including various boards and commissions, 
``may not enact, adopt, enforce, or administer any ordinance, regulation, 
rule or policy which provides that homosexual, lesbian or bisexual 
orientation, status, conduct, or relationship constitutes, entitles, 
or otherwise provides a person with the basis to have any claim of 
minority or protected status, quota preference or other preferential 
treatment.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>