<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981013.0257 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As musicologists and record labels look ever harder for something 
new _ some novelty to justify their jobs or prod their affairs forward 
_ the line between scholarly inquiry and grave-robbing blurs. The 
American auto industry knew better and concentrated on the living. 
It did so by inventing planned obsolescence, a strategy by which dissatisfaction 
with a crumbling prior purchase was made to intersect with the promise 
of something shiny and virginal to take its place. A rhythm of life 
and death, carefully choreographed and spaced out over two or three 
years, made auto makers billions. Planned obsolescence works less 
well in classical music, which has invested the bulk of its holdings 
in the used-symphony and used-opera business, and has lots of trouble 
convincing listeners that the new models are any good. So in this 
moribund compact with the past, musical newness _ always the catalyst 
for waking the sleepy customer _ has to be sought by going backward. 
The early-music movement succeeded by devising the spiffy new concept 
of historical accuracy. Previously, old music was played the way each 
new generation heard it, if it was played at all. Now one is invited 
to trade in the gas-guzzler for the slimmed-down compact: Hamilton 
Harty's Handel exchanged for the sleek 1998 Harnoncourt. A further 
strategy for cooking up novelty is to unearth those long laid to rest, 
prop them up and associate them with what is happening in the present. 
There was evidently grant money available a few years back to organize 
a scholarly conclave on Bruckner and the Nazis, and one hopes that 
participants had a pleasantly subsidized few days on some leafy campus. 
Raising from the dead a man who died in 1896 because very bad people 
played his music 40 years later in their own grandiose, self-serving 
way may not be fair. Not Bruckner's fault, the argument will go, but 
the name is tarnished nonetheless. Why not a seminar on Grieg because 
some present-day serial killer whistled his tunes while carving up 
victims? Still another retro-search for novelty aims at composers 
themselves, the latest exercise being the premiere by the pianist 
Alan Feinberg and the Cleveland Orchestra of a concerto that Charles 
Ives imagined but, depending on your point of view, either never actually 
wrote or wrote so many times that any one version is meaningless. 
The ethical justifications of David Porter's newly reconstructed ``Emerson'' 
Concerto are mixed, but what of someone like Brahms? Are there unsung 
masterpieces hidden on library shelves? Might not the earliest pieces 
that he declined to publish still advertise the embryonic genius? 
Brahms was too smart for the academy and the record companies. Probably 
the first composer systematically to plan his life after death, he 
burned everything musicologists might otherwise have got their hands 
on. Debussy was less farsighted, and scarcely a year goes by that 
some schoolboy exercise of his is not advertised as an important gift 
to the pre-Impressionist literature. Debussy surely expected his juvenilia 
to be buried with him, but he did not count on all those musicological 
shovels scraping at his coffin. Berg has suffered similarly, and Webern, 
too _ especially Webern, whose name on symphony programs promises 
the avant-garde but almost always delivers some white-hot late-Romantic 
sin of his youth: certainly not music he wanted to be remembered for. 
Grave-robbing, I must admit, sometimes pleases. ``The Garden of Eden,'' 
unpublished in Hemingway's lifetime, turns out to be one of his best 
books. But what of those lily-gilders writing out posthumous piano 
accompaniments for Bach's solo string music? The ``new'' Ives concerto 
is a different matter. It was real enough in Ives' mind to inspire 
nearly 40 years of tinkering, but I personally wish that Porter had 
left the ``Emerson'' Concerto to rest in its untidy tomb: not as a 
clumsy-sounding finished product but as an elaborate impulse more 
interesting to think about than to hear. Digging for Ives is a less 
egregious form of grave-robbing than a lot of other examples. For 
little of Ives' important music was published when it was written, 
and his output lacks the pronouncement of completeness implied by 
black and white set on paper by some publishing house. We are teased 
with possibility _ or impossibility. The urge to complete seems to 
vary with the times. The 18th century valued order and abhorred loose 
ends. The Romantics, on the other hand, made ancient ruins _ the marble 
steps leading nowhere, the great columns supporting nothing _ a source 
of reverie. We seem to be somewhere in between. Modern science doesn't 
exactly picture a tidy, knowable universe, and in sympathy, I think, 
a lot of new music makes beginnings, middles and ends a vague concept. 
Musical restorers with little faith in the future keep burrowing in 
the past. The motives range from self-aggrandizement to the thrill 
of the chase or sincere dedication to a composer. One applauds Deryck 
Cooke's motives for reconstructing Mahler's 10th Symphony, while at 
the same time siding with Mother Nature, who in her wisdom allowed 
Mahler only the finished Adagio. Potent by virtue of its enforced 
isolation, this frightening music is obscured by the walls Cooke rebuilt 
around it. Restorers, their zeal and craftsmanship notwithstanding, 
worry us as we watch them filling in the silences left by a dead creator: 
the musical equivalent of patching holes with plastic wood. The results 
from Cleveland mean one more Ives piece to add to our list, though 
I wonder whether we or Ives really needed it. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>