<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981013.0187 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Increasingly, American Jews are traveling to Poland to unearth family 
histories or to revisit a past that is painfully known. These are 
often moving and solemn trips taken for emotional and personal reasons. 
Now a carefully researched guidebook has come along that concentrates 
on Jewish history, people and places in eastern Poland and its main 
border city, Bialystok. Called ``Jewish Bialystok and Surroundings 
in Eastern Poland,'' the guide is written by Tomasz Wisniewski, a 
40-year-old journalist who was jailed by the Communists during martial 
law in the 1980s for his dissident activities. Wisniewski, who is 
not Jewish, spent his time in prison researching the region's Jewish 
heritage and learning basic Hebrew. In contemporary Poland, Bialystok 
has turned itself from a drab Communist outpost into a bustling market 
town where traders from the former Soviet Union hawk their goods and 
then move west. Before World War II, Bialystok's population was more 
than 60 percent Jewish, giving it the highest concentration of Jews 
of any city in the world, Wisniewski writes. Historians have estimated 
that 200,000 Jews from the Bialystok region were murdered during the 
war, with about 60,000 of them taken from the ghetto in the city. 
Today, only about half a dozen Jews live in the city, which was largely 
rebuilt after heavy destruction in the war. To get a sense of what 
Jewish Bialystok was like, Wisniewski has myriad suggestions. Here 
are just a few places to visit: _ The Jewish Cemetery on Wschodnia 
Street, the largest Jewish burial site in northern Poland. The Germans 
removed many of the burial stones, but about 7,000 remain in the 30-acre 
site. Of interest to New Yorkers is a 1922 memorial to Rabbi Chaim 
Herc Halpern, who was chief rabbi in Bialystok for more than 50 years. 
The memorial was a gift of Bialystok Jews living in New York. To the 
right of the Halpern memorial is a black marble pillar commemorating 
the victims of the Jewish pogrom in 1906. _ The Synagogue at Branickiego 
Street, destroyed during World War II, was partly rebuilt for use 
as a movie house and then a sports hall. At the back of the building, 
some characteristic Jewish architectural details were included, like 
high half-rounded windows and a small apse. A plaque describing the 
synagogue's history was added in 1992. _ The Hebrew Gymnasium at 79 
Sienkiewicza Street, now a hospital, was the leading Jewish school 
in Bialystok and one of the finest academies in pre-World War II Poland. 
Graduates, among them former Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir, 
celebrated the 70th anniversary of the school in 1990 at a reunion 
in Haifa, Israel. _ In Tykocin, about 20 miles west of Bialystok, 
stands the Great Synagogue, built in 1642 and considered one of the 
best-preserved sites of Orthodox Jewry in Poland. The synagogue, a 
fortified square structure with a high mansard roof, was heavily damaged 
by the Nazis but was rebuilt after the war and is a museum. Services 
are held at the request of visitors. Wisniewski says that small evocative 
details can allow visitors to reach back to the past. He mentions 
the stamp of the Sholem Aleichem Jewish Library found on an old book 
in an antiquarian book store or the empty space a mezuzah once occupied, 
or a detail from a Star of David on a wall. His book includes period 
photographs that help recreate the lost landscape of Jewish life. 
Bialystok is about three hours by car from Warsaw, but it can also 
be reached by train or bus. Wisniewski also points out that halfway 
between Warsaw and Bialystok, visitors can stop at Treblinka, the 
death camp where the Nazis killed more than 800,000 Jews. The site 
has been transformed into a field of symbolic tombstones, each one 
representing a town whose Jewish residents were killed in the camp. 
The foreword to the guide is by the food critic Mimi Sheraton, whose 
forebears came from other parts of Poland, but who became enchanted 
with the town when she traveled there to try bialys on their home 
ground for a book she is writing. Her researcher was Tomasz Wisniewski. 
``Jewish Bialystok and Surroundings in Eastern Poland'' can be ordered 
through the Ipswich Press, Post Office Box 291, Ipswich, Mass. 01938. 
It costs $12.95; add $2.95 postage for the first copy, 50 cents for 
each additional one. It is also available from www.amazon.com. For 
more information about Wisniewski's genealogical service or his research 
on synagogues in eastern Poland, see the Web site www.gold-cousins.org. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>