<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981013.0261 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Army Corps of Engineers on Tuesday proposed its comprehensive 
plan for replumbing the Everglades, an $8 billion, 20-year project 
that proponents called the most ambitious restoration of an ecosystem 
ever attempted. The plan, which was years in the making, would radically 
alter how fresh water is stored and how it flows south from above 
Lake Okeechobee to Everglades National Park and the Florida Bay. It 
would capture up to 85 percent of the fresh water _ hundreds of billions 
of gallons a year _ that is now channeled out to sea during the wet 
season, leaving the Everglades parched when the rains cease. Under 
the plan, the water would be stored in massive lagoons and in underground 
aquifers, some to be released in the kind of sheet-like flow that 
used to seep across the gently inclined landscape, regulated only 
by the seasons, until settlement and development interfered. And some 
of the water would continue to be used for irrigation or to slake 
the thirst of urban areas. After a few months of public comment, the 
corps will revise the plan and present it next summer to Congress, 
which has to approve it before the work begins, probably not before 
the year 2002. Half the expense would be paid by the federal government, 
and the other half by the state of Florida. Vice President Al Gore 
made the plan public during a visit to Florida Tuesday, two days ahead 
of its scheduled release by the Army Corps of Engineers, which manages 
federal water projects. As he spoke, budget negotiators in Washington 
were still arguing over how much to spend for related water- and land-acquisition 
projects in Florida _ a sign that the proposal remains far from a 
certainty. ``This is an ambitious and aggressive plan, but this much 
we know: The cost of inaction cannot be afforded,'' Gore said. ``It 
is way too high.'' Environmental advocates, one of Gore's core constituencies, 
embraced the plan enthusiastically. ``It is important for a lot of 
reasons,'' said Stuart Strahl, executive director of the National 
Audubon Society's Everglades office. ``It is important because it 
is an endangered ecosystem, because there is no other ecosystem like 
it in the world, because it is our most endangered national park and 
because it is a test case of our interest in living sustainably with 
a natural ecosystem.'' Even big agriculture companies that have been 
leery of plans to remove land from farming spoke approvingly, noting 
that unless something is done they will face water crises in the years 
ahead. ``Over the next 50 years we are going to have significant problems 
and we are not going to survive if we don't do something to re-engineer 
the system,'' said Malcolm Wade Jr., senior vice president of U.S. 
Sugar Corp., one of the region's biggest landowners. About 170,000 
acres of agricultural land will be replaced by storage reservoirs 
and storm water treatment plants, the corps study said. The plan has 
several key features, many of which reverse the corps' practices going 
back for decades as it ditched and drained the Everglades. These features 
include: _ Large water reservoirs will be built north of Lake Okeechobee, 
in the Caloosahatchee and St. Lucie basins, in the Everglades Agricultural 
Area and along western Palm Beach, Broward and Miami-Dade counties. 
_ Water will be stored underground _ recharging the aquifer _ by pumping 
it into more than 300 wells that may accept as much as 1.6 billion 
gallons a day. The injected fresh water would form a bubble around 
existing underground salt water and could be pumped back up when it 
is needed. _ Fresh water would be sent southward on more natural patterns 
by removing more than 500 miles of canals and levees and rebuilding 
the Tamiami Trail (U.S. 41) to let water flow beneath it in more natural 
sheets. But many of these techniques have never been used on such 
a vast scale or in regions like the porous flats of Florida, and much 
testing lies ahead before the wells and reservoirs can be proved feasible. 
The plan is intended to address problems that stem from existing water 
management practices: the loss of 1.7 billion gallons a day of fresh 
water into the ocean, the resulting damage to estuaries where the 
balance of fresh and salt water is disturbed, the over-regulation 
of Lake Okeechobee as a reservoir, the erratic pulsing of water into 
the Everglades at the wrong times and in the wrong amounts, the lack 
of fresh water flowing into Florida Bay, the pollution of water by 
cities and farms and the dwindling supplies of fresh water for all 
purposes. If nothing is done, the study said, water shortages will 
increase as the population grows, and the whole ecosystem will be 
``vastly degraded.'' Wetlands that store and cleanse flood waters 
and provide wildlife habitat will be lost, driving more animals into 
extinction, while inland and coastal water quality will continue to 
decline. In a state so heavily dependent on fishing and tourism, the 
economic effects would be profound, the study said. Although environmental 
groups praised the plan, they said its success is far from assured. 
``There is a perception that somehow the Everglades is saved, or close 
to being saved, or well on its way to recovery,'' said Ron Tipton, 
a senior program officer of the World Wildlife Federation. ``But the 
fact is, we are not anywhere near having restored the Everglades. 
We are perhaps at the end of the beginning phase of coming to the 
critical decisions.'' He added, ``There are big obstacles in the way 
_ very big political and policy obstacles in the way, that we have 
got to get through.'' Among those he cited were the failure of Congress 
to provide the money that has already been pledged for Everglades 
projects, opposition by the sugar industry, uncertainty over the policies 
of Jeb Bush, the front-runner in the race for governor, and hostility 
in the Florida Legislature, which last year passed two bills to weaken 
Everglades protection, only to have them vetoed. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>