<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981013.0330 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The lower house of the Japanese Parliament passed a bill Tuesday that 
would allow the government to inject huge amounts of money into the 
nation's weakened banks, moving Japan closer to the start of repairs 
on its banking system after months of political wrangling. The upper 
house is expected to approve the legislation on Friday, the last day 
of the current session of Parliament. It would provide a total of 
60 trillion yen, or $508 billion, including $144 billion that had 
already been made available, to rescue banks and induce them to increase 
lending and stimulate the economy. The Clinton administration and 
leaders of other countries have called for strong action to bolster 
Japanese banks and to restore growth in the economy here, the world's 
second-largest. Japan's problems have aggravated financial crises 
elsewhere in Asia, which have spread throughout much of the developing 
world. While officials in Washington are encouraged by the new legislation, 
they say it is urgent that Japan follow through and in fact carry 
out the program. One of the biggest questions is whether the banks 
will apply for public funds, even though they need them. Banks appear 
reluctant to accept taxpayers' money, particularly if it means they 
will be punished for past mistakes or subject to harsh conditions, 
including disclosure of financial information they regard as sensitive. 
``The larger issue is whether or not the banks will actually go along 
with the deal,'' said James Fiorillo, banking analyst with ING Baring 
Securities here. If they do not, he said: ``It could derail the whole 
package. It could derail the whole process of saving the system.'' 
Indeed, the stock market slid here Tuesday, partly in response to 
remarks by Finance Minister Kiichi Miyazawa indicating that he was 
not certain that weak but functioning banks would accept public funds, 
or that the government could force them to do so. The chief cabinet 
secretary, Hiromu Nonaka, suggested Tuesday morning that Parliament 
early next year could consider a proposal to force troubled banks 
to accept such funds, and the benchmark Nikkei index of 225 issues 
slid 2.3 percent, or 312.33 points, to end trading at 13,242.79. Japan's 
banks are precariously capitalized, and to strengthen their balance 
sheets they have trimmed their loans to corporations. Even though 
interest rates are the lowest in the world, the reluctance of banks 
to lend has created a credit squeeze, and bankruptcies are soaring. 
By increasing banks' capital, the government hopes to promote lending 
and stimulate the economy, which is in the worst recession since the 
end of World War II. Tuesday's vote came a day after Parliament enacted 
a law to nationalize failing banks. The two pieces of legislation 
amount to a rescue program knitted together on Monday through intense 
negotiations with a fragile coalition of parties in Parliament. The 
plan calls for the government to buy common or preferred stock in 
banks to bring their capital base up to the 8 percent, the international 
standard, or to a lower, government standard in the case of banks 
that do business only at home. As a condition of receiving public 
funds, which could then be lent to credit-starved businesses, banks 
would have to disclose the amount of stock they hold in their portfolios, 
as well as to make progress reports on their plans for financial restructuring. 
Even the stronger banks, which say they easily meet the capital standards 
of the Bank for International Settlements, can receive public money 
if they agree to acquire a failing bank or if there is a sharp credit 
contraction. Banks with insufficient capital will be forced to scale 
down their businesses, be shut down, or acquired. The new legislation 
would replace a program enacted in February. That plan provides $254 
billion in public funds with few conditions; it was scrapped because 
of protests by the Democratic Party, the main opposition group. One 
reason for doubt about whether banks will want to take part in the 
latest plan is that few made use of money available under the previous 
one. In March, the top 19 banks drew a total of 1.8 trillion yen, 
or $15 billion, in public funds to increase their capital, a relatively 
modest amount, and no other banks have applied for tax money since 
then. Their objection was the same as they are expected to have now: 
that the conditions are too stringent. Privately, they also concede, 
it is highly embarrassing to accept tax money. Under the new plan, 
the banks would be required to apply to a newly created independent 
panel, which would impose stiff requirements, and could require banks 
that use public money to set aside part of their profit to absorb 
losses from loans that become unrecoverable. It is also possible that 
the panel may require bank officers to take responsibility for mismanagement, 
though it is not clear exactly what this might entail. Of the 60 trillion 
yen, 25 trillion, or nearly $220 billion, will be used specifically 
for increasing the capital of the banking system. Seventeen trillion 
yen, or $144 billion, already available under the current arrangement, 
will continue to be used to guarantee depositors' accounts, and the 
rest would go to the nationalizing of failing banks. As part of Monday's 
passage of the nationalization law, a new ministerial committee will 
manage failing banks and help draft plans to deal with financial turmoil. 
The Long-Term Credit Bank of Japan, one of the largest and weakest 
institutions, is expected to be temporarily nationalized under this 
plan. The bank could apply to be put under state control as early 
as next week. The bank had originally announced plans to merge with 
Sumitomo Trust and Banking Corp., but that has fallen through, and 
it is not clear whether Long-Term Credit will survive the process 
of nationalization and be sold to another institution, or simply be 
put out of business. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>