<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981013.0280 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The grandly named Gaza Industrial Estate, an unprepossessing 120-acre 
collection of vacant factory sheds and water towers rising from the 
ragged flatlands east of Gaza City, is an unlikely focus for the highly 
charged, high-stakes Middle East peace negotiations. Fenced off from 
potential markets by the barbed wire of the Israeli border, the park 
has been ready for business for nearly a year. But security-conscious 
Israeli officials had been unwilling to guarantee the unimpeded flow 
of goods that an industrial park needs to attract and sustain investment. 
Now, hailed by all sides as the first tangible achievement of the 
current phase of the tortuous Israeli-Palestinian negotiating process, 
the Gaza Industrial Estate is expected to be operating before the 
end of the year. It will employ up to a thousand Palestinians, and 
eventually more, in several small-scale manufacturing ventures. What 
was hailed in Gaza as a diplomatic and economic breakthrough would 
almost anywhere else in the world be an unexceptional, small step 
in industrial development. Still, it is a measure of the Gaza Strip's 
isolation and economic desperation that this tentative, modest project 
looms so large for Palestinian planners. ``This is very, very important,'' 
said Abdel Rahman Naim, head of the Gaza office of the Palestinian 
Directorate for Free Zones and Industrial Parks, part of the Palestinian 
Authority. ``This will be the first concrete outcome of these negotiations, 
the first project with real benefits for people here.'' At the same 
time, the Gaza project has been embraced by Israeli officials eager 
to demonstrate some visible progress and flexibility in the talks. 
``Karni seems like a little item on the agenda, but it can have great 
ramifications,'' said Israeli Trade and Industry Minister Natan Sharansky, 
using the Israeli name for the border crossing known to Palestinians 
as Montar. Opening the park for business has also been a key short-term 
goal of U.S. mediators, who are acutely aware of the steady economic 
deterioration here since the signing of the Oslo accords between Israel 
and the Palestinians five years ago. The United States has pledged 
some $6 million for items like a water treatment plant on the Palestinian 
side and the improvement of Israeli border inspection sites. Gaza 
now has little to offer a labor force that expands by an extraordinary 
5 percent yearly, propelled by what for 15 years has been the highest 
recorded birth rate in the world. Emigration from Gaza to Israel or 
to Palestinian areas in the West Bank is forbidden by the Israeli 
authorities. Depression-scale unemployment _ averaging 37 percent 
last year, the United Nations has reported _ is worsened by Israeli 
denials of daily work visas for the 25,000 Gaza laborers who are authorized 
to cross the border for jobs in construction and agriculture. Israel 
cites security as the reason for the visa denials. As they concluded 
talks in Jerusalem and Gaza in recent days in preparation for the 
coming round of peace negotiations in Maryland, U.S. officials said 
optimistically that they anticipated 17 initial private investors 
and an eventual 40,000 workers at the park, a figure equivalent to 
a fifth of the current Gaza labor force. The Palestinians managing 
the project are more cautious, reporting that they have received a 
dozen serious proposals _ one from an Israeli company, the rest from 
Palestinians _ for projects ranging from garment making to the manufacture 
of steel security doors. If all of the projects go forward, they say, 
the park will employ about 3,000 people within 18 months and as many 
as 20,000 within five years. ``As an industrial zone, this is very 
small,'' acknowledged Awni Abdul-Rahim, the general manager of the 
Palestinian Industrial Estates Development Co., or Piedco, the local 
company running the park. And its economic viability, he added, is 
contingent on the cooperation of Israeli customs and security officials, 
who will ultimately control access. ``Everything depends on Israel,'' 
Abdul-Rahim said. Gaza's exports are routinely obstructed by border 
closings and security checks, further skewing a chronic trade imbalance. 
For every five trucks that arrive here from Israel, only one goes 
out, and it typically goes out very slowly. On a recent afternoon 
at the border checkpoint next to the industrial park, six Israeli 
customs inspectors examined a truckload of Gaza potatoes for hours, 
pallet by pallet, bag by bag, with hand-held metal detectors. American 
advisers hope to smooth these bottlenecks with computerized scanners, 
bonded inspections and other high-tech customs systems developed for 
the border between the United States and Mexico. ``If they want it 
to be a successful business it cannot be interrupted,'' Sharansky 
said. ``Yet one of the biggest explosions of the last year in Tel 
Aviv started with a truck from Gaza, so we can't take the security 
issue lightly.'' While the agreement to open the industrial zone is 
being trumpeted by U.S. diplomats as a done deal, Palestinians and 
Israelis are still haggling over legal and technical details and, 
perhaps more important from the Palestinian viewpoint, how it is portrayed 
in an eventual peace accord. The Palestinian Industrial Estates Development 
Co., which says it is investing $10 million in the industrial park, 
is controlled by the powerful Masri clan from Nablus in the West Bank. 
The Palestinian Authority, which has leased the land for 49 years, 
will receive 10 percent of Piedco's profits, Abdul-Rahim said. The 
Palestinians acknowledge that their ultimate goal is to attract Israeli 
joint ventures, both for immediate business reasons _ Palestinian 
industry ``is weak on marketing,'' Naim said _ and as a long-term 
survival strategy. A precondition for any Palestinian export venture 
is secure access through Israel to other foreign markets, and the 
Palestinians hope to build an allied constituency of Israeli industrialists 
equally dependent on open borders. Palestinian officials, some of 
whom once preached socialist self-sufficiency, promise a laissez-faire 
paradise for prospective export manufacturers. They say there will 
be no corporate taxes, minimal regulatory oversight and workers who 
will earn $300 to $400 a month, the prevailing unskilled pay rate 
within Gaza but about half of what Palestinians earn in Israel. ``There 
will be no interference from government or from unions,'' Naim said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>