<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981013.0225 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Toni Morrison's novels have never been easy reading. Much like the 
work of William Faulkner, another Nobel laureate, they tell large, 
graphic, emotionally charged stories but do so with a level of poetic 
language that fights against being understood too quickly. They are 
full of vision about race and dominion in America, but that vision 
is cumulative, even oblique, emerging only in a slowly prevailing 
rhythm of words. How do you make a mainstream pack-'em-into-the-theaters 
movie from ``Beloved,'' Ms. Morrison's 1987 novel about a former slave 
named Sethe, whose endurance depends on her grappling with a maturing 
flesh and blood daughter, Denver, and with the embodied spirit of 
another daughter, Beloved, whom she long ago murdered out of desperate 
devotion? Well, surprisingly and gratifyingly, you don't. What is 
most impressive about the film version of ``Beloved'' that opened 
Friday is not that it simplifies Ms. Morrison's difficult esthetic 
to attract a wider audience and become a blockbuster in the process, 
but that it takes an opposite tack: It stubbornly reinforces a literary 
way of looking at things, whereby allusion counts for more than action 
or illusion, whereby fleeting images _ a sprawling tree silhouetted 
against an evening sky, a body hanging from a long branch in the light 
of a bonfire, a treelike scar on a woman's back _ naturally enhance 
spare, almost abstract dialogue about the weight of a horrific past. 
The film is meant to appeal to serious readers and to seduce nonreaders. 
Although it comes to the screen heralded by solemn large-scale advertisements 
and a welter of magazine covers featuring its primary star and producer, 
Oprah Winfrey, ``Beloved'' turns out to be that rare lushly photographed 
Hollywood movie that resists being too accessible. This sweet irony 
can surely be attributed to the skill, nerve, persistence and, yes, 
clout of Ms. Winfrey, who has recently been the instigator of similar 
uncompromising literary adaptations on television, and of Jonathan 
Demme. The director of successes like ``The Silence of the Lambs'' 
and ``Philadelphia,'' he probably has the most to lose if this new 
film ends up being considered an artistic failure. Which may well 
happen. It's telling that little of the early Oscar talk about ``Beloved'' 
centers on the title character, played in aggressively unsettling 
fashion by the British actress Thandie Newton. Instead, the buzz seems 
to have settled more comfortably on the performances of Ms. Winfrey, 
as Sethe; of Kimberly Elise, as Denver, and of Danny Glover, as Paul 
D, a former slave who rediscovers Sethe at the head of a troubled 
household outside Cincinnati in 1873 and tries to help her imagine 
a future that's not always shadowed by what Ms. Morrison calls ``rememory.'' 
All these performances are worthy ones, and of a piece with the movie 
as a whole, but they make up the more traditional, realistic side 
of ``Beloved,'' the side that exists as a lyrical history of institutionalized 
evil and the fight for freedom. It's the other side _ represented 
by Ms. Newton's portrayal of the spirit child who suddenly appears 
in the guise of an oddly well-dressed teen-ager and works as a cosmic 
irritant on the souls of Denver, Paul D and especially Sethe _ that 
gives Ms. Morrison's story its dimension. Beloved is no ghost or angel 
in Hollywood terms: she's not equipped with transparent wit, wings 
or the ability to treat the living as bumbling chess pieces. She's 
more essence than being, a frightening Old Testament-like force that 
whips up huge questions of identity. She is both victim and antagonist. 
She is an aspect of everyone around her. She has a feral kind of diction; 
she drools and flails and eats like a wild animal. Most important, 
she is not supposed to be completely understood _ by reader or viewer 
or probably even author. Portraying Beloved, Ms. Newton took on a 
diffuse role that was virtually impossible to get completely right, 
and many people will be put off by the result. At one early screening 
several weeks ago, more than a few viewers inappropriately laughed 
out loud at Beloved's grotesque gestures and slurred speech. It's 
certainly a performance that can fairly be called disturbing and over 
the top all at once, but in almost all of its details Ms. Newton artfully 
followed descriptions in the novel (the screenplay is largely true 
to Ms. Morrison's sentences), and it's difficult to think of anyone 
who could have done better. In any case, though the Oscar nominations 
may go to Ms. Winfrey and Glover, Ms. Newton plays just as large a 
part in giving ``Beloved'' its admirable against-the-grain texture. 
One hopes that the movie will be used in high-school classes as Steven 
Spielberg's ``Amistad'' and ``The Color Purple'' have been. Discussions 
may prove inconclusive, but ``Beloved'' will impress upon young people 
how the ravages of injustice can be addressed not only in court cases 
and documented instances of personal courage but also in the imperfect, 
unliteral contemplation of memory and absences within an individual. 
Many moviegoers will recall that Ms. Winfrey and Glover also appeared 
in ``The Color Purple,'' Spielberg's adaptation of the Alice Walker 
novel about emotional warfare among a group of rural blacks in the 
early 20th century. A look back at that accomplished, if melodramatic, 
film illustrates just how different a Hollywood vehicle ``Beloved'' 
is for the literary-cinematic consideration of America's racial history, 
and perhaps how different 1998 is from 1985. In ``The Color Purple,'' 
Glover is Mister, a self-centered man who is especially cruel to the 
woman he should love the most; Ms. Winfrey, making her feature film 
debut, is Sophia, a willful woman who pays dearly for her self-respect. 
Both come across as versatile actors who are able to swing between 
antics and dramatic effect. In ``Beloved,'' as Sethe and Paul D recall 
their lives as slaves _ in searing, sepia-toned vignettes _ and then 
adjust what those lives have become, Ms. Winfrey and Glover seem to 
have shed the artifices of acting, stripping to a quiet, pure human 
center. From vastly divergent directions, they evoke legitimate tears 
in both films. The character in ``Beloved'' who will undoubtedly cause 
the most tears, however, is Baby Suggs, Sethe's mother-in-law, who 
was bought out of slavery by her enslaved son, Halle, and sent on 
to Ohio, where she became a spiritual leader beyond sectarian concerns, 
waiting for her kin to be free. Played wonderfully by Beah Richards, 
Baby Suggs is a natural bridge between poetry and history, literature 
and cinema, fiction and reality. In swirling scenes that verge on 
the look of documentary, she preaches in a forest clearing, intoning 
truths that have everything and nothing to do with race. ``Here in 
this here place, we flesh, flesh that weeps, laughs; flesh that dances 
onbare feet in grass. Love it. Love it hard. Yonder they do not love 
your flesh. They despise it. They don't love your eyes, they'd just 
as soon pick 'em out. No more do they love the skin on your back. 
Yonder they flay it. And O my people they do not love your hands. 
Those they only use, tie, bind, chop off and leave empty. Love your 
hands! Love them. Raise them up and kiss them. Touch others with them, 
pat them together, stroke them on your face 'cause they don't love 
that either. You got to love it, you!'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>