<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981013.0404 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
John Cleghorn showed what a formidable competitor he could be when 
he played center on the McGill University football team that won the 
intercollegiate championship in 1960. Now that he is chairman of the 
Royal Bank of Canada, the country's largest, and campaigning vigorously 
for government approval to make it a lot larger by merging with the 
Bank of Montreal, he is acting as though he still thinks no one can 
get past him. From the look of things, however, he will need all the 
grit he can muster. Strongly backed by public opinion, the government 
remains uncertain about allowing the Royal-Montreal deal or mergers 
by any other of the country's top five banks, which, with 93 percent 
of the industry's assets, dominate the banking sector to an extent 
unmatched anywhere else in the world. While focusing on the Royal's 
consolidation, Cleghorn also plugs the other proposed big-bank merger, 
between the Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, the second-largest, 
and the Toronto Dominion Bank, the fourth-largest. His argument is 
the same: Being bigger will make the banks better able to compete. 
``If you're going to play in the big leagues, you've got to be equipped,'' 
said Cleghorn, 57, who turned down a chance to play for a professional 
Canadian football team. Yet, even in the league of the big banks, 
Cleghorn faces a potential deal blocker: Peter Godsoe, president of 
Scotiabank, the smallest of the five roughly equal-sized major banks 
and the only one not pursuing a merger. Last year, Scotiabank was 
considered highly likely to join another bank, and Godsoe acknowledges 
that he held preliminary discussions with possible partners. It is 
not clear why a deal did not materialize, but now that Scotiabank 
is the odd man out, Godsoe is on a campaign every bit as evangelical 
as Cleghorn's. ``There is no case to support the megamergers,'' Godsoe 
said in a speech in Toronto last month. He estimates that 1,000 branches 
will be closed and more than 20,000 jobs lost if both sets of big 
banks merge. ``They would eliminate one-third of our country's banking 
system,'' he said, ``and increase concentration to levels not seen 
anywhere else in the world.'' Cleghorn disputes that and accuses Godsoe 
of ignoring credit unions and other institutions that have a significant 
share of Canadian finances in provinces such as Quebec and Saskatchewan. 
He said that Godsoe had opposed the mergers only since Scotiabank 
was left without a partner. ``It's the old game of musical chairs,'' 
he said. That game does not seem to be playing well with most Canadians. 
Much as they love the stability of their banking system _ only two 
banks have failed since the Depression _ Canadians hate the rich and 
powerful big banks and their record profits, polls show. Many consider 
them hopelessly conservative and pampered by laws that limit international 
competition. ``People resent the banks because they have to put up 
with poor service and high charges,'' said John Nunziata, an independent 
member of Parliament from Toronto who is no friend of banks himself. 
``They feel like these big banks don't care about the little guy.'' 
All five big banks are based in Toronto. Canada has only six other 
banks, and all of them are local and comparatively small. In short, 
the system is far different from the United States, which has roughly 
10,000 banks, many of which are larger than the Canadian banks but 
usually dominate only their local or regional market. And the five 
largest American banks control only 19 percent, not 93 percent, of 
the nation's overall banking assets. The regulatory process differs 
markedly, too. With banking a national responsibility in Canada's 
constitution, government involvement in the two proposed mergers will 
be substantial and time-consuming. The Royal and the Bank of Montreal 
made their merger plans known in January and a decision by Ottawa 
is still several months off. By comparison, Citicorp and Travelers 
Group, which announced plans in April to form the world's largest 
financial services company, have already merged after receiving Washington's 
approval. The leaders of all five Canadian big banks have become well 
known, but it is the husky Cleghorn who has taken the lead, logging 
thousands of miles in a public relations campaign that makes him appear 
to be everywhere, speaking to whoever will listen about the benefits 
that he says would flow from allowing Royal and the Bank of Montreal 
to merge. With a combined market capitalization of more than $33 billion 
(in U.S. dollars), the new entity would be the eighth-largest bank 
in North America. Cleghorn and the other merging bankers argue that 
in a world of consolidation, it is essential to have sufficient scale. 
Reflecting similar concerns, a wave of mergers in the United States 
and Europe has turned other banks into mega-institutions. Cleghorn 
says these mergers are altering the dynamics of the financial sector 
so fast that it is almost impossible to keep pace. The proposed Royal-Montreal 
consolidated bank has slipped from 17th to 22nd place in world rankings 
just since the deal was proposed in January. And Cleghorn thinks the 
banks need to be bigger to compete domestically against the more than 
2,200 provincial credit unions and 78 mutual funds that hold an increasing 
share of personal assets, as well as the mutual funds and specialized 
credit card companies from the United States that are also siphoning 
away some of the big banks' traditional customers. Cleghorn sees the 
merger as only the start of his drive to make the Royal globally competitive. 
He envisions the new combined bank serving as a platform from which 
to stage future ventures. The Bank of Montreal is already spread across 
North America. It owns the Harris Bank of Chicago and has an equity 
stake in the Mexican bank Bancomer. And it spent $20 million (U.S.) 
recently to acquire the Security First Network Bank in Atlanta, a 
virtual bank with 17,000 customers that operates on the Internet. 
``This is a building game for North America,'' Cleghorn said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>