<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981013.0179 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There are those who love their mashed potatoes lumpy, and those who 
prefer them ultra silky. I'm a classicist: to me, the perfect mashed 
potatoes are smooth and thickly creamy, but not overly buttered, with 
a definite potato flavor. I always follow certain rules: boil whole 
potatoes in their skins (so they absorb less water and have better 
flavor and texture). Use salted water (to reduce the amount of salt 
needed at the end). Avoid new potatoes (too moist and waxy, they make 
a gummy mash). Mash the potatoes with an old-fashioned ricer, food 
mill, fork or wire masher, never a machine (which also turns them 
to glue). Finally, heat any liquid added to the potatoes, like milk 
or cream. When I'm in the mood for something indulgent, I like mashed 
potatoes a la Joel Robuchon, the French chef. These mashed potatoes, 
widely considered the ultimate, have been copied all over the world. 
To make them, start with fingerling or Yukon Gold potatoes (Robuchon 
uses a variety called the ratte or the princesse). Scrub the potatoes, 
and place them in a pot of cold, well-salted water. Bring to a boil, 
and cook covered, at a simmer, for 20 to 30 minutes. Drain, then peel 
the potatoes as soon as possible (hold them with mitts or a clean 
towel) and pass them through a ricer into a heavy saucepan. Cook, 
stirring with a wooden spoon, for a few minutes to dry the potatoes, 
then add, for each pound of potatoes, six to eight tablespoons of 
cold butter in bits, beating the potatoes constantly with a big wooden 
spoon or paddle. Add about a half cup of scalded whole milk in a thin 
stream, then season the puree with sea salt. They have to be eaten 
to be believed. Chefs insist that the drying step is necessary for 
a perfect puree, one that home cooks usually omit. ``The more steam 
you take out of the cooked potatoes, the nuttier and creamier the 
puree will be,'' David Bouley said. He often substitutes olive oil 
or a puree of roasted onions for some of the butter. Robuchon makes 
only a few variations: olive oil or goose fat for the butter, and 
nutmeg or saffron as seasonings. That's about it. American chefs have 
gone farther afield: _ A few tablespoons of fresh, tender herbs, especially 
basil pureed with olive oil or snipped chives, add color and flavor. 
_ Root vegetables like turnips, parsnips or celery root can be boiled, 
mashed and added to the potato puree for flavor; carrots, sweet potatoes, 
beets, pumpkin or butternut squash contribute color as well. You can 
make up to half the mash with other vegetables. _ Peeled garlic cloves 
can be boiled with the potatoes and mashed at the same time. Pureed 
roasted garlic is another good addition. Raw garlic is too harsh. 
_ Onions, shallots or leeks _ chopped and sauteed until they are soft 
and golden _ are good to fold in at the end. Crisp sauteed onions, 
perhaps with chicken cracklings, are better as a topping. _ Mincings 
of black truffle with some truffle juice or truffle oil ennoble a 
puree, but white truffles should be shaved on top, otherwise they 
get lost. _ Mushrooms, finely diced and sauteed until tender but not 
crisp, can be folded into the puree. One recipe uses the black corn 
fungus, huitlacoche, making the potatoes nearly black. _ Grated fresh 
horseradish and sour cream, folded in at the end, are popular, especially 
with hearty beef dishes like short ribs. Prepared horseradish is not 
as good because it is made with vinegar. Using wasabi paste, sold 
in tubes in many food shops, instead of white horseradish, adds a 
different sharpness and a hint of green. _ Sweet red pepper puree 
blended with the potatoes makes a pretty side dish, served with red 
snapper. _ Cheese, especially grated parmesan or soft goat cheese, 
can be folded in. _ Add steamed diced cabbage or kale, and you're 
on your way to Irish colcannon, also made with chopped onion. Steamed 
spinach, of course, may evoke those less-than-felicitous childhood 
memories. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>