<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981013.0262 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Quantum theory, in its most arcane and practical guises, was the focus 
of the Nobel Prizes in Physics and Chemistry announced Tuesday by 
the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences. The three winners of the physics 
prize and the two winners of the chemistry award are all university 
professors in the United States. Quantum theory, which has been evolving 
since the early 20th century, is a mathematical framework describing 
the behavior of ultra-small objects, including atoms. The chemistry 
prize of $978,000 will be shared by Dr. Walter Kohn, 75, an Austrian-born 
physicist who works at the University of California at Santa Barbara, 
and Dr. John Pople, 73, a Briton who is a mathematician at Northwestern 
University in Evanston, Ill. Their achievements helped extend the 
mathematics of quantum mechanics to predicting specific chemical reactions 
and to designing molecules for use in medicine and other applications. 
Neither of the laureates in chemistry is a chemist. ``I don't even 
have a degree in chemistry,'' Pople said in an interview. The physics 
prize, also $978,000, will be shared by Dr. Robert Laughlin of Stanford 
University, 48, Dr. Horst Stoermer, 49, a German-born professor who 
works both at Columbia University in New York and at Bell Laboratories 
in Murray Hill, N.J., and Dr. Daniel Tsui, 59, a Chinese-born professor 
at Princeton University. In 1982, when they conducted the research 
for which they were honored Tuesday, all three physicists were working 
for Bell Laboratories, which is now a part of Lucent Technologies 
Corp. The Nobel committee honored the three physicists for their discovery 
of a phenomenon called the fractional quantum Hall effect. Their achievement 
culminated a series of discoveries that began in 1879, when an American 
student, Edwin Hall, found that a magnetic field applied perpendicularly 
to a thin metal plate caused an electric potential to appear that 
was perpendicular to both the plate and the magnetic field. This became 
known as the Hall effect, and it is commonly used to measure the strength 
of magnetic fields. In 1980, Dr. Klaus von Klitzing, a German physicist, 
investigated the Hall effect again and discovered that when the strength 
of the magnetic field increased smoothly, the change in electric potential 
did not occur smoothly, but in steps that were proportional to integer 
numbers _ a hallmark of quantum mechanics. The phenomenon was named 
the integer quantum Hall effect, and Klitzing was awarded the 1985 
Nobel Prize in Physics for its discovery. Stoermer and Tsui took this 
a step further in 1982 using an ultra-powerful magnet at the Francis 
Bitter National Magnet Laboratory of the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology in Cambridge, Mass. Preparing their experiment at Bell 
Laboratories, they pioneered a technique for making a transistor sandwich 
from layers of gallium and arsenic. The layers in this sandwich were 
so thin that electron movement between them was restricted to two 
dimensions instead of the usual three. Installed in the big MIT magnet 
and chilled to near absolute zero, their device exhibited the well 
known quantum Hall effect, but with a new twist: the response of the 
electric potential to changes in the magnetic field was not only stepwise; 
it occurred in thirds of a step. It was as if normal electrons, which 
are indivisible, had been split into thirds. After seeing their results, 
Laughlin, the theorist of the group, said he framed an explanation 
for the effect that was ``completely wrong, and which, fortunately, 
was rejected by the referees at the journal to which I submitted our 
paper.'' But later, he said, the true explanation came to him. ``It 
took about one day,'' he said. ``Science is like that. You spend a 
long time in the desert, and then suddenly the truth dawns.'' At a 
news conference at Bell Laboratories on Tuesday, Stoermer compared 
the electrons undergoing the fractional quantum Hall effect to balls 
on a billiard table. Because of a weird quantum effect that occurs 
when the balls are exposed to a magnetic field about a million times 
stronger than that of Earth, they interact with each other as if they 
were a fluid, and ``they look as if they had broken into thirds. When 
you take the magnetic field away, the normal electrons reappear and 
the one-third fractional electrons disappear.'' Laughlin and Stoermer 
agreed that the fractional quantum Hall effect was unlikely to have 
immediate applications. ``It's more of cosmological than practical 
interest at the moment,'' Laughlin said. ``Potentially, it can help 
us understand the quantum structure of the vacuum throughout the spacetime 
of the universe. ``There are two great trends in physics: Newtonian 
reductionism, in which you look for the wheels and cogs that make 
the big mechanism work, and the opposite, in which you take little 
things like the equations of motion and see how they make the big 
mechanism work. The latter is our approach.'' Laughlin said his 13-year-old 
son, awakened at 2 a.m., answered the telephone call from the Nobel 
committee to notify Laughlin of the award. ``Some guy is calling from 
Sweden,'' the boy yelled at his father. If some quantum effects occasionally 
seem more like magic than reality, quantum chemistry restores the 
balance. All very small objects _ molecules, atoms, subnuclear particles, 
photons of light and so forth _ obey the rules of quantum mechanics. 
Quantum mechanics deals with large assemblages of particles, and calculates 
probabilities rather than certainties. Viewed quantum mechanically, 
all objects are said to have ``wave functions'' that include all their 
possible conditions. For instance, it is possible, because a wave 
function includes all possibilities, for an object to be in two places 
at the same time. Since the electrons that orbit atoms are quantum 
particles, the mathematics of quantum mechanics apply to them, and 
physicists and chemists have long known that it is theoretically possible 
to predict the interactions of atoms by calculating the wave functions 
of their orbital electrons. In practice these calculations were originally 
so difficult that the method had limited use in practical chemistry. 
But in the 1960s a breakthrough occurred. Kohn, working at the time 
at the University of California at San Diego, discovered that the 
total energy of an atomic or molecular system could be calculated 
from the density of electrons at all places within the system. Knowing 
the energy of a chemical system allows a scientist to calculate how 
it will react with another system and what its characteristics may 
be. Kohn's approach came to be known as the Density-Functional Theory, 
and it is the basis of many aspects of computational chemistry, in 
which the geometrical structure of molecules can be mapped and reactions 
predicted. For this, Kohn shares the 1998 chemistry award with Pople, 
who refined computer analysis of the quantum mechanics of molecules 
as a powerful chemical tool. Pople was cited by the Nobel committee 
for his 1970 computer program named Gaussian, which allows chemists 
to apply quantum calculations in making rapid, reasonably accurate 
estimates of molecular behavior. Improvements in the Gaussian program, 
the Nobel committee said, have been so dramatic that it ``is now used 
by thousands of chemists in universities and commercial companies 
the world over.'' Among the users are pharmaceutical laboratories 
seeking shortcuts in designing effective therapeutic drugs. In principle, 
Pople said in an interview, mathematics can explain all aspects of 
chemistry. ``The trick is tailoring the mathematics to fit,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>