<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981013.0285 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The excitement stops right after the metal detectors. That's what 
you have to pass through, as though you were heading for an airport 
departure lounge, to join the audience for ``Corpus Christi,'' Terrence 
McNally's new play at the Manhattan Theater Club. There's a parcel-scanning 
X-ray machine, too, presumably on the lookout for weaponry. There 
was, on the night I attended, the momentary frisson of the gnarled, 
desperate-looking man with the thick glasses demanding a last-minute 
ticket. And once you've taken your seat, you can ponder the impressive 
program insert, signed by hundreds of American artists and arts administrators, 
with its brief but resounding statement in support of ``full and diverse 
artistic expression.'' That's pretty much it for pulse-quickening 
drama. The play that brought an outraged chorus of protest even before 
it went into rehearsal is about as threatening, and stimulating, as 
a glass of chocolate milk. The debates triggered by this latest effort 
from McNally, author of the warmly received ``Master Class'' and ``Love! 
Valour! Compassion!,'' are of urgent importance; the play, on its 
own terms, simply is not. You have probably already heard of ``Corpus 
Christi,'' which has been making headlines since last spring. That 
was when word of the content of the play, which presents a Christlike 
hero as a gay man, was leaked to Roman Catholic rights groups, which 
responded loudly and angrily. There were also anonymous threats of 
violence, and the production was canceled. Then there were threats 
from playwrights to boycott the Manhattan Theater Club for what they 
saw as its moral cowardice, and the production was reinstated. There 
have been protesters outside the theater since the work went into 
previews. Yet ``Corpus Christi,'' which is directed by Joe Mantello, 
is hardly blistering satire of any sort, much less a festival of ``Catholic 
bashing,'' as it was accused of being. As a piece of baldfaced impiety, 
the Monty Python movie ``The Life of Brian'' outstrips it by miles. 
As a daring reconceptualization, the rock opera ``Jesus Christ Superstar,'' 
which portrayed its title character in the context of contemporary 
celebrity, was far more startling. Actually, the show that most readily 
comes to mind is the 1971 musical ``Godspell.'' That, as you may recall, 
was a story-theater presentation of the life of Christ. It was enacted 
by young performers who emphasized the ``peace and love'' aspect of 
their flower-child personas, making the implicit argument that not 
all hippies are like Charles Manson. The show has since become a staple 
among church and high school performance groups throughout the United 
States. ``Corpus Christi,'' it's true, is unlikely to be staged in 
church basements anytime soon. It has its share of four-letter words, 
portraits of sadistic parochial schoolteachers (a priest and a nun) 
and a couple of evocations of rough and nasty sex (which here seems 
to be the exclusive province of heterosexuals). There are also many 
instances of the threadbare religious humor common to college revues. 
(The pregnant Mary to Joseph: ``I'm a virgin, Joe.'' Joseph: ``Nobody 
knows that better than I do.'') But from the moment you first see 
the cast of 13 young men milling around the stage as their audience 
files in, the play's willfully nonthreatening tone is apparent. These 
are guys who, with a little tonsorial assistance, could all be working 
at Disney World. They are fresh-faced and polite; they smile a lot 
and would probably hug you, in a noncarnal way, if you asked. They 
are only actors telling ``an old and familiar story,'' as one of them 
puts it in his opening remarks, in their own way. There are, he adds, 
``no tricks up our sleeves, no malice in our hearts.'' As if to emphasize 
purity of intention, the stage is a raised wooden platform floating 
amid exposed walls and lighting equipment. (The designer is Loy Arcenas.) 
In the opening scene, the performers are baptized into being, given 
names, characters and a sprinkle of water by the actor Michael Irby, 
whose name in the play is of course John and who tells each of the 
newly christened, ``I bless you and I baptize you and I recognize 
your divinity as a human being.'' The human beings proceed to explain 
their roles in the evening. The chief characters are indeed gay variations 
on Christ and his Twelve Apostles. (Jesus is here named Joshua and 
played by the puppy-eyed Anson Mount.) It should be noted that there 
is not a screaming queen or sneering leather boy among them. The apostle 
who is a hairdresser brings to mind a college football star; the hustler 
has an angel's face. More conventional professions _ doctor, lawyer, 
architect _ are well represented. These are obviously just folks, 
only a little more photogenic and a lot nicer than most of the rest 
of us. The plot summoned into being by the agile company members, 
most of whom play multiple roles, is indeed familiar. The outline 
doesn't diverge much from basic biblical lore. The Nativity, the Sermon 
on the Mount, the Last Supper are all duly represented here, with 
the inevitable, relevancy-making substitutions. Joshua is born in 
a motel room and grows up in Corpus Christi, Texas (also the home 
town of McNally), where he is persecuted by teachers and schoolmates 
for being different. He moves to a big city and recruits his corps 
of disciples, including his high school sweetheart, Judas (Josh Lucas). 
Joshua performs the expected miracles and spreads his gospel of affirmation, 
summed up in the credo ``God loves us most when we love each other.'' 
When he returns to Corpus Christi, he is betrayed by Judas to ``the 
fag haters in priests' robes'' and crucified to the jeers of those 
who made fun of him as a boy. This is all set forth with the fluid 
grace one expects from Mantello, even though the actors are unable 
to transcend their positions as peaceful ambassadors from Gay Land. 
There are occasional flashes of original wit in McNally's use of Scripture. 
After Joshua strikes a hypocritical priest, an apostle points out 
that he had previously advised them to turn the other cheek. ``I must 
have been in a very good mood,'' Joshua responds. ``Do not take everything 
I say so seriously.'' Like most lines in ``Corpus Christi'' that touch 
on anything mildly provocative (in this case, contradictions in Christian 
teaching), this one evaporates as soon as it is uttered. McNally has 
Joshua intriguingly say more than once that, ``You can come no closer 
to me than my body. Everything important is hidden from you.'' The 
lines have echoes of McNally's more fully developed works, plays like 
``Lips Together, Teeth Apart,'' which ruefully consider the limits 
of people's understanding of each other. Yet as a piece of writing, 
``Corpus Christi'' feels lazy. It rides piggyback on the mighty resonances 
guaranteed by the story that inspired it, and rarely reaches beyond 
the easy novelty of making its central character gay, with such attendant 
scenes as a wedding of two men. The central and inarguably worthy 
message is that no one should be persecuted for being different. That 
the message is still tragically in need of reiteration is evidenced 
by the death last week of a gay student in Wyoming who had been tortured 
and beaten by two other young men. But who, finally, is ``Corpus Christi'' 
preaching to? Most regular theatergoers will find it flat and simple-minded, 
and those on the hunt for signs of sacrilege and homosexual conspiracy 
are unlikely to overcome their resistance. There is no avoiding the 
conclusion that ``Corpus Christi'' is a minor work from a major playwright 
that probably would have come and gone quietly had it not been for 
its early and vociferous opponents. As it is, it is saddled with a 
weight that its stick-figure shoulders cannot support. PRODUCTION 
NOTES: `CORPUS CHRISTI' By Terrence McNally; directed by Joe Mantello; 
sets by Loy Arcenas; costumes by Jess Goldstein; lighting by Brian 
MacDevitt; sound by David Van Tieghem; original music and arrangements 
by Drew McVety; additional musical staging by Jerry Mitchell; production 
stage manager, James Fitzsimmons; production manager, Michael Moody; 
associate artistic director, Michael Bush; general manager, Victoria 
Bailey. Presented by Manhattan Theater Club, Lynne Meadow, artistic 
director; Barry Grove, executive producer. At City Center, Stage 1, 
131 W. 55th St., Manhattan. With: Anson Mount (Joshua), Sean Dugan 
(James et al.), Christopher Fitzgerald (Thomas et al.), Michael Hall 
(Peter et al.), Michael Irby (John et al.), Ken Leung (James the Less 
et al.), Josh Lucas (Judas), Matthew Mabe (Philip et al.), Drew McVety 
(Matthew et al.), Jeremy Shamos (Bartholomew et al.), Ben Sheaffer 
(Simon et al.), Troy Sostillio (Thaddeus et al.), and Greg Zola (Andrew 
et al.). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>