<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981013.0281 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As conservatives and liberals alike have come to agree on the importance 
of marriage and the need to strengthen families, a growing number 
of high schools across the country are requiring students to undergo 
marriage education. On Jan. 1, Florida will become the first state 
to require all public high schools to teach marriage and relationship 
skills, such as how to resolve conflicts. In other states, hundreds 
of individual schools and school districts are adding classes _ some 
a semester long, some a two-week unit within another course _ to teach 
students the skills to make marriage work and avoid divorce. The movement 
to teach relationship skills, however, is only part of a growing debate 
over what, and where, American children should be taught about love 
and marriage. Given the nation's high divorce rates, some educators 
and social policy analysts say, schools have an obligation to help 
students think not only about relationships, but also about the role 
that marriage has played in history and the deeper human issues of 
love, intimacy and commitment. But there is no consensus on what should 
be taught: some see the courses as an introduction to premarital counseling, 
while others want character education or teaching on divorce law. 
Others question the whole concept of marriage education in the schools, 
arguing that it is an area best left to churches and community groups 
and reserved for adults in a relationship _ not high-school students 
working through a crowded curriculum that too often fails to cover 
basic academic skills. ``We have schools that can't teach reading, 
writing and arithmetic,'' said Midge Decter, the conservative writer. 
``The idea that schools should even be touching this chills my blood.'' 
Advocates of the programs believe they can teach young people how 
to avoid divorce. ``This isn't rocket science; it's more like driver's 
ed,'' said Diane Sollee, whose experience as a marriage counselor 
led her to found the Coalition for Marriage, Family and Couples Education, 
a group that promotes schools' teaching of marriage skills. ``It's 
about teaching kids the basic communication skills they need for a 
healthy marriage. ``People in marriages that succeed fight about all 
the same things as people in marriages that fail,'' she said. ``The 
research shows that what distinguishes them is how they handle their 
disagreements. That's a skill we can teach.'' Because the marriage-skills 
programs are so new, there is no research on whether they actually 
prevent divorce. But some students seem to feel that they fill a need. 
In Philadelphia, 19 students at Martin Luther King High School, mostly 
seniors, enrolled in this semester's elective marriage-skills class, 
which is based on a curriculum developed by the family law section 
of the American Bar Association and is now in use in more than 400 
schools. Only four lived with two married parents, and most said they 
hoped the course _ alternating discussion of divorce law and domestic 
violence with exercises in budgeting and conflict resolution _ would 
help them avoid their parents' mistakes. ``My parents broke up when 
I was 2,'' said Marcus Wright, an 18-year old senior in the class, 
which is sponsored by, and mostly taught at, Wolf, Block, Schorr &AMP; 
Solis-Cohen, a local law firm. ``I'm taking this course because I 
want to get married, and I don't want to break up.'' Currently, most 
high schools discuss marriage as one part of a health or ``life skills'' 
class giving practical information on everything from nutrition and 
balancing a checkbook to AIDS prevention and first aid. Many districts 
have chosen the health model as the best way to avoid controversy 
in an era when teaching about sexuality or values can cause school-board 
headaches. ``The left is afraid that schools are going to be used 
for religious indoctrination, and the right is afraid they'll push 
liberal views, so the public-school textbooks describe everything 
as if it's plumbing, which makes it safe, but doesn't help the children,'' 
said Amitai Etzioni, a professor at George Washington University who 
writes frequently on the need for moral education. It is not yet clear 
just what will be in the curriculum in Florida, where it was a liberal 
Democrat, state Rep. Elaine Bloom, who pushed the legislation requiring 
marriage-skills education, with backing from some conservative groups, 
including the local Christian Coalition. Nationally, though, many 
conservatives say that home, church and community organizations are 
the places to talk about marriage, not the public schools. Last month, 
the Institute for American Values, a nonpartisan group concerned with 
family issues, issued a study critical of the most commonly used textbooks. 
The study analyzed the six textbooks, published from 1993 to 1997 
and used in the 20 states that have adopted specific health texts, 
and concluded that they generally avoided discussion of love, religion, 
commitment, values and spirituality, and focused strongly on self-esteem 
and self-actualization. ``Most of the big, interesting words _ mystery, 
romance, love flirtation, jealousy, courtship, passion _ are simply 
left unexamined, as if they were not relevant,'' the report stated, 
``replaced instead by smaller and ultimately sadder words such as 
dysfunction, self-esteem, responsibility, stress, coping, disease, 
and, most of all, health.'' It questioned whether marriage was appropriately 
a chapter sandwiched between ``Mental Disorders and Suicide'' and 
``Digestion and Excretion.'' ``The textbooks emphasize the health-benefit 
aspect, as if the question about marriage is, what am I going to get 
for it,'' said Paul Vitz of New York University, the author of the 
report. ``That me-generation psychology is incompatible with successful 
marriages and families, which require love and self-sacrifice.'' His 
report quoted one of the texts that says, ``The most important relationship 
in your life is the relationship you have with yourself,'' and another 
that has 31 pages on self-esteem and seven on marriage. The Institute 
for American Values report included three recommendations for improving 
marriage education: use examples from literature and art, shift the 
emphasis from health to character, and, if health textbooks are to 
be used, make sure they recognize the religious and sociological perspectives 
on marriage, and incorporate material from marriage-skills research. 
Some see the textbooks as a sign of the times, a reflection of how 
sexual liberation has been accompanied by an odd revaluing, in which 
graphic sexual talk has become a staple of public affairs while intense 
emotions have come to be seen as unseemly. ``The Victorians could 
not discuss the shape of a piano leg without blushing, but they could 
describe fervent, almost religious, passion for a friend,'' said Kay 
S. Hymowitz, a contributing writer to the conservative Manhattan Institute. 
``Now, we talk with strangers about pubic hair, but if we talk about 
love, we turn red with shame. The idea of belonging to someone else 
threatens contemporary values, which have to do with being tough, 
being independent. ``It's hard to say where kids would learn the cultural 
construct of romantic love,'' she said. ``It's not in the school curriculum. 
It's not in rap music. On many campuses, there is no such thing as 
dating anymore. And when parents talk about what they say to their 
adolescents, you hear about responsibility, about saying what you 
mean, but you never hear about love.'' Most of the new marriage-education 
programs now trickling into high schools still tend to focus on practical 
skills like conflict resolution, but one popular program, ``The Art 
of Loving Well,'' developed at Boston University, uses an anthology 
of literary selections to spur discussion of love, loss, romance, 
commitment and marriage. In ``Connections,'' a 15-lesson curriculum 
now used in several hundred schools, mostly in California, students 
choose a partner for a pretend marriage, and meet for seven days to 
divide household duties, plan a wedding, make career choices, create 
a budget, plan a family vacation and face a randomly-assigned crisis, 
like being dismissed from a job. ``The game comes after they've gone 
through lessons on understanding themselves, relationships, and communications, 
and they really get a chance to work through problems,'' said Kay 
Reed, of the Berkeley, Calif., Dibble Fund, created by a philanthropist 
concerned about divorce rates, which distributes the curriculum. ``Some 
people choose a boyfriend or girlfriend to work with, some people 
a friend of the same sex,'' she said. ``In one class, after the quarterback 
on the football team chose a girl as his partner, the girl, who wasn't 
in the class, came in to tell the teacher she would never even think 
about marrying him because he just didn't listen to her.'' The idea 
of teaching relationship skills in high school has trickled down from 
the adult world in the last few years, as educators, therapists, divorce 
lawyers, family court judges and legislators have become familiar 
with adult marriage-skills courses. Since several states have rejected 
legislation to require skills counseling for everyone married, some 
supporters of marriage education now see the high schools as an easier 
place to spread the word. ``Let's face it, this is America, and we're 
not going to force people into counseling,'' said Ms. Sollee. ``In 
high school, it's clearer that this isn't therapy, it's learning skills.'' 
And in Florida, at least, the high-school curriculum is only part 
of a larger marriage-skills effort, including a discount on marriage 
licenses for couples that take a four-hour skills course. ``Our legislation 
is about skills that will help children in all their relationships: 
with their parents, their peers, their brothers and sisters, and ultimately 
with choosing and staying with their mate,'' said Representative Bloom. 
But even some proponents of marriage-skills courses for adults question 
whether they belong in high school. ``There are plenty of community 
settings or religious settings for learning relationship skills,'' 
said Howard Markman, of the University of Denver's Center for Marital 
and Family Studies, who teaches adult marriage-skills courses. ``I 
think relationship skills need to be developed in the context of the 
relationship, and trying to reach kids in schools may be too early.'' 
An exchange last month at a New York City symposium sponsored by the 
Institute for American Values encapsulated the debate over the schools' 
role: ``A lot of these kids don't know who Abraham Lincoln is,'' said 
Ms. Decter, arguing for a traditional academic curriculum. ``They 
don't need to know who Abraham Lincoln is to stay married,'' retorted 
Ms. Sollee. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>