<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981013.2000.2560 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Cell phones aren't the only booming technology in China. The Internet 
is also catching on as a tool for business and communication. Standing 
in the way of Internet access is the great firewall of China, Beijing's 
control over who can get on the Web and what they see when they get 
there. But Mike Atruman, an American businessman in Beijing who runs 
a Web-based marketing company, CT Interactive, finds Chinese officials 
surprisingly open to the Net. They really push forward ideas on the 
Internet. Naturally, there is dichotomy, I mean there is a fear that 
information that might not necessarily be too appropriate would go 
to the Chinese masses, for instance. But people here, and I think 
the leadership here really understands that this is something that 
has got happen. The Internet has got to be pushed forward if China 
is to really enter the information age, the modern age, if you will. 
Now this is intriguing because what we tend to hear about the Internet 
in China is that it is too much an avenue of information that they 
might not be happy with. But you are saying that you are getting a 
positive reaction. Is it truly an active positive position they are 
taking? Well, I think it is a very difficult medium really to regulate. 
You have to understand, the group that are actually in charge and 
monitoring the Internet are not the ones that necessarily deeply understand 
that medium. So what's happening is, yes, there is probably four or 
five Internet sites that are blocked out. One might be Playboy and 
another is CNN I think, but by and large you can really get whatever 
information you would like. The limitation comes from an area I think 
you guys haven't possibly thought through which is genuine Chinese 
content. So someone in China who doesn't necessarily speak English 
or read it, would not be able to get information because it would 
not be provided to them in a Chinese character content. That obviously 
suggests a great business opportunity given the fact that there are 
about 1.2 billion potential Web surfers in China. Have you seen any 
indication that outside service providers and Web sites are thinking 
about translating their content into Chinese? Well, it is interesting, 
translation of content is going to be really important, but I think 
what my company focuses on, and I think what the future of Internet 
in China holds, is that this is going to have to be a medium dedicated 
to the Chinese people. This is going to have to be something that 
Chinese people respond to. If we simply take a Web site and translate 
it into Chinese that is not necessarily something that is going to 
ring true to a Chinese consumer. OK. Well, give us an example of how 
you should be thinking in Chinese if you are going to be trying to 
make money off of the Internet with them as the users. Take, for example, 
a car company. Let's say you were selling a Ford. Now if you translated 
a site from Ford directly over and you said it is a fantastic family 
car, put you, your wife, and your three children in there and go driving 
on weekends. Well, the fact is that most Chinese families do not use 
a car, they only have one child, and they are most certainly not going 
to go out driving on the weekends. Culturally, this doesn't carry 
over. So we are going to have to have a concept, a cultural understanding 
that is going to allow for the same products to be sold or marketed 
or information given but put in a context the Chinese people are going 
to understand. You are liming the outlines of what could be an incredible 
industrial opportunity here. An incredible business for people, but 
you still have the problem of the infrastructure, don't you. There 
aren't that many monitors that can get the Internet for all those 
potential Chinese users yet, are there? That is correct, we are watching 
amazing movement towards the Internet. A year ago there was a little 
over a half million people on the Net, this year we are looking at, 
I think we are near 1.2 million people just a year later. What we 
are looking at right now is a mass exodus towards this medium. For 
instance, in Beijing right now, there is huge jump of cyberclubs, 
there is a huge move forward in people who are able to, for instance, 
college students, are able to get onto a computer rented by the half 
hour, by the hour to look at what is out there. And Mr. Atruman, does 
the government realize, accept the fact that in a development of that 
kind, it is going to have to eventually give up control of what they 
are going to be seeing on it and what they are going to be using it 
for? Yes. There is clearly ambivalence about that. I mean I would 
be very hard-pressed to say, yes, the Chinese government is willing 
to give up this control and is just going to let this Pandora's box 
open and stay open. But I think there is also an understanding that 
this is the package that needs to be bought. In other words, people 
are going to get on the Internet, people are going to need to use 
the Internet to give China this leading edge during the economic crisis, 
and that the only way for this to happen is to let them potentially 
see information that some might see as harmful. So I mean, yes, there 
is certainly conflict about it, but I don't think you are going to 
close it down now. Mike Atrumen of the Internet-based marketing firm, 
CT Interactive, speaking with us from Beijing. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>