<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981013.2000.0681 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The reaction to the accord in Kosovo has been unenthusiastic. The 
Kosovo Liberation Army ignored the agreement in a statement and demanded 
immediate NATO intervention and as the BBC's Paul Wood reports from 
Kosovo's provincial capital, ethnic Albanians there are skeptical. 
At Albanian cafes and bars in Pristina, people are suspicious of pepestio 
brokered by Richard Holbrooke. They do not believe the Serbian authorities 
will keep their promises. Most like this woman are disappointed that 
the bombing did not take place. What can I say, I mean, I'm not really 
surprised because I think most of the ordinary people of Kosovo didn't 
expect the NATO bombings, well, they were only threats and were used 
to them, but the problem is that, I don't think the problem will go 
on having 2,000 troops unarmed or armed here because that won't solve 
the problems and that won't make Milosevic comply with the demands. 
Do you think that people will continue to press for independence either 
as KLA fighters or as people campaigning here illicitly on the streets? 
I'm pretty sure about that. I mean, they decided they want the independence. 
I think they will go on. The main ethnic Albanian political party, 
the LDK has been consulted all the way along by Mr. Holbrooke and 
his team. It now appears that a peace plan will allow only for Kosovo's 
autonomy. The LDK's foreign affairs spokesman, Professor Alis Kashi, 
says the goal of independence hasn't been abandoned. Well, for many 
years, Albanians in Kosovo are requesting peace and stability in the 
region and right of self determination. And there is a strong commitment 
to solve this issue through negotiation process, through negotiation 
without preconditions. So, if we are able to argument our independence, 
I think that will be accepted. But, independence is not our offer 
from the international community and it never will be. Has this been 
accepted here? Well, using more than never, I don't stick with that. 
Soldiers of the Kosovo Liberation Army sing that they are not afraid 
to give their lives for the freedom of their motherland. KLA recruits 
swear an oath promising to fight for independence until death. I asked 
the organization's political representative, Adam Demachi, if an American 
document promising just autonomy would be enough for the KLA. It is 
not enough, now it is not enough, but we will try to qualify them 
to add something to make to be satisfied they decide also we are trying 
to add some essential paragraphs in that present. Independence is 
essential for serious negotiation. The KLA's general staff has made 
clear that the organization will not give up the armed struggle. It 
all points to a long, complicated, and ever deepening involvement 
by the international community in Kosovo. The BBC's Paul Wood reporting 
from Kosovo's provincial capital, Pristina. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>