<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981013.2000.0901 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
NATO officials say the threat of air strikes remains in place. The 
strikes could be launched any time after Friday the deadline for Milosevic's 
compliance. Still, the mood at NATO headquarters in Brussels, Belgium 
was optimistic today. Spokesman, Jamie Shay, says Richard Holbrooke 
accomplished his mission. We are very pleased indeed with what Ambassador 
Holbrooke has been able to negotiate. He has been able to achieve 
things which, until a few days ago, President Milosevic was steadfastly 
refusing. And this, in fact, does offer the hope, finally, of working 
towards a peaceful solution to the crisis in Kosovo. Now having said 
that, of course, Ambassador Holbrooke, is the first person to acknowledge, 
as he did so this morning, that the agreement is worth something only 
to the extent that it is carried out. That it is complied with. And 
so at NATO, of course, we have to be vigilant, though, for the next 
few days to make sure that President Milosevic translates those words 
into deeds. Well, let's talk about those next few days. The air and 
ground verification of a pull out by Milosevic is a central tenant 
of that agreement. He has got four days to do that and then a 2,000 
strong force from the organization for security and cooperation in 
Europe will be deployed as, I guess they are being called verifiers, 
but that is four days. How will you be able to get verifiable proof 
in the meantime? Well, obviously, we can verify what's going on in 
Kosovo already from other normal intelligence sources, as you know, 
satellites and whatever. And so we are not completely devoid of those 
means while we are waiting for the OSE civilian observers to be deployed. 
But I do take your point, yes, it is now urgent, of course, to establish 
the mechanisms for a NATO role in airborne surveillance and, of course, 
the OSE will have to work very quickly to try to locate the 2,000 
observers and put them in place. Well, will the people of Serbia at 
this point and people in Belgrade be able to heave a sigh of relief 
and be able to say there is a 99.9 percent probability that no bombs 
are going to fall in the next four days no matter what happens. That's 
obviously a good question. I think we will be keeping the military 
pressure up. At least for the foreseeable future, because as I say, 
we still don't have proof that President Milosevic is going to keep 
his word and we know that it is the military pressure that has made 
him go as far as he has gone, so I do not think that is an instrument 
that we want to lively discard until we are certain that we do not 
need it any longer. We are not there yet. Now understandably, it is 
not your job to say anything bad about NATO, but at the same time, 
how would you realistically assess what this may have done for NATO's 
reputation and for its ability to handle a crisis like this? You do 
have some critics who are saying, well, Milosevic really managed to 
push NATO and got an awful lot of what he wanted. The threat of military 
force didn't really work like magic on him. Well, it's true that NATO's 
alliance of 16 democracies sometimes doesn't act with Olympic speed 
because, obviously, we do have to go through a consensus-building 
process. But it does mean that when NATO takes a decision like the 
one we took yesterday, to issue a deactivation order, it carries the 
full weight of 16 countries behind it. U.S. as well as European countries 
and, of course, as we have seen did have a very strong impact on President 
Milosevic, and if there is one factor that has been able to stop the 
fighting, finally in Kosovo, hopefully to overt a humanitarian catastrophe, 
let's face it, it hasn't been the economic sanctions, it hasn't been 
the political pressure, it has been the concrete threat of NATO action. 
In fact, this responsibility may go further than that though right, 
if we take Bosnia as an example, it is one thing to stop the fighting 
right now but perhaps you are going to need a force there to make 
sure that the peace that you have insured today will be there tomorrow 
and the day after and the month after that. Well, yes, you are right, 
there is no quick fix solution when you have a situation of -like 
we have seen in Bosnia, like we have seen in Kosovo, of very bitter 
ethnic fighting which leaves a residue of hatred. That is why NATO 
will have to play some kind of role in that and it may obviously go 
on for some time, but I do not think at the moment that it is a foregone 
conclusion, that it will require ground troops. We will just have 
to wait and see. Mr. Shay, thank you very much for speaking with us. 
Thank you, too. Jamie Shay is a spokesman for NATO. He spoke with 
us from Brussels, Belgium. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>