<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981013.2000.2381 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The picture of the modern businessman or woman has changed in the 
past decade. Today's American, Japanese, and European wheeler-dealers 
wouldn't be caught dead without their cellular phones. In China, there 
are tens of millions of potential wheeler-dealers and as the BBC's 
Collin Blain reports, they are falling in love with their cellular 
phones. A busy trading house in Shanghai and there is a mobile phone 
on every hip. A million people here have cell phones and the capital, 
Beijing, is not far behind. Two years from now, the country will have 
50 million mobile users. Communications in China have been transformed 
and society itself is being reshaped. Barriers to the free flow of 
information are melting away. The dissidents of 1989 used lumbering 
fax machines to spread their political message. Today, China's intellectual 
life is nourished by the mobile and the laptop. Thank you for calling. 
All of our representatives are currently busy assisting other customers. 
The government's control of ideas will never be quite the same again. 
Telephone collector, Er Dong Chang, says the telecom's revolution 
has caught the mood of modern China. China is in an age of development. 
So doing business is very important to people. They like to have mobile 
phones so they can make deals wherever they are. In the unlikeliest 
corners of China, the communications revolution is on its way. In 
Yunnan Province, a doctor visits a sick baby in a Tibetan family's 
farm house near the town of Jungian. The examination is the same as 
it would have been before, but the response is much, much quicker. 
Using his mobile, Dr. Lee Ching Chun can arrange advice and medicine 
with the hospital at once and some farmers now have cell phones of 
their own. The director of telecommunications for Jun Dian, Yang Pei 
Cun, says he never imagined how people in the countryside would beat 
a path to his door. Thirty percent of the mobile phone users in this 
area are farmers and the number is growing all the time. When I was 
a young man, all of this was unimaginable. The biggest changes have 
happened in the last three years. China's telecom revolution has happened 
so quickly, places like Jun Dian have jumped fifty years in telephone 
development in a matter of months. Until recently, there were hardly 
any phones at all. Now they have the most up to date technology and 
another remote corner of the planet has joined the digital age. The 
BBC's Collin Blain reporting from Shanghai. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>