<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981013.1700.2364 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Last April, a historic peace accord was reached, ending Europe's oldest 
conflict between neighbors. More than 3,000 people were killed in 
Northern Ireland's 30 years of sectarian violence. It became known 
as "the troubles," a conflict pitting Protestants against Catholics. 
Last month, a majority of people of both faiths supported the peace 
accord in a nationwide referendum. However, the infant peace is still 
a fragile one. A little over a week ago, three brothers under 11 years 
of age were killed in a Catholic neighborhood. And a small number 
of Protestant activists have vowed to proceed with a march through 
a Catholic town despite a police blockade. But what is it about wars 
among neighbors that makes them so brutal and so intransigent? That's 
the question we put to Yanish Bugayski, who specializes in ethnic 
relations at the Washington-based Center for Strategic and International 
Studies. Mr. Bugayski has recently returned from Kosovo. Where there 
has been a long history of hostile interaction, those memories are 
very long. There's often some personal vendettas involved. There's 
the way the history is taught. Often the history of an ethnic group 
is taught in relation to hostility to the outsider, which is often 
a neighbor. And particularly in crisis areas undergoing major transformations, 
such in southeast Europe, these inter-neighborly hostilities again 
come to the fore. And often, if you look back in history, it hasn't 
necessarily been between -- the fighting hasn't necessarily been between 
armies, between soldiers. But it's often involved civilians -- civilian 
casualties, civilian massacres. This was what we witnessed in Bosnia 
over a period of five years. So I would say those -- if there is a 
situation of conflict and if it's provoked by political leaders and 
if there is some objective, whether territorial or in regard to resources, 
those inter-neighborly conflicts are the most deadly. But one would 
assume that it would be a lot easier to drop bombs from airplanes 
at a safe distance where you don't really see the people that you're 
killing than to commit the atrocities that we hear about in so many 
of these neighborly wars. Right. Well, we've witnessed this again 
in Bosnia, and we're seeing it now in Kosovo. A situation where the 
political leaders deliberately want to encourage massacres against 
the population, whether to terrorize them or to drive them out of 
the country. And they're always -- you always will find a certain 
element, a certain number of people who will perform terrible atrocities. 
It's nothing in the genes. It's in the culture. It's in the politics. 
Do you think it has anything to do with the fact that it is -- love 
and hate, they say, are very closely intertwined. And perhaps it's 
easier to hate somebody that you know very well than somebody that 
you don't know at all? Well, my theory of the Bosnian war was not 
that they fought because they were so different, but they fought because 
they are so similar. And it was really, in some level, approaches 
a separation, trying to distinguish yourselves from the other -- whether 
it's the religious self or the ethnic other. And those sort of wars 
are the most brutal because, in a way, you're fighting against yourself. 
Yanish Bugayski of the Center for Strategic and International Studies 
in Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>