<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981013.1700.3203 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After a divorce, many American couples end up in a court room, each 
one arguing for custody Young and his ex-wife, Alice Hector, have 
been battling in a Miami, Florida, court for four years. The case 
has drawn national attention because it challenges the traditional 
roles of mother and father. It also brings to minds movie roles in 
such films as "Mr. Mom" and "Kramer vs. Kramer." Ms. Hector is a highly 
paid attorney in one of Florida's most prominent law firms. Mr. Young 
is a trained architect who says he quit his job nine years ago so 
he could raise their kids while his wife concentrated on her career. 
As of now, Bob Young has legal custody of the children. But Alice 
Hector is appealing that decision. NBC television's Carey Sanders 
has the story from Miami. It wasn't supposed to end like this, in 
divorce, with the battle for custody of their two children, ages 9 
and 12 all playing out on a national stage, pitting the traditional 
notion that a woman makes the better single parent against the idea 
that a dad can do the job just as well. I think it was back in, what, 
15 years ago, in "Kramer vs. Kramer," when Dustin Hoffman said that, 
you know... What law is it that says that a woman is a better parent 
simply by virtue of her sex? I have the time to devote to them as 
I had done. I have made career choices that allowed me the flexibility 
to devote that time to them. In one sense, she took the role of the 
dad. In another sense, I took the role of a mom, and I guess that's 
where the phrase "Mr. Mom" comes from. Alice Hector says that's more 
public relations than reality. He never did any of the traditional 
functions of a Mr. Mom. I mean, he never -- he doesn't make beds. 
He doesn't do laundry. He doesn't clean houses. He doesn't cook food. 
He doesn't do any of the traditional chore that women did at home. 
Hector says her ex-husband claims his motives are sincere, but she 
suspects he's twisting Florida's gender-neutral laws to avoid employment 
and instead get a piece of her $316,000 a year salary. The root of 
the battle? Money. He wants your money? He wants -- he wants -- he 
wants to punish me essentially by getting as much money as he can. 
Do you think he wants to work? I think -- I think there's part of 
him that does. He's very talented. He's a very talented guy. I mean, 
it's just really a shame that he doesn't work. Today, Bob Young works 
for the YMCA. But he was unemployed when the custody battle began 
four years ago. It's been widely reported how the judge at the trial 
court level will stop the proceedings and ask me in a most disdainful 
manner, you know, "What is it I don't get here? Why don't you have 
a job?" I cannot imagine, nor have I -- has it ever been conveyed 
to me that this, that any court treated a housewife in the same manner 
and, you know, asked her why she didn't have a job. A court recently 
awarded custody of the children to Bob Young. Now, Alice Hector is 
asking for that decision to be reconsidered by the judges. Attorney 
Ellen Lyons says her victory for Bob Young is not a landmark decision, 
even though some men's rights groups are calling it just that. The 
kind of headlines that read "Hard-Hitting Litigator Loses Custody 
Of Children To Unemployed Father." Well, if you change the word "father" 
to "mother," it would be a non-issue. About the only thing the parents 
do agree on? Sharing custody of the children will not work, and yet 
it is the one thing both children say they would like. The youngest 
has even worked out a schedule for the judges of the days she'd like 
to be with her mother and then her father. Carey Sanders, NBC News, 
Miami. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>