<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981013.1700.1370 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A Washington teacher, writer, diver, sailor and video producer has 
combined his various skills to produce a series of educational videos 
for children with learning disabilities. Zladica Hoke spoke with Ted 
Greenfield about his adventure-based documentaries which focus on 
teaching different types of writing. In a half hour video on the Caribbean 
reef shark, a deep sea diver holds a large shark in his lap, pets 
his head and tickles his belly. Ted Greenfield, who produced the video 
as part of his Adventure Write video series, says that opening segment 
gets children's attention because most of them know sharks only as 
man-eaters. Sharks like to be petted. In this environment with the 
help of the Underwater Explorers Society, sharks can be easily handled 
and controlled. The truth is we have very little to fear from sharks. 
They don't go looking for a human meal. Most educators suggest the 
best way to learn is through experience. Ted Greenfield says it's 
easier for children to learn to write if they can experience their 
subject matter before they write about it. And modern technology, 
such as his videos, provides good opportunities for near life-like 
experiences. In addition to that, he says children with learning disabilities 
need an easy step-by-step approach to writing. I've taken the material, 
and I've broken it down into very easy-to-swallow pieces. While they 
watch the first video segment on the Caribbean sharks, students are 
instructed to write down words about what they see. Then while watching 
the next segment, they are asked to use these words in random sentences 
describing how they feel about what they've seen. Once they have 20 
sentences each, students are taught to recognize whether a sentence 
was written to inform, persuade, describe or tell a story. Let's say 
my purpose is to inform the reader on the facts about the Caribbean 
reef shark. This will be my main idea. Now write that purpose statement 
down in the form of a sentence. "The Caribbean reef shark is a very 
complex and beautiful fish." Now, all you have to do is support that 
main idea by using three supporting sentences. Ted Greenfield says 
by the time they finish the video course, most students can write 
in four different styles, and they also know a lot about sharks. His 
other videos teach writing for specific subjects at school, such as 
social studies, geography and math. Mr. Greenfield says he gets ideas 
for his educational videos from his personal life. He is currently 
working on a video for teaching writing for algebra, which is based 
on his own experience in flying small aircraft. I remember the first 
time I was landing, getting my airspeed right, getting my vertical 
speed right, getting my distance from the runway right. It just dawned 
on me that I was actually flying through an algebra equation. Scuba 
diving and sailing inspired Mr. Greenfield to produce a video program 
for teaching writing about marine science and biology. His program 
on social studies and geography includes footage he made when he was 
teaching English in Benin, West Africa. The Adventure Write video 
series is designed for children aged 8 to 12 with special educational 
need, such as children with dysgraphia or other problems that prevent 
them from processing the written word. The programs are for classroom 
use under teachers' supervision. Ted Greenfield spent six years as 
a special education teacher. While a teacher, he developed special 
education curricula and counseled emotionally disturbed students and 
students with various disabilities who were being integrated into 
the general school population. What has brought me to work with children 
who have special needs is that I feel that there is no such thing 
as a wrong answer and imagination -- a child's imagination, a child's 
dreams, visions can never be wrong. And I think and I feel that there's 
a lot of those visions, a lot of great ideas, a lot of really high 
spirit within children. And sometimes the disabilities prevent that 
from being released. Ted Greenfield says he always approaches education 
and teaching with this example. Remember, it took two bicycle mechanics 
to build an airplane. I'm Zladica Hoke. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>