<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981206.1830.0066 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The impeachment issue has now moved to center stage and it will stay 
there until the final vote of the house Judiciary committee. The president's 
lawyers learned today they will have 30 hours to make their case, 
not the four days they wanted. They start at 9:00 A.M. on Tuesday. 
On the Sunday talk shows, the sparring has already started. ABC's 
Tim O'Brien is on Capitol Hill. The Judiciary committee today laid 
out a rigid agenda for the week ahead. By noon tomorrow, the White 
House must provide a list of the witnesses it wants to testify and 
summaries of what they will say. The White House had one in Farr days 
to present the president's case, it will get two -- Tuesday and Wednesday 
from 9:00 in the morning until midnight. Abbe Lowell, the democrats' 
chief counsel, will have Thursday morning to further lay out the president's 
case, followed by David schippers, the republicans' chief investigator 
who will present the case for impeachment. The history-making debate 
on whether to impeach the president is to begin by Friday. Over White 
House objections, all witnesses will be subject to questions from 
committee members and staff. To avoid impeachment by the full house, 
democrats need the votes of swing republicans, one of whom said today 
the president's evasive answers to questions from the committee have 
turned the tide against the president. If he continues to lie, if 
he continues to ignore the obvious, I believe the president should 
be removed from office based on his conduct. That it is criminal in 
nature and his unwillingness to come forward and be straight. The 
likelihood of Bill Clinton being impeached seemed remote after last 
month's election. But tonight, it's a much closer call. I think if 
we voted today, the president would be impeached. Other more moderate 
republicans still have doubts the charges justify impeachment. I can't 
vote for impeachment. I don't think it reaches the level of high crimes. 
I think we see crimes, I think we see serious crimes, but not high 
crimes. Impeachment by the house would set the stage for an extraordinary 
trial in the Senate. While no one now seems to think the two-thirds 
vote is there to remove the president from office, Senate majority 
leader Trent Lott said today, the senate wouldn't even consider any 
remedy short of removal until it fulfills what Lott called, its constitutional 
duty to put the president on trial. Tim O'Brien, ABC News on Capitol 
Hill. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>