<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981206.0218 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Taiwan's ruling Nationalist Party found its hand considerably strengthened 
Sunday, a day after elections which endorsed its moderate policies 
toward mainland China and steady management of the economy. Candidates 
were out early, parading with supporters who banged drums and gongs 
in a traditional thanks to the voters, as Taiwan awakened to what 
observers called a rebirth for the 104-year-old party that has ruled 
Taiwan since its leaders fled China 49 years ago. The new clout means 
President Lee Teng-hui can deal with China from a position of increased 
strength by ignoring critics who have called for more aggressive moves 
towards reunification as well as those who want formal independence, 
said Liaw Guang-sheng, a political science professor at National Chengchi 
University. ``This election confirmed the Nationalist leadership and 
strengthens its bargaining position,'' Liaw said early Sunday at a 
seminar where experts gave their perspectives on Saturday's elections. 
``Rumors that the Nationalists are falling apart or crumbling have 
proved to be false,'' Liaw said. But like many election watchers, 
Liaw said he was surprised by the extent of the Nationalists' wins. 
Voters chose Nationalist challenger Ma Ying-jeou to replace the opposition 
Democratic Progressive Party incumbent Chen Shui-bian as mayor of 
the capital city of Taipei. Ma's victory reversed opposition gains 
from local elections last year and seemed to validate the party's 
efforts to shake its lingering reputation for corruption and inefficiency. 
The Nationalists also held onto the national legislature, taking 123 
of 225 seats, compared to just 70 won by the Democratic Progressive 
Party. The DPP consoled itself with an upset win in the major race 
for the mayorship of Kaohsiung, a major city in southern Taiwan. But 
the party's immediate future was cloudy, with some members already 
clamoring for new leadership. Defeated mayor Chen, the DPP's top politician, 
left Taipei on Sunday, saying he had to visit an ill relative elsewhere 
on the island. Chen declined to answer one of the big questions raised 
by Saturday's results _ whether he will run for president in 16 months, 
when Lee is set to retire. Meanwhile, DPP lawmaker Chou Po-lun called 
for the party's chairman, Lin Yi-hsiung, to take responsibility for 
``this terrible defeat'' by resigning. Lin said he would meet with 
party strategists before making any decision. The tiny New Party, 
a Nationalist offshoot that supports greater efforts toward integration 
with China, got 11 seats. Smaller parties and independents ended up 
with the remaining 21 seats. The DPP consoled itself with an upset 
win in the major race for the mayorship of Kaohsiung, a major city 
in southern Taiwan. Scholars said the vote reflects a new consensus 
that while the island's sovereignty can't be compromised, relations 
with China must be stable and peaceful. Extremes of opinion on relations 
toward China, which claims Taiwan as a breakaway province, have alienated 
voters. China and Taiwan separated after a civil war in 1949, but 
Beijing still says it would meet any formal declaration of Taiwanese 
independence with military force. Though negotiations on reconciliation 
remain stalled, the sides have taken gradual steps over the past year 
to renew talks that China broke off in 1995 in anger over Taiwan's 
efforts to assert itself internationally. The Nationalist's performance 
should assure Beijing that their familiar rivals have consolidated 
their power, reducing the likelihood of having to deal directly with 
the DPP anytime soon, said Ming Chu-cheng, a professor at National 
Taiwan University. ``The leaders in Beijing could go to bed without 
taking an aspirin Saturday, knowing their old friends will still be 
around,'' Ming said. Voters also gave the Nationalists credit for 
keeping the economy growing at a time when many neighboring economies 
are suffering recessions brought on by the Asian economic crisis, 
observers said. Nationalist control of the Legislature should ensure 
smooth passage of measures to stimulate further growth, they said. 
``It's the politics of accountability,'' said Jou Sheu, professor 
of diplomacy at National Chengchi University in Taipei. ``Most voters 
abandoned high politics for more immediate issues like the economy.'' 
Still, Jou added: ``Moderation won the day.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>