<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981206.0576 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The military leader who has launched Nigeria on an ambitious path 
toward civilian rule proclaimed on Sunday that ``democracy is here 
to stay,'' following local elections that drew a large and enthusiastic 
voter turnout. The elections, seen as the first step in Gen. Abdulsalami 
Abubakar's plan to hand over power by May next year, were praised 
by U.S. Commerce Secretary William Daley, the most senior American 
official to visit this sprawling West African country since the rule 
of the late dictator Gen. Sani Abacha. Abubakar met Daley and a delegation 
of senior U.S. executives at his state residence in the capital, Abuja. 
``Democracy is here to stay and it will stay,'' Abubakar said in a 
soft voice that drew smiles and nods of approval from the American 
audience. ``This is the first step in our democratization program 
and I'm happy to say that quite a lot of people turned out,'' he said. 
Daley praised the elections as a sign that Nigerians are willing to 
bring about serious reforms and ``join the international community 
every day of the year.'' Saturday's vote was seen as a trial run before 
state and presidential elections between now and February. Inauguration 
ceremonies for the new civilian president are planned for May 29. 
Daley said the United States was contemplating sending more senior 
delegations to expand ties with Africa's most populous country, which 
for years has been plagued by corruption, ethnic divisions and military 
meddling. Early next year the United States is expected to review 
aid sanctions imposed on Nigeria because of its poor record in fighting 
drug trafficking, a member of Daley's team said. The U.S. delegation, 
which visited three other African countries over the past week, spent 
less than six hours in Nigeria before flying back to Washington. A 
U.S. official who spoke on condition of anonymity said that President 
Bill Clinton may attend Nigeria's presidential inauguration ceremonies. 
Saturday's local government elections drew a huge turnout. More than 
50 million people were registered for the vote, and voting was monitored 
by foreign observers and local human rights groups. The mood was mainly 
positive although logistical difficulties hampered voting in a number 
of areas and at least six people were reportedly killed in a clash 
between supporters of two parties at a voting station near Warri, 
about 200 kilometers (125 miles) southeast of the commercial capital 
of Lagos. A leaderless coalition of former opponents of Abacha, who 
died suddenly in June, was leading early results gathered overnight, 
officials said Sunday. The Peoples' Democratic Party, a grouping of 
34 traditional chiefs, academics, businessmen and ex-generals, was 
the top vote-getter in most of Nigeria's 36 states, several National 
Electoral Commission officials said on condition of anonymity. The 
party has a murky platform and no leader, although former military 
ruler Gen. Olusegun Obasanjo has donated dlrs 2.5 million to the party 
and is campaigning for the party's presidential nomination. Obasanjo 
and the PDP appeared to be a compromise choice offering military stability 
with increased civilian participation. Obasanjo had assumed control 
in 1976 after military leader Gen. Murtala Muhammed died in a failed 
coup attempt. Obasanjo became the only military ruler to relinquish 
power and retired in 1979. He has strong support in the predominantly 
Muslim north, the power base for the Nigerian military, which has 
ruled for all but 10 years since independence from Britain in 1960. 
Preliminary election results showed strong results for two other new 
political entities _ the All Peoples' Party and the Alliance for Democracy, 
which includes some members of political parties formerly allied to 
Abacha, electoral officials said. Only parties that obtain at least 
5 percent of Saturday's vote in 24 of Nigeria's 36 states will be 
allowed to participate in February's presidential poll. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>