<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981206.0914 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Former Lt. Col. Hugo Chavez, who staged a bloody coup attempt against 
the government six years ago, was elected president of Venezuela Sunday 
_ a stunning blow to the political and economic establishment that 
has ruled during 40 years of democracy. With 65 percent of the vote 
counted, Chavez had 56 percent compared to 39 percent for Yale-educated 
businessman Henrique Salas Romer, according to official results from 
the National Electoral Council. People danced in the streets, set 
off fireworks and honked their horns in celebration. ``Venezuela is 
being born again,'' Chavez declared when results were announced. He 
appealed for calm and said he would pursue prudent economic policies. 
``Once again the people of Simon Bolivar have shown themselves to 
be a grand people,'' he told the Venevision television network. Chavez 
often invokes South American liberation hero Bolivar in his speeches. 
Because of Chavez's meteoric rise in the polls, the vote had turned 
into a confrontation between rich and poor _ and a warning sign for 
the rest of Latin America. ``These are historic elections. Nothing 
like these elections has happened in Venezuela's political history,'' 
said U.S. Ambassador John Maisto. For the first time ever, neither 
of Venezuela's two traditional parties fielded candidates. In an effort 
to head off a Chavez victory, both the center-left Democratic Action 
Party and the center-right COPEI Party dumped their respective candidates 
during the past week and threw their support to Salas, who had been 
running second in the polls. In 1992, Chavez tried and failed to overthrow 
Venezuela's democratically elected government. His candidacy has blown 
a hole through the conventional wisdom that said democracy and free 
markets were inescapable in Latin America. Chavez on Sunday cast his 
vote amid some 1,000 supporters roaring, ``Chavez! Chavez!'' and ``Viva 
Venezuela!'' As he drove away, throngs of teenagers chased after his 
white van. The voting Sunday was described as orderly, and turnout 
appeared high. Street celebrations broke out throughout the country 
Sunday evening; people donned Chavez's trademark red parachutist's 
beret and hung Venezuelan flags from balconies. ``Down with the oligarchy!'' 
shouted one woman standing outside Chavez's Caracas headquarters. 
Reports that Chavez supporters would stage violent protests if their 
candidate loses prompted an appeal for calm from President Rafael 
Caldera. ``The government and armed forces have promised to respect 
the electoral results. That respect will be sacrosanct,'' Caldera 
vowed, adding that ``we demand that the results be accepted in peace.'' 
Chavez's leftist Patriotic Pole coalition, which calls for fewer privatizations 
and a slowing of free-market economic reforms, already won a plurality 
of Congress in Nov. 8 regional elections, breaking the two traditional 
parties' 40-year political stranglehold. Chavez's call for a new constitution 
and the dissolving of Congress has scared investors and exacerbated 
an economic crisis. Foreign oil companies, including Exxon, Mobil, 
Shell and British Petroleum, have put some of their investment plans 
on hold. Venezuela is the number one exporter of oil to the United 
States. The eleventh-hour attempt by COPEI and Democratic Action to 
close ranks around Salas failed, even though Salas supporters had 
hoped the well-greased political machinery of the old-style parties 
would enable their candidate to win. The campaign took on overtones 
of class warfare. Those who oppose Salas, a former governor of industrial 
Carabobo state, said he would defend the interests of the oligarchy 
if elected. And Chavez's opponents said he is a dictator-in-waiting. 
``To those who call us coup leaders or tyrants, we have to respond 
to them as Jesus of Nazareth: Forgive them, Lord, for they know not 
what they do,'' Chavez bellowed to hundreds of thousands of supporters 
at his closing rally in Caracas Wednesday night. Yet Chavez's militaristic 
rhetoric terrifies middle and upper class Venezuelans, many of whom 
have already fled to Miami. ``He's a crazy man on the loose, a communist,'' 
said Elena Alamos, an elderly woman casting her vote in Caracas's 
upper class Altamira district. An economic crisis caused by a 12-year 
low in oil prices has made making ends meet all but impossible for 
most Venezuelans, whose standard of living has been steadily declining 
for more than 15 years. On Sunday, 11 million of the country's 23 
million inhabitants were eligible to vote. Among the trailing candidates 
was former Miss Universe Irene Saez, who had led the polls until earlier 
this year. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>