<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981206.0176 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A leaderless coalition of former opponents of the late dictator Gen. 
Sani Abacha was leading early results gathered overnight from Nigeria's 
key local government elections, officials said Sunday. The Peoples' 
Democratic Party, a grouping of 34 traditional chiefs, academics, 
businessmen and ex-military generals, was the top vote-getter in the 
majority of Nigeria's 36 states, several National Electoral Commission 
officials said on condition of anonymity. The party has a murky platform 
and no leader although former military ruler Gen. Olusegun Obasanjo 
has donated dlrs 2.5 million to the party and is campaigning for the 
party's presidential nomination expected later this month or in January. 
Elections officials were releasing no national or regional figures, 
emphasizing that it would take time for them to finalize the results. 
It was not clear when an announcement would be made. The turnout was 
higher than expected. More than 50 million people in this country, 
Africa's most populous, were registered for the vote. Foreign observers 
and local human rights groups were monitoring the poll. Problems in 
vote counting were caused by a lack of logistics. Votes in some remote 
rural communities were being collected by donkeys and camels while 
polling stations in the major cities had to deal with a higher-than-expected 
turnout with a shortage of officials and materials. Saturday's poll 
was seen as a test run ahead of presidential elections on February 
15. Although voting went ahead largely peacefully, it was marred by 
scattered reports of ballot shortages and inaccurate voters' lists. 
At least six people were killed when rival supporters of two parties 
_ the PDP and the Alliance for Democracy _ clashed outside a polling 
station near the town of Warri about 200 kilometers (125 miles) southeast 
of Lagos, witnesses said. Although many voters said they were planning 
to vote for change, Obasanjo and the PDP appeared to be a compromise 
choice offering military stability in combination with increased civilian 
participation in government. Obasanjo, who assumed control in 1976 
after a failed coup attempt took the life of military leader Gen. 
Murtala Muhammed, became the only military ruler to relinquish power 
and retire in 1979. Although a southerner, Obasanjo has strong support 
in the predominantly-Muslim north, the power base for the Nigerian 
military which has ruled for all but 10 years since independence from 
Britain in 1960. Preliminary election results also showed strong results 
for two other new political entities _ the All Peoples' Party and 
the Alliance for Democracy, which includes some members of political 
parties formerly allied to Abacha, electoral officials said. Only 
parties which obtain at least 5 percent of Saturday's vote in 24 of 
Nigeria's 36 states will be allowed to participate in February's poll. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>