<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981206.0361 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Kosovo Albanian rebels accused Serb forces Sunday of launching unprovoked 
attacks in the shooting deaths of more than a dozen ethnic Albanians 
in the past few days. They said more Serb forces must pull back in 
order to avoid more violence in the tense standoff between the two 
sides, which have clashed sporadically since an October peace agreement. 
To add muscle to that agreement, the advance party of a NATO European 
military force arrived Sunday in neighboring Macedonia to be on standby 
to rescue if necessary the international civilians trying to verify 
compliance with the October accord. The recent killings in Kosovo 
have heightened fears full-scale combat may resume soon after halting 
two months ago when Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic agreed to 
a withdrawal of many forces from the separatist Serbian province. 
In a statement published in the ethnic Albanian newspaper Koha Ditore, 
the Kosovo Liberation Army blamed the Serbs for the escalation of 
violence, saying they had attacked both villages and KLA positions 
despite the cease-fire. The two deadliest recent shootings _ the killings 
of three ethnic Albanians by unidentified assailants in Pristina and 
eight KLA fighters by border guards on the Albanian border _ were 
Serb ambushes, the rebels said. They disputed the position of international 
officials that both sides are to blame for the rising violence in 
Kosovo. ``It is unacceptable for the international community to equate 
the KLA with Serb forces'' and hold both responsible, the statement 
said. The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, which 
is coordinating an international monitoring mission in Kosovo, condemned 
Kosovo violence last week but declined to single out either side in 
the recent shootings. Some 500 unarmed verifiers now patrol Kosovo 
daily _ a total that is rising almost daily as the OSCE tries to put 
about 2,000 on duty in the province. Driving through tense villages 
in bright orange trucks, the verifiers have brought a sense of added 
security for ethnic Albanians even though they have no weapons. ``Hopefully, 
the deployment of the OSCE verification mission will create a new 
environment, a new atmosphere,'' ethnic Albanian political Ibrahim 
Rugova said Friday. In the Macedonian capital Skopje, four huge French 
Hercules military planes with about 30 military officers and 40 tons 
of equipment landed Sunday in driving wind and snow to set up the 
NATO force to protect the civilian verifiers. Over the next two weeks, 
the force will grow up to a 1,700-man NATO mission, led by France. 
The force will include about 700 French, 350 British and 200 soldiers 
each from Italy, Germany and the Netherlands. If the Kosovo peace 
verifiers run into trouble, the NATO soldiers will swiftly engage 
in a cross-border action from Macedonia to extract them and bring 
to safety. ``We are glad to be here, but I hope we have no job to 
do in Kosovo,'' Lt. Col. Charles de Kersabiec told reporters. In its 
statement Sunday, the KLA said it has urged international officials 
to push for Serb withdrawals from several more positions. It also 
said the Serbs should stop patrolling some roads. Precise details 
of where and how remaining Serb troops can be deployed were not specified 
in the October agreement with Milosevic, brokered by U.S. envoy Richard 
Holbrooke. The embattled southern province in Serbia, which is the 
dominant republic in Yugoslavia, has a population of 2 million which 
consists mostly of ethnic Albanians. Serbia used force this year to 
try to crush separatist rebels and keep Kosovo from seceding. Hundreds 
of people, mostly ethnic Albanian civilians, were killed and as many 
as 300,000 were displaced from their homes. Dozens have been killed 
since the October agreement. In the latest violence, the ethnic Albanians' 
Council for the Defense of Human Rights said a Serb sniper killed 
an Albanian in his field Saturday in Klina, 30 kilometers (18 miles) 
northwest of Pristina. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>