<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981206.0194 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Fatigue lined the round, open face of settler leader Aharon Domb after 
another day of meetings aimed at trying to halt Israel's West Bank 
troop withdrawal. But damage control has replaced idealism, and even 
true believers in the right of Israelis to live in the West Bank are 
talking of just preserving as much as they can. Dejected, Domb said 
his movement has taken a body blow from a government most settlers 
voted for, and has been pushed to the fringe of Israeli politics. 
He said settlers are ``confused and upset,'' but that he didn't know 
what to do to help. Some settlers are taking action, grabbing hilltops 
in the West Bank with the tacit support of the same government that 
signed the agreement with the Palestinians. Standing near his two-story 
house at the edge of the Shilo settlement in the heart of the West 
Bank, Yisrael Medad pointed to one such enclave across a valley on 
a hilltop. There, a few trailers were lined up, and a portable generator 
providing them with electricity whined across the empty space. ``We 
have three families living there now,'' Medad said proudly, adding 
that more hilltops were being seized. Still, the 51-year-old Medad, 
who has lived in Shilo for 18 years, is bitter. Most settlers voted 
for Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu in 1996, believing he would 
champion their cause. But in October, Netanyahu signed an agreement 
to hand over 13 percent more of the West Bank to the Palestinians. 
At the same time, Netanyahu's government is encouraging settlement 
expansion, granting settlers generous tax breaks and subsidies. But 
Domb reacted to a mention of the government's settlement policy by 
slapping his forehead and emitting a long, audible sigh. An allocation 
of dlrs 114 million for settlements in 1999 is ``aspirin for cancer,'' 
he said. His gloom lifted when he talked of Sebastia, an abandoned 
train station north of the West Bank town of Nablus where the religious 
settlement movement scored a major victory 23 years ago. At Sebastia, 
a youthful Domb and his comrades danced in circles and sang ``The 
sons came back home'' _ a reference to the belief that Israel's capture 
of the West Bank and Gaza Strip in the 1967 Mideast war brought the 
Jewish people closer to redemption by restoring the rest of the land 
promised to them by God. In seizing Sebastia, the fledgling movement 
tested then-Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin's resolve not to allow settlements 
in the heart of the West Bank. Rabin lost. From then on, settlement 
after settlement was established, for a total of 144 that are home 
to 176,000 Israelis today. But the glory days appear to be over. ``The 
people here are angry,'' said Ron Nachman, mayor of Ariel, a West 
Bank settlement of 15,000 people living in small apartment buildings 
and detached houses. A member of Netanyahu's Likud Party, Nachman 
said that after the Wye accord, Ariel residents had expected ``warmth'' 
from their government, a visit by a minister. But no one came. Sitting 
behind his cluttered desk, Nachman watched as the television suspended 
from the ceiling showed pictures of a dozen Palestinians attacking 
an Israeli car at a West Bank junction, beating the driver and passenger 
and setting the car on fire. Nachman picked up the phone and called 
a deputy Cabinet minister. They discussed the incident in heated tones, 
but came up with no solutions. There will be more violence now, said 
Shmuel Gross, 32, who moved to Shilo three years ago. His brother, 
a settler in the West Bank town of Hebron, was stabbed to death there 
by a Palestinian several years ago. ``In another month or two, we'll 
be driving down the road and they'll be shooting at the car,'' he 
warned. None of this deters the settlers of Shilo. Ariella Ben Eliezer, 
46, a tall, angular woman wearing a long dress and hat common to Orthodox 
Jewish women, set her blue eyes determinedly. ``This land is a present 
from God, so we must live here,'' she declared. However, a majority 
of the settlers moved to the West Bank in search of a suburban life 
they couldn't afford in Israel's cities. Now, some talk openly of 
leaving. Domb's Council of Settlements claims to represent both types 
of settlers, but its leadership is made up of ideologues. Their disarray 
following the Wye River accord was evident. During the nine-day summit 
that led up to the agreement, the council called settlers to block 
intersections. Only a few hundred responded. A well-advertised demonstration 
in Tel Aviv drew about 40,000, but many were brought in by council 
buses. Domb said demonstrations are not the proper vehicle under the 
present circumstances, but he was at a loss to point to an effective 
tool. The veteran settler activist, gone paunchy and gray two decades 
after Sebastia, acknowledged that he faced a new reality. ``The `nationalist 
camp' has folded its flag,'' he said, ``and now we have to muster 
our forces to hoist the flag again. We know it will never be raised 
to the top of the flagpole. So we'll raise it to half-staff.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>