<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981206.1000.1469 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Recent questionable calls by NFL referees have some coaches and players 
calling for changes. Nick Charles reports. Those men in striped shirts 
on football fields are supposed to blend in, rather than be the spotlight. 
But these days, the gaffes by NFL officials have made more headlines 
than the games. Most ridiculously illustrated, perhaps, Thanksgiving 
day, when the ref couldn't get the overtime coin toss call correct. 
What makes me mad is when you have and you fight and you scratch for 
60 minutes out there, and then it's decided by people that wear striped 
shirts. We'd all like to see the game determined by the players. Sometimes 
you scratch your head over those things. The scratching could be heard 
in numerous places this past weekend, including New England, when 
the Patriots beat the bills. A hotly-disputed pass interference call 
on what would have been the last play of the game changed the outcome, 
made winners out of apparent losers and left a bitter taste in those 
who saw victory snatched away by a neutral party. The culprit was 
human error, and for all the wailing about the injustice of these 
kinds of calls, there is agreement on one thing. I don't think they're 
trying to cheat. I don't think there's anything like that at all. 
I, personally, think these guys are busting their tails to do a great 
job. I know they are. NFL officials have to make critical, split-second 
decisions in a Game being played at a blur -- faster than it's ever 
been. The owners, coaches, players and fans who say these blown calls 
are bad for the NFL's image want the league to bring back instant 
replay, which was voted out in 1992 after a six-year experiment. In 
any form, fashion -- any form, fashion, whatever, I'll be for replay. 
Proponents want to once again give officials the luxury of a Second 
look and the power to change a call. I would love to see instant replay 
come back, but with some kind of modification, where you're not necessarily 
trying to make anyone look bad, because we know that everybody's human, 
and you can make a mistake, but we -- You know, with the help of instant 
replay, you can probably get the call corrected. We're for instant 
replay if it's done real well. We don't want to fall back into the 
-- you know, the time losses and the distractions from the game. The 
league voted to pull the plug on instant replay after the 1991 season 
because it felt the reviews took too much time and caused games to 
drag on. However, recent NFL games have stretched on longer than ever, 
even without it. Replays or not, NFL officials are under siege these 
days. And according to some, one way to ease the abuse and improve 
the game is to do what every other major professional sport does -- 
hire full-time employees. NFL owners will meet again after the season, 
when officiating will likely be a prime topic. And the probable remedy, 
to reinstitute replay. In the meantime, some players are taking no 
chances. Cynics might say the next step would be to print the sign 
in braille. I'm Nick Charles. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>