<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981206.1830.0820 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In "focus" this evening -- saving the past for future generations. 
NBC's Suzanne Malveaux reports on a conservation effort. a corroding 
pyramid, a fading flag, a tattered dress, ancient bones -- fragile, 
irreplaceable items, pieces of history. Oh say can you see. Their 
preservation for future generations, a special challenge. Now a new 
push from technology and funding to protect the priceless. The actual 
star-spangled banner, whose "broad stripes and bright stars" were 
seen that night in 1814, is now in need of saving -- her wool fibers 
decaying after nearly two centuries of exposure to sunlight, heat 
and pollutants. The flag is old. It's 185 years old and it's showing 
its age. In the past the star-spangled banner had been vacuumed and 
spot cleaned with gasoline for preservation. Now at the national museum 
of American history, she is being examined by conservators who wear 
coats and gloves while handling her careful to keep fibers, Lint and 
oil away. Later, they will snip the banner's stitches, remove the 
linen backing, and house the flag in a climate-controlled display 
case. The 3-year flag conservation project will cost $18 million. 
Private corporations and foundations will fund the bulk of it, taxpayers 
will put down $3 million as part of the White House's millennium project. 
Paper is beautifully tenacious, it wants to last. At the national 
archives, special handling for other American treasures. Here conservators 
preserve historic documents. The process begins with clean cleaning. 
Erasers are grated into flakes and are used to grind about dirt and 
mold. A paste, cooked in the lab, is applied to mend any tears. Is 
this actually abe Lincoln's signature right here? Yes, it is, right 
here. Conservators use powerful microscopes to identify the type of 
paper and ink to determine if the document will fall apart or change 
colors during chemical baths intended to preserve it. The most important 
and final stage of the process storing the documents in a contamination-free 
environment. The air in this building is filtered seven-times a day. 
This sculpture weighs 715 pounds. But protecting works of art is even 
more high-tech. At the Los Angeles county museum of art, a special 
platform is designed to keep this sculpture stable in the event of 
an earthquake. For paintings, infrared light and radiation are used 
to see what's hidden beneath paint and varnish and grime. To the naked 
eye all we see is hair on the side going around Christ's head, but 
with the infrared photograph we actually saw there was an ear underneath. 
Grime and time exact a heavy toll on the unprotected. The newly restored 
sphinx was mapped by computer. Pyramids have been damaged by the breath 
and sweat of tourists. The sistine chapel needed a 14-year-long restoration 
job after salt and dirt in the air changed the colors of Michelangelo's 
murals. At Chicago's field ewe seem, a natural wonders is being worked 
on. Scientists and technicians are currently uncovering the fossilized 
skeleton of a dinosaur called "sue," the largest and most complete 
T-Rex fossil ever found. Whoa, that skull is huge! The lab itself, 
now a museum exhibit, in America, and elsewhere, as this millennium 
ends, a determined effort to preserve and protect what can not be 
replaced. Susanne Malveaux, NBC news, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>