<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981206.0133 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Perhaps it's unfair to keep comparing the Clinton impeachment process 
to the Nixon days, the way Democrats do when they say Henry Hyde and 
his judiciary committee don't measure up to Peter Rodino and his. 
After all, Congress in 1974 was not a perpetually snarling, partisan 
body. Nor was it then considered impossible, or undesirable, to keep 
the committee's evidence a secret, the way it is today when grand 
jury testimony is played on television and Kenneth Starr's lurid evidence 
is published before Congress has even read it. In 1974, moreover, 
tear-jerk television programs like Oprah Winfrey's hardly existed, 
so Rodino would have had no inspiration to display remorseful perjurers 
the way Hyde did last week. Maybe the happier comparison for today's 
Republicans is to the only time the House actually voted to impeach 
a president, Andrew Johnson, in 1868. Then the House itself voted 
to impeach first, and drafted particular charges later. At least this 
time the committee plans to draw up its accusations against President 
Clinton before it votes to impeach him. On television Sunday, Rep. 
John Conyers Jr. of Michigan, the committee's senior Democrat, called 
the Republican mood ``psychopathic. People want partisanship, blood.'' 
And Joe Lockhart, the White House press secretary, complained last 
week that Republicans were rushing. What would they have thought about 
1868 for a precedent? On Feb. 21, President Johnson fired Edwin Stanton, 
the secretary of war. Rep. Thaddeus Stevens, the leader of the radical 
Republicans, exulted that the simmering fight would now come to a 
head: ``If you don't kill the beast, it will kill you.'' And in very 
short order. That day, the House referred the issue to the reconstruction 
committee. On the 22nd, the committee recommended: ``Resolved, That 
Andrew Johnson, President of the United States, be impeached of high 
crimes and misdemeanors.'' Stevens said he saw no need to debate the 
issue. But others disagreed, and there was debate that night and again 
on Monday the 24th, before the House voted 126 to 47 for impeachment. 
The actual articles of impeachment finally came up for a vote on March 
3. They accused Johnson of violating the Tenure of Office Act in firing 
Stanton and of denouncing Congress as unfit to legislate with the 
Southern states excluded. Democrats have complained this year that 
the judiciary committee has not given them as much of a chance to 
dispute the case against Clinton as Nixon's defenders got in 1974. 
That is true, but except for the debate on the House floor, in 1868 
Johnson's side in the House had no opportunity at all to make its 
case. Rep. Jerrold Nadler of New York complained last week: ``We haven't 
had hearings, not hearings with witnesses, not real hearings. We've 
only had sham.'' Well, while they had witnesses (in closed sessions) 
in 1974, they never had any in 1868, though perhaps they did not need 
them. Even without cross-examining Monica Lewinsky, the House can 
certainly decide that it has enough evidence that Clinton committed 
perjury and sought to obstruct justice. And it can deem those offenses 
so serious in their threat to the legal system that they qualify as 
impeachable and that by doing so he violated his oath to ``take care 
that the laws be faithfully executed.'' But while the menace to Clinton 
is clear enough, it is worth remembering that the stakes for the nation 
are nowhere near as high today (or in 1974) as they were in 1868. 
Johnson, having pushed through the 13th Amendment abolishing slavery, 
wanted a quick restoration of the rebel states to the Union. The radical 
Republicans put no trust in the white leaders of the new governments 
he helped install (and the Black Codes they enacted made the distrust 
reasonable). They fought Johnson, demanding a severe Reconstruction 
that gave blacks the vote and denied it to many whites. They insisted 
on the 14th Amendment with its guarantee of equal protection of the 
laws. And when Johnson campaigned against them in 1866, trying to 
rally Northern Democrats over the exclusion of the South, they beat 
him badly and increased their majority. The proceedings in the House 
were political, pure and simple. Since Johnson had succeeded from 
the vice presidency on Lincoln's death, under the law of that time 
the next in line for the presidency was Sen. Ben Wade of Ohio, the 
president pro tempore of the Senate who was a leading radical Republican. 
Ousting Johnson would put the presidency, and Reconstruction policy, 
firmly in radical hands. When the issue came to the Senate, it turned 
more heavily on legal issues (probably in large part because Johnson 
backed down and agreed to name a new secretary of war whom the radicals 
could accept). Stevens compared the Senate's role to a scaffold, since 
it was clear Johnson had violated the Tenure of Office Act. William 
Evarts, Johnson's chief defense lawyer (though a critic of his Reconstruction 
policy), insisted that the Senate had to function as a court and consider 
that the president had not just a right but a duty to test the constitutionality 
of the act. The Senate had 42 Republicans and only 12 Democrats. It 
took 36 votes to convict. Despite intense pressure from their party, 
seven Republicans bolted, and Johnson was acquitted on May 16, 1868. 
A telling argument that some of today's impeachers may welcome came 
then from Sen. William Pitt Fessenden of Maine, who filed a written 
opinion: ``To the suggestion that popular opinion demands the conviction 
of the president on these charges, I reply that he is not now on trial 
before the people, but before the Senate ... The people have not heard 
the evidence as we have heard it. The responsibility is not on them, 
but upon us.'' He wrote that he would not deserve the trust of his 
constituents, and would be ``unworthy of a place among honorable men, 
if for any fear of public reprobation, and for the sake of securing 
popular favor, I should disregard the convictions of my judgment and 
my conscience.'' Now, there is a precedent from 1868, in the days 
before continual polling has established that the public does not 
want Clinton impeached, to which today's radical Republicans can cling. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>