<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981206.0138 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The area around the Petitions and Appeals Office on the south side 
of Beijing looks like any Skid Row. Loitering on sidewalks, along 
the sides of a nearby canal and in the lobby of a train station are 
hundreds of elderly men and women in frayed, dirty clothes. In the 
icy weather they sleep in shoddy tents of canvas or plastic, and they 
cook food scrounged from garbage over open fires and use the streets 
or the canal for a toilet. But these are not ordinary derelicts, and 
the streets are not littered with broken wine bottles. Carrying on 
an ancient Chinese tradition, these sorry-looking people have come 
from the provinces with little money but an all-consuming mission: 
to petition the supreme rulers for redress of heartfelt grievances 
_ from alleged thefts by corrupt local officials to pensions denied. 
So many of the street people are elderly because their complaints, 
still unresolved, date back to the Cultural Revolution of 1966 to 
1976, when millions who were persecuted by Maoist mobs lost property, 
jobs, even their lives. Some petitioners have hung around the national 
Petitions and Appeals Office for 20 years, repeatedly turned down 
by officials who cannot, at this point, see how to help them. A typical 
petitioner is Dong Xiulan, a 78-year-old woman from the northeast 
who appears neatly dressed for a person who has lived under a bridge 
for 15 years. She started her quest in the late 1970s, first making 
trips to Beijing when officials in her home county refused to help 
_ ``They acted like Lords, demanding that I give them money'' _ then 
moving here for good in 1983. She says that because of bureaucratic 
mistakes her husband, a Communist Party member and a fighter in the 
People's Liberation Army in the war against Japanese invaders, was 
not awarded his proper pension when he was discharged in the 1950s. 
Then in 1968, Red Guards called her husband a ``capitalist roader'' 
and beat him to death, she says, leaving her and their three children 
penniless and tainted by association. ``I'm not asking for another 
life in return for the life of my husband,'' she said, clutching her 
husband's army discharge card and a stack of tattered letters from 
a succession of offices that denied they had jurisdiction in the case. 
``I'm just asking for the compensation my husband was entitled to.'' 
Now, she says, the appeals court is refusing to help because she lacks 
proper personal documents and cannot afford to get them. But she continues 
to make fruitless visits to the office every day and survives by begging 
or eating discarded food. When China lacked a formal legal system, 
appealing directly to higher authorities was the main means of seeking 
redress for grievances. When the Communists took over in 1949, they 
continued the tradition, with formal appeals offices in the provinces 
and, for those who were still not satisfied, in Beijing. The practice 
reached a peak in the late 1970s, after Mao's death and the end of 
the Cultural Revolution, when hundreds of thousands of people each 
year appealed through these offices to have their political condemnations 
reversed or to be compensated for lost property. Many were successful. 
But some, for one reason or another, failed to win their cases. And 
some, like the tenacious petitioners living around the appeals office, 
have never given up trying. Clustered among the old people with 20-year-old 
cases, there are several younger men who recently traveled from villages 
and keep busy writing up their petitions. Some said they are here 
because corrupt local officials had failed to give them disaster relief 
payments they were due. But resort to this appeals office has dwindled 
as China has begun to develop its legal system. More and more, people 
with any money or bureaucratic savvy turn to other means _ lawsuits, 
exposure in the news media or group demonstrations _ to fight official 
mistakes or misdeeds. Still, the Petitions and Appeals Office, now 
something of a backwater, remains besieged with the human flotsam 
from a period that many Chinese would just as soon forget. The aging 
petitioners persist with the burning quests that consume their lives. 
``My complaint is very deeply rooted,'' said Hao Chengyou, 63, interviewed 
inside his tent of plastic sheeting under a bridge. ``But if they 
would even give me half of what I am asking, I would be satisfied.'' 
Hao said he had worked at a petrochemical plant in the northeast, 
in Heilongjiang province. But in the 1960s he was laid off, and then 
supported his family by selling milk from their cow. Because of that, 
in 1967 Red Guards labeled him a ``capitalist roader,'' took the cow 
and sent him into the hinterlands. Ever since, Hao has appealed in 
his home province and in Beijing for a pension for his years as a 
state industrial worker, and for payment for that cow. County officials 
now deny he ever owned a cow, he said indignantly. ``The cow was pregnant 
when they took it,'' Hao said. ``So they actually owe me for two cows.'' 
Sun Yuying, 80, was a Communist army veteran, then ran a labor camp. 
But he spent 10 years in jail during the Cultural Revolution because, 
he says, he praised Deng Xiaoping, who was then in disgrace. For most 
of his 20-year quest in Beijing for rehabilitation and a pension _ 
which was denied, he says, because local officials lost his all-important 
personal file _ he earned enough money selling scraps picked out of 
garbage to rent a small room. But two years ago, as rents jumped, 
he moved into a canvas lean-to along the canal. Sun said he has finally 
given up. ``I am totally disappointed,'' he said, waving the blue 
rubber kitchen gloves he wore against the frigid air. ``If I spend 
my time at that office, how can I make any living?'' Why Beijing officials 
have tolerated these unkempt street people for so long is something 
of a mystery. Perhaps, some think, they feel pity, or even a bit of 
guilt. Not everyone does, though. In a street-side stall selling hats 
and gloves near the appeals office, an exasperated vendor waved her 
arm toward the petitioners strewn along the sidewalk with their carts 
and bags of possessions and said, ``The police should just get rid 
of them.'' But whatever the reason they have been allowed to remain, 
the petitioners themselves do not feel grateful. ``My husband fought 
for the revolution for many years,'' Ms. Dong said. ``But now nobody 
has any sympathy for my misfortune.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>