<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981206.0146 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Setting the stage for this week's impeachment vote in the House Judiciary 
Committee, Republicans on the panel on Sunday offered President Clinton's 
lawyers two full days for their defense, but underscored a commitment 
to end the inquiry by year's end. In a testy letter Sunday to the 
White House counsels, Thomas E. Mooney, the judiciary panel's chief 
of staff and general counsel, said Clinton's lawyers would be granted 
30 hours over Tuesday and Wednesday to make their case before the 
panel, which hopes to conclude the inquiry by Saturday. The White 
House had requested four days to defend the president. And Mooney 
instructed the White House to abide by inquiry rules and submit a 
written request and summary by noon Monday that lists the witnesses 
it wants to present, and reasons for calling them, an attempt by Congress 
to keep a tight rein on the proceedings and blunt any political theatrics. 
Once the paperwork is received, Rep. Henry Hyde of Illinois, the chairman 
of the judiciary panel, will act on the request. Mooney, in his letter 
to Charles Ruff and Gregory Craig, the White House counsels, also 
chastised the White House for what he considers the political gamesmanship 
leading up to this week's vote. ``You have consistently ignored the 
rules adopted by the committee; rules that you have been aware of 
for nearly two months,'' Mooney wrote. ``Once again, you have failed 
to comply with the committee procedures and demonstrated contempt 
for the committee's process. I am concerned that your recent maneuvers 
may be little more than an attempt to delay the committee and turn 
attention away from the facts before it.'' The White House late Sunday 
responded to the panel's instructions with equal indignity. ``The 
independent counsel spent four years and $40 million investigating 
the president,'' said James E. Kennedy, special adviser to the White 
House counsel. ``The committee is spending four months doing the same. 
Our request for just four days has now been cut in half. Nevertheless, 
we will work to defend the president despite these restrictions. We 
will respond formally to the committee tomorrow.'' The White House 
has identified three possible witnesses: Nicholas Katzenbach, attorney 
general in the Johnson administration; Bruce Ackerman, a Yale Law 
School constitutional scholar, and Sean Wilentz, a Princeton University 
historian. Nearly four months after the independent counsel, Kenneth 
Starr, delivered his report of possible impeachable offenses to the 
House, the Judiciary Committee will launch the final chapter of its 
factious inquiry this week, debating the merits of impeachment before 
taking its vote. There remains little doubt that the panel, controlled 
by Republicans, will vote to impeach Clinton for his behavior in the 
Lewinsky scandal and hand the House at lease one article of impeachment, 
which could include perjury and obstruction of justice. The pivotal 
battle will come the following week, when the full House is expected 
to decide whether to impeach Clinton, a vote that is still too close 
to call. That vote is now expected to be held on Dec. 16 or 17. ``My 
sense is that it's about a 50-50 proposition right now,'' Rep. Tom 
DeLay of Texas, the chief Republican vote counter and impeachment 
advocate, said during an appearance on ``Fox News Sunday.'' ``I think 
if we voted today the president will be impeached, but I think it 
weighs very heavily on the case to be presented by the committee next 
week and a lot of members are going to look at this.'' Just one month 
ago, it seemed all but certain that Clinton would escape the 11-month 
scandal with a slap on the wrist. Mid-term election losses by the 
Republicans appeared to strip impeachment of any momentum in the House. 
But that has changed. The impeachment question is likely to be decided 
by a number of Republican moderates who remain troubled by the notion 
of impeachment and would prefer to censure the president, a move pushed 
by Democrats that would be acceptable to the White House. But some 
Republican moderates concede that the move toward censure is losing 
out to impeachment. They say Clinton is responsible for giving impeachment 
this new momentum, and cite his responses to 81 questions sent by 
the Judiciary Committee. Those answers were deemed by Republicans 
and even a few Democrats to be one exercise too many in arrogance 
and overly legalistic denials of wrongdoing. ``When the president 
pretty much stiffed the Congress, then I think a number have said, 
`No. I may vote for impeachment now,' '' Rep. Christopher Shays of 
Connecticut, one of the few Republican members who openly opposes 
impeachment, said on ABC's ``This Week with Sam Donaldson and Cokie 
Roberts.'' ``His answers to the 81 questions were outrageous. He still 
doesn't get it. He still doesn't tell the truth.'' Republicans have 
also criticized Clinton for what they believe is an effort to stall 
the proceedings until next year, when Republicans will hold an even 
slimmer majority. In the last few days, it has been DeLay's position 
that has gained momentum, despite claims that he has not used his 
power as a majority whip to pressure colleagues to vote for impeachment. 
It will take 218 votes in the House to send articles of impeachment 
to the Senate, which then sits in judgment. Delay said he has counted 
five Republicans who will vote against impeachment and said he is 
aware of five or six Democrats who will vote for it. Republicans hold 
an 11-vote majority in the House. The recent turnaround in sentiment 
has prompted the White House to scramble for votes and hash out a 
new defense strategy, and White House lawyers were meeting late Sunday 
to decide their course. A penitent White House performance on Tuesday 
and Wednesday, when Clinton's lawyers will appear before the Judiciary 
Committee, could help sway Republican moderates who are undecided. 
Even if the full House ultimately votes to impeach Clinton, it is 
highly unlikely that the Senate, which has expressed deeper reservations 
about impeachment, would vote to remove the president. It takes 67 
out of 100 votes to remove a president from office. Republicans hold 
55 seats in the Senate. Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott, R-Miss., 
said Sunday that if the Senate receives articles of impeachment, it 
would hold a trial. ``Do we have to?'' Lott asked on NBC's ``Meet 
the Press.'' ``I don't think absolutely, but I think that it would 
be hard not to do that if the House votes one or more articles.'' 
Lott also said he envisioned a relatively short trial with a tight 
focus, most likely to begin after the first of the year. ``I could 
see it taking just a few days to perhaps a few weeks,'' Lott said. 
``But I _ again, it will depend on what they do and how the articles 
are offered and what the will of the Senate is in line with the Constitution.'' 
On Monday, Republicans on the Judiciary Committee are expected to 
gather behind closed doors to plan strategy for this week's events 
and continue drafting articles of impeachment. On Thursday, after 
the White House has made its case from 9 a.m. to midnight on Tuesday 
and Wednesday, the chief investigative counsel for the Democrats, 
Abbe Lowell, will make his presentation, followed by the Republican 
counsel, David Schippers. Debate will likely begin Friday, followed 
by a vote on Saturday. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>