<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981206.0130 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When Rhoda Wright learned that the television assembly plant where 
she had worked for 27 years would close, she did all the right things. 
She helped to counsel fellow workers through their shock. She used 
her $13,000 in severance to pay off a car loan. And once the plant 
shut in April, she enrolled as an accounting student _ hoping to one 
day get back to her old wage of $10.60 an hour. But for all her energy 
and determination, a bleakness creeps into Mrs. Wright's story. Her 
unemployment insurance will run out by next December, six months before 
she graduates. She expects to land an accounting job quickly enough, 
even at age 49, but only at $8 an hour. ``I don't have a clue anymore 
what our income is going to be,'' she said, ``but we'll get by. We 
always have.'' She has told her two grown daughters not to come to 
her for help anymore. Her big concern is that her husband, Ronald, 
who is 53 and just back at work as a metal worker after suffering 
a mild stroke, will fall ill again. ``I would probably have to quit 
school and take one of those $6-an-hour jobs,'' she said. Mrs. Wright 
is hardly alone in the difficult choices she must make after losing 
a job she had counted on to sustain her until retirement. Plant closings, 
layoffs and forced early retirements are rising sharply again. The 
cutbacks announced last week at Bankers Trust, Boeing and Johnson 
&AMP; Johnson, and threatened at Exxon and Mobil, are only the latest 
examples. But the outcries and conflict that accompanied downsizing 
in the 1980s and early 1990s are largely gone. Rather than protest, 
unions are more likely to help laid-off members move on to other jobs, 
often working in tandem with the very managers who did the laying 
off. For their part, corporate executives no longer call attention 
to downsizing as healthy for profits and stock prices. Much more often 
they express regrets, blame global forces beyond their control, fatten 
severance packages for workers and announce layoffs well in advance 
of the final day. The downsizing is coming just when a strong job 
market, mainly in the service sector, offers new jobs more quickly 
than in the past, and that softens the blow considerably. Unemployment 
has fallen to 4.4 percent nationally and less than 3 percent in central 
Indiana. The layoffs are concentrated in manufacturing, both nationally 
(245,000 jobs have disappeared since March) and here in central Indiana. 
More than three dozen companies have announced or carried out layoffs 
here in recent months. ``You would see a more militant and adversarial 
relationship come back if the unemployment rate were two or three 
percentage points higher than it is today,'' said Larry Gigerich, 
president of the Indianapolis Economic Development Corp. ``There are 
plenty of unfilled jobs, and although they are at lower pay, people 
feel they can take them and work back up to their old wage, or they 
feel that another job will soon open up like the one they lost. Such 
expectations are not necessarily realistic.'' Certainly, Mrs. Wright 
is far from regaining her old wage, and so are most of her former 
colleagues at Thomson Consumer Electronics. Thomson gave 14 months' 
notice to 1,100 workers that its television plant in nearby Bloomington 
would be closed in April, and the operation moved to Mexico. Since 
then, only 100 have matched or bettered their old pay _ at a General 
Electric Co. plant in Bloomington that makes a popular double-door 
refrigerator and has been adding staff at $10 to $12 an hour. Thomson 
had paid $10.50 to $11 an hour. Still, labor unions and workers seem 
more willing than in the past to accept, as beyond anyone's control, 
the reasons offered by corporate America for a plant closing or a 
layoff. Lately, the main reason given is the Asian crisis, which has 
killed demand for American merchandise in that once-vibrant region 
and stepped up the flow of inexpensive foreign merchandise to this 
country. ``Let's be realistic,'' said George Becker, president of 
the United Steelworkers of America. ``If it is inevitable that a place 
is going to go down and there is nothing that can be done to save 
it, if there is no way to compete or there is no market for the product 
_ if that is going to happen, we are going to negotiate with the company.'' 
Federal subsidies, channeled through the states, also ease the pain. 
The money goes not only for retraining but increasingly for counseling, 
often on the shop floor right after a layoff is announced. Some of 
the federal money pays the wages of labor union staff members involved 
in retraining. Despite all the help, regaining the old wage rarely 
happens. The largest group of former Thomson workers, more than 500, 
has taken early retirement, accepting lump-sum pension payments of 
$80,000 or less instead of the $90,000 or more they would have received 
at full retirement. Mrs. Wright is among 200 men and women who are 
either unemployed or going to school to qualify for new careers, according 
to the company and the union, the International Brotherhood of Electrical 
Workers. Two hundred ex-Thomson workers have found jobs at lower pay. 
Many in this group joined Cook Inc., a nonunion shop that makes medical 
catheters in Bloomington, and pays $6 to $8 an hour. But some, like 
Martie Hammer, a 46-year-old divorced woman with no children, were 
more adventuresome. Ms. Hammer, who drove a forklift at Thomson for 
17 years, took a four-month course in truck driving, and now drives 
a tractor-trailer cross-country for the Celedon Corp., one of numerous 
truckers here, all of which seem constantly short of drivers. Her 
life has changed. Instead of being home every evening, she is on the 
road for 10 days, sleeping in a bunk in her tractor cab, then at home 
for two days. That is a disruption, she says, to her social life. 
And her pay is less: Not quite $400 a week, compared with her Thomson 
wage of $424, excluding overtime, which in her case averaged 15 hours 
a week. ``I don't mind driving a truck,'' she said. ``A lot of people 
would not do it, but I am trying to get back to where I was at Thomson. 
It takes away from your self-esteem until you find something as good, 
or better. You know there has to be something better.'' Maybe. Thomson's 
ex-employees have been engaged in this odyssey to regain their old 
wages for only eight months. Six hundred former Maytag Corp. employees 
have been struggling for two years, with little more to show for it. 
Their Maytag jobs ended in December 1996, when the company closed 
a stove factory in Indianapolis and moved the operation to a nonunion 
factory in Tennessee. ``We had 400 of the 600 workers placed in jobs 
in less than a year; we were happy about that,'' said Gigerich, who 
worked with the Private Industry Council, a local group of union and 
corporate representatives that lent a hand. But today few of the former 
Maytag workers earn the $34,000 annually they averaged at Maytag. 
The best paid, roughly a third of the old work force, earn about $25,000, 
mostly at the numerous machine tool shops in this area, Gigerich said. 
Another group found work at about $22,000 in warehouses and distribution 
centers, as forklift drivers or loading trucks. And a third group 
earns about $20,000 in retail stores or at the telephone customer 
service centers and data processing operations that have proliferated 
in this area. The Maytag layoff _ announced in February 1996, nine 
months before the plant closed _ was a turning point, the first significant 
example in greater Indianapolis of the softer approach to downsizing. 
A year earlier, the First Data Corp., which employed 1,000 people 
at a telephone service center here, had closed the operation on short 
notice without first notifying the local government. Downsized workers 
told hardship stories in television interviews, and city officials 
were publicly critical. The officials wanted less confrontation. And 
Maytag obliged. Apart from the nine-month lead time, Maytag sweetened 
the severance package beyond what the contract with the Sheet Metal 
Workers Union required. The company also piled on overtime in the 
final months, mainly to stockpile stoves but also to give workers 
extra money to pay off debts and build up nest eggs _ an opportunity 
most took. Finally, the company participated in a worker-management 
committee that supervised retraining and counseling. A $1 million 
federal grant financed the endeavor. ``We were trying to tell that 
work force that you could not have done anything to prevent the move,'' 
said Thomas Schwartz, a Maytag spokesman. ``That plant closing, and 
the way we worked with the city, and the employee group, that is as 
close to a model as I can come up with.'' That still leaves Margaret 
Edens and her husband, Clifford, struggling. Both had worked at Maytag, 
she assembling stove counters at $12.50 an hour, he repairing stoves 
at $13.13 an hour. They finished up in a marathon of overtime and 
then, when the end came, they used some of the accumulated pay to 
finance a week's vacation in the Southwest _ the Grand Canyon, Las 
Vegas, Nev., Monument Valley _ before facing their new, diminished 
life. Margaret Edens, who is 44, is the sort of worker who corporate 
managers and union officials point to as ideal in a downsizing situation. 
She is among a minority, they say, with the self-discipline and focus 
to benefit from job training, and also among a minority with the emotional 
fortitude to overcome the trauma of losing a pay package she cannot 
easily replace. After Maytag announced the closing, she became a union 
representative on the transition committee. For a while, she drew 
a federally subsidized salary as a case manager, counseling laid-off 
workers, including some from Maytag _ work she loved. Now she has 
a part-time job as a claims taker in the state employment office, 
earning $8.05 an hour, without benefits. Her goal is to work full 
time in the employment office, with benefits, although the pay, she 
says, will probably be less than what she earned at Maytag. ``We used 
to make money and our life style just rose,'' Margaret Edens said. 
``Now when I get up, it is, `How much do we have to earn to get by?' 
And that is $8 or $9 an hour for each of us just to maintain a middle-of-the-road 
life. We are just managing to do that.'' Clifford Edens, also 44, 
reacted to the downsizing the way many workers do. He shunned job 
training or counseling, and did not accept, until months later, that 
he would probably never match his Maytag earnings and company-paid 
health insurance. ``You work so long for a company, you lose touch 
with the job market,'' he said. He had entered the factory in 1972, 
right out of high school. Clifford Edens had hoped to shift into social 
work, but without more schooling, he said, the pay was an ``unrealistic'' 
$7.50 an hour at best. He took a job at a Goodwill Industries factory, 
as a group leader at $9 an hour, helping disabled workers keep an 
assembly line going. But the work was too stressful and he soon left. 
Finally, he learned from a friend of an opening at Flexalloy Inc., 
as an inspector and tester of the giant bolts and other fasteners 
the company supplies for bridge and building construction. There was 
an on-the-job training requirement, and a federal training grant helped 
for a while to pay his starting wage of $9.25 an hour. That was in 
September of last year; he now earns just over $10, and pays $12 a 
week for health insurance. ``I am treated very well at this company,'' 
he said, allowing himself a little optimism. ``There are positions 
there that pay $13 an hour or more that I could possibly attain.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>