<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981206.0212 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Since Mayor Rudolph Giuliani unveiled his plan to ship New York's 
trash across the harbor, New Jersey's politicians have had a wonderful 
time promising to stop it. They think they can insult New York _ ``Drop 
Dead'' was a headline in Gov. Christine Todd Whitman's news release 
_ and repel our trash barges from their shores without suffering any 
consequences. They are naive. New York has a weapon in reserve if 
they continue the garbage war. But before revealing it, before escalating 
tensions, let's peacefully reach across the river and try to understand 
what this fight is all about. It's not about garbage. It's about self-esteem. 
New Jerseyans are understandably sensitive about their state's image, 
which for most outsiders is the one glimpsed along the New Jersey 
Turnpike: swamps, junkyards, smokestacks and refineries. Unlike New 
York, where highway builders stupidly intruded on lovely parks and 
shorelines and neighborhoods, New Jersey's planners had the sense 
to preserve their scenic areas by running their main highway through 
the state's underbelly. It was excellent environmental planning but 
terrible public relations, which is why New Jerseyans living in beautiful 
surroundings far from the turnpike must endure taunts from New Yorkers 
living in squalor. No wonder New Jerseyans' first instinct is to resist 
any new trash from their tormentors. But this trash is actually an 
opportunity for New Jersey to profit at New York's expense. New Jersey 
would gain jobs and tax revenues from the private companies that would 
unload the barges, routing some of the trash to a local incinerator 
(New Jersey's incinerators need more business) and packing the rest 
in sealed containers for shipment to out-of-state landfills. New Jersey's 
politicians worry that New York's garbage would despoil the state's 
beaches. But the city's barges would be unloaded in new enclosed plants 
far from any beach, on the old industrial waterfronts of Carteret 
and Newark. The Newark site is near a garbage incinerator, the Pulaski 
Skyway and a plot of land contaminated by dioxin from a factory that 
made Agent Orange. Club Med will not be opening a resort there anytime 
soon. New Jersey's politicians could learn from officials in Virginia 
who gladly accept trash from both New York and New Jersey. Instead 
of whining about being a ``dumping ground,'' these politicians have 
used the revenue from their landfills to lower property taxes and 
build new schools. When Congress was considering a bill to ban the 
interstate shipment of trash, these Virginia officials pleaded to 
keep it flowing. Of course, it was relatively easy for them, because 
Virginia does not have New Jersey's image problem. Virginians look 
down on the rest of America. They can pocket New York's trash money 
without suffering an identity crisis. But with a little courage, maybe 
New Jersey could learn to acquire that same confidence. Imagine if 
a brave politician announced: ``Let's take the boors across the river 
for everything they've got. New York's garbage money will make the 
Garden State yet greener! To take trash is not to be trash!'' All 
right, that is tough to imagine. Maybe there is no stopping this garbage 
war. But before they go any further, New Jersey's politicians should 
at least be warned of the weapon at New York's disposal. We too can 
refuse to be a dumping ground. Every day, New Jersey's capitalists 
send trucks across the river with loads of materials destined for 
our trash heaps. Their farmers ship fresh blueberries and tomatoes, 
knowing full well that some of them will rot. Millions of disposable 
items are sold in New York by companies based in New Jersey _ drugs 
from by Hoffman-LaRoche and Merck, toys from Toys ``R'' Us, groceries 
from A &AMP; P and Pathmark. Why should we keep buying from economic 
warriors who think interstate commerce should flow in only one direction? 
If they won't take our garbage, why should we take their sources of 
garbage? New Yorkers would probably be glad to start buying from companies 
in friendlier states, especially if the boycott gave them an excuse 
to walk around wearing ``I Hate NJ'' buttons. That would not be good 
for New Jersey's industries or its politicians. And it is definitely 
not going to do anything for their self-esteem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>