<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981206.0083 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Heard the latest management mantra? Six Sigma. In consultant-speak, 
it denotes the path to a corporate nirvana where everything _ from 
product design to manufacturing to billing _ proceeds without a hitch. 
In engineer-speak, it means no more than 3.4 defects per million widgets 
or procedures. In practice, Six Sigma is a statistical quality-control 
method that combines the art of the efficiency expert with the science 
of the computer geek. And a growing group of big no-nonsense companies 
like Allied Signal, Motorola and General Electric swear by it. ``Six 
Sigma has galvanized our company with an intensity the likes of which 
I have never seen in my 40 years at GE,'' said John Welch, chairman 
of General Electric. So fervent a proselytizer is Welch that GE has 
spent three years and more than $1 billion to convert all of its divisions 
to the Six Sigma faith. The GE Medical Systems unit recently introduced 
a $1.25 million diagnostic scanner, the first product that GE designed 
from start to finish using Six Sigma principles. Six Sigma teamwork 
enabled GE Plastics to produce 1.1 billion pounds more plastics without 
building one new plant. Over all, Welch credits Six Sigma with raising 
the company's operating profit margins to 16.6 percent from 14.4 percent. 
So what exactly is this philosophy of flawlessness? First, the name. 
Sigma is the Greek letter that statisticians use to define a standard 
deviation from a bell curve. The higher the sigma, the fewer the deviations 
from the norm _ or, in industry parlance, the fewer the defects. At 
One Sigma, two-thirds of whatever is being measured falls within the 
curve. Two Sigma encompasses about 95 percent. At Six Sigma you are 
about as close to flaw free as mere mortals can get. No company can 
really achieve that kind of perfection, of course. But as with any 
religion, Six Sigma presents an ideal state toward which adherents 
continually strive. ``Six Sigma gets people away from thinking that 
96 percent is good, to thinking that 40,000 failures per million is 
bad,'' said James Morehouse, a vice president of the consulting firm 
of A.T. Kearney Inc. Six Sigma was developed more than a decade ago 
at Motorola. But since then, it has been embraced by numerous corporations 
and is even included in courses on quality at the Harvard Business 
School. As applied in industry, Six Sigma is a rigorous statistical 
method of breaking a customer's requirements into tasks or steps, 
and setting the optimum specification for each part of the process, 
based on how the parts interact. ``Six Sigma translates fuzzy customer 
requirements into technically measurable responses,'' said Maurice 
Berryman, a Six Sigma consultant in Dallas. Here is an example: Say 
a customer wants to be billed on the same day each month. With Six 
Sigma, making that happen means analyzing the interaction of everything 
involved in processing that customer's order. When and how does the 
sales department send through paperwork, and at what point does a 
difference in days, hours, even minutes, have an impact on when the 
bill goes out? Does it make a difference when shipping coordinates 
with billing? How long does mail sit in the mail room, and at what 
point does it matter? Once everything is quantified, the what-if scenarios 
begin: Would a stricter paperwork processing schedule in sales make 
mail room bottlenecks irrelevant? Would adding a person in accounting 
give the mail room an extra hour's leeway? In principle, Six Sigma 
is little different from the type of analysis that Frederick Taylor, 
the industrial efficiency pioneer, might have performed with stopwatch 
and notebook a century ago. But in Six Sigma analyses, there are thousands 
of permutations and combinations _ probably too many for the human 
mind to fathom, although easy enough for even a moderately speedy 
computer. Thus, modern information technology has made Six Sigma a 
practical way to identify the optimum configuration of most products 
or processes. ``Six Sigma gets people from all over the organization 
to work together on improving the end product, not just their individual 
piece of it,'' said Frank Jones, a Six Sigma specialist at the management 
consulting firm Booz-Allen &AMP; Hamilton. In the case of the new 
GE Medical Systems product _ a superfast diagnostic scanner called 
the Lightspeed _ 200 people spent nearly three years and almost $50 
million to run 250 separate Six Sigma analyses. While one team was 
checking out the reliability of measurement devices, another was figuring 
out which factors affect the scanner's life, while yet another was 
dissecting image quality into factors that could be massaged to filter 
out picture-blurring electronic noise. The Lightspeed, like many diagnostic 
scanners, employs computed tomography, or CT. CT scanners work by 
sending electromagnetic waves through the body and recording the amount 
of energy that comes out. Since various tissues and organs absorb 
energy differently _ bones absorb more than flesh, for example _ the 
emerging waves, in the form of light, yield a good picture of the 
internal landscape they have passed through. The scanners let doctors 
study wafer-thin cross sections of parts or all of a patient's body 
without making any incision. GE Medical Systems, which already controls 
39 percent of the $1.6 billion global market for scanners, has high 
hopes for the Lightspeed. The new scanner captures multiple images 
simultaneously, requiring only 20 seconds to do full-body scans that 
once took three minutes _ important because patients must remain perfectly 
still during the scan. And unlike previous CT scanners, the Lightspeed 
does not need to cool down for as long as three minutes between uses. 
``The speed is breathtaking, and it ran without downtime from the 
start,'' said Dr. Carl Ravin, chairman of the department of radiology 
at Duke Medical Center. The Lightspeed is not perfect, of course. 
But Six Sigma enabled GE Medical to anticipate which compromises doctors 
would accept. For example, the Lightspeed takes slightly thicker scan 
slices than doctors normally specify, but no one complained because 
the thicker slices were virtually free of electronic noise. ``Six 
Sigma let us predict the amount of variability that customers will 
tolerate before they perceive it as a defect,'' said Marc Onetto, 
who oversees Six Sigma projects at Gems, as GE Medical Systems is 
commonly known. Of course Six Sigma itself is not perfect, either, 
since it cannot compensate for human error. Take what happened when 
Gems tinkered with the computer that translates the data the scanner 
collects into images an operator can read. CT scanners generate a 
lot of heat, and the heat often caused the printed circuit boards 
to overload. A Six Sigma team figured out that by perforating the 
metal box that holds the boards, they could dissipate the heat. They 
were right _ except that they forgot to check what other impact that 
change might have. Gems started sending out scanners with perforated 
computer boxes. The holes compromised the structural integrity of 
the metal, the metal warped outward and the circuit boards loosened 
_ causing as many failures as the heat had. Gems technicians spotted 
the problem during field tests, and the company corrected it by reinforcing 
the metal before any scanner was running at a hospital or a clinic. 
But the mistake taught Gems an important lesson about Six Sigma. ``You 
must take it step by step,'' said Charles Young, a Gems spokesman 
who has been steeped in the process. ``You get into trouble if you 
compromise the rigor of the process. You can't skip steps and jump 
to premature conclusions.'' The Lightspeed project started, as so 
many new products do, with customers clamoring for more, better, faster. 
By late 1995, Gems knew that Siemens, Toshiba and other competitors 
were working on faster scanners. The company also knew it could probably 
get its own faster version ready, approved by the Food and Drug Administration 
and on the market before the 1998 Radiology Society of North America 
show, the annual December trade exposition at which the medical equipment 
industry displays its latest wares. But readying a scanner as radically 
different as the Lightspeed was an iffier proposition. ``Going for 
that quantum leap in technology in that time frame was one of the 
toughest decisions of my career,'' said Vivek Paul, general manager 
of the CT business at Gems. ``We shifted development resources from 
existing products, and that left us very vulnerable if Lightspeed 
couldn't be built in time.'' In January 1996, the race against the 
clock began. The most important parts of the scanner are the tubes, 
which focus the waves, and the detector, which translates them into 
pictures. So they received the heaviest attention. The old tubes, 
which cost $59,000 each to replace, had long been a thorn in GE's 
side. Hospitals and clinics wanted them to operate for at least 12 
hours a day, for 6 months; typically, they lasted only half that long. 
Moreover, Gems was scrapping some $20 million in tubes each year because 
they failed preshipping performance tests. Even so, a disturbing number 
of faulty tubes were slipping past inspection, only to be pronounced 
dead-on-arrival _ Gems really does call them DOAs _ at the customer's 
door. So the Gems Six Sigma teams deconstructed the tubes. They knew 
that one problem involved the petroleum-based oil in the tube, which 
prevents short circuits by isolating the anode, which has a positive 
charge, from the negatively charged cathode. The oil often deteriorated 
after a few months, but they did not know why. By using statistical 
what-if scenarios on all parts of the tube, however, the researchers 
learned that the lead-based paint on the inside of the tube was adulterating 
the oil. By November 1996 they had developed a paint that would preserve 
the oil and protect the tube. CT scanners generate X-rays by bombarding 
metals with high-speed electrons. Even a few air molecules can slow 
the electrons down, so the tube needs a total vacuum. But too many 
tubes were reaching the end of the production line with ``beads'' 
_ tiny openings, usually where glass and metal are sealed, that let 
air leak in. So Gems engineers made a list of things that could cause 
a vacuum leak. Through Six Sigma analysis, they ruled out type and 
length of glass. But they did learn that the metal pin through which 
current flows into the tube tended to tarnish, which would loosen 
the seal. They also found other significant factors: the type of gas 
used in processing the tube, and the speed with which the glass cooled 
down after going through a heat-treating furnace. Thus informed, the 
engineers used computer modeling to test numerous combinations of 
different temperatures, gases and such. They wound up ``pre-oxidizing'' 
the metal pin, roughening its surface and helping it adhere to the 
glass. They replaced the hydrogen gas with nitrogen. And they changed 
the heating process from one in which tubes move continuously through 
the furnace to one in which they are processed in fixed batches, making 
the heating and cooling periods easier to control. ``Six Sigma gave 
us a methodical way to test how changes in one factor would interact 
with changes in others,'' said Beth Hulse, the engineer who led the 
project. Trying to eliminate all leaks would have put Gems way behind 
deadline and way over budget. And it was now early 1997. So Gems settled 
for a process that cut the pre-shipment scrap rate by 40 percent and 
that has eliminated DOAs so far. And while the new tubes are priced 
at $85,000, or 40 percent more, they carry a one-year warranty. Converting 
an electron beam to X-ray images is not an efficient process. Only 
about 1 percent of the energy that hits human tissue emerges as light, 
with the rest dissipated as heat. And that heat can affect the quality 
of the image. Statistical analysis showed that adding a $100,000 resistor 
would control the temperature. But the same tests also revealed that 
changing a few inexpensive capacitors elsewhere in the tube, and redesigning 
how the wires are padded, would yield a similar result. Another way 
to cut down on fuzzy images and false readings _ detection of tumors 
that are not really there, for example _ would have been to tighten 
the specifications for the focal point, the accuracy with which the 
electron beam hits the target tissue. But that would have involved 
a costly tube redesign. By April 1997, a Six Sigma team had learned 
that widening the tungsten wires that cover many of the wave-receptor 
cells in the detector plate would create a bigger target, thereby 
compensating for any tiny inaccuracies in the beam's trajectory. Although 
this change requires giving the patient a higher dose of X-rays during 
the scan, the dose is still within the medically accepted margin of 
safety. ``By making the data collection process less efficient, we 
made the scanner as a whole more efficient,'' said Gary Strong, a 
Lightspeed designer. But the image quality still needed improvement. 
The detector surface in each scanner has thousands of ``pre-amp chips,'' 
semiconductor components that amplify the light signals so that a 
computer can read them. But each chip emits some energy itself, which 
in turn gets picked up by other chips, causing extraneous rings or 
shadows in the image. Redesigning the chips, Gems concluded, would 
take at least eight months, which could mean missing the target date 
for field tests: April 1998. But Six Sigma analyses showed that Gems 
could get the same result by relaxing specifications for the relationship 
between the amount of energy that comes into and out of the pre-amps, 
and by writing simple software that would allow the computer to control 
the variation. The project was completed last March _ just before 
the deadline for the field tests. The Lightspeed, which went on the 
market in September, costs 25 percent more than older scanners but 
seems to be a hit. Gems has installed 12 Lightspeeds, and has orders 
for 50 more. But the Six Sigma work at Gems is far from over. The 
Gems chief executive, Jeffrey R. Immelt, is working on projects to 
find a better way to position flexible tabs _ the items that keep 
electrons in alignment as they travel across the detection panels. 
And he will soon join a team that will apply Six Sigma methods to 
reduce variances in customer service. ``Six Sigma lets you approach 
problems with the assumption that there's a data-oriented, tangible 
fix at the end,'' Immelt said. ``And that is a radical culture change.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>