<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981206.0176 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Broncos are making their quest to remain undefeated interesting. 
After doing everything they could to give the game away to the Kansas 
City Chiefs on Sunday, the Broncos improved to 13-0 with a 35-31 victory. 
Quarterback John Elway led Denver to two touchdowns in the final eight 
minutes to keep the perfect season alive. Tight end Shannon Sharpe 
caught safety Reggie Tongue asleep in the secondary with 3 minutes 
34 seconds remaining for the game-winner _ Denver's first lead of 
the game. The Chiefs had one last drive, which was kept alive when 
linebacker John Mobley was called for pass interference on tight end 
Tony Gonzalez, putting the Chiefs at the Denver 36. But they could 
not move the ball, and the game was over when, on fourth-and-10 at 
the 36, quarterback Rich Gannon was sacked by defensive lineman Alfred 
Williams. The Chiefs were able to take advantage of several Broncos 
miscues, including a Terrell Davis fumble inside the Kansas City 1-yard 
line, an Elway interception at the goal line, and a bobbled snap on 
a Denver punt. Then Kansas City lineman Leslie O'Neal blocked a 37-yard 
Jason Elam field goal early in the fourth quarter. Over all, the Broncos 
were not crisp for the second consecutive week. The score was tied 
at 21-21 until the Chiefs went on an 80-yard drive, with Gannon (27 
of 43 for 240 yards) making good decisions and the Chiefs' coaches 
calling smart plays, mixing screens with well-timed short passes. 
The drive ended with a 26-yard touchdown pass to wide receiver Joe 
Horn, who beat defensive back Tito Paul, for a 28-21 lead. After the 
blocked field goal, the Chiefs did not waste time trying to take the 
life out of the Broncos. They converted a fourth-and-1 at the Denver 
28 when running back Bam Morris dived for almost 2 yards. The drive 
stalled at the Broncos' 3, but a field goal by Pete Stoyanovich gave 
Kansas City a 31-21 lead with 8:25 left. Denver has one of the most 
potent offenses in football and it showed on their next series. They 
struck back quickly, in under two minutes, keyed by a 50-yard pass 
from Elway (22 of 32 for 400 yards) to Green. Davis scored from 1-yard 
out and the Broncos trailed just by 3 points. Then came the Sharpe 
catch, his only one of the game, and Denver's quest stayed alive. 
Call this game The Brawl, Part II. The first time these two teams 
played, in Kansas City, Sharpe did as much taunting of Chiefs fans 
as he did of Chiefs players. The real action in that game was on the 
field. It was one of the nastiest games of the season, and Chiefs 
Coach Marty Schottenheimer said it was an embarrassment to his organization. 
Linebacker Derrick Thomas was called for three personal fouls in the 
final minutes of the game, and Chiefs defensive lineman Wayne Simmons 
had one. Thomas was suspended for one game by the team, and Simmons 
was sent packing. In a way, Sharpe's tongue instigated the events, 
but he had boycotted the news media all this past week because he 
did not want the incident to become a distraction. Before the game, 
Sharpe approached Thomas, and the two hugged at the 30-yard line. 
This game was much cleaner, but in some ways it was more shocking. 
Maybe inspired by how they were manhandled the first time the teams 
met this season, a 30-7 Broncos' victory, the Chiefs played inspired 
football. They were able to slow Davis and the running game as well 
as take advantage of Broncos turnovers, such as punter Tom Rouen's 
fumbling a snap that Kansas City recovered. On the very next play, 
Andre Rison ran a crisp post pattern for a 31-yard touchdown and a 
7-0 lead. Denver's offense was again stifled, and the Chiefs took 
advantage this time with a Kimble Ambers 11-yard touchdown pass to 
take a 14-0 lead, and the stadium was eerily quiet. But the Broncos, 
as they do better than almost any team, made adjustments on both sides 
of the ball. Noticing how the Chiefs were jumping a lot of their short 
routes, wide receiver Rod Smith went deep for a 58-yard reception. 
Three plays later, Davis went up the gut for a 1-yard score to put 
the Broncos back in the game, 14-7. Even after Kansas City scored 
again when Morris leaped into the end zone from two feet out for a 
21-7 lead _ the drive was keyed by a 28-yard pass-interference call 
on cornerback Darrien Gordon, who grabbed wide receiver Derrick Alexander 
_ there was never a feeling that the Broncos were going to lose control 
of the game. But it was a physical game, with hard hitting in every 
phase. Before the Bronocs cut the score to 21-14 with 6 minutes 31 
seconds left in the first half, they had a first-and-goal at the 1. 
Davis did not gain on the first play, nor on the second as he was 
pounded at the line of scrimmage. He finally snuck in on third down. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>