<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981206.0151 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There was so much talk of redemption by the Jets Sunday that perhaps 
they should have held the game at a tent revival, or a self-help seminar. 
Even Coach Bill Parcells spoke of a higher power helping guide them 
to one of the most exciting, loud and potentially important victories 
in the Jets' 39 seasons. ``God's playing in some of these games, and 
He was on our side today,'' said the relieved coach, sounding like 
a battlefield commander. The 32-31 triumph over the Seahawks _ and 
the game was that close _ kept the Jets (9-4) tied with the Dolphins 
for first place in the American Conference East, and sets up their 
prime-time meeting at Miami on Sunday night. If the Jets win their 
final three games, they will take the division title for the first 
time since the big AFL-NFL merger of 1970. The winning play was launched 
on a last-ditch fourth-down 5-yard quarterback sneak by Vinny Testaverde, 
himself an improbable hero whose future began here this season at 
the age of 34. Testaverde rode the hole created by Kevin Mawae, the 
former Seahawks' center, who had been jittery facing his former teammates. 
Testaverde carried to the vicinity of the goal line before he went 
down with 20 seconds remaining in the game. Did the ball break the 
plane of the white line for a touchdown? Head Linesman Earnie Frantz 
III, who was facing Testaverde, immediately signaled touchdown. That 
set off a display of feverish activity: Jets' fans began jumping up 
and down in the stands, the Seahawks jumped up and down in protest 
and Jets' players, some of them having just finished praying on the 
sidelines, jumped up and down with glee. Television viewers were able 
to see the play _ again and again _ and they know it wasn't a touchdown. 
No matter, there is no instant replay. ``He called it right away and 
signaled,'' said referee Phil Luckett, who also conducted the now-infamous 
coin toss on Thanksgiving Day at Detroit. ``I kind of bobbled it,'' 
Testaverde said after the game. ``And I wasn't able to reach out, 
and the ref called it good. But we had some calls go against us.'' 
So, did you think you were in? ``It doesn't matter,'' Testaverde replied. 
``It's what the ref thinks.'' But if there is an element of luck in 
any of this, Jets' fans know it all evens out. After all, the last 
time the Jets had a record this fine it was 1986, and they remember 
how injuries and bad bounces and who-knows-what conspired to end their 
season in despair. Only the current regime seems to have been able 
to shake the stretch of failure that began 12 years ago. Sunday's 
victory guarantees a second straight winning season, and that hasn't 
happened for the Jets since 1986. In the years since, how many times 
have the Jets returned from a fourth-quarter deficit of 12 points? 
How many times have they won in December? This was only the Jets' 
seventh December victory in the 1990s, against 26 losses. ``Look,'' 
Parcells finally concluded after pondering all the bad things the 
Jets had done Sunday, including rookie Jason Fabini's offside penalty 
that pushed the Jets back after they had gotten to the 3, ``I would 
call it a lot of luck on the Jets' side.'' But he also noted, ``We 
showed a champ's heart today.'' The Jets made their share of bad plays. 
They seemed to have the Seahawks reeling early as Keith Byars snared 
a 3-yard pass from Testaverde to open the scoring. On the next Seattle 
drive, Jerome Henderson intercepted the young quarterback Joe Kitna 
(17 for 24 for 278 yards). But Henderson tried to do too much with 
the interception, and after running it back through traffic he was 
finally stopped _ and stripped of the ball. On the next play, Kitna 
launched a 70-yard touchdown bomb to Joey Galloway, who got in front 
of cornerback Aaron Glenn. On the next drive, Galloway produced a 
57-yard score, also over Glenn, and suddenly the Jets were behind, 
14-7. Glenn, the only player on the team who has gone to the Pro Bowl 
as a Jet, intercepted a pass meant for Galloway in the second quarter. 
But when he came down with the ball, he landed awkwardly on his right 
ankle. He was on crutches at game's end, wearing a soft cast, and 
the team said he had a sprain. It was a bad day for injuries for the 
Jets _ who had entered the game as the least-injured team in the league 
_ as Byars broke his arm. The Jets gave no hint of the future availability 
of Glenn and Byars. In the third quarter, Testaverde was intercepted 
for a touchdown return by Anthony Simmons, Curtis Martin scored a 
touchdown for the Jets on a 1-yard run, and Seattle scored a 50-yard 
field goal to take a 31-19 lead into the final period. There was a 
sense that it just wasn't going to end well for the Jets. The Jets' 
defense was giving up big plays, and the offensive game plan favored 
Testaverde's passing to Martin's rushing. Martin was to tote the ball 
only 17 times for 37 yards as the Jets felt they could create passing 
plays, and used nine receivers. Testaverde was 42 of 63 for 418 yards, 
setting a club record for attempts and tying the team mark for completions. 
Testaverde threw the ball 18 times in the final 15 minutes. He helped 
bring the Jets to 31-26 early in the quarter on a 16-yard pass to 
Keyshawn Johnson. Then the Jets' defense stiffened. Galloway was unable 
to shake Ray Mickens, who had replaced Glenn. Galloway caught no more 
passes after his second score, and Ricky Watters failed to break any 
more big runs. Finally, with 3 minutes 15 seconds remaining, Testaverde 
took over again. And at the end, Parcells gave Testaverde the option 
to decide the Jets' fate: The quarterback could decide whether to 
run or to pass. He was the only person behind the center as five receivers 
were spread out. Testaverde told the Jets in the huddle he would make 
the call at the line of scrimmage. And what did he see? ``It was kind 
of cloudy,'' he said. For this game, though, he could see forever. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>