<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981206.0120 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It is the year 2000. Millions of Mexican immigrants line up outside 
polling places, not only in Los Angeles, Brooklyn and other major 
locations in the United States where Mexicans have settled but in 
hundreds of towns across the country, preparing to vote in Mexico's 
presidential elections. Thousands of Mexican election officials have 
fanned out across the United States to supervise the balloting, which 
caps a campaign in which candidates barnstormed through Mexican population 
centers in dozens of American states. They lambasted U.S. policies, 
unpopular in Mexico, on immigration, narcotics and other matters. 
Fiction? No, this is the scenario that emerges from a recent Mexican 
government study, which, at the request of the Mexican Congress, offers 
detailed logistical options and budgetary estimates for extending 
the vote to the estimated 10 million Mexicans living in the United 
States. ``It is viable,'' the report concludes. Millions of potential 
votes are at stake, perhaps 15 percent of the Mexican electorate, 
and the Mexican Congress must decide in coming months whether to approve 
any of the options the report outlines. In the month since the report's 
publication, opposition leaders have praised its proposals as a long-overdue 
attempt to extend suffrage to migrant workers who have been disenfranchised 
both in Mexico and the United States. But President Ernesto Zedillo's 
allies in the governing Party of the Institutional Revolution, known 
as the PRI, have lampooned them as too costly and complicated. For 
whom would Mexicans north of the border vote? The conventional wisdom 
holds that they would favor the opposition because many migrants are 
thought to blame the PRI for the economic problems that forced them 
to leave. The debate gained volume on Friday, as prominent American 
academics joined Mexican leaders on both sides of the fray during 
a conference at Tijuana's Colegio de la Frontera Norte, a government-financed 
research organization. ``The implications of all this are frightening,'' 
said Rodolfo O. de la Garza, a professor of government at the University 
of Texas, contending that an extended display of Mexican politicking 
on U.S. soil would provoke a nativist fury in the United States directed 
not only at migrants but also at Mexican-Americans. ``When the rocks 
start flying, xenophobic Americans are not going to ask for an ID 
card,'' he said. Emilio Zebadua Gonzalez, the counselor in the Federal 
Electoral Institute who coordinated the study, shrugged off the criticisms. 
``We have to decide whether Mexicans who live in the United States 
have the rights of other Mexican citizens,'' he said. The institute's 
voting study was set in motion in July 1996 when Mexico's Congress 
deleted a clause from the constitution requiring Mexicans to vote 
in their home districts and mandated the electoral institute to study 
ways of extending the presidential vote to Mexicans abroad. A number 
of other countries allow their citizens living in the United States 
to vote in their presidential elections, but none of the operations 
are on the scale that would be needed for voting by Mexicans. The 
institute impaneled 13 demographers and other social scientists, and 
on Nov. 12 they published a 14-volume study, one of the most detailed 
ever produced about Mexicans in the United States. Nearly 10 million 
potential Mexican voters live north of the border, including 7.1 million 
Mexican-born immigrants and 2.7 million adult children of Mexican-born 
parents, who could also exercise the right to vote under the Mexican 
Constitution, the report said. In addition, about 100,000 Mexicans 
live in the other countries, and voting rights could be extended to 
this group as well. Three out of four Mexican immigrants live in 33 
counties in California, Arizona, Colorado, Texas, Illinois, Georgia 
and New York, the report said. The other quarter are widely dispersed 
throughout the rest of the country, including Alaska and Hawaii, with 
only 11 American states having few or no Mexican residents, according 
to the report. The report lists procedures that would allow Mexicans 
in the United States to receive credentials complying with the exacting 
electoral standards that have allowed Mexico to largely eliminate 
ballot fraud in recent years. Six ways were suggested for Mexicans 
to cast ballots in the United States. Most would involve establishing 
polling places in consulates, churches, Mexican-owned businesses and 
immigrant homes. The report also outlines the possibility of voting 
by mail or telephone. Depending on the registration and ballot procedure 
chosen, extending Mexico's vote north would cost between $76 million 
and $356 million, the report said. The latter figure is roughly equivalent 
to the government's entire yearly anti-poverty budget. Considerable 
debate at Friday's conference centered on how much interest Mexicans 
living in the United States might have in voting in Mexican elections. 
Citing opinion samplings collected among migrants passing through 
border cities and Mexican airports, the study reported that 83 percent 
of Mexicans living north of the border want to help choose the Mexican 
president, but that many said they could spare little time to register 
or to cast ballots. Wayne Cornelius, a political science professor 
at the University of California at San Diego, said an increasing number 
of migrants live permanently in the United States but remain interested 
in Mexican politics because they finance construction of churches 
and other public works in their Mexican hometowns. ``I consider these 
voting proposals to be of fundamental importance for the democratic 
transition in Mexico,'' Cornelius said. Jeffrey Passel, a demographer 
at the Urban Institute in Washington, D.C., also praised the report 
but questioned why Mexico would consider allowing the 2.7 million 
children of Mexican parents living in the United States to vote. ``Many 
don't speak Spanish and have never been in Mexico,'' he said. Clark 
Reynolds, an economics professor at Stanford University, said the 
proposals would anger many Americans and undercut efforts to involve 
Mexican immigrants more fully in U.S. politics. ``This will cause 
a political explosion, trust me,'' Reynolds said. ``I know the United 
States, and we've not had a very happy 10 years in U.S.-Mexico relations. 
If you go forward with these plans, there will be a huge conflict.'' 
Much discussion centered on the 2.7 million potential voters who live 
in the United States with no immigration documents. The report suggests 
that Mexico might seek to negotiate guarantees from the U.S. Immigration 
and Naturalization Service that undocumented Mexicans would not be 
arrested while waiting to vote. But Roger Diaz de Cossio, a Mexican 
diplomat who designed an array of foreign ministry assistance programs 
for migrants, scoffed. ``The INS has laws to obey, and they're going 
to obey them regardless of whether Mexicans are going to the polls,'' 
Diaz said. Ernesto Ruffo Appel, whose 1989 to 1995 tenure in Baja 
California made him Mexico's first non-PRI governor in the modern 
era, accused the authorities of whipping up opposition to the voting 
proposals out of fear that migrants will vote against the PRI. ``I 
think that fear is well-founded,'' Ruffo said. ``So for the good of 
Mexico, it's important to get going on this now.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>