<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981206.0136 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
John Chadwick, a self-effacing linguist who played a critical role 
in deciphering the ancient Greek writings known as Linear B, then 
spent the rest of his life deflecting credit to his collaborator, 
died in England on Nov. 24. Chadwick was 78 and a longtime resident 
of Cambridge. In an era in which astronauts spend weeks in space and 
sheep are cloned, it is hard to imagine the excitement _ or the controversy 
_ the two men created in 1953. That was when Chadwick and his colleague, 
Michael Ventris, announced that they had unlocked the secrets to a 
puzzle that had confounded scholars for more than half a century, 
and even determined that Linear B was a style of Greek used 500 years 
before the age of Homer. The mystery began in 1900 when Sir Arthur 
Evans, a British archaeologist excavating the ancient Minoan palace 
at Cnossus, on Crete, discovered clay tablets imprinted with strange 
pictographs that had been baked kiln-hard and had survived a fire 
that had destroyed the palace 3,000 years earlier. The 90 or so symbols 
on these and other tablets later found elsewhere on Crete and in a 
few places on the Greek mainland, dated to about 1400 B.C., and bore 
no resemblance to any known writing system. Evans gave them the prosaic 
name of Linear B, to distinguish the writing from a system he called 
Linear A. Evans and other scholars may not have been able to decipher 
Linear B or to account for its origin, but they had no doubts on one 
point: it was not Greek. That language could not possibly have been 
used when Crete was under Mycenaean control, they said, and anyway, 
the entire Bronze Age world was thought to have been illiterate. As 
a result, when Ventris and Chadwick published their findings, they 
were widely derided by scholars who felt it was impossible that there 
had been a Greek-speaking people on Crete hundreds of years before 
the rise of the Greek city states, notwithstanding the two men's analysis 
of an apparently consistent syntax and their plausible reading of 
the tablets as Greek listings of commercial transactions. And then 
there was the matter of the men's scholarly credentials. Ventris was 
neither an archaeologist nor a professional linguist, but a 31-year-old 
architect; Chadwick, 33, who had studied Greek and other languages 
at Cambridge, had worked as a lowly assistant lexicographer for the 
Oxford Latin Dictionary before becoming a classics lecturer at Cambridge 
in 1952. But as Chadwick, an incorrigibly modest man, never tired 
of pointing out, Ventris was an amateur linguist of genius with a 
lifelong interest in cryptography. Ventris had been fascinated with 
the Linear B puzzle ever since he was 14 and happened to attend a 
lecture given by Evans in 1936. Chadwick, a London native who had 
served in the Navy in World War II, had only a cursory interest in 
Linear B until he happened to turn on the radio in June 1952 and heard 
an interview in which Ventris discussed his outrageous theory that 
Linear B was Greek. Fascinated, Chadwick wrote to Ventris, and the 
two men began an intense collaboration. In a matter of months, they 
produced a complete system to decipher the ancient tablets and eventually 
translated 300 of them. They were published as ``Documents in Mycenaean 
Greek'' in 1956, just weeks before Ventris was killed in an automobile 
accident. By then the discovery of further Linear B tablets on the 
Greek mainland, all yielding plausible readings by the Ventris-Chadwick 
system, had persuaded almost all scholars that Linear B really was 
the earliest form of what evolved into classical Greek. The discovery 
that an early form of Greek had been spoken and written on Crete and 
elsewhere from about 1400 to 1150 B.C. forced a vast revision of settled 
scholarly understanding of the development of the Greek world. Chadwick, 
who is survived by his wife, Joan, and a son, described the detective 
work in ``The Decipherment of Linear B'' (1958) and became a leading 
authority on the Mycenaean Greek language and society, publishing 
``Mycenaean World'' in 1976. Although the initial inspiration and 
the breakthrough were clearly Ventris', it is generally recognized 
that Chadwick's exhaustive knowledge of ancient Greek was indispensable 
in developing the complete deciphering system, a contribution that 
has often been overlooked. The entry on Linear B in the Grolier Multimedia 
Encyclopedia, for example, attributes the discovery to Ventris and 
makes no mention of Chadwick, which is hardly surprising _ the entry 
was written by Chadwick. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>