<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981206.0090 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Scottish Power PLC is expected to announce Monday that it is buying 
Pacificorp, a major provider of power in the Northwest, for $7.5 billion 
in stock, people close to the talks said Sunday. The transaction, 
which must be approved by U.S. regulators, would be the first purchase 
of an entire U.S. utility by a foreign company and could lead to more 
acquisitions of U.S. companies by foreign concerns. Under the deal, 
whose final terms were being negotiated Sunday, Pacificorp stockholders 
would receive one Scottish Power American Depository Receipt worth 
$25.25 for every Pacificorp share, a premium of 21.7 percent to Pacificorp's 
closing price of $20.75 a share on Friday. Pacificorp stockholders 
will have about 36 percent of the shares in the combined group. The 
new company will be based in Glasgow, Scotland, and will be headed 
by Murray Stuart, chairman of Scottish Power, and Ian Robinson, the 
company's chief executive. Pacificorp will be run as a North American 
subsidiary of Scottish Power and is expected to be run by the Pacificorp 
team currently in place, led by Keith McKennon, the company's chairman 
and chief executive. The merged company would have almost 7 million 
customers in Britain and the United States for its water, power, gas 
and telecommunications services. People close to the talks said the 
deal came together quickly and that the companies had been negotiating 
for a little more than a month. The merger is a reversal of sorts 
for Pacificorp, which was viewed as a potential buyer of a British 
utility earlier this year but lost a bidding war for Energy Group 
PLC of Britain to Texas Utilities Co. in August. Since then, Fred 
Buckman resigned as chief executive of Pacificorp and the company 
said it would abandon its global expansion plans and sell almost all 
its assets aside from its electric utility business in the West. Its 
subsidiaries, Pacific Power and Light and Utah Power and Light, operate 
in nine Western states. The company also owns an Australian utility, 
Powercor. Pacificorp's earnings have slid in recent years, partly 
because of the costs of its failed takeover efforts and volatile power 
prices, which hurt results in its energy-trading business. Its stock 
has fallen 24 percent this year and the company became the subject 
of considerable takeover speculation. Scottish Power has been interested 
in expanding into the U.S. electricity market, which is opening to 
competition. It was reported to have discussed buying Florida Progress 
Corp. and Cinergy Corp., a Midwest utility based in Cincinnati. Scottish 
Power officials have said their expertise in deregulation gained in 
Britain could be used in the United States, where deregulation in 
the utility business is behind that in Britain. It is thought that 
Scottish Power is being advised by Morgan Stanley Dean Witter and 
that Pacficorp is being advised by Salomon Smith Barney. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>