<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981206.0211 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Abraham Feinberg, a businessman, philanthropist and supporter of Israel, 
died Saturday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan. 
He was 90 and lived in Manhattan. Feinberg rose from modest beginnings 
to become chairman of a New York-based apparel manufacturer, Kayser-Roth 
Corp., and then chairman of American Bank and Trust Co., which was 
bought in 1978 by Bank Leumi, an Israeli institution. At his death 
he was chief executive of Central Bottling Corp., a beverage-bottling 
business in Israel. He also invested in businesses based in the United 
States and in Israel and was involved in the construction of buildings 
in Manhattan and Israel. In the political world, he led many Democratic 
fund-raising drives. His family said he played an important role in 
providing financial support for President Harry Truman's successful 
whistle-stop campaign for re-election in 1948. In 1952, while the 
country was waiting to see whether Truman would run again, Feinberg 
visited him at the White House and then told reporters the president 
had not made up his mind. Truman later declined his party's renomination. 
Feinberg was also long active in support for Israel and in philanthropy. 
After World War II, and before Israel was founded in 1948, he helped 
displaced European Jews to move on to what was then Palestine. He 
became president of Americans for Haganah, which was the military 
organization of the main Zionist movement. ``During that period,'' 
he said in a 1950 interview, ``I helped to mobilize support of all 
kinds for people who were fighting their great battle for independence.'' 
His family said that he was active in getting weapons for Haganah 
and that he also helped Israel acquire other military equipment in 
later years. He accompanied Chaim Weizmann, Israel's first president, 
to his first meeting with Truman, and a substantial U.S. loan to Israel 
ensued, his family recalled. His family also said he had useful informal 
contacts with the Israeli and American governments during some Middle 
East crises. In addition, Feinberg was for 17 years the chairman of 
the Development Corporation for Israel, also known as the Israel Bonds. 
He was also a major supporter of the Weizmann Institute of Science 
in Israel and its chairman for 40 years. In 1960, when Feinberg was 
honored by B'nai B'rith as its Man of the Year, Truman observed that 
in addition to the good works by Feinberg that had been made public, 
``I could name two or three times as many that he has done anonymously, 
without personal credit and always at sacrifice to himself.'' One 
beneficiary of Feinberg's largess was Brandeis University, in Waltham, 
Mass., whose board of trustees he formerly headed. Earlier this year, 
his family said, he made it known that he was giving the university 
$13 million to set up an International Center for Ethics, Justice 
and Public Life with campuses in Massachusetts and Israel. He was 
also a former member of the New York City Board of Higher Education. 
Born and raised in the Bronx, he graduated from Townsend Harris High 
School in Manhattan and had all his higher education at night: he 
attended City College and received law degrees in 1929 from Fordham 
and in 1936 from New York University. By day, he started out in the 
clothing industry on a modest scale working with his father in hosiery 
sales. Feinberg is survived by his wife of 69 years, the former Lillian 
Farber of Manhattan; one daughter, Judith Schneider Weissberg, a psychologist, 
of Manhattan; four grandchildren; six great-grandchildren; a brother, 
Wilfred, of Manhattan, the former Chief Judge of the United States 
Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit; and a sister, Belle Feinberg 
of Manhattan. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>