<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981206.0068 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
One evening last month at an impromptu gathering of reporters at the 
Comdex computer trade show, Bill Gates, chairman of Microsoft Corp., 
enthusiastically described a breakthrough technology for improving 
the readability of text on the flat-panel color displays used on laptop 
computers. The new technique, which he said would be added to Microsoft's 
Windows operating system next year, is known as Cleartype, and it 
makes text on a portable computer almost as readable as a newspaper 
or a book, Gates asserted. Such an advance could be the key to shifting 
the balance from text on paper to computer screens, he added, helping 
to popularize electronic books and making online publications legible 
enough to read directly from a computer screen for long periods without 
eye strain. No one disputes that Cleartype represents a crucial step 
in the evolution of the information age and could mean an economic 
bonanza for the computer, Internet and publishing industries. But 
Gates' portrayal of the underlying technology as a Microsoft innovation 
has set off an intense debate among some computer researchers. The 
company says Cleartype is the result of work done by Bill Hill, a 
Microsoft researcher who joined Gates on stage for the Las Vegas introduction 
of the technology last month. Hill, the company says, discovered a 
fundamental new approach to rendering type by inventing algorithms 
that draw upon the basic physics of human vision. But within hours 
of the introduction, the Internet was buzzing with claims that Cleartype 
was suspiciously similar to approaches developed many years earlier 
by researchers at Apple Computer, IBM, Xerox Corp. and elsewhere. 
No one is suggesting that Microsoft intentionally violated the patent 
rights of any other company or individual. The major reason for the 
industry's fascination is that the issue speaks to a theme that winds 
through the government's landmark antitrust case against Microsoft 
now being tried in federal court. In testimony by executives of Netscape 
Communications Corp. and Sun Microsystems Inc., Microsoft has been 
portrayed as a high-technology opportunist that often copies and absorbs 
the innovations of other, smaller companies but seldom invents much 
on its own. That perception is not new. Despite spending almost $3 
billion a year on research and development, Microsoft is frequently 
portrayed as a company distinguished by its ability to capitalize 
on the ideas of others. Indeed, Microsoft became the giant of the 
industry by purchasing another company's operating system and licensing 
it to IBM for its first personal computer. And Gates once defended 
Microsoft from accusations that his company borrowed the look and 
feel of the Windows operating system from Apple's Macintosh by insisting 
that both companies borrowed a graphical interface pioneered at Xerox's 
legendary Palo Alto Research Center. This time, however, Microsoft 
insists that ``the techniques we've developed are significantly different 
than the claims for prior art of which we're aware,'' said Dick Brass, 
a Microsoft vice president for technology development who is leading 
the company's electronic-book development. But John Seeley Brown, 
director of the Palo Alto Research Center, is one of a group of researchers 
who do not see it that way. ``They may have found a minor twist,'' 
Brown said, ``but the idea of how the eye perceives color based on 
the display of sub-pixels is where we started this game.'' Microsoft 
has refused to disclose details about Cleartype, saying it did not 
want to compromise the patent protection it seeks. During his impromptu 
Comdex chat with reporters, though, Gates divulged that Hill and a 
small group of Microsoft researchers had been able to take advantage 
of the fact that on a liquid crystal display, or LCD, each picture 
element, or pixel, consists of three separate sub-pixels, of different 
colors. When all three are switched on simultaneously, the viewer 
is tricked into seeing a single white pixel because the individual 
sub-pixels are too tiny for the eye to resolve. This means that LCDs 
should be able to render type fonts as much as three times the actual 
screen resolution, making them far sharper and easier to read. The 
stairstep edges of lines on a typical computer screen give fonts a 
jagged appearance, so smoothing type has long been a quest of software 
designers. Most settle for one of a variety of techniques known as 
anti-aliasing or hinting. The most common technique is to paint pixels 
along a character's edge in shades of gray, which essentially smudges 
the characters' borders to make them appear less jagged. Microsoft 
says its sub-pixel approach is ``an unprecedented innovation in font 
display technology'' and Gates called it a ``leap forward'' in screen 
sharpness. Other industry researchers acknowledge that the Cleartype 
technology will make screens sharper, but insist that the underlying 
concepts have been known for decades. ``The thing that I objected 
to is they made such a big deal out of it,'' said Steve Gibson, a 
software developer who wrote programs for the Apple II personal computer. 
``I'm afraid they are going to try to claim it as their own.'' Gibson 
decided to stake his own claim to history by creating a Web page (http://grc.com/cleartype.htm) 
to document what he calls the original pioneering work in sub-pixel 
technology by Steven Wozniak, designer of the Apple II computer. Though 
Wozniak was designing for television screens rather than for LCD displays, 
he used a sub-pixel technology to effectively double the horizontal 
resolution of the Apple II by blending two sub-pixels, purple and 
green. Wozniak, who now teaches school in Los Gatos, Calif., recalled 
in an e-mail interview that the concept ``was actually quite simple.'' 
``One of my greatest contributions to the first low-cost computers,'' 
he wrote, ``was to realize that these properties of color equaling 
screen position allowed me to achieve color and hi-res both, at very 
low cost.'' Nor was Wozniak the only designer to explore color's relationship 
with resolution. In 1989, Ronald Feigenblatt, an IBM expert on LCDs, 
wrote a technical paper on using color to increase the resolution 
of graphical objects, including fonts. Feigenblatt, who has since 
left IBM, said that at an academic conference that year, IBM demonstrated 
a prototype flat-panel display using software he had designed that 
used color sub-pixels to enhance resolution. Brass said that neither 
the work of Feigenblatt nor that of Wozniak had any bearing on Cleartype's 
development. ``The Wozniak patent deals with improving the display 
of a TV set receiving an Apple II signal, and the Feigenblatt patent 
deals with improving the rendition of color on an early LCD,'' he 
said. ``Neither of these technologies is about improving font resolution 
on a display.'' The most direct challenge to Microsoft's claim of 
originality, however, comes from Dpix Inc., a Xerox subsidiary spun 
off from the Palo Alto Research Center. Dpix makes a high-resolution, 
7 million-pixel color flat-panel display using techniques that seem 
to closely parallel Cleartype technology. In the Dpix display each 
pixel is composed of four sub-pixels _ two green and two red-and-blue 
_ to increase the readability of the fonts above and beyond the resolution 
of the screen, which is already twice that of today's standard flat 
panels. ``We address the green pixel separately with different gray-scale 
data, which gives you a much finer resolution to the font and a much 
finer curve,'' said Malcolm Thompson, president of Dpix and a longtime 
flat-panel researcher. Thompson said his company had not sought a 
software patent because such techniques had been used for many years 
in military flat-panel displays for enhancing photographic imaging. 
Microsoft was not aware of the Xerox research, Brass said. Microsoft's 
application for patent protection for its font technology is one reason 
the announcement has stirred controversy. Software was not routinely 
patented until the mid-to-late 1980s, so the Patent Office does not 
have a rich database on which to draw when assessing software claims. 
``We built the whole industry around there not being patents,'' said 
Dan Bricklin, a developer who invented the spreadsheet. ``The old-timers 
don't even think of patenting ideas new-timers think they invented. 
It's a real mess.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>