<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981206.0139 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When a Central Intelligence Agency scientist visited Hughes Electronics 
Corp. in Los Angeles in 1995 to learn more about China's missile capabilities, 
he became concerned that the satellite manufacturer may have helped 
improve Chinese military capabilities. The worries of the scientist, 
Ronald Pandolfi, were not warmly received back at CIA headquarters, 
intelligence officials now say, and the agency killed his study, called 
a National Intelligence Estimate. But today, the information gathered 
by Pandolfi is part of various criminal and congressional investigations 
looking at the transfer of American space technology to China and, 
more broadly, at the intersection of commerce and national security 
in the Clinton administration. Officials disclosed over the weekend 
that the Senate Intelligence Committee had asked the Justice Department 
to determine whether the agency had obstructed justice by alerting 
Hughes to the Senate panel's recent interest in Pandolfi and the officials 
he saw at Hughes in 1995. CIA officials deny that the agency intended 
to hinder the Senate inquiry, and say they helped facilitate Pandolfi's 
questioning by investigators. An agency spokesman, Bill Harlow, said 
the agency would not talk about Pandolfi's experiences or the 1996 
National Intelligence Estimate he wrote, because of the investigations. 
The classified intelligence estimate warned that the transfer of American 
satellite technology could contribute to China's ballistic missile 
capabilities, other officials said. CIA officials disagreed with some 
of Pandolfi's conclusions and decided that the estimate was not ``rigorous'' 
enough, one official said, so it was not published or distributed 
to other government officials. But Pandolfi's warnings may turn out 
to have been right after all. The Pentagon and the State Department 
have now looked at the same question that bothered Pandolfi three 
years ago: Did Hughes help to significantly improve China's military 
capabilities? Experts on intelligence and missiles at the two departments 
have drafted reports with troubling conclusions, according to officials 
familiar with the drafts. ``The drafts I've read suggest some pretty 
serious problems,'' one administration official said. The Pentagon 
report could be sent to Congress as early as this week, another official 
said. Pandolfi could not be reached Sunday for comment. An official 
at Hughes said no one was available Sunday to comment on the inquiry. 
But the company, a unit of General Motors, has denied any wrongdoing 
in the past and says it is cooperating with the investigations. Last 
July, Steven Dorfman, vice chairman of Hughes, told the Senate subcommittee 
on proliferation that, in the company's review of a 1995 explosion 
of a Chinese rocket carrying a Hughes satellite, ``no material technology 
was transmitted to the Chinese that would help them build missiles.'' 
Two months later, Pandolfi testified before a closed session of the 
Senate Intelligence Committee. His testimony remains secret. Officials 
say the agency brought Pandolfi to the committee's attention, though 
not immediately. CIA officials see nothing unusual about disagreements 
over complicated intelligence matters. But, other officials said, 
what the Senate committee has heard raises questions about whether 
the CIA and other agencies or departments of the Clinton administration 
have paid too much attention to helping companies like Hughes build 
commerce abroad, and not enough attention to national security. The 
story of the intelligence analyst begins in January 1995 when a Chinese 
rocket carrying a Hughes satellite exploded soon after takeoff. Before 
long, a newspaper in Hong Kong controlled by the Chinese government 
suggested that the accident had been caused by Hughes. Hughes thought 
the Chinese were to blame, but some officials were reluctant to bluntly 
confront the Chinese for fear of offending an important customer, 
a former Hughes executive said. It is not clear exactly what Hughes 
told the Chinese, but the satellite manufacturer agreed to help Chinese 
scientists and engineers figure out what went wrong in the January 
launching. Hughes sought and received permission from the Commerce 
Department before it undertook the accident review. The expertise 
and technology needed to put a satellite into orbit are similar to 
what is needed to deliver weapons from a ballistic missile. China's 
civilian rocket and space program is run by the same government-controlled 
companies that develop and sell ballistic missiles. There were no 
Pentagon monitors present at Hughes' 1995 accident review because 
satellites licensed by the Commerce Department did not always require 
such a presence. Pandolfi was alarmed when he heard on his Los Angeles 
trip about what had transpired in the accident review, an associate 
recalled. ``What they told him they were sharing and how far the company 
had been willing to go, he thought it was questionable from the standpoint 
of national security,'' the associate said. But the analyst's concerns 
never went very far after the agency killed the intelligence estimate 
he drafted in April 1996. But this year it was revealed that a federal 
grand jury was investigating whether Hughes and another American space 
company, Loral Space and Communications, had gone too far in assisting 
the Chinese after another rocket failure, this one in 1996, with a 
Loral satellite on board. Soon, the grand jury and various congressional 
committees became curious about the earlier accident review by Hughes. 
The Commerce Department acknowledged to Congress that the license 
for that review should have been approved by the State Department, 
which has authority over all defense services or equipment _ and which 
requires Pentagon monitors. Dorfman told the Senate that, in hindsight, 
the Pentagon monitors ``should have been there,'' at the 1995 accident 
review. In 1995 the chairman of Hughes, C. Michael Armstrong, was 
leading the fight to persuade President Clinton to shift jurisdiction 
over satellites from the more restrictive State Department to Commerce. 
The criminal inquiry is now focusing, among other things, on whether 
Hughes knew or should have known it was required to get State Department 
approval before helping the Chinese in 1995. After the news accounts 
earlier this year, Pandolfi spoke with federal and congressional investigators. 
CIA officials say the agency helped arrange those interviews after 
some delay, one official said. When the intelligence committee wanted 
to further explore the issue with Hughes, the agency alerted the satellite 
maker, but, within 24 hours, had also informed the committee about 
its heads-up to Hughes, one official said. The concern of Congress 
involves broad issues of national security. It was the Senate panel 
on proliferation that asked the Pentagon to assess the national security 
implications of the 1995 accident review. And the Senate intelligence 
committee, officials said, is looking at whether what happened to 
Pandolfi is part of a larger question: Has the Clinton administration's 
strategic partnership with Beijing affected the way the intelligence 
community sees China? 
</TEXT>
</DOC>