<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981206.0127 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Alvin Ailey's imprint on his dance company is still so strong that 
one often forgets how many works he commissioned from experimental 
choreographers who worked in styles other than his own. That is the 
context in which to view Judith Jamison's ``Echo: Far From Home,'' 
a new work that gives nonlinear narrative an original twist. After 
Ailey's death in 1989, Ms. Jamison succeeded him as artistic director 
of the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater and pursued a two-pronged 
policy. The classics of Ailey, Donald McKayle and Talley Beatty, who 
emerged from the modern-dance mainstream of the 1940s and '50s were 
preserved in the company repertory. These works, more than others, 
are identified with the humanist strain that defined Ailey as man 
and artist. But Ms. Jamison also continued a policy of reaching out 
to choreographers who focused on new forms as much as emotional expression. 
Ailey introduced into the company post-1960s rebels. These included 
Rudy Perez, Louis Falco, Jennifer Muller, Ulysses Dove, Kathryn Posin, 
Diane McIntyre, Elisa Monte and Bill T. Jones, some of whom favored 
repetition, reductive vocabularies and Minimalist music. These elements 
are part of Ms. Jamison's esthetic as a choreographer, and as director 
she has favored post-modern choreographers like Dove, Donald Byrd, 
Jawole Willa Jo Zollar and herself as well as Lar Lubovitch in his 
Minimalist mood. Some of these choreographers are black and some are 
white, and when a few touch upon the black heritage that is the company's 
prime inspiration, they do so more obliquely than their predecessors. 
No easy definition, then, fits Ms. Jamison's ``Echo: Far From Home,'' 
which was given its premiere by the company on Friday night at City 
Center (131 West 55th Street, Manhattan). The images onstage are of 
universal relationships: parents react to each other and to their 
daughter, who also reacts to a lover and a ballet teacher. But it 
would be coy to suggest that the black experience is foreign to this 
piece. It even begins with a taped voice declaring ``No black children 
in this school,'' as the audience sees a photo of a girl in a tutu. 
That ``Echo'' has an autobiographical tinge is not to be excluded. 
Not every white ballet teacher in the 1950s (or later) accepted black 
pupils. Ms. Jamison begins and ends with the photo of the girl in 
the tutu. If one reads her narrative line correctly, the child triumphs 
over discrimination by finding her true self. She becomes a dancer 
without rejecting her identity, which is defined in two ways: Ms. 
Jamison's dance idiom and Tom Feelings' paintings. These suspended 
panels, with their forceful swirling strokes of paint, include portraits 
and evocations of the slave ships of the past. The African heritage 
is part of Ms. Jamison's choreography. It is not that she reproduces 
African dances, but what looks like purely formal movement here incorporates 
elements of African dance (rapidly moving bent knees, tilted torso 
and arms shooting upward). With a post-modern sensibility that draws 
from eclectic sources, she creates her own fascinating idiom. When 
she stylizes African dance, it becomes something new as in a solo 
for Edward Franklin, a wonderfully imposing dancer who watches over 
the heroine as an ancestral figure. He is called Mentor in ``Spirit 
Walker,'' the second part of this nine-part suite. With its episodic 
structure, the work has admirable movement quality but leaves its 
characters undeveloped. One can also wonder on what level of irony 
Ms. Jamison is operating. Linda Caceres is the daughter who wears 
a black halter and Romantic tutu over her shorts; her solo is called 
``Degas Me.'' Richard Witter as a virtuosic seducer and Linda-Denise 
Evans as a leggy pinup of a teacher, share the same cartoonish quality. 
The teacher even passes down to her pupil a pair of red shoes, fairy-tale 
symbols of the urge to dance. On the other hand, the emotional imagery 
is more realistic for Uri Sands as the carpenter-father who seems 
set against both his daughter's career and her boyfriend. A duet, 
strongly danced by Sands and Renee Robinson as the mother, expresses 
some conventional angst. Robert Ruggieri's percussive Minimalist-style 
score adds a trendy hard edge. ``Echo: Far From Home'' is anything 
but tidy in its shifts of sensibility: an interesting but disjointed 
work. It was, however, extremely well danced as was everything else 
on this program. Dwana Adiaha Smallwood's breathtaking delicacy and 
perfect form lent new elegance to ``Cry,'' Ailey's great solo in praise 
of ``black women everywhere.'' A beautifully rehearsed ensemble, bobbing 
dynamically through changing angular shapes, gave the striking abstract 
design of Hans van Manen's ``Polish Pieces'' clarity and wit. There 
was also time for strong emotions in the work's duets with Ms. Evans 
and Franklin and especially Mucuy Bolles and Bernard Gaddis. Ailey's 
``Revelations,'' superbly performed, completed the program. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>