<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981206.0196 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Rep. Rodney Frelinghuysen of Morristown, N.J., is just the kind of 
Republican the Clinton administration thinks it can deal with: a centrist 
with a long resume of bucking his conservative leaders on issues like 
abortion, gun control and the environment. So it was not unusual recently 
for a member of President Clinton's Cabinet, Energy Secretary Bill 
Richardson, to phone Frelinghuysen, who sits on an important energy 
subcommittee. But Richardson was not interested in discussing nuclear 
reactors or oil prices; he was calling about the main thing politicians 
in Washington talk about these days, impeachment. Frelinghuysen did 
not take the call. Like many Republican moderates from New York, New 
Jersey and Connecticut, he has been withholding judgment, trying to 
keep his head low while the White House and Republican conservatives 
exchange potshots over Clinton's future. With articles of impeachment 
likely to reach the House floor by mid-month, the Northeast moderates, 
the single largest group of swing voters on this panel of 435 grand 
jurors, are coming under pressure to take a stand. Almost daily, they 
receive telephone calls from their leadership asking about their position 
and perhaps nudging them to vote yes. Many, like Frelinghuysen, have 
been contacted by White House officials or friendly Democrats looking 
to see if they could support censure instead of impeachment. All must 
endure an endless stream of media pundits who offer daily predictions 
on what the moderates will do. It is an agonizing 15 minutes of fame 
that many of the moderates would rather do without. ``This is one 
hell of a mess,'' said Frelinghuysen, who has suggested docking the 
president's pension as punishment, an idea that appears to have been 
rejected by the House leadership. ``And it's one we didn't even get 
ourselves into. The president did it for us.'' Their anguish is not 
hard to understand. Many Republican moderates from the New York metropolitan 
area represent districts where voters have supported Clinton in past 
elections and have expressed firm opposition to impeachment. Clinton 
won by large margins in all three states in 1996, and his approval 
ratings are as high in the region as anywhere in the country. The 
moderates include Rep. Nancy Johnson of New Britain, Conn., who cited 
her alliance with the president on children's health care legislation 
on the stump this year. Rep. Michael Forbes of Suffolk County on Long 
Island appeared with Clinton in August to promote managed care legislation. 
Rep. Peter King of Nassau County, N.Y., traveled to Ireland with the 
President in September. ``These are pragmatists,'' said the chief 
of staff of one moderate from the region, who spoke on the condition 
of anonymity. ``These are not people out for Clinton's blood. This 
is a wing of the party that does not feel Clinton is an evil guy.'' 
Or, as Rep. Christopher Shays of Stamford, Conn., put it, ``I didn't 
run for Congress to spend all my time working on getting rid of the 
president.'' Shays and King are two of five Republicans who have said 
that they will vote against impeachment. A third is also from the 
region: Rep. Jack Quinn of Hamburg, N.Y. Only two Republicans from 
the area, Reps. Marge Roukema and Bob Franks, both from New Jersey, 
have said they will probably vote for impeachment. The remaining Republicans 
from the three states say they remain undecided. But if Clinton's 
supporters think the Northeastern moderates are a lock to vote against 
impeachment, they are wrong. Some worry that voting against impeachment 
will antagonize the conservatives who dominate the House leadership. 
Others feel that a large number of their constituents, including Democrats, 
want Clinton to be punished for lying about his affair with Monica 
Lewinsky, though they would prefer something less severe than impeachment. 
But censure is a choice the Republican leadership is not likely to 
allow, leaving a straight up-or-down vote on impeachment. Other moderates 
have a deep-seated anger toward the president, whose conduct they 
think has insulted them and stained his office. Several said they 
were particularly infuriated with Clinton for refusing to take more 
responsibility for his actions when he answered 81 questions sent 
to him by the House Judiciary Committee last month. In what seems 
an effort to win over wavering moderates, the White House has promised 
a vigorous defense before the judiciary panel. A gnawing concern among 
many moderates is that supporting impeachment could upset a scandal-weary 
electorate. Many of them attribute the losses of Republican incumbents 
like Rep. Michael Pappas of Rocky Hill, N.J., and Sen. Alfonse D'Amato 
in New York last month to voters' anger with the Republican congressional 
leadership and the plethora of investigations into the president. 
``There is no doubt that Republicans were hurt in November by the 
perception that we were focused on Lewinsky and not on issues such 
as Social Security, taxes and health care,'' said King, who has become 
a leading proponent of censuring the president. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>