<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981206.0112 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Hoping to offer high-speed Internet access to more consumers, the 
biggest personal computer company and local telephone companies plan 
to petition the FCC Monday to relax regulations that they say are 
impeding network modernization. Compaq Computer and Gateway, together 
with Microsoft and Intel, plan to join with the Bell local phone companies 
and GTE to announce their allied effort Monday morning in Washington, 
according to executives involved in the group. The communications 
and technology powerhouses intend to urge the Federal Communications 
Commission to waive many of the rules requiring the local phone giants 
to give would-be competitors access to all parts of their networks. 
They also plan to ask for exemptions from the rules barring the Bell 
companies from the long-distance business, so they can offer wide-ranging 
data services. The group contends that releasing the companies from 
such regulations will give them the financial incentive to invest 
the billions of dollars required to deliver corporate-caliber Internet 
access to residential consumers at reasonable prices. ``We in the 
computer industry think we stand in the shoes of the consumers here 
because we both want broadband deployment and competition,'' Peter 
Pitsch, a former FCC official who is now communications policy director 
for Intel Corp., said in a telephone interview. ``Broadband'' is the 
industry term for high-speed communications services that can include 
text, images and even audio and video information. The group intends 
Monday to present the FCC with a statement of 10 principles that the 
companies say will promote the development of advanced data systems 
for consumers. It also means to begin lobbying members of Congress 
who have influence over communications policy. ``If adopted, these 
principles would both promote competition and strengthen the incentives 
of the incumbent local telephone companies to promote broadband,'' 
Pitsch said. Under rules the FCC created in response to the Telecommunications 
Act of 1996, the local phone incumbents are required to sell access 
to different parts of their networks to competitors. But the computer-communications 
alliance wants the commission to let the phone companies reserve their 
advanced Internet communications equipment for their own use. The 
Bells have long said that the requirement to sell access to their 
systems reduces their incentives to invest in and build advanced data 
networks in the first place _ a point of view that the computer giants 
have come to embrace. ``We don't want to undercut the incentives of 
the incumbent companies,'' Pitsch said. ``Everyone is pretty much 
starting from ground zero when it comes to these data services, and 
if they take the risk, they ought to get the reward.'' In a nod to 
competition, the group does intend to propose that the local phone 
incumbents readily make space available in their network-switching 
centers for competitors to install their own equipment and that the 
incumbents be required to resell access to the actual copper wires 
that run to homes. By proposing that the Bells be allowed into the 
long-distance market for data services, the alliance will be seeking 
to at least partly lift a long-distance ban that has been in place 
since the breakup of the old AT&AMP;T Bell system in 1984. Nearly 
three years ago, the Telecommunications Act opened a path for the 
Bells to enter the long-distance arena. But Congress stipulated that 
each Bell company would first need to convince the FCC it had sufficiently 
opened its network to competitors _ a test that no Bell has passed. 
The law, however, also directed the FCC to look into ways of encouraging 
the development of more high-speed data options for consumers. And 
for all of the hype that surrounded the passage of the Telecommunications 
Act, most American consumers have no more options for high-speed links 
to cyberspace than they did before 1996. As a result, the FCC is under 
mounting political pressure to encourage the mass-market availability 
of high-speed data systems. So while the commission's chairman, William 
Kennard, is unlikely to embrace the proposals wholeheartedly, he is 
also very likely to be less hostile to them than his predecessor, 
Reed Hundt, would have been. Hundt was seen in the communications 
industry as an implacable foe of the Bells. In allying with the local 
phone carriers, the computer behemoths are making their first significant 
foray into the political jungle that is the world of telecommunications 
regulation. The proposals are almost certain to draw harsh condemnation 
from the Bells' archrivals, the long-distance companies, led by AT&AMP;T 
and MCI Worldcom Inc. Still, the formation of the alliance is a vivid 
sign of how the computer industry has come to rely on the communications 
industry to provide the Internet links that are driving the PC business. 
It is a relationship that is almost certain to grow closer and more 
complicated in the coming years, as Internet connections and computers 
become perhaps as common as telephone dial tones. ``This is the first 
time that the telephone industry has gotten together with the computer 
industry and said, `Look, the capability of the public network is 
really not keeping pace with consumer needs for bandwidth, given the 
way the Internet is growing,''' said Robert Blau, BellSouth Corp.'s 
vice president for executive and regulatory affairs. Alex Gruzen, 
Compaq Computer Corp.'s director for Internet services, said connecting 
to the Internet is now the primary reason that consumers buy computers. 
The problem for PC makers, though, is that the speeds at which most 
home users link to the Internet from home have not kept up with increases 
in processing power achievable by the computers themselves. That means 
that users who already have a powerful computer often have no compelling 
reason to buy a new, more powerful one. ``The deployment of broadband 
networks means you get multimedia applications over the Internet,'' 
said Joseph Tasker, vice president for government affairs for Compaq, 
the No. 1 maker of personal computers. ``And computers and networks 
go together.'' The concept of letting local phone companies avoid 
reselling access to their data systems has gained currency at the 
No. 1 maker of data networking equipment, Cisco Systems Inc. Although 
Cisco is apparently not a member of the new coalition, John Chambers, 
Cisco's chief executive, said in an interview last week that the resale 
requirements were standing in the way of the phone companies' offering 
high-speed data services to consumers. ``If you build this infrastructure 
and you immediately have to sell it to someone else,'' he said, ``the 
build-out is not going to take place.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>