<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981206.0145 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Despite widespread logistical problems in voting, officials who monitored 
Nigeria's local government elections on Saturday described them on 
Sunday as a positive step toward the presidential elections in February. 
Results of the elections for 774 municipal governments were still 
being tallied Sunday, although reports from across the country suggested 
that the three leading parties had performed according to expectations. 
Foreign monitors estimated the voter turnout at 20 percent, a figure 
they described as good given the local nature of Saturday's contests 
and the dismal turnouts during rigged elections under the late dictator, 
Gen. Sani Abacha. Monitors said there were few reports of violence. 
A notable exception was in the impoverished Niger Delta region, where 
10 people were killed in skirmishes related to the elections, Nigerian 
newspapers reported. The elections provided the first glimpse into 
how fair presidential elections might be in a country that has been 
ruled by military governments for all but four years since 1966. Several 
organizations from the West, as well as local ones, sent observers 
throughout this country of 108 million people to oversee ballots, 
which were often cast on street corners, under trees, in private homes 
or simply along roadsides under a scorching midday sun. ``There were 
some evident problems, but we did see some places that had excellent 
procedures that could be copied anywhere else,'' said K. Srinivasan, 
leader of a monitoring team for the Commonwealth of Britain and its 
former colonies. The Commonwealth suspended Nigeria in 1995 after 
Abacha ordered the execution of the writer Ken Saro-Wiwa. ``I'm confident 
that the problems will be evaluated and resolved in time for the presidential 
elections,'' Srinivasan said. Clement Nwankwo, chairman of the Transition 
Monitoring Group, an organization of 45 Nigerian groups monitoring 
the elections, said that he had received consistent reports from his 
group's 600 monitors. ``There were some problems that there were shortages 
of voting material and mix-ups of voter registration lists,'' Nwankwo 
said. ``But they were not considered significant enough that the elections 
could not be considered free and fair.'' After Abacha's unexpected 
death in June, his successor, Gen. Abdulsalami Abubakar, announced 
that Nigeria would hold local, statewide and presidential elections 
_ one set each month starting in December. Abubakar, who is not running 
for president, has pledged that the military will hand over power 
to a civilian government next May. He created the Independent National 
Electoral Commission by decree to run the elections. To respond to 
concerns about fraud _ 20 million of 60 million voters' cards disappeared, 
for example _ several safeguards were taken on Saturday, including 
sealing Nigeria's borders during voting hours. But foreign monitors 
said that some practices followed on Saturday needed to be improved 
for the presidential elections. Many officials presiding at polling 
places appeared poorly trained and arrived late, the monitors said. 
And at many polling places, it was possible to see how individuals 
voted because ballots were cast out in the open. ``This week's election 
is not a watershed,'' said Thomas Melia, vice president of the National 
Democratic Institute, which is monitoring the elections. ``It's a 
time for testing. The significance of the voting will become clear 
when we see what improvements are made in subsequent elections.'' 
The Independent National Electoral Commission said it will release 
final results this week. But preliminary figures and reports suggested 
that the People's Democratic Party had won the highest number of local 
seats nationwide. The party is centrist and has the best-known presidential 
candidate in Gen. Olusegun Obasanjo, a former president and the only 
military ruler to have given up power to a civilian government. Two 
other parties, the All People's Party and the Alliance for Democracy, 
were expected to muster enough votes in 24 of the 36 states to present 
candidates in statewide and presidential elections. Turnout is expected 
to rise for those elections, though monitors and party officials said 
they were encouraged by Saturday's turnout, especially since few bothered 
to vote in manipulated elections under Abacha. ``The difference is 
so clear,'' said Nat Yaduma, a leader in the People's Democratic Party 
in Adamawa state in central Nigeria. ``More people are participating 
because of the credibility of the election process.'' As results were 
announced in wards in Lagos starting on Saturday night, candidates 
and supporters could be seen celebrating, carrying winners aloft through 
the streets. ``The victory is a sweet one, a very sweet one,'' said 
Akanni Sanni Mojeed, 56, who won a district chairmanship in Lagos 
for the Alliance for Democracy. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>