<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981206.0077 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
He's back _ and not too many people here are happy about it. After 
leaving the talent agency business three years ago for a troubled 
odyssey as a top executive in Walt Disney Co. and then as a Broadway 
theatrical mogul, Michael Ovitz has returned to the job he knows so 
well: overseeing the careers of movie stars. Ovitz's return to Hollywood 
is expected to be announced in the next few weeks with the start of 
a new company, Artists Management Group, that will seek to manage 
movie stars, directors and writers. Ovitz has said privately that 
the company, which has already lured several young managers and agents 
from other companies, is part of an overall plan involving sports 
franchises, entertainment, the Internet and the computer business. 
But across Hollywood _ where memories of Ovitz's sometimes abrasive 
tactics as chairman of Creative Artists Agency are recalled with an 
undercurrent of nervousness and hostility among even agents at his 
former company _ the return of one of Hollywood's top power brokers 
has been greeted with an unmistakable chill. ``He is floundering a 
little, and he's using the clients and clout of these young managers 
to get back into the mainstream,'' said Tom Ross, the former top music 
agent at Creative Artists who worked for Ovitz for years. ``Why is 
he coming back? He wants to be Michael Ovitz again,'' said Bernie 
Brillstein, a top talent manager who has tangled with Ovitz over the 
years. ``He wants to reinvent himself.'' No one underestimates the 
shrewdness and inventiveness of Ovitz, whose severance package from 
Disney reached an extraordinary $100 million. But in returning to 
the Hollywood fray he may find a somewhat altered landscape. His new 
firm represents one bona fide star, Leonardo DiCaprio, and, perhaps, 
Cameron Diaz, but the young managers and former agents who have joined 
Ovitz do not represent the kind of A-list stars that bring in $15 
million or $20 million a picture. Few Hollywood moguls have left such 
a trail of enmity. Some of the biggest names in town _ like David 
Geffen and Jeffrey Katzenberg, two of the owners of Dreamworks, as 
well as Ron Meyer, who runs Universal Studios for Seagram Co. _ barely 
speak to Ovitz. Michael Eisner, the Disney chairman who dismissed 
Ovitz as his No. 2, has frosty relations with him. And the formerly 
warm relationship between Ovitz and Edgar Bronfman Jr., chief executive 
at Seagram, has chilled. At the same time, several of Ovitz's former 
partners at Creative Artists, like Meyer, as well as some of the top 
agents there and at other big agencies, like International Creative 
Management and William Morris, express mistrust and anger, albeit 
privately, at what they view as his high-handed treatment of them 
in the past. Agents, movie executives and lawyers say Ovitz is coming 
into the management field less from a position of strength and more 
on the basis of his formidable reputation. Moreover, the degree of 
ill will toward him among some agents and studio executives may actually 
hurt Ovitz _ he will not be granted too many favors, said several 
agents. On the other hand, even his foes at companies like Dreamworks 
or Universal Studios would probably fall over themselves to sign up 
DiCaprio to a new movie. Why Ovitz, who had ambitions to emerge as 
a player on Wall Street and Madison Avenue, is returning to Hollywood, 
is a subject of intense speculation here. A top entertainment industry 
lawyer, who has dealt with Ovitz for years, said: ``Mike Ovitz has 
realized that his power emanates from the world of Hollywood, the 
world of movie stars. If he doesn't have this connection, he's just 
another guy with a lot of money.'' Ovitz declined to comment, partly 
because legal issues involving the signing of his top managers have 
not been fully sorted out. Across Hollywood, Ovitz remains not only 
a source of some mystery and fear _ he is a masterful handler of the 
Hollywood press _ but a figure with an extraordinary track record 
who transformed the talent agency business. ``Based on the representation 
business he built with some other smart and talented executives at 
CAA, there's certainly every reason to think he'll be equally successful 
in the management business,'' said Brad Grey, whose management and 
production company, Brillstein-Grey, representing television and film 
stars, as well as writers, is one that Ovitz is probably seeking to 
somewhat emulate. Ovitz's move into the management field not only 
worries rival managers but especially concerns top agents all over 
town. Virtually every top agent interviewed expressed plenty of anxiety 
about two issues: One is that Ovitz would seek to poach on their agency 
_ and try to hire star agents for his new company. More important, 
the agents worry that Ovitz will seek to lure movie stars and directors 
from their talent agencies, including the one he helped start, Creative 
Artists. In doing so, Ovitz, as a manager, would essentially declare 
war on talent agents. In some ways, Ovitz's decision to launch Artists 
Management Group _ as opposed to another talent agency _ underlines 
the proliferation of managers in Hollywood in the last few years, 
a relatively new phenomenon. Actors used to be represented solely 
by talent agents, but many now retain managers as well (together with 
lawyers and public relations representatives, too). Taking 10 percent 
to 15 percent of a client's fees, a manager often works with an agent 
to shape careers and oversee projects. But there are lines drawn between 
managers and agents. Managers are, essentially, unregulated by law. 
They are often given producer credits and films and television shows 
for their star clients, sometimes earning hefty sums in the process. 
But they are ostensibly barred from actually negotiating employment 
contracts for clients. Agents, on the other hand, earn their fees 
negotiating contracts. They are, however, barred from producing movies 
or television shows. In his venture, Ovitz will serve as a majority 
owner with his prize hire, Rick Yorn, a fast-stepping, aggressively 
ambitious 30-year-old manager, whose clients include DiCaprio and 
Ms. Diaz. But Yorn and his sister-in-law, Julie Silverman Yorn, also 
a manager, have yet to work out their contracts from their current 
employer, Industry Entertainment. Characteristically, Ovitz's efforts 
to urge Yorn to break his contract with Industry Entertainment, which 
is owned by Interpublic Group of Cos., have outraged executives there. 
``We've been betrayed,'' said one top manager at Industry Entertainment, 
who spoke on condition of anonymity. Yorn did not respond to phone 
calls. The Yorns bring in a generally youthful list of actors, including 
Claire Danes, Matt Dillon, Geena Davis and Samuel L. Jackson. Ovitz 
has also sought to enlist two former clients, the directors Barry 
Levinson and Sydney Pollack. One rival agent said Ovitz's efforts 
to bring in former clients like Dustin Hoffman and Warren Beatty had 
failed so far. Three years ago, Ovitz left the powerhouse Creative 
Artists Agency, which he founded with several partners, to take the 
No. 2 job at Disney. At the time Ovitz made it clear that, after more 
than two decades as an agent, he loathed the hand-holding, late-night 
calls and temper tantrums of movie star clients. By all accounts, 
Ovitz, who was already wealthy, also yearned to move into the financial 
big leagues of corporate moguls. Only one year later, Eisner, Disney's 
chairman, ousted Ovitz from a job whose severance reached an extraordinary 
$100 million. Despite the financial bonanza, it was, for Ovitz, a 
humiliating fall that left him shaken. His most high-profile deal 
since then has been a $20 million investment in Livent Inc., the Broadway 
theater company. That investment has almost disappeared. Six months 
after Ovitz took over Livent, the company filed for bankruptcy-law 
protection. Ovitz and his team filed a lawsuit against the company's 
founders, Garth Drabinsky, and his partner, Myron Gottlieb. The lawsuit 
contended that the two men had misled Ovitz by hiding the fact that 
the company was losing millions of dollars on its expensive productions 
of musicals like ``Ragtime'' and ``Showboat.'' Drabinsky filed his 
own lawsuit against Ovitz and other Livent executives charging that 
they had acted together ``in a conspiracy to injure him.'' On another 
front, Ovitz has formed a group aggressively pursuing a National Football 
League franchise for the Los Angeles area in the city of Carson. The 
proposal includes such glitzy backers as his former clients, the actors 
Tom Cruise and Kevin Costner, and the basketball figures Magic Johnson, 
Shaquille O'Neal and Jerry West. But Ovitz's past is plainly haunting 
him as he embarks on another chapter of his formidable show business 
career. ``Times have changed,'' said Brillstein, the talent manager. 
``But as far as I know, Mike Ovitz hasn't won any popularity contests 
lately.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>