<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981206.0080 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Manhattan growls like an underfed pit bull in ``Stop Kiss,'' a sweet, 
sad and enchantingly sincere play by the young American writer Diana 
Son. The sirens, the horns, the tattoos beat by unknown hands and 
feet on doors and floors: the sounds of the city are edged in threats, 
signs of violence that has happened or is waiting to happen. Yet it's 
all so irresistibly exciting, isn't it? ``I love ... New York,'' says 
one character, newly arrived there. The pause in her declaration suggests 
that she was intending to finish the sentence with someone's name, 
but the substitution of the city works nicely. In this delicately 
balanced comic drama, which opened Sunday night at the Joseph Papp 
Public Theater, falling in love with New York or in New York is risky. 
Only the brave need apply. ``Stop Kiss'' has probably generated the 
warmest advance word of mouth of any downtown production this season. 
Only two days into previews, it had sold 85 percent of the tickets 
for its five-week run, which has been extended to Jan. 3, and it is 
easy to understand why. As directed by Jo Bonney, with a fine cast 
led by the wonderful Jessica Hecht, the production captures the heady 
feelings of falling hard for a less than cuddly metropolis in ways 
that musicals and plays like ``Wonderful Town'' and ``Barefoot in 
the Park'' must have for other generations. But this particular valentine 
comes equipped with warning lights. The problems of urban living aren't 
just cute and eccentric here, though it might seem that way when the 
evening begins. Cutting back and forth in time, before and after a 
random act of violence that is the work's center, the production generates 
an underlying ominousness in even its lightest moments, so that toward 
its end, the clatter of dropped silverware in a coffee shop generates 
disproportionate unease. But wait. This story of a charmingly unfocused 
radio traffic reporter named Callie (Ms. Hecht) and her friendship 
with Sara (Sandra Oh), a schoolteacher from St. Louis, is also a gentle, 
affectionate work, with a blithe sense of comedy that brings to mind 
early episodes of ``The Mary Tyler Moore Show.'' Imagine Rhoda and 
Mary slowly discovering that they are physically attracted to each 
other, and you'll know what I mean. The breezy comic spirit doesn't 
trivialize the play's underlying gravity. Only a few of the jokes 
or one-liners, such as a sideswipe at Mayor Rudolph Giuliani, seem 
to exist for their own sake. Ms. Son, who is 32, presumably grew up 
with television, like most American children. To say that the impact 
shows is not an insult. She is able to transform sitcom situations, 
which were mostly appropriated from boulevard plays to begin with, 
back into the stuff of theater. The surface ease of ``Stop Kiss'' 
is belied by its emotional and thematic continuity; images and ideas 
are linked without calling didactic attention to themselves. You may 
have heard that ``Stop Kiss'' is about gay-bashing, which isn't quite 
right. The signal event in the play is indeed the brutal beating of 
a young woman after she is seen kissing another woman. What Ms. Son 
does, however, is slyly place the occurrence in the context of a larger 
consideration of the perils of living life fully. Making choices and 
commitments is a scary business, ``Stop Kiss'' suggests, but what 
is the alternative? The play's heroine hasn't committed to anything 
when we meet her. Callie, who is hovering around 30, came to New York 
as a university student and has stayed on, fairly contentedly but 
passively, showing initiative only in the selection of restaurants. 
She presents her job, surveying traffic patterns from a helicopter 
for a radio station, as something to make fun of. She and her longtime 
boyfriend, George (Kevin Carroll), sleep with other people, but ``will 
probably get married,'' she says. The rent-controlled apartment where 
she has lived for many years (envisioned with pitch-perfect squalor 
by the set designer Narelle Sissons) is still mostly unfurnished, 
with stacks of newspapers as its most prominent decorative accent. 
This description, which brings to mind the perpetual adolescents of 
television shows like ``Friends'' and ``Seinfeld,'' may make you wish 
you could switch channels. But that only means you haven't seen what 
Ms. Hecht can do with a part like this. As she demonstrated in Christopher 
Kyle's ``Plunge'' last season, this actress, who brings to mind the 
young Sandy Dennis without the post-nasal drip, finds symphonic shadings 
in ambivalence and the short attention span. Here, she creates a portrait 
of someone who has made a defense system out of being easily distracted, 
the idea being that if you don't focus, you won't want things too 
badly. Watch how Ms. Hecht's eyes are suddenly arrested, in mid-conversation, 
by an article in a newspaper, randomly spread on the floor, or the 
gentle bobbing of a cat's wire toy. Listen to how her voice slides, 
like a virtuoso skater, away from self-revelations. As someone else 
says of her, she has a tendency, in all things, to ``swerve.'' This 
observation is made, in a delightfully drunken moment, by Sara, the 
Midwesterner who, against her parents' and boyfriend's wishes, has 
come to New York to work with third-grade public school students in 
the Bronx. Unlike Callie, Sara is strongly focused and alarmingly 
unafraid, to the point that she feels compelled to answer beggars 
and harassers on the street. Yet when the women meet, it's clear that 
they share a sense of humor and a whimsy that borders on the precious 
and might be less appealing in the hands of two other actresses. Ms. 
Oh's Sara mixes wryness with enthusiasm, and she has a nifty way of 
dropping her voice into a low register to punctuate the ends of her 
sentences. Ms. Oh doesn't have Ms. Hecht's variety or fluidness, but 
the actresses balance each other well. The ensemble is rounded out 
by four other performers, all excellent. The magnetically casual Carroll 
and the deliberately self-conscious Rick Holmes, as the respective 
men in Callie's and Sara's lives, are perfect contrasts that further 
define these women, and the play wisely doesn't dismiss the complexity 
or appeal of these earlier romantic relationships. Saundra McClain 
is dead on as both a bourgeois witness to a crime and a Caribbean 
hospital nurse. Saul Stein, in the evening's only thankless part, 
does what he has to as the detective who questions Callie after Sara 
is beaten senseless. These scenes of interrogation are spliced early 
into the continuing narrative of Callie's and Sara's mutual sentimental 
education, and they are initially a brutal contrast to the rest of 
the play. Yet as staged by Ms. Bonney, with the enriching assistance 
of James Vermeulen's lighting and especially David Van Tieghem's sound 
effects and music, the production never loses its sense of the connections 
between the lightness and the darkness, which are weaved seamlessly 
in Ms. Son's script. It is also impossible to imagine a better tour 
guide through this uncertain landscape than Ms. Hecht. Callie is asked 
throughout the play, as it seesaws in time, to make the sort of whiplash 
emotional transitions that could cause nosebleeds. Ms. Hecht never 
strips gears and never seems less than fully committed to each moment. 
Her ability to embrace unlikely extremes matches that of the play, 
and it's what makes ``Stop Kiss'' considerably more than a sitcom 
with a conscience. PRODUCTION NOTES: `STOP KISS' By Diana Son; directed 
by Jo Bonney; sets by Narelle Sissons; costumes by Kaye Voyce; lighting 
by James Vermeulen; sound and original music by David Van Tieghem; 
production dramaturg, Mervin P. Antonio; production stage manager, 
Buzz Cohen; senior director, external affairs, Margaret M. Lioi; associate 
producer, Wiley Hausam; artistic associate, Brian Kulick; associate 
producer, Bonnie Metzgar; general manager, Michael Hurst. Presented 
by the Joseph Papp Public Theater/New York Shakespeare Festival, George 
C. Wolfe, producer; Rosemarie Tichler, artistic producer; Mark Litvin, 
managing director. At the Shiva Theater, in the Joseph Papp Public 
Theater, 425 Lafayette St. With: Jessica Hecht (Callie), Saul Stein 
(Detective Cole), Sandra Oh (Sara), Saundra McClain (Martha and Nurse), 
Kevin Carroll (George) and Rick Holmes (Peter). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>