<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981206.0108 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In recent seasons, the best features of the Rangers and the Toronto 
Maple Leafs have been their classic uniforms and the cachet that comes 
from being among the Original Six franchises of the National Hockey 
League. Both teams missed the playoffs last season, and their weakness 
in two major news media markets may have contributed to a downturn 
in overall interest in hockey. Much has changed this season _ suddenly, 
if only temporarily. On Monday night in Madison Square Garden, the 
meeting of the Leafs and Rangers will pit two of the NHL's hottest 
teams. There will be a buzz about it, and maybe even some snap, crackle 
and pop. The Leafs, having moved from the Western to the Eastern Conference, 
have 32 points, tied with the New Jersey Devils for most in the East. 
The Rangers, with 25, are only a .500 team, but they have won four 
in a row and have gone five games in succession without a defeat. 
The parallels are many. Both teams are coached by veteran hockey men 
who recently took charge after serving as general managers with other 
teams. John Muckler of the Rangers ran the front office in Buffalo; 
Pat Quinn of the Leafs served in Vancouver. Both teams have star centers 
from Europe: Mats Sundin of Sweden for the Leafs; Petr Nedved of the 
Czech Republic for the Rangers. Both have veteran defensemen recently 
traded for each other: Mathieu Schneider from Toronto to New York 
for Aleksandr Karpovtsev. The Leafs also feature several players who 
used to be popular Rangers. They are Tie Domi and Kris King, a couple 
of musclemen, and goalie Glenn Healy, who is being recalled from the 
minor leagues to replace Felix Potvin. Tired of serving as the backup 
to Curtis Joseph, Potvin announced over the weekend that he would 
stay home until he was traded. Domi played a major role in helping 
the Leafs win their seventh game in their last 10 outings Saturday 
night, a 4-3 victory over Montreal. With Toronto trailing by a goal 
late in the game, Domi told Quinn on the bench that he and King should 
be used, along with their linemate Darby Hendrickson. ``Put us out 
there!'' Domi said, before scoring the tying goal that sent the game 
into overtime. The winner was scored by Tomas Kaberle, a rookie from 
the Czech Republic. Noting that the other goals were scored by Daniil 
Markov and Dmitri Yushkevich, Domi said: ``Look who else did the scoring 
_ two Russians and a Czech.'' Domi was speaking of their enthusiasm 
for the ultra-Canadian rivalry with Montreal, but his observation 
also applied to the recent history of the Leafs. At one time, the 
Leafs tried not to employ Russians. Under the new, progressive leadership 
of Ken Dryden, the team's president, and Mike Smith, its associate 
general manager, the Leafs are catching up with the world view of 
the sport in the late 1990s. The Rangers' latest victory, by 2-1 in 
Ottawa on Saturday night, came with the help of goals by Niklas Sundstrom 
and Todd Harvey and 29 saves by goalie Mike Richter. The Rangers managed 
only 17 shots on Damian Rhodes, but they played with a tenacity and 
patient poise that seem to be growing as Muckler's philosophy takes 
root. ``You are getting into a situation where different people are 
doing it on different nights, and that's what it takes,'' Muckler 
said. `` I thought Sundstrom worked hard. I was very pleased. Richter 
had his best game all year long. I thought he was tremendous.'' Richter, 
in the first year of longterm contract, said the Rangers are a well-coached 
team and added: ``I'm enjoying playing. It's such a good time when 
you are winning. Every time out there, you expect good things to happen. 
Guys are buying into the system a lot better than we used to.'' Brian 
Leetch, the captain, said the players feel comfortable with their 
roles on the team, particularly since Nedved's arrival almost two 
weeks ago that has helped to stabilize the forward lines. ``Each line 
provides a little bit of everything,'' Leetch said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>