<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981206.0200 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There were exactly two minutes to play and Jake Plummer had the Arizona 
Cardinals at the doorstep of the New York Giants' end zone Sunday. 
Trailing by 6 points, Jake the Snake held the football and another 
comeback for his budding legend in his hands. He dropped back, scrambled 
left then stopped as Giants defensive tackle Keith Hamilton dove at 
his feet, clawing with one hand at Plummer's ankles. With linemen 
for both teams falling around him and time getting short, Plummer 
glanced toward his favorite receiver, Frank Sanders, and flung a pass 
into the end zone. Giants linebacker Corey Widmer saw the pass, too, 
and more significantly, saw that Sanders was uncovered. Widmer ran 
back and jumped, the football hitting his hands and then the ground. 
In a season with few moments of exhilaration, the Giants had come 
to Arizona and found a day to celebrate. With a 23-19 victory over 
the Cardinals, the Giants brought at least a brief moment of shimmer 
to a shoddy season. ``It felt good to enjoy playing football again,'' 
Widmer said. ``It was emotional and there were mood swings, but when 
I saw that football in the air I knew I had to get there. It's the 
kind of moment you enjoy for the simple things _ get to that spot 
and knock the ball down.'' Now the Giants (5-8) will be coming off 
a victory as they prepare for next weekend's game with the undefeated 
Denver Broncos at Giants Stadium. The Giants, as amazing as it may 
seem, are just one game out of the race for the third wild card playoff 
spot in the National Football Conference, behind the Cardinals (6-7) 
and New Orleans Saints (6-7). ``I'm not worried about the playoffs, 
but I'm glad the Broncos are still undefeated,'' said Giants defensive 
end Michael Strahan who played a spectacular game on Sunday. ``That's 
how we want them.'' Strahan also credited the team's week in Arizona 
preparing to play the Cardinals as part of the reason for the Giants' 
improved play. ``We hung out together, we had roommates, we were a 
team again,'' Strahan said. ``I think it loosened the guys up. We 
remembered how lucky we are to play football.'' It also helped that 
they were playing the Cardinals, who have now lost four successive 
games to the Giants and 9 of the last 11 between the teams. ``I don't 
know why we play better against them,'' said Giants Coach Jim Fassel, 
who is 4-0 against the team where he was once offensive coordinator. 
``I wish I knew so I could work on it against the other teams on our 
schedule.'' The Giants' success on Sunday was largely due to their 
running game. The Giants rushed for 200 yards, with Gary Brown gaining 
124 yards on 25 carries. When the Giants defeated the Cardinals in 
October, they followed the same formula, rushing for 141 yards. Giants 
quarterback Kent Graham completed 8 of 23 passes for 144 yards _ a 
workmanlike performance that Fassel suggested would probably be good 
enough for him to keep Graham in the starting lineup. A tedious, poorly 
played first half _ the Giants would have 13 penalties for 100 yards 
_ surprisingly led to a spirited second half. The momentum of the 
game seemed to shift from the Cardinals to the Giants when the Giants 
scored on their first possession of the third quarter, driving 63 
yards on 11 plays to cut the Cardinals' lead to 17-13 on a 28-yard 
field goal by Brad Daluiso. The Giants then took the lead when they 
used seven consecutive running plays and scored a touchdown on an 
8-yard burst by fullback Charles Way. Ahead by 20-17, the Giants later 
added a 45-yard, fourth-quarter field goal by Daluiso and conceded 
a safety on a punt in the final minute to protect their 6-point lead. 
Late in the third quarter, a goal-line stand by the Giants defense 
set the tone for the rest of the game. Plummer led the Cardinals to 
the Giants' 1-yard line, but a run by Mario Bates lost a yard and 
a busted play cost Arizona 2 more yards when Strahan chased down Plummer. 
Plummer then threw an ill-advised pass into the end zone as he was 
being hit by Giants defensive linemen Chad Bratzke and Christian Peter. 
Giants reserve cornerback Jeremy Lincoln intercepted Plummer's pass. 
Plummer may have had an uneven game, but he was at his best in the 
Cardinals' initial scoring drive in the first quarter, twice scrambling 
for first downs when his receivers were covered. Then, from the Giants' 
20-yard line, Plummer tossed a perfect shovel pass to Adrian Murrell, 
whose dash up the middle of the field split the retreating Giants 
defense for a touchdown. Surprisingly, the Giants came right back 
to tie the score, 7-7. After an incomplete pass on first down, two 
consecutive false starts by Giants linemen and a 1-yard run by Way, 
the Giants called a screen pass to Tiki Barber on third-and-19. Since 
the Cardinals were blitzing, when Barber caught the ball, there was 
an open path and two blockers before him. Guard Ron Stone gave Barber 
one block and wide receiver Chris Calloway sealed the inside pursuit 
and Barber was suddenly in the clear with 60 yards of open field for 
a touchdown. The Cardinals used the screen pass to great success on 
their next possession, thanks to some inadequate tackling by the Giants. 
Plummer hit Larry Centers up the right sideline, and he juked several 
Giants out of his path _ most notably free safety Tito Wooten. The 
play was good for 54 yards. On the next play, Murrell ran up the middle, 
dragging linebacker Marcus Buckley for a few yards and blowing past 
Wooten, who missed another tackle at the goal line. Murrell's 8-yard 
touchdown run gave Arizona a 14-7 lead, a lead they extended with 
a 21-yard Chris Jacke field goal in the second quarter. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>