<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981206.0174 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
By electing James P. Hoffa its president, the Teamsters union showed 
that it was willing to re-embrace the Hoffa name. Now the question 
for the rest of the labor movement is whether it is ready to do so 
as well. While publicly, at least, labor leaders on Sunday hailed 
Hoffa's victory and pledged to work with him, leaders and rank-and-file 
alike remember his father's mob ties and fear that Hoffa will allow 
corruption to flourish again in the Teamsters, setting back the whole 
labor movement. But many experts say that Hoffa's potential upside 
may be as big as his potential downside, noting that if the man with 
the most famous last name in labor proves to be an honest, dynamic 
leader as promised, he will give the movement a much-needed shot in 
the arm. While Hoffa's path remains unclear, one thing is certain: 
overnight he has become one of labor's two most prominent spokesmen, 
sharing the spotlight with _ some would say stealing it from _ the 
AFL-CIO's president, John J. Sweeney. Hoffa captured the presidency 
on Saturday when his main opponent, Tom Leedham, conceded defeat. 
In declaring victory Sunday on the NBC News program ``Meet the Press,'' 
Hoffa said it was time to get past the legacy of his father, James 
Riddle Hoffa, who led the union from 1957 to 1971, and who disappeared 
in 1975 after being released from prison. ``It's 1998,'' Hoffa said. 
``People want to start over.'' Some labor experts say that friction 
could develop between Hoffa and Sweeney and other AFL-CIO leaders 
over some of the old-style union barons who were key to his victory. 
``There might be some uneasiness in the relationship between Hoffa 
and the AFL-CIO leadership,'' said Richard Hurd, a professor of labor 
relations at Cornell University. ``The AFL-CIO's leaders came into 
power talking about the need to change very dramatically from the 
past, and to some people Hoffa represents the old way of doing things.'' 
One issue that may prove divisive is labor's involvement in politics. 
Hoffa has repeatedly criticized his predecessor, Ron Carey, and the 
Sweeney-led AFL-CIO for overwhelmingly backing Democrats. He has said 
that the Teamsters will make sure to support labor-friendly Republicans. 
``We're going to be bipartisan,'' Hoffa said on ``Meet the Press.'' 
``We're going to try to find people on both sides of the aisle who 
support our agenda.'' Some labor experts say this new political tilt 
stems partly from the fact that Hoffa's father was hounded by the 
Democratic Kennedys, while it was a Republican, President Richard 
M. Nixon, who eventually commuted his father's prison sentence after 
he was convicted of fraud and jury tampering. But some of Sweeney's 
allies say that Hoffa's strategy is essentially the same as that of 
the AFL-CIO, which in the past year has moved away from reflexively 
backing only Democrats. ``His approach and the federation's aren't 
all that different,'' said Gerald McEntee, president of the American 
Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees. ``Our union and 
the federation are not captive to the Democratic Party. This year 
we supported more Republicans than ever before.'' Hoffa, a Detroit 
labor lawyer, takes over the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, 
one of the nation's most powerful unions, after it has floundered 
for more than a year, ever since Carey, the previous president, was 
sidelined by a campaign-finance scandal. Hoffa promises to make the 
1.4 million-member union a powerful player again, vowing that it will 
throw its weight around in politics, organizing and contract talks. 
Many union leaders may be uneasy about his last name and the baggage 
it carries, but they say it is important for all of labor that the 
Teamsters are no longer leaderless or rudderless. ``I think he has 
the potential to be a great leader,'' Sweeney said in an interview 
Sunday. ``I think that the most important part of all this is that 
a very strong union that has a long, rich history has finally got 
a leader again.'' A year ago there were bitter tensions between Sweeney 
and Hoffa, but union officials say they have largely patched up their 
differences. The tensions stem from 1996, when Sweeney, Richard Trumka, 
the federation's secretary-treasurer, and some allies heading powerful 
unions not so subtly backed their friend, Carey, over Hoffa in the 
1996 Teamsters race. Carey, who was instrumental in helping Sweeney 
gain the AFL-CIO's helm, won that race but the victory was overturned 
and he was expelled from the Teamsters because three aides had steered 
union money to his campaign. Hoffa said Sunday that it would be a 
``challenge'' to get along with Sweeney. ``You know the AFL-CIO interfered 
in our elections on behalf of Carey,'' he said. ``Nevertheless, we 
are willing to turn the page on that.'' But another possible source 
of new tensions is that, in the view of many Sweeney supporters, Hoffa 
and some of his allies typify old-style, top-down unionism. Sweeney, 
Carey and other Sweeney backers have embraced a bottom-up style that 
emphasizes rank-and-file participation as a way to increase a union's 
power. ``Some of the reaction is, there they go again, the Teamsters 
are doing their old thing,'' said Michael Belzer, a professor of labor 
relations at the University of Michigan and former truck driver who 
used to support Carey. ``For those who support the new bottom-up approach 
that Sweeney is pushing, Hoffa doesn't represent a hopeful sign.'' 
But Hoffa's supporters say his critics misread him, noting that he 
promises to unite the members and involve the rank and file more. 
Probably the biggest concern that many labor leaders have about Hoffa 
_ one they do not want to discuss publicly _ is his ties to some questionable 
figures. One of Hoffa's closest allies is Larry Brennan, the powerful 
head of the Teamsters in Michigan. He had a major hand in running 
a union welfare fund, which federal officials criticized for misappropriating 
$725,000. And a federal monitor criticized Brennan for giving his 
subordinates $30,000 in raises and then having them funnel that money 
into his campaign. Hoffa received some bad news this weekend when 
a court-appointed review board charged Tom O'Donnell, a New York Teamster 
running for vice president on the Hoffa slate, with filing false campaign 
finance reports. The Independent Review Board asserted that O'Donnell, 
who heads a local of movie truck drivers, failed to disclose that 
the Hoffa campaign was paying an aide, Kevin Currie, who was a convicted 
felon. The report stated that to hide Currie's role, the Hoffa treasury 
was paying Currie's wife, who did not work in the campaign. O'Donnell 
could be suspended or expelled as a result of these charges. He could 
not be reached for comment Sunday. Hoffa's critics say he must have 
known about the falsehoods regarding Currie, but a Hoffa spokesman 
denied that he had any knowledge of it. But Hurd said he doubted that 
the allegations of Mr. Hoffa's ties to unsavory characters would stop 
other union leaders from cooperating with him. ``I really don't think 
most labor leaders are going to lose any sleep over Jimmy Hoffa's 
connections with organized crime,'' Professor Hurd said. ``Labor leaders 
have proved amazingly adept at avoiding these kinds of issues so that 
they can work together when they want.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>