<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981206.0109 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Two Supreme Court Justices joined 120 other judges, bar leaders, and 
legal scholars here this weekend to consider ways to bolster public 
support for judicial independence at a time when judges are coming 
under frequent attack for their rulings, their budgets, and perhaps 
most fundamentally, their power. ``If you believe in judicial independence, 
you believe in freedom,'' Justice Anthony M. Kennedy told an American 
Bar Association symposium. He added: ``The bar must support the judiciary 
in its cause when it is under attack. Judges do not have political 
clout. They need the bar.'' This conference, co-sponsored by the University 
of Pennsylvania School of Law, was the first of three the bar association 
will have on the subject over the next five months. The ongoing project 
will include a national survey of public attitudes toward the judicial 
system, to establish a baseline to measure the impact of those proposals 
that are put into effect as the result of the project. In launching 
the program here, Philip S. Anderson, a Little Rock, Ark., lawyer 
who is the bar association's current president, cast a wide net. Thirty 
state court chief justices attended or sent other judges or representatives 
of their court systems. While not everyone at the invitation-only 
conference agreed on the dimensions of the problem, there was rueful 
assent to the observation of one of the keynote speakers, Professor 
Steven Lubet of the Northwestern University School of Law, that ``everyone 
loves the concept of an independent judiciary, but only about half 
of us really like independent judges, especially when we disagree 
with them.'' There was also widespread agreement with a definition 
offered by Justice Adolpho A. Birch Jr., a member and former chief 
justice of the Supreme Court of Tennessee. ``Judicial independence 
is the judge's right to do the right thing or, believing it to be 
the right thing, to do the wrong thing,'' he said. The stars of the 
gathering were undoubtedly Kennedy and Justice Stephen G. Breyer. 
Their decision to travel here, during a busy period for the court, 
both underscored and validated the concerns of the other judges, particularly 
those who ``are only an election cycle, at most, away from unemployment,'' 
as Judge Wendell L. Griffen of the Arkansas Court of Appeals described 
the vulnerability felt by state judges who must face the voters either 
for election or for retention in office. Most state judgeships are 
filled by election, and there was considerable discussion about the 
threats to the image of an independent judiciary posed by negative 
campaigns and by the judicial candidates' need to raise money. One 
judge who described her own experience for the group was Kate Ford 
Elliott of the Pennsylvania Superior Court, who lost a race for the 
state supreme court last year after her opponent ran a commercial 
in the last four days of the campaign accusing her of having ``let 
criminals loose on technicalities.'' Judge Elliott remained on the 
Superior Court, an intermediate appellate court. ``I don't decide 
Microsoft versus Netscape,'' she said during a panel discussion of 
judicial elections. ``I decide whether Joe Smith gets to have his 
child for the weekend'' and similar cases ``very important for people's 
lives.'' ``We're allowed to do that because people trust us,'' she 
continued, asking how a judge ``can you ever maintain that covenant 
of trust'' after enduring a reputation-damaging political campaign. 
Justice Harold F. See of the Alabama Supreme Court held the group 
spellbound with a videotape of the attack ads his opponent ran against 
him in a 1996 race. Over the image of a skunk nosing through the underbrush, 
the narration called See ``a slick Chicago lawyer'' who never passed 
the Alabama bar exam. In fact, he had taught for 20 years at the University 
of Alabama Law School and was admitted to the Alabama bar without 
having to take the exam. He spent $2.4 million and won the election. 
Because of such experiences, state judges rarely express much sympathy 
for federal judges, protected as they are by life tenure. Yet several 
of the scholars at the conference observed that life tenure, a rare 
arrangement among the world's judicial systems, was itself a source 
of political vulnerability for judges who are easily portrayed as 
arrogant in their insularity and unaccountability. In fact, if there 
was one incident that galvanized the current concern over judicial 
independence, it was the bipartisan attack, early in the 1996 election 
year, on a federal district judge in New York, Harold Baer Jr. In 
a decision questioning the credibility of New York City police offices, 
Baer had ruled that the police lacked an adequate basis to pull over 
and search a car in Washington Heights and that the 80 pounds of cocaine 
and heroin they found could not be used as evidence. After Republicans 
including Sen. Bob Dole denounced Baer, a recent Clinton appointee, 
President Clinton's spokesman suggested the President might seek the 
judge's resignation. Within a few weeks, Baer reconsidered the case 
and reversed his own ruling. That episode, as well as subsequent calls 
by several Republicans in Congress for the impeachment of federal 
judges on the basis of their rulings, led a number of groups, including 
the American Judicature Society and the Century Foundation, formerly 
the Twentieth Century Fund, to organize projects on judicial independence. 
The Century Foundation's bipartisan group, Citizens for Independent 
Courts, plans to issue a report in June on several related issues, 
including how to define the line between legitimate criticism and 
intimidation of judges. In brief remarks to the group here, Breyer 
stressed his view that judicial independence exists not for the benefit 
of judges, but of the people. He said that around the world, a realization 
was growing ``that people's liberty and their prosperity depends in 
part on their judicial institutions'' and that ``strong judicial institutions 
depend on judicial independence.'' ``Judicial independence is in part 
a state of mind,'' he said, `'a matter of expectation, habit and belief 
among not just judges, lawyers, and legislators, but millions and 
millions of people.'' However, he said, ``I don't think judges can 
help'' in their own cause because judges' views are easily dismissed 
as ``institutional self interest.'' ``It becomes up to others to do 
the explaining,'' he told the bar leaders and law professors, adding: 
``That's why you're here.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>