<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981206.0143 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
David Levy, the former foreign minister, announced Sunday night that 
he would not rejoin the Israeli Cabinet, potentially foiling Prime 
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's latest effort to shore up his fragile 
coalition. It was unclear whether Levy's announcement was simply the 
latest tactic in negotiations that began almost two weeks ago, when 
Netanyahu offered to give Levy a leading role if he would bring his 
five-member Gesher parliamentary group back into the prime minister's 
camp. If it is the final word, however, it could have devastating 
implications for Netanyahu, who has been scrambling to hold together 
his right-wing coalition since he signed a land-for-security accord 
with the Palestinians in October. The Labor Party leader, Ehud Barak, 
indicated Sunday that if the deal with Levy fell through, Labor might 
call for a vote on Monday to dissolve the parliament and to set a 
date for early elections _ after the October plan is carried out. 
With Levy and his Gesher party, such a proposal would have a majority, 
Labor officials said. This raises the possibility of a crisis for 
Netanyahu's governing coalition just six days before a visit by President 
Clinton to Israel, the West Bank and Gaza. In a separate but related 
issue, Israeli radio and television reported Sunday night that a majority 
of Cabinet ministers had agreed that Clinton should be pressed to 
postpone his visit, which many see as an endorsement of Palestinian 
sovereignty. The ministers' motivation was not the Levy affair, but 
renewed tensions between the Israelis and the Palestinians. Israeli 
said again last week that it would freeze steps to carry out the October 
accord unless the Palestinians met certain demands, including the 
renunciation of plans to announce a state next May. ``President Clinton 
himself should reconsider the timing of his visit,'' said Yehoshua 
Matza, the minister of health. The prime minister's office downplayed 
Levy's announcement, signaling that negotiations to bring him back 
into the government would continue. ``The prime minister believes 
that there is a basis for returning Levy and the Gesher faction to 
the Likud, and therefore he continues in his efforts to do so,'' said 
Aviv Bushinsky, Netanyahu's media adviser. ``The prime minister believes 
that Levy could contribute to the government from his experience and 
help it especially during this period.'' In a sign that political 
survival is more important than ideology, Netanyahu, an avowed proponent 
of fiscal restraint, had been prepared to give Levy, a champion of 
social spending, the plum job of finance minister. The prime minister 
originally offered Levy either the Finance Ministry or the National 
Iinfrastructures Ministry, and it appeared at first that Levy would 
accept the latter. But there followed some public questioning of Levy's 
motives and abilities _ including a blistering skit on the influential 
weekly satire program, ``Hartzufim,'' in which Levy was portrayed 
as a prostitute. Last week, Levy, a professed advocate for the working 
class, called a news conference to announce he had chosen the Finance 
Ministry. Prices on the Tel Aviv Stock Exchange immediately dipped, 
and they rallied Sunday when it appeared that the Levy deal would 
fall through. Yaakov Neeman, the current finance minister, is a professional 
appointee who has kept a tight lid on the kind of social spending 
that Levy advocates. He said last week that he would step down if 
it would help save the government from collapse. In reaching out to 
Levy, Netanayhu seemed to be marshaling his resources to clear a serious 
political hurdle _ the always contentious budget vote, which he keeps 
delaying. Levy, a white-haired political veteran, resigned as foreign 
minister after the last budget was passed in January. Denouncing the 
Netanyahu administration as aimless, he criticized the lack of social 
spending and the stalemate in the peace negotiations. Political associates 
said Levy considered returning because he felt politically sidelined 
and saw no future for his small party. Gesher broke away from Likud 
in 1992 to concentrate on social issues. Levy, who was born in Morocco, 
courted Sephardic Jews from there and other Arab countries but they 
were instead drawn to Shas, the burgeoning third party of Israel. 
Levy was said to have felt particularly defeated after the municipal 
elections a month ago, when his son lost the mayoral election in the 
town where Levy began his political career. When Netanyahu invited 
him back to the Cabinet, it was seen as a preparatory step for a unity 
government with the opposition. But negotiations over the merger of 
Gesher into Likud stumbled when some Likud leaders balked. And after 
it was reported that Levy was making budget demands that Netanyahu 
felt could not be accommodated, rumors flew that the prime minister 
was looking for a way to rescind his invitation. ``I have reached 
the inevitable conclusion that the prime minister's offer was a sham,'' 
Levy said Sunday night, referring to the rumors. ``I will not rejoin 
this government.'' Even his associates, however, would not pronounce 
this the end of the idea. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>