<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981206.0148 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Just weeks after it went to the brink of military action against Iraq, 
the United States now appears willing to go along with a consensus 
on the U.N. Security Council and grant a comprehensive review of the 
sanctions against Saddam Hussein even if he has not cooperated fully 
with arms inspectors, diplomats say. For months Washington has insisted 
that Iraq must show full cooperation with arms inspections before 
Baghdad can have any hope of such a review. But now, while Iraq is 
still far from total compliance, both the Iraqis and their strongest 
critics have apparently decided that there is more to gain in staging 
a review than in igniting a new confrontation. Iraq has doggedly pursued 
the idea of a review in hopes that it will accelerate the lifting 
of a crippling oil embargo. On Sunday the official Iraqi press repeated 
the demand that the review begin soon, since inspectors have been 
back at work on routine tasks in Iraq for more than two weeks. They 
had been idled for months by Iraqi noncooperation. On the other side, 
the United States and Britain believe that a review will prove yet 
again that Iraq still has much to answer for about its banned weapons 
programs. Such an outcome would strengthen the U.S. policy of keeping 
sanctions in place indefinitely. The decision to authorize the review 
could come as early as next week, when Richard Butler, the executive 
chairman of the U.N. Special Commission, which has been charged with 
disarming Iraq, reports to the council about recent inspections. Diplomats 
say that the review would then probably begin in January, although 
details have yet to be decided. The review would be the first of its 
kind and be designed to look at all relevant resolutions and requirements 
set on Iraq since its invasion of Kuwait in 1990. Previous reviews 
were narrowly focused to assess Iraqi compliance at six-month intervals. 
It is also likely to be used to spell out exactly what more the Iraqis 
must do before sanctions can be lifted. The Iraqis are hoping that 
once the Security Council takes a broad view it will see in effect 
that Iraq has met a majority of requirements, no longer poses a threat 
and can be dealt with through far less intrusive, long-term monitoring 
regime. The U.S. view, diplomats say, is that the review will backfire 
on the Iraqis. If the Iraqis want a ``comprehensive'' review, they 
note, that is exactly what they may get. Such a review would provide 
an opportunity to hold Baghdad accountable for a broad range of transgressions 
since the gulf war, including the failure to pay compensation to Kuwait 
or to return stolen Kuwaiti property, and a deplorable human rights 
record. These grievances are in addition to the charge of harboring 
programs to make weapons of mass destruction. The Iraqis, on the other 
hand, will focus on a narrow definition of compliance aimed specifically 
at the lifting of the oil embargo. The shift is taking place despite 
Iraq's refusal to hand over documents demanded by Butler's commission. 
The International Atomic Energy Agency, which monitors Iraqi nuclear 
programs, has also been denied documents, independent arms control 
experts say. But one Western diplomat noted last week, ``It's pretty 
clear that nobody wants to go to war over documents.'' (MORE) nn On 
Friday, Russia's envoy, Sergei Lavrov, added that he thought a number 
of Security Council members had serious questions about the importance, 
or even the existence, of some of the documents being sought. Envoys 
from a cross-section of council members say that no nation wants a 
conflict during the year-end holidays and the Muslim holy month of 
Ramadan. Neither does anyone want to conduct the review, which is 
expected to be a complicated survey of Iraq's relations with the United 
Nations, during the same period. The Iraqis are also prepared to accept 
a January timetable, Lavrov said, because despite their calls for 
an immediate review, the Iraqis want the Security Council's full attention 
and many diplomats take time off during the holidays. Iraq's deputy 
prime minister, Tariq Aziz, arrived in Moscow on Sunday for talks 
with Russian officials, two days after Butler visited Moscow at Russia's 
request. Russia is expected to take the lead in pressing Iraq's case 
at the United Nations. Since Saddam allowed the inspectors to return 
last month, they have expanded their activities in Iraq. But the inspectors 
have so far avoided provoking a showdown over any one of a number 
of sites the Iraqis consider sensitive. No Security Council member 
is pressing for a confrontation, prompting Scott Ritter, the U.S. 
concealment expert who resigned from the Special Commission in August, 
to write in an article in the current issue of The New Republic that 
the resumed inspections are a ``sham.'' In this atmosphere, threats 
from the United States and Britain, countries that went to the brink 
of war to force Saddam to back down in mid-November, have all but 
ended, although officials in both countries continue to warn Iraq 
that an attack can never be ruled out. U.N. Secretary-General Kofi 
Annan has made the same point in recent days during a tour of Arab 
nations. The Iraqis have apparently decided to postpone accounting 
for disputed documents until a review takes place, when they can argue 
with the support of Russia, France, China and several countries that 
hold rotating council seats that the documents are unimportant or 
irrelevant. The Americans and British, on the other hand, say that 
they have recent history on their side. For more than a year, Iraq 
has been demanding reviews of its biological, chemical and missile 
programs. On every occasion, international experts, including Russian, 
Chinese and French scientists, have refused to accept Iraqi explanations 
for missing material. If a comprehensive review ends with similar 
results, the Americans and British will be in a stronger position 
to keep sanctions in place without resorting to military action, at 
least in the short term. Iraq hopes to see a review end with the lifting 
of the oil embargo imposed after the August 1990 invasion of Kuwait. 
Other sanctions like bans on air travel and the freezing of assets 
could be lifted later as other requirements are met. Security Council 
resolutions say, however, that all prohibited weapons systems must 
be adequately accounted for before the oil embargo is removed. At 
the moment, even if nuclear, chemical and missile systems are cleared 
of major suspicions, the Iraqi biological weapons program poses huge 
problems, and these are not likely to disappear in the next few weeks. 
While American and British statements on Iraq have been subdued lately, 
the two governments are working hard at the same time to undermine 
Saddam's confidence if not his regime by pressing Iraqi exile groups 
to step up and coordinate their activities against Baghdad, leaders 
of these groups say. The United States, exiles said in interviews 
this week, is also broadening its appeal to Saddam's opponents by 
trying to bring Shiite Muslim opponents who operate in southern Iraq 
from bases in Iran into a concerted effort to undermine the Baghdad 
government, along with Kurdish groups in northern Iraq. Some exiles 
are skeptical of this plan, saying that Iran is not ready to give 
the Iraqis based there the go-ahead to join a movement that will be 
assumed to have the support of the United States. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>