<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981206.0153 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Clinton administration is urging its European allies to embark 
on a new initiative to combat weapons of mass destruction, as an example 
of the kinds of new threats a modernized, post-Soviet NATO must deal 
with in the next century, senior American and NATO-country officials 
say. In a meeting of the North Atlantic Council in Brussels on Tuesday 
and Wednesday, called to set the agenda for the 50th anniversary NATO 
summit meeting to convene here in April, the United States will propose 
a new NATO Center for Weapons of Mass Destruction, commonly referred 
to as ``WMD.'' The center would be a clearinghouse for increased intelligence-sharing 
by Washington intended to produce a more unified assessment of the 
threats posed both by states, like Iran or Iraq, and ``non-state actors,'' 
like terrorist groups of the kind led by Osama bin Laden. Washington 
believes that with access to more sophisticated intelligence, NATO 
countries will agree more on the dangers posed by the post-Cold War 
world, and be more prepared to collaborate in policing them. The Americans 
are also pushing for greater collaboration by the alliance to deter 
weapons of mass destruction and to defend allied populations and territory 
against them. Proposals include vaccines, advanced protective outfits 
for the military, detection equipment and other cooperative research 
and development. This would alleviate the need for each country of 
the alliance to bear the cost of covering every contingency on its 
own. ``This is a microcosm for the new NATO, and for its larger debates 
and dilemmas,'' a senior American official said. ``We're trying to 
ensure that NATO makes it effectively and relevantly into the new 
era.'' But the debate over weapons of mass destruction is also a microcosm 
for a more controversial discussion over how far NATO should move 
beyond its traditional role _ the collective defense of its members' 
territories _ to what Secretary of State Madeleine Albright, in a 
memorandum to American ambassadors, calls ``the broader concept of 
the defense of our common interests,'' both in Europe and beyond. 
Questions of NATO's mandate and reach are particularly sensitive after 
the Soviet collapse and while Europe pushes for a stronger political 
identity, with some muscle to match. Though the United States and 
its overwhelmingly superior abilities for military logistics and intelligence 
are considered mandatory for collective NATO action in Europe, as 
has been seen in Bosnia, some Europeans also fear being made a junior 
partner to American strategic interests elsewhere, like the Middle 
East. American and British officials insist such fears are overblown, 
and they appear to have allayed French and German concerns about a 
``globalized NATO.'' The Americans and the British argue that no one 
is trying to redefine Article 5 of the NATO charter, which mandates 
collective defense against attack, but to examine new ways that Article 
5 could be triggered. While a Russian tank invasion is no longer likely, 
a missile attack against Rome with a biological warhead could qualify 
as an Article 5 attack. ``Some don't like the idea because it might 
mean NATO using force to take out weapons or facilities in Iraq,'' 
said a senior American official, referring to fears that NATO would 
make pre-emptive strikes outside Europe. ``But we're not talking about 
that, but lower-key things, like heightening awareness and how NATO 
operates if there is an attack.'' The alliance's current ``strategic 
concept,'' which defines its military and political mission, was last 
revised in 1991, before the Soviet Union collapsed, and still speaks 
of ``strategic balance in Europe.'' All of NATO's 16 members _ soon 
to be 19 with the addition of Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic 
_ agree that the concept needs updating. President Clinton wants to 
introduce the new doctrine _ together with a simpler statement of 
NATO's purpose designed for voters instead of generals _ at the April 
summit meeting at which he will be host. ``We're not in the game of 
strategic balance anymore, but of collective defense and the extension 
of security beyond our borders,'' said a senior diplomat for a NATO 
country. That includes NATO's enlargement to the east, its partnerships 
with non-members and peacekeeping operations like in Bosnia and threats 
of bombing in Kosovo, the diplomat said. But it does not mean NATO 
tramping into the Middle East in pursuit of biological weapons that 
might someday be used, he said, as the French originally feared. ``Early 
American ideas that NATO might globalize itself have faded,'' the 
diplomat said. ``We're talking of retaining NATO as an effective European 
instrument.'' American officials argue that NATO is, in any event, 
an alliance based on consensus. ``If member countries don't want NATO 
to do something, then NATO won't do it,'' an official said. Individual 
NATO countries are already free to join _ as some did _ ad hoc alliances 
such as that massed against Iraq for the Persian Gulf War in 1991, 
which operated under a U.N. Security Council mandate. Even senior 
French diplomats say they no longer believe that Washington is pushing 
NATO to be the instrument of ``a new Holy Roman Empire,'' as one put 
it. The current French concern, as the April summit meeting approaches, 
is the so-called ``mandate question,'' a desire to insure that NATO 
does not define itself in the new strategic concept as able to act 
without reference to the U.N. Security Council, where five countries, 
including France, hold veto power. While the alliance agreed to threaten 
to bomb Serb positions to halt the violence in Kosovo, it did so without 
a Security Council resolution. The legal basis in international law 
was ``humanitarian intervention'' to prevent the deaths of thousands 
of ethnic Albanians huddling homeless in the mountains. But while 
the American envoy Richard Holbrooke called Kosovo a precedent, German 
and French officials say it was merely a special case. The Americans 
for now are happy to agree and take the pragmatic, case-by-case approach. 
Washington is eager that the mandate debate not limit NATO's flexibility 
and render any military action subject to a Chinese or Russian veto 
in the Security Council. That would not only be self-defeating, an 
administration official said, but would ``drive Congress around the 
bend.'' But most European countries, as well as Canada, prefer NATO 
to act, when not specifically in self-defense, under a Security Council 
resolution. Between now and April, officials say, there will be some 
language agreed upon that could refer simply to NATO acting on ``a 
firm legal basis,'' or, as likely, there will be no language on the 
issue at all. Even the American initiative on weapons of mass destruction 
is not without controversy. While few European officials question 
the importance of the issue in the next century or object to more 
intelligence-sharing from Washington, they do have a set of concerns. 
They do not want this WMD initiative to overshadow the April summit 
meeting; they don't want the Americans to act as if European countries 
have done nothing to protect themselves and their population; they 
don't want the Americans to scare the European public, and they want 
NATO initiatives to enhance, not duplicate or supersede, existing 
institutions dealing with such weapons. These institutions, like the 
International Atomic Energy Agency or the Nuclear Suppliers Group, 
concentrate on export controls of dangerous materials. Most European 
countries prefer to concentrate on perfecting and tightening such 
controls, and not militarizing the fight against proliferation, a 
European official said. That is why recent comments by Defense Secretary 
William Cohen, rejecting German and Canadian calls for NATO to rule 
out the first-use of nuclear weapons, caused a small tempest. Even 
with the Soviet threat gone, he said, such weapons could deter the 
use of biological and chemical weapons by those who might attack NATO. 
But the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons against non-nuclear 
states who have signed the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty would violate 
that treaty, said Joseph Cirincione of the Carnegie Endowment. ``It's 
another reason for Europeans to worry about Washington trying to drag 
NATO into its disputes in North Africa or the Middle East,'' Cirincione 
said. ``After all, where would these weapons be used? It's very difficult 
to identify a use of nuclear weapons today in the defense of NATO 
itself.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>