<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981206.0085 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Last week, the first lady came to town to light the five and a half 
miles of lights stapled to the branches of the Rockefeller Center 
Christmas tree, and while she was in Manhattan she also electrified 
a clutch of the town's media executives. It was a most worthwhile 
schmooze for all involved. During a week when she appeared on the 
cover of Vogue's December issue _ the first time a first lady has 
done so _ Hillary Rodham Clinton swept through the media world, having 
lunch with editors from Time, Teen People and People magazine on Tuesday, 
greeting a table of Vogue editors at breakfast on Wednesday, and delivering 
a 15-minute oration in praise of Harvey Weinstein and his media company, 
Miramax Films, on Thursday. You will be reading more about Mrs. Clinton 
very soon: Newsweek and Time magazines are working on profiles of 
the first lady for the end of the year, and she is under consideration 
by Time to be its Person of the Year, although that will depend on 
how the impeachment proceedings of Bill Clinton are resolved. (If 
he is impeached, she will not be considered; if he is not, she will 
be.) Mrs. Clinton's visit demonstrated the fact that magazine editors 
need famous faces to generate a little heat and light for their publications. 
They can feed off the prestige of the first lady while she uses them 
as a vehicle to support her favorite causes. And it also showed that 
at least in the case of Weinstein, a generous campaign contributor, 
the principle of the favor bank is alive and well in the world of 
media, as it is in the political arena. She called him ``my friend 
Harvey.'' And he said she was ``the first lady of all our hearts.'' 
(Gwyneth Paltrow, however, was the first lady of Miramax, Weinstein 
said.) Carl Sferrazza Anthony, a biographer of first ladies, said 
Mrs. Clinton had only recently begun to deal with the media in a way 
that was both shrewd and yet comfortable for her. For example, the 
Vogue cover article _ something coveted but never attained by Nancy 
Reagan _ would not have been possible until this year. ``As she has 
become more comfortable with the reality that she has been made into 
a symbol upon which everyone can write all of their frustrations and 
aspirations, and she has accepted this creation of her as a symbol, 
she has become more comfortable with the media,'' Anthony said. ``And 
thus more comfortable with the lengthier and more in-depth kind of 
story that a magazine would do.'' By sitting for the cover of Vogue, 
Mrs. Clinton generated a storm of international press so thick that 
the Vogue publicity department sent it out in a binder. Anna Wintour, 
editor in chief Vogue, said the magazine sold 900,000 newsstand copies 
of the October issue, which featured Oprah Winfrey as its gamine cover 
model; Ms. Wintour expects that Mrs. Clinton's cover will exceed the 
Winfrey cover in newsstand sales. ``The press hit way before the issue 
was out, and now we can only keep our fingers crossed,'' Ms. Wintour 
said. And Vogue, a Conde Nast publication, validated Mrs. Clinton 
in a way that no other venue could: The article, written by the historian 
Ann Douglas, scarcely touches on the Monica Lewinsky debacle, choosing 
as its frame Mrs. Clinton's devotion to historic preservation. Mrs. 
Clinton gets to appear on the cover of a fashion magazine in a velvet 
dress, looking self-assured and _ perhaps most important _ well-coiffed. 
``People have seen it as a vindication for her, that being on the 
cover of Vogue is beyond power and politics,'' Ms. Wintour said. ``It 
proves in a way that she is a woman of stature and an icon to American 
women.'' Score: Vogue, one. Mrs. Clinton, one. On Tuesday, Mrs. Clinton 
spoke at a lunch given by Ann Moore, president of the People division 
of Time Warner, and Patricia Fili-Krushel, president of the ABC Television 
Network. Mrs. Clinton sparked waves of murmurs as she walked into 
the room with her Vogue makeover: She wore a slate-gray suit, a cluster 
of glittering red beads twisted around her neck, and her hair was 
smooth and straight, in the same sleek, I-will-survive hairstyle that 
Princess Diana adopted in the pages of Harper's Bazaar after her divorce 
from Prince Charles. The lunch was ostensibly to celebrate Mrs. Clinton's 
work with the National Campaign to Prevent Teen Pregnancy, but Mrs. 
Clinton _ standing at a podium emblazoned with the bright blue Teen 
People logo before a bank of news camera crews _ praised Teen People 
``and its 10 million readers'' for the magazine's articles on teen-age 
celibacy. Mrs. Clinton, in turn, got to gather a roomful of influential 
people in broadcast news (like Lesley Stahl, Barbara Walters and the 
entire cast of ABC's midmorning talk show for women, ``The View'') 
and print (Time's managing editor, Walter Isaacson, and editors from 
every major Time Inc. magazine and Hearst Magazines' Ladies Home Journal) 
and ask them to send the message of teen-age celibacy to readers. 
She also urged Ms. Fili-Krushel to infuse the plots of ABC network 
shows with the same message. After lunch, everyone was given a bag 
with a coffee mug, a reprinted article about teen-age pregnancy from 
Teen People wrapped in a shot of a dreamily gazing Leonardo DiCaprio, 
and a copy of Mrs. Clinton's book ``It Takes a Village.'' Score: Teen 
People, one. Mrs. Clinton, one. On Thursday evening, Mrs. Clinton 
walked into the Ziegfeld theater for the premiere of the Miramax film 
``Shakespeare in Love'' on the arm of Weinstein, who is co-chairman 
of Miramax with his brother, Bob, and is a generous contributor to 
the Democratic Party and the Clinton Legal Expense Trust. Mrs. Clinton 
further earned the devotion of Weinstein. As the first lady walked 
to the stage, a thousand folding movie theater seats simultaneously 
flipped up for an ovation, with a noise that sounded like a flock 
of large sea birds taking off. She delivered a speech praising the 
20-year history of Miramax, and spoke about how much she and the president 
enjoy watching Miramax movies in the White House screening room. ``Harvey 
and Bob have really given us a lot of pleasure,'' she said. ``They've 
raised the bar for excellence.'' She spoke about the ``buzz'' behind 
Miramax movies and media ventures, and said the Miramax company ``has 
done a great service.'' Weinstein blushed like a newlywed. Score: 
Mrs. Clinton, one. Miramax, one. Anthony, the biographer, said Mrs. 
Clinton had learned to be at ease with the press over the last six 
years. When the couple first arrived at the White House, he said it 
was not a personal priority for her to get attention from the magazine 
world. ``Now, it's a matter of maybe acquiescing more, in rounding 
out the picture of being first lady,'' he said. ``I think she's realized 
that there is a halfway point.'' He added, ``Maybe the willingness 
to do a Vogue article is not so much a compromise to some traditional 
role of first lady, but a way of complying with the traditional expectations, 
yet still managing to do it in her own way.'' Ms. Douglas, the author 
of the Vogue profile, said she was surprised by the article's eventual 
status as the cover piece. Ms. Wintour had not initially intended 
the article that way, and by late summer, Ms. Douglas had assumed 
that Vogue would cancel the piece. ``When the scandal heated up, I 
assumed it was dropped,'' Ms. Douglas said. Actually, the opposite 
happened. Ms. Wintour thought the Lewinsky affair made the article 
more important. Ms. Douglas pointed out that the cover was especially 
successful in light of the Democratic Party's gains in the November 
elections . ``Just think how she would have looked on the cover of 
Vogue if the Democrats had lost,'' Ms. Douglas said. ``My original 
title for the piece was `The Triumph of Hillary Clinton.' And they 
didn't go with that. But putting her on the cover said it anyway.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>