<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981206.0089 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Bill Gates, chairman of Microsoft Corp., put the matter succinctly 
while speaking in New York last week. The next battleground for the 
personal computer industry, he said, is industrial-strength corporate 
computing _ the lucrative province of hardware and software suppliers 
like IBM, Sun Microsystems and Oracle. The outcome of that battle, 
according to Gates, is not much in doubt. He spoke of the supremacy 
of the ``PC model'' _ hardware and software as separate businesses 
(Microsoft, of course, dominates the software side). ``The PC model 
will take over the rest of the industry,'' he declared. The personal 
computer forces, led by Microsoft, are already moving up the computing 
food chain from their desktop stronghold. In the last couple of years, 
Microsoft's hub software for feeding information to and from many 
users at once _ called Windows NT Server _ has captured the market 
for corporate networks that span a few hundred desktop computers. 
Yet Microsoft has not really cracked the sizable market for heavy-duty 
computing chores, like securities trading or travel reservations systems, 
in which workers typically use powerful work stations running Unix 
software or terminals connected to mainframe computers. The standards 
of performance, availability and reliability for these systems, which 
must handle millions or billions of transactions a day, have been 
regarded as beyond Microsoft's reach. That assumption, however, may 
be challenged by an announcement planned for Monday that the Nasdaq 
stock market intends to move one of its key systems from a mainframe 
onto a cluster of powerful PC server computers, running Windows NT. 
The system monitors trading and feeds the data to Nasdaq's in-house 
regulators and, if necessary, to the Securities and Exchange Commission. 
It tracks trades as they occur and crunches the data to spot trades 
that appear to be errors or suspicious _ and must recognize them within 
90 seconds. Nasdaq has decided to move its market-monitoring system 
off its Tandem Computers mainframe mainly because its proprietary 
software tended to make the system inflexible, said Gregor Bailar, 
chief information officer of the National Association of Securities 
Dealers Inc. To analyze fast-moving markets and the proliferation 
of new securities, he explained, Nasdaq felt it needed a more open 
technology in which many third-party developers were making software 
tools for the securities industry. Nasdaq took bids from both Unix 
and Windows NT suppliers, and Bailar said he had some qualms whether 
Windows NT would be up to the task. ``This is a mission-critical system 
for us, and I wanted to be convinced,'' Bailar said. The leading Windows 
NT proposal was put through 30 different benchmarking tests, including 
handling up to 4 billion daily transactions. ``I was a bit surprised 
by NT's performance,'' Bailar said. David Osborne, chief technology 
officer for Micro Modeling Associates, the lead consultant on the 
project, predicts that Nasdaq's move will attract a lot of attention 
on Wall Street. Many Wall Street firms use Windows NT as a desktop 
operating system, said Osborne, whose consultancy works for many investment 
banks. ``But the major Wall Street firms have been watching closely 
to see if Windows NT is really going to work on the server side for 
big, high-transaction systems,'' he said. ``The Nasdaq project is 
a bellwether for NT.'' Still, industry analysts note that winning 
a single showcase project, like the one at Nasdaq, scarcely means 
that the markets for large Unix systems and mainframes are facing 
an imminent threat of Windows NT. ``This is a notable milestone for 
NT, but it has a long way to go before it is widely deployed across 
the top tier of corporate computing uses,'' observed Dwight Davis, 
an analyst for Summit Strategies, a research firm. Even Microsoft, 
which has been criticized in the industry for making inflated claims 
about Windows NT, which was introduced in 1993, is speaking carefully 
these days. ``We're not saying there isn't a lot more work to be done 
at the high end, but we've come a long way,'' said Edmund Muth, marketing 
manager for the Microsoft group responsible for so-called enterprise, 
or corporatewide, customer networks. ``In that context, the Nasdaq 
project is directional.'' In the server business, Microsoft is pursuing 
its tried-and-true formula of focusing first on the high-volume, less-costly 
end of the market as its launching pad. From there, it gathers a primary 
community of users, software developers, resellers and consultants 
_ and moves up toward higher tiers of the corporate computing market. 
Last year for the first time, for example, computer systems running 
Windows NT Server software passed Unix server systems in terms of 
units sold worldwide, according to International Data Corp., a market 
research firm. In the first half of this year, IDC reported that sales 
of server machines running Windows NT reached 472,505, compared with 
258,320 for all Unix suppliers. When measured by revenue, however, 
the Unix leadership in heavy-duty corporate computing remains intact. 
In the first half of 1998, sales of Unix servers were $11.6 billion, 
compared with $3.3 billion for server machines running Windows NT. 
At the upper end of corporate computing, a supplier's services and 
skills often matter as much or more than the cost of hardware and 
software. And increased competition has brought sharp declines in 
the price of large Unix systems and mainframes. One result is that 
even the mainframe, once seen as a technological dinosaur and a corporate 
albatross for IBM, has made a comeback. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>