<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981206.0224 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial for Monday, Dec. 7: Though 
NATO has played a useful role in suppressing violence in the Balkans 
in recent years, it remains a military alliance without a clear purpose 
in the wake of the Cold War. Washington's answer to this identity 
crisis has been mischievous. First it pushed through the admission 
of three new members from Central Europe without adequately weighing 
potential consequences. Now it is pressing ideas that could ultimately 
lead to transforming the alliance into a global strike force against 
threats to American and European interests. Such a role would go far 
beyond any sensible mandate. If Washington's proposals are strictly 
limited to strengthening defenses within Europe against biological 
and chemical weapons and international terrorism, they are fine. But 
the Clinton administration and other NATO governments must guard against 
policies that would have the alliance reach out anywhere in the world. 
If military intervention is required outside Europe, it should be 
conducted by coalitions of willing nations, including those in the 
region itself. Washington would do better to encourage NATO's European 
members to assume more of the burdens of maintaining European security 
and stability. Western Europe's governments are only now, tentatively, 
starting to take limited responsibility for security issues in Europe, 
like the Balkans. Their political fortitude is uncertain, their defense 
budgets tightly constrained and their military forces relatively small. 
NATO's new central European members, Poland, Hungary and the Czech 
Republic, are even less suited for a global role. NATO should be worrying 
primarily about its role in Europe, which requires much clarification. 
NATO operations need to be better coordinated with European civilian 
institutions, like the European Union and the Organization for Security 
and Cooperation in Europe. Recent experience in the Balkans has shown 
that in the aftermath of civil war, some tasks are better done by 
paramilitary police, humanitarian agencies and diplomats than by heavily 
armed NATO troops. Long-running debates must be resolved about what 
kinds of crises can best be handled by European NATO members and which 
require American involvement. Increased command responsibility may 
have to be given to European generals and admirals. These issues have 
caused friction between France and the United States. But, with Britain 
now moving closer to continental positions and Germany's new government 
making clear it wants to re-examine traditional NATO practices, the 
alliance's political dynamic is changing. NATO has always declared 
itself free to be the first to use nuclear weapons in any potential 
conflict. That policy ought to be reconsidered in the absence of the 
overwhelming conventional military threat posed by the old Soviet 
bloc. NATO's new role should be premised on more equal partnership 
in European defense. America should maintain its commitment to helping 
defend its allies against outside threats. But it should expect them 
to take on more responsibility for managing anarchy and strife in 
their own backyard, not in far corners of the world. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>