<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981206.0113 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The debate over how to prepare Social Security for the next century 
has been cast all year as a philosophical clash between those who 
would keep the system intact and those who would rebuild it to allow 
individual investment in the financial markets. But regardless of 
which path Congress and the Clinton administration choose, they will 
be forced to select from the same unappetizing menu of benefit cuts, 
tax increases and tradeoffs between risk and investment return to 
assure that Social Security will be able to weather the baby boom 
generation's retirement. When President Clinton brings together members 
of Congress, economists and public policy analysts on Tuesday and 
Wednesday for a White House conference on Social Security, the focus 
will be as much on those politically excruciating choices as on the 
sweeping debate over the system's structure. ``No matter which ideological 
side you're on, you still have to make painful choices,'' said Ron 
Gebhardtsbauer, a senior pension fellow at the American Academy of 
Actuaries, who will participate in the conference. Administration 
officials hope the conference will be a springboard for legislative 
action to shore up the program, which without any changes will run 
short of money starting in 2032. But they said that the most they 
can hope for out of the conference is to find some common ground as 
a first step toward bipartisan legislation next year. Gene Sperling, 
the White House economic adviser, said that the conference would be 
``an opportunity to build some bipartisan trust in an area that has 
often been typified by very partisan and very harsh rhetoric in the 
past.'' Trust and bipartisanship will be essential because the options 
that the conference will be examining are as explosive and subject 
to demagoguery as any on the domestic political agenda. Should the 
nation raise the retirement age, a step that would in effect be a 
benefit cut for most people? Many economists say the answer is yes, 
since people are living longer and healthier lives. Organized labor, 
however, is vociferous in its opposition, saying it would be cruel 
to anyone doing physical labor. Moreover, many people do not realize 
that the age at which full retirement benefits can be claimed is already 
being increased to 67 from 65 over the next 24 years. Should the relatively 
well off have to pay more in taxes to help keep the system afloat? 
Social Security is financed by a 12.4 percent tax _ split equally 
between employers and employees _ on earned income up to a certain 
level, currently $68,400. Some proposals call for the income cap to 
be substantially increased or even eliminated, steps that would amount 
to a tax increase on middle- and upper-income workers. Such an increase 
would help close much of the financial gap facing Social Security, 
but would make the system a worse deal for those paying the higher 
tax. Other ideas include reducing annual cost-of-living adjustments 
and reducing benefits for wealthy recipients. Some are complicated, 
like reducing the lifetime average earnings used in setting benefit 
levels by increasing the number of years used in calculating the average. 
Some seem relatively straightforward, such as requiring all new state 
and local government employees _ many of whom are not covered by Social 
Security _ to be brought into the system, helping to increase payroll 
tax revenues. Some ideas have more or less been ruled out. There is 
no serious discussion of an across-the-board benefit cut. And President 
Clinton has all but promised not to raise the payroll tax rate, although 
he has left open the option of increasing revenues through other means, 
like raising the cap on taxable earnings. Politicians on both sides 
of the aisle say the most likely outcome is a compromise that includes 
some limited use of private accounts, a variety of benefit cuts and 
tax increases, and use of the projected federal budget surplus. Clinton 
is seriously considering support for some version of individual accounts 
for Social Security, although his advisers insist that he has made 
no decisions yet and that the most likely outcome is a compromise 
between the competing visions. Clinton has remained silent about which 
of the benefit cuts and tax increases he might support. ``I think 
he is wrestling with some of the difficult issues,'' Sperling said. 
``I do not feel that he has locked in on one specific proposal at 
this point.'' Republican leaders all support some version of the individual 
accounts plans, most of which call for diverting a portion of payroll 
tax revenues into accounts that would be owned and controlled by the 
worker. They have support from a number of prominent Democrats, including 
Sens. Bob Kerrey of Nebraska, John B. Breaux of Louisiana and Daniel 
Patrick Moynihan of New York. But most liberal Democrats, especially 
those in the House, strongly oppose individual accounts and say the 
current system, under which payroll taxes go to pay benefits to current 
retirees, can and should be maintained. The challenge underlying both 
approaches is to close a long-term gap between Social Security's revenues 
and its promises to pay benefits. Starting in 2032, unless changes 
are made, the system will take in enough money from the payroll tax 
to pay only 75 percent of promised benefits. Proponents of individual 
accounts say the solution is to harness the power of financial markets. 
Allowing a portion of their payroll taxes to be invested through personal 
accounts will generate much better returns for workers than the current 
system, they say, and will give workers greater control. ``The fact 
is that when today's 30-somethings start to retire we will not be 
able to pay the tab,'' said M. Anthony Burns, the chairman of Ryder 
System Inc., who headed a study of the issue for the Business Roundtable, 
an organization of large corporations. ``We must bolster our current 
social safety net by increasing individuals' abilities to own and 
grow their retirement funds.'' But shifting payroll taxes into private 
accounts creates a problem. That money has already been earmarked 
to pay benefits to current retirees. Current workers, therefore, would 
effectively be called on to save for their own retirement and to support 
current retirees simultaneously. As a result, individual account plans 
require deeper cuts in guaranteed benefits for current workers than 
those required by plans that would not establish individual accounts. 
Advocates of private accounts say the cuts in guaranteed benefits 
will be more than offset by high returns on individual investments. 
Opponents, however, say the result will be to leave many retirees, 
especially those most vulnerable in old age, at he mercy of the markets. 
``We have seen an unprecedented level of outrage among working families 
when they learn of the benefit cuts and tax increases being proposed 
by those who would turn Social Security over to Wall Street,'' said 
John Sweeney, the president of the AFL-CIO. Some liberals say the 
threat to Social Security is exaggerated and that if the system assumes 
even moderate economic growth in coming decades most of the problem 
will disappear. Most liberals, though, are less sanguine, and the 
plans they are advancing generally rely, just like those of conservatives, 
on Wall Street. The difference is that liberals want the government 
rather than individuals to do the investing, by putting as much as 
40 percent of Social Security's reserves into stocks and bonds. They 
say that such an approach allows the system to benefit from the power 
of the markets without exposing individuals to the risks of the Wall 
Street's ups and downs. Moreover, most plans advocated by liberals 
also call for benefit cuts and tax increases. A plan developed by 
Henry J. Aaron and Robert D. Reischauer of the Brookings Institution 
calls for accelerating the planned increase in the retirement age 
to 67 and continuing to raise it gradually as life expectancy increases; 
reducing spouses' benefits; computing average lifetime earnings in 
a way that reduces benefits, and subjecting a greater portion of benefits 
to income taxes. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>