<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981206.0141 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Nick Polidore, a state gymnastics champion with bangs, dimples and 
baggy blue jeans, would seem as robust as any other 11-year-old. But 
he has asthma, so ragweed or a simple cold can propel him to an emergency 
room, gasping for breath. Once, an asthma attack would keep him in 
a hospital for a day or two. But since his family doctor here, Brandt 
S. Loev, took up disease management, a system for controlling chronic 
conditions like asthma, the big emergencies have stopped _ and so 
have the big bills to his mother's health insurance company. Disease 
management sounds familiar, even common-sensical. On each office visit, 
Loev checks Nick's breathing and health completely and then an aide 
teaches him how to avoid attacks, how to use inhalers, how to test 
his lungs himself with a simple bedside device the clinic gave him. 
Once upon a time, this is what managed care was supposed to do: cut 
costs by keeping people healthy. Instead, health management organizations 
and insurance companies concentrated on cutting costs, especially 
by reducing doctors' fees. But now that those methods have played 
out and in many cases profits evaporated, some health care organizations 
are looking to better medical practice as an answer. The new remedy 
is managing chronic diseases, which account for 60 percent of medical 
costs in the United States. ``The next phase has to be managing care 
better and disease management is another word for that,'' said Uwe 
S. Reinhardt, a health care economist at Princeton University. The 
movement is breeding as many as 300 companies that contract with health 
maintenance organizations and employers to supervise the care of people 
with chronic diseases. The revenue of these companies is expected 
to double over the next year, to $348 million, said Al Lewis, a broker 
who negotiates contracts for the companies with health maintenance 
organizations. Among the 1,000 HMOs that belong to the American Association 
of Health Plans, at least 150 are collaborating with the American 
Diabetes Association in a 10-year disease management program that 
aims to reduce blindness and foot amputations among diabetics by 40 
percent and kidney failure by 30 percent. One leader in the movement 
is the University of Pennsylvania Health Center, which offers management 
programs for 20 chronic conditions through its 85 clinics in and around 
Philadelphia, including Loev's clinic in West Chester. In September, 
it licensed VHA Inc., a group of more than 1,200 nonprofit hospitals, 
including Columbia Presbyterian in New York, to use its programs. 
``Everybody's talking about it,'' said Dr. Joseph Carver, disease 
management medical director for Aetna U.S. Healthcare, which has enrolled 
nearly 59,000 members in programs that include those for managing 
congestive heart failure and low back pain. ``Everybody says they're 
doing it.'' But disease management is still a small part of health 
care, and it is not clear whether it will gain wide acceptance among 
doctors, some of whom belittle it as ``cookbook medicine.'' They see 
their control of health care threatened, in part by lower-paid technicians, 
or disease managers, typically nurses with advanced training. Consumer 
advocates warn that disease management can be abused, most obviously 
by HMOs and the disease management companies that are thriving by 
taking on chronic conditions like asthma that promise quick savings 
while shunning those like hypertension that can take a decade or more 
to yield savings. ``I see a lot of enthusiasm for this as a way of 
solving some serious problems,'' said John M. Eisenberg, administrator 
of the Federal Agency for Health Care Policy and Research and a proponent 
of disease management. ``What we all have to be worried about is whether 
the emperor has any clothes.'' Scholars like Reinhardt say the University 
of Pennsylvania's 2-year-old program is promising. Disease management 
permeates the university's Mayfair Family Practice in northeast Philadelphia, 
which serves an aging population of patients, many with multiple ailments, 
in a blue-collar neighborhood. ``I would say 90 percent of the people 
who come in here have some form of chronic disease,'' said Winifred 
Waters, the nurse-manager. ``We have a lot of nuns who are on Medicare, 
and every nun has severe osteoporosis.'' For 18 years she and her 
husband, Dr. Patrick T. Waters, a family practitioner, operated the 
clinic alone. Like most health professionals, they kept abreast of 
advances in care by reading medical journals and attending conferences. 
But as managed care spread and cut their fees, their income plunged. 
They had to see more patients, faster, which left little time for 
comprehensive treatment of chronic diseases. Four years ago, they 
sold the practice to the University of Pennsylvania Health System 
and became salaried employees, with two younger doctors. Early last 
year, they began working under the system's disease management guidelines, 
or protocols. As an example of how the arrangement works, Waters said, 
he pointed to a package of a medication, Niaspran, a new prescription 
drug to lowe cholesterol, which a drug company's salesman had left 
as a sample. Niaspran is a form of niacin, which is sold over the 
counter, and is released over an extended time in the body. Niacin 
can cause severe flushing, making people feel hot and reddening their 
faces. The salesman said Niaspran had less severe side effects. In 
his own practice, Waters said, he would not have prescribed Niaspran 
until he had enough research to support its use. But he e-mailed a 
University of Pennsylvania expert on the management of high cholesterol, 
Dr. Dan Rader, asking him about the drug. Rader checked with the Food 
and Drug Administration, which endorsed it, and so Rader then added 
it to the university's one-page protocol for niacin therapy. But the 
biggest change brought by disease management, Waters said, is the 
advent of the university's circuit-riding nurse educators, each specializing 
in specific diseases. On a recent Thursday, five older patients were 
in the clinic's kitchen for a noon class on diabetes, instructed by 
Patricia Bourne, diabetes educator and disease manager. Bourne conducts 
these classes and individual counseling sessions with new patients 
and those who need special attention. Patients can call her for help, 
and every month or two, University of Pennsylvania nurses call patients. 
If a nurse detects a problem, she calls in Bourne. ``This is very 
new,'' one patient, Audrey Grubman, said. ``I met with Pat on a one-to-one 
basis in June and July. My doctor told me a lot of these things, but 
she reinforces it. She keeps it in front of your mind to take better 
care of yourself.'' Waters says Bourne is a boon to him, too. He still 
sees patients in quick, 10- and 15-minute visits. ``But this allows 
me to do more of what I'm best at doing,'' he said. It also pays. 
Waters' bonus depends in part on holding down his patients' need for 
surgery and emergency treatment of heart attacks and strokes. The 
secret to both improving health and reducing costs, says Dr. David 
S. Shulkin, the University of Pennsylvania's s health system medical 
director, lies in making good medicine, not cutting costs, the priority. 
``We're implementing best practices,'' he said, ``and letting the 
economics sort itself out.'' So far, disease management seems to work. 
Shulkin said that of 1,547 university patients with hypertension, 
only 19 percent had blood pressure readings at or below 140/90 when 
they enrolled in the program, but 53 percent achieved those levels 
afterward. Of 1,497 with adult diabetes, 40 percent had safe levels 
of blood sugar before enrollment; afterward, the figure was 60 percent. 
Some management programs that affect large numbers of people, like 
one for high cholesterol, can cost more to operate than they save. 
``But when you balance out the winners and losers,'' Shulkin said, 
``it turns out to be a significant cost-saver overall.'' Pediatric 
asthma care seems to be a winner at the university's West Chester 
clinic. Before Loev examined Nick Polidore, the resident disease management 
coordinator and patient educator, Wendy York, retrieved the boy's 
chart. It had a blue dot for asthma pasted on it, which told her to 
collect specialized forms to guide Loev through his examination. The 
forms leave little to chance or intuition. ``We have a protocol,'' 
Loev said, ``so we're consistent in treating all patients all the 
same way.'' Then York takes over. ``I'd like to get a pulmonary function,'' 
she tells Nick. Wiry, weighing about 80 pounds, Nick is a little lethargic 
three days after a mild attack. He stands, takes a deep breath and 
blows into a spirometer. His reading is a little worse than his best. 
York counsels him, as she does on each visit, in using inhalers, nebulizers 
and bronchodilators and in giving himself emergency epinephrine shots 
to open breathing passages. She has him show her how he blows into 
a peak flow meter, a plastic pipe that measures his breathing. ``If 
you do a peak flow,'' said his mother, Sharon Polidore, ``you can 
see if you're not getting enough air in.'' Nick has mastered his part 
in managing his disease. ``He's a classic case,'' Loev said. ``Our 
emergency room costs are lower. Our hospital costs are lower. Our 
specialist costs are lower. The patient is much more in control. And 
the patient who comes in isn't as sick.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>