<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981206.0188 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
On Thursday morning, after a fitful night's sleep, Rochelle Saks had 
her last artificial insemination. Her medical plan does not cover 
infertility treatments, she owes her doctor almost $10,000 and she 
can afford to pay only a few hundred dollars a month to retire the 
debt. Thus, he has refused to continue treating her. ``I've been up 
since 2:30 in the morning, thinking this is our last try,'' Ms. Saks 
said before that final visit to the doctor. ``We cannot afford to 
go any further on our own.'' But a bold decision to sue her employer 
could turn the tide for Ms. Saks and others like her. She is among 
a small but growing band of plaintiffs who have filed class action 
complaints with the Federal Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, 
charging that denying medical coverage for infertility treatments 
is unlawful discrimination. The argument for coverage, closely watched 
by the estimated 6 million infertile couples in the United States, 
was bolstered by a Supreme Court ruling in June, not directly related 
to infertility, that declared that reproduction was ``a major life 
activity'' and that, therefore, those who could not procreate were 
protected under the Americans With Disabilities Act. That decision 
has led to an increase in such complaints to the commission and ``sends 
a clear message to employers'' that denial of infertility coverage 
will come under new scrutiny, said a lawyer with the commission who 
spoke on the condition of anonymity. The complaints could lead to 
settlements brokered by the commission or wind up in U.S. Court, under 
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act or the newer Americans With Disabilities 
Act. ``Now we have a leg to stand on,'' said Mark Sokoloff, one of 
Ms. Saks' lawyers. The idea of requiring coverage of infertility treatments 
is fiercely contested by insurance company advocates, business groups 
and some academics. Ms. Saks, 37, is an unlikely standard-bearer, 
a soft-spoken store manager who until recently discussed her quest 
for a child only with her closest friends and relatives. But she said 
she was galled by what she called the hypocrisy of her employer, Franklin 
Covey Co., which sells motivational books and educational materials 
based on the Mormon principals of its owners, who say that family 
is their No. 1 priority. One of those books, ``The Seven Habits of 
Highly Effective Families,'' by Stephen Covey, sits on the coffee 
table in the Sakses' modest town house in this Putnam County village. 
The book is dedicated to ``all children, our common mission'' and 
begins with the author's unqualified assertion that ``family is what 
I care the most about.'' In the Franklin Covey store that Ms. Saks 
manages in White Plains, the shelves are filled with parenting guides. 
And at company management conferences, there are frequent discussions 
of policies to help employees balance work and family. Yet Ms. Saks 
and her husband, Joel, a salesman of hair products, said they received 
no support from company executives during their wrangle with the insurance 
company that administers the Covey medical plan. That plan explicitly 
excludes coverage for ``surgical impregnation procedures,'' including 
artificial insemination and in vitro fertilization, and for injectable 
drugs that assist in conception. It also excludes coverage for ``complications 
arising from noncovered surgery,'' a footnote that would haunt the 
Sakses. Ms. Saks, an employee of the company since 1995, began treatment 
for hormonal imbalance and infertility in June 1997, using a physician 
approved by the plan. She was prescribed a standard regimen of oral 
medication and was artificially inseminated with her husband's sperm. 
Last September, Ms. Saks became pregnant, but miscarried a month later. 
Virtually all her medical claims were denied by the insurer, including 
those related to her miscarriage, which was deemed a ``byproduct of 
an uncovered procedure.'' Ms. Saks appealed the plan's denial of coverage 
and spent many months fighting over medical bills, which then totaled 
about $9,500. Two months ago, Ms. Saks was informed that $1,458 worth 
of services rendered between her positive pregnancy test and her miscarriage 
would be covered. But beyond that one month of care, her appeals were 
denied. But Ms. Saks remained optimistic that the company's family-centered 
ethos would prevail if she brought her dilemma to someone's attention. 
Among the many letters she sent was one to Sean Covey, the company's 
vice president. ``I would hope that a company that puts so much emphasis 
and value in family would see the need to help its employees achieve 
what matters most,'' Ms. Saks wrote. That letter, and many others, 
went unanswered. ``It was shocking,'' Saks said of the company's silence. 
``We thought they practiced what they preached.'' Last month, with 
the help of Resolve, an advocacy organization for infertile couples, 
Ms. Saks was put in touch with two New City law firms that were willing 
to take her case free of charge. Ms. Saks' complaint was filed late 
in October by the Jacob D. Fuchsberg Law Firm and the firm of Bernstein 
Litowitz Berger &AMP; Grossmann , and the EEOC notified Franklin Covey 
of the action. Several calls last week to Franklin Covey's corporate 
headquarters in Salt Lake City seeking comment went unanswered. A 
second equal-opportunity complaint, also organized by Resolve, has 
been filed on behalf of a couple denied infertility treatment by the 
Long Island Rail Road. The second couple was not willing to be interviewed 
or identified. According to Resolve, the railroad paid for a procedure 
to remove sperm from the man, who has fertility problems. But the 
second half of the procedure, the injection of sperm into his wife, 
was not covered because the woman, also a railroad employee, is healthy. 
While complaints of this kind are just now gaining ground in New York, 
they have already succeeded in Chicago. A police officer there won 
a $1.5 million class action settlement last year from the city for 
coverage of infertility treatment. And several other complaints to 
the EEOC have recently been settled, including one against a suburban 
police department and another against a consulting company. Despite 
these recent victories for infertile couples, there is ample disagreement 
about whether insurance coverage for assisted reproduction is realistic, 
or required under the law. George Annas, the chairman of the health 
law department at the Boston University School of Public Health, thinks 
that infertile couples have a much stronger claim for time off for 
treatment and other ``reasonable accommodations'' in the workplace 
than they do for medical coverage, since employers have no ``affirmative 
obligation'' to provide any insurance. Not long ago, the New York 
State Task Force on Life and the Law issued a 462-page report on assisted 
reproductive technologies and concluded that there is ``no persuasive 
reason'' for requiring insurance coverage of infertility treatment 
when so many people have no health insurance at all or have coverage 
that excludes other conditions, including mental illness and dental 
problems. That report was a blow to New York state lawmakers sponsoring 
a bill to mandate insurance coverage for infertility. That bill died 
in a committee last year but is expected to be reintroduced, with 
amendments that would put limits on the number of procedures, the 
total cost and who would qualify as a patient. Two states, Massachusetts 
and Illinois, already mandate infertility coverage, but self-insured 
companies are exempt. Proponents of insurance reimbursements for infertility 
treatments, which are rarely covered, make an economic as well as 
a moral case. A study in Massachusetts, based on actual experience, 
found that the additional cost of such coverage was $1.71 a month 
per member. Other studies, based on projections, put the cost at about 
$3 a year. The current situation encourages women to have expensive 
and ineffective gynecological surgery that is covered by insurance, 
advocates say, rather than more appropriate and effective procedures, 
including in vitro fertilization, which is generally not covered, 
but has a much higher success rate. And when women do choose in vitro 
procedures without insurance, they are more likely to implant many 
embryos to increase the odds that the expensive procedure will succeed. 
But that also raises the odds of highly expensive and dangerous multiple 
births. The issue of insurance coverage dominates the agenda of Resolve, 
the advocacy group, which continues to recruit potential plaintiffs 
for legal action, even as it lobbies lawmakers in Albany for a state 
mandate. On Thursday, at Resolve's annual holiday party, Ms. Saks 
received a rousing ovation for filing her complaint. She acknowledged 
the applause from the safe circle of her mother-in-law's embrace, 
her cheeks streaked with tears and mascara. Ms. Saks was clearly debilitated 
from a long day that began in the doctor's office. But she spoke optimistically 
about the artificial insemination. ``This time I was on a lot more 
drugs and I responded well,'' said Ms. Saks, who will learn in a few 
weeks whether the procedure was successful. Her lawyer, Sokoloff, 
and Resolve's executive director, Pamela Madsen, prowled the room 
where the party guests included some of New York's leading infertility 
doctors. They were searching for someone who would take Ms. Saks as 
a patient, despite her inability to pay. But by Friday morning, that 
hope had evaporated. ``As of now, there's no new doctor,'' Ms. Madsen 
said. ``She's cut off. That's it.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>