<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981206.0152 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The system wasn't exactly ``broke,'' as they say in college football. 
It was merely subjective and political, driven by money and personalities, 
just like the rest of the world. But what the heck, they tinkered 
with the system of producing a national college champion, so we all 
could sleep soundly and not have to fret about who was No. 1. A new-fangled 
witches' brew of three computer rankings and two polls of coaches 
and writers came up with exactly the same game they would have had 
under the previous system _ No. 1 Tennessee against No. 2 Florida 
State in the Fiesta Bowl on Jan. 4, the first time the championship 
will be ``official.'' The new formula got a break Saturday when two 
undefeated teams, UCLA and Kansas State, both lost. The system does 
not have any tolerance for three undefeated teams, so somebody would 
have been on the outside, whining, which is an integral part of college 
football. As a result of Saturday's mayhem, we now have Tennessee 
playing Florida State in the Fiesta Bowl four days into the new year. 
Whatever happened to New Year's Day, you ask? New Year's Day doesn't 
matter anymore. Might as well go bird-watching or read a good book. 
All those football announcers can squeal their favorite expressions, 
all the cheerleaders can prance, all the players can wave to their 
moms, all the coaches can spout their cliches, none of it means squat. 
The only game in town this year is the Fiesta Bowl, because of the 
final rankings of the Bowl Championship Series, announced Sunday shortly 
before Vinny Testaverde of the Jets obviously did not get into the 
end zone but whatever. I'll miss the potential for mischief from other 
major bowls. I don't know about you, but I find ambiguity to be good 
entertainment, like listening to a shifty-eyed witness giving testimony 
under oath. What do you mean ``national?'' What do you mean ``champion?'' 
What do you mean ``unofficial?'' Under last year's system, the Fiesta 
Bowl would have had first crack at the two best teams, and undoubtedly 
would have opted for Tennessee and Florida State. Tennessee earned 
its spot by going undefeated and Coach Bobby Bowden of Florida State 
earned his spot by rallying his players after an early loss, reminding 
them that the entire season is basically a series of bowl games. Kansas 
State was a victory from unprecedented glory and riches but lost to 
Texas A&AMP;M, in double overtime in the Big 12 championship game. 
Twenty-four hours later, it was not included in any of the major bowls. 
Tough. UCLA may have lost its shot at a national championship because 
of a real hurricane, Georges, which forced the postponement of an 
early game. When the game was finally played Saturday, the Miami Hurricanes 
themselves blew UCLA out of the picture. Now UCLA gets to play Wisconsin 
in the Rose Bowl, always a lovely day in the bosky dell in Pasadena, 
but now about as appealing as a spring intrasquad game. Tough. Last 
year the Rose Bowl was a player because it had not joined the conglomeration. 
When Michigan barely held off Washington State, it left room for Nebraska 
to impress by stampeding all over Tennessee the next night in the 
Orange Bowl. So Michigan and Nebraska each finished first in one of 
the polls. So we had two champions. So what was the harm? Under last 
year's setup, the Rose Bowl would be a stinker this year because Wisconsin 
is not considered anywhere near as good as Ohio State, the Big Ten 
runnerup, now playing Texas A&AMP;M. ''We're happy to be in the Sugar 
Bowl, but I think we can make an argument that we're one of the top 
two,'' said John Cooper of Ohio State Sunday. ``We were No. 1 for 
nine straight weeks. It's difficult to run the table to go undefeated. 
The day we got beat, we did not play our best game. You stub your 
toe one time you've got to be a great team to get a chance to come 
back.'' Cooper was whining a bit and politicking, but that's what 
college football coaches are supposed to do. Under last year's setup, 
Cooper could have envisioned a situation this year in which Florida 
State barely nipped Tennessee in a Fiesta Bowl stinker while Ohio 
State drubbed Texas A&AMP;M to make a case for being No. 1 in somebody's 
poll. Any poll would do. Let's give thanks for small favors. If there 
had been three undefeated teams, right now you would be hearing a 
cry for a playoff system, four teams, eight teams, 16 teams. The season 
still ends the first week in January. We don't need a playoff system. 
Our scholar-athletes all have finals. Don't they? 
</TEXT>
</DOC>