<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981206.0101 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A federal law aimed at encouraging businesses to share sensitive information 
about year 2000 computer problems has produced scant results in its 
first month and a half, according to corporate year 2000 specialists, 
consultants and lawyers. Congress rushed what it called a Good Samaritan 
law to President Clinton this fall amid growing concerns that many 
computers and software programs could malfunction if they interpret 
the two-digit representation of the year _ 00 _ as 1900 or do not 
recognize it as a valid year. Many trade groups, including those representing 
electric utilities, airlines and the computer industry, have been 
telling the government that fear of lawsuits has been stifling the 
exchange of information that could help reduce the risks. ``Clearly, 
collaboration is essential as time ticks away,'' said Tim Morton, 
vice president at Electronic Data Systems Corp., who oversees a Web 
site that his Dallas-based consulting and management company has set 
up as a public forum where companies can report on year 2000 issues. 
The new law is intended to make it much more difficult for plaintiffs 
to attack companies, trade groups and other distributors of year 2000 
information, even if the information turns out to be faulty or incomplete. 
Plaintiffs would have to prove that those sharing the information 
knew it was wrong or were reckless about whether it was truthful. 
The law does not bar fraud claims and does not cover sales pitches 
to consumers. It also does not apply to pending lawsuits or restrict 
the Securities and Exchange Commission's ability to ask for year 2000 
information and enforce its disclosure rules. The new law covers two 
types of information. The narrower category, known as year 2000 readiness 
disclosures, deals only with the year 2000 status of a company's own 
products and services. It covers, for instance, any comments by the 
Boeing Corp. about its aircraft and any advice from Citibank about 
whether consumers can expect its automated teller machines to dispense 
cash. The other category, known as a year 2000 statement, is far broader, 
including comments on other companies' products or projections about 
the impact of possible year 2000 problems. A utility trade group, 
for example, would have some protection if it estimated how long power 
plants could operate on stockpiled coal if railroads were unable to 
ship new supplies, as would a hospital that reported to others that 
a particular medical device failed a year 2000 readiness test. The 
experience so far with the new law raises questions, though, about 
how much pent-up desire there is to share year 2000 information freely. 
At the very least, it suggests that while it is popular to blame lawyers 
for discouraging such activities, many other factors have also been 
involved. Some companies, for example, fear use of the information 
by regulators or competitors. The new law's main impact has been to 
send businesses scurrying to lawyers. Computer users are unsure how 
much shelter the law provides and whether taking advantage of it in 
some cases is worth the trouble. ``Our phones were ringing off the 
hook as soon as the law passed,'' said Wynne Carvill, a partner in 
the large year 2000 team at Thelen, Reid &AMP; Priest in San Francisco. 
The rush for legal counsel stemmed in part from a provision giving 
companies a 45-day window to bring some statements made as far back 
as Jan. 1, 1996, under the umbrella of the law. That window, which 
was opened when Clinton signed the bill into law on Oct. 19, closed 
last Thursday. The retroactivity provision applied only to readiness 
disclosures. Lawyers say there are several twists to the provision 
that may undermine its value, including one requirement that everyone 
who received the statement be informed that it is being reclassified 
as a protected disclosure. Another provision gives any customer who 
already relied on the statement 45 days to object to its being reclassified. 
``Most of my clients think it's not worth the effort to go back and 
dig up what they said in the past,'' said Mark Pomeroy, a lawyer in 
Columbus, Ohio. Many year 2000 project managers say information is 
beginning to flow more freely. But both the managers and lawyers say 
pressure from regulators and customers, not the new law, appears to 
be the driving force. ``I haven't seen people saying more because 
of the act,'' said Michael Siavage, an Atlanta lawyer whose firm, 
the Red Hot Law Group, has many software companies as clients. That 
could change, many experts say, as more industry groups organize clearinghouses 
of information patterned after the group set up by major automakers. 
John Koskinen, chairman of Clinton's Year 2000 Council, has been encouraging 
the formation of such groups. ``The critical thing is to exchange 
more technical information, not readiness statements,'' he said. ``This 
is a way to jump-start those who are late into the game.'' Koskinen 
said he would like to see such information open to the public but 
that the crucial thing was to make sure industry groups made it freely 
available to everyone in their industries, including companies that 
do not participate in trade groups. George Surdu, global coordinator 
of the Ford Motor Co.'s Year 2000 efforts, said the law would prove 
to be helpful in the long run. ``The speed of enactment sent a strong 
message,'' he said. Backers of the law are already lobbying Congress 
to close what they see as loopholes that limit its protections and 
to pass other measures that might limit future lawsuits. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>