<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981202.1830.0929 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Tonight, we're going to continue our investigation into breast implants 
and questions about their risks. The government banned the use of 
silicone implants for cosmetic surgery six years ago because of safety 
concerns. But a completely different kind of implant made from saline 
has stayed on the market and gained acceptance as the "safer" alternative. 
There has been a boom in breast implant surgery of late -- an estimated 
120,000 women have received saline implants this year. ABC's John 
McKenzie reports, there are now questions about these implants and 
the problems they may cause. The number of breast implant operations 
has now more than tripled since the silicone scare of the early '90s. 
That's because of the growing popularity of saline implants, pouches 
of common saltwater that can be inflated right in the operating room. 
But even these implants have had problems. Valves can leak and the 
implants have to be removed. That means more surgery, more scar tissue 
and thousands of dollars more in expenses. The mentor corporation 
is a major supplier of saline implants. ABC News has learned that 
work has begun on a national, class action lawsuit expected to allege 
the company made defective leaf valves. That a separate fraud suit 
charges the company failed to reveal the extent of the problem. Executives 
at mentor declined to be interviewed on camera. They did say any suits 
against them are without merit and that the valves problems were caused 
by surgical techniques used by doctors. But a University of Toronto 
study of failed saline implants, published last year in "the Canadian 
journal of plastic surgery," showedded that the leaf valves can leak 
even without those techniques. Although mentor insists implants made 
with leaf valves were safe, they stopped making them three weeks ago. 
But by then, they had been implanted in more than 50,000 women. The 
FDA cited mentor for unprecedented violations in the way it makes 
its silicone implants, which are still used for special medical needs. 
There is a second issue. What happens when any sail Lien implant leaks 
or ruptures? Back in 1992, health authorities reassured women that 
even if there is a Leak or rupture in saline implants what's released 
is basic saltwater, easily absorbed by the body. But surprising new 
research at Washington University in St. Louis suggests that saltwater 
is not always so safe, that saltwater can be a breeding ground for 
harmful microorganisms. A look at some saline implants removed from 
Canadian women suggests just how contaminated they can become. And 
if these bacteria and fungi were released into the body? There would 
be risk of an infection which would manifest itself as increase in 
size of the breast, fever, redness, pain, those kinds of things. Mentor 
says reported infection rates from saline implants are low. I don't 
think anybody knows how often this happens when there are no studies 
and no data. Nobody can say. And that poses a basic dilemma for any 
woman whether there's enough reliable evidence regarding the safety 
and effectiveness of saline breast implants. John McKenzie, ABC News, 
New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>