<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981202.0576 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Dozens of Palestinians ambushed an Israeli car on Wednesday, smashing 
its windshields with stones, then pulling an Israeli soldier out of 
it and kicking and beating him. The attack prompted Israeli police 
to fire pistols into the crowd while Israeli soldiers opened up with 
a barrage of rubber-coated metal bullets and tear gas. Eleven Palestinians 
were injured by rubber bullets. And in Jerusalem, a 41-year-old Palestinian 
street cleaner was stabbed to death Wednesday in a mixed Jerusalem 
neighborhood. Police said they suspected the attack on Osama Musa 
Natche was carried out by an Israeli extremist. There are fears that 
the escalating tensions between Israelis and Palestinians could result 
in a new round of violence before U.S. President Bill Clinton's planned 
trip to Israel. The clash in Ramallah began when 150 students from 
Bir Zeit University marched in the West Bank city to protest Israel's 
refusal to release a large number of Palestinian prisoners jailed 
for anti-Israeli activities. The demonstrators, most of them followers 
of Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat's Fatah faction, then walked to 
the outskirts of Ramallah, and began stoning Israeli cars at a traffic 
circle near the Jewish settlement of Beit El. At one point, a white 
car with Israeli license plates approached. The vehicle was driven 
by a man wearing a skullcap, and a soldier was in the passenger seat. 
To shouts of ``Yahudi! Yahudi!'' _ the Arabic word for Jew _ about 
two dozen Palestinians began pelting the car with stones and smashing 
its windows. The driver stopped the car and ran away after a large 
rock struck him in the face. The attackers then converged on the soldier, 
attacked him and seized his M-16 assault rifle. The soldier held his 
hands up to fend off blows as several Palestinians struck his head 
with rocks. After a minute of relentless attack, the soldier got up 
and ran, bleeding from the head. After he escaped, his assailants 
doused the car with kerosene and set it on fire. Prime Minister Benjamin 
Netanyahu's adviser, David Bar-Illan, held the Palestinian Authority 
responsible, saying it had incited residents to violence over the 
prisoners' issue. Bar-Illan also said the attack was ``a gross and 
dangerous'' violation of the Wye River land-for-security agreement 
negotiated in October with the help of President Clinton. Hassan Asfour, 
a Palestinian peace negotiator, would not comment on the attack until 
he heard more about it. Earlier this week, Netanyahu complained in 
a letter to Clinton that the Palestinians have repeatedly violated 
the peace agreement. He asked Clinton to use his influence to halt 
the violations. Bar-Illan said the sending of the letter indicates 
``there is a danger to the peace process if the violations continue.'' 
But he said that, as of now, the Clinton visit was still on. In the 
letter, Bar-Illan said, Netanyahu objected to recent statements, including 
one by Arafat, that a Palestinian state would be declared on May 4, 
1999. The daily Maariv newspaper said Netanyahu asked Clinton to publicly 
distance himself from Arafat's statements and persuade the Palestinian 
leader to withdraw them. The Wye accord urges both Israel and the 
Palestinians to refrain from unilateral steps that would prejudge 
the outcome of talks on a permanent peace accord. The Palestinians 
have also lodged a series of complaints about Israeli violations. 
Arafat's deputy, Mahmoud Abbas, said Wednesday that Israel's plans 
to construct more than a dozen access roads for Jewish settlements 
in the West Bank was not approved at the Wye River summit. Israel's 
Cabinet authorized the road projects to improve security for Jewish 
communities that will become isolated as a result of Israel's promised 
withdrawal from 13 percent of the West Bank. Thousands of acres (hectares) 
of Palestinian land are being expropriated for the roads. ``I want 
to make it very clear that there is no such agreement because no rational 
Palestinian would agree to the confiscation of land for roads,'' Abbas 
told the Voice of Palestine radio. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>