<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981202.0255 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The president named the U.S.-educated economist Salim Hoss as the 
next prime minister of Lebanon on Wednesday. Hoss accepted the appointment, 
telling reporters after meeting President Emile Lahoud: ``We are facing 
big challenges which we should confront.'' He said his government 
would work to reduce the budget deficit and continue efforts to end 
Israel's occupation of part of southern Lebanon. His first task would 
be to appoint a Cabinet, he added. Lahoud issued a decree appointing 
Hoss after he secured a majority of recommendations from the Parliament. 
Hoss, a legislator from Beirut who turns 69 on Dec. 20, has held the 
premiership on four previous occasions. He survived a 1987 car bombing 
that killed a bodyguard in his motorcade. Hoss became a contender 
for the post after the current prime minister, Rafik Hariri, bowed 
out Monday in a power struggle with Lahoud. Hariri has been serving 
in a caretaker capacity since Lahoud's inauguration last week. Hariri, 
53, a billionaire businessman, launched the multibillion dollar reconstruction 
of Lebanon and restored economic confidence after the country's devastating 
1975-90 civil war. But during his six-year tenure, the country sank 
deep into debt and ordinary Lebanese complained that the benefits 
of reconstruction did not filter down to them. Hariri was asked by 
Lahoud last week to form a new government. But he rejected the request 
after the president's survey of Parliament members _ required by the 
constitution _ gave the incumbent prime minister a majority but not 
the overwhelming support he had in the past. Lahoud on Tuesday began 
a new poll of the Parliament, and this time Hoss got majority backing. 
Parliament Speaker Nabih Berri said Wednesday that Hoss had the support 
of 95 of the 128 lawmakers in the half-Christian, half-Muslim legislature. 
Hoss is a Sunni Muslim, like every prime minister under Lebanon's 
power-sharing arrangement. The president is a Maronite Catholic, and 
the Parliament speaker is a Shiite Muslim. His style of government 
is expected to be quite different from the flamboyant Hariri. Hoss 
is expected to maintain a good working relationship with Lahoud, the 
62-year-old assertive army commander who was elected by an overwhelming 
vote in Parliament. Lahoud has pledged to clean up the graft-riddled 
administration. With security established across much of the country 
after the 1975-90 civil war, Hoss takes over the premiership with 
economic development and government reform as the major challenges. 
Hoss will have to calm markets made nervous by the sudden departure 
of Hariri. The Central bank, fearing a run on the Lebanese pound, 
has expressed readiness to intervene with its foreign currency reserves. 
Like almost all politicians in Lebanon, Hoss is an ally of Syria, 
the main power-broker in Lebanon, where Syria still maintains some 
30,000 troops. Hoss, who earned an advanced degree in business and 
economics from Indiana University at Bloomington, has a reputation 
as an honest politician He first served as prime minister in 1976 
in the early days of the civil war and also was prime minister in 
1987, after Prime Minister Rashid Karami was assassinated. He was 
named to the post again in 1989 under President Rene Mouawad and the 
following year under President Elias Hrawi. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>