<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981202.0903 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Under increasing public pressure to withdraw troops from southern 
Lebanon, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and members of his Cabinet 
on Wednesday toured an Israeli-occupied zone where seven soldiers 
have been killed over the last two weeks. The tour was part of Cabinet 
discussions to reassess Israel's 15-year military presence in the 
area, but Netanyahu has said he would not bend to public pressure 
and no immediate policy change was expected. Israel is at war in southern 
Lebanon with Iranian-backed Hezbollah guerrillas, who claimed responsibility 
for killing the seven soldiers last month and 16 others this year. 
Israel and its allied South Lebanese Army militia patrol a self-styled 
security zone there to prevent cross-border attacks by Hezbollah on 
Israeli communities. ``We are here to defend the children and the 
villages and the citizens in northern Israel and that is the major 
goal,'' Netanyahu said. ``If we can find a way to defend northern 
Israel without (the army) being here, we'll take them out.'' Netanyahu 
has said he would withdraw troops if Lebanon would guarantee the safety 
of their border. Both Lebanon and Syria, the main power-broker there, 
want Israel to unilaterally withdraw from foreign soil and have refused 
such guarantees. Israel believes Syria is allowing the conflict there 
to escalate to force Israel to withdraw from the Golan Heights as 
well, a strategic plateau Israel captured from Syria in the 1967 Mideast 
war. Fearing further violence, the United States warned Syria that 
Israel could attack Syrian troops in Lebanon if the flow of weapons 
to Hezbollah was not halted, the Yediot Aharonot newspaper reported 
Wednesday. U.S. intelligence has confirmed that Iranian-purchased 
weapons for Hezbollah pass through the airport in the Syrian capital, 
Damascus, and reach the guerrillas by land. ``We will not be able 
to prevent Israel from acting against Syrian targets if the situation 
in south Lebanon continues to deteriorate,'' read the U.S. message 
to Syria, according to the mass-circulation daily. The United States 
informed Damascus it would be a ``mistake'' for them to think that 
intensifying the conflict in Lebanon would pressure Israel to renew 
peace talks with Syria, Israel's U.S. Ambassador, Zalman Shoval, reportedly 
told Netanyahu this week. Larry Schwartz, the spokesman for the U.S. 
embassy in Israel, would not comment on the report but said the U.S. 
State Department has sent messages to Israel, Syria and Lebanon urging 
them to act with restraint. The deaths of 23 Israeli soldiers in the 
security zone this year has widened public debate on how to end years 
of occupation in Lebanon. Some argue that a unilateral withdrawal 
is the only way out, while others say withdrawal without security 
guarantees would leave civilians in northern Israel open to attack. 
Meanwhile, three Lebanese civilians are on trial in an Israeli military 
court accused of passing intelligence information and explosive charges 
to Hezbollah. The trial is being held behind closed doors, but the 
court released the names of two of the accused, Bulos Abu-Zeid, an 
officer in the Israeli-backed South Lebanese Army and Ibrahim Abu-Zeid. 
The third defendant was not named. The military prosecutor submitted 
confessions signed by the accused, but they said these were not given 
voluntarily. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>