<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981202.0922 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Salim Hoss, a U.S. educated economist, was designated prime minister 
of Lebanon on Wednesday, and promptly pledged to continue his predecessor's 
reconstruction program, but with a dollop of austerity. Former Prime 
Minister Rafik Hariri was the architect of a multibillion dollar drive 
to rebuild the country from the devastation of the 1975-90 civil war, 
and Hoss sought to clam fears that Hariri's departure would undermine 
the program or devalue the currency. The new government would pursue 
``austerity in the extreme'' in the 1999 budget, which has to be presented 
in the coming weeks, Hoss told reporters after President Emile Lahoud 
invited him to form a government. ``We will also be austere in ways 
of implementing projects,'' Hoss said, referring to Hariri's plans. 
The government would ``set priorities in reconstruction and development 
projects that do not exceed the financial capabilities of the state,'' 
he said. But it would honor contracts for reconstruction ``although 
some of these projects were executed without a plan,'' Hoss said. 
The national currency is ``in very solid state'' and measures will 
be taken against speculators, he said. Earlier Wednesday, Lahoud issued 
a decree appointing Hoss after he received the constitutionally required 
recommendations from a majority of Parliament members. Speaker Nabih 
Berri said Hoss had the support of 95 of the 128 lawmakers in the 
half-Christian, half-Muslim legislature. Hoss, a legislator from Beirut 
who turns 69 on Dec. 20, has held the premiership on four previous 
occasions. He survived a 1987 car bombing that killed a bodyguard 
in his motorcade. The president had initially been inclined to re-appoint 
Hariri, the billionaire businessman who had been prime minister since 
1992. Hariri even had the majority support of legislators but not 
the overwhelming margin he had enjoyed in the past. A chagrined Hariri 
bowed out of the race on Monday, but will continue in a caretaker 
capacity until the Parliament approves the new Cabinet. Hoss is a 
Sunni Muslim, like every prime minister under Lebanon's power-sharing 
arrangement. The president has to be a Maronite Catholic, and the 
speaker is a Shiite Muslim. A soft-spoken, down-to-earth man, Hoss's 
style of government is expected to be quite different from that of 
the flamboyant Hariri. His economic policies are expected to be different 
as well. The holder of an advanced degree in business and economics 
from Indiana University at Bloomington, Hoss said Wednesday he favored 
cutting interest rates, which are running at 14 percent. He has argued 
that such high rates have discouraged investment. Hoss's first economic 
challenge will be in drawing up the budget for the 1999 fiscal year, 
which begins in January. The budget deficit is running at a high 17 
percent of the Gross Domestic Product _ the value of all goods and 
services produced within the country. In his previous terms as prime 
minister, Hoss has earned a reputation as an honest politician. He 
is known to share Lahoud's goal of ridding the administration of corruption. 
Like almost all politicians in Lebanon, Hoss is an ally of Syria, 
which maintains some 30,000 troops in Lebanon and is the main power-broker 
in the country. He reaffirmed government support for the guerrillas 
fighting Israel's occupation of a zone in southern Lebanon, amounting 
to 10 percent of the country. Israel has controlled the area since 
1985 as a buffer against guerrilla attacks on its northern territory. 
Hoss first served as prime minister in 1976, in the early days of 
the civil war, and after the assassination of Prime Minister Rashid 
Karami in 1987. He was named to the post again in 1989 under President 
Rene Mouawad and the following year under President Elias Hrawi. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>