<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981202.0889 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Iraq on Wednesday presented a former American soldier suffering from 
war-related illnesses to push its claim that U.S. forces used artillery 
containing a radioactive substance during the 1991 Gulf War. Her voice 
wavering and hands shaking, former Sgt. 1st Class Carol Picou urged 
some 600 Iraqi scientists and doctors at a medical conference to help 
explain what she said were unexplained ailments. ``I have numerous 
illnesses, brain damage, neurological disorders. I have no muscle 
(control) left in my rectum,'' said Ms. Picou, 42, who served as a 
nurse and truck driver in the U.S. Army. A native of Toccoa, Georgia, 
she said she sometimes finds herself uttering words that aren't what 
she had intended to say. Besides Ms. Picou, Iraq also sponsored the 
visit of two former British soldiers to attend the two-day conference. 
They stood in a row with five Iraqi officers. All claim they suffer 
from similar neurological illnesses. They, however, looked in good 
physical shape. Ms. Picou and the Britons, Raymond Bristow and Colin 
Dursell-Lee, said they defied their government's orders to attend 
the conference. The meeting will discuss what Iraq claims is the high 
incidence of cancer among Iraqi civilians in southern Iraq exposed 
to depleted uranium from artillery shells fired by U.S. forces during 
the 1991 Gulf War to evict Iraq from Kuwait. But there have been no 
independent studies to confirm that claim. And a Western scientist 
attending the conference said it is premature to blame depleted uranium 
for the illnesses. ``Right now we have no idea whether it is depleted 
uranium or oil fires. It will take a long time to know, and not in 
my lifetime,'' Dr. Hari Sharma, a radio-chemical specialist at Waterloo 
University in Canada, said. An umbrella of U.S. veterans group claimed 
in March that at least 400,000 service men and women had contact with 
depleted uranium during the Gulf War. But Bernard Rostker, Pentagon's 
adviser on Gulf War illnesses, has called the report exaggerated. 
He said too few Americans were on the battlefield during the war and 
shortly afterward for so many to have been exposed. Depleted uranium 
is a metal residue left when natural uranium is refined. It is used 
in artillery shells and bombs designed to penetrate the armor of tanks. 
On impact, the shells create an airborne dust, which if inhaled or 
ingested, can be poisonous. Most of the U.S. troops who came into 
direct contact with the substance were in vehicles hit by fellow Americans 
in mistaken attacks the Army calls ``friendly fire.'' Sami Raoof, 
who heads a newly-formed Iraqi office on the Gulf War impact, said 
Iraqi scientists found an increase in radiation levels at sites where 
depleted uranium shells were used. He said cancer cases in southern 
Iraq have increased by almost 200 percent compared to before the war. 
Shawqi Marqus of the Health Ministry said Iraq has conclusive evidence 
that Ms. Picou and the two Britons are suffering from exposure to 
depleted uranium. He did not elaborate. Raymond Bristow, one of the 
Britons at the conference, said he can only walk with the aid of a 
cane. A former army technician, he said he was told by Canadian doctors 
who tested his blood that he had been exposed to 100 times more than 
the average radiation level. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>