<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981202.0290 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Israeli troops on Wednesday opened fire on Palestinian protesters 
demanding freedom for jailed activists after the demonstrators beat 
an Israeli soldier and burned his car. Two Palestinians were seen 
being placed in an ambulance, but the extent of their injuries was 
not known. The clash began when 150 Palestinians attacked an Israeli 
soldier driving near the Jewish settlement of Beit El. Jumping on 
the hood of the car, the protesters smashed his windshield, dragged 
the soldier from the car kicking and seized his M-16 automatic rifle. 
They poured kerosene on the car and set it ablaze. The Israeli soldier, 
wearing a green uniform, ran away, bleeding from a head wound and 
with blood on his hands, as the demonstrators threw stones at him. 
The Palestinians also took his mobile telephone and a briefcase from 
the soldier. Israeli police stationed at a joint position with Palestinian 
counterparts fired pistols into the crowd while nearby Israeli soldiers 
opened up with a barrage of rubber-coated metal bullets and tear gas 
at the Palestinians. Police confirmed both live rounds and rubber-coated 
ammunition was used. The clash, which lasted about half an hour, followed 
the stabbing death of a Palestinian street-cleaner in Jerusalem which 
police said may have been carried out by an Israeli extremist. There 
are concerns that the escalating tension could result in a new round 
of violence in advance of Clinton's planned trip to Israel and the 
Palestinian lands later this month. In Jerusalem, a 41-year-old Palestinian 
street cleaner, Osama Musa Natche, was stabbed to death in a mixed 
neighborhood on the border between the Arab and Jewish sectors of 
the city. Israeli police said they were investigating the possibility 
that the killer was an Israeli who has already murdered one Palestinian 
and wounded five in earlier attacks. ``There are a number of items 
of evidence on the scene of the crime which suggests that the motive 
for the crime was nationalist,'' said Jerusalem police commander Yair 
Yitzhaki. Israeli officials said Wednesday that Prime Minister Benjamin 
Netanyahu had complained in a letter to U.S. President Bill Clinton 
that the Palestinians have repeatedly violated the Wye River peace 
agreement. At the same time, Palestinian officials accused Israel 
of violating the Wye River summit accord by not freeing jailed Palestinian 
activists and by confiscating West Bank land. In a two-page letter 
sent Sunday, Netanyahu asked Clinton to step in and use his influence 
to halt the Palestinian violations. David Bar-Illan, a top aide to 
Netanyahu, said the sending of the letter indicates that ``there is 
a danger to the peace process if the violations continue.'' But he 
said that, as of now, the Clinton visit to the region Dec. 12-15 was 
``a go.'' In the letter, Bar-Illan said, Netanyahu objected to recent 
statements, including one by Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat, that 
a Palestinian state would be declared on May 4, 1999. The daily Maariv 
newspaper said Netanyahu asked Clinton to publicly distance himself 
from Arafat's statements and persuade the Palestinian leader to withdraw 
his remarks. The Wye accord, negotiated with Clinton's help in October, 
urges both Israel and the Palestinians to refrain from unilateral 
steps that would prejudge the outcome of talks on a permanent peace 
accord that are scheduled to be complete by next May 4. The Palestinians 
issued a series of complaints about Israeli violations of the Wye 
accord reached in October. It obligates Israel to withdraw from 13 
percent of the West Bank in three stages by the end of January in 
exchange for Palestinian security measures, including a crackdown 
on Islamic militants. Arafat's deputy, Mahmoud Abbas, said Wednesday 
that Israel's plans to construct more than a dozen access roads for 
Jewish settlements in the West Bank was not approved at the Wye River 
summit. Israel's Cabinet approved the building to improve security 
for Jewish communities isolated by the planned withdrawals. Thousands 
of acres of Palestinian land are being expropriated for the road projects. 
``I want to make it very clear that there is no such agreement because 
no rational Palestinian would agree to the confiscation of land for 
roads,'' Abbas said on the Voice of Palestine radio. Palestinians 
protested Israel's appointment of a low-level delegation to deal with 
the issue of a further withdrawal after the 13 percent pullback. They 
said this was an indication that Israel was not taking Palestinian 
concerns seriously. The Palestinians also complained that Israel broke 
a promise concerning prisoner releases. Under the Wye accord, Israel 
is to free 750 prisoners in three stages. In the first stage last 
month, Israel freed 250 prisoners, but 150 of them were common criminals. 
Arafat wants all of those released to be Palestinians jailed for anti-Israeli 
activities. Bar-Illan said the criteria for the releases were agreed 
on at the Mideast summit and that Israel was in compliance. Netanyahu 
has said he would not release prisoners involved in attacks on Israelis 
or members of Islamic militant groups. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>