<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981202.1281 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Substitute Suat Kaya headed in the equalizer in injury time Wednesday 
to lift Turkey's Galatasaray to a 1-1 draw with Italy's Juventus in 
a politically tinged Champions League match that came off without 
a hitch. The clubs' countries are locked in a dispute over the fate 
of Abdullah Ocalan, a Kurdish rebel leader arrested in Rome who has 
asked for political asylum. Fears the tensions might spill onto the 
soccer field resulted in postponement of the game for a week and extra 
security measures Wednesday. Kaya's goal, from steps away off a free 
kick, ended a late flurry of offense from Galatasaray after Juventus 
had taken a 1-0 lead with 12 minutes to go on Nicola Amoruso's goal. 
Amoruso, who entered the game in the 66th minute, fired French playmaker 
Zinedine Zidane's lobbed cross from the left flank between Galatasaray's 
Brazilian 'keeper Claudio Taffarel and the near post. The goal silenced 
the crowd of 23,000, barely outnumbering the police officers present 
at Ali Sami Yen Stadium. Officers in riot gear escorted the players 
and officials off the field after the final whistle. Authorities had 
also said they worried about a provocation by the rebels from the 
Kurdistan Workers Party, or PKK, aimed at staining Turkey's image. 
Such concerns led European soccer's governing body, UEFA, to put off 
the match. But while obscenities directed at Juve's players and chants 
of ``Down with PKK! Down with Italy!'' echoed through the stadium, 
there was no real unruliness, much less violence. Juventus was to 
leave Istanbul immediately after the game. The club flew in just hours 
before the match, in defiance of UEFA rules requiring clubs to arrive 
the day before a game. The result leaves Galatasaray (2-2-1) tied 
atop Group B with Norway's Rosenborg. Both have 8 points with one 
rotation left before the quarterfinals. Juventus has tied all five 
of its games for 5 points and now needs a win against Rosenborg coupled 
with a Galatasaray loss to Spain's Athletic Bilbao next week. Galatasaray 
reacted well after Amoruso's score. First, the hosts produced a one-on-one 
chance for Hakan Unsal, but reserve Juve 'keeper Michelangelo Rampulla 
_ who replaced starter Angelo Peruzzi, a victim of leg cramps, in 
the 59th _ blocked the shot with eight minutes left. Four minutes 
later, Juve defender Alessandro Birindelli swept off the line an errant 
clear attempt after Rampulla fumbled the rain-slicked ball. Winger 
Okan Buruk had nearly scored for Galatasaray in the 70th, when a napping 
Juventus defense left him all alone to strike from 15 meters (yards), 
but Rampulla dove to his right to deflect the dangerous shot. A lackluster 
first half saw little initiative from either side, and most of Juve's 
surges forward were stopped by the hosts' effective offsides trap. 
The Italians have had trouble scoring since star striker Alessandro 
Del Piero went down with knee ligament damage. Juve has gone three 
straight Serie A games without a goal. Juve midfielder Antonio Conte 
sent a long blast off the mark in the 20th minute, and center back 
Ciro Ferrara's glancing header flew wide of the post after Taffarel 
failed to punch away a corner kick in the 40th. Galatasaray's offense 
ran through Romanian veteran Gheorge Hagi, but his play, while pretty, 
rarely produced concrete chances. Italian Sports Minister Giovanna 
Melandri and her Turkish counterpart, Yucel Seckiner, both attended 
the game in a show of political goodwill. Before the match, police 
searched spectators for weapons or items like loose change that could 
be hurled onto the field. Even umbrellas and mobile phones were not 
allowed. Some fans tossed objects from the stands, but police appeared 
to block everything. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>