<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981202.0261 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Emile Lahoud on Wednesday named the American-educated economist 
Salim Hoss as the next prime minister of Lebanon. Lahoud issued a 
decree appointing Hoss after a majority of lawmakers in Parliament 
expressed their support for him. Hoss, a legislator from Beirut who 
turns 69 on Dec. 20, has served as prime minister on four previous 
occasions. He survived a 1987 car bombing that killed a bodyguard 
in his motorcade. Hoss became a contender for the post after the current 
prime minister, Rafik Hariri, bowed out in a power struggle with Lahoud. 
Hariri's Cabinet has been serving in a caretaker capacity since Lahoud's 
inauguration last week. Hariri, 53, a billionaire businessman, launched 
the multibillion dollar reconstruction of Lebanon and restored economic 
confidence after the country's devastating 1975-90 civil war. But 
during his six-year tenure, the country sank deep into debt and ordinary 
Lebanese complained that the benefits of reconstruction did not filter 
down to them. Hariri was asked by Lahoud last week to form a new government. 
But he rejected the request after the president's survey of Parliament 
members _ required by the constitution _ gave the incumbent prime 
minister a majority but not the overwhelming support he had in the 
past. Lahoud began a new poll of the Parliament on Tuesday, and this 
time Hoss got majority backing. Parliament Speaker Nabih Berri said 
Wednesday that Hoss had the support of 95 of the 128 lawmakers in 
the half-Christian, half-Muslim legislature. Hoss is a Sunni Muslim, 
like every prime minister under Lebanon's power-sharing arrangement. 
The president is a Maronite Catholic, and the Parliament speaker is 
a Shiite Muslim. His style of government is expected to be quite different 
from the flamboyant Hariri. Hoss is expected to maintain a good working 
relationship with Lahoud, the 62-year-old assertive army commander 
who was elected by an overwhelming vote in Parliament. Lahoud has 
pledged to clean up the graft-riddled administration. With security 
established across much of the country after the 1975-90 civil war, 
Hoss takes over the premiership with economic development and government 
reform as the major challenges. Like almost all politicians in Lebanon, 
Hoss is an ally of Syria, the main power-broker in Lebanon, where 
Syria still maintains some 30,000 troops. Hoss, who earned an advanced 
degree in business and economics from Indiana University at Bloomington, 
has a reputation as an honest politician He first served as prime 
minister in 1976 in the early days of the civil war and also was prime 
minister in 1987, after Prime Minister Rashid Karami was assassinated. 
He was named to the post again in 1989 under President Rene Mouawad 
and the following year under President Elias Hrawi. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>