<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981202.0130.0075 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
the house judiciary committee had a busy day. first, it voted to expand 
its impeachment inquiry of president clinton to include alleged campaign 
fund-raising abuses. then it approved subpoenas seeking fund-raising 
evidence from the justice department. and committee members called 
a variety of witnesses to testify, as they try to determine whether 
perjury warrants impeachment. jonathan karl has more. the committee 
heard from two women republicans say have something in common with 
the president -- they each lied under oath in a civil lawsuit about 
sex. the civil case eventually was dismissed. correct. and yet, despite 
the dismissal, you were prosecuted by the clinton justice department 
for this act of perjury. is that correct? that's correct. lying under 
oath cost barbara battalino her job at the veterans administration. 
she is now serving a six-month sentence of house arrest. pam parsons 
pled guilty to lying in a civil suit about going to a gay bar. her 
sentence was four months in jail and five years probation. for republicans, 
the experience of battalino and parsons is directly relevant to the 
case against the president. we're exploring whether there's one rule 
of law for the powerful, for the rulers, and another one for the ruled. 
there's a reason for the emphasis on perjury. republicans believe 
the strongest charge against the president -- and the article of impeachment 
with the best chance of passing the house -- is that he committed 
perjury, intentionally lying under oath. the committee is expected 
to pass at least one article of impeachment as soon as next week. 
for their part, democrats repeated their mantra. even if the worst 
of the charges against the president are true, they don't warrant 
impeachment. no one is suggesting that lying to the american public 
is anything but wrong. the only question before this judiciary committee 
is whether the president's actions arise to the level of an impeachable 
offense. the committee also heard from judges and legal scholars who 
offered differing opinions about whether or not perjury is an impeachable 
offense. nothing can trivialize the role of law more than to selectively 
isolate this case and act as if it is the only case of perjury that's 
important. mr. chairman, you contributed to that. i thank you, professor 
der show wiz. i don't thank you for criticizing the motives, saying 
that we're out to get the president. you haven't the slightest idea 
of the agony that many of us go through over this question. there 
is a difference between the cases of the perjurers who testified before 
the committee and that of the president. the witnesses pled guilty 
to lying under oath. the president admits that his testimony was misleading, 
but insists that he did not lie. jonathan karl, cnn, capitol hill. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>