<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981202.0130.1464 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
hollywood relationships are notoriously rocky. but none so much as 
the relationship between a star and his or her writer. and as jill 
brooke reports that can make or break you in tinseltown. so you may 
wonder, why is it that there are so few good shows to watch on tv 
this season? well, the awful truth is that success often depends on 
the rapport between the writer and stars. that scene doesn't have 
to be funny. we won't drive it for the funny. bill cosby has worked 
with many writers over the years, but says tom straw is his best collaboration 
yet. you put the proper writers with the proper theme for a show and 
bingo, connection. but it's not as easy as it looks. so many things 
that do go wrong on the shows can be a difference of opinion between 
the writer and star over the direction of the show. it can be petty. 
it can be a personality difference that has surfaced. you know, bill 
talks about chemistry, and that really is born out of a relationship. 
we know what to expect of each other. we know what we want of each 
other. unfortunately, this situation is rare for many reasons. first, 
the networks often force actors and writers into a shotgun marriage. 
a mistake is, a lot of times, they will put you -- a stand-up comic 
or a talent with a producer. they will give you one lunch. "go have 
lunch with this guy. see if you like him." they go, "this is the talent." 
"nice to meet you." and they'll go, "we like him, i think we can write 
for him." they'll look at a couple of your tapes, and that's all they 
have to go on. second, because of so many networks needing product, 
writers are often plucked before they may be skilled enough to run 
a show. you see them with the mother or grandmother. it used to be 
that it took seven years to become a head writer. the average now 
is two years. when things are working well, it's great. but when things 
don't work well in my experience, sometimes the writers and actors 
turn into armed camps and basically each sort of blame the other. 
and last but not least, the writer must be in sync with the actor's 
style. that's the transcendent part. for example, cosby respects the 
quality of writing on "frasier" and "ally mcbeal," but wouldn't hire 
their writers. i won't do what they've written. it doesn't mean that 
it isn't funny or that it won't function. i know that the best chemistry 
here is tom straw and his staff. and the proof is that the show is 
a strong performer for cbs. jill brooke, "cnn entertainment news," 
new york. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>