<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981202.2130.0026 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
But first, the Clinton administration is criticizing Israel for threatening 
to stop its pullout from the West Bank. After an attack on an Israeli 
soldier today, the Israeli cabinet set new conditions for the troop 
withdrawal. It wants the Palestinian authority to abandon its intention 
to declare statehood. And it wants an end to incitement and acts of 
violence. The White House says it is inappropriate for Israel to add 
new conditions to the wye peace accord and insists it must be implemented 
as signed. Jerrold Kessel has more on the violence that triggered 
Israel's announcement. The two Israelis in a car were encountered 
by protesting palestinian students, angry at Israel's continued detention 
of thousands of palestinian prisoners. The violence erupted when the 
students dashed from the edge of the palestinian town towards an Israeli-controlled 
road. Under the barrage of rocks and outbursts of anger, the civilian 
driver abandoned the car. The young Israeli soldier, who was in the 
front seat beside him, remained in the vehicle as it came to an abrupt 
halt next to a new Palestinian hotel. The attack continued, the solider 
was roughed up some more. "Pig get out," some yelled. The soldier 
was pulled out as the beating continued. His rifle was stolen. But 
some of the Palestinians yelled out "enough, enough, let him go," 
and the solider fled in the direction of a nearby Israeli base. As 
the car was set on fire, Israeli police and troops arrived. Stones, 
teargas and rubber-coated metal bullets flew. The student protesters 
gradually forced back into the palestinian-controlled town. Here, 
there were only light injuries to the two Israelis and four palestinian 
students. But a half-hour's drive away, in Jerusalem, a 41-year-old 
Palestinian died, stabbed to death in a mixed Arab/Jewish neighborhood. 
Police said before the funeral, they believe the killing was carried 
out by an Israeli extremist, who may have been responsible for a series 
of previous attacks on Palestinians in the city. Fresh violence in 
east Jerusalem after the funeral, as Palestinian protesters clashed 
with Israeli police. There were injuries, and an Israeli car was torched. 
The clashes come on top of angry finger-pointing by leaders of both 
sides who accuse the other side of violating the recent wye agreement. 
An ominous prelude to the visit in ten days' time of President Clinton, 
who brokered that accord. On a hill near the site of the West Bank 
clash, Palestinian and Israeli flags do still fly, side by side, at 
a joint military headquarters. But the way things seem here now at 
friction points, it looks very much as if the president's visit will 
be less about symbolism and praising the palestinians and Israeli 
leaders, and more about simply keeping the process alive. Jerrold 
Kessel, CNN, Ramallah, on the West Bank. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>