<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981202.2130.0194 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Clinton's lawyers are mounting a defense in the impeachment 
inquiry against him. Their decision comes in the wake of today's ruling 
that allowed house investigators to read confidential justice department 
memos on the investigation into President Clinton's 1996 campaign 
finances. Next week, White House lawyers will appear before the house 
Judiciary committee to offer a defense to Ken Starr's allegations. 
And they say they may call witnesses. Bob Franken has more on the 
expanding impeachment inquiry. The republicans finally got their way. 
They could finally read the secret memos on the campaign finance investigation. 
I think this is a step in the right direction. Judiciary committee 
attorneys were sent to the justice department -- One republican, one 
democrat. The judge ruled no copies could be made. No note-taking. 
And the staff lawyers can only tell chairman Henry Hyde and ranking 
democrat John Conyers what they saw. The report from the former head 
of the justice department's campaign task force who recommended to 
attorney general Janet Reno the appointment of a Independent counsel 
is the one generating the greatest interest. Republicans had no comment. 
Republicans claim they had had a tip that a memorandum from former 
justice department campaign finance task force included allegations 
of criminal conduct by President Clinton. I think it is incumbent 
upon to us review this information which has been compiled by the 
department of justice, to make certain that there's no evidence of 
of impeachable conduct there by the president. I think as we get to 
the specifics, the entire impeachment process will probably just fall 
apart on its own weight. But republicans are discussing a tentative 
schedule that begins next Tuesday, which the Judiciary committee is 
leaving open for the White House to present the president's defense. 
In addition, the republican and democratic investigators for the committee 
will make their cases. That could spill into Wednesday. Then, the 
committee would begin Thursday considering articles of impeachment. 
At the same time, there are still efforts to craft a censure alternative. 
Democrats now acknowledge they've made some contacts with republicans 
and they remain amon muss. I've had some serious conversations with 
a few republicans that have indicated they're supportive of a censure 
option and feel that that's the best way to bring this matter to closure. 
Early closure could be jeopardized if the republicans find something 
they decide to pursue in the campaign finance material. And it could 
certainly be jeopardized if the full house votes to impeach President 
Clinton. Bob Franken, CNN, Capitol Hill. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>