<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981202.2100.0659 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We have for you tonight the latest on the impeachment inquiry under 
way on the hill. Late tonight the White House released a letter to 
house Judiciary committee chairman Henry Hyde accepting an invitation 
to defend the president before the committee next week. A lot of folks 
thought they wouldn't. Attorneys for the president, among them Greg 
Craig, Charles ruff, say they also want to call witnesses. They're 
asking access to certain materials from Ken Starr's investigation 
and on subjects like Kathleen Willey and campaign finance. Also today, 
a federal judge ruled house Judiciary committee investigators, one 
from each party, could look at a secret justice department memos containing 
the campaign finance abuse allegations against the president. Some 
of the memos, by the way, were written by F.B.I. director Louis freeh 
and Charles LaBella, recommending that Janet Reno appoint an independent 
prosecutor. Sources say there could be evidence of criminal wrongdoing 
on the memos. That could affect the schedule of the Judiciary committee 
that they set today, by the way. The tentative plan is to wrap up 
the impeachment inquiry next week, vote on impeachment and seventh 
send possible articles of impeachment to the full house floor the 
week of December 14 perhaps. With us tonight to discuss where this 
committee's inquiry is now headed and the question of who's in charge 
these days, to come come come, chief counsel for the government reform 
and oversight committee, which has investigated campaign fundraising 
abuses, the 1996 campaign, and Roy neel who served as chief of staff 
to Al Gore and the president. Roy, let's begin with you. Some people 
were floating out word that White House attorneys would not engage 
in this section of the battle. They wouldn't get involved in the fight. 
They'd take a pass on the opportunity to defend the president, opting 
instead to let this thing get over with. They are engaging now. What 
signal does this send? Well, I'm sure that the White House wants to 
get this over just like the American people want to get this over. 
This is a process that's seemed to have lost credibility with the 
public, and perhaps the committee is seeking for a way to regain some 
stature for the process. I suspect the White House is not at all worried 
about going up there to Congress and dedefending the president in 
this process. Barbara, what was is it -- what signal, if any, does 
the White House decision send to you? Well, it will be interesting 
to see because I don't think they've indicate who had they want to 
call, but to date, they have not challenged any of the factual information 
in the Starr referral and they've been invited to submit exculpatory 
evidence to the committee and they have not done so. You have a situation 
where the president's own personal lawyer, Bob Bennett, has already 
indicated to the judge in the Jones case that you couldn't rely upon 
an affidavit, which the president himself had said was accurate, the 
Monica Lewinsky affidavit. Mr. Bennett said that was false and you 
can't rely upon that testimony. So you have a lot of very serious 
perjury allegations here that have gone unchallenged. And you have 
democrats tonight on TV, such as virgil Goode and other folks saying 
they're very concerned with perjury, which is a serious charge, which 
if you're found guilty of perjury, you can't vote. And I don't believe 
you can hold office in some states if you're guilty of perjury. So 
this is a serious matter that the president is going to need to respond 
to. Roy, the White House is known to be a bit troubled by more and 
more the moderate republicans indicating they might just take another 
look at voting for some articles of impeachment. You know, does that 
give it any more credence or any more hope for the pro imimpeachment 
folks in the Senate? Well, the thing is what Congress has to do is 
look at the rule of law. And yesterday, they had some very serious 
hearings on perjury and looking at the consequences of perjury for 
real life people, for the, you know, your vires out there. You know, 
if they had lied numerous times under oath before a grand jury in 
a civil proceeding, they would be subject to losing their medical 
licenses if they were doctors, losing their law licenses, being on 
home defence or being in jail. That's what we saw yesterday. And this 
whole fallacy that we've had for a year that perjury isn't usually 
pursued, there are 4300 cases alone in California last year and the 
Clinton justice department has put some of those people in jail for 
perjury. So it's an important issue. Neel sneel -- Roy neel? Ron, 
if there was ever a case of making a mountain out of a mole hill, 
this is it. The people have largely understood what the president 
has said. The president has apologized to the American people and 
to everybody involved in these allegations. Obviously the Judiciary 
committee has a job to do. The full house has to do as well. I think 
they're in a box. They don't seem to have much of a case. There's 
no stomach for removing this president from office, although there 
are some who seem determined to do it. And I wouldn't want to be in 
the position of those trying to pull us all back together. What about, 
Roy, the topic of punishment. Vom determined to see him leave office. 
Others are determined that his second term would not end without some 
kind of statement, some kind of admission on his part that he did 
wrong. And for all the teachers and parents trying to tell children 
across the country that their president did wrong. roy? Well, people 
trying to teach values, it's a personal thing. Within families, within 
Churches and so on. What about when you're a public figure? And to 
turn this into an impeachment process, to remove the president of 
the United States, there are people who just can't seem to bring themselves 
to accept the fact that this has been a successful spt presidentcy, 
a successful vice presidency, and to go about this process this way 
certainly undermines public confidence in governing. They ought to 
get back to the work of making sure this economy stays wrong, making 
sure we have education opportunities, and all the business of government 
here. But this process has overwhelmed policy and public discourse 
for a long time. I would hope and think the responsible leadership 
in Congress is seeking far way to end this as soon as possible. We'll 
have you back to talk about prognosis. We're going to have to end 
it there with apologies. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>