<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981202.2100.0064 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We begin tonight with the official beginning of the Christmas season, 
at least in the city of New York. This is how it looked from the air. 
It happened with a flick of the switch a short time ago at Rockefeller 
plaza. So it's against that backdrop that the timing of our lead story 
this evening is being seen as devastating for thousands of American 
families nationwide. Word is coming from several large firms that 
layoffs are on the way. Some have just been announced. Others are 
coming in in what is quickly becoming the mean season of corporate 
downsizing. Apparently without concern for the calendar, with Christmas 
just weeks away. Before we talk about what this means nationally against 
the backdrop of an otherwise robust economy, a look at this latest 
wave of bad news for workers, here is NBC news correspondent Jim avala. 
More than half a million Americans face layoffs this year. Well on 
the way to a record. What's happening out there? Mergers. The five 
largest in U.S. history, all born in 1998. From oil companies to banks, 
to phone companies. Giant marriages that ultimately streamline and 
downsize. Cutting the workforce. You've got to cut costs because Wall 
Street is going to drop your stock price if you don't take action. 
Michael book, blue collar worker at mobil owner in Beaumont, Texas, 
his job now on the line after the new merged mobil-Exxon created a 
new merger larger than some countries. Many people are labeled redundant. 
These companies are making obscene E earnings. I mean, they're making 
huge, huge earnings. But that's not enough. They can't to cut workers 
and expect more. He's not alone. 1998 is just the peek of a layoff 
spree that began in the 1990's and is growing. Boeing's announced 
job cuts this year, 48,000 workers. Today it's Kellogg, announcing 
layoffs, 525 employees at their battle Creek factory. You have to 
make these changes and deliver value to consumers and ultimately deliver 
on your first priority -- value to your shareholders. But some economists 
believe these layoffs do not signal trouble. Change, yes, but not 
trouble. why? Because the American economy is so strong it's creating 
many more jobs than are lost. Two million more this year than last. 
And the new jobs are not at fast food restaurants. Real earnings are 
up nearly 4% this year. People can land elsewhere in the economy where 
they couldn't just a few years ago, even if they're pushed out of 
that you shall curb Shi, corporate job. Experts say in this climate, 
American workers won't be staying with their company long enough to 
earn a gold watch, but will be making enough to buy their own. Now 
the question, what should Americans make of this news with layoffs 
by the thousands, one week after a record close for the Dow. With 
us tonight, Ron Insana of CNBC. Ron, how is it possible that what 
is being called a robust economy also produces so many layoffs? Well, 
Brian, as Jim suggested, simply more jobs are being created than being 
destroyed at the moment. There is a possibility that the workers being 
displaced in major corporations like Exxon-mobil, like Kellogg, like 
bankers trust and deutch bank, will find work elsewhere as the economy 
continues to grow. The layoffs at Boeing did spark a selloff on Wall 
Street as people began to fear again that the Asian economic crisis 
is not getting any better. And as a consequence, that is putting some 
downside pressure on stock prices. At least it did today. The Dow 
by the closing bell recovered, but it still ended down 69 points for 
the session. Volume was fairly heavy for the day at 727 million shares. 
And the NASDAQ also down on the day, volume approaching one billion 
shares. There's concern that the Asian crisis might leak through to 
this still strong economy. And government types are fond of saying 
the jobs created outnumber the jobs Doe stroyed. But are the people 
being laid off right now, three weeks before Christmas, ready to move 
into those vacant jobs? Or is there a skill issue? Well, there's going 
to be a skill issue and certainly going to be an industry issue F. 
you're a laid off oil worker, and prices remain low, you might expect 
other companies will merge as well. It might be easier for somebody 
on Wall Street to find work after being laid off, if indeed the markets 
continue robust. Very busy couple of days on the economic front. Ron 
Insana has been covering it all. Ron, thank you 
</TEXT>
</DOC>