<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981202.2100.1794 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Word came to us today that a chemical used in certain children toys 
and feeding devices, particularly those used for teething infacts 
could potentially be harmful. Some are being looked at while others 
are being pulled effective immediately. Matt wald of the "New York 
Times" Washington bureau has been covering the story today, has written 
about it for tomorrow morning's edition. Hello, Matt. He's with us 
tonight from our Washington Bure bureau. Big picture, what is this 
compound? What's being pulled right now? Well, this is the compound 
that makes vinyl soft. Vinyl starts out to be P.V.C., which is what 
they use for pipes. You add a softening agent. The softening agent 
they were using up until the mid 1980's, they fed it to rats and mice 
and discovered it cost cancer. They switched to this agent. They discovered 
this agent does the same thing. The degree of risk just isn't known. 
It's a big uncertainty. The mechanism that causes health problems 
in rats is not applicable to humans, but some people are concerned 
about this. The problem is the consumer product safety commission 
says it doesn't have near enough evidence to go for a ban. Instead 
they've been negotiating with the manufacturers to switch where possible 
to other materials. And the first materials they're looking at are 
the products that are designed to go into the mouth. Of course, everything 
goes into babies' mouths. But there are pacifiers, teethers, rattles, 
and nipples for baby ls that are designed to go in the mouth. And 
those, it would seem rational if you could do it easily, to switch 
to something else. Most of those are now made of latex. There are 
a few that are still made of vinyl. And then there's the question 
of what you do with every other toy that kids can mouth. Mike T: and 
Matt, we have some videotape which we're going to rool. But we should 
stress that not everything in the videotape has been labeled or even 
is under investigation as potentially dangerous. There's just so much 
we don't know right now. Products like those vinyl -- I'm using maybe 
a term of art -- that book right there. Baby's first book that's made 
to go in the tub, made to get wet and not be harmed. But as you mentioned, 
everything goes into the mouth. Yeah. Although one of the things it 
turns out we don't know is how long these things spend in the mouth, 
how much a typical kid will put it in his mouth. The other thing we 
don't know, and it's produced very strange experiments, is how fast 
this material comes out of the vinyl, and into the mouth and gets 
swallowed. They had a team of volunteer adults essentially standing 
around crewing on rubber ducks and spit into a lab dish. They would 
analyze the saliva and see how many of these softening agents came 
out. They did a mechanical test and they got wildly different results. 
So the dose rate is one of the many unknowns here. Matt, bottom line 
for people before even they get to read your biline in the morning. 
They're going to be looking around their house if they're raising 
young children, kind of counting up the plastic items wondering well, 
we have these things. What should we do? Where can they go for guidelines? 
The theory is if this stuff is bad for you, it can catch up to you 
20, 30, 40 years later. It's nebulous. The consumer product safety 
commission said today that products that go in the mouth, there's 
only three that are still out there. They're no longer manufactured 
but they may be on shell evs, may be in people's homes. That are using 
vinyl. That's the Gerber clear and soft line, some pacifiers, bottles 
and nipples. Other materials, dozens, many too many to mention, toys, 
like that book and sorts of things, do have vinyl in them. But kids 
don't chew on them scently. They say it's easy to do the pacifiers. 
They don't know how to make the more complicated shapes in material 
other than vinyl. It's an open question what happens next. A lot of 
young parents and grand patients will be paying attention. The story 
will appear tomorrow. Thanks for coming on. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>