<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981202.2100.2218 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
From "dateline NBC" tonight, a case that's caused numerous comparisons 
to the Jonbenet Ramsey case in Colorado. Two distraught parents here 
battling with investigators, trying to solve the mystery of what happened 
to their child. As in the Ramsey case, the parents are suspects. It 
all started just over a year ago, Thanksgiving 1997. We get the story 
fra "dateline NBC" and NBC's correspondent Bob McKeown. Come on, Sabrina. 
Come on, sweetty. Come over here and see mommy. Who could ever forget 
that face? A 5-month-old baby girl with long, brown hair, making her 
first determined efforts to crawl. Sabrina, what are you doing? Her 
name is Sabrina Paige aisenberg. This tape was made just over a year 
ago. It was the last home video Sabrina's mother would take of her. 
There are no pictures to record her first words or her first steps 
or her first teeth. And this is the last portrait taken of the aisenberg 
family together. Parents, Steve and Marlene, brother William and sister 
Monica. Just days after this video was taken, Sabrina vanished from 
her crib. She's been missing without a trace ever since. why? Why 
would somebody do this to our family? Who could have done such a thing 
to us? We'll never stop asking that until she comes home. The aisenbergs 
say apart from their tape and the photographs, all they have from 
Sabrina now is the hope that someday they'll see their baby again. 
Somebody will walk in with a little girl and you're always check could 
that be Sabrina is that her? And then seeing the different stages 
that the little child is going through and missing, you know, Sabrina 
would be doing that now. Or I wonder does she have her teeth yet. 
Do the kids ask you about Sabrina? All the time. What do they ask? 
When is she coming home? When are we going to be a family again? Now 
a year later, the aisenbergs insist they're convinced their blufed 
little girl will somehow be returned to them. But others in Tampa 
seem to believe the parents know more than they are saying ability 
the night their baby disappeared. It was sometime in the early hours 
of November 24, 1997. A few days before Thanksgiving. At the family's 
home in this Tampa suburb. As usual, Marlene says she woke up about 
6:30 to check on the kids. The parents first told their story to "Dateline" 
who months after the baby disappeared. You know your baby cries and 
you wake up immediately. But there was no such noise? Not from any 
of their rooms. She found the garage door open then rushed to Sabrina's 
room. What I heard was, you know, Marlene screaming hysterically. 
And I run out and check Sabrina's crib. She's not there. I'm trying 
to get her to calm down. She's calling 911 hysterical. While police 
searched, the F.B.I. arrived to wait for a call from a kidnapper. 
None came. Later that day, the aisenbergs went on TV to appeal for 
the safe return of their baby daughter. This morning someone came 
into our home and took our Sabrina Paige out of her crib. And took 
her out of our home. And I'm begging that person to please bring our 
baby back to us. Whatever happened just hours before, this would be 
a turning point in the case. Some people thought Marlene just didn't 
appear distraught enough to be a grieving mother. And we all miss 
her and love her very much and we need her to come home to us, please. 
Marlene says viewers didn't see what happened when they turned the 
camera off. The day this happened, I'm in shock. And the minute that 
plea was over, I completely broke down hysterical. And a month later, 
there was a more emotional plea. Please, please bring her home. But 
police questions quickly focused on the aisenbergs themselves. Why 
hadn't they or their children heard an intruder in the house? Why 
didn't their dog bark? Was it true, as the family said, that they 
always left their garage door unlocked? The patients insist they answered 
everything investigators wanted to know. We talked to them prior to 
hiring an attorney about eight to 10 times in the first couple days. 
It was just 48 hours after Sabrina disappeared when the parents say 
they were told they were suspects. That the aisenbergs hired Barry 
Cohen, a top criminal attorney in Tampa. They're doing a half-assed 
job of trying to find Sabrina. Investigators say he has since allowed 
his clients to fully address the questions that remain unanswered. 
We're willing to talk to you as long as there's a tape recorder present 
and I'm permitted to be present. But the police rejected speaking 
to the patients with any condition -- parents with any conditions 
attached. So investigators moved to force them to talk with subpoenas 
to appear before a federal grand jury. Are you going to take the fifth? 
Aisenbergs' attempt to quash those subpoenas left. They each spent 
15 minutes in front of the grand jury then left. Did you claim the 
fifth amendment? That's something we don't feel comfortable commenting 
on at this time. The question is why could you not give them more 
than 15 minutes of your time? The grand jury is something that is 
a private proceeding. We want to value that. We know we had nothing 
to do with our daughter's disappearance, and I think that our whole 
goal throughout this whole thing is to try to get our daughter home, 
get her story out. There are many patients that would say I -- parents 
that would say I'd answer anything. But we have. But you didn't before 
the grand jury. But we have with the police. Not according to the 
police. They say that thought the aisenbergs have given countless 
interviews on television and interviews and magazines, the parents 
have not yet sat down for a formal interview with the investigators 
who are trying to find out what happened to their baby. Have you eliminated 
the aisenbergs, the parents from that list of suspects? no. The aisenbergs 
have not been ruled out. Lieutenant Greg brown is a spokesman for 
the Hillsboro county sheriff's department. They retained Mr. Cohen 
on the third day and since that point, we have not been allowed to 
ask them speppingses about what their actions were, what they did. 
We were banned from discussing that. For their part, the aisenbergs 
argued they promptly have given police blood samples and air samples, 
dirt from their yard, names of friends and acquaintances, all in an 
effort to solve the case. Their take on it seems to be that they are 
providing you with materials you would need to find their daughter. 
They were in the house when alleged crime occurred. They probably 
have more information than any other human being on the face of this 
earth, and you have to clear people as you go out from the center 
of where the crime occurred. And the first people you get to are the 
aisenbergs. It seems to me what you got here is a family that's lost 
their child, under whatever circumstances, and the two people who 
should be most active in getting to the bottom of it, the parents, 
and the police. Aren't talking to each other. There's a federal grand 
jury that's been impaneled to look at this, and that is the appropriate 
forum at this time. Prior to the grand jury, we were the appropriate 
place to discuss it, now that it's been impanelled, that's the appropriate 
area. If there has been six months of suspicion between the police 
here in Tampa and Sabrina's parents, it's at least in part from the 
statistics of this crime. According to the national center for missing 
and exploiting children, there have been exceptional cases where stain 
jers have abducted children six months or less, but they are few and 
far between. And when a baby is kidnapped, the person who's done it 
is someone in their very own family. You can't see it by looking down 
the aisenbergs' street, but this quiet community has been divided 
by the crime. Some neighbors suspect the worse. I've always thought 
that unfortunately that there may be some involvement with the parents, 
that they know where the child is at or what occurred with the child. 
But others still trust in the parents and believe they're doing everything 
they can to bring their little girl home again. I know Steve and Marlene. 
I know they had nothing to do with this. And I see how it has destroyed 
so much of their life. In fact, the aisenbergs are convinced the police 
are spending more time trying to implicate them than to find their 
daughter. They spoke to "Dateline" to publicize the belief that the 
baby they last saw a year ago might now look very different, perhaps 
like her sister Monica at the same age. This is Monica at 17 months. 
We're praying that Sabrina will have that same family resemblance. 
The Internet site dead -- dedicated to finding Sabrina also has an 
age progression image of how she might look today. But a year after 
the aisenberg baby vanished into thin air. Please bring Sabrina home. 
The candle light vigils are a thing of the past. The billboard with 
her picture is no longer a part of the Tampa skyline. And although 
occasional fliers still go out, the search for Sabrina seems to be 
running out of steam. Do you believe that you will ever find out what 
truly happened that night? yes. What leads you to believe that at 
this stage? A lot of information that we can't discuss because it's 
an open case at this point. But we feel very confident that this case 
will be resolved. But with the passing of a year, there is no resolution 
in sight for Steve and Marlene aisenberg. The disappearance of their 
then 5-month-old daughter still unexplained. You say you know Sabrina 
will come home. You also are aware of the statistics in crimes such 
as these, which are that they're solved very quickly or they're not 
solved at all. And the likelihood is that something terrible may have 
happened to your daughter. We believe she's going to come home and 
we won't believe anything else. She'll come home. We believe whoever 
took her is taking care of her and loving her. Because nobody could 
do anything but. Nobody will take our baby to hurt her. And we'll 
believe that until the day she comes home. We should tell you that 
in October, the aisenbergs attorney took his offer off the table. 
He now refuses to let the aisenbergs talk to police under any circumstances. 
We should also tell you the federal grand jury investigating the disappearance 
of their daughter is continuing to gather. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>