<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981202.2100.3399 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> MISCELLANEOUS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Mike Espy is on the front page of most newspapers tomorrow morning. 
The house speaker and other republican leaders in the house reaffirmed 
their support for the embattled Henry Hyde and said they are prepared 
to watch this thing go past January if need be. "Dallas morning news," 
it has happened so many times it's lamb cliche. Violence yet again 
derailing the peace process in the Middle East. This time the West 
Bank withdrawal. And this was why. An Israeli soldier pulled from 
his car, beaten with stones by a Palestinian mob. This will not please 
the prime minister of Israel. There is increased trouble, and now 
increased tension. "U.S.A. today" instead of waiting for something 
terrible to happen, airlines are going to download data that in effect 
spells out every moment, every minute of an airline flight while the 
flight is in progress, and afterwards will download after landing. 
They can look back over the data to see what if anything went wrong 
and any indications of future trouble. Also "Miami Herald" a big makeover 
plan in the White House. Of course; it could take 20 years like everything 
else in Washington. $300 million. The plans for the White House, adding 
a recroom underground parking, a visitor's center, and a new briefing 
room. The current one having been in disrepair for some time. It is 
home to rats and, of course, other journalists. Now here's Jane pauley 
with a program note. Thanks, Brian. Tonight on "time & again," one 
of America's favorite stars, now on N a real-life drama. Michael J. 
fox who's displosed he has parking son's disease, we'll look at his 
sitcom success to big screen stardom in big movies like "back to the 
future." We'll hear from co-star and future life Tracy pollin. And 
we'll hear from fox himself about work, life, family and fame. Michael 
J. fox coming up next. Mike T: "time & again" with Jane pauley next 
on MSNBC. That's our broadcast for Wednesday night. For all the journalists 
who helped put it together, we hope to see you back here at the same 
time tomorrow night for the Thursday edition. I'm Brian Williams. 
And for all of us here, scant miles from the glow in the sky caused 
by the tree at 30 rock. The switch thrown tonight by first lady Hillary 
Rodham Clinton opening the season in New York officially. We're going 
to see it, I swear to you, this view from the air. We'll stay on all 
night if we have to. Oh, it's live. They turned the lights off. Made 
a liar out of me. Good night, everybody. A popular star, a remarkable 
career and a drama that's all too real. Over the years with Michael 
J. fox. I'm Jane pauley and this is "time & again." Hello and welcome 
to "time & again." Michael J. fox is best known for comedy. But now 
he's in the real life drama of his life. Parkinson's disease, the 
same disorder of the nervous system that afflicts an estimated 1 million 
americay, it should. NBA action, the brilliant ad campaign used to 
say it's fantastic. They may have to rewrite it now. NBA action, it's 
irrelevant. Just a reminder. We're here twice nightly. The "the news 
with Brian Williams" is next. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>