<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981202.1830.0888 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
NBC news "in depth" -- tonight, on the brink of a new era, you are 
looking live at the space shuttle, "endeavour," set to lift off overnight, 
carrying the next piece of the international space station. When it's 
completed, the space station will be more than 350 feet wide and over 
260 feet long. And it would, on Terra firma, weigh 1 million pounds. 
Is this the future of space exploration, or, as some claim, just a 
Pointless and expensive exercise? NBC news Robert Hager tonight, "in 
depth." Modern-day pioneers astronauts at cape Canaveral, scheduled 
to soar into space before dawn tomorrow, weather permitting. The first 
U.S. flight to begin construction of what's eventually supposed to 
look like this. The international space station. One of the largest, 
most complicated, and most controversial public works projects in 
history. Bob cabana commands tomorrow's flight. This crew is ready 
to go. Believe me, they are up to the challenge. The first piece of 
the space station, already up there waiting. Already boosted into 
orbit aboard a Russian rocket. It's a power generator called zarya, 
which means "sunrise." Now, the shuttle will haul up part two, called 
"unity," a sort of connecting hub of the future station. Full-sized 
mock-UPS of the two, zarya and unity, seen in Houston today, where 
astronauts train for three difficult space walks next week to hook 
the two together. What will be one of the most difficult construction 
job frs devised. Requiring special tools made with big handles that 
can be grasped by clumsy space gloves and complex parts designed to 
connect easily. Imagine a simple job like using a power tool to tighten 
a bolt on the side of the spacecraft. In the weightlessness of space, 
when the astronaut used the tool, it would actually spin the astronaut's 
body instead of the bolt. So to solve that problem, astronauts would 
bring with them a foot restraint device like this, to keep their body 
from spinning. And that device would fasten onto the side of the spacecraft, 
right there. But is this huge project worth the price? $20 billion 
already spent by the U.S. $40 billion more to go. And some believe 
it could be as much as $100 billion more. For what? For experiments? 
More discovers along the lines of teflon or making ball bearings. 
Science writer, Timothy ferris -- We've been doing micgrogravity experiments 
aboard the space shuttle for years now, and I'm not aware of a single 
scientific discovery of any major consequence that has come out of 
them. Or is it about space exploration? This is going to take us back 
to the Moon and on to Mars and beyond. All kinds of great things, 
coming. But others argue that it would be much less expensive to fly 
directly to the Moon or Mars. The space station isn't space exploration. 
It's a mission to nowhere. It doesn't go anywhere, it just goes around 
and around in low earth orbit. It's a kind of motel 6, 200 miles up. 
a boondoggle, or an inspirational journey, that signals a new era 
in the history of our presence in space. The shuttle is poised tonight, 
just hours to scheduled liftoff and counting. Robert Hager, NBC news, 
Washington. One more note on the magnitude of this project, over the 
next 6 years, it will take 34 space shuttles and 9 Russian Rockets 
to haul the approximately 100 pieces that will make up the space station. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>