<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981202.0418 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After only two days of deliberation, a federal jury on Wednesday acquitted 
Mike Espy, the former agriculture secretary, of corruption charges, 
ending an independent prosecutor's four-year investigation of Espy's 
acceptance of sports tickets and other favors from companies he was 
supposed to regulate. ``It's cost a lot, it's been tough but I knew 
from day one that I would stand here before you completely exonerated,'' 
Espy, a former congressman and once a rising star in the Democratic 
Party, told reporters outside the courthouse. The jury took barely 
10 hours to reject 30 counts brought by Donald Smaltz, an independent 
prosecutor. The trial judge had earlier dismissed eight other counts. 
Even as he savored his swift and thorough redemption, Espy made it 
clear he was among the critics who point to each such verdicts as 
a judgment of the independent counsel law under which he was prosecuted. 
Congress is expected to hold hearings early next year on whether to 
renew the law, which expires in June. There is little expectation 
that it will be extended as many public officials in both parties, 
wearied by high-profile investigations from Iran-Contra to Whitewater, 
seem opposed to the law. Espy made it plain that when Congress holds 
hearings, he hoped his ordeal would seal the law's fate. ``I would 
like to be the first witness,'' he said. Espy likened Smaltz who spent 
more than $17 million investigating him over a four-year period to 
a ``schoolyard bully.'' Both Espy and Smaltz, in comments to reporters 
after the verdict, neatly crystallized the debate over the wisdom 
and effectiveness of the Ethics in Government Act, the post-Watergate 
law that provides for independent counsels to investigate allegations 
of wrongdoing against senior administration officials. The independent 
prosecutor, Espy said, was ``someone with all the money, all the power, 
very little supervision, no timetable and able to unleash powerful 
hordes of prosecutors on you and your family,'' summarizing the arguments 
that will be heard in Congress from the law's opponents. After Espy 
and his jubilant family departed, Smaltz appeared and first told reporters 
that he accepted the verdict. But then, in his prepared statement, 
Smaltz appeared to continue to argue the case he had just lost, saying: 
``A public official's acceptance of gratuities goes to the heart of 
the credibility in the performance of his duties. When a public official 
accepts gratuities, it calls the impartial execution of his judgment 
into question when he has matters before him that affect the gratuity 
givers.'' William Noakes, an associate independent counsel, said that 
with the conclusion of the Espy trial, Smaltz's office has only a 
few matters remaining and will soon close up shop. Smaltz took the 
opportunity to offer a both a valedictory and a defense of his work, 
saying that his office had achieved more than a dozen convictions 
and garnered some $11 million in fines and criminal penalties, mostly 
from companies that were charged with giving illegal gratuities to 
Espy. ``If our investigation and prosecutions dissuade corporations 
from giving gifts to their regulators, and the regulators from accepting 
gifts from those who are regulated, I believe that the costs we have 
incurred are worth the price,'' Smaltz said. He also said that despite 
the acquittal, there was value in prosecuting Espy because it would 
discourage other officials from behaving the same way. ``The actual 
indictment of a public official may in fact be as great a deterrent 
as a conviction of that official,'' he said. Throughout his tenure, 
Smaltz had been the target of critics who complained that he personified 
the problems with the independent counsel law, that he was excessively 
ambitious and eager to expand his jurisdiction beyond his original 
mandate. At times, he faced even more criticism than Kenneth Starr, 
the independent counsel for Whitewater matters who has told Congress 
that President Clinton may have committed impeachable offenses. A 
few weeks after his appointment in September 1994, Smaltz stunned 
many in official Washington when he subpoenaed flight logs and notes 
of pilots working for Tyson's Foods, a large poultry and food processor 
based in Arkansas whose owner, Don Tyson, has been a longtime patron 
of Clinton. He was trying to find out if Tyson had arranged for cash 
bribes to be ferried to Clinton when he was governor of Arkansas. 
When lawyers from Tyson's protested that none of the matters were 
within Smaltz's jurisdiction, a federal judge agreed and ordered Smaltz 
to stop. Smaltz also suffered a setback when a federal judge threw 
out charges he had brought against Henry Espy, Espy's brother, saying 
they were unrelated to the prosecutor's mandate. But Smaltz has had 
successes as well. His two most notable victories were having Tyson's 
Foods agree to pay $6 million after pleading guilty to making illegal 
gifts to Espy. He also got Sun Diamond Growers, a California cooperative 
for growers of nuts, raisins and other dried fruits to pay a $1.5 
million fine for illegally condoning gifts to Espy by its lobbyist. 
But a federal appeals court in Washington overturned the conviction 
of Sun Diamond and the case is on appeal to the U.S.Supreme Court, 
one of the remaining items of business for Smaltz's office. The case 
involves the meaning of the unlawful gratuity statute, which makes 
it a crime to give, offer or promise ``anything of value'' to a public 
official ``because of any official act performed or to be performed.'' 
Smaltz had argued that the law was violated anytime a gift was motivated 
by the recipient's official position. But in overturning the conviction 
last March, the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit 
said the gift had to be motivated not only by the recipient's position, 
but by some official act, either a reward for a past act, or an inducement 
for a future one. Espy was charged with violating the same statute, 
receiving an illegal gratuity. In presenting 70 witnesses over nearly 
two months, Smaltz portrayed Espy as eager to ask companies he regulated 
for hard-to-get tickets to sporting events, including the U.S. Open 
tennis tournament, and games played by the Dallas Cowboys football 
team and the Chicago Bulls basketball team. Espy was not charged with 
bribery but under the gratuity law, with taking about $34,000 worth 
of tickets and other favors like luggage. Espy did not take the stand 
and presented no witnesses in his defense, resting his case after 
the prosecution presented 70 witnesses. Ted Wells, one of Espy's lawyers, 
sought to demolish Smaltz's case during closing argument to the jury 
that the prosecution presented no witnesses who testified his client 
ever made a decision based on anything he ever received. He said that 
many of the gifts Espy received were the result of longstanding friendships 
with people who were lobbyists and that the law allowed federal officials 
to accept items in those circumstances. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>