<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981202.0404 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After Boeing Co. and McDonnell Douglas Corp. announced their $16 billion 
merger in 1996, European regulators nearly blocked the deal because 
they were so worried that the new American aerospace giant would pose 
an unfair threat to Airbus Industrie, the European consortium that 
is Boeing's sole competitor making large passenger jets. But now, 
almost exactly two years later, in a story that has come to resemble 
the fabled race between the tortoise and the hare, Boeing looks as 
if it is the company running out of gas while Airbus appears to be 
steadily gaining ground. Boeing's stunning disclosure on Tuesday that 
it would scale back production of most of its airplanes and cut its 
work force by an additional 20,000 jobs over the next two years on 
top of 28,000 previously announced cuts is the latest in a string 
of high-profile embarrassments since it completed the merger in August 
1997. Even with the cuts, which account for 20 percent of its work 
force, Boeing said that it would still earn a profit of only 1 percent 
to 3 percent on a whopping $50 billion in revenue in 2000 _ a margin 
more in line with a supermarket chain than the maker of jets that 
sell for $150 million each. Investors had bid up Boeing shares in 
recent months in the belief that the company was on the road to recovery 
after posting its first annual loss in 50 years in 1997. They abandoned 
the stock in droves Wednesday as nine Wall Street analysts downgraded 
their recommendations. Shares of Boeing plunged $6.6875, or 16.5 percent, 
to $33.6875 in record volume on the New York Stock Exchange. The steep 
decline helped drag the Dow Jones industrial average down 69 points, 
to close at 9,064.54. Boeing executives said that the latest announcements 
were the unfortunate result of the economic downturn in Asia. ``The 
situation in Asia has worsened dramatically,'' Philip M. Condit, Boeing's 
chairman and chief executive, told analysts and reporters Wednesday, 
adding that it was ``much deeper and more prolonged than we had first 
estimated.'' But many who watch Boeing say that the effect of Asia 
should have been clear to the company's top executives months ago 
_ when they dropped an earlier bombshell on Wall Street by disclosing 
lower-than-expected earnings estimates that were revised even lower 
on Tuesday. The downturn itself, they added, is to blame for only 
a small part of the company's troubles. ``Yes, external factors have 
played a role,'' said Byron Callan, an aerospace analyst at Merrill 
Lynch in New York. ``But 80 to 90 percent of the problems Boeing has 
today are problems that Boeing created.'' Indeed, Airbus operates 
in the same global economy as Boeing, yet it appears to be suffering 
far less. Just how well _ or badly _ Airbus is doing is difficult 
to measure because as a private company it does not have to disclose 
its financial condition the way Boeing does. But David Venz, an Airbus 
spokesman, said Wednesday that the airplane maker has lost orders 
for only 15 of its single-aisle models because of the Asian recession 
and that it had only a handful of finished jets sitting in storage 
waiting for buyers to arrange financing for them. Boeing, on the other 
hand, has 24 planes in storage, down from 36 at the end of June. The 
two competitors approach the market in different ways. Airbus, which 
is hampered by European restrictions on laying off workers, has decided 
to expand its airplane production steadily. It plans to produce 234 
airplanes this year, 293 in 1999 and 317 in 2000. Boeing is more manic, 
increasing production and hiring tens of thousands of workers in boom 
times, then laying them off when the downturn comes. It says it will 
produce 550 passenger jets this year and a record 620 next year before 
decreasing to 490 in 2000. Boeing's current troubles date back to 
its ill-fated decision in 1996 to win market share at all costs. Worried 
that it would lose ground to Airbus, Boeing agreed to deliver hundreds 
of planes at cut-rate prices in the mistaken belief that it could 
overhaul its antiquated production methods and deliver a record number 
of airplanes at the same time. After laying off 30,000 thousand workers 
during a slump in the early 1990s, Boeing hired 32,000 new workers 
in just 18 months. Though Boeing has the image of a technologically 
advanced company, each of its planes is essentially custom-made from 
millions of parts that are tracked by paper. ``They are still building 
these aircraft in the primitive way they were using 40 years ago,'' 
said E. Han Kim, a professor of finance and international business 
at the University of Michigan Business School. Many of the new workers 
did not have the same refined skills as the journeymen they replaced. 
To make matters worse, Boeing's factories were soon overwhelmed by 
parts shortages. Production fell so far out of kilter that the company 
was forced to freeze production of its 747 and 737 models for a month 
in October 1997 in order to catch up. The blunder cost the company 
$4 billion in accounting charges and angered many of its customers. 
Airbus has since won key orders from longtime Boeing customers like 
United Airlines, United Parcel Service and British Airways, which 
had an all-Boeing fleet until it decided in August to buy a fleet 
of Airbus planes. Boeing, in the meantime, is still trying to recover. 
Harry S. Stonecipher, Boeing's president, said Wednesday that the 
company still took 20 percent to 30 percent more hours to produce 
an airplane than it did in 1994. After dismissing the head of the 
airplane division in September and installing Alan R. Mulally, who 
played a key role in the development of the 777, Condit says that 
Boeing is committed to increasing its productivity and still thinks 
the company can achieve double-digit profit margins, though he will 
not say when. Mulally is now in the unenviable position of having 
to motivate a work force to give 110 percent at a time when it knows 
that the ax is about to fall. ``I imagine that you could probably 
scrape morale off the floor at this point,'' Callan said. And because 
Boeing must still produce 620 airplanes next year, the bulk of the 
layoffs will most likely occur in the last half of the year, just 
when Boeing is scheduled to begin negotiating a new contract with 
the International Association of Machinists, which represents 40,000 
of its hourly workers. The union struck Boeing for 69 days during 
the last round of negotiations in 1995. If things do not improve at 
Boeing soon, the machinists may not be the only ones fearing for their 
jobs. ``I don't know how many chances you get to get your credibility 
back,'' said Nicholas Heymann, an aerospace analyst at Prudential 
Securities. Callan of Merrill Lynch said, ``There are institutional 
investors who recently saw light when the stock was at 40 again and 
just lost 18 percent of their value today, and they are going to want 
action.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>