<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981202.0346 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A Nigerian widow who says she and her 11-year-old daughter face sexual 
abuses if they are forced to return to her homeland has asked to stay 
in the United States under new legislation that makes an international 
convention against torture part of U.S. law. The woman, Virginia Anikwata, 
who has been battling to stay in the United States for 10 years on 
various grounds after the death of her husband, a student, will have 
a hearing Friday on her new claim in Arlington, Va., according to 
her lawyer in Washington, Morton Sklar. Ms. Anikwata says that if 
she returns to Nigeria she will become the shared property of her 
late husband's extended family and that her daughter, Chinedu Sharon, 
a U.S. citizen, will face genital cutting, known widely in Africa 
as female circumcision. Immigration law no longer automatically allows 
an immigrant to remain in the United States with a child who is a 
citizen. Sklar said Ms. Anikwata's case built on a precedent set by 
Fauziya Kassindja, an illegal immigrant from Togo who was given asylum 
in the United States in 1996 based on her fear of having to undergo 
genital cutting if she returned. In Ms. Anikwata's case, however, 
she is asking for protection for herself and the girl, and she is 
not using asylum procedures but legislation enacted by Congress in 
October. That law provides automatic protection against deportation 
for people who file claims under the 1984 United Nations Convention 
Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman and Degrading Treatment or 
Punishment. The United States ratified the convention in 1994. Sklar, 
director of the U.S. branch of the independent World Organization 
Against Torture, said the process could take a year to complete in 
hearings under the antitorture law. In that time Ms. Anikwata will 
be permitted to work and cannot be deported. ``The Kassindja case 
established the right of a woman not to go back to a situation where 
she would be subjected to FGM,'' Sklar said, using a shorthand expression 
for female genital mutilation. ``What's unique about this case is 
that for the first time it deals with whether a parent can use this 
protection on behalf of a child. The Immigration and Naturalization 
Service has not recognized that right yet.'' The protection of children, 
especially girls, is becoming an issue in more immigration and asylum 
cases, and judges have considerable flexibility in considering pleas. 
On Nov. 5 an immigration judge in New York allowed an Indian couple 
to stay in the United States on the ground that their two daughters, 
both U.S. citizens, could not be expected to develop well under the 
hardships of India. A campaign on Ms. Anikwata's behalf has been led 
by Equality Now, a New York human rights organization that helps women 
in the developing world and immigrants in the United States. ``We 
want courts in this country to recognize that girls from countries 
where the practice of female genital mutilation takes place are at 
risk and that their mothers are very likely not going to be able to 
protect them,'' said Jessica Neuwirth, a lawyer who is president of 
Equality Now. Ms. Neuwirth said it was also outrageous that immigration 
officials had suggested that Ms. Anikwata should leave her daughter 
behind if she is fearful of her fate in Nigeria. They have no relatives 
in the United States. Ms. Anikwata, 36, married Godfrey Anikwata in 
Nigeria in 1986 and moved with him to the University of Maryland, 
where he was a student. Anikwata was found to have terminal lung cancer 
and died in September 1987, when their only child, Chinedu Sharon, 
was 2 months old. With her husband's death, Ms. Anikwata lost her 
right to remain in the United States. The family of the late Mr. Anikwata, 
Ibos like Ms. Anikwata, has been demanding that she return to Nigeria 
to become part of the extended clan and bear other children by male 
relatives, she said in an affidavit. After having lived in the United 
States she did not want to live under that arrangement. She also has 
other fears. ``If a male dies and has only one child that child becomes 
the property of the husband's family,'' Ms. Anikwata wrote in the 
affidavit. ``I do not want her to have to face an uprooted life, to 
have to live with persons and a culture she does not know, to see 
her mother having to commit acts against her principles and, most 
of all, to endure female circumcision, which will surely be her fate.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>