<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981202.0522 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Think it's easy being the Mets? They've spent the last six weeks trying 
to catch up with two teams, one in their division, the other in their 
city. They have made many moves as part of that effort, but a miracle 
has not been among them. No matter what the Mets do, they continue 
to face a daunting task. When the season ended they were 18 games 
behind the Atlanta Braves and galaxies of interest behind the World 
Series champion Yankees. The standings, of course, don't carry over 
to next season, but the strengths of the teams do. The Braves will 
begin the last season of this millennium with the core of their starting 
pitching rotation intact. They traded Denny Neagle, but they still 
have Greg Maddux, Tom Glavine and John Smoltz, owners of the last 
seven Cy Young awards. They also fortified their hitting and their 
defense with the acquisition of second baseman Bret Boone and right 
fielder Brian Jordan. The Yankees will begin next season with their 
entire team intact. That is bad news for a lot of teams, not only 
the Mets. Think of how Baltimore and Boston must feel. But as much 
as the Mets don't have to compete with the Yankees for a division 
title during the summer, they compete with them for the metropolitan 
area's attention year round. ``We want people to come to Shea, too,'' 
a member of the Mets said Wednesday. Giving Mike Piazza $91 million 
had at least as much to do with the Yankees as the Braves. Overpaying 
by $20 million to $30 million was a steep premium to pay, but it is 
Fred Wilpon's and Nelson Doubleday's money, and in one sense it was 
strategically spent. The Piazza signing, stunning as it was coming 
from the Mets, abruptly halted the runaway euphoria emanating from 
the Yankees' World Series conquest. General Manager Steve Phillips 
spent another chunk of the owners' money Wednesday, giving Robin Ventura 
$32 million for four years and completing what should be an airtight 
infield. Besides the expenditure, the most interesting aspect of the 
signing was Ventura's decision to choose the Mets over the Orioles. 
``I felt it was a better fit,'' Ventura said in a conference call 
Wednesday. ``After being on a very young team, it's nice to be on 
a team with some veterans.'' Some of those players, he said, helped 
sell him on the idea of joining the Mets. He said he spoke with Piazza, 
Al Leiter and Dennis Cook. ``They were excited; there was a sense 
that the team is going to win,'' Ventura said. ``The feeling was you 
better jump on now or we're going on without you. I had the opportunity 
to go other places. To me, it boils down to the best chances for winning. 
I expect this is my best chance to win and I expect to win here.'' 
Ventura's arrival gives the Mets a Gold Glove left side of the infield. 
The players on the right side wear conventional gloves, but they use 
them well. The same cannot necessarily be said for much of the outfield. 
The pitchers' task, then, will be obvious: keep the ball in the infield. 
Rick Reed, Bobby Jones and Masato Yoshii should especially benefit 
from the solid infield defense. They throw strikes and force batters 
to hit the ball. The more flawlessly fielded balls they get, the better 
their chances of winning. Good defense helps make average or good 
pitching better. Bad defense undermines good pitching. Good defense 
also produces more double plays, another element that makes pitching 
better. Ventura's presence in the lineup also expands the heavy-hitting 
part of the batting order, teaming him in the middle with John Olerud, 
Piazza and Bobby Bonilla. The lineup's missing link is a legitimate 
leadoff hitter. If the Mets make no other moves _ that is, if they 
do not acquire a legitimate leadoff hitter _ the assignment will most 
likely fall to Brian McRae, who in 51 games as the leadoff hitter 
last season had mixed success. But the Mets may sign Rickey Henderson 
for a year, hoping that even if he can't hit much any more, he could 
still walk to first and steal second. On the other hand, an outfield 
with Henderson and Bonilla is reminiscent of the moves the Mets made 
before the 1992 season that they thought would produce a division 
championship. They spent the next five years recovering from the disaster 
those moves turned out to be. The Mets, who had a $58.66 million payroll 
last season, raised their 1999 payroll to $52.7 million for the 14 
players who are signed. The Yankees have 17 players signed for a total 
of $66 million, but they still must add the salaries of Derek Jeter, 
Andy Pettitte and Mariano Rivera to that total. The Mets' roster of 
unsigned players doesn't include equivalent young stars. The Mets 
don't necessarily want to catch up to the Yankees in the salary standing. 
If they can get 50 percent of the area's attention, they will consider 
their busy off season a worthwhile endeavor. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>