<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981202.0524 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
House Republicans overwhelmingly told their leadership Wednesday they 
wanted to bring impeachment to a quick vote this month in the House, 
as the Judiciary Committee, under criticism for expanding its inquiry, 
appeared to be moving to wrap up the investigation by the end of next 
week. The Republicans made their views known as the staff of Rep. 
Tom DeLay, R-Texas, the majority whip, reached across the country 
in a conference call to informally gauge Republican support for impeachment. 
The conference call came after several days in which the House Judiciary 
Committee looked like it wanted to expand its investigation of President 
Clinton's relationship with Monica Lewinsky to also include campaign 
financing, raising the possibility that the proceeding could spill 
over into next year. The committee's recent moves into other areas 
have worried some Republicans and Democrats, who cite the public's 
general opposition to impeachment. Rep. Henry Hyde, R-Ill, the Judiciary 
chairman, made it clear Wednesday, however, that he wanted to proceed 
on schedule, even as his committee investigators reviewed two secret 
Justice Department memorandums on alleged fund-raising abuses. Hyde 
would not characterizing their contents. ``There is little appetite 
to pursue this past the first of the year,'' said Rep. Bill Paxon, 
R-N.Y. ``Most members, whether they are for impeachment or not, want 
to get this over with. They see it is a political disaster to have 
it in the next Congress. Unless there's something more, most members 
would want an up or down vote and get it over with.'' Michael Scanlon, 
a spokesman for DeLay, said the Texas Republican was not trying to 
push the vote on impeachment in any direction. ``These are members 
talking to DeLay,'' he said. ``We weren't telling them where we are. 
Tom got on the conference calls, asked a few questions and shut up. 
These were members talking.'' He said their overwhelming sentiment 
was to move quickly to a vote. Scanlon asserted there was no formal 
vote counting. But by day's end, Republicans said it was clear there 
were up to 12 Republican votes against impeachment and another small 
core group of moderates still unwilling to commit. Democratic leaders 
say they believe that only three to five of their members will turn 
against Clinton. If Republicans lose only 12 votes, they could narrowly 
pass iompeachment if several Democrats break ranks. The White House, 
meanwhile, Wednesday accepted the Judiciary Committee's invitation 
to present its case next Tuesday. But it left open the possibility 
that Clinton's lawyers may call witnesses. In a letter to Hyde, White 
House counsel Charles Ruff and Gregory Craig, a presidential assistant, 
sought access to sealed material held by the committee before Clinton's 
lawyers appear. Paul McNulty, a committee spokesman, suggested that 
the panel would be unlikely to turn over sealed material. ``If the 
president's lawyers want to examine Justice Department memos outlining 
a criminal investigation possibly involving the president and the 
vice president, they should take that up with Attorney General Janet 
Reno,'' he said. Republicans accused the White House itself of stalling. 
``People up here are not amused,'' an aide to Republican leaders said. 
``There is concern growing that this is not a good faith acceptance 
of an offer to testify. Rather it is more of a tactic to push the 
schedule back, particularly where it may come up against Christmas.'' 
The rapid series of events came amid new signs that Republicans also 
overwhelmingly opposed sending a censure resolution to the floor right 
now, and most likely not even if an impeachment vote was defeated. 
Rep. Robert Livingston, the incoming speaker, who has come under criticism 
from Republicans and from Rep. Dick Gephardt, the House minority leader, 
for his failure to take charge of the impeachment process, was to 
meet with DeLay on Thursday. His spokesman, Mark Corallo, said that 
Livingston would continue to defer to Hyde until the committee had 
ended its inquiry. Seeking to dispel the impression that its inquiry 
could spill over into the new year, the committee put out a tentative 
schedule to wrap up final hearings next week and then allot next Thursday, 
Friday and possibly and Saturday for debate and votes on articles 
of impeachment. That would allow the House to convene and vote on 
any articles of impeachment the week of Dec. 14. The Republicans counted 
as a victory a judge's decision to grant committee investigators the 
right to review two secret Justice Department memorandums, in which 
FBI Director Louis Freeh and Charles La Bella, a former Justice Department 
prosecutor, made the case that Reno should name an independent counsel 
to investigate Clinton's 1996 campaign finance practices. Under an 
order by U.S. District Judge Norma Holloway Johnson, one Republican 
and one Democratic investigator from the panel were permitted Wednesday 
to read the full memorandums. The investigators _ David Schippers, 
the chief Republican investigative counsel and Kevin Simpson, a Democratic 
counsel _ were not allowed to take notes or photocopy the material, 
conditions requested by the Justice Department to protect grand jury 
information contained in the documents. The Republicans had subpoenaed 
the documents after saying they had received information they could 
contain allegations of wrongdoing by the president. Rep. John Conyers, 
the ranking Democrat on the House Judiciary Committee said Wednesday 
night that the four hours of review of the memos had found they were 
not ``in any way relevant'' to the inquiry into the president. ``We 
trust that this closes a short and unproductive chapter of this very 
strange proceeding,'' he said. The Republicans did not characterize 
what they had found. But one Republican official emphasized that unless 
there was ``stunning, stunning'' information, Hyde wanted to complete 
work and report out one or more articles of impeachment to the House 
on schedule by the end of next week. Republicans said they would take 
a closed deposition from LaBella on Friday and could possibly schedule 
Freeh for the same day. The drive to expand the inquiry into campaign 
finance has been spearheaded by Schippers, the committee's chief investigative 
counsel, who would like to rule out possible wrongdoing, Republican 
and Democratic aides said. One Republican aide said there is a possibility 
that Schippers may continue his investigation into campaign finance 
abuses next year, after the impeachment inquiry's resolution, as part 
of his original mandate. But shutting down another avenue of inquiry, 
they said it was now unlikely that they would question Bruce Lindsey, 
a deputy White House counsel. Even as the committee moves steadily 
on its course toward impeaching the president, Democrats and some 
Republicans have been pushing instead for Clinton to be censured in 
strong terms. But Republicans said that support for censure among 
their members had been steadily eroding for a variety of reasons. 
They said that even many moderate Republicans were infuriated by Clinton's 
legalistic and unrepentant answers to 81 questions sent him by the 
Judiciary Committee. Conservative Republicans believe that tactically 
they will gain more votes for impeachment if censure is not an alternative. 
And some Republicans believe their party can run against Democrats 
as the party of sex and perjury if Democrats are prohibited from going 
on for censure. ``The more the Democrats are on TV talking away on 
censure, the less inclined the Republicans are to support censure,'' 
Paxon said. ``They see it as nothing more than a political out for 
the Democrats.'' But several other Republicans said they are still 
quietly trying to craft a censure option and hoped that Livingston 
might be receptive to them once Hyde has finished his work. ``This 
is a floating crap game,'' said one Republican still working against 
the odds for censure. He said Livingston did not want to undermine 
Hyde. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>