<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981202.0429 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The White House has asked the government's top law enforcement and 
intelligence officials and key Cabinet members to recommend by early 
next month whether President Clinton should grant clemency to Jonathan 
Pollard, the former Navy analyst convicted of spying for Israel, administration 
officials said on Wednesday. In a sign that Clinton may decide quickly 
if he should give in to Israeli pressure to release Pollard, the White 
House counsel, Charles Ruff, has sent a letter to Attorney General 
Janet Reno, Director of Central Intelligence George Tenet, Secretary 
of State Madeleine Albright and Defense Secretary William Cohen asking 
for their views on the Pollard case by Jan. 11. Tenet has already 
made clear his fierce opposition to clemency for Pollard. In the past, 
the Justice, Defense and State Departments have joined the CIA in 
opposing clemency. A White House spokesman, David Leavy, cautioned 
that while Clinton planned to make a final decision on the case in 
a ``timely manner,'' he had not set a deadline. The president is scheduled 
to travel to Israel and Gaza this month to discuss the Middle East 
peace effort in separate meetings with Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu 
of Israel and the Palestinian leader, Yasser Arafat. He seems likely 
to be confronted with further questions from the Israelis about the 
Pollard case during his visit. The case became a central issue in 
the peace talks held at the Wye Plantation in Maryland in October. 
On the last of nine days of strenuous negotiations, Netanyahu demanded 
Pollard's release in exchange for his support for an agreement. But 
Tenet, reflecting the views of the intelligence community, strongly 
opposed Pollard's release, and made it clear to the president he would 
resign if Clinton gave in to the Israeli demand, according to several 
administration officials. In the end, Clinton rejected Netanyahu's 
demand, and instead agreed only to review the case again. Pollard's 
status has become a recurring issue in American-Israeli relations 
in recent years, one that is raised at almost every opportunity by 
Israeli leaders. Pollard was arrested in 1985 after spying for Israel 
for at least 18 months. In 1987, he pleaded guilty, and was sentenced 
to life in prison. Pollard was a prolific spy, handing over thousands 
of classified documents to Israel, often taking bundles of them out 
of the office on weekends so they could be copied off by Israeli agents 
and then returned on Monday so they would not be missed. Intelligence 
and law enforcement officials argue that he betrayed more secret documents 
than almost any other spy in recent American history. Much of the 
most sensitive intelligence he turned over to the Israelis involved 
Soviet weapons systems, material that had been gleaned from spies 
working for the United States in Russia. While Pollard argued that 
he was spying for an ally that deserved intelligence it had been denied 
unfairly by Washington, American officials have never been certain 
whether any of the information he gave Israel was in turn provided 
to Moscow, which had its own spies in the Israeli government during 
the 1980s. American officials involved in the original damage assessment 
of the Pollard case complain that they never received full cooperation 
from Israeli officials and say that Israel has never agreed to return 
all of the documents Pollard stole. Under pressure from Israel, Clinton 
has reviewed the case twice before, once in 1993 and again in 1996. 
Each time, the president decided against clemency after receiving 
recommendations from Cabinet officials and agencies involved in the 
case. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>