<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981202.0327 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
French train conductors say they're lonely and overworked, so they 
have been on strike since last Thursday, disrupting long-distance 
rail service in many regions. French journalists say their paychecks 
don't buy as much as they used to, so they went on strike this week, 
too _ not against their newspapers and television and radio stations, 
but against a government plan to do away with a special tax deduction 
of up to 50,000 francs, or $8,850, that they have enjoyed since 1934. 
The long-term unemployed, who closed state job offices last Christmas 
and demanded higher benefits, occupied an unemployment office Monday 
in Marseilles, where the movement began last year, demanding a Christmas 
bonus of 3000 francs, or $530, like the one they received last year. 
The French have been taking to the streets since the Revolution, usually 
to demand something from the state. Not surprisingly, because government 
spending amounts to 56 percent of the gross domestic product, compared 
with 41 percent in the United States. The end of the year, when the 
days become short, cold and gray, usually brings a spate of labor 
disputes and visions of paralyzing national shutdowns like the three-week 
transportation strike in 1995 that sealed the fate of a conservative 
government that had tried to reduce pension benefits. The latest strike 
on the state railroad is not anywhere near that big. But its 11,000 
conductors have kept up steady pressure to try to force the network 
to hire additional conductors. A union conductor in Bordeaux, Sauveur 
Ventura, told Agence France-Presse on Monday that it was sometimes 
a lonely job with many responsibilities but nobody to talk to except 
passengers. ``In addition, we're also attacked by customers who complain 
about fares being raised,'' Ventura said. Then Agence France-Presse 
shut down most of Tuesday because of the journalists' strike. The 
182,000 railway workers run some of the fastest, cleanest and sleekest 
trains in the world. These days they work, indirectly, for a Communist, 
Transport Minister Jean-Claude Gayssot, under a Socialist government 
that promises to reduce the workweek for all of them to 35 hours a 
week starting next year, as some have had for years. But the conductors 
are also striking to make sure that the workweek reductions are negotiated 
seriously. The former aerospace executive in charge of the railroad, 
Louis Gallois, said last week that railroad employees accounted for 
20 percent to 30 percent of all workdays lost to strikes in France. 
``It's the way the enterprise resolves its internal conflicts,'' Gallois 
said. ``Everybody lives off strikes, the hierarchy, the administration, 
the staff and the labor unions.'' Even though fewer than 10 percent 
of all workers in France belong to unions, opinion polls show that 
the French people as often as not sympathize with them. That may not 
be true of journalists, whose profession is one of 73 that enjoyed 
special tax breaks that a Conservative government decided three years 
ago to try to abolish. Journalists, including foreign correspondents 
based here, can deduct 30 percent of their salaries, up to the 50,000 
franc ceiling, from their taxable income as a writeoff for supposedly 
nonitemizable professional expenses. An accountant who works for many 
journalists here, Richard Van Ham, said losing the deduction would 
cost many a loss of income. Print and broadcasting employees' unions 
demonstrated Tuesday in front of Parliament, even though the upper 
house had voted to postpone consideration of the measure for a year. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>