<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981202.0251 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Modernism can be dangerous. Just ask Cremilda Conceicao, whose forehead 
and sweat pants bear the battle scars of 14 years of cleaning the 
see-through elevator, transparent sinks and 17 levels of Plexiglas 
walkways and mirrored I-beams that snake bewilderingly through the 
late architect Paul Rudolph's Beekman Place triplex, perhaps the city's 
most stunning apartment. ``It's a crazy place, very accidental,'' 
she was explaining this week, spritzing Windex as she recounted how 
she almost fell off a balcony while trying to clean a Plexiglas platform 
that serves as head-grazing ceiling for one level and the floor for 
the level above. ``You're always cleaning back and forth, back and 
forth. It's never ending.'' The never-ending possibilities of space 
was a concept held dear by the Modernist architect, who died at age 
78 last summer. He left behind a mysterious infinity-box of an apartment 
_ the building is now on the market for $5.65 million, reduced from 
$6.25 million _ in which every detail was the product of his singular, 
some might say obsessive vision, from a built-in television set encased 
in chrome-plated Formica to steel staircases without banisters, whose 
dagger edges continue to wreak havoc on Miss Conceicao's sweat pants. 
The latest occasion for Windex was a party given by Nest magazine 
last week, a dizzying affair that drew nearly 200 people, some of 
whom found themselves drinking white wine and listening to performance 
artists while trying to forget they were standing in a cantilevered 
bathtub. Never mind the transparent sink through which you could see 
into the bedroom below. The most sought-after accessory may not have 
been a Prada waist pouch, but a scopolamine patch for seasickness 
tucked surreptitiously behind the ear. The apartment, a tectonic collision 
of abstract-mirrored and transparent forms that occupies the top three 
and a half floors of the nine-floor building, may ultimately be looked 
upon as a poignant piece of modernist folk art. Like the Rev. Howard 
Finster's ``Paradise Garden,'' it is a fiercely personal, handmade, 
never-finished laboratory of one man's ideas. And like the Finster 
environment, it is in jeopardy. The creator of this passionate spatial 
fantasy, a rare, intact artifact from the Plexi-Baroque period, was 
a celebrated Harvard-educated architect, who served as chairman of 
the Yale University School of Architecture from 1958 to 1965, and 
during his lifetime was described by Mildred F. Schmertz, the former 
editor of Architectural Record, as the ``world's most eminent diehard 
late modernist.'' Though he studied with Walter Gropius and was steeped 
in Bauhaus, Rudolph's spaces were ``emotionally decorative,'' observed 
Donald Luckenbill, who served as Rudolph's project architect from 
1969 to 1982 and oversaw the apartment's construction (though Rudolph 
tinkered with it practically daily until his death from asbestos-related 
cancer _ ``He could never leave it alone,'' Luckenbill said). He loved 
making turns; for example, entering the apartment is a Rod Serling 
experience in which floors feel tenuous and corners seem to dematerialize 
in reflections. ``He wanted to reorient you to the inside, to debrief 
you and then capture you in a new world,'' Luckenbill said. ``He wanted 
to overwhelm, bedazzle you with what he could do.'' The apartment 
is indeed bedazzling. It was conceived as a sequence of pinwheeling 
planes, the concept of split-level taken to extremes. It is a piece 
of spatial choreography, composed of mirrored steel beams and translucent 
acrylic bridges, that do not form rooms so much as interpenetrate, 
changing elevations and seemingly defying gravity. Rudolph was constantly 
experimenting with materials, once sheathing the apartment with Plexiglas 
floors, lighted from beneath. He was not a big fan of furniture, so 
he invented built-ins, like a daybed in which beige suede pillows 
are attached with metal rings to steel springs, like a spiral notebook. 
In some ways, the apartment might be interpreted as the rebellious 
act of a minister's son who pushed the limits of conventional notions 
of space and home. ``It's not a normal home,'' said Peter Blake, an 
architectural critic and close friend. ``It's a dream house, completely 
mad and uninhabitable in many ways, but beautiful to be in.'' The 
most uninhabitable spaces may be the bathrooms (mercifully, a see-through 
Jacuzzi is now boarded up). But one bathroom has no privacy, despite 
Plexiglas shutters. ``He was interested in translucency,'' Ms. Schmertz 
said. ``Perhaps too interested.'' The apartment also contains precipitous 
drops, modernist crevasses, which, a close friend said, resulted in 
the loss of a pet cat. ``People tried not to drink too much when they 
were at Paul's,'' she said, ``but that poor cat. ...'' Nevertheless, 
the idiosyncratic space abounds in human touches, like a spear from 
New Guinea that projects out defiantly from a kitchen equipped with 
see-through shelves and see-through glasses. Rudolph invented ingenious 
ways to organize his treasures, like tiny Mexican milagros, marching 
single file along ribbons of Mylar embedded in Plexiglas. Rudolph's 
spirit seems to permeate the place even now, accentuated by a small 
memorial surrounded by votive candles containing his ashes. It is 
a shrine to modernism, one that is betraying its age in scuffed chrome, 
buckling carpeting and fraying Plexiglas. The fate of Rudolph's daring 
creation is of deep concern to his friends and to those who envision 
the space as an architectural and urban think tank. The Landmarks 
Preservation Commission does not designate residential interiors unless 
they are open to the public, though at 30 years old, the Rudolph design 
could qualify. Ernst Wagner, the estate's co-executor and a longtime 
friend, says there had been an attempt to contact potential modernist-loving 
white knights and former clients like Sid Bass, the Texas industrialist. 
Sotheby's International Realty, the property's agent, has placed ads 
in Malaysia, Singapore and other outposts where Rudolph worked in 
his later years, marketing it as contemporary. ``But the Asian economy 
is not exactly at the point where many are able to make this kind 
of purchase,'' said Frederick Williams, an associate broker. To Wagner, 
``preservation is a key issue, because this was a very, very personal 
piece of work.'' Thomas Heckman, an attorney and the estate's co-executor 
with Wagner, said net proceeds from the building's sale will go to 
the Library of Congress, home to 1,493 tightly packed tubes of renderings 
extricated over a two-day period from the apartment. Meantime, the 
space is being rented out for fashion shoots. ``It's unlike any place 
in New York,'' Blake said. ``I'm buying lottery tickets myself.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>