<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981202.0223 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Today most bathroom sinks have pop-up stoppers instead of the old-fashioned 
rubber plugs. Generally pop-up stoppers work well, but over time they 
may become clogged with hair or other debris and fall out of alignment. 
Then they may not open or close properly. Fortunately, these stoppers 
are easy to repair. The tools required are simple ones, usually only 
a screwdriver and a pair of pliers. The repair procedure consists 
of disassembly, cleaning and reassembly. After all the parts are in 
place, it may be necessary to readjust the linkage so the stopper 
closes properly. While adjustments are straightforward, it may take 
a little experimentation to get them just right. Usually the pop-up 
stopper and connecting linkage consists of five parts. The stopper 
is, of course, positioned in the throat of the drain pipe. When it 
is down, it contains the water in the sink. Raising the stopper allows 
the water to drain. The base of the stopper connects with a pivot 
rod that runs through a fitting in the drain pipe to mate with a clevis 
directly under the lift knob on the sink. The pivot rod has a ball 
positioned midpoint on its shaft. The ball acts as a fulcrum and allows 
the rod to swing up and down and activate the stopper. The clevis 
is a piece of flat metal perforated with a series of adjustment holes. 
Not all sinks have a clevis. Instead, the pivot rod may connect directly 
to a vertical rod from the lift knob. The clevis, however, is useful 
because it makes it easier to adjust the action of the stopper. The 
lift knob on top of the sink raises and lowers the stopper. It has 
a vertical rod that runs through the sink and connects with the clevis 
below. The two pieces are held together with a set screw. Pulling 
up on the lift knob causes the pivot rod to raise on one end and pull 
the stopper down at the other. Pushing down on the knob reverses the 
action. If the stopper fails to close properly, the linkage may be 
out of alignment or the stopper may be clogged with debris or hair. 
It's best to remove the stopper and examine it before attempting to 
adjust the linkage. On some sinks, the stopper only rests on the pivot 
rod and can easily be removed by pulling it straight up. Other stoppers 
have a locking notch that grips the pivot rod. To remove this type 
of stopper, give it a quarter turn counterclockwise then lift up. 
There is also another kind of stopper that connects to the pivot rod 
with a retaining ring. It cannot be removed from the drain until the 
pivot rod is pulled free. This is neither complicated nor difficult. 
Use a pair of channel pliers (wrap the plier jaws with masking tape 
so they do not damage the fitting) to loosen the nut at the drain 
fitting, then pull back the pivot rod. This will free the stopper 
so you can remove it. Once the stopper is free, examine it carefully. 
Clean it, if necessary, then look at stopper head. Some stoppers have 
an O-ring around the head. When the stopper is down, the O-ring seals 
the drain to keep water from seeping past the stopper. If the O-ring 
is cracked or flattened, it cannot make an effective seal, so replace 
it. Clean the stopper and the inside of the drain pipe, then reposition 
the stopper by reversing the removal procedure. Before pushing the 
pivot rod back into place, inspect the two washers, or gaskets, positioned 
on either side of the ball-fulcrum. Make sure these are in good condition. 
Cracked or worn washers will allow water from the drain to leak past 
the retaining nut on the drain fitting. You are now ready to adjust 
the linkage so the stopper moves correctly in the drain. It is best 
to start by adjusting the lift rod-clevis connection. The adjustment 
is made by loosening the set screw that holds the clevis and lift 
rod. Use a short screwdriver or a pair of pliers (wrap the jaws with 
masking tape) to loosen the set screw (for stubborn screws you may 
need a few drops of penetrating oil), then slide the clevis up or 
down to reposition the stopper. Another way to adjust the travel of 
the stopper is by moving the pivot rod up or down into a different 
hole in the clevis rod. The rod is held in place with a spring clip. 
Squeeze the clip, then slide the rod free. Move the rod and clip to 
another hole, then try closing the stopper again. These adjustment 
procedures are easy enough, but you will have to work under the sink 
in a cramped and confined space. Be careful to avoid bumping your 
head on the sink. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>