<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981202.0417 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Martin Gurule hid on the roof of his death row prison until after 
midnight, dropped to the ground, clambered over two razor-tipped fences, 
slipped through a crease in the space-time continuum and disappeared 
into the eighth dimension. It is as good an explanation as any. The 
29-year-old inmate, awaiting lethal injection for the 1992 murder 
of a Corpus Christi restaurant owner and his cook during a robbery, 
has been the subject of one of the most intensive manhunts that Texas 
prison officials have ever mounted. Six days ago, he became the first 
death row prisoner in Texas to escape in 64 years. But while prison 
officials said they were convinced that Gurule was still hiding in 
the 17,000 wooded acres surrounding the prison's Ellis Unit, 15 miles 
northeast of Huntsville, they acknowledged that they really did not 
know where he was. ``I can say _ and I am choosing my words very carefully 
_ that we have no hard evidence that he is anywhere outside of those 
woods,'' said Glen Castlebury, a spokesman for the Texas Department 
of Criminal Justice. Is there any hard evidence that Gurule is still 
in the woods? Castlebury tugged at the bill of his hat, which read 
``Don't Mess With Texas,'' and shrugged. ``I told you I was choosing 
my words carefully,'' he said. Police said that while they had received 
several reports of Elvis-like sightings of Gurule throughout the state 
in recent days, none of the leads had panned out. And there have been 
no reports of stolen vehicles or food or weapons in or near the Huntsville 
area. The roads surrounding the wooded acres had police officers posted 
every hundred yards or so. They were still there Wednesday, some of 
them sitting on lawn chairs beside smoking campfires. Deeper in the 
woods, officers with dogs and others on horseback picked their way 
through the dense piney thickets. Others patrolled the nearby Trinity 
River by boat, and still others hovered overhead in at least three 
helicopters. The escape continued to have repercussions Wednesday 
on the Texas prison system, where officials suspended the work program 
that allowed Gurule access to a recreation yard from which he made 
his escape. State officials also announced the appointment of a commission 
to investigate the incident. ``Texas had an unusual program where 
death row prisoners were allowed to work in a confined and secure 
factory adjacent to their cell block,'' said Ned Benton, a professor 
of public administration at John Jay College of Criminal Justice at 
City University of New York and a former director of the Oklahoma 
Department of Corrections. ``I don't know that the program was implicated 
in the escape, but I think they intend to evaluate that.'' Indeed 
they do. Wayne Scott, executive director of the criminal justice department, 
said Texas prison officials never liked the death row work program, 
but were forced to carry it out after a court case involving charges 
of overcrowding and poor conditions. All 453 death row inmates in 
Texas are housed in the Ellis Unit. All but about 150 of them are 
kept locked in their cells 23 hours a day, allowed only one hour of 
supervised exercise and recreation. The others, though, have qualified 
for the work program, either doing jobs around the prison (Gurule 
was a janitor) or, as most of them do, making pants for prison guards 
at a factory attached to their prison block. And all of the inmates 
deemed ``work capable'' were also allowed several hours in the outdoor 
recreation yard each day. ``In prison, it's always a carrot-and-stick 
kind of thing,'' Fitzgerald said. ``It's like you use television sets 
or exercise equipment as a management device to get them to act like 
good inmate citizens.'' To qualify for the Texas work program, an 
inmate had to be on death row for several months, during which time 
there were no behavioral problems. ``That was most definitely the 
case with Gurule,'' said Castlebury. ``Until 12:20 a.m. last Friday.'' 
That is when Gurule and six other death row inmates dropped off the 
roof and were sighted by a guard. Guards in two towers 200 feet away 
from the men began to shoot and all of them, except Gurule, surrendered. 
Gurule kept running and made it over the two fences and into the woods. 
Castlebury said the authorities found some blood spots near where 
Gurule made his escape. ``We don't know whether he caught some flesh 
on that razor wire or whether he was nicked by one of the shots,'' 
he said. The manhunt began before dawn on Friday. Prison officials 
set up a seven-mile perimeter around the prison, blocking the handful 
of roads leading into the remote area and searching through the brush 
with dogs. In the early hours of the search, authorities emphasized 
the rugged nature of the surrounding terrain, which they said made 
searching difficult but also provided an inhospitable landscape for 
the fleeing inmate. By Tuesday, however, authorities began to emphasize 
the ways in which the inmate could still be surviving in the wild. 
``It's hunting country around there and there are all sorts of duck 
blinds and deer camps where he might have found shelter,'' Castlebury 
said. Often, hunters stock their camps with canned food, so he could 
be sitting out there, right now, over a dinner of pork and beans. 
There are some poisonous snakes and a few alligators in the area, 
which might have ended Gurule's flight. Another possibility, Castlebury 
said, is that the escaped inmate has succumbed to whatever injuries 
had caused those blood splotches. The one chilling possibility that 
the authorities do not like to consider is that Gurule somehow managed 
to get to a road, flag down a car and convince the driver to take 
him somewhere _ and that perhaps he is out there now with a hostage. 
Searchers decided to alter their tactics early Wednesday, changing 
from a policy of constantly stalking the woods with dogs and horses 
to making only occasional and random searches. ``Basically, we're 
trying to lure him out, to sucker him, to give him the idea that we're 
pulling out,'' Castlebury said. ``We want to get him to move. As soon 
as he moves, we got him.'' By late Wednesday, though, there was no 
sign of movement. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>