<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981202.0252 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Pity the consumer who walks into a car dealership and says, simply, 
``I want to buy a car.'' The salesman probably attempts to help the 
customer by asking a series of questions. New? Used? Sedan? Sports 
car? Sport utility vehicle? Pickup truck? Minivan? ``Well, golly, 
I don't know, which kind do I need?'' In coming weeks thousands of 
consumers will go shopping for a personal computer with an even foggier 
plan than that of the car buyer above. In the commercial spirit of 
Christmas, which descended on my town this year shortly after Halloween, 
I visited a local computer emporium to pretend to shop for the computer 
equivalent of a minivan. Shopping for a PC was not a pleasant experience. 
No doubt there are many knowledgeable, cheerful, courteous, patient, 
empathetic salespeople working in computer stores whose goal is to 
match consumers with the ideal computers to meet their needs and budgets. 
I just didn't find any. Without further ado, here is some of the advice 
that I had hoped to hear from the salespeople, but didn't: The Internet 
is the driving force for the computer industry today. You do not need 
a fancy computer to connect to the Internet, browse the World Wide 
Web, send and receive e-mail, or, for that matter, to operate simple 
Windows business applications like word processing, spreadsheets and 
scheduling. Any new computer will do. Even a used computer of fairly 
recent vintage will do (for example, an Intel 486). But software developers 
are coming out with cool new Internet applications all the time, including 
audio and video, and they almost always require more of everything 
_ microprocessor speed, hard-disk space, bandwidth, graphics capabilities 
and so on. For the long term, your overall experience will be better 
with a newer and more powerful computer, one that can be upgraded. 
If you wait, you will always be able to buy a better, faster and cheaper 
computer a couple of months from now. By waiting, though, you will 
miss the benefits of having a PC today. For those who cannot wait, 
rest assured that today's computers are better than ever and better 
bargains than ever. For those who can wait, the new technologies coming 
in the spring are very impressive. These include powerful new microprocessors 
from Intel and AMD, a new crop of low-cost home PCs and some special-purpose, 
low-cost, non-PC information appliances that offer Internet access 
with less complexity than a PC. Procrastinators can also take advantage 
of price cuts that typically come in February and March. Apple, for 
example, is rumored to be planning to cut the price of the popular 
iMac to $999 after the holidays and to introduce an improved version 
of iMac at the original price, $1,299. Craig R. Barrett, the chief 
executive of the Intel Corp., said last month at Comdex that he expected 
to see PCs with Intel chips for as little as $399 late in 1999. A 
Korean-backed company called eMachines is already selling an Internet-ready 
computer with Windows 98 but no monitor for $399, or $499 with a 14-inch 
monitor. It is based on a relatively feeble Cyrix processor, but its 
components are otherwise respectable. If all you want to do is connect 
to the Internet, browse the Web, send and receive e-mail, do some 
word processing and simple business applications, balance the checkbook 
and so on, almost any new PC on the market today, even the low-end 
eMachines model, will meet your needs. If you want to play the latest 
games or do fancy stuff with multimedia, you will lust for more speed 
and power. Speed and power cost more, sometimes a lot more. The cheapest 
computers are no-name clones, assembled from bargain-bin components 
in so-called screwdriver shops. Some of these PCs are surprisingly 
good. Others are cobbled together from discontinued parts. Several 
companies, including Gateway, Dell and Apple, now offer consumers 
the chance to buy or lease a new computer with Internet access for 
as little as $50 a month. No matter how attractive the sellers try 
to make such programs sound, consumers are always much better off 
buying a computer with cash. But for those who lack cash and want 
to get a child or other family member on line immediately, these programs 
offer an affordable entry point. Even so, remember that buying a computer 
creates a hole in your wallet that will leak for years to come. There 
will be more spending _ a lot more _ for software; hardware upgrades; 
peripherals, like modems, printers, scanners and digital cameras; 
classes and instruction books; Internet access, and even for computer 
furniture. Brand-name machines, from Compaq, Dell, Gateway, Hewlett-Packard, 
International Business Machines and others, usually cost more but 
offer the security of technical support, warranties and on-site service 
policies. Screwdriver shops often go out of business without notice. 
Many people prefer to pay extra for peace of mind. PC Magazine just 
released its annual survey results on customer satisfaction. Only 
three makers of desktop computers earned an A grade this year: IBM, 
Dell and Hewlett-Packard. For notebook computers, the only As went 
to Dell and Gateway. Customers were asked to rate reliability, satisfaction 
with repair experience, satisfaction with technical support and repair 
frequency. The class clowns were Packard-Bell and AST Research. But 
enough general advice. Let's get down to the bitty gritty. A good 
salesman will ask, ``What do you want to do with the computer?'' before 
making a specific recommendation. The trouble is that people who have 
had limited exposure to computers often do not know yet what a computer 
can do, much less what they want to do with it. The safe route is 
to get a midrange machine _ a minivan _ that is capable of doing most 
things well today and is capable of being upgraded later, once a favorite 
task is identified. There is not room here to get into the Macintosh 
versus Windows debate, except to note that an Apple Macintosh G3 can 
be set up to run Windows software as well as Macintosh software. Still, 
more than 9 out of 10 buyers will choose a Windows-only machine. Here 
are my minimum specifications for Windows-based machines: Processor: 
An Intel Pentium II with a speed of 350 megahertz or higher. Or an 
AMD K6-2 processor rated 300 MHz or higher. Yes, it is safe to buy 
a non-Intel processor. Frankly, lesser chips _ the newest Intel Celerons, 
the older Pentiums with MMX, the AMD K6s, the Cyrixes _ will all do 
fine for today's common applications. But the Pentium II 350 and higher 
and the K6-2 300s and higher take advantage of a new and improved 
electronic plumbing system built into better computers, technically 
called the 100-MHz external bus, or PC-100 data bus. Older computers 
have a 66-MHz data bus. The faster data bus makes most applications 
run faster, and it means that the owner can upgrade to faster processors 
down the road. Memory: Microsoft asserts on its Web site that Windows 
98 will work on a computer with as little as 16 megabytes of system 
memory (16 MB of RAM, or random access memory). Technically, that 
is true. But technically, one can also play a round of golf with a 
7-iron and a putter. The experience is improved by having more clubs. 
(Except for my game, of course, which would not suffer noticeably 
if I used a Coke bottle, an umbrella and a pool cue.) As a rule, 64 
MB is the practical minimum. Do not buy any computer with less than 
32 megabytes of RAM. Memory is very cheap these days, so buy 128 MB 
if you can. Adding more RAM is the single best improvement one can 
make to a computer. Hard-disk drive: As long as software developers 
keep making bloatware, you will need a bigger hard drive. Look for 
6 gigabytes (GB) or more. Monitor: The biggest you can afford. Modem: 
It must say V.90. Backup: The floppy disk is on its way to obsolescence. 
Consider spending more for a Superdisk or a newer HiFD disk drive, 
which works with older diskettes but offers much greater storage. 
As an alternative, get a Zip drive or, better, a CD-R drive (which 
allows you to write data onto a blank CD disk) to augment the floppy 
drive. Fun: The low-end machines are not good for games. If games 
are important, spend more for a better computer or get a separate 
Sony Playstation. A DVD-ROM drive cannot record data, but it is a 
smart alternative to a boring CD-ROM drive if you can afford it. You 
can still use your old CDs and install CD-based software, and on higher-end 
systems you can also watch DVD movies. Yes, you want a good set of 
speakers. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>