<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981202.0362 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Federal Election Commission is widely expected to reject its staff 
auditors' recommendation that the 1996 campaigns of President Clinton 
and former Sen. Bob Dole repay the government millions of dollars 
because of violations of campaign finance rules. ``It's a virtual 
certainty that these things won't be adopted,'' said David Mason, 
a Republican in his first year as a commissioner. Mason said in an 
interview Wednesday that when the six-member commission meets Thursday 
he would offer motions that would have the effect of blocking most, 
if not all, of the repayment requirement. Kent Cooper, a former senior 
staff member of the commission and now a consultant on campaign finance 
matters, agreed with Mason's assessment. ``If they go along with the 
staff recommendation, that would be a shocker,'' Cooper said. ``I 
think they'll block it on a 6-0 vote.'' The main reason for the confident 
predictions that the commission will overrule its auditors is that 
the six members _ by law, three Republicans and three Democrats _ 
are generally beholden to their parties, and both parties are vigorously 
opposing the stiff penalties that were recommended. The auditors' 
report, released on Tuesday, found that the Clinton and Dole presidential 
campaigns illegally benefited from issue advertising paid for by their 
political parties. The staff recommended that the Clinton campaign 
committee be forced to repay the government $7 million and the Dole 
campaign $17.7 million. The assessments would partly offset the $13 
million each candidate received in federal matching money in the primary 
season in 1996 and the more than $60 million each received for the 
general election campaign. In return for the federal money, the candidates 
agreed to limit their spending of private funds. The commission may 
vote on the audit on Thursday, or a vote may be put off until next 
week, officials said. It would take a majority of four of the commissioners 
to adopt the report. In September, Attorney General Janet Reno subpoenaed 
an early draft of the audit, and it became the basis for a preliminary 
inquiry into whether she should ask for an independent counsel to 
investigate accusations of unlawful spending by Clinton and the Democratic 
Party. She is expected to announce her decision by Dec. 7. The word 
among law enforcement officials has been that she is likely to find 
insufficient grounds to warrant an outside counsel. No one knows whether 
the final audit or its rejection by the commission will affect her 
decision. But Reno was put in an awkward position by the finding that 
the Dole campaign had committed some of the same violations that Republican 
lawmakers have accused Clinton of. Under the independent counsel law, 
she is required to ask for an outside prosecutor if she finds clear 
evidence of criminal wrongdoing by the president. But she cannot seek 
an independent counsel to investigate Dole and the Republicans because 
they are not among those covered by the law. If the auditors' recommendations 
are rejected, it will illustrate two important points: The campaign 
law is so riddled with loopholes that almost any restraint can be 
breached, and the FEC is basically toothless. At issue is the millions 
of dollars the parties spent on issue advertisements on behalf of 
their presidential candidates. The auditors found that the issue ads, 
as anyone who saw them on television recognized, were hardly distinguishable 
from the candidates' own commercials, spending on which was carefully 
limited by law. Mason, who was an assistant to Sen. Trent Lott, R-Miss., 
and a scholar at the Heritage Foundation before he was appointed to 
the FEC, has spoken and written in opposition to limits on ``soft 
money,'' the unregulated money used by political parties. But in this 
case, he said, that view is irrelevant. He holds that there is no 
basis in the law for requiring repayments of matching funds that candidates 
received during the primaries. And those who predict that the FEC 
will overrule their auditors' recommendations point out that the terms 
of two commissioners _ Lee Ann Elliott, a Republican, and Danny McDonald, 
a Democrat _ expire in April, and presumably they want their parties 
to reappoint them. Three others _ Mason; Darryl Wold, also a Republican, 
and Karl Sandstrom, a Democrat _ were recently appointed to the commission, 
presumably because of their loyalty to their parties. The sixth member 
is the acting chairman, Scott Thomas, a Democrat. ``You can bet that 
they've been getting a lot of calls on this,'' said Cooper, the former 
FEC staff member. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>