<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981202.0348 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In unusually emphatic and optimistic terms, scientists told a Senate 
hearing Wednesday that research with human embryonic cells was likely 
to yield important medical benefits and should be supported by the 
federal government. ``It is not too unrealistic to say that this research 
has the potential to revolutionize the practice of medicine and improve 
the quality and length of life,'' said Dr. Harold Varmus, director 
of the National Institutes of Health. At the hearing, the scientists 
who announced last month that they had isolated and cultured the cells 
explained how they could be grown into any desired tissue of the body 
and used to treat almost any disease, particularly those like Parkinson's 
disease and juvenile diabetes that are caused by deficiency of a specific 
type of cell. ``There is almost no realm of medicine that might not 
be touched by this innovation,'' Varmus said. But use of the human 
embryonic stem cells also raises ethical issues. The cells are widely 
regarded as meriting a special moral status. They are close cousins 
to the fertilized egg, although they cannot by themselves develop 
into an infant. Among a panel of ethicists who followed the scientists, 
some said that the practical benefits of treatments using the cells 
should outweigh moral qualms about their use, but Richard M. Doerflinger, 
of the National conference of Catholic Bishops, said that ``scientific 
progress must not come at the expense of human dignity'' and warned 
against use of the cells unless they had been derived from spontaneously 
aborted fetuses. The purpose of the hearing, held by the Appropriations 
subcommittee on Labor, Health and Human Services, the Senate committee 
that approves funding for federal biomedical research, was to explore 
the implications of the new research in light of the ban on using 
federal funds for embryo research. The ban, originating on the House 
side, has been attached to appropriations bills for the last three 
years. The human embryonic stem cells described last month were developed 
by academic scientists who were supported by Geron Corp. and received 
no federal funding. University scientists, who receive most of their 
support from the National Institutes of Health, would like to work 
with the cells but will not be able to do so unless the federal ban 
on financing of embryo research is lifted. Evidently hoping that the 
ban will not be introduced for a fourth year, Varmus and other scientific 
witnesses were unusually eloquent in describing the expected benefits 
of embryonic stem cell research. These cells are the all-purpose genetic 
material from which all of the body's tissues are molded. In the womb, 
the embryonic cells develop naturally into the highly organized set 
of tissues that constitute a living infant. Now that the cells can 
for the first time be cultured in the laboratory, scientists hope 
to channel them into any desired type of cell, replacing or relieving 
the need for transplantable donor organs and providing novel treatments 
for many other kinds of disease. Dr. Thomas Okarma, Geron's vice president 
for research, said embryonic stem cells were a potential source of: 
_ heart muscle cells to treat congestive heart failure; _ blood-forming 
cells to help cancer patients whose own bone marrow cells had been 
damaged by chemotherapy; _ cells to line the inside of blood vessels, 
to treat atherosclerosis; _ insulin-producing cells to cure those 
with insulin-dependent diabetes; _ nerve and brain cells to treat 
patients with Parkinson's and Alzheimer's disease and victims of stroke. 
The two scientists whose embryonic stem cell work was funded by Geron, 
Dr. James A. Thomson of the University of Wisconsin in Madison and 
Dr. John Gearhart of Johns Hopkins University, offered similarly optimistic 
testimony. Though Geron has a strong commercial interest in advertising 
the value of the cells, on whose use it owns an exclusive license, 
the company's general position on the wide applicability of the cells 
was supported by Varmus, an eminent biologist. When Sen. Arlen Specter, 
R.-Pa., pressed the scientists to say how soon treatments using the 
cells might be available, Thomson said therapy for Parkinson's could 
be expected in five to 10 years, and Gearhart predicted seven to 12 
years. Scientists usually decline to predict the date of prospective 
treatments because many results that seem promising in the laboratory 
stumble before reaching the marketplace, and regulatory delays are 
equally unpredictable. But even this enthusiastic panel of researchers 
became resolutely noncommittal when Specter asked, ``Do we have a 
realistic fountain of youth with this technique?'' At least two major 
obstacles remain to be overcome before any possible stem cell treatments 
emerge. One is that biologists have not yet identified the natural 
signals that are assumed to govern the differentiation of embryonic 
cells in the body. Another is that the developed cells produced from 
the embryonic stem cells will be rejected unless they can somehow 
be genetically manipulated so as to avoid provoking the patient's 
immune defenses. Varmus said that ``these technical challenges, though 
significant, are not insurmountable.'' Both the derivation and use 
of human embryonic stem cells raise unaccustomed ethical questions, 
ones that President Clinton last month asked the National Bioethics 
Advisory Commission to address. Thomson derived his cells from pre-implantation 
embryos that had been created in fertility clinics and would otherwise 
have been discarded. The embryos, at that stage a small blob of cells 
known as a blastocyst, had been frozen for several years. The cells 
Gearhart used came from aborted fetuses, from a region destined to 
form the egg or sperm cells. Doerflinger, representing the Catholic 
position, objected to any research that involved the creation or destruction 
of an embryo for research purposes, which in his view included the 
cells Thomson used, and, in practice, those used by Gearhart. But 
he said Gearhart's method might be acceptable if it were applied only 
to spontaneously aborted fetuses, depending on whether or not the 
method creates human embryos. ``I think the answer is no, but I don't 
know and I don't think anyone knows,'' he said. Varmus said he believed 
that Gearhart's research probably could have been funded by the National 
Institutes of Health, despite the ban, but that he was awaiting a 
ruling from the office of general counsel in the Department of Health 
and Human Services. Many biologists are eager to start research on 
the human embryonic stem cells but will have to wait a little while 
yet. Although Sen. Tom Harkin, D-Iowa, said at the hearing that he 
thought even the cells used by Thomson did not fall under the federal 
funding ban, Specter said afterwards that he was not yet ready to 
reach a judgment on whether research of the sort Gearheart conducted 
could be federally funded. Okarma said that Geron would make the cells 
freely available for research purposes. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>