<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981202.0301 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When Richard Nixon asked, ``Will it play in Peoria?'' he was taking 
the nation's temperature, checking on the predilections of mainstream 
citizens. But he was also reviving an adage from the early part of 
the century, when this city was a center of whiskey production and 
an active vaudeville circuit stop, and the farm folks were renowned 
as a particularly dour and tough-to-please audience. When I echoed 
the question last month _ what I actually said was: ``So what plays 
in Peoria?'' _ the occasion was a round-table discussion, organized 
at the request of The New York Times, among representatives of local 
arts groups. The subject was the health of the arts in this conservative 
heartland city of 113,000 people on the Illinois River. And it was 
with the emblematic history of Peoria in mind. ``We wondered how long 
it would take you to ask,'' said the mayor, Bud Grieves. ``We get 
that a lot.'' Best known today, perhaps, as the headquarters of Caterpillar 
Inc., the heavy-equipment manufacturer, Peoria, a three-hour drive 
southwest of Chicago, has exported a healthy regiment of cultural 
troops: comedians Richard Pryor and Sam Kinison, pop singer Dan Fogelberg 
and actors Susan Dey and Tom Irwin, not to mention Betty Friedan. 
But even with them long removed _ and casting aside the gimmickry 
of my journalistic conceit _ the city still serves as an adequate 
emblem of the nation's cultural health. Which is to say, there is 
a lot more going on than you might expect. The mayor had joined officials 
from the Peoria Symphony, the Peoria Players Theater, the Peoria Ballet, 
Opera Illinois and a dozen or so others on the second floor of a once-abandoned 
warehouse on the city's developing riverfront that a young entrepreneur 
has successfully transformed into a dinner theater. Mostly, they wanted 
to brag on themselves, with some reason. All the nonprofits at the 
table, even the opera, were at least breaking even. That week, the 
city-owned Peoria Civic Center was presenting the music of both Mahler 
and Motley Crue. The Peoria Arts Guild, which exhibits the work of 
regional artists and each summer sponsors an art fair that attracts 
thousands of visitors, was preparing to move, with the help of a $1 
million gift from a local patron, to a new building near the river, 
one more addition to what is becoming a bona fide cultural district. 
The schools have maintained a modest budget for arts instruction. 
And as Grieves pointed out, for 60 years the citizenry has upheld, 
through a referendum, a tax to support twice-weekly summer concerts 
by the Peoria Municipal Band. That, of course, is not the whole story; 
there is much that doesn't play in Peoria. But it is worthwhile to 
pause here and consider the good news, because in the continuing public 
discourse about the state of the nation's cultural life, the good 
news doesn't seem be heard much. Instead, mostly because of the well-publicized 
struggle of the National Endowment for the Arts to remain alive and 
viable, it seems fair to say the prevailing perception is that the 
arts in America are suffering, that the nation's cultural life has 
diminished, that the artistic side of the American character is undernourished. 
The endowment had its budget reduced by Congress from $176 million 
in 1992 to the current $98 million, and, even though its Congressional 
support seems to have stabilized in recent months, its role as grantmaker 
has been decried by conservatives because of its support for a handful 
of controversial projects. In fact, in its own report on the state 
of the arts in this country, ``American Canvas,'' the endowment sounded 
an ominous note, describing the arts as undersupported by the public, 
and the arts community as insufficiently engaged with society as a 
whole. That report was released 14 months ago, about the same time 
this newspaper gave me the assignment to travel the country and write 
about the arts as they are practiced and appreciated outside New York. 
In that time, I have visited 40 cities, my own personal American canvas, 
and my impression is that far from being dormant or in retreat, the 
arts, on balance, are edifyingly, thrillingly abloom. Virtually everywhere. 
The quantity of activity in any given community has surprised me almost 
every time, and more often than not I was surprised by its quality 
as well. Who would have suspected that in Bozeman, Mont., a city of 
35,000 people, there are some 75 arts organizations? Or for that matter, 
that in Peoria and its surrounding counties there are more than 50, 
including an orchestra, now in its 101st season, that is the 15th-oldest 
in the United States and that drew some 1,500 people to hear Mahler's 
Fourth Symphony last month, its tricky, exposed solos in the middle 
movements handled with delicacy by the horns and woodwinds. Frequently, 
I would visit a place to see something or someone specific, and while 
there come upon a trail of breadcrumbs leading irresistibly to something 
or someone else. In El Paso, I found a Chicano artists cooperative, 
painters, sculptors and musicians squatting _ with permission _ in 
the shell of an old furniture store, enlivening a struggling neighborhood. 
During a visit to the Walker Art Center in Minneapolis, I was introduced, 
by Richard Flood, the chief curator there, to Christi Atkinson, who 
runs No Name Exhibitions, a group of more than 100 local artists in 
the midst of renovating an old soap factory. The building was only 
partly spiffed up; it might be 10 years before the renovation is complete, 
Ms. Atkinson said. But already artists were working in studios, and 
several shows had been mounted, even though the place doesn't have 
heat yet. I never thought to find _ who would? _ an amateur production 
of ``The Marriage of Figaro'' in the woods of mid-coast Maine. Nor 
did I expect a riverfront concert in Des Moines by the Kabbalas, an 
Iowa-based rock band with a sound that is part Middle Eastern, part 
electric klezmer and part Spike Jones. In Sacramento, I stumbled on 
Fred Rochlin, a 74-year-old retired architect who had just begun a 
second career _ as a monologist. This is hardly scientific evidence 
of anything, true. But these anecdotal examples (and dozens of others) 
of arts activity in disparate places, often underfinanced and almost 
always beneath the radar of the media, have reminded me that the impulse 
toward art _ making it and appreciating it _ is irrefutably potent. 
And here are some numbers to underscore my impression. In a survey 
released in September, the endowment reported that in 1997, 20 million 
Americans sang in choirs or other groups; 33 million took photographs 
for artistic purposes; 24 million wrote creatively for reasons other 
than school or work, and 22 million played classical music on some 
instrument or other. The same year, 5 million Americans acted on a 
public stage. And 97 million, fully half the adult population of the 
United States, attended at least one of the following events: a museum 
exhibit, a jazz performance, an opera, a classical music concert, 
a stage musical, a play or a ballet. In terms of percentage, that 
is up from 41 percent of adults who attended arts events in 1992, 
the last time the survey was conducted. (And it is worth noting that 
this number does not include those who saw a movie, read a novel or 
played in a garage band.) The numbers suggest that our arts institutions 
have begun to address _ successfully _ the problem of integrating 
themselves into their communities. More educational programs, more 
children's programming, more outreach: all of this has emphasized 
the good the arts can do, focusing attention on what Ben Cameron, 
the executive director of the Theater Communications Group in New 
York, an umbrella organization for nonprofit theaters, calls ``the 
value rather than the quality'' of art. Of course, in many cities, 
Peoria included, arts institutions continue to worry about aging audiences. 
Minority groups still complain about feeling unwelcome in theaters 
and concert halls where, beyond the occasional token production, programming 
rarely reflects their interests and where, at the same time, traditional 
programmers feel frustrated at being unable to attract minority audiences, 
despite what they feel are their best efforts. ``We have a minority 
marketing committee but I'll be frank, we have really struggled,'' 
said Debbie Ritschel, the marketing director of the Peoria Civic Center. 
``Our African-American community works very well within its own community, 
but we can't seem to get them here.'' Last year, she added, ``An Evening 
With Langston and Martin,'' a theatrical presentation about the Rev. 
Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and Langston Hughes, sold only 125 tickets, 
even though it had considerable star power, with Danny Glover as the 
renowned poet of the Harlem Renaissance. Stan Maclin, who performs 
in an African drumming troupe that is based in Peoria, pointed out 
that in this city, which is 70 percent white, ``most people who look 
like me don't attend meetings like this.'' ``We aren't usually invited,'' 
he said. ``It's overwhelming. If you don't know how to get the audience, 
it's because you've created a situation where you feel you can participate 
but we don't.'' Even so, the fact that minority attendance has recently 
climbed nationwide in museums, opera houses and theaters is an indication 
that some people who were not showing up in these places in the past 
are doing so now. An annual survey of nonprofit theaters, for example, 
compiled by the Theater Communications Group, indicated that in 1997, 
17.2 million people attended a performance at one of 197 nonprofit 
theaters in the nation. That is 160,000 more people than the survey 
counted a year before, which is even more impressive considering that 
31 fewer theaters participated in the survey this year. Further, while 
it is true that society still marginalizes some outre artists and 
audiences, even the margins yield a kind of optimism. Did you know 
that in August, 1,300 people attended the National Poetry Slam in 
Austin, Texas, testimony to an almost entirely unacknowledged new 
art form that is being nurtured in coffeehouses and bars in almost 
every city in the country? I don't even know what to call it _ performance 
poetry? competitive poetry? _ these spoken-verse contests rooted for 
and hooted at as though they were football games. ``There is a mix 
of people involved, people off the street, dissatisfied M.F.A. students,'' 
said Guy LeCharles Gonzalez, a New Yorker who, representing the Nuyorican 
Poets Cafe on the Lower East Side of Manhattan, was a member of this 
year's championship team in Austin. ``We have some people involved 
in the so-called legit journals, too, but the lifeblood is people 
who feel they don't have a voice elsewhere.'' Interestingly enough, 
Gonzalez, 29, works as the membership coordinator for the Academy 
of American Poets, which is at the very center of the establishment, 
and whose president, Jonathan Galassi, once dismissed slam poetry 
as ``karaoke.'' Gonzalez also runs a Monday night series of readings 
at 13 Bar Lounge in Greenwich Village. ``Obviously, we're not recognized 
by the establishment as a legitimate form, so funding sources that 
are there for others are not there for us,'' he said. ``But if the 
NEA fell apart tomorrow, these coffee shops would still have readings.'' 
For the purposes of many arts groups, of course, the NEA has already 
fallen apart; it is impossible to know how many groups disappeared 
when their Federal grant money did. But less publicized is that local 
and state governments are supporting the arts at record levels. Part 
of the reason for this is that the arts have become such proven economic 
generators that countless communities have, in the last few years, 
applied public funds to the construction of arts facilities in order 
to spur redevelopment of benighted neighborhoods. Places as different 
(and unexpected) as Las Vegas and Madison, Wis., have begun creating 
strategies for developing cultural tourism. In another economic trend, 
in spite of concerns that the decline in federal grantmaking to the 
arts would spur a dwindling of corporate grantmaking as well, that 
hasn't exactly happened. Though a triennial survey released in November 
by the Business Committee for the Arts, an organization in New York 
that encourages and tracks partnerships between businesses and arts 
groups, reported that the percentage of American businesses contributing 
to the arts dropped to 39 percent last year, from 45 percent in 1994, 
the total contributed amount rose to an estimated $1.2 billion last 
year, from $875 million three years earlier. Further, and since 1994, 
when half of corporate arts financing derived from the Northeast and 
the West Coast, the money is now more evenly distributed. Last year, 
60 percent of corporate arts financing came from the South and the 
Midwest, which is particularly significant because almost all corporate 
contributions to the arts are made locally, and nearly half of the 
businesses surveyed made contributions to small or emerging arts groups. 
Indeed, even as Congress, in its snubbing of the endowment, has refused 
to acknowledge the importance of the arts to Americans, the corporate 
community has done the opposite, according to the IEG Sponsorship 
Report, a Chicago publication that tracks corporate sponsorships of 
all types: more than one-third of corporate arts contributions originate 
not from corporate foundations or charitable contributions funds but 
from marketing budgets. Clearly, businesses believe an affiliation 
with the arts helps instill public confidence. But does it help sell, 
say, chocolate cake? ``Oh, sure it does,'' said John Bryan, the CEO 
of Sara Lee Corp., which recently received a presidential arts medal 
for its arts support. ``There are a couple of reasons the arts are 
especially effective for corporations. One is the opportunity to identify 
with the quality image that the cultural aspects of our lives project. 
Our business is a simple one of creating value by building brands, 
and to a large extent this happens in the art world. The name on a 
painting tells you, `This is an original thing.' It gives you trust 
in that bit of art, even though it may not be obvious to you why this 
piece is better than another. The name gives you confidence. The same 
is true of a brand. So identifying with art is a fantastic opportunity.'' 
Of course, some would question the value of reveling in the corporate 
sponsorship of art. After all, if art is a mere commodity, if it is 
so unchallenging as to be popular, if it is fit for mass consumption, 
then perhaps it is uncertain why we value art and artists in the first 
place. Isn't art supposed to be provocative? Thorny? Difficult? Art 
is, by nature, independent, unbeholden to commerce; as arts organizations 
increase their reliance on corporate support, and increase their solicitation 
of it, such independence may be threatened. In fact, one of the often 
heard complaints now is that artists and arts institutions are in 
retreat from controversy, a concession to the indignant conservatism 
that at the beginning of this decade undermined the National Endowment 
for the Arts, alienated the public and chilled private support. Artists, 
the argument continues, have conceded as well to a complacent national 
audience that won't pay to be challenged, only to be entertained. 
This is a reasonable concern, but whether, over all, Americans have 
access to as much controversial, experimental art as they once did 
is difficult to measure. So is the relative worthiness of the art 
we are producing. Does more participation in the arts result in more 
great art being created? Or does it inevitably attenuate our standards? 
I'm not touching that. What is true, certainly, is that in most of 
the country, art is not being made for export; what is created stays 
home. And for that reason, it is subject to home rule. ``People don't 
like to see their friends and neighbors in controversial roles,'' 
said Ginny Andrews, a board member of the Peoria Players Theater, 
a community group now in its 80th season of admittedly fluffy fare. 
``They'll accept it from a touring company, but not from us.'' This 
is not an altogether terrible thing; it is one reason for places like 
New York, so artists who get weary of the outlook in Peoria have a 
place to go. And in my experience, most places, from time to time, 
will surprise you with their tolerance, if not their enthusiasm. They 
have never had Tony Kushner's play ``Angels in America: A Gay Fantasia 
on National Themes'' in Peoria, which is what you might expect, but 
a production of its first half, ``Millennium Approaches'' was well 
received last month at Illinois State University in Bloomington, 40 
miles away. Two years ago, the Lakeview Museum here had a Robert Mapplethorpe 
photography exhibit, which caused no stir at all. ``On the other hand, 
I can't say the room was overworked,'' said Pat Barton, the museum 
board president. In the last 14 months, I have seen a lot of theater, 
opera, painting, dance, orchestral music, jazz, blues and rock-and-roll. 
Some of it has been terrible. But much of it was not, performing valuable 
service in its community. And if I have learned anything in my travels 
thus far, it is that I have only scratched the surface. ``People pay 
attention to certain places, New York, Chicago, as if they're the 
center of the world,'' said Preston Jackson, a sculptor who teaches 
at the Chicago Art Institute but whose studio is on the Peoria riverfront. 
``They're not. There's a healthy art scene in Springfield. There's 
one here. Benton Harbor, Mich., that's another hot spot. People who 
want to see art should get up and travel a little bit.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>