<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981202.0329 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
More than four decades after Dr. Sam Sheppard was convicted of murdering 
his wife in a case that transfixed America, the Ohio Supreme Court 
cleared the way Wednesday for his son to finally try to prove his 
father's innocence and to sue the state of Ohio for wrongfully imprisoning 
him. Ohio's highest court ruled, 4-3, against a request by the Cuyahoga 
County prosecutor to stop the suit by the son, Sam Reese Sheppard, 
from going to trial. ``I'm heartened we're getting our day in court, 
and I'm surprised, because I didn't think the Supreme Court would 
have the will to do this,'' said Sheppard, who lives in Oakland, Calif. 
Sheppard was 7 years old in 1954 when his father was found guilty 
of bludgeoning his wife, Marilyn, to death in their lakeside home 
in suburban Cleveland, and was sentenced to life in prison. Ten years 
later Sheppard's conviction was overturned by the U.S. Supreme Court 
on the ground that the news media turned the trial into a carnival, 
and in a second trial Sheppard was found not guilty. But the son believed 
that justice had not been done, and embarked on an investigation that 
has now found DNA evidence exonerating his father and pointing to 
a window washer at the Sheppard home as the murderer. The Shepard 
case, the O.J. Simpson trial of the 1950s, entered popular culture 
by forming the basis for the television series ``The Fugitive'' and 
the movie of the same name. Sheppard contended that a ``bushy-haired'' 
intruder was the real killer. But prosecutors always dismissed his 
defense, and the case has continued to polarize Cleveland. Indeed, 
Stephanie Tubbs Jones, the prosecutor in Cleveland who tried to block 
the wrongful imprisonment trial, issued a statement Wednesday saying 
she would ``ask the Supreme Court to reconsider its decision.'' ``Let 
me clearly state,'' Ms. Jones said, that the Ohio Supreme Court's 
opinion ``in no way suggests that Sam Sheppard should be declared 
innocent or that his claim for money damages has any merit.'' Ms. 
Jones, who was elected to Congress last month, will leave the prosecutor's 
office in January, but she has taken what some lawyers, politicians 
and journalists in Cleveland see as a tough, personal stance against 
Sheppard and his efforts to clear his father. Ms. Jones said she would 
also ask the trial judge, Ronald Suster, of Cuyahoga County, to find 
that the statute of limitations had expired and that Sheppard had 
no legal standing to bring a case for wrongful imprisonment on his 
father's behalf. Ms. Jones made similar arguments to the state Supreme 
Court in trying to stop the trial, but the court majority rejected 
her contentions and held that they were issues that could be decided 
by the trial judge. As an indication of how politically sensitive 
the Sheppard case remains, one of the three dissenting justices on 
the Ohio Supreme Court, Francis Sweeney, was an assistant prosecutor 
in Sheppard's second trial. He refused to recuse himself. Terry Gilbert, 
the lawyer for Sheppard, said he would be happy ``to sit down and 
discuss a settlement in a civil way'' with the prosecutor's office. 
``This case has been a painful legacy for Cleveland,'' Gilbert said, 
``and it's time that the community resolve the tragedy and acknowledge 
that Sam Sheppard was wrongfully imprisoned and that this had consequences 
for him, his family and our system of justice.'' Gilbert said he did 
not expect the trial for a declaration of innocence and wrongful imprisonment 
to begin before next summer, given the complexity of the case. If 
Sheppard was found to be wrongfully imprisoned, under Ohio law his 
son could then bring a separate suit for damages in the state Court 
of Claims. Gilbert said he and Sheppard had not yet discussed what 
amount of damages they would seek. By law, the state would be liable 
for $25,000 for each of the 10 years that Sheppard served in prison, 
plus lawyers fees and any loss of earnings, which could be considerable, 
given that he had had a large medical practice. Among the evidence 
Gilbert plans to introduce will be DNA evidence taken from the exhumed 
body of Sheppard and wood chips with blood smears taken by police 
from the Sheppards' house after the murder. The evidence was examined 
by Mohammad Tahir, a supervisor of DNA and serology at the Indianapolis-Marion 
County Forensic Services Agency. According to Tahir, the samples show 
the blood did not come from either Sheppard or his wife; therefore, 
there must have been a third person present at the murder. That person, 
Tahir said, was the window washer, Richard Eberling, whose DNA was 
obtained after a court order as part of Sheppard's lawsuit. Eberling, 
who had been convicted of another murder, died in prison last July. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>