<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981202.0198 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
They are, rest assured, the only Microsoft products to be tested for 
excessive hugging. Arthur and DW look for all the world like simple 
stuffed toys based on the aardvarks from PBS's most popular children's 
show, ``Arthur.'' But these two 21-inch figures, called Actimates, 
are not toys: they are furry computer peripherals. Both Arthur and 
DW have roughly 700 internal parts _ including 512 kilobytes of computer 
memory _ to natter and sing away with a vocabulary of roughly 4,000 
words. It's only when you squeeze one of the creature's extremities 
that it reveals its true nature. ``Do you know what's gross?'' Arthur 
asks when you squeeze his hand and then his ear in a weird impression 
of a Masonic handshake. ``Green goop that drips from faucets. That's 
gross.'' DW, in return for a handshake, will recite the date and time. 
The tricks, however, don't end there. Sit an Actimate in front of 
a computer running an Arthur CD-ROM (made by Microsoft; $35) or the 
PBS Arthur Web site (underwritten by Microsoft) and the doll will 
help the child solve on-screen puzzles and games. Put the doll in 
front of a television set showing ``Arthur'' programs or Microsoft-adapted 
videotapes of the show (about $15) and the dolls will talk back to 
the television. ``That's got to hurt!'' the Arthur doll groans when 
the on-screen Arthur takes a tumble. If this all sounds too much like 
one of those horror movies where dolls spring to life, be warned: 
Arthur and DW are not alone. This fall has seen the release of a menagerie 
of fuzzy computers. Mattel has introduced My Interactive Pooh, a $100 
Winnie-the-Pooh doll that can download 20 minutes of chat or songs 
from a CD-ROM into its memory, call a child by name and interact with 
a computer through a cable link. Two other, less expensive creatures 
_ Furby from Tiger Electronics and Real Live Babe, a toy pig from 
Equity Toys based on the movie character _ have sophisticated electronic 
innards that allow some interactivity (although neither have computer 
or television interfaces). And this month Microsoft announced four 
new Actimates that will be based on the BBC-produced ``Teletubbies.'' 
All of these dolls offer varying levels of interactivity and differing 
claims about educational value. Microsoft, which financed sophisticated 
psychological testing during the Actimates' development, does not 
even use the word toy to describe its dolls. They are, Microsoft press 
releases say, nothing less than ``learning systems.'' But the educational 
value of these kinds of interactive toys is a matter of keen debate 
among child-development experts. Should parents buy a fuzzy chip-enhanced 
doll in the hope that it will help a child learn? ``People think these 
kinds of things are going to get their kids to be Harvard grads,'' 
said Mariann Szymanski, president of the Toy Tips Research Center 
at Marquette University. ``They're not.'' Claire Lerner, a child development 
specialist at Zero to Three, a Washington-based nonprofit organization, 
also worries that parental anxiety alone drives these purchases. ``Parents 
are very overwhelmed right now with an explosion of research on how 
they can help their children's' development,'' she said. ``There's 
a real danger in promoting these toys that way.'' There have also 
been positive reviews. Microsoft has received high marks for its first 
Actimate, an interactive version of Barney, the purple dinosaur. The 
dolls certainly seem educational. Among other things, they try to 
get children to say the alphabet backwards, pick out rhyming words 
and play simple memory games. Indeed, the dolls often seem almost 
oppressively instructive. Arthur, for example, can be programmed to 
act as a singing alarm clock. A child expecting a cheerful ``What 
do you want for breakfast?'' after waking is more likely to hear, 
``Today is the Hindu festival of light. To find out more, go to your 
local library.'' Dr. Erik Strommen, a developmental child psychologist 
who had been trying to find ways to make computers more accessible 
to small children, was working at the Children's Television Workshop, 
the home of ``Sesame Street,'' when Microsoft approached him about 
working on Barney in 1996. ``I gasped when I first saw it,'' Strommen 
said of an early prototype. ``I hadn't thought along these lines. 
My initial reaction was, This jumps the fence.'' Strommen's job, as 
the project's research and design consultant, was to figure out how 
to make the gadget an effective learning toy, a task that would ultimately 
involve upward of 25 formal psychological test programs studying 500 
children and a variety of more casual assessments at day-care centers 
near Microsoft's headquarters in Redmond, Wash. The goal, Strommen 
said, was that Barney should give children ``a sense of mastery.'' 
Unfortunately, the first test versions of Barney undermined that goal. 
Because the device was capable of doing so many things _ and because 
it insisted on doing so many things _ it was perceived by many children 
as a fuzzy tyrant. ``He was browbeating,'' Strommen said. The problem, 
Microsoft concluded, was that Barney had been programmed like a piece 
of software _ unfriendly, unyielding and full of tasks to complete 
_ instead of like a toy. The company had assumed that kids would play 
along with Barney, while the kids expected that the (italics)doll(end 
italics) would play around with them. To tone Barney down, subsequent 
versions replaced some of the orders with praise and idle pseudoconversation. 
Some of the lessons Strommenn learned from Barney, which is aimed 
at children as young as 2, didn't completely transfer to Arthur and 
DW, which are intended for ages 4 to 8. To reflect their older audience, 
the Arthur and DW dolls deal with more complicated learning material 
like basic arithmetic, telling time and the alphabet. To that end, 
they have double the computer memory and roughly twice the vocabulary 
of Barney. Remembering the tyrannical Barney, Strommen thought it 
might be useful to further humanize Arthur and DW by allowing them 
to make preprogrammed mistakes when participating in, say, an arithmetic 
exercise while the child is using a computer. The scheme, however, 
made children furious. It showed, Strommen said, that no matter how 
much they appeared to be treating the toys like human playmates, the 
children had very different expectations for the devices. ``Children 
are more sophisticated than we give them credit for,'' he said. ``They 
always know damn well that this is not a person. All the Actimates 
behave in three distinct ways. When used with the PC or television 
connections, the toys' programming emphasizes what psychologists call 
scaffolding, that is, providing temporary forms of assistance. For 
example, if a child has trouble picking out ryhming sounds in a word 
game, the Arthur and DW dolls gently offer the correct answer. Older 
human playmates and parents do much the same thing when they help 
children count by, say, filling in missing numbers. When an Actimate 
comes under the control of a PC, however, it keeps scaffolding but 
encourages the child to play only with the on-screen image of the 
character that appears on the CD-ROM or Web site. The dolls receive 
their instructions through a hamburger-size radio transmitter ($55) 
that plugs into a standard MIDI port (on a machine running Microsoft 
Windows) to form a wireless link between the fuzzy creatures and PCs. 
There is a second radio transmitter (for another $55) that plugs into 
any standard VCR. That transmitter literally puts words in the dolls' 
mouths, the words having been sent as data through the television 
signal. When in couch-potato mode, the Actimate tries to focus the 
child's attention on the tube. If the child squeezes the doll while 
the TV is on, the doll will offer such peevish remarks as ``Are you 
trying to get my attention?'' The idea of a toy's encouraging children 
to watch TV might appall many parents, but Strommen said that viewing 
in the company of a parent or older child helps younger children learn. 
``Research tells us that you're sitting there watching TV,'' he said. 
``And research also shows your parents are not with you,'' he said. 
The Actimate is programmed to act like a surrogate parent. That is 
the kind of help that Marla Smith needed. A shift worker and single 
mother in Decatur, Ill., Ms Smith doesn't always have the time she 
would like to help her 5-year-old son, Travis, learn. She bought a 
PC three years ago but struggled to find software appropriate for 
young children. Last year, she ordered a Barney doll with computer 
interface and CD-ROM after seeing them advertised on a home shopping 
channel. ``It was expensive but I figure it was worth it,'' she said. 
For Travis, the chip-laden Barney fulfilled an important traditional 
stuffed-doll role. Last May, after he broke his arm after a failed 
attempt to emulate Superman, Travis insisted on bringing his Barney 
to the hospital emergency room for comfort. The robo-Barney had also 
become part of his daily computer sessions. Ms. Smith said her son 
has learned to identify color, basic shapes, several songs and how 
to operate the computer. ``According to his teachers, he is ahead 
of all the other kids in his class,'' she said, attributing a large 
part of that success to the doll. ``If only they had them when I was 
a kid.'' Some experts in child development disagreed with that kind 
of assessment. Ms. Szymanski said that figures based on well-known 
characters are useful at helping children with ``character development 
roles,'' but cautioned that parents should not believe that by buying 
these toys, ``they're going to make their kids smart.'' Ms. Lerner 
suggested that simpler, time-proven toys can often be more effective 
at preparing young children for computers (to say nothing about life) 
by developing logical thinking and motor skills. ``I look at a shape 
sorter and think that I'd rather my child use that,'' Ms. Lerner said. 
``With a shape sorter, a child is much more an active agent than they 
tend to be with highly titillating toys that do so much.'' Mitchel 
Resnick, head of the learning research group at the Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology's Media Lab, agreed that some of the ``richest 
learning experiences'' are provided by simpler toys like old-fashioned 
building blocks that allow children to act as designers or creators. 
``Just because something is complicated or electronic doesn't mean 
it's useful,'' he said. ``What's more important is the nature of the 
interaction the toy supports. Sophisticated toys can lead to different 
types of interactions, some better and some worse.'' Even Strommen 
at Microsoft readily acknowledged the value of traditional toys. ``What 
we can do with technology a person can do infinitely more powerfully,'' 
he said. But whether or not Microsoft becomes a giant in the stuffed-toy 
business, the distinction between traditional toys and the new microchip-driven 
toys is likely to blur. Resnick emphasized that parents must now focus 
on what the toy does instead of what it contains. ``Asking today about 
electronics in toys is as if you said in the 50s, `Do you think toys 
made of plastic are going to be dominant in the future?' When you 
go to Toys `R' Us today, there is not a plastic toys category.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>