<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981202.0518 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Albert Frey, an early ambassador to America of the International Style 
of architecture who later brought its themes to buildings in harmony 
with the American desert, died at his home in Palm Springs, Calif., 
on Nov. 14, said his executor, F. Gillar Boyd Jr. He was 95. Frey 
belonged to a generation that believed in a political role for modern 
architecture, that of social liberation through machine-made, egalitarian 
and affordable designs. His chosen materials were aluminum, glass, 
cables and, eventually, the very boulders and sands of the desert 
where he settled. In a career that spanned more than 65 years, Frey 
remained true to the principle that architecture should make the most 
of the least. His best known works were the East Coast houses he designed 
with Lawrence Kocher in the 1930s and the many buildings he created 
in the Palm Springs of the 1940s, '50s and '60s. ``He was the last 
of a generation of European architects that came to the West Coast 
envisioning that, in this unformed landscape, a perfected vision of 
a modern future could bloom,'' said Terence Riley, chief curator of 
architecture and design at the Museum of Modern Art. Albert Frey was 
born in Zurich on Oct. 18, 1903. He studied architecture at the Institute 
of Technology in Winterthur, Switzerland, and received his degree 
in 1924. In 1929 he spent about 10 months working in the Paris atelier 
of Le Corbusier, where he worked on the detailing of one of Le Corbusier's 
masterworks, the Villa Savoye. In 1930, Frey came to the United States, 
convinced that it was the land of opportunity for modernist design. 
While in New York, he met Marion E. Cook, a writer, and they were 
married from 1938 to 1944. In New York, he worked for several prominent 
architects, including Philip Goodwin, one of the architects of the 
Museum of Modern Art. Frey is credited by his biographer with contributing 
to the design of the original Roy and Niuta Titus Theater as well 
as of the museum's roof deck, with its distinctive circular cut-outs. 
Both are to be restored by Yoshio Taniguchi, the architect of the 
museum's latest expansion plans. But it was the 1931 Aluminaire house 
that drew critical and popular attention to Frey and his collaborator 
Kocher, then the managing editor of Architectural Record. Commissioned 
by the Architectural League as a way to promote modernist housing 
ideas, the Aluminaire House was one of only two American houses represented 
in Philip Johnson and Henry-Russell Hitchcock's landmark 1932 museum 
show, ``International Exhibition: Modern Architecture.'' In 1987, 
with modernism in disfavor, the aluminum and glass house was about 
to be destroyed when the New York Institute of Technology rescued 
it and moved it to the West Islip, N.J., campus of the New York institute, 
where it was dismantled. It is now under reconstruction at the school. 
In 1939, Frey moved to Palm Springs. He became part of the movement 
championed by other California modernists including John Lautner to 
emphasize the central place of nature in modern architecture. For 
Frey, the desert was his true love. ``When I saw the landscape of 
the desert, I knew I found a place I could call home,'' he said to 
Joseph Rosa, author of a 1990 biography of Frey. Numerous buildings 
by Frey helped transform Palm Springs into a mecca of what might be 
called leisure modernism comparable to Miami Beach. Notable projects 
there included the Palm Springs City Hall, designed in partnership 
with John Porter Clark and Robson Chambers; the Raymond Loewy house, 
done for the famous industrial designer along with Clark, and the 
Tramway Valley Station and Gas Station, another project with Chambers, 
which has a hyperbolic paraboloid roof that serves as the visual gateway 
to the city. His own homes, Frey 1 and Frey 2, encapsulated the man 
in their spare elegance perfectly attuned to the landscape. Both houses 
are made of corrugated aluminum and glass. Frey I, which has been 
substantially altered over the years by subsequent owners, featured 
a stairway and dining table suspended by cables from the ceiling. 
Frey 2, where the architect lived from the '60s on, is centered on 
a single room built around a boulder. With the resurgent interest 
in modernism in the last decade, Frey is once again in vogue. This 
fall a monograph on his homes was published and there was an exhibition 
on the Aluminaire house at the Architectural League. In retirement 
since 1990, he nevertheless agreed last summer to do some house sketches 
for an executive at Gucci. He is survived by a sister, Emma Schneider, 
who lives in Herrliberg, Switzerland. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>