<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981202.0255 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
I've certainly cried over television before. Those stock triumph-over-tragedy 
movies have been known to reduce me to a quivering mess of smeared 
mascara, and even though I know I'm being had, I always fall victim 
to the schmaltzy AT&AMP;T commercials. And oh yes, when I was younger 
and less hardened to the vagaries of professional sports, I used to 
cry whenever the Minnesota Vikings lost. (In those days, that meant 
quite often.) But until last month, I've never cried over my television 
service. In this electronic age, we take television service for granted. 
For most Americans, Katie Couric is either captured out of thin air 
by an antenna or piped in via cable. That's for most Americans. I 
was part of most America for 35 years, until my husband, a photographer 
who can live anywhere for his work, decided he wanted to be in the 
country, far from the urban plagues of crowds and crime. I'd spent 
10 years in New York and four in Austin, Texas, and though living 
in the country wasn't my dream, it wasn't my nightmare either. So 
off we went to a stone barn we had renovated on a 200-acre piece of 
land 50 miles southwest of Austin, in the middle of the Texas Hill 
Country, with its undulating horizon, massive live oaks and impossibly 
green rivers. I am a freelance writer, and like many people who flee 
the city for the serene countryside, I hoped that via fax, Federal 
Express and the Internet I could conduct business as effectively as 
I had before _ albeit with a few limitations, like a 1 p.m. Fedex 
cut-off time. There have been some challenges, however. Before the 
phone company upgraded our lines, we'd occasionally think a vacuum 
cleaner had called when we picked up the receiver. ``Those squirrels 
have been chewing on the wires again,'' the technician would say when 
he came out to investigate the static. For a year after we moved here, 
we had to use a long-distance number to connect to AOL, which inhibited 
any surfing urges. Progress finally came to Podunk in the form of 
a local server. We had trouble with our television, too. Even with 
a decent-sized antenna, the picture looked like the closest thing 
the Hill Country would ever see to a blizzard. But the solution seemed 
easy: a satellite dish. Not a huge, wading-pool-sized number that 
looks as if you are communicating with aliens, but a compact, 18-inch 
one. We mounted it on our dog kennel, and got beautiful reception 
on a stupefying array of channels. For some time, we felt we had a 
slight technological edge over our city friends. Not only because 
of the vast selection of stations, but also because we received our 
networks from distant cities (satellite providers do not tailor their 
transmissions to local markets). I could sit in my living room, with 
cows roaming outside in the fields, and _ in what seemed like a geography 
warp _ I could watch Chuck Scarborough and Sue Simmons deliver New 
York news. Sometimes I would pretend I still lived there, and that 
if I opened my door I'd be back on my old Chelsea sidewalk. We also 
got a West Coast station for every network, so that if I missed 60 
Minutes at 6 p.m., I could catch it on the CBS station out of Los 
Angeles at 9 p.m. One of our ABC stations came from Nashville, close 
to my hometown, and I was able to keep up on weather and political 
races there. The media junkie in me was ecstatic. I had a strange 
sense that, while physically in the middle of nowhere, I was living 
everywhere in the country at once. (Of course, we couldn't get our 
own local television news, since satellite services offer very little 
local programming; for that we relied on radio and the Austin paper.) 
Any perceived advantages came to a screeching halt in September, when 
I clicked on PBS so my 17-month-old son could watch Teletubbies. The 
screen was black, except for a note advising me to call Direct TV, 
my satellite provider. I soon found that all of the networks were 
off _ Fox, ABC, CBS and NBC _ though I still received the other 300-some 
channels, from CNN to the Animal Planet network. After making a few 
distraught calls, this is what I learned: A law passed by Congress 
in 1988 stipulated that a house was not allowed to receive network 
programs through a satellite dish unless it was ``unserved'' _ meaning 
it was not able to get an acceptable picture from the local affiliates 
via antenna. The definition of ``acceptable'' was based on a standard 
devised by the Federal Communications Commission in the 1950s, when 
fuzzy pictures were more the norm. No one really paid attention to 
this for some years, and many viewers in cities and suburbs bought 
dishes and got their networks from far-off markets. This all changed 
when the Fox and CBS affiliates in Miami went to federal court in 
1997 and sued Primetime 24, which feeds the networks to satellite 
providers like Direct TV. The affiliates believed they were losing 
viewers and advertising dollars, because many in their viewing area 
were getting their Ally McBeal and Cosby from stations far from South 
Beach. The affiliates won the suit, and in July a judge ordered all 
satellite providers to stop offering networks to anyone but the unserved. 
Although the injunction will not go into effect until next February, 
and related litigation is still going on, companies like Direct have 
begin turning some customers off now, so that it will be in compliance 
with the ruling. The FCC estimates that 2 million people nationwide 
will be affected by the judge's order. I didn't worry too much when 
I heard this, remembering the quality of our picture pre-dish. So 
I was quite shocked when I was told two weeks after we lost the networks 
that we didn't qualify as unserved and weren't going to get them back. 
I argued with the Direct TV representative, rattling off our rural 
credentials _ miles from the closest city, hilly terrain that makes 
reception miserable. ``We don't even have a Starbucks, for God's sake,'' 
I declared finally. That gave her pause, but ultimately the only thing 
she could do was advise me to call my Austin affiliates for a waiver. 
On the phone, the staff at most of the affiliates acted sympathetic 
and asked me to send a letter explaining my situation. In fact, the 
letters and my fervent appeals got me nowhere. Three stations sent 
back a form response, essentially saying that it was my satellite 
provider's responsibility to come out and test the strength of my 
signal. If I didn't pass, the satellite provider could give me my 
service back. I made one more call to Direct TV, and was told it didn't 
have the manpower to test 1 million customers; I was designated ``served'' 
merely by my zip code, which out here covers a broad swath of land. 
I was encouraged, however, to join a satellite provider lobbying effort 
by calling a special 800 number, through which I would be connected 
right to one of my senator's offices so I could vent my frustration. 
At least one bill is before Congress to address the problem by redefining 
what is an unserved area. The most exasperating part of this whole 
experience _ the thing that brought me to tears finally _ was my call 
to the PBS affiliate for a waiver. I expected no problem. It is, after 
all, Public Television. But when I spoke to the head of the Austin 
station, he told me they weren't granting waivers, period. He wouldn't 
even allow me to write a letter stating my case. I was furious. Not 
only do tax dollars help support the station, but I have been a regular 
contributor to PBS all my adult life. I got off the phone and wept, 
much to my surprise. It's not that television is that important to 
me in a couch potato sense. It's important in my feeling that I'm 
maintaining a level of ``connectedness'' out here that somehow approximates 
the level that came so easily in the city. My not getting PBS was 
the last straw, and somehow a metaphor for life in the country. There 
are so many amenities you give up out here _ dry cleaners, newsstands, 
take-out Chinese _ I couldn't stand losing one more. Knowing what 
is going on in the world and the media, I realized, is not just crucial 
for my work, but also for my sense of who I am. For all its failings 
and all the statistics about falling viewership, network television 
acts as a national community, and I felt more isolated than ever from 
mainstream America. My network-less stint began just about the time 
the Starr Report hit and I was desperate to know what Ted Koppel was 
saying about the whole affair; I wanted to hear the jokes Jay Leno 
and David Letterman were making. I also noticed that I missed out 
on what are essentially national rituals, like the new season of prime 
time shows. Though I don't watch much prime time, I do like to check 
out a hot new show to see what everyone is talking about. I've been 
told I'm not missing much this year, but I would like to see for myself 
how bad it all is. And despite ESPN, nothing beats the networks when 
it comes to sports. I had to miss the playoffs and the whole World 
Series this year (what hideous mistake by Chuck Knoblauch?). And when 
my father visited recently, he was ready to drive to a friend's house 
in Austin to catch his Sunday football. Mostly however, I long for 
the small traditions that had become part of my daily routine. At 
6 p.m. every weekday, while I made dinner, I would watch The News 
Hour with Jim Lehrer, the most calming source of news. Now, I look 
at the clock at 6 p.m. and think of what I'm missing _ like a phantom 
limb that aches. What is Michael Beschloss' take on the impeachment 
hearings? What does Paul Gigot think of Newt Gingrich's demise? What 
I essentially discovered is that for me, the shows on network television 
are similar to what they say about all the cultural activities in 
Manhattan: It's not whether you indulge in them that matters; it's 
knowing you can when you want to that makes all the difference. At 
this point our choice is simply to accept our un-American status until 
a new bill passes, or, as my local affiliates advise, go the distinctly 
anti-high-tech route and put a 30-foot antenna on our roof. But my 
husband and I spent too much time and money renovating our house to 
turn it into a pin cushion. So for now aesthetics are winning out. 
But George Clooney and the rest of the folks at ``ER'' beckon. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>