<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981202.0500 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The decision by the International Monetary Fund and the United States 
Treasury last year to push Asian nations to send their interest rates 
soaring was a crucial blunder that worsened the world financial crisis, 
the World Bank concluded Wednesday in a report of how the trouble 
started. The 200-page document deliberately omitted any direct reference 
to the IMF or to the Treasury, which has a major voice in the IMF's 
decisions. The omission, bank officials said, was a conciliatory gesture 
to both institutions, which have often disagreed with the bank on 
strategies to fix the crisis that began 18 months ago. The World Bank's 
blow-by-blow account of a series of cascading misjudgments places 
much of the blame on global investors who lent money with abandon 
to developing nations, and on Asian officials who were eager to accumulate 
the cash. But it left little doubt that in the bank's judgment the 
IMF and the Clinton administration shared responsibility for mishandling 
the initial response to the crisis. The report also predicts that 
most of the afflicted nations will probably begin climbing out of 
recession next year, with growth continuing in 2000. But it warns 
that ``there is still a substantial risk that the world economy will 
plunge into recession in 1999,'' particularly if Japan is unable to 
end its recession. The World Bank report reflects a broader debate 
among economists and policymakers about whether decisions by the IMF 
and the U.S. Treasury deepened the crisis, and whether the movement 
in recent years to liberalize financial markets around the world should 
be dramatically slowed. It argues that some system should be developed 
to limit the rush of short-term investments into developing countries 
that do not yet have the regulatory systems in place to monitor how 
the foreign cash is spent. ``The heart of this current crisis,'' Joseph 
Stiglitz, the chief economist of the Bank, said Wednesday, ``is the 
surge of capital flows. The surge is followed by a precipitous flow 
out. Few countries, no matter how strong their financial institutions, 
could have withstood such a turnaround, but clearly, the fact that 
the financial institutions were weak and their firms highly leveraged 
made these countries particularly vulnerable.'' Neither the IMF nor 
the Treasury, both of which saw the report before it was published, 
issued any public comment on it Wednesday. There are parts they agree 
with: IMF and Treasury officials have often blamed the huge volume 
of private investment into developing countries _ and the refusal 
of investors to heed the risks associated with putting their money 
into countries with few regulatory safeguards _ for creating the conditions 
that led to the bust. But they continue to defend their initial strategy 
of urging Thailand, Indonesia and South Korea to raise their interest 
rates, a classic economic solution intended to reassure investors 
and stabilize national currencies. In Thailand and South Korea, those 
rates have now declined to about 7 percent and the currencies have 
stabilized, developments that IMF officials say vindicate their approach. 
The Bank's report argues that the strategy backfired, stabilizing 
the currencies at the cost of plunging the countries into deep recessions 
with substantial unemployment. The report asserts that the interest 
rate increases spread the economic pain far beyond the banks, investment 
funds and real estate companies that had gotten the countries into 
trouble to begin with, sending thousands of small businesses in to 
bankruptcy. ``Some estimates are that levels of bankruptcy in Indonesia 
now are 75 percent,'' Stiglitz argued Wednesday, ``and, you know, 
you cannot have a country perform with 75 percent of its firms in 
bankruptcy.'' The report was published on the day that the board of 
the IMF formally began its review of the latest bailout, a $41.5 billion 
aid package to Brazil. While the World Bank is a major participant 
in that bailout, it warned Wednesday against the risk of what it termed 
``rescue creep'' as aid packages get larger and larger. ``No reasonable 
amount of public money can stop a justified speculative attack'' on 
a country's currency, the report concluded. ``By themselves, larger 
packages worsen moral hazard problems'' _ the risk that investors 
will expect governments to bail them out _ ``and may lead to excessively 
tough conditions, defeating the end objectives.'' The World Bank and 
the IMF were both created by the Bretton Woods agreement in 1944 to 
bring order to the world economy. The bank's primary responsibility 
is tending to the poor with development programs to help fend off 
poverty and disease; the IMF focuses chiefly on economic and monetary 
policy. Those differing mandates have often led them to disagreements, 
and two months ago Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin publicly warned 
both institutions that the time had come to put their differences 
aside. One of the many proposals floating around Washington to reform 
the institutions would merge their governing boards, but that would 
require a marriage of two very different cultures. The IMF continues 
to insist that it made the best judgments it could at a time of tremendous 
chaos last year, when the governments of Thailand and South Korea 
were going through elections and seemed unable to make decisions. 
And it argues that its program in Indonesia was undermined by the 
refusal of the government of President Suharto to stick to its economic 
agreements, and then by the political chaos that resulted in Suharto's 
resignation and continues on the streets to this day. Still, at a 
seminar early this week a senior IMF official conceded that the fund 
made some judgments ``too quickly'' and mistakenly thought it was 
seeing a repeat of past currency crises, particularly the one that 
struck Mexico in 1995. Several months ago, Stanley Fischer, the IMF's 
first deputy managing director, noted that ``in most cases governments 
call us in only after they discover they are in a mess, usually because 
they didn't do things they needed to do long ago. If the problems 
were easy to solve, they'd do it themselves.'' Many of the conclusions 
in the report are likely to fuel the debate over what to do next. 
For example, the Bank calls for a tremendous slowdown in the movement 
in recent years to deregulate financial markets in developing countries, 
a reversal of the policy that the IMF advocated as late as April 1997, 
just three months before Thailand's troubles touched off the crisis. 
``Financial-sector liberalization,'' the report adds, ``which can 
significantly boost the risk of crisis, should proceed with care _ 
fully and in step with the capacity to design and enforce tighter 
regulation and supervision.'' In the past year the IMF and the Treasury 
have begun to take the same line, stressing the need to build regulatory 
institutions before opening economies to huge capital flows. The Bank, 
however, praised the IMF's programs in several countries, including 
their focus on restructuring corporations and compelling countries, 
in return for aid, to overhaul their bankruptcy systems and inject 
public funds into weak banking systems. It also credited the IMF for 
loosening the conditions on the bailout programs to ease the pain 
on the poor. Still it noted that 17 million more people in Indonesia 
are expected to fall below the poverty line this year, as wages collapse. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>