<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981202.0294 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Just about everything in the new Getty Center's first year of operations 
has been larger than life, but one of the more revealing developments 
at its spectacular campus here took place quietly. The Getty had previously 
agreed to bring an exhibition on Sigmund Freud to its campus. But 
several months ago Getty officials called the nearby Skirball Cultural 
Center and asked if it wanted to be the host of the exhibition, which 
is now at the Library of Congress in Washington, adding that the Getty 
would still foot the cost, roughly $300,000. ``They approached us, 
which I think was a very important statement,'' said Dr. Uri Herscher, 
president of the Skirball, which is dedicated to Jewish-American culture. 
It was the first time the Getty had engaged in such a cooperative 
venture with another museum here. When the J. Paul Getty Trust opened 
its $1 billion hilltop home last Dec. 16 after 13 years of planning 
and construction, it was one of the more celebrated cultural events 
in the nation. Visits to the museum are running about 50 percent ahead 
of what had been expected: close to 2 million people will have made 
the trip in the first year, even though parking reservations have 
been almost impossible to obtain, and the museum can be reached only 
after a tram ride. As a result, the Getty's first new construction 
project involves an additional set of restrooms. But behind the big 
numbers and public enthusiasm, the Getty, one of the wealthiest private 
arts institutions in the world, has been rethinking its mission and 
its role in Los Angeles. For good or for ill, the once remote and 
self-contained museum is reaching out in new ways, as it did to the 
Skirball, however slowly at times; it is also turning from unfettered 
growth to an era of limits on what it can do by itself. Barry Munitz, 
who was named the Getty's president and chief executive shortly after 
the opening, has made it a point to consolidate some of the trust's 
activities and to reach out to other museums here. Munitz has insisted 
that the trust's endowment, though close to $5 billion, could no longer 
be the sole source of support and that he would be seeking corporate 
sponsorships as well as donations from individuals. As these shifts 
gain momentum, three senior officials have departed. And some of the 
other museums in Los Angeles have expressed nervousness about some 
of the Getty's ambitions. Just this week the Getty announced that 
Miguel Angel Corzo had resigned as chief of its respected Conservation 
Institute. Munitz insisted that it was just one part of an institution 
undergoing what he called ``a pretty dramatic transformation.'' ``It 
wouldn't surprise me if there were one or more resignations down the 
road of senior people,'' he said. ``Inevitably that may happen.'' 
The Getty Trust has long been a leader in financing arts education 
projects, archeological digs and conservation efforts around the globe. 
It also gives roughly $7.5 million a year in arts grants. But Munitz, 
57, has sought to give these efforts greater muscle, adding flesh 
to the initial goals he had vaguely sketched when he took over in 
January after leaving his post as chancellor of the California State 
University system. ``We sort of staggered across the finish line when 
we opened last year and expected we'd take some time to catch our 
breath, but Barry came in with a lot of energy and a desire to move 
us to a higher level,'' said Stephen Rountree, the chief operating 
officer of the trust. Munitz, who was reared in Brooklyn, was an unexpected 
choice for the job as head of the trust since he was an academic and 
businessman with no experience at an arts institution. But he made 
it clear from the start that he had some new ideas. He succeeded Harold 
Williams, a somewhat cerebral former tax lawyer who had presided over 
a decade of enormous growth when the Getty, previously housed in a 
small faux-Roman villa in Malibu, was seen as a somewhat cloistered 
if impressive institution. Eli Broad, a leading collector who helped 
build two other major museums here, has worked closely with both men 
and said their personal differences were being underlined by the Getty's 
new directions. ``Barry, as a result of his personality and his background, 
is more of a populist and he has a greater interest in serving a broader 
public,'' said Broad. ``Harold's agenda was different. Neither is 
right or wrong. They're just different.'' The California State University 
system Munitz had headed has long been seen as the more accessible 
but second-tier portion of the state's higher education system, behind 
the prestigious University of California campuses. Munitz said he 
made it clear to the board that if he came to the Getty, he would 
push to broaden its public mission. ``When they chose someone like 
me it was a profound political statement and the board recognized 
it clearly,'' said Munitz, who was also Governor-elect Gray Davis' 
surprise choice several week ago to lead his transition team. The 
changes at the Getty so far have been mostly small, but symbolic. 
The Getty recently opened an information kiosk at, of all places, 
a shopping mall. Even when the museum cut back its advertising because 
it was overwhelmed by visitors, it continued to advertise on a local 
Spanish-language radio station to diversify its audience. An institution 
that long shunned commercial partnerships, in part because of its 
wealth, is now planning to allow a corporation, Aetna, to sponsor 
a planned show of Degas' photography, which is now at the Metropolitan 
Museum of Art. Munitz said he found the Getty Center's six-building 
campus, designed by Richard Meier and covered in acres of honey-tone 
travertine marble, quite beautiful but in practical terms ``surprisingly 
and unhappily inflexible.'' Thus, he said, he is already tinkering 
with ways of trying to make it more adaptable. Many internal barriers 
are being taken down. Munitz initiated a review of the Getty's many 
divisions that has already resulted in the closing of its Information 
Institute, which was involved in software development for the arts. 
About 15 people are likely to lose their jobs. In a far more important 
symbolic break, Munitz composed his review committees of midlevel 
staff members and a few outsiders. Such policy decisions used to be 
the province only of top administrators. The reviews also cut across 
the previously rigid boundaries separating the various institutes 
that make up the Getty Trust, including the Conservation Institute, 
which is involved in the conservation of artworks, and the Research 
Institute, which has a vast library, an online system and sponsors 
extensive arts scholarships. As Munitz noted, the security cards of 
one institute did not work for the others, which meant that visiting 
a different area was like obtaining a visa. ``The institutes were 
all in their own worlds,'' said Jack Meyers, a senior program officer 
in the Getty's grant program and a member of the panel that reviewed 
the Information Institute. ``The idea of someone immersing themselves 
in another area here felt really different.'' Given its enormous size 
and influence, the Getty's new activism is also raising deep concerns 
in some quarters. For instance, Munitz said he intended to seek donations 
of money and art from wealthy individuals. Told of this plan, Andrea 
Rich, president and chief executive of the Los Angeles County Museum 
of Art, a major institution with almost no endowment, said such a 
move would be threatening. ``It would be a problem if they went out 
and competed with us for charitable contributions and art,'' said 
Ms. Rich. ``It would have an impact on this institution.'' Told of 
the concerns, Munitz said he intended to work cooperatively with other 
museums, but that competition for certain extremely wealthy donors 
``might be inevitable.'' Ms. Rich said: ``This has been a time for 
them to get their internal house in order. It's good to hear what 
they're trying to do, but we just have to see how it manifests itself. 
I'm being cautious.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>