<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981202.0368 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A Palestinian mob beat an Israeli soldier and seized his gun in the 
West Bank on Wednesday, prompting a warning from Prime Minister Benjamin 
Netanyahu that he might halt further Israeli troop withdrawals in 
the West Bank under the new land-for-security accord with the Palestinians. 
Violence also erupted in East Jerusalem after a Palestinian was killed 
by an assailant believed to be a Jewish serial stabber responsible 
for attacks on several Arabs in the past year. The incidents fueled 
the war of words between Israelis and Palestinians that has been raging 
since they signed their latest agreement, known as the Wye memorandum 
in Washington on Oct. 23. Consulting Cabinet ministers after the West 
Bank incident, Netanyahu warned that there would be no further military 
withdrawals unless the Palestinian Authority halted ``acts of incitement 
and violence,'' abandoned plans to declare an independent state in 
May and accepted Israeli criteria for the release of Palestinian prisoners. 
Saeb Erakat, the chief Palestinian negotiator, dismissed the Israeli 
demands as ``completely unacceptable.'' And Ahmad Tibi, an adviser 
to Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat, accused Netanyahu of seeking 
pretexts to renege on the accord. (In Washington, the Clinton administration 
also rejected Israel's new conditions and insisted that the Wye accord 
should be carried out quickly. State Department spokesman James Rubin 
said the United States condemned the beating of an Israeli soldier. 
``There is no place for that kind of violence in the peace process,'' 
he said. U.S. officials said that despite the danger to the peace 
process posed by a recent rash of violence, and the new Israeli ultimatum, 
President Clinton still intended to visit the West Bank and Israel 
later this month.) The beating of the soldier took place outside the 
Palestinian-ruled town of Ramallah in the West Bank. Students from 
Bir Zeit University who had marched for the release of Palestinian 
prisoners stoned an Israeli car and smashed its windows at a junction 
on the northern outskirts of the city. After the driver fled, an Israeli 
soldier riding in the car was beaten and his gun seized before the 
mob set the vehicle on fire. The shaken soldier escaped with light 
injuries. Israeli troops who rushed to the scene fired rubber-coated 
bullets and tear gas to disperse the attackers. The commander of Israeli 
forces in the West Bank, Brig. Gen. Yitzhak Eitan, accused the Palestinian 
police of failing to block the marchers, and Israeli forces responded 
by preventing a convoy of Palestinian police officers from leaving 
Ramallah. The soldier's gun was later returned to the Israelis by 
the Palestinian Authority. Describing the Ramallah incident as ``the 
climax'' of Palestinian violations of the latest peace accord, Netanyahu's 
office released a statement laying down three conditions for a further 
Israeli pullback. After consulting Cabinet ministers, the statement 
said, Netanyahu decided that there will be a withdrawal only if the 
Palestinian Authority accepted that prisoners released by Israel under 
the Wye accord cannot ``have blood on their hands'' or be members 
of Hamas; if it abandoned plans to declare an independent state and 
declared itself ready to negotiate a permanent peace, and if it halted 
incitement and violence while punishing the rioters who attacked the 
car Wednesday. ``The Palestinian Authority is encouraging acts of 
violence such as the brutal attack today in Ramallah, in an attempt 
to pressure Israel on the issue of the prisoners,'' the statement 
quoted Netanyahu as saying. The Palestinians have demanded that Israel 
release prisoners suspected of anti-Israeli violence and political 
activity, while the Israelis have insisted on freeing mostly common 
criminals. Addressing a rally of prisoners' families Tuesday, Ahmad 
Korei, the speaker of the Palestinian parliament, declared, ``The 
leadership that threw stones is ready to return and use stones to 
free the people and the land.'' The victim of the stabbing in Jerusalem 
was identified as Osama Natsheh, a 41-year-old father of eight who 
worked as a city street cleaner. A masked assailant stabbed him near 
his home in the mixed Jewish-Arab neighborhood of Abu Tor, on the 
dividing line between the Jewish and Arab areas of Jerusalem, the 
police and relatives said. Natsheh's funeral set off fierce clashes 
in downtown East Jerusalem, where scores of Palestinian youths threw 
stones at Israeli police officers, who responded with heavy volleys 
of rubber-coated bullets and tear gas. An Israeli pickup truck was 
set on fire after its driver was forced out of the vehicle, and several 
people were reportedly injured. The stabbing of Natsheh was the second 
fatal attack in a series of seven knifings of Arabs in Jerusalem that 
began in December 1997, apparently in revenge for Palestinian slayings 
of Jews in the city. Shmuel Ben-Ruby, a spokesman for the Jerusalem 
police, said that investigators had recovered the knife used in Wednesday's 
attack and that the evidence pointed to a possible connection to earlier 
stabbings. A knife found after the fatal stabbing of an Arab last 
May reportedly bore the name of a slain Jew. Natsheh's relatives said 
he had left for work shortly before 5 a.m. when he was stabbed about 
30 yards from his home. Natsheh staggered back toward the house, but 
collapsed on the sidewalk in a pool of blood. A few hours after the 
killing, a trail of blood marked Natsheh's last steps on a street 
flanked by Jewish and Arab homes. Grieving relatives sat silently 
as a mournful wail of Koran verses wafted from a loudspeaker. A hand-made 
sign in Hebrew left by a Jewish neighbor said: ``No to violence. Respect 
for every human life.'' Jewish residents of Abu Tor later issued a 
statement condemning the killing, calling for coexistence and urging 
the police to catch the attacker. Netanyahu also denounced the slaying. 
``A murderer is a murderer, and murder is murder,'' he told reporters. 
``We are not prepared to accept murder of innocents, and we demand 
pursuit of all legal means against the murderers.'' But Natsheh's 
neighbors said they felt unprotected by the Israeli police, who have 
been unable to stop the serial stabbings of Arabs in Jerusalem. ``When 
we walk to work we're not safe,'' said Daoud Natsheh, the victim's 
nephew. ``Only one side is secure. When a stone is thrown in a Jewish 
neighborhood the police all arrive immediately. When something happens 
here nobody reacts.'' Faisal Husseini, the top Palestinian official 
in Jerusalem, accused the Israeli authorities of dragging their feet 
in investigating attacks on Arabs. Ben-Ruby asserted that police and 
the Shin Bet security service were working intensively to track down 
the assailant. He said that several suspects had been arrested after 
the previous stabbings, which occurred in the area of the strictly 
Orthodox neighborhood of Mea Shearim. The suspects were later released 
for lack of evidence. ``The problem is that this is a lone stabber 
working by himself, keeping his secret to himself, which makes it 
difficult to solve,'' Ben-Ruby said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>