<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981202.0243 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Bleary-eyed and coffee-saturated, you wait for the commuter train 
in the morning, then the subway, then for hordes of people to cross 
the busy street. By the time you force yourself through the revolving 
doors at 9 to get to work, the last thing you want to do is wait for 
a crowded elevator to haul you up to your office. We could all take 
a lesson from the Three Stooges, for they knew how to get an elevator 
pronto: a simple yank on the floor indicator stick above the door 
inevitably brought the car to them instantaneously _ along with a 
jumble of bewildered passengers picking themselves up off the floor. 
That technique doesn't work that well today. After all, when was the 
last time you even saw a mechanical floor indicator? In the last 50 
years _ with the banishment of human operators and starters, individuals 
who stood outside elevator banks and, with the flick of their metal 
clickers, told the operators to start moving _ elevator management 
has become a computer-controlled science, where improvements are measured 
in fractions of a second. The Holy Grail, according to Bruce Powell, 
perhaps the industry's only certified elevator scholar, is to make 
elevator operation seem effortless from the point of view of passengers. 
As sole possessor of the title ``technical fellow'' at Otis Elevator 
Co. in Farmington, Conn., the industry leader, Powell directs a team 
of people trying to figure out how to move as many people as possible 
as quickly as possible in an elevator. Mechanically, elevators use 
the same basic design they did when Elisha Otis invented the safety 
version in the 19th century (the first modern elevator is said to 
have been built in 1743 in France as a way for Louis XV to slink around 
the Palace of Versailles undetected _ or, in an alternate version, 
to allow his mistress to arrive clandestinely). Cars ride up and down 
a vertical track, raised by either a hydraulic system or a counterweight. 
A series of cables and ratchets stop the cab from falling; if a cab 
falls, a safety brake kicks in to slow and stop it. Today's high-speed 
elevators have redundant safety systems. The world's fastest elevator, 
in Osaka, Japan, can move at 2,600 feet per minute (nearly 30 miles 
per hour), compared with the elevators at the World Trade Center in 
New York, which can travel at 1,600 feet per minute. Greater speed 
does not mean greater danger. The last time an elevator may have entered 
free fall was in 1945, Otis officials say. That was when a B-25 bomber 
hit the Empire State Building between the 78th and 79th floors, severing 
lift cables. A cab dropped 75 stories, but the two women inside survived. 
In the 1950s, automatic elevators went to floors in the order the 
call buttons were pushed. Like an emotionally dependent golden retriever, 
a car would go to the floor that issued the first call, leaving other 
would-be passengers stranded. Elevators would arrive at lobbies in 
packs, often empty, rivaling only Manhattan buses as hallmarks of 
inefficiency. By the beginning of the next decade, mechanical elevator 
dispatchers had been programmed to send cars all the way up and all 
the way down, stopping for passengers along the way _ great if you 
were the one on or off first, but frustrating if you were along for 
the long ride. With zoned dispatching strategies, introduced in the 
mid-1960s, elevators were designated as expresses, serving just lower 
or higher floors, or as locals. Zone system technology is still in 
use. One impetus for smarter elevators came from Asia's economic boom. 
The growth of heavily populated skyscrapers created an ideal market 
for better elevators. To make elevators more efficient, the industry 
developed fuzzy logic, which allows a system to keep several objectives 
in mind as it juggles elevator routes. If someone on the eighth floor 
calls for the elevator, the electronic controller is told, in effect: 
``Hey, stupid, don't just send the closest cab. Send the one a few 
floors farther away if it's empty because it'll actually get there 
faster.'' First used in a building in Osaka in 1993, fuzzy logic came 
to U.S. shores two years ago in an Otis retrofit of the elevator systems 
in the TransAmerica building in San Francisco. This is fuzzy logic 
with a twist: not only did TransAmerica workers save time in their 
vertical journeys, but they also found out which elevator they would 
be taking the moment they asked because of Otis' early car announcement 
technology. When a passenger asks for an elevator, the system determines 
which car the passenger should take and directs the passenger to that 
elevator door immediately by flashing a light over that door _ instead 
of indicating the car shortly before its arrival. To make sure that 
20 embarking passengers do not collide into 15 exiting workers, the 
system directs riders to one or more empty cars that will leave more 
quickly instead of to full ones. Yet the system can be misunderstood. 
After it was installed at TransAmerica, an angry executive, misunderstanding 
the advance signal, complained to the building manager that the elevators 
must be broken because ``the elevator light came on and no car came 
for a long time.'' Lunch-time lectures were quickly held to explain 
the new system. The next big thing in the industry is perfecting neural 
networks, computer programs that mimic, to some extent, the kind of 
complex information processing done by neurons in the brain. A neural 
network system not only learns from the past in directing elevators 
but also tries to predict future behavior. The technique is becoming 
possible only now, thanks to more powerful microprocessors. ``These 
systems will be like computer chess programs,'' Powell said. ``They'll 
look at a building's traffic flow and posit `what ifs.''' For example, 
elevator systems today can learn to adjust the way they deploy their 
cars based on changes in passenger traffic in the past few days. With 
a neural network, ``we'll be able to ask what will happen to traffic 
and car availability a few minutes after I send car A out and to instruct 
the system not to do so if certain other conditions occur,'' Powell 
said. People should not have to modify their behavior to adapt to 
elevators' needs, he said, adding: ``We'll need very speedy computer 
chips. We want elevators to act more like us.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>