<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981202.0443 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
House Republicans overwhelmingly told their leadership Wednesday they 
wanted to bring impeachment to a quick vote this month in the House, 
as the Judiciary Committee, under criticism for expanding its inquiry, 
appeared to be moving to wrap up the investigation by the end of next 
week. The Republicans made their views known as the staff of Rep. 
Tom DeLay, the House whip, reached across the country to members for 
the first time in a series of conference calls that helped gauge the 
support for impeachment. The conference calls came after several days 
in which the House Judiciary Committee looked like it wanted to expand 
its investigation of President Clinton's relationship with Monica 
Lewinsky into the area of campaign finance, raising the possibility 
that the proceeding could spill over into next year. Committee investigators 
reviewed two secret Justice Department memorandums on alleged fund-raising 
abuses today, but Henry Hyde, the Judiciary COmmittee chairman, while 
not characterizing their contents, made clear he wanted to proceed 
on schedule. ``There is little appetite to pursue this past the first 
of the year,'' said Rep. Bill Paxon, R-N.Y. ``Most members, whether 
they are for impeachment or not, want to get this over with. They 
see it is a political disaster to have it in the next Congress. Unless 
there's something more, most members would want an up or down vote 
and get it over with.'' By day's end, Republicans said there were 
up to 12 Republican votes against impeachment and another small core 
group of moderates still unwilling to commit. Democratic leaders say 
they believe that only 3 to 5 of their members will turn against Clinton. 
If the Republicans lose only 12 votes, and if several Democrats break 
ranks, impeachment could pass by a narrow margin. Michael Scanlon, 
a spokesman for DeLay, said the Texas Republican was not trying to 
push the vote on impeachment in any direction. ``These are members 
talking to DeLay,'' he said. ``We weren't telling them where we are. 
Tom got on the conference calls, asked a few questions and shut up. 
These were members talking.'' He said that their overwhelming sentiment 
was to move quickly to a vote. The White House, meanwhile, accepted 
the Judiciary Committee's invitation to present its case next Tuesday. 
But it left open the possibility that Clinton's lawyers may call witnesses. 
In a letter to Hyde, Charles Ruff, Clinton's special counsel, and 
Gregory B. Craig, his assistant, sought access to sealed material 
held by the committee before Clinton's lawyers appear. ``It is plain 
that the scope of the defense must equal the scope of the inquiry,'' 
the White House letter stated. ``Once we have reviewed this material, 
we will be prepared to present a vigorous defense of the President.'' 
Republicans accused the White House itself of stalling. ``People up 
here are not amused,'' an aide to Republican leaders said. ``There 
is concern growing that this is not a good faith acceptance of an 
offer to testify. Rather it is more of a tactic to push the schedule 
back, particularly where it may come up against Christmas.'' The rapid 
series of events came amid new signs that Republicans also overwhelmingly 
opposed sending a censure resolution to the floor right now, and most 
likely not even if an impeachment vote was defeated. Rep. Robert Livingston, 
the incoming speaker, who has come under criticism from Republicans 
and from Rep. Dick Gephardt, the House Minority Leader, for his failure 
to take charge of the impeachment process, was to meet with DeLay 
on Thursday. His spokesman, Mark Corallo, said that Livingston would 
continue to defer to Hyde until the committee had ended its inquiry. 
Seeking to dispel the impression that its inquiry could spill over 
into the new year, the committee put out a tentative schedule to wrap 
up final hearings next week and then allot next Thursday, Friday and 
possibly and Saturday for debate and votes on articles of impeachment. 
That would allow the House to convene and vote on any articles of 
impeachment the week of Dec. 14. The Republicans counted as a victory 
a judge's decision to grant committee investigators the right to review 
two secret Justice Department memorandums, in which Louis Freeh, the 
FBI director, and Charles La Bella, a former Justice Department prosecutor, 
made the case that Attorney General Janet Reno should name an independent 
counsel to investigate President Clinton's 1996 campaign finance practices. 
Under an order by U.S. District Judge Norma Holloway Johnson, one 
Republican and one Democratic investigator from the panel were permitted 
Wednesday to read the full memorandums. The investigators _ David 
Schippers, the chief Republican investigative counsel and Kevin Simpson, 
a Democratic counsel _ were not allowed to take notes or photocopy 
the material, conditions requested by the Justice Department to protect 
grand jury information contained in the documents. The Republicans 
had subpoenaed the documents after saying they had received information 
they could contain allegations of wrongdoing by the president. Rep. 
John Conyers, Jr., the ranking Democrat on the House Judiciary Committee 
said tonight that the four hours of review of the memos had found 
they were not ``in any way relevant'' to the inquiry into the President. 
``We trust that this closes a short and unproductive chapter of this 
very strange proceeding,'' he said. The Republicans did not characterize 
what they had found. But one Republican official emphasized that unless 
there was ``stunning, stunning'' information, Hyde wanted to complete 
work and report out one or more articles of impeachment to the House 
on schedule by the end of next week. Republicans said they would take 
a closed deposition from LaBella Friday and could possibly schedule 
Freeh for the same day. But shutting down another avenue of inquiry, 
they said it was now unlikely that they would question Bruce Lindsey, 
a deputy White House counsel. Even as the committee moves steadily 
on its course toward impeaching the president, Democrats and some 
Republicans have been pushing instead for Clinton to be censured in 
strong terms. But Republicans said that support for censure among 
their members had been steadily eroding for a variety of reasons. 
They said that even many moderate Republicans were infuriated by Clinton's 
legalistic and unrepentant answers to 81 questions sent him by the 
Judiciary Committee. Conservative Republicans believe that tactically 
they will gain more votes for impeachment if censure is not an alternative. 
And some Republicans believe their party can run against Democrats 
as the party of sex and perjury if Democrats are prohibited from going 
on for censure. ``The more the Democrats are on TV talking away on 
censure, the less inclined the Republicans are to support censure,'' 
Paxon said. ``They see it as nothing more than a political out for 
the Democrats.'' But several other Republicans said they are still 
quietly trying to craft a censure option and hoped that Livingston 
might be receptive to them once Hyde has finished his work. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>