<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981202.0441 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Releasing its own survey of doctors who work for the Food and Drug 
Administration, an advocacy group accused the agency Wednesday of 
lowering its standards for safety and efficacy, working too hastily 
and approving drugs that should never have been allowed on the market. 
The report has drawn a scathing rebuttal from the drug industry, an 
oblique defense from the agency and criticism from representatives 
of chronically ill people who advocate swifter drug approval. But 
some scientists said the report raised significant concerns. The survey, 
announced at a news conference, was conducted by the Public Citizen's 
Health Research Group of Washington, which is directed by Dr. Sidney 
Wolfe and was founded by consumer advocate Ralph Nader in 1971. The 
organization has criticized the pharmaceutical industry and, more 
recently, the drug-approval process, which Congress accelerated in 
1992 and 1997. The people surveyed were medical officers, agency employees 
assigned to oversee individual drugs being evaluated for approval. 
The survey was anonymous, and completed by only 53 of the 172 people 
to whom it was mailed. Among its findings were these: _ Nineteen medical 
officers identified 27 new drugs that were approved even though the 
officers thought they should not be. _ Seventeen said the food and 
drug agency's safety and efficacy standards were lower than in the 
past. _ Nineteen said they felt more pressure to approve drugs from 
within the agency and from Congress and the pharmaceutical industry. 
But a majority of the medical officers did not answer the survey, 
and a majority of those who did answer did not complain, making it 
impossible to tell whether the survey found genuine problems or merely 
provided malcontents an outlet for gripes. In a statement, the drug 
agency said in part, ``The public should rest assured that the FDA 
maintains the highest standards in the world for approving drugs.'' 
Agency officials declined to be interviewed, and the statement from 
Dr. Janet Woodcock, director of the agency's Center for Drug Evaluation 
and Research, did not specifically address issues raised in the report. 
Jeff Trewhitt, a spokesman for an industry group, the Pharmaceutical 
Research and Manufacturers of America, said, ``It is highly irresponsible 
to issue a so-called study based on clandestine communications with 
faceless, anonymous sources.'' Virginia Ladd, president of the American 
Autoimmune Related Diseases Association, in Detroit, said, ``We worked 
for FDA reform to speed up the process.'' She said that new drugs 
that became available through speeded approvals were very helpful 
to her group. Dr. Kenneth Kaitin, who studies drug regulation at the 
Tufts University Center for the Study of Drug Development in Boston, 
said, ``The research is shoddy, the survey is inconclusive and equivocal, 
and by no stretch does it support the conclusions.'' But Dr. Charles 
Flexner, an associate professor of medicine in clinical pharmacology 
at Johns Hopkins University, in Baltimore, said the report raised 
important issues. Accelerated approvals have helped people with HIV 
and cancer, he said, but more recently the process has gone too far. 
Dr. Carol Braun Trapnell, a former FDA medical officer who is now 
director of medical affairs for GloboMax, a firm in Hanover, Md., 
that consults with the pharmaceutical industry, also said the Public 
Citizen report identified important issues. She said that she had 
worked at the agency for 11 years, until about a year ago, and that 
the climate there seemed to change toward the end of her tenure. There 
was less concern about scientific issues, she said. In one case, Dr. 
Braun Trapnell said, she told a supervisor that she had doubts about 
a drug because of a lack of data about dosage, but he told her to 
find a way to approve it anyway. ``You start to wonder why you're 
breaking your back trying to do good science if that's the prevailing 
attitude,'' she said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>