<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981202.0447 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial for Thursday, Dec. 3: The 
question is, what happens now? Twenty-one years after passing a gay 
rights ordinance that spurred the rise of the religious right _ and 
was then defeated by the voters in a battle that raised civil rights 
for homosexuals to the level of a national debate _ the Miami-Dade 
County Commission has done it again. It took a whole generation to 
overcome the traumatic rejection of the original ordinance, but on 
Tuesday, by a vote of just 7-6, the commission added the category 
of sexual orientation to the county's human rights law. It will now 
be illegal to discriminate against homosexuals in housing, employment, 
credit, finance and public accommodation in metropolitan Dade County. 
The last time the commission supported gay rights, reacting to a new 
gay political network that had quietly rounded up money and votes 
for several commissioners in the 1976 election, the vote came as a 
surprise. There had been no debate to prepare the public. The performer 
Anita Bryant, a devout Baptist and popular Miami Beach resident, led 
a coalition called Save Our Children, which included the Roman Catholic 
archdiocese, to trounce the ordinance at the polls. This time around, 
some things are different. Nationally, Anita Bryant's attack moved 
legions of closeted homosexuals into political awareness and public 
activism. It also marked the beginning of two decades of battle between 
homosexual and conservative Christian activists over the issue of 
gay rights. In 11 states, 27 counties and 136 cities, elected officials 
have passed laws to establish homosexual civil rights. But getting 
a majority of any electorate to approve them is a different matter. 
In Miami, gay rights leaders, some of whom were stunned in their youth 
by the vote 21 years ago, are much better organized. They carefully 
sought and won the endorsement of a broad coalition of organizations 
_ from labor unions to business groups to the NAACP and the PTA _ 
to demonstrate support in the community at large. And because the 
language of the ordinance this time exempted religious organizations, 
the Roman Catholic archdiocese said that it would not oppose the measure. 
The commission, which 21 years ago was almost entirely white, is now 
mostly black and Hispanic, and some African-American and Hispanic 
commissioners voted Tuesday for the ordinance. Like Anita Bryant 21 
years ago, however, the Christian Coalition in Miami is now deciding 
how to fight this new law. ``Whatever we can do to defeat or repeal 
this ordinance, we will do,'' Anthony Verdugo, the Coalition head 
in Miami, said Wednesday. If he should seek repeal by referendum again, 
the battle would take place in a county vastly changed. In statements 
before and after the vote on Tuesday, the leaders of Miami and Dade 
County's civic, business and political structure showed how much their 
support of the ordinance has grown. But the population of the county 
has shifted in ways that could lessen support for gay rights. Its 
residents are poorer, fewer of them are Jewish or middle-class, and 
many more of them are socially conservative Roman Catholic Hispanic 
immigrants than a generation ago. If a referendum is scheduled, it 
will be a pitched battle that could charge the national political 
atmosphere once again. With the next presidential election in sight, 
neither the Christian Coalition nor gay activists who felt they played 
an important role in Bill Clinton's victory will want to lose the 
second battle of Miami. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>