<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981202.0516 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With no debate or notice, the state Senate suddenly and overwhelmingly 
approved legislation Wednesday night that would help New York City's 
politically influential police union win higher raises, reopening 
a contentious battle that previously inflamed relations among the 
union, state officials and Mayor Rudolph Giuliani. Already approved 
by the Assembly, the bill now goes to Gov. George Pataki, who faces 
the same predicament that he confronted when he received the last 
version in early 1996: veto the legislation and antagonize the union, 
the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association, or sign it and incur the wrath 
of Giuliani. Pataki vetoed the earlier measure, though he has not 
said what he will do with this one. But Senate aides said they believed 
that the leadership of the Republican-controlled Senate would not 
have approved the legislation if it thought the governor would veto 
it. The passage of the bill drew an immediate attack from the mayor, 
who maintained that it would seriously damage the city's finances. 
The bill, which would give the union the right to ask that a state 
panel rather than a city one arbitrate impasses on wages, appeared 
dead when the Senate declined to approve it at the end of the legislative 
session in June. But Wednesday night, with attention during a special 
two-day session focused on backroom haggling over a salary increase 
for elected state officials, the Senate leadership quietly slipped 
in the bill, and it passed, 58-1. Such furtive steps on controversial 
bills are a time-honored custom in Albany, where legislative leaders 
often use the hectic end of a session to shroud some work. The passage 
of the police union bill came as the Senate narrowly approved the 
salary measure, which would give 38 percent raises to most state elected 
officials and increase base salaries for legislators to $79,500 from 
$57,500 a year. In an indication of the anxiety the bill stirs among 
members, the vote was split largely along geographic, not partisan, 
lines. It won approval from members from New York City and its suburbs, 
where the cost of living is high and some local officials make more 
than state legislators. Members from upstate, where the public is 
generally considered to be more fiscally conservative, mostly opposed 
it. The final vote in the Senate was 32-27. The Democratic-controlled 
Assembly had approved the legislation Tuesday, 86 to 55. Pataki responded 
to the salary bill Wednesday with silence, withholding his support 
while he negotiates with legislative leaders on other proposals that 
he wants. Because of the way salary increases are handled in the state 
constitution, the bill is required to become law before Jan. 1 if 
the Legislature is to receive an increase next year. So Pataki is 
using the calendar as leverage over legislative leaders. The Senate 
also passed several other measures that have been linked in negotiations 
to the salary bill, The measures would allow the creation of so-called 
charter public schools in the state, which would be independent from 
local school bureaucracies; end tenure for public school principals, 
which would largely affect New York City, and stiffen penalties for 
school violence. Another Senate bill would prohibit legislators from 
receiving any increase in salary if the new state budget is not approved 
by the April 1 deadline. One of the last bills approved was a resolution 
that would increase the governor's salary to $179,000 from $130,000. 
But in a bit of gamesmanship, the Legislature added a clause that 
would cancel the measure if lawmakers' salaries do not increase next 
year. While Pataki backs these educational measures in general, the 
Democratic leadership in the Assembly does not. So Pataki is hoping 
that he can trade support for a salary increase, which is particularly 
popular among Assembly Democrats from New York City, in return for 
the Assembly's approval of some variation of the Senate proposals. 
Both houses could return later this month for another special session 
if leaders progress in negotiations on the bills tied to the pay raise. 
Upon learning that the Senate had passed the police arbitration bill, 
Giuliani derided the Legislature as a prisoner of powerful interest 
groups like the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association. Giuliani said 
that if the bill becomes law, it could cost the city $1 billion after 
the next contract is negotiated early in the next decade. ``The inability 
of the New York state politicians to stand up to the special-interest 
pressure of the PBA is one of the reasons why people disrespect politicians 
today,'' Giuliani said in a telephone interview. Giuliani noted that 
the bill would not affect him, because by the time the talks for the 
next contract take place, he will have left office under the city's 
term-limits law. But he said he was fighting the bill because it would 
permanently harm the city's budget. John McArdle, a spokesman for 
the Senate leadership, said the Senate approved the legislation to 
insure that police officers around the state were treated equally. 
``This bill affords the New York police officers the same rights that 
other police officers have in being able to settle contract disputes,'' 
McArdle said. A spokesman for the police union could not be reached 
for comment Wednesday night. Zenia Mucha, Pataki's communications 
director, did not respond to messages seeking comment on the police 
and salary bills. The police union has long been one of the most forceful 
interest groups in Albany, repeatedly lobbying for bills that intrude 
on city officials' authority over the police department and generously 
handing out campaign contributions. In the last two years, it contributed 
$160,000 to state candidates and committees, most of them in the Legislature. 
After Pataki vetoed the earlier version of this legislation in 1996, 
the Legislature took the extremely rare step of overriding him. Giuliani 
then succeeded in getting the law overturned in court, arguing that 
it illegally seized authority from the New York City government without 
its permission. The new bill tries to address that issue by moving 
all wage arbitration for any police officers in the state to the state 
board, not just that for New York City. But Giuliani vowed that if 
Pataki signed the measure, he would go to court again. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>