<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981202.0509 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Republicans seeking to challenge a 21,000-vote lead that would make 
Eliot Spitzer, a Democrat, the next state attorney general of New 
York, at one point charged that 1,000 votes might have been cast in 
Manhattan by dead voters. While the accusation conjures visions of 
an all-powerful Democratic political machine at work _ something not 
seen in Manhattan for at least a generation _ an examination of computer 
files by The New York Times turned up no pattern of vote fraud, and 
found not one phantom vote from beyond the grave. The inquiry found 
the names of several thousand people who remained on the voter rolls 
even after their reputed deaths. But it counted only a handful of 
votes cast by voters listed by the Social Security Administration 
as having died. And it turned out that all but one of these voters 
were alive and living in Manhattan and were found to have cast legal 
ballots; in that one instance, a son with the same name as his father 
said he had mistakenly signed next to his father's name in the voting 
book. The New York City Board of Elections has often been vilified 
as an outdated and mismanaged bureaucracy, and in the fight over the 
race for attorney general, Republicans working for the incumbent, 
Dennis Vacco, have cited what they said were a number of irregularities, 
including the charge about dead voters. They ultimately pulled back 
and acknowledged that they could not prove that dead voters cast ballots, 
but contended that they found enough problems to cast a cloud over 
the election results. The Times' inquiry found no pattern of problems 
with dead voters, but it did find evidence that the city Board of 
Elections had made a considerable effort to clean up the rolls and 
remove the names of ineligible voters. The Times compared the rolls 
of all voters registered in Manhattan last year with a list provided 
by the Social Security Administration of the 17.4 million Americans 
who have died since 1990. The comparison turned up the names of nearly 
8,000 people registered to vote in Manhattan who had the same first 
name, last name and date of birth as dead Americans. The Times narrowed 
the list to 4,600 of the deceased who had lived in the same ZIP code 
where New Yorkers of the same name voted. The Times then checked a 
random sample of more than 900 of these 4,600 registered voters in 
nearly 200 election districts to see whether anyone had signed his 
or her name in voting books. Only four voted, fewer than half of 1 
percent. Assuming that the same pattern held for the 4,600, that would 
amount to 19 votes. Assuming that the pattern held for all 8,000 votes, 
it would amount to 38 invalid votes. And even if the same pattern 
held across all of New York City, it would amount to only 132 votes 
_ far short of the 21,000-vote lead that Spitzer has over Vacco. In 
reviewing the four cases, The Times found that three of the people 
who voted were reported to be alive by neighbors, relatives or a doorman 
or by their own testimony. Their continued existence was later confirmed 
by the Social Security Administration as well. The fourth case appeared 
to be a vote from beyond, but that vote also had a logical explanation. 
While Bethel Harris died in 1992 at the age of 81, the signature of 
Bethel Harris was in the voting book in the polling place in the community 
room of the Washington Heights Co-op. But the culprit turned out to 
be his son _ who is also named Bethel Harris. The younger Harris, 
44, said he had voted in every election for the last 26 years, accompanying 
his mother, Claudia. ``I vote every time, elections, primaries and 
whatever, and I have been voting since I was 18,'' he said. The first 
year after his father died, Harris voted on a paper ballot. Mrs. Harris 
said her son discovered that while his own voting card had been removed 
from the files, his dead father's card remained. The next year, and 
in general elections and primaries since, Bethel Harris Jr. showed 
up at the polls, signed the book under the name Bethel Harris and 
voted. He did not notice, Mrs. Harris said, that the date of birth 
listed on the voting form showed his father's birthday in 1917 in 
small print, rather than his own. Moreover, his signature is similar 
to his father's. Board of Elections officials pieced together a slightly 
different account of the younger Harris' voting history, but confirmed 
that he was eligible to vote, voted legally, and is now listed as 
a voter in his Washington Heights building. When The Times phoned 
and knocked on the doors of the other purportedly dead voters, it 
found them very much alive. Jose Romero, a retired hospital security 
guard who lives on the Upper West Side, said, ``I'm still alive, and 
well.'' Romero and his daughter said that the date of death listed 
for Romero was actually the date his wife died. Neighbors said that 
another voter, Antonio Pagan, was alive and well on Riverside Drive. 
One neighbor said that Pagan, 65, told her his Social Security check 
had stopped coming for a while, until he convinced the agency that 
he was alive. And Board of Elections officials said they had called 
the fourth voter, Sally Anderson, and confirmed that she too was alive 
and entitled to vote. When Thomas Spargo, a lawyer for Vacco's campaign, 
announced that he had a list of dead Manhattan voters who may have 
cast ballots, dozens of Republican campaign workers spent days poring 
over signature books in boxes haphazardly scattered across a room 
at the Board of Elections' Manhattan headquarters, on Varick Street. 
But after reporters from The Times began reviewing signature cards 
at the Board of Elections late last week, Spargo acknowledged that 
the attorney general did not have any lists of dead voters, only lists 
of people listed as being dead who may have voted. And Monday, Spargo 
acknowledged that the number of irregularities his volunteers had 
found could not affect the result, all but conceding Vacco's defeat. 
He said then that the Vacco campaign had found ``a significant number 
of irregularities.'' But he added that ``in certain cases, because 
of a lack of a date of birth in the Board of Elections records and 
people being in the same household with the same name, we didn't always 
have the most accurate information.'' Asked about The Times' findings, 
Assemblyman Herman Farrell, the Manhattan Democratic Party chairman, 
said they showed that the Republican charges were completely unfounded 
and demonstrated that the kind of major voter fraud alleged by the 
Republicans made no sense today, in an age without either powerful 
or efficient organizations. ``It is not about being powerful enough; 
it is about being efficient enough,'' he said. ``If I were efficient 
enough to organize dead voters, I would be far more effective at getting 
live voters to the polls.'' An analysis by Aristotle Industries, which 
resells lists of registered voters to candidates, indicates that the 
voter rolls of New York City and state are cleaner than average. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>