<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981202.0221 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Just off the two-lane highway that runs through Washington State's 
lush Vashon Island sits the wood-paneled headquarters of the K2 Corp. 
Although Vashon is the kind of place where, just down the road from 
the company, people leave their trucks unlocked, keys in the ignition, 
while they purchase chicken feed, K2 seems more standoffish. In its 
front window, the company has a sign posted prominently that says, 
``Sorry, No Factory Tours.'' At mention of the sign, Andy Luhn, a 
company spokesman, shrugs and mutters something about espionage. It 
is here that the first convergence took place of commercial sports 
equipment and piezoelectric technology, a way of translating mechanical 
energy (shocks, bumps, vibrations and the like) into electricity and 
heat. The technology was developed largely in secret during both world 
wars and has been used in military, medical, aerospace, automotive 
and industrial products. But in 1995, the release of the K2 Four ``smart 
ski'' introduced the first high-volume commercial application of piezoelectricity 
for vibration control in sports equipment. Since then, a handful of 
sports equipment manufacturers have begun embedding piezoelectric 
(the first part is pronounced pee-AY-zoh) modules in snowboards, mountain 
bicycles, baseball bats and water skis, in some cases using microprocessors 
to improve the modules' performance. Next year, a piezo-enhanced golf 
club should be available. The warning sign in front of K2's factory 
seems in keeping with the company's portrayal of itself as groundbreaking 
innovator for having wed piezoelectric technology to sports equipment. 
``I guess we take it for granted that it's very revolutionary,'' Luhn 
said. Some the users and makers of rival skis, snowboards and bicycles, 
however, aren't so sure. While no one questions the basic workings 
of piezoeletric materials, not everyone is enamored of the results 
on the slope or the mountain. And where some see revolution, others 
see gimmick. Among the skeptics is Soren Wolff, a ski instructor at 
Squaw Valley USA, near Lake Tahoe, Calif. Wolff owns a pair of K2 
Fours _ but his motive for buying them might not be what the marketing 
people at K2 had in mind. ``I'm a slave to fashion,'' he said. ``I 
thought they were cool looking. They brought the retro pattern back.'' 
Wolff was referring to the red, white and blue striped design recycled 
from the original 1971 K2 Four ski. So how well do the skis work? 
``To be completely honest, I'd say it's more of a novelty,'' Wolff 
said. ``But, yeah, it works. If a person has achieved a certain amount 
of proficiency, anything will work. People are going to get on a ski, 
and it turns left and right.'' A representative of a competitor of 
K2 had a harsher assessment. ``It's just a gadget, and people like 
gadgets,'' said Daniel Morney, Rossignol Ski Co.'s vice president 
of racing and promotions. The technology has also brought mixed reviews 
from the other sports where it has been applied. Dan Grausam, an expert-class 
mountain bicycle racer in Berkeley, Calif., said he was not impressed 
by the piezo in the K2 bicycle. ``While they're certainly adequate 
bikes, the piezoelectric system hasn't really revolutionized suspension,'' 
Grausam said. ``If you believe K2's marketing hype, right, it's like 
they're the only company that does this and it's the best thing in 
the world. ``Certainly, a lot of people ride them and race them successfully. 
But they're not the end-all, be-all of suspension.'' The physics behind 
piezoelectric technology is well established. Piezoelectric materials 
convert mechanical impulses to electrical energy, and vice versa. 
Steven Hall, associate professor of aeronautics and astronautics at 
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, said the technology should 
transfer well to skis. ``There's no question that you could measure 
it in a laboratory and it would be a significant effect,'' said Hall, 
who added that he is a friend of one of the developers of the piezoelectric 
module that K2 uses. ``I know that in similar kinds of systems, when 
you use piezos to do damping, you can get significant levels. So it 
ought to work in a ski as well as in any other system.` In a ski equipped 
with the devices, vibrations are damped down by very thin piezoceramic 
plates. The plates absorb joint-jarring vibrations and convert them 
to harmless electrical impulses relayed through wires to an electronic 
shunt circuit. The electricity lights up a small red or green LED 
(light-emitting diode). The excess energy dissipates as heat. In theory, 
with the plates installed, instead of knocking you off your feet, 
tough runs should merely light up a tiny spot on your ski. Mountain 
bike shock absorbers use the technology somewhat differently. Electronic 
sensors monitor how bumpy the ride is and relay that information to 
the piezoceramic ``bender'' plates. Rather than converting the mechanical 
energy to electrical energy and dispersing it, the piezoceramic plate 
converts the electrical signal back to mechanical energy. As a result, 
the ceramic bends, letting varying amounts of oil flow to the bicycle's 
shock absorbers, as needed, for cushioning against the world's roots, 
rocks and off-road trails. Piezoelectric devices are by no means the 
only method on the high-end sporting goods market right now to reduce 
vibration. ``Everybody's got something,'' said Sean English, manager 
of the San Francisco outdoor equipment store Any Mountain. Rossignol, 
for example, has the patented ``VAS,''or Vibration Absorbing System, 
which uses a viscoelastic material, a kind of rubber. Other damping 
materials include products that use wood, titanium or synthetics. 
For outdoor sports, however, especially those during the winter, one 
of the advantages of piezoceramics is that they ``experience almost 
zero temperature sensitivity,'' said Brian Mulcahey, a spokesman for 
the Actice Control eXperts of Cambridge, Mass. ACX, as the company 
is known, produces all of the piezoceramic modules currently used 
in sports products. Piezoelectric technology predates modern, so-called 
``smart'' sports products by more than a century. It was the scientists 
Jacques and Pierre Curie who discovered that quartz and other crystals 
emitted electricity when subjected to mechanical stress. Examples 
of the process can be found in everyday life. All that is needed, 
for example, are two of the decidedly low-tech quartz rocks commonly 
found on the beach, said John Frank, an engineer at Ideo Product Development 
of Palo Alto, Calif. who has helped develop piezoelectric applications. 
``They're called `flash rocks,''' he said. ``When you throw them against 
the floor, they spark. While piezoelectric quartz crystals were used 
after World War I in a myriad of products, from sonar submarine detectors 
to crystal radios, the crystals were hard to produce. ``Cutting the 
quartz crystals was some sort of black art that companies would spend 
years and years trying to master, said Frank. During World War II, 
isolated research groups in the United States, the Soviet Union and 
Japan found piezoelectric capacities in certain ceramics that were 
easier to produce than cutting crystals. While piezoceramics have 
been used since they were first manufactured, they are typically brittle, 
expensive, and very fragile. The process of soldering wires to the 
ceramic to harness the electricity often caused irreparable breakage, 
making mass consumer applications like the K2 skis impractical. Ken 
Lazurus, co-founder of ACX, worked with raw piezoceramics at MIT's 
Space Engineering Research Center while completing his PhD. ``There 
was no technique for making these in high volume,'' said Mulcahey. 
He said Lazurus was the one who figured out how to mass-produce them. 
The key to the ACX module is the innovative packaging: a plastic-like 
material called polyimide that protects the ceramic and eliminates 
the need for soldering wires directly onto it. Because ACX's innovation 
renders the technology relatively durable and inexpensive, sports 
equipment manufacturers like K2, O'Brien International and Worth Inc. 
can add the vibration-damping module to their products without making 
them exponentially more expensive. The innovations in the original 
K2 Four piezoelectric ski damped up to 70 percent of the ski's vibrations, 
according to K2, which says that in its first full year of sales, 
the K2 Four was the best selling ski in the nation. An entire line 
of K2 skills _ the Merlin series _ now uses the dampers, and all told 
about a third of the company's skis have the piezo module implanted. 
Skiers with a taste for the high-tech, however, will have to pay more 
for the privilege. The piezo-enhanced Merlin III, for example, costs 
$565, while the roughly comparable K2 Three, without any damper, costs 
$425_ a $140 price difference. ``We've increased the price of the 
high-end end product by about a hundred dollars,'' said Mulcahey. 
Peizoelectric devices have also increased the cost of the other sports 
products to which they have been added. Andy Mapple, the 1998 slalom 
waterskiing World Cup Champion, helped design the piezoelectric enhanced 
``Mapple Siege'' slalom ski. Released by O'Brien International in 
September, the Mapple Siege and its fellow piezo-enhanced ski, the 
Vision GT, are the latest piezo sports products. ``The only drawback 
is that it adds expense,'' said Mapple, who tested the skis in several 
World Cup events. ``With any sport or anything else, you pay for the 
technology.'' The Vision GT is just over $200 more than a non-piezo 
ski a notch down on the line. And even Mapple thinks that the vibration 
damping advance won't eliminate the skill needed to ski well. ``I'm 
not sure that putting piezos in the ski will make you ski more buoys,'' 
he said, ``but it will make you ski more buoys more often.'' The costs 
of the technology can be driven still higher, because some manufacturers 
have begun combining piezoelectric devices with microchips. In October 
1997, for example, K2 BIKE, a division of K2, came out with a ``smart 
shock'' system based on ACX's technology. An electronic sensor determines 
whether or not shock-absorbtion is needed and how much (if the rider 
hits a boulder, say, he or she needs harder shock than if he or she 
hits a molehill). The sensor sends a signal to a microprocessor, which 
then sends an electric signal to the piezo module. The piezoceramic 
reacts with a mechanical impulse: It moves, allowing more or less 
oil into the shock for greater or less cushioning. K2 BIKE now uses 
piezoelectric modules in 70 percent of its products. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>