<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981202.0332 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Let me lay before you a modest proposal that will enable us to double 
aid to education, insure everybody's health, put a million new cops 
on the streets and install an impenetrable missile defense _ all while 
cutting taxes across the board. Here's the big idea: a national lottery 
with the world's first billion-dollar jackpot. Radical, you say? Smacks 
of a banana republic, unbefitting the only global superduperpower? 
You are out of step with the people; you have missed the great something-for-nothing 
cultural shift. Gambling is now far more American than apple pie. 
Annual U.S. sales of apple pie (35 percent of the total pie market) 
can be estimated at a mere $150 million; the gaming profession (formerly 
the casino industry, and before that the gambling racket) turns over 
bets of at least $50 billion a year. Politicians oppose gambling's 
political juggernaut at their peril. The Republican governors of South 
Carolina and Alabama, old-fashionably trying to resist the tide of 
lotteries and video poker games in their states, were overwhelmed 
by candidates advised by the Cajun Clintonian, James Carville, to 
advocate letting the good dice roll. And not just in the swingin' 
South did the bingo brigades triumph in the '98 elections. Missouri 
showed us the way in an initiative legalizing ``boat in the moat'' 
casinos on riverboats that sit in man-made basins. Arizonans voted 
2 to 1 to continue their troubled lottery. Californians by the same 
margin gave Indian tribes the right to build glitzy casinos to snatch 
back high-rolling palefaces from Las Vegas, in the highest-spending 
statewide campaign in U.S. history. Only in Maryland did the gambling 
fever fail to infect the populace. Gov. Parris Glendening, a Democrat, 
standing in the racetrack gate to bar slot machines, turned back a 
conservative candidate backed by gambling interests. The people have 
spoken. Morality, shmorality. Those of us fuddy-duddies who hold that 
state-sponsored gambling is a perversion of public policy have been 
routed. Time not just to move on, but to move up to the Age of the 
Crapshooter. Who can be expected to support my Billion-Dollar National 
Lottery (BDNL)? Democratic intellectuals should seize upon it. First, 
it would put the federal government in direct competition with private 
casino operators, always a desirable matchup. Second, a national lottery, 
with its publicizable billion-dollar jackpot, would undermine the 
burgeoning state lottery system and concentrate power in Washington, 
always better equipped to allocate resources fairly. Republican fat 
cats should be supportive. Everyone in the 38 percent bracket knows 
that it is in the nature of lotteries to soak the poor, who have been 
getting away with economic murder since the imposition of progressive 
taxation. Under the BDNL, the sure losers _ those poor suckers happy 
to contribute a high percentage of their earnings to a lottery _ make 
it possible to reduce the heavy tax burden of life's winners. Campaign 
strategists of both parties will set up their dissembly lines. All 
know that with the siren call of money ``earmarked for education,'' 
lottery income soon substitutes for general revenues formerly spent 
on education. Thus, in the hands of persuasive focus groupies, a surreptitious 
sin tax can masquerade as a virtuous, pain-free non-tax. Opposition 
is likely to come from newly affluent Indian tribes now snatching 
bread from the mouths of Bugsy Siegel's successors. Sen. Richard (Slots 
for Tots) Bryant of Nevada induced the General Accounting Office to 
launch a $70,000 harassment of the federal commission finding rampant 
compulsive gambling. Instead, his contributor-constituents should 
get him to induce tax-free tribal profiteers to reduce the $1.7 billion 
budget of Interior's Bureau of Indian Affairs. The most serious challenge 
to the BDNL will come from the cyberbettors. Government-sponsored 
gambling will whet the next generation's appetite for ever-greater 
ripoffs of indigent thrill-seekers. Our great national bet would ultimately 
be covered and raised: On the Internet, helping squeeze a few hundred 
million taka out of Bangladesh, millennial gamblers can foresee the 
Trillion-Dollar Global Jackpot. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>