<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981202.0393 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Deep in the nation's heartland, the Colorado Rockies are 1,000 miles 
from the nearest seaport. But jet travel, satellite television and 
foreign-language Web sites are quickly integrating America's most 
popular skiing state into the world tourism economy. This winter, 
foreign skiers are expected to buy 10 percent of lift tickets at Colorado 
ski areas, triple their share of a decade ago. Last winter at Vail 
and Breckenridge, the nation's two busiest ski areas, foreign skiers 
bought about 15 percent of tickets sold. At Aspen, the most international 
of Colorado's resorts, foreigners accounted for 21 percent of ticket 
sales. The number of lift tickets sold to Americans has been more 
or less flat for the last decade, so Colorado resorts believe their 
biggest future growth will be international. This winter, the foreign 
invasion will be fueled by two new factors. In September, British 
Airways inaugurated a daily nonstop flight between Gatwick Airport 
outside London and Denver International Airport. This restored a trans-Atlantic 
link that was lost five years ago when Continental dropped the service. 
``Last year, Britain was our third biggest market, after Colorado 
and Texas,'' said Jim Felton, spokesman for Breckenridge, a resort 
that sold 1.3 million lift tickets over all last winter. ``The British 
Airways flight should keep that momentum going.'' Vail's international 
visibility should grow in February, when the resort and Beaver Creek 
will host the 1999 World Alpine Ski Championships. In 1989, the last 
time Vail had that honor, the television audience outside the United 
States was estimated at 300 million people. This winter, with the 
spread of cable and satellite TV through Eastern Europe, Asia and 
Latin America, the foreign audience is expected to be 500 million. 
``The 1989 championships truly put the Vail valley on the international 
map,'' said John Dakin, spokesman for the nonprofit Vail Valley Foundation, 
which is organizing the races. ``In 1989, Europe was having a snow 
drought. European viewers were seeing their correspondents standing 
waist deep in Vail's snow and saying the men's alpine had been canceled 
because of too much snow.'' This winter, the races will be held from 
Jan. 30 through Feb. 14. ``Vail is going to become one giant TV studio, 
constantly selling how great the skiing is here,'' said Bruce Mainzer, 
head of marketing for Vail Resorts, which owns Vail, Breckenridge, 
Beaver Creek and Keystone ski areas. The arson fires atop Vail in 
October, claimed by environmentalists angry over Vail's addition of 
new ski trails, are not expected to have much impact on foreign visits 
this winter, said John Frew, president of Colorado Ski Country USA, 
a trade group. Three buildings were destroyed and four chairlifts 
damaged; the lifts are expected to reopen by January. ``The facts 
seem to have come through fairly accurately, people seem to realize 
that the Vail experience has not been impacted,'' Frew said in a telephone 
interview from London, where he was the host for ski-promotion events 
at a travel trade fair. ``Out of 500 questions I answered, two were 
about the Vail fires.'' He added that he had not heard of any cancellations 
because of the fires. Frew, who was on his third promotional trip 
to London this year, said that economics are dictating Colorado's 
pursuit of the foreign skier. His research indicates that foreign 
skiers stay longer and spend more than American skiers: The average 
skier from the Denver area spends $49 a day, the average out-of-state 
skier spends $150 a day, and the average foreign skier spends $300 
a day. While Aspen aims to sell one quarter of its tickets to foreigners 
by the year 2000, marketers at Colorado's lesser-known ski areas have 
also caught the foreign bug. Copper Mountain has reservationists that 
speak Japanese, German and Spanish. Skiers in Australia, Britain, 
Germany, the Netherlands, Japan, Mexico and New Zealand can now call 
a toll-free international number and speak in their own language to 
a reservationist at the Rocky Mountain resort. Silver Creek, a small 
Brazilian-owned resort, has hired an international marketing manager 
and is organizing ski trips from Brazilian cities such as Brasilia 
and Belo Horizonte. Itiro Takahashi, the marketing director and one 
of 20 Brazilians who will work at Silver Creek this winter, said: 
``We are promoting easy slopes, a resort where no one gets lost, the 
possibility of shopping trips on the side.'' Skiers from Rio de Janeiro, 
Sao Paulo and Buenos Aires tend to go to Aspen, while skiers from 
Mexico tend to favor Vail. To cater to this market, Elena Campa is 
publishing this month a 64-page Spanish-language guide to Vail and 
a 48-page guide in Spanish and Portuguese to Aspen. On her bilingual 
Spanish-Portuguese Web site for Latins planning Colorado ski vacations, 
www.andandocolorado.com, ``we are averaging 6,000 hits a month,'' 
Ms. Campa said. With traffic heavy to advertisers through the site's 
links, she said that many Vail and Aspen companies are now having 
their own Web sites translated into Spanish. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>