<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981202.0424 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Newly reunited, Exxon and Mobil might have some of the heft of Standard 
Oil, their forefather company that once dominated the American oil 
industry. But they do not have the old chutzpah. The proposed colossus 
lacks one thing that made Standard Oil the prime target of antitrust 
crusaders and muckraking journalists: a Rockefeller. Even before President 
Theodore Roosevelt's antitrust campaign finally shattered Standard 
Oil into 34 pieces in 1911, John D. Rockefeller, the founder, had 
retired from management. Today, many of his 140 descendants have small 
shareholdings in Exxon, Mobil and other cousins of the Standard Oil 
family, but none has significant stakes or exercises control. ``I 
don't think that any member of my family has been involved in the 
oil industry for almost a century,'' says David Rockefeller, a soft-spoken 
third-generation scion and a somewhat reluctant spokesman for the 
family's petroleum industry patrimony. ``We have all gone on to other 
things.'' Of Rockefeller descendants who still carry the family name, 
John D. Rockefeller's only son, John Jr., became a leader in philanthropy. 
Of John Jr.'s children _ David's generation _ two became bankers and 
investors, two went into politics, and one, John III, spent most of 
his life giving away money made by his grandfather. So, if the Justice 
Department decides to challenge the Exxon-Mobil merger on antitrust 
grounds, it might find the target less tempting than Rockefeller's 
Standard Oil. John D. Rockefeller personified the trust kings of the 
Gilded Age, who accumulated unprecedented and to this day unmatched 
power over key industries like oil, steel and railroads. Faced with 
the Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890, Rockefeller was brash, removed 
and defiant. He was in the popular mind the plutocrat who inspired 
an activist government role in regulating big business. Ron Chernow, 
author of ``Titan,'' a biography of the elder Rockefeller, compares 
the Standard Oil founder to Bill Gates, chairman of Microsoft, which 
is currently the target of an antitrust lawsuit. Both created dominant 
companies from scratch, drove rivals out of business through aggressive 
pricing, and innovated relentlessly to maintain their franchises. 
In both cases, the government attacked the methods of the individual 
businessman as a core part of the threat posed by the companies, Chernow 
said. ``One of the main reasons for the break up of Standard Oil was 
John D. Rockefeller. He was Standard Oil and Standard Oil was John 
D. Rockefeller,'' Chernow said. ``It was much easier for the government 
to attack a company that had a face attached to it. Exxon and Mobil 
today is a faceless bureaucracy. It's leaders don't inspire the same 
emotion from the general public.'' The same could be said for the 
Rockefeller clan itself, whose modern reputation is anything but antagonistic. 
David Rockefeller is a good example. Now 83 years old, he is not the 
oldest living Rockefeller. But he has become a public leader for fellow 
heirs. Rockefeller was chairman of Chase Manhattan Bank, where he 
worked for 35 years, and an international businessman who cultivated 
relations with royalty, power and wealth on every continent. He is 
famous for his rolodex, which he has said contains in excess of 100,000 
business cards. He has a personal secretary to manage his contacts. 
Rockefeller is currently at work writing memoirs from a life that 
has little to do with oil, though the book will recount his impressions 
of his grandfather and family history. Rockefeller's father, John 
Jr., wound down the family's role in the oil industry in the 1920s 
and 1930s. Many oil shares were sold to fund the construction of the 
massive Rockefeller Center office complex in midtown Manhattan, which 
consumed a great deal of the family's wealth and did not return profits 
in John Jr.'s lifetime, David Rockefeller said. But David, through 
his role as one of America's leading corporate bankers as well as 
a continuing minority shareholder, has kept tabs on developments and 
both Exxon and Mobil, and he finds the rationale for the merger compelling. 
``Both companies are well managed and Exxon particularly is among 
the half dozen best managed companies in the country, I think, if 
you look at return on equity and social responsibility,'' Rockefeller 
said in an interview. ``But in this environment of dramatically declining 
prices and changing competitive picture, this made sense.'' Bringing 
together Exxon and Mobil reunites only four the 34 companies that 
made up the Standard Oil empire. But by value, it recreates a much 
larger chunk. Chernow estimates that the combination represents slightly 
more than half the assets of Standard Oil in 1911, in part because 
Exxon and Mobil included Standard Oil's large New York and New Jersey 
units. Still, Rockefeller sees few antitrust implications from the 
linkup. ``You could point to fact that this brings together some of 
the companies that were broken up by efforts of Roosevelt, but it 
is not recreating a monopoly position,'' Rockefeller said. ``While 
the numbers are big, the impact in terms of antitrust in my mind is 
not a threat.'' A more unfortunate result of the merger, he said, 
will be the loss of jobs at the two companies. ``It is always distressing 
to see things of this kind resulting in unemployment for people, but 
as percentage of total employees worldwide it is still small. And 
frankly, we live in a world of modern technology. For companies to 
be competitive, they have to take advantage of technology, which often 
makes it possible to get the same output with fewer people.'' Rockefeller, 
a leading patron of New York's Museum of Modern Art, said he is also 
aware of concerns that the Exxon-Mobil combine will play a less creative 
role in charitable giving than the two, especially Mobil, did as independent 
companies. But he said that that's one place where his remaining oil 
industry influence can still be brought to bear. ``It is a risk that 
giving will decline, yes,'' Rockefeller said. ``But as someone who 
is active in that area, I will try to persuade them not to diminish 
their giving.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>