<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981202.0420 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A one-star Navy admiral accepted a finding of guilt Wednesday on charges 
that he improperly steered military contracts to his partner in an 
adulterous affair. He agreed to early retirement at a substantially 
reduced pension and to penalties including 30 days of house arrest, 
Navy officials said. The officer, Rear Adm. John Scudi, 54, effectively 
pleaded no contest to the charges at a closed administrative hearing 
in Norfolk, Va., which was a less severe alternative to a criminal 
investigation and precluded any possibility of a court-martial and 
prison sentence. The disposition of Scudi's case through administrative 
means, as opposed to criminal proceedings, allowed the Navy to bring 
a quick, quiet end to a matter that might have caused it sustained 
embarrassment and scrutiny. The accusations against Scudi, a graduate 
of the U.S. Naval Academy who had served in the Navy for more than 
three decades, followed a string of high-profile adultery cases in 
the armed forces in recent years and heated debates over the military's 
handling of accusations of adultery. Several experts on military justice 
and several Navy officials who spoke on condition of anonymity said 
that Scudi's punishment was in fact more severe than that meted out 
to most officers accused of adultery. They said that the Navy was 
sending a clear signal that it did not coddle high-ranking officers 
accused of ethical violations. Comdr. John Singley, a Navy spokesman 
in Norfolk, Va., stressed the severe financial toll of Scudi's agreement 
to request a retirement at the rank of captain as opposed to admiral. 
If the secretary of the Navy approves that request _ a formality at 
this point _ Scudi's annual pension of $60,240 would be $17,700 less 
than he might otherwise have received. ``This is hardly a slap on 
the wrist,'' Singley said. ``This represents a significant economic 
loss.'' But Robert Maginnis, a retired Army colonel who works as a 
senior policy adviser for the Family Research Council, a conservative 
group, said that the private administrative hearing was a convenient, 
easy way for the Navy to deflect further attention and humiliation. 
``It's a black eye removed, and this guy gets off fairly lightly,'' 
Maginnis said. ``I think it's very light. The Navy is setting another 
bad precedent by demonstrating that the higher up you are, the less 
accountable you are. We've sent people to Leavenworth for far less 
than this.'' Maginnis said he was speaking in particular about accusations 
that Scudi, who worked at the Navy's headquarters in the Pentagon 
as the director of the its offices of privatization and base management, 
steered about $150,000 in contracts over several years to a woman 
with whom he was having an adulterous affair. Scudi is married. Scudi's 
lawyer, Kevin Barry, did not return a message left on his telephone 
answering machine Wednesday night. Navy officials said Wednesday that 
Scudi has repeatedly declined requests to be interviewed. They said 
he started serving his house arrest Wednesday in the bachelor quarters 
at the National Naval Medical Center in Bethesda, Md. Within the military 
system, adultery is usually prosecuted only when it accompanies other 
accusations of criminal wrongdoing, and the cases are usually handled 
as discreetly as possible. Other prosecutions involving adultery have 
come to varied ends. In 1995, Navy Rear Adm. Ralph Tindal was found 
guilty in a non-criminal Navy inquiry of being involved in a yearlong 
affair with a female enlisted aide and received virtually the same 
punishment as Scudi. In an even more widely publicized case, First 
Lt. Kelly Flinn, the Air Force's first female B-52 pilot, dropped 
her request for an honorable discharge and agreed to a general discharge 
as a way of avoiding a court-martial and a possible prison sentence 
on charges including adultery and lying to senior officers. The general 
discharge rendered her ineligible for pension and veterans benefits 
and required her to pay back $18,000 in costs of her education at 
the Air Force Academy. In Scudi's case, Navy officials did not have 
to offer him an administrative hearing but could have proceeded directly 
to a grand jury-style proceeding to determine whether enough evidence 
existed for a court-martial. For his part, Scudi could have rejected 
the administrative hearing and pressed for a court-martial, where 
he would have been allowed to mount a more vigorous defense. Experts 
on military law said that both Navy officials and Scudi would have 
been taking a risk if they had gone to a court-martial, where either 
side could have lost its case. If convicted of all charges, he could 
have faced dismissal, a loss of pay and benefits and a maximum of 
11 and a half years in prison. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>