<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981202.0489 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With Exxon and Mobil deciding to join forces in the biggest corporate 
merger ever, the pressure on other major oil companies to find partners 
intensified Wednesday _ something acknowledged by Peter I. Bijur, 
the chairman and chief executive of Texaco Inc. Badgered at a meeting 
with Wall Street analysts about how Texaco, the No. 3 oil company, 
could compete against the Exxon-Mobil goliath, Bijur announced a cost-cutting 
program intended to save $600 million by 2000. He also said that Texaco 
would not be goaded into a marriage with another rival. But he did 
not totally rule out such an arrangement. Bijur said during the meeting 
at Texaco's corporate headquarters in White Plains, N.Y., that recent 
merger announcements left ``absolutely no doubt that the landscape 
of the international petroleum business is changing.'' He also said 
that he had assumed crude oil prices would run in the $19-a-barrel 
range this year and not at the 12-year low of $11 a barrel reached 
in recent days. The 41 percent plunge in oil prices over the past 
year is a major reason for the consolidation in the petroleum industry. 
Bijur repeatedly emphasized that Texaco was prepared to go it alone 
and compete with the new giants. ``I don't think bigger is better. 
I think excellence is better,'' he said. But he also said that ``I 
never say never to anything'' and that ``nothing is off the table.'' 
Shares of Texaco fell $2.8125 to $54 Wednesday, reflecting broad pessimism 
about the profit outlook for petroleum companies with no prospect 
that oil prices will rise anytime soon. Texaco, with $45.2 billion 
in sales last year, would trail far behind the new collosus of Exxon 
Mobil, which had combined sales of $201.6 billion last year, and other 
giants like Royal/Dutch Shell Group and British Petroleum, now in 
the process of taking over Amoco Corp. Bijur said there were other 
ways, short of mergers, that large corporations can achieve cost savings 
and build their market presence. Texaco has formed two alliances with 
Shell Oil Co. to combine a large part of its refining and marketing 
in the United States, which will make it the largest refining unit 
in the country, accounting for about 15 percent of gasoline and motor 
oil sales. Another alliance with Shell and Saudi Refining Inc. will 
combine refining and marketing in the Eastern United States. Bijur 
said the alliances have cut a combined 2,000 jobs; 870 have been from 
Texaco. He said that the two arrangements ``were already doing'' what 
Exxon and Mobil plan to do. Speaking about Texaco's cost cutting, 
Bijur said the company's corporate center in White Plains will shed 
a fifth of its work force or 100 jobs; the resulting free space will 
be leased out. He said that the company's exploration and production 
units would also cut 1,000 jobs. Those reductions, combined with cuts 
in other operations, he added, would save the company about $400 million 
next year and that the savings would grow to $600 million by 2000. 
He acknowledged, however, that in exploration and production, a company 
combining two partners like Exxon and Mobil has more of a presence. 
``I`d like to have a larger base of opportunity,'' he said. He added 
that the lower oil prices also are forcing suppliers to cut costs 
and rivals are being weakened. ``We are ready to take advantage of 
any bargains which may appear in the marketplace,'' he added, an indication 
Texaco might look for acquisitions. Oil companies have been able to 
ride out the downturn in crude prices in part because they have been 
able to feed their refineries with cheaper crude while prices of gasoline 
and other refined products have been slower to come down. Thus, Texaco's 
earnings from production of crude fell by about $700 million in the 
first nine months this year while earnings in refining and marketing 
were up by $100 million. The company has also put off spending on 
some of its projects; capital spending for the year will total about 
$4 billion, down 13 percent from the $4.6 billion that had been planned. 
Daniel Yergin, chairman of Cambridge Energy Research Associates, said 
that the latest mergers among big oil companies define a new niche 
in size, ambition and efficiency. ``What's the formula for success?'' 
he said. ``Becoming a super-major that can think long-term and still 
deliver the returns that shareholders demand.'' Smaller, independent 
oil producers are also having to decide whether to consolidate or 
cut back or both. Union Pacific Resources said Wednesday that it would 
cut its headquarters staff in Fort Worth, Texas, by 20 percent, or 
more than 200 jobs. ``We've just joined the parade of companies taking 
similar actions,'' said Dan Sullivan, a company spokesman. Union Pacific's 
hostile bid last year for Pennzoil, another independent producer, 
failed. This year, Union Pacific bought Norcen Energy Resources for 
$2.6 billion. Among the Exxon employees who would be at risk in a 
merger are the 460 at the Florham Park, N.J., headquarters of Exxon 
Company International, which manages operations outside the United 
States. Exxon said Wednesday that some would move to Houston, where 
the combined company's exploration and production would be based, 
and some would move to Fairfax, Va., the base for refining and marketing. 
A number still to be determined would lose their jobs. Exxon and Mobil 
appear most likely to face challenges over their concentration of 
gas stations in the Northeast. Together, they own 35.1 percent of 
the gas stations in Washington, 26.2 percent in New Jersey, 22.2 percent 
in New York and 21.5 percent in Connecticut. But, as a sign of the 
companies' resolve to complete their deal, their agreement includes 
a huge, $1.5 billion termination fee. Subject to a number of conditions, 
whichever company backed away would have to pay that amount to the 
other. Besides the break-up fee, Exxon is also entitled to buy as 
much as 14.9 percent of Mobils stock if another company makes Mobil 
an offer. The deal will also be reviewed by European regulators. Globally, 
the combined company will also prove a much stronger competitor in 
natural gas. Mobil especially has been at work on liquefaction plants 
and other projects that are making natural gas a commodity capable 
of being traded among nations. At his news conference Tuesday, Lee 
R. Raymond, the Exxon chief executive, said that the deal could prove 
as significant for the development of natural gas as for oil. If so, 
the company could become an even stronger rival for Enron Corp., the 
Houston company intent on becoming for the global natural gas business 
what Exxon has been for oil. Kenneth L. Lay, Enron's chief executive, 
said Wednesday that his company would still have proprietary strengths. 
``Are we fearful of the combination?'' he said. ``No. They're much 
more driven to the exploration and production side of the business.'' 
Enron has concentrated more on distribution, marketing and trading, 
often backing power plants to use the natural gas supplies. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>