<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981202.2000.2997 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is The World. I'm Lisa Mullins. In today's geography quiz, we're 
searching for the destination for solo sailors. In the transatlantic 
Route D'Ron Boatrace. The race began off the coast of Northern France 
and it ended at today's site. Which is our answer: Guadeloupe. Ellen 
McArthur was among the competitors in the race. And an exceptional 
one she was. The 22 year old yachter came in fifth overall. And was 
the first woman ever to complete the race. I was convinced to do the 
race. Because for the last four years, I've been sailing long-distance 
full time. And mainly single-handed. That's my forte. And last year 
I did a transatlantic race which was in a smaller boat to Martinique 
and other Caribbean islands. And this year it was a bigger boat and 
to Guadeloupe. How difficult is this kind of sail? Did you encounter 
many problems along the way? The first week was very bad weather. 
We had five depressions which rolled across the Atlantic straight 
into us. And we had up to 45 knots of breeze. Fifty-five at stages, 
and listing 65. It's a lot of wind. And the boat's leaning over with 
a lot of motion. I'm quite small. So physically it was a challenge. 
The boat wasn't designed around me. So I couldn't reach some things. 
And getting at the patches was quite difficult. And I had some breakages. 
The hydraulics on my kiel broke halfway along the trip. So I was five 
hours covered in hydraulic oil. Trying to stabilize the system. Oh 
my gosh. How can you continue to travel the boat when there's a hydraulics 
failure like that? And you're trying to concentrate on that and making 
sure you're heading in the right direction and you're safe? Well actually, 
in order to fix the keel, I had to head in the wrong direction and 
go downwind. I was going upwind before that. To turn downwind, the 
wrong direction. Stabilize the boat, and it was just a case of if 
you have a problem, you've got to solve it. There's no way out. You 
just do it. I understand you had a few physical problems. Took a rather 
heavy blow to the head at one point? Yes. I was on the foredeck in 
the depressions. And the boat was pounding up and down on the waves. 
Literally, the boat would come up and hit me from underneath. And 
during one of those collisions with the boat, I hit my head on the 
wire rod forestay. And that's what went straight into my head. And 
I felt a crunch. And I thought "Oh, crumbs. What's going on here?" 
But all that happened was my head swelled up and a massive lump. And 
I think I'm okay. Gosh. Sounds like a lot of fun, Ellen. There's a 
lot of pleasure that comes out of it. When the dolphins come alongside 
the boat, that's a moment which is just fantastic. It doesn't matter 
how many times you see them. You never tire of their beauty. It's 
incredible. And there were days when it was sunny. And we're sailing 
along at a good speed. There were days when we had fantastic runs. 
We were doing great miles. It's hard because it's the highest of the 
highs and the lowest of the lows. And you have big problems. But then 
the great points of it are so extremely high that it is a great compromise. 
So you finished fifth overall. First in your own class, the 50-footers. 
And you beat eight other racers in the 60 foot boats. Tell us what 
it was like for you as you sailed the Kingfisher, your boat, into 
Guadeloupe? It was dark. It had been a 12-hour desperate battle to 
get the boat into the finish. Every corner I turned, the wind turned 
against me. Or the wind was too strong. Or there was no wind. The 
sixth margin finished the one day when it rained. So that's a good 
extra hour to get it in. And then I crossed the line just very slowly. 
Edging over -- edging past the mark. And as I crossed, there were 
floodlights blazing. There were people cheering. There were horns 
being sounded. And it was a moment when you've been alone for so long. 
And then all of a sudden there are all these people who are so excited 
about your arriving. It's wonderful. Yes. So, you're 22 years old. 
And you've already achieved this kind of success. I wonder what's 
next for you, Ellen? Next is the Vonde Globe. That's the single-handed 
non-stop around the world race in November, 2000. Well, we wish you 
the best of luck. And hope to talk to you on the other end of the 
Vonde Globe. Thank you very much. Ellen McArthur, thank you. Bye bye. 
bye. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>