<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981202.2000.2601 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In Istanbul, more than 20 thousand Turkish police and paramilitary 
troops are on duty. But not for political demonstration. They're there 
for a soccer match. As Turkey and Italy face each other on the soccer 
field. The tension between the two countries is dangerously high. 
At issue is the case of a suspected terrorist, Abdula Erjulon. The 
Kurdish rebel leader who Italy has refused to hand over to Turkey. 
The New York Times' Steven Kinsor is in Istanbul. He says the security 
operation surrounding today's soccer match is massive. The police 
and the security forces here are determined that there be no incident. 
At this soccer game, which is being played under the cloud of a very 
intense and emotional political confrontation between Turkey and Italy. 
As a result, they have flooded the stadium and the whole area around 
it with security. And it's almost inconceivable in this -- in light 
of that show of force, that any kind of an incident is going to take 
place. That's very important for Turkey. Because this game is being 
broadcast in more than 20 countries around the world. Including in 
most of Europe. And the Turks, who have shown themselves in the last 
couple of weeks to be very emotional in their anti-Italian sentiments 
and statements. Want to show that they can play a sport match and 
keep it on the level of sports. Yes. This is also not a case of outright 
hostility to the Italians. Because there is a matter of Turkish pride 
here. And they pride themselves in being hospitable to the enemy on 
the soccer field. Isn't that right? In the tradition of hospitality 
in Turkey in general. I think anybody that comes here for a visit 
can tell you about that. And certainly, that's playing a psychological 
role here. Now, the tradition of hospitality is being weighed against 
very intensely emotional fervor. That's been whipped up here over 
the last couple of weeks. So far though, everybody I've talked to 
during the course of the day predicted to me that there would be no 
trouble. And scoffs at the idea there would be. And their attitude, 
combined with this enormous security presence, has seemed to have 
created a very calm environment. Yes. And what about the mood among 
spectators so far? As far as you can tell? How did they, for instance, 
greet the Italian team when they took the field today? There were 
no untoward demonstrations. Though the game, as we're speaking in 
the half-time, there've been a fair number of yellow cards which are 
shown for roughness and other fouls. But there hasn't been any outright 
display from the crowd of anti-Italian sentiment. This is an important 
game because of the league in which it is being played consists of 
only the champions of each country. As a result, there's a lot of 
stake psychologically to the Turks. Who sometimes feel they always 
have to prove themselves as being as good or better than Europeans. 
They're cheering very strongly for the Turkish side, Gala Tasari. 
And although there's a lot of emotion in the sports sense, I don't 
get the feeling that it's been carried over into politics. The burning 
of Italian flags and the stomping of Italian goods and so forth, that 
we've seen on the streets of Istanbul in recent weeks. Appears to 
have been left at home. Yes. And briefly, how much of an issue then 
is Italy's refusal to hand over Abdula Erjulon in Turkey. You've known 
of course there is the most wanted man in Turkey. The head of the 
Kurdish Separatist Movement. What are people saying about it outside 
the field? It's a huge issue here. The Kurdish Rebel Group, the PKK, 
which Erjulon founded and has directed for more than a decade. Has 
committed a number of savage terrorist atrocities here. The government 
and the press have made a great show of portraying the victims of 
the war as martyrs. There is a widespread feeling that this is a group 
that incarnates evil. Actually, any point of view that strongly contradicts 
that can't be even expressed in the Turkish press or public life. 
As a result, the PKK is very hated here. The very idea that any country 
would harbor the head of the PKK, or even considering treating him 
as a normal civilized human is deeply insulting and outrageous to 
the Turks. They have transferred this feeling of outrage, literally, 
in the Italian judicial system. Steven Kinsor is with the New York 
Times. He was speaking to us from Istanbul. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>