<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981202.2000.3250 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We put the musical wraps on today's program. With a woman who blends 
North African and Spanish styles. Her name is Ishtar. Her band is 
Alabena. And our reporter is Marco Warner. Looking at Ishtar, you'd 
never know that this exotic blond daughter of an Egyptian mother and 
Moroccan father used to sing rhythm and blues by night. And by day, 
tighten rivets on fighter jets for the Israeli Air Force. It was like 
work. You'd just arrive to the base at eight o'clock. You're going 
out, you leave the base at four o'clock. It's the private parties. 
A lot of hotels. We travel a lot over Israel. We used to sing all 
kind of black music. Like Stevie Wonder, Shaka Khan, everything. I 
mean all kind of music. Not all kind of music. Ishtar didn't translate 
"You are the Sunshine of My Life" into Arabic. And Ishtar didn't do 
gypsy music in those Israeli hotel lounges either. A few years back, 
French record producer Charles Igli was traveling through Spain. And 
was struck by the rhythmic similarities between flamenco and Arabic 
music. He had an idea: Form a group that morphs the two influences. 
Serendipitously, when Igli returned to Paris, he met Ishtar. Who had 
since moved there to sing in nightclubs. Igli then drafted Los Ninos, 
a Spanish quartet whose gypsy style hooked Ishtar immediately. I found 
it really great. Because for me, the gypsy music, the real gypsy flamenco 
is totally 100 percent oriental. And a lot of things are similar to 
the Egyptian classic music that I knew from my grandmother's house. 
Alabena performs not only in Arabic. But in Hebrew, Spanish, French, 
and English. The band has performed in Arabic and Hebrew before Amir 
of Saudi Arabia. Who counts himself a big Alabena fan. In Israel, 
Ishtar says, the group appeals to Jews and Arabs. The real peace for 
me exists already in Israel. That's not a lot of people knows it. 
Because for me, the real peace is when you go out on the street. And 
when you work with people. When you eat with people. When you live 
with them. Not when you sign papers. Ishtar insists that Israel is 
misunderstood. Maybe that's why she and Alabena's manager came up 
with the idea of covering the 1965 hit, "By the Animals." We were 
looking for a song. I remember we were sitting in a bar. And I said, 
"Hey, I have the idea. Let's do 'Don't Let Me Be Misunderstood'." 
And I was just thinking: "Wow, that's going to be very difficult to 
translate. And the music to sing it in Arabic." So I said, "OK, we'll 
try." But the first time I didn't believe that it would work. But 
we did it. And I'm very glad for this song. For The World, this is 
Marco Warner. Music from the North African Spanish band Alabena. Brings 
this edition of our program to a close. Don't forget we're on line 
at www.TheWorld.org. In Boston, I'm Lisa Mullins. Join us again tomorrow. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>