<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981202.2000.0676 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In Iraq, the threat seems to be biological and chemical weapons. As 
part of the cease-fire agreement that ended the Gulf War, Iraq agreed 
to scrap its weapons of mass destruction. And to allow the U.N. special 
commission to verify that it's keeping its promise. Only after ONSCOM 
declares Iraq in full compliance, will the Security Council lift its 
sanctions. When Iraq's President Saddam Hussein halted cooperation 
with ONSCOM in October. The United States and Britain threatened air 
strikes. Iraq backed down. But there's skepticism that Saddam will 
continue to cooperate. As The World's Patrick Cox reports, there is 
also skepticism that Washington will respond with a military strike. 
Publicly, the United States says it's playing a waiting game. It's 
waiting for the ONSCOM inspectors to verify Iraq's compliance with 
U.N. mandates. In two weeks they'll report back to the U.N. Security 
Council. At that point, if Iraq is deemed to be dragging its feet, 
the United States may begin a sustained bombing campaign. The two 
previous standoffs this year didn't result in air strikes. Now, even 
if the Iraqis balk, Harvey Sickemann who advised three secretaries 
of state, doesn't think President Clinton will use the military option. 
At this point, I think the President is more afraid of the use of 
American military force than Saddam. Probably because he's convinced 
himself that it won't do very much good. And might expose American 
forces to losses. And as a consequence, he prefers the policy of saying 
"Let Saddam do whatever he wants with ONSCOM. So long as he doesn't 
knock it off completely. The important thing is to keep the sanctions 
there." The international tide seems to be turning against Saddam 
Hussein. Even though his sympathizers on the U.N. Security Council: 
France and Russia, are cautioning the U.N. inspection team to avoid 
confrontation. Both countries are said to be increasingly frustrated 
with Saddam. Arab nations too, are distancing themselves from Iraq. 
Many tacitly siding with the United States. But Rahid Adargum, a columnist 
with the Arab Daily Al Highat. Says this could change rapidly if war 
breaks out during Ramadan. Which begins December 19. It will be difficult 
for the United States to initiate military strikes during the holy 
month of the Muslims. It might be interpreted by some that this is 
an American drive against the Muslims. And that is probably why there 
are adminitrationists trying to avoid the months of Ramadan. A senior 
administration official agrees that launching strikes during Ramadan 
would not go over well with Gulf and Middle Eastern states. But adds 
that if bombing is already underway by the beginning of Ramadan, that 
air strikes would not be suspended for the holy month. However, many 
including Michael Eisenstad of the Washington Institute for Near-East 
Policy, doubt that the United States will take military action at 
all. If we did not act in mid-November. And if we did not act in February, 
I wonder if there's any conditions under which we will act. The White 
House says it is concerned about the number of fatalities to Iraqi 
civilians that a sustained bombing campaign would inflict. Estimates 
range as high as 15 thousand. But Eisenstad says the administration 
must realize that the future of the U.N. inspections and the West's 
knowledge of Iraq's weapons program are at stake. We're in a situation 
where if you want weapons inspections to be effective, you have to 
be willing to strike. And you have to strike. The Iraqis, meanwhile, 
are trying to highlight the effects of war on their civilians. Today, 
Iraqi officials accused western powers of firing radioactive munitions 
during the 1990 Gulf War. Munitions that Iraq says caused soaring 
rates of cancer. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>