<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981202.2000.2291 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As if Milosevic didn't have enough distractions, the Organization 
for Security and Cooperation in Europe opened a two-day meeting in 
Copenhagen, Denmark today. To discuss Kosovo. The OSCE is sending 
two thousand observers to verify a cease-fire in the Serbian Province. 
Which ended seven months of fighting between Milosevic's forces and 
the Separatist Ethnic Albanians. International monitors, diplomats, 
and aid workers may or may not bring peace to Kosovo. But they are 
certainly bringing money. The World's Jackie Roland reports from Pristina, 
on the impact of foreign dollars on Kosovo's economy. Ramisaid Salahud 
shows a real estate agent around her apartment in Central Pristina. 
Ramisaid and her husband are retired. And they say the place is too 
big for them now. They're hoping to rent it out to foreigners working 
in Pristina. And move to a smaller home. They're asking $700 in rent 
a month. The real estate agent, Ayup Kolatsa, says that's more than 
they could have gotten a year ago. The arrival of the foreigners has 
sharply increased the cost of renting premises. For example, before, 
you were able to rent an apartment for one or two hundred dollars. 
Right now, since the internationals arrived, the prices have gone 
up by about 50 percent. Apartment dwellers and homeowners are not 
the only people cashing in on the arrival of the foreigners. Workmen 
are busy renovating this bar in Central Pristina. Which the owners 
hope will become a regular watering hole for journalists, aid workers, 
and anyone else with money in their pocket. Six foreign investors 
dreamed up the project in the hope of repeating the success of similar 
establishments in Bosnia. A team of Serbs and Ethnic Albanians will 
run the bar. Yvonne Vesolinovich, a Serb from Belgrade, is one of 
them. Since the investors who hold this bill are foreigners, we expect 
of course, many of their friends will come here. That means foreigners. 
But also expect local of people to come, Albanian Serbs. The Organization 
for Security and Cooperation in Europe is set to be the leading international 
body in Kosovo. Over the next year, it's expected to spend $200 million 
on its cease-fire verification mission. The OSCE will employ thousand 
of locals who will in turn fuel the economy. But some in Kosovo are 
cautious. Viton Soroy, and influential Ethnic Albanian publisher, 
warns that the economic boom is temporary. And will have limited effects. 
The people who have big houses are the ones who will rent big houses. 
And those who don't have big houses will never be in a position to 
rent anything. So there will be a greater separation between those 
who have and those who don't have. During the past 10 years, political 
unrest between Serbs and Ethnic Albanians has taken its toll on Kosovo's 
economy. Unemployment is estimated at 70 percent. And emigration is 
generally viewed as the only way to make a decent living. Nype Zecka 
an Ethnic Albanian economist, says the problems are enormous. In this 
territory which is called Yugoslavia, there isn't any condition for 
investments. There has to be, I think, two things moving on. Full 
improvation of this area. At least in Kosovo and surrounding countries 
like Serbia and Montenegro. And a rebuilding or settling down the 
proper economical system. Of which is based on free market. And the 
open economy. But that's unlikely to happened without political stability. 
Vital private and foreign investment will probably be scarce. Until 
the Serbs and Ethnic Albanians reach an agreement on the future status 
of Kosovo. For The World, this is Jackie Roland, in Pristina. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>