<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981202.2000.2026 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The so-called strong man of Serbia, Slobodan Milosevic has ruled the 
region for just over a decade. No small feat in that part of the world. 
White House officials have admitted in the past, that they don't much 
like Milosevic. Though when it comes to diplomatic relations with 
Belgrade, and striking peace deals over Kosovo. It sees him as the 
only man to do business with. This week though, the tone seems to 
have changed. State Department spokesman James Rubin said that Washington 
would not lose any sleep if Milosevic passed from the political scene. 
A comment that coincides with a purge by Milosevic of many of his 
inner circle. Milosevic has dismissed the leaders of the Army, the 
Air Force, and the Intelligence Service. Laura Silver is a Balkan 
analyst based in New York. Can you tell us if you see these things 
as signs that Milosevic is indeed in trouble? I think Milosevic on 
one hand, is very much in trouble. On the other hand though, he's 
politically strong. Because he's the only show in town. He has no 
real viable opposition at this point. And I think when he moved to 
purge these insiders. These people he's worked very closely with over 
the years. He did it as a sign of weakness. But in fact, he also may 
be gearing up for more battles ahead. Tell us the significance of 
some of these people. Who were at one point, very important and very 
close to him. The significance of their dismissal. How important have 
they been? I think the most significant dismissal by far, is that 
of the Chief of Secret Police of the Intelligence Service. Yovi Bostanchi. 
He was very, very powerful. He was in fact, the second most powerful 
man in Serbia. Next to Slobodan Milosevic. So why would he get rid 
of him? I think he got rid of him because he could eventually have 
been a possible alternative to Milosevic. I think he was scared. I 
think since they had worked so closely. Yovi Bostanchi had his own 
power base. He had his own support. His own network. Amongst the people. 
And I think that was what made Milosevic nervous. In this time when 
Milosevic himself has nothing to offer the people of Serbia. And that's 
where he's weak. In that Serbia is impoverished. People see no political 
alternative. They see no hope of getting out of this latest crisis. 
And that's why Milosevic is nervous. That he's almost in a corner. 
What about those comments by James Rubin. Saying that the West wouldn't 
lose any sleep if Milosevic passed from power. What do you think prompted 
comments like that? Well, I think its questions -- that the West has 
been questioning, the United States has been questioning. Why is the 
West seemingly supporting Slobodan Milosevic? But continually using 
him as the main power broker. And negotiating with him. And making 
him look as if he is important to the outside world. And also to the 
people of Serbia. I think there's also this problem that the West 
does not want to be perceived as supporting Milosevic. They find his 
policies distasteful. They find it reprehensible, what he's done in 
Croatia, in Bosnia, in Kosovo. Against the Ethnic Albanians. So I 
think that the West is caught between not wanting to look like they 
support Milosevic. But at the same time, actually using him as the 
key point man in the Balkans. So, are you saying that the West has 
not been working to undermine his position? I think the West is working 
to do whatever it can to keep a lid on former Yugoslavia. So if it 
looks like the opposition would be strong enough to oust Milosevic. 
And do it relatively painlessly. I think we would see more active 
support for the opposition. But at this point, I think the West is 
very wary about unseating Milosevic if they don't know who the alternative 
would be. And I think there would be a danger that it could be someone 
more erratical even, than Mr. Milosevic. And that's what the West 
is scared about. If you could summarize for us what this means. Obviously 
this is an important time for the region. And how important would 
it be if he does continue to see his power erode? I think it's incredibly 
important if Slobodan Milosevic were to be ousted from power. I think 
what would be the most positive development of course, is if a democratic 
opposition leader comes in his place. On the other hand, if he were 
to be succeeded by someone such as Voyoslav Shecil, a radical and 
extreme Nationalist. Then I think there would be a period of great 
uncertainty and perhaps an even greater violence. Balkan analyst Laura 
Silver. Speaking to us from New York. Thank you very much. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>