<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981202.2000.0374 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Around the globe in North Korea, in Pakistan, and in Iraq. The United 
States is concerned about the threat of arms proliferation. North 
Korea appears to be developing nuclear weapons and long-range missiles. 
Pakistan and India detonated several nuclear explosions last May. 
And Iraq's hostility toward U.N. arms monitors suggests it may still 
be trying to maintain its chemical and biological weapons programs. 
The United States is wrestling to come up with appropriate policies 
to deal with these different threats. We open our program today with 
three stories about the threat of weapons of mass destruction. Beginning 
with Andrew North's report on the crisis over North Korea's apparent 
nuclear goals. It's still just a war of words. But tensions are rising 
again between the United States and North Korea. Over the Communist 
regime's suspected nuclear and military ambitions. At the root of 
the trouble is an underground site. A hundred miles north of the capitol, 
Phun Yang. The U.S. government suspects it's a nuclear production 
facility. And it wants to gain access. Fearing that North Korea is 
flouting a 1994 agreement to dismantle its nuclear program. In return 
for food and fuel. North Korea recently offered to grant access to 
the underground site. In return for a U.S. payment of $300 million. 
But the Clinton Administration rejected this as blackmail. But today, 
a North Korean military official said U.S. demands were aimed at provoking 
a war against his country. That, says James Lily, former U.S. Ambassador 
to South Korea. Is typical of the North Korean's approach since that 
agreement in 1994. They got the agreed framework by military threats. 
The United States claimed it avoided war as a great policy victory. 
And then they gave the North Koreans $4.6 billion worth of lightwater 
reactors. Japan and South Korea paid. We gave them heavy oil. We've 
been giving them food. Military threat has worked. They have used 
it to get concessions. And I think they're continuing on that policy. 
Another cause for alarm has been North Korea's long-range ballistic 
missile program. In late August, it test-fired a missile which flew 
over Japan and into the Pacific Ocean. And yesterday, the Japanese 
government said it had intelligence that North Korea was preparing 
to fire another. This increased tension comes just two days before 
U.S. and North Korean officials resumed talks in New York on the suspect 
site. U.S. officials are again expected to demand unconditional access. 
But James Lily says it's time for the Clinton Administration to review 
its approach to North Korea. "First, he says, "it should admit that 
its 1994 agreement has failed to persuade Phun Yang to abandon its 
nuclear ambitions." Once we admit that, then we move on to what I 
consider to be a larger program of dealing with North Korea. The first 
stage of this is to take the force option off the table. If in fact 
they ever attack, they will be destroyed. Once you get that done, 
then you start dealing with the economic problems. Which are at the 
heart of what's happening. You cannot throw food at them unconditionally. 
You've got to tie food and oil to economic reform. Otherwise you're 
just throwing your money down a dark hole. "The final step, Lily says, 
"is for Washington to do more to encourage North-South dialogue. To 
build confidence and understanding between the two neighbors. Only 
then, he says, "will North Korea's belief in the value of confrontation 
start to evaporate." For The World, I'm Andrew North. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>