<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981202.2000.0939 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Painter Chris O'Feely has won the Turner Prize. Britain's most prestigious 
award for modern art. The judges gave O'Feely the prize and $35,000 
for what they call his art's inventiveness, exuberance, humor, and 
technical richness. The judges did not say how much significance they 
attached to O'Feely's use of elephant dung in his paintings. From 
London, The World's Steven Beard reports. The Turner prize carries 
enormous cache in the world of modern art. It brings the winner fame 
and commissions. So the glittering awards ceremony at the Tate Gallery 
in London had all the tension of Oscar night. The winner of the Turner 
Prize is Chris O'Feely. In spite of the delighted whoops of surprise, 
the 30 year old black painter, O'Feely, had in fact been expected 
to win. Some critics have compared him with the 18th century visionary, 
William Blake. O'Feely's canvasses are said to exude a vivid complexity. 
But his acceptance speech did not. Thank God. Where's my check? Thank 
you. OK, I don't know what to say. I'm just really happy. I can't 
believe it feels like a film. And I'll watch the tape when I get home. 
Thanks. There was more controversy about this award than the wild 
applause might suggest. O'Feely's predilection for using elephant 
dung in his work has troubled some reviewers. He collects the stuff 
from the elephant house at London Zoo. Covers it in resin, sprinkles 
it with glitter, and sticks it on some of his canvasses. One critic 
described the end result as "shit." A prominent art historian said 
O'Feely's work is "pornographic on the edge of the permissible." But 
the public seems to like it. These are kitsch. You know, I think it's 
rather enjoyable. I think one might actually have it as part of a 
wallpaper. I think his stuff is very dynamic. And it challenges the 
ways of painting. He uses so many different layers. And it's so interesting 
to see the different textures in his work. They put dots on it. And 
it's so hard to put dots. Chris O'Feely is the first painter to win 
the Turner prize for 14 years. After a string of victories by video 
makers, performance artists, and the like. Some art lovers are expressing 
relief that a more traditional medium of expression has at long last 
triumphed. O'Feely's choice of material is anything but traditional. 
However, he dismisses the dung debate as trivial. I'm trying to delve 
into depths that go a lot further than whether or not it's an oil 
paint, or elephant dung, or whatever. You know. So, I don't think 
I won the prize because I'm a painter. And I don't think -- I just 
think there's a lot more to it than just paint or not paint. Any doubts 
about whether O'Feely deserved to win the Turner Prize might be dispelled 
by consideration of the runners-up. One is renowned for her depictions 
of female genitalia in pink suede. While another submitted a slow-motion 
video of naked Hungarians in a health spa. For The World, this is 
Steven Beard, in London. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>