<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981202.2000.1258 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As bird lovers know, your Bali starling or your yellow-crested cockatoo 
hails from Asia. So do hundred of bird species. Some of them which 
are popular with American pet owners. All of which are popular with 
Asian environmentalists. But as The World's Lucy Craft reports from 
Tokyo. In many cases, these birds have flown. Like any oasis, the 
Tokyo Municipal Wild Bird Park at first seems like a mirage. It is 
tucked away in one of the city's grimmer neighborhoods. A bleak district 
of warehouses, wholesale markets, and streets jammed with tractor-trailers. 
Overhead, a constant stream of jets take off from the city's nearby 
airport. The Wild Bird park is an anomaly, says chief ranger Yutaka 
Kobaishi. The park came about through a campaign organized by local 
residents. Originally, it was a landfill. Than reeds began to grow. 
And ponds formed. That's when the birds began to gather. And people 
started to gather to watch them. The marshes of the park are lush 
with ducks, egrets, herons, and kingfishers. As the carefully tended 
foliage in the park grows thicker and taller, it has attracted a greater 
variety of forest birds. But Chief Ranger Kobaishi says migratory 
species, those which stop to rest or nest here on route from places 
like Siberia and Southeast Asia, are fewer in number each year. Birds 
such as longbills and clovers have drastically decreased. Because 
wetlands along their flyways have been wiped out in many cases. Shrinking 
habitats, less room for wildlife to breed and feed is a fact of life 
in every corner of the planet. But the stakes are arguably higher 
in Asia. The region hosts huge numbers of what ornithologists call 
endemics -- species found only in a certain area. While Britain has 
just a single endemic species. And Germany has none. The island nations 
of Indonesia and the Philippines alone, are home to nearly 600 endemic 
birds. Richard Grimmet is an Asian-based representative for Birdlife 
International. An umbrella organization of conservation groups. Just 
from the point-of-view of endemism and diversity, the region is very, 
very important. That combined with the rapid transformation of land 
use means that a lot more bird species are global significance and 
under more pressure here than in Europe, for example. Bird protection 
is far more organized and powerful in the West. The sponsor of this 
meeting, Birdlife International, dates back to 1922. And enjoys a 
huge following in Europe. Western supporters of conservation are usually 
motivated by aesthetic considerations. Richard Grimmet again. Birds 
help us to define who we are and where we come from. So on the Island 
of Sumba for example, in Indonesia. Where there are eight endemic 
birds. Those bird species are unique to Sumba. And they help the people 
of Sumba distinguish themselves from other nations and other cultural 
groups. But Asian environmentalists go to great lengths to avoid something 
like birdwatchers. Filipino conservationist Blas Taperanza says that 
in order to get approval for a wildlife sanctuary, the idea has to 
be sold to local residents first. We are not going to their community 
and tell them what to do. It doesn't work that way. It has to be some 
kind of -- probably a compromise between top down and bottom approach. 
Involving the communities of the lowest level. Asian conservationists 
say the best way to gain local converts is by framing environmentalism 
as a bread and butter issue. Conservation groups advertise birds as 
a good tool for pest control. And for dispersing seeds that regenerate 
valuable trees. Environmentalists also use the canary and the myna 
approach. How birds can serve as the early warning system about pollution 
of crucial water supplies. That resonates in countries like the Philippines. 
Where mineral water now costs twice as much as gasoline. Rudy Andow 
is a Birdlife representative from Indonesia. For example, if you go 
to farmer. And say you cannot chop down that trees. Because it kills 
the bird. They say, yes? Who cares? But if you can say to the government, 
for example, if you chop down that trees, you need to build 80 dams. 
And it costs you this million U.S. dollars. But if you keep that forest, 
you save that eight million U.S. dollars. And you can use it for other 
purposes. The financial crisis engulfing Asia has brought misery to 
many human inhabitants of the region. But for wildlife, the economic 
slump has a silver lining. Recession bound countries like Korea and 
Japan have all but stopped buying tropical timber. Relieving the pressure 
on Indonesia's forests, says Birdlife International's Richard Grimmet. 
There is nothing like the pressure for development. That there was 
two, three years ago. So they were not the resources for mines, for 
bridge building, for rapid transformation of the forest areas for 
transmigration. If you like, there's a window of opportunity to make 
more conservation progress that will last longer than we had two or 
three years ago. Bird protection groups from around the world are 
set to meet in Malaysia next year. To draw up a list of crucial species, 
sites, and habitats. For The World, this is Lucy Craft, in Tokyo. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>