<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981202.1600.0831 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
December 3rd is the first anniversary of the signing of the treaty 
to ban anti-personnel land mines. Over the past year, enough nations 
have ratified the agreement to allow to enter into force next March. 
The members of the international campaign to ban land mines say there's 
still a lot of work to do. VOA's Joe DeCapoa reports. One of the members 
of the international campaign to ban land mines is the Geneva-based 
organization, Handicap International. In mid-1997, it erected a sculpture 
of a giant wooden chair in front of United Nations headquarters in 
the Swiss city. One of the chair's legs has been torn off to remember 
the 26,000 people killed or maimed each year by land mines. Paul Barmullen 
is director of Handicap International Switzerland. He says although 
the treaty takes effect in March of next year, there are many problems 
yet to be solved. The treaty is the beginning of a solution. It is 
not the full solution yet. What we need now is the political will 
to increase the mining and also to increase assistance to survivors 
because nothing is actually written in this convention to support 
the victims of land mines. He says the victims and their families 
need not only medical care but food, job training, and financial assistance. 
Around the time of the treaty signing in Ottawa, Canada a year ago, 
the estimated number of land mines in the ground stood at 110 million. 
Since then, many have taken issue with that number saying it is far 
too high. But Mr. Barmullen says the number of land mines is not the 
real issue. I would say the figures that matter today are not so much 
the number of mines that you have in the ground. It's rather the number 
of square miles that you are not using for cultivation, agriculture, 
whatever, because you suspect it to be mined. He also says in countries 
such as Cambodia, there are thousands of unexploded ordinates known 
as UXOs left over from the Vietnam War. He says since 1992, 90,000 
land mines have been removed from Cambodia compared to 450,000 UXOs. 
He says the unexploded weapons may be much more unstable than land 
mines. And Mr. Barmullen says many more people need to be trained 
to remove mines and unexploded ordinates, estimating there are only 
10,000 deminers in the world right now. President Clinton has said 
the United States will sign the land mine treaty in the year 2006 
providing suitable alternatives can be found to replace the weapons. 
The United States cited security concerns in South Korea as one of 
the reasons for not signing the treaty in Ottawa. Joe DeCapoa, VOA 
News, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>