<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981202.0500.1332 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In 1976, just under one half of high school graduates in the United 
States went on to college the next fall. Just over two decades later 
in 1997, 67 percent enrolled in college. This growing number of students 
comes from high schools all over the country where different criteria 
might have been applied in grading them. Sladitza Hoke reports that 
colleges are now relying more and more on standardized test scores 
to be certain that they accept students who will be able to perform 
at the required academic level. Last year, 43 percent of all high 
school graduates in the United States took the scholastic assessment 
test known as SAT-1. The SAT is sponsored by the College Board, the 
New York-based Association of Colleges and High Schools dedicated 
to facilitating the transition from high school to college. College 
boards' Janice Gams says it's a reasoning test. The purpose of taking 
the test, the SAT, is to show how good you are at reasoning mathematically 
and verbally. It's a test of developed reasoning skills. The test 
is not geared to a specific subject, history or anything like that. 
No, it's not. It's just - It's an English course, and it's just verbal 
and mathematical reasoning skills. Janice Gams says every year, about 
two million college bound students from more than 20,000 American 
high schools take the SAT because it's a requirement in most colleges. 
Janice Gams says the test scores give educational institutions a good 
indication of how well a student will succeed at that particular institution. 
Since standardized testing is so important, some schools offer special 
courses to prepare their students, and publishing companies offer 
a variety of books for the same purpose. "Up Your Score, The Underground 
Guide to the SAT" is a typical example. The latest edition of the 
book offers strategies by six students who have achieved the perfect 
score of 1600. One of the six, Adam Jedd, suggests guessing as a good 
strategy in some cases, like when you have to identify the meaning 
of some very obscure words. You just look at the answers and you see 
if any of the words in the different answer choices are related to 
each other. And by doing that, usually you can narrow it down to about 
two answers. Something I figured out is typically, if you can narrow 
it down to two choices in that section, usually the one that's I would 
positively, and the one that's more positive would be the one that's 
correct. Let's say you have one word that means to create and you 
have one word that means to destroy, usually the one that means to 
create would be correct. I don't know why that is but it just seems 
to work out a lot of the time. For many American students, a college 
entrance test such as the SAT is not the first standardized test they 
have ever taken. Janice Gams of the College Board says a growing number 
of students take advanced placement examinations which tests their 
knowledge in specific subjects, such as science, history, languages, 
or music. Students who do well on these exams earn college credits 
for them. Often, standardized testing starts even before high school. 
In many elementary schools, it has become a required part of the spring 
calendar as schools look for ways to measure students' achievement. 
In Washington D.C., the new school superintendent introduced obligatory 
testing last year in order to motivate both students and teachers 
to improve their performance. The District of Columbia adopted one 
of the most widely used standardized tests in the nation: Stanford 
Achievement Tests Ninth Edition, known as Stanford Nine. Sixth grade 
teacher, Sean Murphy, says Stanford Nine is a useful tool for measuring 
students' achievement in math and reading. The way we use it is to 
judge where the children - what their knowledge level is, and then 
we get together and make strategies on how to either extend them if 
they're above or how to raise them if they're below. And it's a good 
diagnostic tool to see what we need to do to individualize each child's 
education. Critics of standardized testing say the pressure on students 
and teachers to achieve high scores has led some schools to emphasize 
practicing for the tests over real learning, and some critics quote 
studies that show boys do better in these tests than girls. But since 
the introduction of Stanford Nine, Washington public school students 
have improved their scores so more people here see benefits in standardized 
testing. Educators say colleges will continue to use standardized 
test scores to help them decide which students to enroll. Elementary 
school teacher Sean Murphy says students who get used to being tested 
every year may have less anxiety about college entrance tests when 
they have to take them. I'm Sladitza Hoke. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>