<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981202.0500.2765 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A promising new therapy combining high tech imaging and lasers may 
enable doctors to destroy cancerous breast tumors without surgery. 
Brian Cislak reports. The technique is called interstitial laser photocoagulation. 
The surgeon uses magnetic resonance imaging, a nonradioactive way 
of looking inside the body to visualize the tumor. He or she then 
inserts a needle into the tumor and threads a thin conduit of glass 
fibers through it. A high energy laser beam travels along the fibers 
toward the tumor, heating it up and vaporizing it. This is all accomplished 
without cutting the patient open. For 15 years, this technique has 
been used to zap tumors of the liver, head, and neck, and prostate. 
It has not been practical for breast lumps until now. The dilemma 
in the breast has been that often we don't know where the tumor lies 
and how it extends. Steven Harms is director of Imaging Research at 
the University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences. So the fact that 
we couldn't see the tumors well with traditional imaging prevented 
us from using this minimal approach to breast cancer or tumor removal. 
That changed with the arrival of new computer software that enhanced 
the contrast and resolution of the magnetic resonance image. This 
allowed surgeons to distinguish tiny cancerous breast tumors from 
normal tissue. At the meeting this week in Chicago with the Radiological 
Society of North America, Dr. Harms and his colleagues described a 
test run of the so-called laser lumpectomy on 15 patients. After the 
laser procedure, the patient underwent standard surgical tissue removal 
to insure that the experimental procedure worked. Biopsies of the 
excised tissue show that the cancerous breast lumps identified by 
MRI and zapped by the laser had been totally destroyed. So we knew 
that that would work and would allow us to take it to the next step 
where we treat with the laser instead of doing a lumpectomy, and we 
believe that that will offer us the potential for having a treatment 
without deformity. Dr. Harms says the procedure is minimally invasive, 
painless, and does not require hospitalization. The patient has an 
18 gauged needle inserted which is about the same size as the needle 
used to draw blood. We use a local anesthetic to put the needle in 
and we see the tumor being destroyed on the MRI screen and adjust 
the laser depending on what we see on the screen. Then when we're 
finished killing the tumor, we pull the needle and the laser, put 
a Band-Aid on the skin, and the patient is free to leave and get back 
in their car and go home. What's more, says Dr. Harms, the laser procedure 
may also benefit patients who would require more radical breast surgery 
than just the removal of a tiny lump. Right now, if you have two breast 
lesions, in different quadrants, that would automatically disqualify 
you from having lumpectomy surgery. But if those are small lesions 
that are accessible with laser lumpectomy, perhaps even some of those 
people who are now being treated with mastectomy could have a laser 
lumpectomy. Dr. Harms stresses that the results of his study are preliminary 
and that more research is needed on larger numbers of patients. But 
the early indications are that laser lumpectomy is a promising alternative 
for women who seek to avoid disfiguring surgery. I'm Brian Cislak. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>