<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981202.0500.2027 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Also making headlines today is a report by a Japanese newspaper stating 
that the United States has warned Tokyo that North Korea may be preparing 
to launch another ballistic missile by the end of the year. Yamyuri 
Shimbun reports U.S. spy satellites have detected North Koreans moving 
missile components from storage to a launch pad. The Japanese officials 
confirm they have received the U.S. intelligence reports. VOA's Les 
Carpenter and Meredith Buell spoke with Steve Herman, who's in Tokyo 
covering the story. It's not secret that U.S. intelligence satellites 
since the August launch of a ballistic missile by North Korea have 
been keeping a very close eye over North Korean territory. And what 
they're watching for are indications that North Korea again might 
be assembling missile components and preparing for a second launch. 
The Japanese government after that first launch was not only angry 
and alarmed that the missile flew over Japan, but that North Korea 
gave Japan no advanced warning, endangering air and maritime traffic 
around Japan. This time around, and I think some of these newspaper 
source leaks of Tokyo are making it clear to the media and also diplomatic 
channels that if North Korea does launch a second missile for whatever 
the purpose, it better notify the Japanese government in advance. 
Steve, is it possible to tell whether the rocket is a ballistic missile 
that could carry a warhead as opposed to one that would carry a satellite? 
Well, most of the experts that I've talked with about this over the 
past couple of months say if a ballistic missile is able to launch 
a satellite, it is also able to carry a warhead. And basically as 
far as a threat is concerned to another country, there's not too much 
difference. Why would Japan feel particularly threatened? I understand 
flying missiles over their island is not exactly what you'd want to 
have happening. But wouldn't any missiles that North Korea would fire 
would really be aimed at South Korea first? Not necessarily, because 
North Korea sees a threat from South Korea, obviously, but also from 
the U.S. military forces. And there are substantial U.S. military 
forces in Japan. In the event of a war between South Korea and North 
Korea, the United States is mandated to come to the aid of South Korea, 
and the aid would come not only from U.S. military forces in South 
Korea but also in Japan. Steve, how concerned is the average person 
in Japan about this? They're quite concerned, Japanese. They usually 
don't get visibly ruffled by too much, but after the previous test 
a couple of years ago, we also had some North Korea missile activity 
where it became clear that they could hit the outskirts of Tokyo. 
And now after this launch in August, it's clear that the North Koreans 
have the capability to launch a missile that could anywhere on Japanese 
territory. People were very concerned and upset. There's a feeling 
that there's really not been such a threat to Japan in the post World 
War II era. Do you expect anymore reaction from the Japanese government 
than what we've had so far? I don't know that they're going to say 
anything publicly. The Japanese government likes to engage in what 
we might call quiet diplomacy. There's this meeting going on starting 
Friday in New York and Washington between the United States and North 
Korea. The Japanese certainly want this particular issue to be raised, 
and I think by the evidence of the story we're seeing in the Japanese 
newspaper today, that's pretty clear evidence that the Japanese are 
giving clear warning to North Korea that "If you do this again, you 
better let us know in advance." That is reporter Steve Herman in Tokyo 
speaking with VOA's Meredith Buell and Les Carpenter. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>