<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981202.1600.3193 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In Zambia, a network of community schools has been developed for children 
who are not able to attend government-run schools because they're 
too old or too poor to pay the school fees. There are more than 150 
of these open community schools in Zambia serving more than 20,000 
of the countries least privileged children between the ages of nine 
and 16. Lisa Shline visited one of the schools in Zambia's capital, 
Lusaka. You're writing nine, one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, 
eight, nine. Again. One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, 
nine. A group of girls listen intently as their teacher leads them 
through their morning mathematics drill. The girls attend St. Francis 
Community School, one of 23 such schools run by an American Catholic 
charity in Lusaka. Agnes Enwicha is assistant supervisor at the school. 
Most of the children like now, you find that they look as if they're 
six years old, but the are all above nine. So the nutritional schedules 
of the children is not good. Like most teachers in community schools, 
Agnes Enwicha is not trained and volunteers her time. She says the 
children are very poor and do not get enough to eat. I think three 
years ago, that's when some donors, they brought us a package of new 
sugar, so used to make something. And still now I giving them. But 
by now, or since last year, we have nothing. So many children just 
come here with nothing. Their stomachs are empty. she's dozing in 
class, very weak. She can't even concentrate to do much work teaching. 
Studies conducted among groups of poor children in the United States 
show their academic performances shot up after a breakfast school 
program was introduced. When questioned about this, Zambian school 
officials say the have no money for such a feeding program. The director 
of the school is Sister Marion, a nun with the sisters of St. Francis 
from the American city of Philadelphia. She came to Zambia in 1992. 
St. Francis is one of 23 community schools run by her order in Lusaka. 
Close to 4,000 pupils attend these schools. Sister Marion says the 
children come from the communities in which the schools are located. 
Their children that are the most formidable and needy. Out of the 
4,000 we give priority to girls, so 60 percent of our students are 
girls and 30 percent are orphans. We give priority to the orphan child. 
So most of these children would be unable to afford the uniforms, 
to afford the shoes, to afford the fees in a government school. The 
school offers a four-year educational program. It operates on a flexible 
basis. Class hours are arranged to suit the children, many of whom 
have to work. The curriculum is based on that of the government schools, 
but Sister Marion says it is more condense so children can complete 
almost seven grades of work in four years. The curriculum, it's called 
Sparks. It was developed by the Ministry of Education with the help 
of UNICEF pushing it forward, and it's relevant education, education 
that the children will need for their lives in their community, in 
their compound. We enroll children between the ages of nine and 16. 
Once they've reached the age of nine, they no longer can go to a government 
school to enter grade one. So their chance for education is lost completely. 
The United Nations predicts the number of orphans in Zambia will reach 
600,000 by the year 2001. One-third of the orphans who go to St. Francis 
lost their parents to AIDS. The school teaches the children reading 
and writing skills. It also teaches them how to protect themselves 
from getting HIV AIDS. Lisa Shline for VOA News, Lusaka. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>