<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981202.0500.2543 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In Washington, a congressional committee conducting an impeachment 
inquiry into President Clinton's activities remains split along party 
lines. Democrats say the inquiry is spinning out of control. As VOA's 
Paula Wolfson reports, their complaints centers on the committee's 
majority Republicans insistence of expanding the probe beyond the 
impeachment report of the independent counsel, Kenneth Starr. Committee 
Republicans want information about the president's campaign fund-raising 
activities. Committee Chairman Henry Hyde says the panel has every 
right to move in a new direction. We're taking a look at this, and 
we're going to take a look and it's justifiable that we take a look. 
The panel wants to know more about a series of confidential Clinton 
administration memos. They were sent to Attorney General Janet Reno 
by FBI Director Louis Freeh and former Justice Department official, 
Charles LaBella. Mr. Hyde said other congressional investigators have 
not been able to gain access to these papers. One distinction between 
the burden committee and our effort here is that the documents we're 
seeking, the LaBella report, the Freeh report, which everybody in 
town knows recommended an independent counsel but has been kept in 
a deep freeze, was never made available to them. The committee issued 
subpoenas to both Mr. Freeh and Mr. LaBella, along with other administration 
officials. Republicans also want evidence related to fund-raising 
gathered by Kenneth Starr during his four-year investigation of the 
president. Democrats called it a desperation move, an attempt to win 
support for a losing case. Massachusetts Congressman Barney Frank 
was blunt. No one thinks that the campaign finance situation is going 
to yield in anything like this time period evidence about the president 
of the United States. The vote on the subpoenas came midway through 
a committee hearing on the topic of perjury. Members heard from legal 
scholars, judges, and former Justice Department officials, all providing 
their views on the ramifications of lying under oath. They also listened 
to the personal stories of two women who gave false testimony and 
paid a price. Psychiatrist Barbara Battalino lied about her relationship 
with a patient in a government hospital. She said anyone who lies 
in a legal proceeding deserves punishment, even the president. Because 
the president is not a king, he or she must abide by the same laws 
as the rest of us. Committee Republicans hope to make perjury the 
core of their case against Bill Clinton. Chairman Hyde says he remains 
convinced the panel can finish its work by the end of the year, but 
Democrats say the expansion of the probe is giving them doubts. House 
Democratic Party leader Richard Gephardt says the process is out of 
control and no one is in charge. Somebody on their side needs to be 
given the responsibility, take the responsibility to drive this train, 
get in the seat of the engineer and drive this train to a certain 
outcome that everybody in the country understands and believes is 
a fair process. Incoming House Speaker Bob Livingston has indicated 
he would like to see the whole matter resolved as quickly as possible, 
but he has denied reports he is putting pressure on Chairman Hyde 
saying the committee needs to see all the evidence before reaching 
a conclusion. Paul Wolfson, VOA News, Capitol Hill. The committee 
hopes to wrap up its probe and vote on one or more articles of impeachment 
later this month. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>