<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981202.1600.0355 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Lebanon's new president, Emil Lahud has appointed veteran politician 
Salim Hoff as the country's new prime minister. The appointment was 
made after outgoing Prime Minister Rafik Hariri refused to stay on 
the job. VOA Middle East correspondent Scott Bob brings us up to date. 
Veteran parliamentarian from Beirut, Salim Hoff, confirmed the announcement 
Wednesday telling reporters he accepted the appointment because Lebanon 
is facing big challenges which need to be confronted. Mr. Hoff said 
his first task will be to choose a new candidate but that his top 
priority is to address the government's high budget deficit which 
is now at 40 percent of expenditures. He said in addition his government 
would continue efforts to end Israel's occupation of part of South 
Lebanon. Mr. Hoff is 68 years old and a longtime member of parliament. 
He served as prime minister on four occasions during Lebanon's civil 
war and most recently in 1990. He has also held a number of ministerial 
portfolios including economy and trade, industry and oil, and information. 
Educated as an accountant, Lebanon's new prime minister holds a master's 
degree from the American University of Beirut and a doctorate in economics 
and business from the University of Indiana in Central United States. 
Mr. Hoff is a respected leader with a reputation for honesty. According 
to the speaker of the Lebanese parliament, Nabif Berri, he received 
the support of 95 of the parliament's 128 members. He also reportedly 
received the backing of Syria, which maintains 30,000 troops in the 
country and exerts considerable influence in Lebanese politics. Mr. 
Hoff's nomination came after several days of political uncertainty, 
which followed the refusal by outgoing Prime Minister Rafik Hariri, 
to stay on in the job. Mr. Hariri, a construction tycoon who led the 
effort to rebuild Lebanon after the civil war was reportedly upset 
that he did not receive unanimous support from the parliament. Mr. 
Hariri was also unhappy over what he felt was undue interference in 
his selection by Lebanon's new President Emil Lahud. President Lahud, 
the former army commander, was inaugurated last week and pledged to 
crack down on corruption and government inefficiency. The prospect 
of a power struggle with Lebanon's forceful new president reportedly 
led Mr. Hariri to decide to leave the government and join the opposition 
in parliament. The political uncertainty unsettled Lebanese markets 
and put pressure on its currency, but these concerns were quickly 
calmed by Wednesday's announcement. Scott Bob, VOA News, Middle East 
bureau. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>