<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981202.0500.1830 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Prompted by slumping world oil prices while continuing a trend of 
mega mergers in major industries this year, two sets have of giant 
oil companies Tuesday announced plans to merge. Europe's Total and 
Petrofina say they'll get together, but they've already been dwarfed 
by the $77 billion merger of America's Exxon and Mobil Corporations. 
However, VOA's Linda Kashden reports the Exxon-Mobil merger will face 
tough scrutiny from government anti-trust regulators as it reassembles 
part of the disbanded Rockefeller Standard Oil Trust of the early 
1900s. Mergers enable companies to cut costs by shedding duplicate 
staff and reducing capital spending. U.S. petroleum industry analyst 
Larry Goldstein estimates Exxon and Mobil will save about $4 billion 
in spending cuts and downsizing that will accompany their merger. 
While low oil prices caused by the Asian crisis and the resulting 
decline in economic activity have intensified the need for cost cutting 
this year, Mr. Goldstein says the oil industry began merging and downsizing 
almost 15 years ago. We have today about 50 percent less workers working 
in an industry that's producing more, refining more, and marketing 
more, and unfortunately for the workers, that trend now is going to 
pick up some steam, and you're going to see enormous economies of 
people over the next three to five years. Their work forces may be 
dwindling, but the company's economic resources are growing. Mr. Goldstein 
says that as production capabilities soar, the merged oil companies 
will have more in common with countries with nationalized petroleum 
businesses like Venezuela and Iran and with other oil companies because 
of merged Exxon-Mobil ranks behind Saudi Arabia but ahead of Kuwait 
in a line of the world's top oil producers. Vincent Farrell, chief 
investment officer for the Wall Street firm Sphere Benzak expects 
to increased business alliances between the companies and countries. 
Mr. Farrell says giants like Exxon-Mobil will be able to offer oil 
producing nations the technology and capital they desperately need. 
The Saudis a month or two ago said they'd welcome western technology 
again for the first time in 25 years. Well, this would be the company 
I'd love to deal with, biggest company in the world. Exxon and Mobil 
makes sense when you figure the economic power they can bring hunting 
for the big elephants. But it's going to be the big elephants that 
they're going to go after, and a lot of the little fields will get 
put aside. About 90 years ago, the U.S. government ordered the break 
up of John D. Rockefeller's Standard Oil Company on the grounds it 
was a monopoly that had the power to force competitors out of the 
market. Oil companies may insist bigger is better in today's oil market, 
but analysts agree U.S. anti-trust regulators will study the Exxon-Mobil 
merger closely before deciding whether or not it violates U.S. anti-trust 
laws. Linda Kashden, VOA News, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>