<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981202.1600.2695 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Despite the odds against it, a nine-year-old boy was killed last week 
by a shark off the coast of Florida. Such attacks are rare. So rare 
that in the last three decades, only 12 people have been killed in 
U.S. waters, the last in 1988. Compare that with the 1500 who died 
after being struck by lightning. While last week's shark attack has 
set off a new wave of fear, Roseanne Skirbel reports the shark is 
more threatened than its sometimes human prey. The shark population 
in the Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico is decreasing by an alarming rate, 
some species by as much as 85 percent over the last two decades. That 
according to a state by state analysis released earlier this year 
by a coalition of U.S. environmental groups. We need to start thinking 
about fish as wildlife as opposed to just seafood or something that 
you might see in the store or on a menu someplace. Mary Camhi of the 
National Audubon Society's Living Oceans Program and lead author of 
the report, "Sharks on the Line." She says one menu item that has 
proven particularly fatal to the shark population is shark fin soup. 
The increasing demand for shark fin has popularized a practice known 
as finning or cutting the fins off live sharks and dumping the wounded 
beasts back into the water. But the most pressing threat to sharks 
is excessive fishing by commercial and recreational anglers. Among 
American coastal states, Florida, New Jersey, and Louisiana account 
for nearly 90 percent of commercial sharks brought to shore. Last 
year, Louisiana, which has no state protection management plan, produced 
270,000 kilograms of shark meat from coastal waters. That came after 
protective measures had been put into effect in federal waters beyond 
the state's jurisdiction. Following the release of the report detailing 
the decline of the shark population, Mary Camhi says a number of states, 
including Louisiana and New Jersey, proposed regulations for their 
shark fisheries that if implemented could improve the situation. But 
she says even more should be done. By doing things like putting in 
size limits on those sharks, reducing the amount of sharks that they 
can take. We also would like them to give special attention to sharks 
that are particularly vulnerable when in trouble. For example, we're 
very concerned about one species, the dusky shark, that has declined 
by as much as 85 percent in the last two decades. And it's a very 
slow growing shark. It takes almost 19 years to reach maturity. And 
because it's so depleted, it's going to take at least three to four 
decades even if we stopped fishing today for these populations to 
recover. While shark in U.S. waters in the Atlantic Ocean and Gulf 
of Mexico are managed by federal and state regulations, no federal 
management in place along the Pacific Coast or in Hawaii. And Mary 
Camhi says the only other countries with comprehensive fishery management 
plans are Australia, New Zealand, and Canada. So essentially, in most 
waters of the world, in federal waters of other countries, as well 
as on the high seas, fishing is a free for all for sharks, and there 
is no management whatsoever. Mary Camhi with the National Audubon 
Society's Living Oceans Program says while the current picture looks 
bleak, there is some encouraging global news. For example, part of 
the IUCN shark specialist group, which is a organization of quite 
a few shark scientists and researchers and economists, et cetera, 
from around the world that are looking at and collating data on the 
status of sharks, and putting this information together into a status 
report that will document the decline and the status of at least a 
hundred species of sharks. Mary Camhi says the Living Oceans Program 
of the National Audubon Society is also producing a global shark action 
plan to give guidance to fishery managers around the world on data 
collection and shark conservation practices. The United Nations Food 
and Agriculture Organization is developing a similar plan for shark 
fishing nations. I'm Roseanne Skirbel. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>