<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981202.0500.2252 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
U.S. Secretary of State Madeleine Albright urged delegates from more 
than 40 countries to untangle the complex and emotional issue of Holocaust 
era art and assets looted by the Nazis during World War II. VOA's 
Kyle King reports on the international conference here in Washington. 
The three-day conference brings together some of the world's most 
renowned experts on Nazi-confiscated art and assets, as well as survivors 
of the Holocaust and government representatives. U.S. Secretary of 
State Madeleine Albright, whose grandparents were killed by the Nazis, 
told the delegates that the conference offered the world a chance 
to correct one of history's great injustices. We know well our inability 
to provide true justice to Holocaust victims. We cannot restore life 
or rewind history, but we can make the ledger slightly less out of 
balance by devoting our time, energy, and resources to the search 
for answers, the return of property, and the payment of just claims. 
Delegates to the conference will examine a host of issues, including 
the question of unpaid insurance claims to some Holocaust victims. 
They will also try to resolve some of the issues surrounding art and 
other property seized by the Nazis and how to compensate the victims. 
Much of the art now hangs in public galleries, and ownership has been 
a difficult, complex, and emotional issue. The chairman of the conference, 
Abner Mikvah, told the delegates it will take creative solutions to 
resolve the ownership questions. One such example of a creative solution 
involved a contested art work that was resolved by one party receiving 
compensation for half the value of the works, while the other party 
donated its half of the work to a museum. The work will be available 
for viewing by the public. That happened in my own city of Chicago. 
But some of the ownership issues will be more difficult, including 
the fate of many works of art now in Russia, where officials view 
them as compensation for Russia's suffering at the hands of the Germans. 
Secretary of State Albright said she hoped the conference would speed 
its work because she noted the survivors of the Holocaust are now 
old and many records are being lost over time. In sometimes emotional 
remarks that recalled her loss of family members in the Holocaust, 
she said it was important for the cause of justice to find a common 
approach to dealing with the issue. Kyle King, VOA News, the State 
Department. Russia has now agreed to support the U.S.-led effort to 
return stolen art works and other assets to victims of the Holocaust. 
Moscow's representatives at the international conference in Washington 
said Russia will help create a global database of art works so survivors 
can find their missing property. But he said Russia will continue 
to distinguish between art seized from Holocaust victims and art taken 
from German museums in the closing days of World War II. Russia considers 
the museum art works as compensation for damage caused by the Nazis. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>