<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981202.1600.1348 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Many novels, movies, and television shows have told the story of the 
Old West in America when a few tough marshals and judges upheld the 
law in a lawless land. One of the legendary figures of frontier justice 
was the man whom actor Paul Newman played in the 1970s movie, "The 
Life and Times of Judge Roy Bean." VOA's Ted Lanfair recently visited 
Roy Bean's Saloon and courtroom in Texas. Crusty old Judge Roy Bean 
was known as the law west of the Pecos, meaning the Pecos River in 
Southwest Texas, which in the 1880s pretty much separated civilization 
from the truly wild West. He was so firm in his rulings that everybody 
called him the hanging judge. The sight of Roy Bean's Saloon plus 
his hold in the opera house he built and a cactus garden out back 
are part of a Texas welcome station on the U.S. side of the Mexican 
border where Ned Billings is in charge. He says outlaws were well 
aware that Judge Bean had a hanging tree out front of his saloon where 
he held court. It played an important part in the Paul Newman movie. 
He did have a hanging tree. He didn't have the authority to hang anyone 
and he did not hang anyone. So that kind of misleads folks just a 
little bit. And of course Roy did die a natural death. So that's another 
let down as far as the movies are concerned. People thought he was 
shot by an outlaw or something. That's correct. I've heard shot, hung, 
a number of things, but of course he was not. He died a natural death. 
Most of the time, Judge Bean dispensed justice while sitting in a 
rocking chair on the front porch. His law library consisted of a single 
volume, an old copy of the statutes of Texas. But as often as not, 
he'd have the book upside down and just pretend to read from it. A 
prisoner who'd been tied to a nearby mesquite tree would be brought 
before him. He'd say a few words, find the defendant guilty, and fine 
him a substantial amount of money. Then Judge Bean would stick the 
money into his pocket and invite everyone, including the defendant 
in for drinks on the house. Who was this character, Roy Bean? He came 
in here and set up a saloon building in 1882, and the Texas rangers 
immediately saw there was a need for some kind of established law, 
and all of their cases were having to be taken to Pecos, Texas who 
in those days was about a two-week round-trip by horseback. So they 
had Judge Roy Bean or Roy Bean at that time, appointed as a J.P. judge 
to take care of their court cases here, and that brought a little 
bit of a semblance of law and order here. Of course, Roy Bean was 
probably not only the only permanent citizen of the town, but probably 
one of those that they considered tough enough to make it stand. Even 
though he was the law West of the Pecos, Roy Bean made a dollar anyway 
he could. Once he staged a world heavyweight boxing match that had 
been banned in Texas. He simply moved it to Mexican territory on a 
sandbar in the middle of the Rio Grande River. He got an audience 
for the prize fight because the railroad had set up a construction 
camp to build a bridge across the Pecos. For awhile, about 3,000 men 
and a few women moved into what is now the town of Langtree and drank 
at Judge Bean's saloon, the Jersey Lily. Now that place and how it 
got its name is quite a story. It and the name of the town came Roy 
Bean's fascination with actress and singer Lily Langtree from Jersey, 
England. He never met her, but he saw photographs of her and read 
articles about her. The old bachelor stayed up late into the night 
writing Lily letters and sometimes she wrote back. Judge Bean had 
a big house built. He called it the Opera House hoping that Lily would 
one day come and visit and sing. She did on a singing tour of Texas 
but it was a year after Judge Roy Bean died. Now remember when Ned 
Billings said Roy Bean was the only permanent resident of Langtree, 
Texas in the 1880s once the railroad construction workers had moved 
on? Well, that town has really grown since then. In Langtree today, 
there are 18 people, and there's Judge Bean's dusty old place and 
that Texas welcome station. Truth is, though, they're all pretty much 
out in the middle of nowhere. I'm Ted Lanfair. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>