<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981202.1600.2154 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
If truth is the first casualty of war, then perhaps children are its 
last and most serious casualty. This is especially true in the conflict 
being fought at the end of the 20th century. Some children are recruited 
as soldiers; others are made homeless or orphaned by fighting. Those 
children who survive combat are often left with emotional scars. Children 
in combat is the topic of today's Dateline. Here's Pamela Taylor. 
Tens of thousands of children have been made homeless or orphaned 
by fighting in the Yugoslav province of Kosovo. In Rwanda, children 
were among the 500,000 victims of the mass killings that occurred 
there in 1994. Those who survived often witnessed the brutal slaying 
of parents and siblings. At a conference in Charlottesville, Virginia 
last month, a group of Nobel Peace Prize winners discussed the effects 
of war on the world's youngest citizens. We have more in this report 
from VOA's Stephanie Mann. Archbishop Desmond Tutu of South Africa, 
who won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1984, was among the speakers at a 
recent conference at the University of Virginia. He says the impact 
of violent conflict on children continues long after the fighting 
ends. Our children who are going to be the adults of tomorrow are 
brutalized. They have lost in many ways a reverence for life, and 
the violence that erupts in this society in part is the consequence 
of children having known nothing better. They have gone through life 
seeing people say the way you resolve a quarrel, a disagreement is 
dispatch your enemy; the best kind of enemy is a dead enemy. Archbishop 
Tutu says with that kind of experience, children of conflict lose 
the compassion and gentleness that ought to be natural to children. 
Another Nobel laureate, Betty Williams of Northern Ireland, has dedicated 
her life to trying to bring peace to places torn by conflict. Ms. 
Williams won the Nobel Prize in 1976. She's traveled the world lecturing 
on peace and helping impoverished communities bring medical care and 
educational opportunities to their children. Last year, Ms. Williams 
founded an organization called World Centers of Compassion for Children, 
which is dedicated to creating safe environments for children in areas 
devastated by war and poverty. After having done 23 years of journeying 
around the world on behalf of children, I've come to one conclusion 
and one conclusion only. The children must be given their own voice, 
because the adults are not doing a very good job of representing them. 
So what we will do at World Centers of Compassion for Children is 
to create a political voice, to create a voice so strong we will have 
to develop courts to deal their issues separately, 'cause the children 
of the world need a marshal plan, a huge, new plan. Betty Williams 
acknowledges many international organizations are already working 
on behalf of children such as UNICEF and Save the Children Foundation. 
But she says such groups compete for funding and do not coordinate 
their activities. Ms. Williams says all the groups working for children 
should come under an umbrella agency so they can do the job better. 
The 1992 Nobel Peace Prize recipient, Regoberto Manchu of Guatemala 
works on behalf of indigenous people. Ms. Manchu says she never really 
had a childhood because she did not go to school and had to work at 
an early age. She saw her younger brother die of malnutrition, and 
later her parents and another brother were killed during Guatemala's 
civil war. During an exchange, Ms. Manchu expressed doubt the kind 
of international effort promoted by Betty Williams can be effective, 
and Ms. Williams responded. I think that in each nation, we have to 
create laws and conditions which will protect the interests of children. 
I don't think that this can be done in a global fashion. I too have 
spent many, many years going from one international conference to 
another, and I find that in those international conferences, people 
do not really know what's going on in different national levels so 
that we really have to go from the national to the global. Regoberto, 
we have to create a model refuge. Until we build the model, and I 
believe all the laureates should be involved in this, to create the 
safe havens and be able to allow the children's voice to be stronger 
than ours, we will see no changes. Several Nobel laureates attending 
the conference called on governments to stop spending money on their 
armies and instead put those funds into the health and education of 
their children. VOA correspondent Stephanie Mann at a conference of 
past Nobel Peace Prize Winners in Charlottesville, Virginia. The United 
Nations considers the problems of children and conflict so serious, 
it has appointed a special representative to deal with the issue. 
Olara Otunu is the U.N. representative for Children and Armed Conflict. 
In his report to the United Nations in early November, Mr. Otunu focused 
on the problem of children all over the world being forced to fight 
in combat. Mr. Otunu talked with Nuro Ahimi of VOA's Dari language 
service, one of Afghanistan's two major languages. I'm trying to mobilize 
as many governments as possible to make the protection of children 
an important aspect of their own concern. I'm also trying to mobilize 
NGOs, and there are now a number of NGOs which have formed international 
coalition to campaign on this issue. And, of course, the media and 
aspects of society. The most important thing right now is for us to 
move from simply invoking the word of the international instruments 
to seriously mobilizing international pressure to lean on those who 
are abusing and brutalizing children and women in situations of conflict. 
That this is a taboo, is unacceptable, unacceptable by international 
standards, but also unacceptable in terms of local value systems within 
each of this society, within Afghanistan, within Sri Lanka, within 
Sierra Leone, within Liberia. These atrocities violate the local values 
about the protection of children and women even in times of conflict. 
In Afghanistan now the biggest business is just war, going to war, 
being part of the war machine of one side or the other side. And this 
may be the biggest employment opportunity and the children take advantage 
of it. We have to tackle this problem at root. Children are recruited 
and abducted into war for many reasons. Sometimes it's forced. Sometimes 
it is political ideology and brainwashing: "Come and fight for the 
mother land. Come and fight for self-determination. It is the enemy 
community," and so on. But sometimes it's the cost of economic and 
social breakdown and poverty. And when they feel that there's no future 
for them, there's no hope, there's no, then they will tend to naturally 
gravitate towards the fighting groups. They provide organization. 
They provide a sense of power. They may provide food and other resources. 
So we've got to tackle all aspects of the factors that lead to the 
recruitment and use of children in war. Plus you know, just very recently, 
the month of August, there were reports about this horrendous massacre 
in Mazai Sharif, as a report indicates that something, probably more 
than 2,000 civilians were killed in the month, the beginning of August 
when the Taliban took over in Mazai Sharif, and that was just horrendous. 
Olara Otunu, the U.N. special representative for Children and Armed 
Conflict speaking with Nuro Ahimi of VOA's Dari service. Children 
in conflict was the topic of today's Dateline. I'm Pamela Taylor. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>