<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981118.1830.0062 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. We'll begin tonight with why tomorrow is so important. 
Sometime tomorrow morning the independent counsel, Ken Starr, will 
pull up a chair in front of the House of Representatives Judiciary 
committee and begin to lay out all the evidence which he believes 
may make president clinton liable to be impeached by the House of 
Representatives. We'll start in Washington with Jackie Judd. Good 
morning. Kenneth Starr spent a final day preparing for what a friend 
called "one of the most important moments in his life" and in the 
life of his four-year-long investigation of the president. Lawyers 
familiar with Starr's testimony say they expect him to take the full 
two hours given him for an opening statement, and to go well beyond 
the Monica Lewinsky matter. He will try to establish that the allegations 
against the president of perjury and obstruction of justice were part 
of a long-standing pattern. To do that, Starr will get into areas 
not included in his report to congress, areas where Starr never found 
enough evidence against the president to charge him. That means bringing 
up long-time Whitewater targets like Webb Hubbell and susan McDougal, 
whom Starr cannot prove has covered up wrongdoing by Mr. clinton. 
A lawyer close to Starr defends the plan, saying the Lewinsky episode 
"Cannot be looked at in a vacuum, it has to be put in historical perspective." 
It also will allow Starr and the republicans to argue the case against 
the president involves more than lying about sex. Those familiar with 
Starr's thinking say he is prepared to defend the credibility of the 
evidence against the president, but they say he will not cross the 
line and be an advocate for impeachment. There are democrats who, 
no doubt, will say Starr crossed that line long ago. Peter? We'll 
cover the hearings tomorrow. ABC's Linda Douglass will also cover 
those hearings and is on Capitol Hill tonight. Just how much of an 
issue will Ken Starr himself be? He will be the issue if democrats 
have their way. Their lawyers have been prepping them with every bit 
of Negative information that has ever been printed about Ken Ken Starr. 
Did he slant his report to make the president look bad? Did he deny 
Monica Lewinsky a lawyer and so on. The republicans though are going 
to be prepared. They're coming in with their own briefing book, which 
is called positive points about Ken Starr. We thought for a long time 
Ken Starr might be the only witness. Tonight the republicans have 
announced there will be four others who will have testimony taken 
behind closed doors. This will be after tomorrow's hearing. Those 
four are presidential aide Bruce Lindsey, Bob Bennett, and a couple 
of figures in the case involving Kathleen Willey, the woman who said 
the president groped her in the oval office. There will probably be 
more witnesses to come. Does everybody on Capitol Hill agree that 
this will be an explosive morning? Everyone does. Each side is trying 
to tamp down expectations for hand-to-hand combat. The democrats are 
talking amongst themselves about that. Yes, we are expecting explosions. 
Linda Douglass on Capitol Hill tonight. it's historic, however, potentially 
explosive. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>