<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981118.1830.1196 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We're going to take "A closer look" at violence tonight, with a particular 
focus on violence against women. The government has released a new 
study on the subject, having interviewed 8,000 women and 8,000 men. 
It found that 18% of women have been raped or the victim of attempted 
rape at some point. It's a sobering look at what too many women face 
in their lifetime. Here's ABC's Aaron brown. The numbers will not 
surprise the thousands of women who are victims of violence, it is 
happening everywhere. There's no pocket of people who are safe and 
can say this is not happening in our community, my people or in my 
economic status. We can't say that anymore. What the survey says we 
can say is that nearly one in five women has been raped or has been 
the victim of an attempted rape in their life. That in the 12 months 
prior to the survey there were 876,000 rapes, that's 2,400 a day, 
only about one in nine was reported to police. And according to the 
survey, more than half the rapes occurred before the woman reached 
18, and were overwhelming committed by someone she knew. It's not 
the boogie man we need to be afraid of. It's not the dirty old man, 
but it's people who are their peers. It's people that they know, people 
their parents probably trust who really are the danger. But the report 
deals with more than rape. It found that more than half of all women, 
and two-thirds of all men have been physically assaulted at some point 
in their lives. If that number seems especially high it is because 
the definition of assault is broad. It included everything from a 
slap at one end to gun violence at the other. By any measure, the 
report shows a nation where violence is frighteningly common and its 
costs, from prison cells for the convicted to social services for 
the victims, is extremely high. Aaron brown, ABC News, New York. there's 
a lot of ground covered in this survey. We talked to Mark rosenburg. 
You described and defined a pretty wide range of violence done to 
women. Why such a wide range, all the way from a slap to a rape? One 
of the problems in asking women about violence that's done to them 
is how you ask the question. It's been found if you start with an 
easier question to answer, have you ever been pushed, have you ever 
been slapped, and then work your way up to more severe forms of attack, 
have you ever been hit with an object, have you ever been beaten up 
or shot at, you can get better answers to the tough questions. It 
turns out most of the assail ants of the women we spoke to are intimate 
partners, they're exspouses or very close friends. Was there anything 
in the report that surprised you? I think what surprised me is the 
yuck age of the victims. Violence against women is a very much a problem 
of violence against our young girls. 54% of all the women who had 
been raped in their lifetime were raped before they were 18 years 
old and 22% were raped before they were 12 years old. This means we're 
failing to protect our children and that our children are being robbed 
of the right to a good life. That was a surprise. Thank you for your 
time. The violence report today. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>