<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981118.1204 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
BELGRADE, Yugoslavia (AP) - Predrag Mijatovic scored in the 64th minute 
to give Yugoslavia a hard-fought 1-0 victory over Ireland in their 
Euro 2000 qualification soccer match Wednesday. Star striker Mijatovic 
profited from a mistake by Steve Staunton, who missed a cross into 
his penalty area and the Yugoslav striker scored on a sliding shot 
into the right corner of the Irish goal from close range. Yugoslavia 
started the match with several swift attacks as free-kick specialist 
from Lazio Rome Sinisa Mihajlovic tested Irish goalkeeper Shay Given 
twice. Real Madrid's Mijatovic failed to connect one of Mihajlovic's 
crosses in the 34th minute from a close distance. But the well-organized 
Irish defense, led by Manchester United's Roy Keane, withstood all 
of the Yugoslav attacks, and their midfield started controlling the 
European Championship qualification game in the second part of the 
first half. The only serious Irish attack in the first half came in 
the 9th minute when Dennis Irwin fired from some 20 meters, but the 
ball went wide. In the 50th minute, an Irish appeal for a penalty 
was turned down by Swedish referee Karl Erik Nilsson when Jason McAteer 
appeared to have been brought down by Yugoslav goalkeeper Ivica Kralj. 
The Yugoslavs switched into a higher gear at the start of the second 
half, and Mijatovic's fierce shot zoomed past Given and his right 
goal post in the 60th minute. The threat of NATO air strikes on Yugoslavia 
over clashes in the province of Kosovo forced UEFA to postpone the 
Oct. 10 game between the two teams in Belgrade. When tensions eased, 
the match was given the go-ahead for Wednesday. The Yugoslavs were 
playing their first qualifying game of the competition, while the 
Irish already have six points from victories over Croatia (2-0) and 
Malta (5-0). Macedonia and Malta complete qualification Group 8. ``It 
was tough, the Irish played well, but we deserved this victory,'' 
said Yugoslav coach Milan Zivadinovic after the match ended at the 
Red Star stadium in front of some 35,000 fans. Lineups: Yugoslavia 
- Ivica Kralj; Jovan Stankovic, Goran Djorovic, Dejan Stankovic, Sinisa 
Mihajlovic, Miroslav Djukic, Slavisa Jokanovic, Vladimir Jugovic (Nenad 
Grozdic, 85th minute), Predrag Mijatovic, Savo Milosevic (Ljubinko 
Drulovic, 76th) Dragan Stojkovic (Darko Kovacevic, 45th.) Ireland 
- Shay Given; Dennis Irwin, Gary Breen, Kenny Cunningham, Steve Staunton, 
Jason McAteer (Keith O'Neill 80th,) Roy Keane, Mark Kinsella, Alan 
McLoughlin (David Connolly, 72nd), Damien Duff, Niall Quinn (Tony 
Cascarino, 72nd). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>