<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981118.1206 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Germany rallied in the second half-time to salvage a 1-1 draw against 
the Netherlands in an exhibition match Wednesday. Olaf Marschall scored 
for Germany in the 52nd minute after Michael Reiziger had given the 
Dutch a well-deserved lead in the 22nd. While the Netherlands, a semifinalist 
at the World Cup, dominated the fast-moving first half, Germany raised 
its game in the second half that had slowed to a typical exhibition-game 
pace. For both teams, it was a test in their buildup for the 2000 
European Championship. Germany, the reigning champion, has to qualify, 
while the Netherlands has an automatic berth as co-host with Belgium. 
German coach Erich Ribbeck, like his Dutch colleague Frank Rijkaard 
in his third match since taking the job, recalled 37-year-old veteran 
Lothar Matthaeus to the post of libero. Matthaeus raised his German 
record of national team appearances to 130, having made his debut 
in 1980, also against the Dutch. While Ribbeck relied on his veterans, 
Rijkaard was forced to bring in two rookies, defender Marc van Hintum 
of Vitesse Arnheim and striker Ruud van Nistelrooy of PSV Eindhoven. 
The Dutch were without four injured stars _ striker Dennis Bergkamp 
of Arsenal, Juventus midfielder Edgar Davids, Inter Milan midfielder 
Aron Winter and midfielder Ronald de Boer of Ajax Amsterdam. Both 
teams had three players in the starting lineups who were not at the 
World Cup. The Dutch tested German goalkeeper Oliver Kahn in the seventh 
minute when Marc Overmars sent a long-range, low shot but Kahn dove 
to his right side to palm the ball away. With the Dutch dominating 
the match, van Nistelrooy failed to beat Kahn after intercepting a 
disastrous back pass by Andreas Moeller. But in the 22nd, Reizinger 
strolled through the midfield and when no German challenged him, the 
Barcelona defender fired from 25 meters (yards). Kahn got his hands 
on the spinning ball but could not hold it and it bounced into the 
net. The Germans began regrouping late in the first half and Marschall 
came close with a header in the 40th. The Dutch replied immediately 
but Patrick Kluivert and Overmars wasted point-blank opportunities. 
The Germans began the second half with more resolve and Marschall 
got the equalizer when he latched onto a long, looping pass from Matthaeus 
that split the Dutch defense and slotted the ball under Edwin van 
der Sar. In the closing minutes, Kahn foiled Michael Mols from close 
range with a reflex save. Fearing fan violence, authorities stepped 
up security for the match between two bitter neighboring rivals but 
police reported no incidents before the game. Seven German hooligans, 
all known to police, were detained at the railway station and eight 
more in nearby Dortmund, while seven Dutchmen were turned away at 
the border. Organizers withdrew 7,000 tickets still available for 
the match at the urging of the police, to avoid rival fans mixing 
together on the stands. That left 45,000 fans watching the match in 
nearly freezing weather at the Parkstadion. Lineups: Germany: Oliver 
Kahn; Lothar Matthaeus (Carsten Ramelow, 70), Jens Nowotny (Marko 
Rehmer, 46), Christian Woerns; Thomas Strunz (Dietmar Hamann, 86), 
Jens Jeremies, Joerg Heinrich, Mario Basler (Alexander Zickler, 72), 
Andreas Moeller; Oliver Bierhoff, Ulf Kirsten (Olaf Marschall, 21). 
Netherlands: Edwin van der Sar; Michael Reiziger (Kees van Wonderen, 
67), Jaap Stam, Frank de Boer, Marc van Hintum; Jeffrey Talan (Dries 
Boussatta, 73), Clarence Seedorf, Philip Cocu, Marc Overmars (Peter 
van Vossen, 81); Ruud van Nistelrooy, Patrick Kluivert (Michael Mols, 
46). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>