<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981118.0262 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Israeli and Palestinian officials geared up Wednesday to relaunch 
long-suspended talks about a final peace treaty, even as snags threatened 
the implementation of an interim accord signed just last month. Wednesday's 
meeting was an indication that the peace process was moving once again 
after a series of disputes. But those disputes did not stop: The latest 
arose over the first group of Palestinian prisoners that Israel was 
to release. Palestinians complained that 150 of the 250 to be set 
free were ordinary criminals and not political prisoners as promised. 
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's bitterly divided Cabinet has scheduled 
a meeting Thursday to examine Palestinian steps under last month's 
Wye accord. A go-ahead from the Cabinet will set in motion an Israeli 
troop withdrawal from parts of the West Bank, probably on Friday. 
By a wide margin, Israel's 120-member Knesset endorsed the accord 
Tuesday, negotiated in a marathon summit at Wye Plantation in the 
U.S. state of Maryland and signed at the White House Oct. 23. The 
dovish opposition Labor Party provided the margin of approval in the 
75 to 19 vote with nine abstentions. Most of the ``no'' votes came 
from Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's own coalition. Five members 
of his Cabinet voted against the accord and others were absent. Right-wingers 
charged that the troop withdrawal endangers Jewish settlers in the 
West Bank. They also complained that the government did not present 
detailed maps of areas to be handed over to the Palestinians. Israeli 
Foreign Minister Ariel Sharon was to meet at the Foreign Ministry 
in Jerusalem later Wednesday with Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat's 
deputy, Mahmoud Abbas, to discuss a permanent peace treaty between 
the two sides. It will be the first official meeting about a final 
status agreement since the ceremonial opening in May 5, 1996. Abbas 
told the Voice of Palestine radio that his meeting with Sharon will 
focus on the agenda for full-scale talks on a permanent settlement, 
which he expected to begin in a week to 10 days. The interim framework, 
including the Wye accord, is set to expire on May 4, 1999. ``At the 
end of final status talks, we see the creation of a Palestinian state 
with Jerusalem as the capital because final status negotiations are 
about borders and refugees, Jerusalem and settlements,'' Abbas said. 
Palestinian threats to unilaterally declare an independent state, 
coupled with a reference to armed conflict by Arafat, led to a mini-crisis 
Monday. Netanyahu suspended Israel's withdrawal until Arafat retracted 
the statement. At a news conference Tuesday, Arafat reiterated his 
commitment to negotiations as the only way to settle disputes with 
Israel. The Israelis accepted this as a retraction and lifted their 
suspension threat. According to the Wye agreement, the first Israeli 
pullback involves giving the Palestinians civilian rule over two percent 
of West Bank land now under full Israeli control. Also, an area amounting 
to 7.1 percent of the West Bank is to be transferred from joint Israeli-Palestinian 
control to full Palestinian rule. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>