<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981118.0567 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the aftermath of the scandal-plagued Tour de France, French lawmakers 
are expected Wednesday to pass one of the world's toughest anti-doping 
laws. The legislation would create a powerful doping prevention committee, 
order federations to show that they are acting to stamp out the use 
of illegal drugs, and punish individuals found prescribing, supplying, 
facilitating or encouraging the use of such substances. Three legal 
experts, three medical or scientific representatives and three sports 
officials would make up the nine-member committee. It would have the 
power to impose specific penalties, and stiffen sanctions where it 
believes that sports federations have failed to crack down on doping. 
The credibility of the system rests not only on its ability to test 
individual athletes, but also to control federations that are too 
lax, said Jean-Claude Nery, an official at the Culture Ministry. Under 
the bill, adopted by the French Senate in May and expected to be passed 
by the National Assembly on Wednesday, the Ministry of Sports will 
have the right to carry out raids on premises and order athletes to 
undergo medical examinations. Sports federations must also discipline 
offenders and make an official report on infractions within five months 
of an offense. Furthermore, the government will only issue sports 
licenses to authorities that have a certificate showing that they 
are combating doping. Sports Minister Marie-George Buffet, who has 
made the fight against doping her central policy since coming into 
office in June 1997, admits that clamping down on doping will be a 
long, hard struggle. ``It will need a battle from day to day to reverse 
the flow,'' Buffet said before presenting the bill. ``We cannot believe 
that once the law has been passed and applied, we have dealt with 
the problem,'' she said. Buffet also said that she would give details 
of the law to the next meeting of the International Olympic Committee 
(IOC) in an attempt to promote a more coherent international anti-doping 
policy. The doping controversies at the Tour de France, during which 
the Festina team was expelled for admitting to the use of the performance-enhancing 
drug erythropoietin (EPO), gave new impetus to the fight against banned 
drugs in France. But other sports have also been hit by drug scandals. 
In 1997, former soccer internationals Cyrille Pouget and Vincent Guerin, 
as well as Antoine Sibierski and Dominique Arribage, were suspended 
after testing positive for the banned anabolic steroid nandrolone. 
Stephane Paille, who plays for Scottish team Heart of Midlothian, 
was suspended after testing positive for amphetamines. And French 
international goalkeeper Bernard Lama was suspended from his club 
Paris-Saint Germain after testing positive for cannabis. (parf-ae-sp) 
File Stored As: PSK0117 sfpatto 470 11-18 15:20 rs BC-Sports-France-Doping 
Law France s 
</TEXT>
</DOC>