<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981118.0888 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Signaling that the Mideast peace accord was moving forward, Israel 
and the Palestinians resumed long-suspended talks on a lasting peace 
treaty Wednesday and agreed to formally reopen those negotiations 
with a ceremony next week. Palestinian official Mahmoud Abbas, who 
met with his counterpart Israeli Foreign Minister Ariel Sharon, said 
that Israel would carry out the first stage of a long-overdue West 
Bank troop withdrawal Friday and release 250 Palestinian prisoners. 
``Palestinian and Israeli security officials will meet Thursday to 
discuss the maps and preparations for the redeployment,'' Abbas told 
The Associated Press. They will also complete paper-work for the opening 
of the Palestinian airport. According to the Wye River peace agreement 
signed by the two sides in Washington last month, Israel is to withdraw 
from 13 percent of the West Bank in three stages in exchange for Palestinian 
security and anti-terror measures. In final status talks, Sharon and 
Abbas, also known as Abu Mazen, will tackle the most explosive issues 
of the Israeli-Arab conflict including permanent borders, refugees, 
water, Jewish settlements and the status of Jerusalem, claimed by 
both sides. ``We are starting today to negotiate the permanent agreement,'' 
Sharon told reporters at the start of the meeting. ``I think that 
we have to look to the future. Looking to the past will not help us.'' 
Alone except for a translator, the two men sat across from each other 
in the second-floor of the barracks-like buildings in Israel's Foreign 
Ministry complex. Afterwards, Abu Mazen told the AP they discussed 
on-going work between negotiating committees on the economy, a Palestinian 
seaport and future Israeli withdrawals. ``Within a week there will 
be an opening ceremony for the resumption of the final status talks, 
it will be in the Palestinian autonomous areas,'' Abu Mazen said. 
The Palestinians were also preparing to issue Wednesday a list of 
rules and regulations regarding weapons. Israel insisted as part of 
the peace agreement that Palestinian forces disarm militants and others 
carrying illegal weapons in territory under their control. Prime Minister 
Benjamin Netanyahu's bitterly divided Cabinet is to convene Thursday 
to review Palestinian progress in the accord before giving the final 
go ahead for the first withdrawal from 2 percent of land in the northern 
West Bank. The Cabinet was also expected to discuss a dispute over 
the prisoner release. Palestinian officials complained that 150 of 
the 250 prisoners to be freed were ordinary criminals and not political 
prisoners as promised. Also causing friction was an on-going effort 
by Jewish settlers to take-over more West Bank land. Israeli soldiers 
chased settlers off a rocky hilltop near the Jewish settlement of 
Kedumim on Wednesday. About 30 settlers camped on the site Tuesday, 
declaring that they were establishing a new community there. ``We 
are trying to keep the land from being given to the enemy,'' said 
Shoshi Nor, one of the Kedumim settlers, after coming down from the 
hill they occupied. Eleven settlers were detained for questioning, 
according to Israeli police. Israel's government has also angered 
Palestinians by confiscating Arab-owned land to build access roads 
to settlements that would be surrounded by Palestinian-controlled 
territory after the Israeli withdrawals. ``This is an obvious violation 
of the agreement,'' said Ahmed Tibi, a senior adviser to Palestinian 
leader Yasser Arafat. The Sharon-Abbas meeting is the first official 
session over a final status agreement since the ceremonial opening 
in May 5, 1996 and is slated to be completed by the end of the interim 
framework, including the Wye accord, on May 4, 1999. Earlier, Abbas 
told the Voice of Palestine radio, ``At the end of final status talks, 
we see the creation of a Palestinian state with Jerusalem as the capital.'' 
Palestinian threats to unilaterally declare an independent state, 
coupled with a reference of armed conflict by Arafat, led to a mini-crisis 
Monday when Netanyahu placed the withdrawal on a one-day suspension 
until Arafat retracted the statement. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>