<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981118.0266 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the biggest anti-government turnout since deadly clashes with the 
military last week, about 4,000 student protesters marched through 
the capital's streets and laid flowers outside the gates of the heavily 
guarded Parliament Wednesday. Two peaceful protests were held in downtown 
Jakarta after legislators inside started work on enacting political 
reforms that the students view as falling short of true democratic 
reform. Meanwhile, police with sticks beat student activists who forced 
their way into the governor's office in Surabaya, Indonesia's second-largest 
city. Radio reports said several students were injured. Hundreds of 
protesters demanding democratic reform also tore down the gates of 
the local Parliament in Surabaya. In Jakarta, rush-hour traffic was 
brought to a standstill when about 2,500 students marched peacefully 
past hotels and office buildings. They were blocked by about 100 army 
anti-riot officers from proceeding to the National Monument near the 
presidential palace. To avoid a confrontation, the group headed toward 
Atama Jaya University, where soldiers and police had opened fire on 
protesters last Friday. A separate group of about 1,500 demonstrators, 
riding in and atop 15 buses, was blocked by soldiers. They were later 
allowed to gather outside the Parliament building under a military 
escort. Earlier, in a speech that opened a new session of the legislature, 
Speaker Harmoko warned that any delay to the reform process could 
``trigger new problems'' in the sprawling Southeast Asian nation, 
already beset by political and economic turmoil. He said parliamentary 
elections in May or early June 1999 would be ``based on honesty and 
justice, and would be direct, open to all, free and secret.'' Sixteen 
people, including eight students, were killed last week. Security 
forces fired plastic bullets at protesters who tried to march on Parliament. 
Other people, including some police, died when rioting broke out in 
parts of Jakarta. Hundreds were injured. City authorities said 123 
buildings and 97 cars were damaged or set afire, the newspaper The 
Jakarta Post reported. Military commander Gen. Wiranto took out advertisements 
in several national newspapers expressing his ``sincere condolences'' 
for last week's deaths. Opposition and students have demanded that 
Wiranto resign as armed forces chief and defense minister in the wake 
of the shootings. ``We hope that their souls are accepted at God's 
side and for all the families that they left behind, may God give 
them patience and strengthen their souls to face this hardest of situations,'' 
the advertisement said. Friday's was the worst violence since riots 
killed 1,200 people in May, forcing then autocratic President Suharto 
to quit after 32 years in power. ``For those who died outside the 
Parliament we deliver our condolences and hope that the deaths will 
prove to be meaningful in the long term,'' Harmoko said. Police have 
questioned more than a dozen opposition figures, including two retired 
generals, in a sedition inquiry. Suharto's successor and one-time 
protege, President B.J. Habibie, has alleged that the student protests 
were orchestrated by conspirators wanting to topple his 6-month-old 
government. The Jakarta Post quoted police as saying those questioned 
were suspected of subversion, which carries a maximum penalty of lifetime 
imprisonment. Five were summoned to police headquarters Wednesday. 
The roundup is the first major crackdown on dissidents since Habibie 
took office. ``The accusations are a mere fabrication,'' said Lt. 
Gen. Kemal Idris, a retired army general, before he entered the National 
Police headquarters. Last week's bloodshed erupted after tens of thousands 
of students tried to march on the green-domed legislature where the 
1,000-member People's Consultative Assembly approved a range of political 
reforms sponsored by Habibie. These reforms will now be enacted by 
the 500-member Parliament, which makes up half of the assembly but 
is now sitting in its own right. Although the reforms call for new 
elections and go some way in dismantling Suharto's authoritarian legacy, 
the students and other critics say that they don't go far enough. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>