<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981118.0590 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Undeterred by cloudy skies and disappointing results the previous 
night, visitors and residents of this northern city headed up mountains 
Wednesday evening hoping for the best view of a once-in-a-generation 
spectacle of shooting stars. Throughout Asia, the hoped-for Leonids 
meteor storm Tuesday night turned out to be a minor shower, with more 
fizzle than sizzle for people who stayed up in many cases until the 
break of dawn. Wednesday night promised the third and final chance 
to observe a grand show, although minor meteors showers should continue 
for several more days. Hong Kong police also were bracing for another 
batch of hopeful star gazers, but cloudy weather was threatening to 
dash their hopes. They estimated some 30,000 people had fled the city 
lights and headed to the south side of Hong Kong island Tuesday night 
to try for a glimpse of the meteor shower. Traffic jams clogged roads 
leading to viewing points and police were forced to close some roads, 
but cloudy skies blocked views of the shower of cosmic dust. Insufficient 
public transportation left many with no choice but to walk home early 
Wednesday, Hong Kong media reported. In Thailand, the numbers of sky 
watchers Wednesday appeared to be much reduced from Tuesday, which 
experts had touted as the best day for observation. The showers are 
caused by the earth's passage through the long tail of the Comet Tempel-Tuttle. 
It is called the Leonid shower because the meteors appear to come 
from the direction of the constellation Leo. Though the Leonids occur 
every November, they are usually not particularly spectacular. But 
every 33 years, the comet speeds through the inner solar system and 
sheds swarms of particles as it nears the sun. Some 20,000 people 
Tuesday night visited the national park at Doi Inthanon, Thailand's 
highest mountain near Chiang Mai, but few shooting stars could be 
observed, and clouds obscured half the sky much of the night. Only 
300 had come to the park by early Wednesday night, and the weather 
prospects again appeared poor. ``I don't want to call it a disappointment,'' 
said Malee Arunpairog, 66, a mother of three on vacation with a friend. 
``This was an opportunity to get together with eight other friends. 
It's nature and there's nobody to blame. I'm just glad it didn't rain 
on us.'' In Singapore, 35,000 people lent a party atmosphere to the 
meteor show as they crowded on to the equatorial city-state's resort 
island in the early hours of Wednesday. Although only a handful of 
shooting stars were sighted, and the view was mostly obscured by cloud 
cover and light pollution. Vietnamese scientists at Hanoi's Dich Vong 
astronomical observatory post could see a few of the Leonids for 15 
minutes shortly after midnight Tuesday, the Afternoon News reported. 
Hazy skies in the east largely prevented Vietnamese spectators from 
seeing the meteor shower, the paper said. In Tokyo and many other 
Japanese cities, public offices and private businesses heeded a government 
plea to dim their lights to enhance viewing of the storm. ``It's wonderful,'' 
said Toshiaki Kogai, one of hundreds of Japanese who watched the storm 
from a park just south of Tokyo. ``I never imagined it would be like 
this.'' In Kanagawa prefecture (state) near Tokyo, a 19-year-old trade 
school student died when she fell off the handrail of a bridge to 
the concrete below while trying to see the cascading stars with her 
friends, police said. Four other people died in traffic accidents 
on the way to or from star-gazing throughout Japan, and another person 
died in an accident caused by a driver distracted by the stars, Kyodo 
News agency said. A 21-year-old woman was reported slightly injured 
when she fell into a smokestack from a dormitory roof in Tokyo, Kyodo 
said. Tokyo police received more than 100 calls complaining about 
noise made by the gazers and about their illegally parked cars, it 
said. Police would not comment on the reports. Though the night remained 
bright in the capital area, meteors could be seen every two or three 
minutes at the height of the shower. In the United States, the best 
seats were wherever the sky was darkest and clearest. The crowds that 
gathered at sites in the Mojave Desert in California early Tuesday 
were enthusiastic. Sandra Macika, 36, of San Jose saw about 30 meteors. 
``I could see in front of me big streaks of light falling on the highway,'' 
she said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>