<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981118.2130.0160 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
House republicans have voted on their choices for key leadership posts 
in the next Congress. Today, they nominated Louisiana congressman 
Bob Livingston, who was unopposed, to be their candidate for house 
speaker. He will run against the democrats' candidate, minority leader 
Dick gephardt, in a full house election in January. House majority 
leader Dick Armey and house majority whip Tom DeLay both were re-elected 
to their posts. Bob Franken has more. There's a new leadership team 
for house republicans in part because of GOP handling of the impeachment 
issue. We muffed our message a little bit in the last elections. The 
American people held us accountable. The incoming speaker has made 
it clear he does not want the matter hanging over his head when he 
takes over in January and most GOP strategists have pointed advice 
on how to make sure republicans don't repeat their mistake. It's critical 
for republicans to move on to issues that the public is more concerned 
about -- taxes, education, the budget and to move away from lewinsky. 
Do it fast. Get it over with. But republicans on the Judiciary committee 
are not ready to get it over with not yet. I don't believe we should 
write the conclusion before we have our first day of hearings. At 
the moment, it appears the committee will vote for articles of impeachment 
before year's end probably along party lines. Though some of the house 
members who supported the Judiciary committee inquiry are dead set 
against actual impeachment of the president. This is just out of the 
box and we don't know how to get it back in the box. It just totally 
derailed us last year. We basically had not a government shutdown, 
but a legislative shutdown. And in the minds of some republicans, 
as well as democrats, a Vote by the full house could be an embarrassing 
act of futility. I can see a circumstance where the articles of impeachment 
come out of committee and the Congress clearly doesn't have the votes, 
that it would be unfair to cram this down the throat of the American 
people and take a vote that just really doesn't go anywhere. So the 
decision to put impeachment to a full house vote is not altogether 
certain a decision that could turn out to be the final act of the 
Gingrich-as-speaker era. However, there's still a lot of talk about 
some sort of sanction, a milder alternative to impeachment. The difference 
is, it's no longer the democrats promoting that, it's the republicans. 
Bob Franken, CNN, Capitol Hill. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>