<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981118.2100.1557 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It was known as the midwest. Tonight we've learned it's now the high-performance 
heart land. We're joined by two of its republican governors, Tommy 
Thompson and John engler. Governor Engler, do you feel you should 
have a little bit more of a say in the national party? Didn't used 
to be that way. But the way you put it, it's an inescapable truth 
that the republican parties and governors are a success story. What 
was that? I think you're asking for -- that horn went off -- there 
might be two more blasts. A ship's getting ready to leave the dock 
here. I think the republican governor influence is going to be strong. 
I think it eeling be strong in the 2000 campaign for the presidency. 
I think the model for America, a republican model, more limited government, 
and decisions closer to home where the family can participate in the 
local community at the state level is something we've really worked 
on. And I think that can be communicated. I think that's a view sort 
of properly aligns what the founding fathers of this country sought 
to have. We ought to have a strong Congress that comes to our defense 
in international issues, but many of the domestic items ought to be 
left to the state and local communities. Washington can help, but 
not the kind of help Bill Clinton is offering, trying to federalize 
school funding. I think we're very important to the debate and we'll 
be very important in the 106th Congress with speaker Livingston and 
majority leader a lot more to tell you about. Tommy Thompson, would 
you be happy if the G.O.P. ticket was George W. bush and, say, Tom 
rich of Pennsylvania? I'd be happy with any of those individuals because 
I really want a Republican governor on thic et -- ticket because it's 
so important. The future and visionaries come from republican governors, 
and they deserve to be the title bearers of our party. I also would 
like to echo what John said. We have reached an agreement with the 
congressional leadership, Bob livingston and Trent Lott today, Brian, 
and we're going to sit down on a Quarterly basis, starting on December 
4, and every quarter thereafter, setting policy, getting together 
with Congress, their leadership, the committee chairman, and republican 
governors. I think you're going to see a much better united front 
in the future. Gentlemen, thank you very much. I realize you were 
able to join us because there's so little to do in New Orleans in 
the evening. Tommy Thompson and -- thanks a lot. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>