<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981118.2100.0239 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We already kw tonight some of what independent counsel Ken Starr is 
prepared to say under oath before the committee behind us on the hill 
tomorrow morning. Joining us with that tonight, NBC news correspondent 
Lisa Myers, who has covered this story closely from the beginning 
of the investigation. Lisa is across town in our bureau. Lisa, first 
of all, how is it that we know this? I've already seen a faxed copy 
of his opening statement tonight. And, second, what is the headline? 
Well, the statement managed to be released almost the moment it was 
faxed to the hill, and the headline is basically that most of it does 
have to do with Lewinsky, but there is some news here. Starr reveals 
for the first time this he came close to sending the house charges 
against the President a year ago. That would have touched off impeachment 
proceedings even before Monica lewinsky. Now, the charge they had 
actually written the report claimed Clinton has perjured himself in 
the whiwater investigation. Ument matly Starr decided the evidence 
wasn't strong enough. What Starr does also is lay out a tightly focused 
lawyerly argument of how he views the allegations against the president, 
emphasizing this is not about personal, private, sexual behavior as 
the White House has tried to cast it. For example, in his statement, 
Starr says, "the evidence -- Now, trying to refute the charge that 
he's a sex-crazed out of control prosecutor, Starr also defends his 
investigation and the resulting X rated referral he sent to Congress. 
He says -- Now, Starr goes on to list about 10 ways he says Clinton 
misused his governmental authority and resources, like using his government 
secretary and U.N. ambassador in support of the relationship with 
Lewinsky. He went on to talk about what he called premed dated and 
deliberate acts of perjury. So, that is really the -- Starr's testimony 
in a snapshot. And, Lisa, you mentioned tangentially Whitewater. How 
much by percentage of what you've seen so far tonight goes beyond 
the immediate matter of Lewinsky? About a third of the statement is 
really an overview of the other investigations. For example, he clears 
White House senior aides of any knowledge of misuse of the F.B.I. 
files and said there was no evidence that any of the information itself 
was misused. He does talk, however, about a -- in that he says that 
the, quote, pattern of -- He says, essentially, the president tried 
to thwart other investigations, but he did not accuse him of any criminal 
misconduct in those matters. Lisa, we'll be relying on you during 
coverage tomorrow. Thanks for joining us. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>