<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981118.2100.0059 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
And good Wednesday evening to you. From Capitol Hill, where the time 
until the gavel falls on the formal impeachment proceeding against 
this president can now been measured in hours. The nation's capitol 
is a busy place tonight. There are new people and new positions, both 
sides positioning themselves for tomorrow, where first thing in the 
morning, the independent prosecutor who has gathered volumes of testimony 
under oath will be sworn in and submit to questioning from a house 
committee. And from the White House, though briefly. There are early 
indications tonight that Ken Starr will be passionate on several points, 
chiefly that the president misused his office and lied under oath, 
violating the oath of office, in order to defend himself against charges 
he knew to be true. If president is on the other side of the globe 
tonight as Washington prepares now for the hearings that will consume 
this city and will be seen live by millions on television across the 
country and around the world. Before we get a preview of what know 
is in the Starr statement prepared for delivery in the morning, we 
want to get the latest tonight from the White House. Here's NBC's 
David Bloom. Inside the same committee room where articles of impeachment 
were voted against Richard Nixon 24 years ago, preparations today 
for the Clinton impeachment hearings. The chairs are ready. Only the 
players and the drama await. Tonight republicans said they'll take 
sworn testimony from and could call as witnesses the president's attorney, 
Bob Bennett, deputy White House counsel, Bruce Lindsey, and two people 
tied to Kathleen Willey, Nathan landau, a democratic donor under investigation 
by Starr for allegedly trying to intimidate Willey, and her former 
lawyer, Daniel Gecker. The sources say independent counsel Kenneth 
Starr will focus his two-hour opening statement mostly on the Lewinsky 
case, but he'll also claim the White House obstructed the investigation, 
just as it this warted his four-year probe into the crin on the's 
Whitewater land deal. Henry Hyde made clear today he has no plans 
to rein in Starr. The democrats want to stick to Monica Lewinsky. 
We want to look at everything. That's the big difference. In a letter 
to the White House, Hyde also warned the president's lawyers that 
during the 30 minutes Clinton attorney David Kendall will have to 
cross-examine Starr, "you will not be permitted to inquire into the 
conduct of Starr's investigation. " that drew the White House's ire. 
It's very unfair for the committee to say that they can go and talk 
about any subject they want and go off on a fishing expedition while 
they tell the White House counsel that there's areas that we're not 
allowed to raise. For his part, the president is about as far away 
from these hearings as possible, flying tonight to Tokyo, Japan. Republicans 
accuse the president of stalling, pointing out he's so far refused 
to answer 81 questions put to him by Henry Hyde almost two weeks ago. 
David Bloom, NBC news, the White House. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>