<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981118.2100.0657 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With us tonight with a preview of tomorrow, two members of the house 
judiciary committee, republican congressman Bill McCollum of the state 
of florida, democratic congressman Marty meehan of the commonwealth 
of massachusetts. Both gentlemen with us in Washington tonight. Congressman 
McCollum I'd like to begin with you with a Devil's advocate question. 
We're only going to do this once, let's hope. We're only going to 
have Ken Starr testify for one batch of this. Why limit the White 
House to 30 minutes? Why not, as long as you're going to do this once, 
send everybody away satisfied they've had a fair shot? Well, first 
of all, it isn't a trial, so we're not talking about the same type 
of context. We're talking about a hearing and counsel having 30 minutes 
each so that actually the democrats get more time than the republicans 
do. And then we all individually as members, democrats, republicans, 
get five minutes of questioning time. The question isn't does the 
White House deserve to get more? It's how much is fair in the context 
of a hearing and realizing this is a Discovery process and trying 
to establish prima facie evidence to go forwd. I think it's appropriate 
it be done in this fashion. Congressman meehan, the Devil's advocate 
question would be the opposite. Why did the democrats deserve any 
say in this or more than 30 minutes with ken Starr Because kentarr 
has had this investigation ongoing now for 4 1/2 years. All the testimony 
before the grand jury has never been cross-examined. It's incredible 
that we have 445 pages of evidence in the official referral from the 
independent counsel. None of the witnesses have ever been cross-examined. 
As a former prosecutor, I can tell you I have two, 2 1/2 days worth 
of questions to try to flush out the truth in cross-examination. It 
can't be done in a half-hour or 30 minutes. You sure you want to as 
a democrat start going down that road? If you do it for 2 1/2 days 
with Ken Starr, there's a whole lot of people in that mountain of 
evidence I'm saying if there were going to be a legitimate cross-examination, 
it would take longer. I agree with Bill McCollum on one point. He 
said this certainly wasn't a trial. It doesn't resemble anything I've 
ever seen in a trial or judicial proceeding in this country. It's 
not supposed to be a trial or judicial proceeding. It sure isn't. 
The impeachment process and the hearings of it are to define probable 
cause to decide if the house is going to send it to the Senate for 
trial. It's not a beyond a reasonable doubt whether or not a crime 
was committed. We're going to see a lot of contest tomorrow trying 
to attack Ken Starr. Any prosecutor in America knows that a grand 
jury could indict a ham sandwich. If Bill McCollum says this is a 
grand jury proceeding, we're going to move it over to the Senate, 
the country better get ready for a long process. Three times in the 
history of our cotry have we had impeachment hearings. There is no 
way this impeachment hearing has been fair. I read off the Internet, 
off the wire, who the witnesses are. They're deciding at the last 
minute. You're trying to get -- we're trying to get the president 
to answer 81 questions. He hasn't. We're determined to resolve this 
matter and get it done by the middle of december, as we had hoped 
to do, before Christmas. We're doing our best. We need cooperation 
from the democrats and the White House to do it. The vehicle of Ken 
Starr is primarily designed to lay out the facts in front of us. What's 
the argument? Questions on materiality, your side has raised, who 
better to explain how his rationale came into being than the man who 
authored the charges? There's nothing he can tell us. Congressman 
McCollum, how when you hand it to the Senate, how are you going to 
deal with the issue of, well, how do we know pages 1 through 3,000 
contain information that's verifiable? Don't you -- won't you, by 
definition, hand over an incomplete case here? I don't think if we 
do it we will at all. What we're trying to ferret out, and we have 
volumes of material here, people forget -- we are sorting out whether 
or not there's been perjury committed in our judgment based on all 
the different witnesses there, including corroborative witnesses, 
already under oath. You're talking about whether obstruction of justice 
has occurred in the context Ken Starr's talking about, was the president 
involved in a pattern. And so, we're looking at the entire context 
of this. If we were to call every witness that you can conceivably 
call that he's called and repeat it all over again, we'd be here for 
six months the way marty wants to do it. I don't think the public 
wants that. That is not the way I want to do it. I have conducted 
a threshold inquiry myself of the facts as laid out by the independent 
counsel. Even if you presume he's rights on everything, I don't think 
it's impeachable conduct. And I don't think the American people are 
convinced. This has been an embarrassment. Punish the president, not 
the country. We're not going to reach a conclusion. See you both, 
however, tomorrow morning on the house Judiciary committee as we get 
gavel into order. Thank you for coming on. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>