<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981118.2100.1803 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Returning now to our top story this evening, tomorrow morning, Bill 
Clinton will become only the third American president to face a formal 
impeachment inquiry. As for the scope and specificsover that inquiry, 
the White House doesn't like the ground rules, but today, reluctantly, 
since it's not their show, they agreed to it. That's a 30-minute time 
limit and a limited line of questioning and cross-examination of the 
main witness, Kenneth Starr. With us for a preview of the questioning 
tomorrow, Harvard law school professor prof Charles ogletree, who 
served as counsel to Monica Lewinsky's first attorney. And represented 
Anita hill during the clarns Thomas hearings. He's with us from Boston. 
And Douglas kmiec, who was constitutional legal counsel to former 
president ronald Reagan legal. He is now a visiting professor at Pepperdine 
law school. He is with us from Los Angeles tonight. Gentlemen, welcome. 
Professor ogletree, does the White House have grounds to be angry 
as hornets over the fact that this is it, we get no other chance at 
it, they're limited to 30 minutes? Indeed, they do. This is deja vu 
all over again. This is what happened when he represented Anita hill. 
Congress set the rules in the sense of making it seem like a rile 
when, in fact, its wasn't a trial. I think in this case the White 
House has much to complain about when an investigation has taken years 
and they have 30 minutes. But there's a way to get that lot of mileage 
out of that. What would that be? One of the problems that every member 
of this Judiciary committee is planning to cross-examine judge Starr 
and tie him down. That is a foolish tactic. That won't work. They 
need to ask broad questions like -- what do you think the president 
has done that's inappropriate? Do you think his lawyers acted in an 
unethical or illegal way at all? Can you explain from your point of 
view why the public now has such a high approval rating of President 
Clinton even though you have accused him of many serious crimes? But 
I think they're going to try to grandstand and get 30-second sound 
bites. Ken Starr is a great witness. He'll resolve all issues, and 
they'll be totally ineffective if they cross-examine him rather than 
getting behind him. Douglas kmiec, the point professor ogletree makes 
is interesting. Do you believe that a lot of democrats are wasting 
time with partisan attacks when, forget the messenger for a moment, 
whatever Ken Starr's message tomorrow is going to have a large and 
lasting impact, arguably, and it's not going to go away. This one 
is for the books tomorrow. That's right. I don't think any member 
of Congress ought to be playing to the cameras tomorrow, but I suspect 
many of them will. This is an extraordinarily important matter. I 
think the direction that the committee has gone in is a fair one. 
They've been given the instruction by the full house to investigate 
this matter comprehensively. They're certainly not bound by the referral 
document, and it would appear that Ken Starr is coming in to talk 
about the full ope of what he believes is a serious obstruction of 
justice and a misuse of the the presidential office in the context 
of his various investigations, not just those dealing with Monica 
Lewinsky, but with the Whitewater investigation, as well as the f.B.I. 
files and things beyond. Do you agree that the tactic of broad questions 
might be a good one, questions that in the course of answering them 
may have him backtracking, tripping up, and saying I don't mean to 
infer that morality is part of our job here? I don't think the broad 
questions would be effective because Ken is a very effective advocate, 
and he would be able to turn those broad questions to his own purposes. 
I mean, this is a person who has argued multiple cas before the Supreme 
Court of the United States United States, knows how to handle the 
broad as well as the specific, and I think he's been preparing over 
these last few days to speak not just to the members of the Judiciary 
committee, but to speak to us, to speak to the American public, and 
to try and convey to us his very sincere belief that perjury, lying 
under oath, obstruction, misusing governmental privileges, whether 
they be executive privileges or attorney-client privileges is not 
proper behavior for the president of the United States. Charles ogletree, 
if you're Ken Starr and you point out this is a federal judge and 
a smart guy, how are you preparing tonight? He's pretearing to pre-- 
to do what clarns Thomas did, make a statement then say I can't answer 
that question, that's grand jury material, that's beyond the scope. 
It's a fake trial. It's being presented as a fake trial. I think we 
are ill-prepared if we think we're going to have a substantive debate 
about what went on the last few months or get answers behind judge 
starr's decision in trying to charge the president with forms of impeachable 
conduct. What about this one being for the books? There's one aspect 
no one can change, and that is what's spoken tomorrow in a prepared 
statement and response to questions can't be taken back. And there's 
explosive language in it. The real point is that Ken Starr, who I 
like -- his favorability ratings are in single digits. He can odge 
come up in the public's view. His two hours of opening statement is 
a way for him to say I'm a human person, motivated by principles, 
even if you look behind what he did, wiring someone to talk to Monica 
Lewinsky, dragging people before the grand jury. I think when people 
put all those things together, it may be explainable, but it has a 
bad smell for most Americans. Thank you, gentlemen, for coming on 
tonight. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>