<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981118.2100.2337 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Impeaching the president, the American people seem to be sending a 
clear message through pollsters it's not what they want. Poll shows 
about two-thirds of the people want to move on. That has some republicans 
rethinking how long this process that begins tomorrow on the hill 
should go. But others insist they won't let a disappointing election 
deter them from what they call their constitutional duty. The stakes 
were different back in 1974, the last time the gavel fell on this 
sort of thing. Here with that from "dateline NBC," Josh mankiewicz. 
Mr. sarbine? It was the beginning of the end for nix nix nix's presidency. 
As much as it pains me to say it, he should be impeached and removed 
from office. The 38 committee members were the sons and daughters 
of a less cynical america. When they were young, America was a placehere 
presidents were giants, moral heroes, larger than life in word and 
deed. Men like Franklin Roosevelt and dwight Eisenhower. Impeachment 
was an unwelcome task. I did not really want to have to do this to 
a president of the United States. It was a responsibility you didn't 
want. It was a responsibility I never sought. I think most of the 
members of that committee took absolutely not one bit of pleasure 
in voting for the impeachment of the president. It was very, very 
traumatic. I had trouble sleeping at night. I constantly was obsessed 
with this. Republican Lawrence hogan of Maryland also served on the 
committee, confronting the evidence that his president committed high 
crimes and misdemeanors in the Watergate cover-up was the most painful 
experience of his life. The president, when this whole idea was suggested 
to him, didn't in rhteous indignation rise up and say, get out of 
here. You're in the office of the president of the United States. 
But my president didn't do that. He sat from, and he worked and worked 
to this up so it wouldn't come to light. For a few republicans, it 
was an emotional struggle between conscience and party loyalty. When 
the crucial vote came, a coalition of republicans broke ranks and 
gave impeachment bipartisan support. Hogan was one of the six. yes. 
I knew it would have a terrible impact on many of my friends and political 
supporters, and I can remember going in the republican cloak room, 
and one of my colleagues says, let's here it for Larry hogan. And 
those things hurt. Democrat -- this democrat was the first member 
of Congress to call for impeachment, but even he knew just how hard 
the hearings were for president nixon's supporters. One of the people 
we talked to was Larry hogan, and he was really in agony. I remember 
talking to him and some of the other republicans, and I'll never forget 
after the famous tapes came out -- The smoking gun. -- I was in the 
cloak room with a very prominent republican who had represented Mr. 
Nixon very well and ably. He turned to me and, almost crying, said, 
I have been betrayed by one of my best friends. To many, the handful 
of republicans who voted for impeachment were profiles in courage. 
They need bip partisan credibility to sell impeachment to the public 
and to hope for conviction in the Senate. But the story, that kind 
of credibility is hard to achieve because impeachment is part of the 
political process. After all, the founding fathers gave the job to 
Congress, not the courts. There were some democrats who would have 
impeached Nixon for jaywalking. There were some republicans who wouldn't 
have impeached him for murder. There were extremes on both sides. 
But for the most part, the great bulk of the Congress acted slowly, 
they acted judiciously. The Judiciary committee did proceed with caution, 
but throughout the nation, the anxiety over impeachment was enormous. 
I mean, let's face it. What we're talking about here is overturning 
the man date of the American people. That's pretty serious stuff in 
our democracy. People have died in revolutions all over the world 
to have the right to elect presidents democratically, and here we 
were undoing that. The committee knew full well their decision would 
be judged by history. A century earlier, President Andrew Johnson 
was impeached by the house but escaped being removed from office by 
a single vote in the Senate. Historians agree his case grew out of 
an orgy of partisanship. No one in 1974 wanted to follow that example. 
Don't impeach a president unless you really can prove fundamental 
abuses of power. That lesson was learned well after the impeachment 
of Andrew Johnson and was the standard set for Richard Nixon. The 
ball was set high, but the evidence does damning. Obstruction of justice, 
abusef power, contempt of Congress. Still, after more than a year 
of revelations, Senate hearings, and a Criminal investigation, the 
house had not yet started impeachment proceedings. Then on October 
20, 1973, President Nixon fired arch bald Cox, the watergate special 
prosecutor. Good evening. The country tonight is in the midst of what 
may be the most serious constitutional crisis in its history. The 
attorney general resigned, and his deputy was fired. It was culed 
the Saturday night masker. The Congress did not start impeachment 
proceedings until the American people rose up almost in unison and 
demanded congressional action, and that was only the result of the 
Saturday night masker. In what would prove to be his final address, 
President Nixon appealed to the nation to move past Watergate. O year 
of Watergate is enough. I have no intention whatever of ever walking 
away from the job that the people elected me to do for the people 
of the United States. But the scandalad developed a mentum of its 
own, both in the marbled halls of Washington and on the nightly news, 
although the coverage was a far cry from today's cable news networks 
and Internet. It wasn't the 24-hour media cycle in those days. It 
wasn't "the New York Times" competing with the tabloids. In fact, 
the media was slow to pick up on the Watergate matters. But after 
two years of the steady drip, drip, drip, of Watergate revelations, 
with impeachment a certainty and with support in his own party in 
freefall -- I shall resign the presidency effective at noon tomorrow. 
-- Ricrd Nixon became the first president to resign from office. Now, 
as we fast-forward to President Clinton's crisis, will history repeat 
itself? It could, but there are some big differences. Wall Street 
may be nervous today, but when the Watergate scandal unfolded, america's 
economy was taking a nose dive. When the economy is sour, it's hard 
for people to feel good about themselves, their president, or their 
country. Contrast that to the booming economy and prosperous years 
of the 1990's, and you have a fundamental difference between the Watergate 
era and the era of Bill Clinton. With the economy humming, the American 
people might be willing to cut the president some slack, but don't 
count on any let-up from the media. Rumors of another sex scandal 
-- With saturation coverage and instant analysis of each lurid detail, 
President Clinton's case is very much a scandal for the 1990's. Bill 
Clinton up close and very, very, very personal. And there are differences 
in Congress too. Today's committee seems to be moving much faster 
than its more deliberate watergate counterpart. And so far, the voting 
has broken down along partisan lines. The president now says he has 
no one to blame but himself for the mess he's in. But in Kenneth Starr, 
he's facing a very different kind@F prosecutor than richard Nixon 
did. During Watergate, this counsel chose not to draw any conclusions 
about impeachment. In Watergate, you did not have a independent counsel 
who acted like an impeacher. He has made a powerful indictment of 
the president. There are no question the alleged offenses are different 
too. Watergate involved a conspiracy to cover up crimes, N an affair. 
It was an abuse of government power, a story of political corruption. 
No one could make the argument that Watergate just involved someone's 
private life. In fact, the Judiciary committee did look into allegations 
of income tax fraud committed by President Nixon but rejected it as 
grounds for impeachment. It might be indictable, but it is not something 
that should cause the president to be removed from office. Because 
it doesn't involve misusing the powers of his office? Exactly. This 
is something personal and very lamentable. But the framers of our 
constitution were very wise. They said he can only be removed for 
extraordinary things like treason or bribery or other high crimes 
and misdemeanors. To leave office before my term is completed is abhorrent 
to every instinct in my body. During President Nixon's impeachment 
crisis, the presidency itself seemed at risk, but at the very moment 
Mr. Nixon left the White House, the public's worst fears started to 
fade. Our long national nightmare is over. Our constitution works. 
The country survived. But Watergate left many Americans with a permanently 
jaded view of politics and their presidents. Today M Americans don't 
expect their president to be a role model. Bill Clinton was elected 
in 1992 after discussions of personal failings that would have doomed 
a candidate in Richard Nixon's day. And now the legacy of a diminished 
presidency may actually help Bill clinton as he fights for his political 
life. The presidency has never recovered. But, in fact, ironically, 
the idea of a president who is less of a mythic figure has helped, 
not hurt, Clinton, because the fall isn't so far. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>