<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981118.2100.1208 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Turning now to what was seen as one of the few bright spots for the 
republicans on election night, they are heralded as the stars of the 
G.O.P. there are 35 of them after 50 possible slots. They wield increasing 
power across the country and in their party. They are the nation's 
republican governors. And two of their leading members join us tonight 
from the meeting of the g.O.P. governors going on. John Engler has 
served as governor of Michigan for the past eight years, re-elected 
to another term. Tommy Thompson recently re-elected to his fourth 
term. Governor Engler, you have mentioned that chairman Jim Nicholson 
of the republican party, nice man, tough job, should prappings go 
back to his day job in I believe Colorado and that the national G.O.P. 
would be well served by bringing in somebody new. Where does that 
stand? Who's your choice? Oh, I don't have a choice. I'm a Lame duck 
governor. I'm not running for everything. I was asked that the day 
after the election, and I said that in terms of the the national television 
audience -- there are so many shows like yours, brian, I thought there 
could be somebody more effective than Jim. He's a wonderful guy and 
done a good job with the party. But we were a lot better than we showed 
in the November election this year, and I think one of the things 
that the governor's success stories represent is actual performance 
on the job, but then an agenda. Tommy and I in running for our re-elections 
in our respective states, we talked about what we're goirning to do 
going forward. We're talking about the agenda. I think in Washington 
maybe we got mired down a little bit and forgot to tell everybody 
exactly what the important differences were by keeping the republicans 
as majority and giving them even more of a chance to work their programs 
in the Congress. Now, wait a minute. You slipped in a new one on me. 
High-performance heart land. Is this a marketing slogan we're trotting 
out? We used to be called the rust belt, but with Tommy's work in 
Wisconsin, what we're doing in Michigan, and all through, Ohio, Jim 
Edgar in Illinois a lot of good work has been done. We're seeing our 
economies pull the nation. Bill Clinton takes a little credit for 
it now and then, but we like to look at the heart land and say this 
is what's making America work and click today. Governor Thompson, 
why is it you think the G.O.P. did better than they appeared to at 
the elections? Is it the state level? I think there's no question 
that governors like John Engler, George bush, all the governors across 
America were running not only on their past records but also looking 
to the future. They were pointing out issues and how we can improve 
education in our respective states, how we can make welfare better, 
how to get people out of poverty, protect the environment, and cut 
taxes. This is something the national party didn't do. They didn't 
have an offense. They were always on defense. The democrats, of course, 
took it to them, and the republicans in Congress didn't have an answer, 
whereas on the state level, the governors had the answers. We're the 
ones that are the laboratories of democracy. If you want a good idea, 
if you want to find a solution to a societal program, talk to a republican 
governor. We're the ones that are moving that. That's why we were 
effective and won the election. Governor Thompson, governor Engler, 
stand by. We need a break. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>