<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981118.1830.0209 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
At the same time, the republicans completed their shakeup of the house 
leadership today, electing a new speaker of the house and adding a 
black republican to their leadership team. As NBC's Gwen Ifill tells 
us tonight, the realignment didn't change the fundamental philosophy 
of the republican leadership, but look for some style changes. Today's 
big winner, Louisiana congressman Bob Livingston, the republicans' 
choice to replace house speaker Newt Gingrich. We muffed our message 
a little bit in the last elections. The American people held us accountable. 
But, as abe Lincoln said, a slip is not a fall. But with a narrow 
majority in the house -- now only 12 -- republicans are coping with 
a new balance of power in the Congress they took by storm only four 
years ago. We're going to be reaching out to democrats who believe, 
as we do, that our principles are sound for the nation. But the day's 
leadership fights exposed the splits in the republican party, with 
new leaders anxious to pursue cooperation over conflict. Majority 
leader Dick Armey, the plain-spoken Texan who was Gingrich's deputy, 
fighting off a vigorous challenge. Each and every one of us, I daresay, 
provided for the others a merry chase. And a historic first -- conservative 
J.C. Watts, a former football player and the only black republican 
in the house, becoming fourth-ranking leader. I think it does help 
for people of all colors to see that the republican party is a party 
of many faces, many people, many ideas. On his first birthday Watts 
defeated conference chairman John boehner, another Gingrich loyalist. 
I'm going to Disneyland and celebrate. Two junior lawmakers, Jennifer 
Dunn of Washington state, and another former football player, Steve 
Largent of Oklahoma, failed to oust armey. And Dunn pledged to help 
pick up the pieces from the acrimonious leadership fight. It's very 
important to sweep up the residue and bring unity back to our team. 
With republicans still licking their wounds from election losses that 
cost Newt Gingrich his job, Livingston's first challenge as the new 
speaker already looms -- impeachment hearings. Livingston is telling 
lawmakers he wants them completed before he takes over in January. 
With public distaste for impeachment proceedings still high, republicans 
are going to have some trouble changing the subject to social security 
and taxes. But they are hoping to try. Gwen Ifill, NBC news, the capitol. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>