<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981118.1830.0043 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. By this time tomorrow night, the first full day of the 
impeachment hearings of the house Judiciary committee will be over 
and we'll have a much better idea of Ken Starr's best case against 
President Clinton -- and president clinton's best defense against 
the Starr case. A majority of Americans may not want the president 
to be impeached, but the process is under way, and it is historic. 
We begin tonight with NBC's David Bloom on how the agenda is changing 
right up to the last moment. David? Tom, on the eve of tomorrow's 
historic impeachment hearings, republicans with no apologies said 
tonight they will expand their inquiry. After Kenneth Starr testifies, 
republicans plan to subpoena two witnesses. A top White House aide, 
and two witnesses tied to Kathleen Willey, the White House volunteer 
who claimed she was groped by the president and then threatened. Inside 
the same committee room where articles of impeachment were voted against 
Richard Nixon 24 years ago, preparations today for the Clinton impeachment 
hearings. The chairs are ready. Only the players and the drama await. 
Tonight, republicans said they will take sworn testimony from and 
could call as witnesses, the president's attorney, deputy White House 
counsel, bruce Lindsey. And two people tied to Kathleen Willey, Nathan 
Lan drou, a donor under investigation by Starr, and her former lawyer. 
Sources say independent counsel Kenneth Starr will focus his two-hour 
opening statement mostly on the Lewinsky case, but he'll also claim 
the White House obstructed this investigation just as it thwarted 
his earlier whitewater probe. Republican chairman Henry Hyde made 
clear today he has no plans to reign in starr. The democrats want 
to stick to Monica Lewinsky. We want to look at everything. That's 
the big difference. In a letter to the White House, Hyde also warned 
the president's lawyers that during the 30 minutes Clinton attorney 
David Kendall will have to cross-examine prosecutor Starr, "you will 
not be permitted to inquire into the conduct of Starr's investigation." 
That drew the White House's ire. It's very unfair for the committee 
to say that they can go and talk about any subject they want, go off 
on a fishing expedition, while they tell the White House counsel that 
there's areas that we're not allowed to raise. For his part, the president 
is about as far away from these hearings tonight. Flying to Japan. 
And republicans charge he's stalls, points out that Mr. Clinton has 
refused to answer 81 questions put to him almost two weeks ago by 
Henry Hyde. tom? Thanks, very much. David Bloom tat White House. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>