<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981118.1830.0881 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
NBC news "in depth" tonight -- a warning from the government. Tonight, 
about truth in advertising from the booming business in these popular 
health supplements. It's estimated there are up to 1,000 different 
supplements on the market. The government definition covers vitamins, 
minerals, herbal products, hormones and amino acids. And so many of 
these products promise amazing health benefits. But are they really 
telling the whole truth? Can they deliver on the promises? NBC's Robert 
Hager tonight, "in depth." 100 million Americans a year take dietary 
supplements. A $12 billion a year business and exploding. Your total 
is $162.43. Theo Pappas takes 18 supplements a day. Echinacea and 
golden seal, I take because they are immune boosters. Red clover I 
take because it deters the growth of tumors. But what's the scientific 
evidence? As the business grows, so do a lot of questionable advertising 
claims. Ecstasy, and increased energy promised by one. 49 pounds off, 
in 29 days, by another. Today, the federal trade commission warns 
it will reign in such assertions. The FTC's Michelle rusk -- We are 
warning them not to make claims that are not adequately supported 
by good scientific evidence. The government today published precise 
guidelines. It said, for instance, if an ad cites University studies, 
there better be studies, and good ones. Or if it cites a testimonial 
about an exceptional case, there better be one. The industry's trade 
group says it supports this. And blames some of the past claims on 
a misunderstanding. It seems like many companies are not quite sure 
what the ground rules are, so the intention is for the FTC to make 
its policy clear. But others say the business is growing so fast that 
the government may be powerless to police it. The agency doesn't have 
sufficient resources to really back up these guides with enforcement. 
As a practical matter for the consumer, that means Buyer beware. Dietary 
supplemental claims simply cannot be trusted . For instance, this 
infomercial -- For 60 days in a row, I ate a pound of Kentucky fried 
chicken. I checked and my cholesterol had dropped remarkably and to 
my surprise, I had lost 25 pounds. The FTC asked for substantiation. 
They had some research on the benefit of the products, but obviously 
nothing that would come close to supporting that kind of extreme claim. 
The company agreed to drop the ad. Consumers, like Theo Pappas, swear 
by their favorite products. I feel terrific and I don't feel like 
any of this is harmful to me. And I am not afraid of taking them. 
But as more and more products hit the market, the government wants 
to make sure customers aren't misled, by promises that can't be kept. 
Robert Hager, NBC news, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>