<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981118.0415 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Many California doctors say the bonuses and other financial incentives 
that managed care organizations give them for speeding up office visits 
and restricting care compromise the quality of care, according to 
a survey of doctors reported Wednesday in The New England Journal 
of Medicine. But, the survey added, when health maintenance organizations 
include incentives based on patient satisfaction and quality, or the 
theory that better care is often cheaper care, doctors believe the 
quality does indeed improve, along with their satisfaction. Anecdotal 
accounts of physician discontent with managed care are commonplace, 
but The New England Journal's editor, Dr. Jerome P. Kassirer, said 
this analysis, by a doctor-led group of researchers at the University 
of California at San Francisco, breaks ground in examining the link 
of financial incentives to such unhappiness. The article, ``Primary 
Care Physicians' Experience of Financial Incentives in Managed Care 
Systems,'' is based on a survey conducted two years ago of 766 primary 
care, office-based, independent doctors who have HMO contracts and 
of salaried doctors for California's big HMO, Kaiser Permanente. The 
average age of the doctors _ pediatricians, internists, family practitioners 
and obstetrical-gynecologists _ was 49, and an average of 56 percent 
of their patients were members of HMOs. The doctors' average annual 
salary is $130,000, which includes bonuses and other incentives that 
typically accounted for 7 percent of their pay, or $10,500. The Blue 
Cross and Blue Shield Association, made up of 55 state and local affiliates, 
saw the study less as a rebuke than as fodder to support changes in 
the health care system that it has begun to endorse. ``Managed care 
is a work in progress,'' said Patrick Hayes, the association's president 
and chief executive. ``There's no question about our needing to reinvent 
managed care as it has been implemented in the last 10 or 15 years.'' 
The study does not try to establish whether the incentives have led 
to an actual decline in the quality of care, but it warns that they 
may. In analyzing the survey, Dr. Kevin Brumbach, Dr. Andrew B. Bindman 
and their team found that 38 percent of the doctors, or 291, were 
subject to financial incentives to control costs. These included limiting 
referrals of patients to specialists, limiting the use of hospitals 
and prescriptions and raising their productivity by seeing more patients. 
Of the 291 doctors, the study said 28 percent ``reported that they 
felt pressure to limit what they told patients about treatment options.'' 
A much higher proportion, 57 percent, felt pressured to restrict their 
referrals, and a nearly a third of these doctors said the pressure 
was severe enough to compromise the quality of care. And 75 percent 
of the doctors, or 575, said they felt pressured to see more patients. 
A third of these doctors, too, said care was compromised. By contrast 
two other incentives, quality and patient satisfaction, pleased the 
doctors, particularly at Kaiser. Ten percent of the office-based doctors 
and 31 percent of those at Kaiser said the quality of care was an 
incentive. Patient satisfaction was a criterion for 11 percent of 
the independent doctors and for 45 percent of those at Kaiser. The 
study added that the Kaiser doctors felt more pressure than the independent 
doctors to see more patients, and faster. But it also said that ``they 
were the least likely to report feeling pressure to limit referrals 
or to restrict what they told patients about treatment options.'' 
The California Medical Association saw Wednesday's report of the study 
as ammunition to force changes in laws governing HMO contracts with 
provisions that the association says undermine good care. On Tuesday, 
the California Department of Corporations rejected an association 
petition urging the changes; within a week, the association plans 
to appeal. ``This state has gone from the leading edge in managed 
care to the bleeding edge,'' said Dr. Jack Lewin, the association's 
chief executive. ``Doctors are at this point burnt out.'' Concluding 
a two-page editorial on discontent among doctors that was based on 
the study, Kassirer of The New England Journal writes: ``There has 
been an undercurrent of unhappiness among physicians for many years, 
but the complaints seem more widespread and strident now. One thing 
we know: disgruntled, cranky doctors are not likely to provide outstanding 
medical care.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>