<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981118.0181 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Many woodworkers frown upon the use of stain for coloring wood. They 
feel that it is too often used to disguise inferior and uninteresting 
wood (pine or poplar) to make it appear more like high-quality wood 
(walnut or mahogany). Still, many professional cabinet makers and 
furniture craftsmen find that there are a number of legitimate reasons 
to color wood with stain. Woods often have light colored patches that 
contrast strongly against darker areas. Staining can be used to bring 
the extremes closer together for greater harmony. Stain can also be 
used to subtly alter the tone of wood. Thomas Chippendale, for example, 
often used a walnut-colored stain in an attempt to mute the reddish 
cast of mahogany. Stain can also be used to disguise the fact the 
different woods have been used to make one piece of furniture, for 
example, a Windsor chairs with seats made of soft wood; arm rests, 
legs and stretchers of maple; and crests of hickory or white oak. 
Restorers often use stain when they make replacement parts, like a 
drawer front or leg. They stain the newly fashioned piece so it matches 
the hue of the surrounding wood. Finally, stain can also be an effective 
wood preservative. Exterior grade stains can be used to protect wood 
from the damaging effects of the ultraviolet rays of the sun and from 
insect and fungus attack. Stain may be loosely defined as any transparent 
or translucent agent used to color wood. Unlike paint, which has pigment 
suspended in a binder, the coloring agent in stain is a dye that is 
dissolved in liquid. Thus, the color penetrates into the wood fibers, 
rather than resting in a surface film like paint. Some stains are 
simply coloring agents; others are formulated with polyurethane or 
varnish so that staining and finishing can be combined in one operation. 
One drawback to using finish-stains is that the some of the color 
will remain in the finish. If the finish chips or wears away, the 
color will go with it, leaving a light patch that contrasts with the 
rest of the wood. The most common type of stain is oil stain. The 
liquid solvent is usually a petroleum spirit. Most formulations also 
have a binder to hold the pigment in the wood once the solvent has 
evaporated. Oil stains should only be applied in one coat; otherwise 
the binder will build up and create a varnish-like finish. A variety 
of shades and hues can be concocted by mixing different colors of 
stain. If you try this, however, avoid mixing different brands, because 
the ingredients in oil-based stains are not always be compatible between 
brands. Oil-based stains are readily available in most paint and hardware 
stores; for that reason they are usually the first choice for do-it-yourselfers. 
Water-based stains are fast drying (this can be a disadvantage if 
you are coloring large surfaces) and produce softer colors than the 
oil-based stains, but they have a tendency to raise the wood grain. 
It is usually necessary to sand the surface after applying them. Traditional 
water-based stains do not have a binder and may be applied in successive 
coats to create darker hues. New water-based stains are formulated 
with acrylic polymer binders. Aniline dyes are manufactured from coal 
tar. They are usually sold in powder form and must be mixed with either 
petroleum solvents or water. They are available in a wide range of 
colors and can be readily mixed to match almost any existing hue. 
For this reason, they are favored by restorers or manufacturers looking 
to create dramatic color effects. Aniline dyes have a very short working 
time; most professionals apply them by spraying. It is not difficult 
to apply stain, but care must be exercised so the final color is uniform 
and without streaks. For best results, stain should brushed on (with 
a brush reserved exclusively for stain) in the direction of the grain. 
Stain the entire surface; then use a lint-free rag, dipped it in stain 
and wrung out, to wipe off the excess. Always work with the grain. 
Allow the stain to dry before applying the finish. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>