<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981118.0382 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the wake of a court decision invalidating its affirmative action 
requirements for broadcasters, the Federal Communications Commission 
will propose new rules to encourage television and radio stations 
to hire minorities and women. But it will no longer require an evaluation 
of how stations are achieving that goal. According to drafts of the 
proposed rules, the commission will no longer make a comparison between 
the percentage of minorities and women in a station's work force and 
the proportion of those groups in its broadcast area when the agency 
is ruling on the station's renewal of its broadcast license. ``We 
are de-linking it from the renewal process,'' said FCC Chairman William 
Kennard. Under the old rules, which were put in place in 1987 during 
the Reagan administration, broadcasters with at least 10 employees 
were encouraged to have a work force where the proportion of minorities 
and women was half their percentage in the local broadcast area. For 
example, if a station had 100 employees and minorities constituted 
20 percent of the population in the local area, the station was encouraged 
to have 10 minority workers. Commission officials had argued that 
such numerical goals were merely one part of a set of guidelines to 
evaluate a station's good faith efforts to recruit minorities and 
women. They insisted, however, that a person's sex or race could not 
be factors in actual hiring decisions. Although these figures were 
looked at when a television or radio station sought to renew its license, 
commission officials contended that no renewal application had ever 
been denied because of a failure to comply with the guidelines. Nonetheless, 
Judge Laurence Silberman of the U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals for 
the District of Columbia ruled in April that the mere possibility 
that a station could lose its license for failure to comply with the 
commission's guidelines would induce station managers to secretly 
give minorities and women a preference when it came to hiring. Legal 
experts say it was the first time that a federal court had struck 
down affirmative action efforts that involved the recruitment of minorities 
and women, and not their actual hiring. The Clinton administration 
has yet to decide whether to appeal Silberman's ruling to the Supreme 
Court. The new proposals, which will be voted on by the FCC's five 
commissioners on Thursday, will still require stations to undertake 
certain efforts to enhance the number of women and minorities that 
they employ in order to be granted license renewals. These efforts 
include looking at a station's actual recruitment efforts and examining 
whether a station has been sued for employment discrimination and 
whether it maintains training and internship programs. ``We can still 
require that broadcasters demonstrate that they are reaching out in 
their communities to pull together a diverse applicant pool,'' Kennard 
said. ``But they will no longer compare the profile of their station 
with that of the communities they serve.'' Last year, women made up 
41 percent of all broadcast employees, according to the commission, 
up from 23.3 percent in 1971. Minorities totaled 20.2 percent of all 
employees, a jump from 9.1 percent in 1971. Civil rights advocates 
say the commission's new rules are part of a broad retreat on affirmative 
action in the face of hostile court rulings on the issue. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>