<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981118.0493 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Kenneth Starr, the independent counsel, will insist in the House impeachment 
hearing on Thursday that President Clinton not only obstructed justice 
by covering up his affair with Monica Lewinsky but also threw up ``roadblocks 
and hurdles'' time and again that slowed the prosecutor's other investigations. 
Shortly before Starr's prepared testimony for the House Judiciary 
Committee's first hearing was released Wednesday night, Rep. Henry 
Hyde of Illinois, the committee's chairman, announced that Republicans 
would subpoena four new witnesses amid signs that the panel's majority 
was seeking to broaden the inquiry far beyond the Lewinsky matter 
to try to show a larger pattern of obstruction of justice. Hyde also 
sought a Justice Department report on campaign finance investigations 
concerning Clinton, and the department indicated it was likely to 
provide it. In his statement, Starr ran through a litany of the investigations 
he has conducted since he was first charged with examining the president's 
failed Whitewater real estate venture, and said, ``The pattern of 
obstruction of justice, false statements, and misuse of executive 
authority in the Lewinsky investigation did not occur in a vacuum.'' 
He complained that his office ``had to litigate in the courts as our 
investigation ran into roadblocks and hurdles that slowed us down.'' 
Unlike the prosecutors who investigated Presidents Reagan and Carter, 
Starr said, ``We have been forced to go to court time and again to 
seek information from the executive branch and to fight a multitude 
of privilege claims asserted by the Administration _ every single 
one of which we have won.'' Also, for the first time, Starr announced 
that he has exonerated the Clinton administration from any wrongdoing 
in the firings of seven employees in the White House travel office 
and into whether White House officials misused confidential FBI files 
of White House and government employees in their own and previous 
administrations. As for Whitewater, Starr said he had drafted an impeachment 
referral in late 1997 that outlined accusations that Clinton had testified 
falsely at the trial of his business partner Jim McDougal and the 
former governor of Arkansas, Jim Guy Tucker. But Starr said he never 
sent the referral, because he said the evidence was not substantial 
enough. Much of Starr's testimony dealt with the Lewinsky matter, 
on which he referred 11 potential articles of impeachment to the House 
in September. Starr summed up his view of the president's hostility 
to his investigation in these terms: ``Over the next several months, 
it became apparent that the strategy to win had many prongs. ``First, 
the president denied the truth publicly and emphatically. ``Second, 
he publicly promised to cooperate with the investigation. ``Third, 
the president deflected and diverted the investigation by telling 
aides false stories that were then relayed to the grand jury. ``Fourth, 
he refused invitations to testify to the grand jury for over six months. 
``Fifth, his administration delayed the investigation through multiple 
privilege claims, each of which has been rejected by the federal courts. 
``Sixth, surrogates of the president attacked the credibility and 
legitimacy of the grand jury investigation. ``Seventh, surrogates 
of the president attempted to convince the Congress and the American 
people that the matter was unimportant.'' Hyde said Republicans wanted 
to take depositions from Bruce Lindsey, the Clinton confidant who 
is deputy White House counsel and from Robert Bennett, Clinton's private 
attorney in the sexual harassment case brought by Paula Jones. He 
said the committee would also question, Daniel Gecker, the lawyer 
for Kathleen Willey, a White House volunteer who has said the President 
made a sexual advance to her, and Nathan Landow, a Democratic developer 
and fund-raiser close to the White House who counseled Ms. Willey 
on whether she should testify in the Jones case. On Clinton's 1996 
campaign finance practices, Hyde wrote to Attorney General Janet Reno, 
seeking unrestricted access to a memorandum from Charles G. LaBella, 
the former top prosecutor for campaign finance abuses, in which he 
recommended that an independent counsel investigate the president 
and Vice President Al Gore. In the letter, obtained by The New York 
Times, Hyde said that because he wanted to wrap up his impeachment 
inquiry expeditiously, ``I do not believe that the committee can or 
should wait for you to finish your preliminary inquiry of possible 
crimes of the president or your campaign finance investigation.'' 
Hyde once again said that he intended to finish his investigation 
by the end of the year. But Democrats and the White House accused 
the Republicans of ranging far beyond Starr's charges of 11 possible 
impeachable offenses in the Lewinsky case and of trying to start a 
battle over lawyer-client privilege. ``In an effort to pick a partisan 
food fight they've been reduced to picking up Ken Starr's leftovers,'' 
said Jim Kennedy. a White House spokesman. ``They are even trying 
to out-Starr Starr by breaching the attorney- client privilege.'' 
``What we have here is an impeachment in search of a crime, and in 
another 48 hours we will be reopening the Vincent Foster case,'' said 
James Jordan, the spokesman for Democrats on the committee. Rep. Martin 
Meehan, D-Mass., said the fast-moving events meant that ``this is 
going to be a long involved process.'' The Justice Department, is 
likely to cooperate with Hyde's request for the memorandum written 
by LaBella, department officials said. First, however, judicial approval 
must be obtained to disclose grand jury information in the report. 
The Justice Department could go to court to seek permission as early 
as Thursday. The activity and partisan positioning came a day before 
Starr is to take center stage before Congress, set free for the first 
time in his investigation of the president to give a wide-ranging 
public presentation of his case against the president. In his prepared 
testimony, Starr argued that his case against Clinton has nothing 
to do with sexual liaisons and he protested that his office had taken 
no pleasure in investigating the sordid affair. ``The propriety of 
a relationship is not the concern of our office,'' Starr said. ``No 
citizen who finds himself accused in a sexual harassment case, or 
in any other kind of case, can lie under oath or otherwise obstruct 
justice, and thereby prevent the plaintiff from discovering evidence 
and proving her case.'' Starr took on one of the major White House 
defenses, the argument that the perjury he alleges Clinton committed 
is a personal crime far below the level of ``high crimes and misdemeanors'' 
the Constitution sets as a standard for impeachment. He said in his 
statement: ``History and practice support the conclusion that perjury, 
in particular, is a high crime or misdemeanor. Perjury has been the 
basis for the removal of several judges. As far as we know, no one 
questioned whether perjury was a high crime or misdemeanor in those 
cases. In addition, as several of the scholars who appeared before 
you testified, perjury seems to have been recognized as a high crime 
or misdemeanor at the time of the founding.'' Starr subtitled the 
final section of his statement ``Reflections.'' In it, he defended 
the work of his office over nearly five years. In the Lewinsky investigation, 
Starr said neither he nor his staff ``relished'' the case. ``My staff 
and I agree with the sentiments expressed by Chairman Hyde in the 
Nov. 9 hearing when he said, `I'd like to forget all of this,''' Starr 
said, adding: ``I mean, who needs it?'' He also detailed his legal 
background, dating to his position as a law clerk in 1973, and attempted 
to joke about his lack of political acumen. ``Every person is, of 
course, deeply affected by his or her experiences,'' Starr said. ``For 
my part, my experience is in the law and the courts. I am not a man 
of polls, public relations, or politics _ which I suppose is obvious 
at this point. I am not experienced in political campaigns.'' Starr 
will have two hours on Thursday to make his case before the committee, 
and Republicans are hoping that he will be a compelling speaker who 
can improve his tarnished public image and focus the American public 
on his charges that the president committed perjury, obstructed justice 
and abused the power of his office. Rep. Bob Barr, R-Ga., said the 
hearing would give Starr ``the capability, without his words being 
distorted by the White House, to talk to the American people.'' Starr 
will then be questioned for a half hour apiece by the committee's 
Republican and Democratic senior investigators, David Schippers and 
Abbe Lowell. The 37 committee members will then question him and when 
they are done White House lawyers have been granted 30 minutes to 
cross-examine him. The White House on Wednesday grudgingly accepted 
the Republicans' offer of a half hour, although it had wanted 90 minutes. 
Charles Ruff, the White House counsel, said that the difference in 
time allotted to the prosecutor and to the White House ''is not consistent 
with the standard of fairness.'' Hyde told reporters Wednesday that 
he would be ``liberal'' with the half-hour time limit. ``If they're 
on a line of questioning and they need more time, I will grant them 
more time,'' he said, ``I wish to control the time. They're not being 
mistreated at all.'' Hyde has informed the White House that Clinton's 
lawyers will not be allowed to question the prosecutor about the controversies 
surrounding his investigation, which include questions about his contacts 
with Paula Jones' lawyers and an investigation of whether his office 
had leaked grand jury information. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>