<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981118.0242 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The irony is rich. That's what makes the Cooper-Hewitt National Design 
Museum of the Smithsonian Institution different from other arty museums 
in the United States. In 1976, the dark and pompous Andrew Carnegie 
mansion on Manhattan's Upper East Side was turned into a bright public 
showplace for the usable arts of daily life. Here were exhibitions 
that talked straight, with a voice that was gutsy and sharp, yet highly 
refined. (In a current show, sketches of Disneyland are framed like 
Palladios.) But not all irony is nice. One of the Cooper-Hewitt's 
crueler facts of life is that its director, Dianne Pilgrim, who has 
multiple sclerosis, could not enter the front door of the museum she 
had run for 10 years. Her wheelchair was not designed for steep palace 
staircases. This year Ms. Pilgrim solved that problem _ for herself 
and for thousands of others who had trouble climbing those granite 
steps and heaving open massive glass-and-bronze doors made for butlers. 
The museum has just completed a $20 million, four-year expansion and 
renovation, including a new ramp, which have shrunk many barriers 
that have kept it from serving its purpose: showing the biggest possible 
audience that utility, done well, can move the soul. Or at least brighten 
your day. Perfectly timed with that reopening is a major exhibition, 
``Unlimited by Design,'' which is all about taking the needless barriers 
and discomforts out of everyone's daily routine _ not just in museum 
mansions, but in ordinary places like the home office, bathroom, kitchen 
and garden. To that end the museum has transformed a room into a playground 
and set up a modern workplace with talking-and-listening computers, 
a streamlined bathroom and, most remarkably, two futuristic yet buildable 
kitchens. There are 150 services and products featured. Some are on 
sale in the museum store, like the responsive ``Wiggly Giggly'' balls 
that help vision-impaired children. Others, like the pop-up mini-dishwashers 
and pasta-cooking stations, are waiting for manufacturers to propel 
them into the marketplace. ``This is something I've wanted to do since 
I became director,'' Ms. Pilgrim said. The show promotes universal 
design, a term coined in the 1970s by the late Ronald Mace, an architect 
who championed a new perspective: that making the world easier for 
the disabled actually makes life easier for everyone. Over the last 
20 years, Mace and others worked to make universal design as acceptable 
as public safety. What was required was common sense and the infiltration 
of the comfy world of smug young people, where fear and denial about 
aging and infirmity are strong. When making a sidewalk, for example, 
why not cut the curb down for mothers wheeling strollers, for travelers 
with baggage, for anyone using wheelchairs. In 1990, the Americans 
With Disabilities Act made curb cuts mandatory. Although the message 
about accessibility has traveled widely over the last five years, 
the Cooper-Hewitt claims that it is the first museum to hold such 
a show. ``Unlimited by Design'' had as its curators Bruce Hannah and 
George A. Covington, the authors of ``Access by Design'' (Van Nostrand 
Reinhold, 1997). Hannah is an industrial designer who teaches at Pratt 
Institute; Covington, who is legally blind, is a writer and lawyer 
known as an advocate for universal design. Covington said, ``It's 
not a `crip' show,'' meaning a show only for people with disabilities. 
The guest curators were aided by manufacturers and teams of researchers. 
For example, the Rhode Island School of Design spent five years on 
its universal kitchen project, under the direction of Jane Langmuir, 
an architect. Two kitchens shaped by that research are making their 
debut here. The problem in presenting these universal designs is thorny, 
however. How do you tell a engaging, hands-on story about a serious 
mission? (In fact, many hand-ons features of the universal kitchens 
had to be ``utilities off,'' for insurance reasons: no water, no gas.) 
A limitation of the ``Unlimited'' show is that the inventions are 
too numerous to label and often too subtle to see. The Metaform bathroom, 
for example, is packed with solutions designers have sought for decades. 
One ingenious prototype is from Gianfranco Zaccai of Design Continuum, 
which erases the shower threshold, a detail vexing to those in wheelchairs. 
Only a contractor could discern the hidden invention: a plastic perforated 
floor is placed over the drain. The Metaform streamlined plastic toilet 
flips up to save space; when closed, it cleans itself. ``I wanted 
this to be a beautiful design show,'' said the exhibition's director, 
Donald Albrecht. In that, he has succeeded, perhaps too well. The 
irony lies in the etiquette of it all. By taking great pains to prove 
that accessible design can be beautiful, the show has collected lots 
of beautiful design, presented it beautifully and made it look, well, 
sort of inaccessible. But all this ends up being compatible with the 
politely provocative tradition of the Cooper-Hewitt. What ``Unlimited 
by Design'' shows is the highly romanticized relationship most designers 
have with design. Few of them like confronting the messiness of daily 
life _ and the unesthetic needs of actual people. It is easier to 
serve an ideal than to wrestle with all the permutations of body types 
and biological functions. Globally, most ``good design'' is lovely 
to look at and delightful to touch but conceived for an idealized 
client who chucks utility for style. Beauty is thin stuff. And inner 
beauty (that is, functions that spur better patterns of living) is 
not always pretty. Photogenically, the two universal kitchens in the 
exhibition would be shelter magazine rejects. The beauty they create 
is in the reorganized, retooled, refreshed life of the person using 
them. Although Ms. Langmuir doesn't brag about it, the RISD crew did 
what designers seldom dare. They blew up preconceptions about what 
a kitchen should be _ stacks of costly steel and wood boxes _ and 
started from scratch. Eventually, they poured their ideas into two 
kitchens _ each a universe of its own. The Maxi is for families and 
those who entertain; the Mini suits the cooking-for-one style of dorms, 
studios and hotels. The students and researchers cooked together, 
videotaped the chaos, did time-and-motion studies, sketched and, best 
of all, asked thrillingly mundane questions: if everyone eats pasta, 
they said, isn't there an easier way to cook it? They designed a pasta 
basket that looks like a deep-fryer, then fitted that into a basin 
that fills with water in the Maxi kitchen. The contraption makes it 
possible to cook the pasta and drain it without moving it. That way, 
there's no dumping heavy pots of scalding water. And pasta-making 
was just the beginning. The kitchen's main event is a ``wet island'' 
_ with interchangeable functions that can be customized and combined 
in many ways. The island contains a long work surface that lets you 
wash, chop, discard, cook, clean and juggle dishes in a series of 
continuous motions. Behind the narrow ribbon of work surface are three 
dishwashers (one for glasses, one for dishes, one for pots), which 
pop up for easy loading or sink out of view to create extra work surfaces. 
``The idea is to clean as you cook,'' Ms. Langmuir said. The sink 
is not the usual giant tub but a shallow basin equipped with a pull 
sprayer and lined with ribbons of water activated by infrared sensors. 
Cantilevered from the island is a wooden counter that recognizes the 
way American families actually dine and snack: on the run. This weekend, 
Ms. Langmuir showed a small visitor, a 9-year-old budding chef thwarted 
by grown-up kitchen counters, how the universal kitchen can change 
shape to suit the people using it. ``You press this button and an 
electric motor moves the counter down to 28 inches, or up to 40,'' 
Ms. Langmuir said. The little girl, an ebullient cook who struggles 
at 38-inch-high counters at home, watched the counter sink slowly. 
When it stopped, she beamed an empowered grin, the kind Girl Scout 
leaders live for. All it took was a few inches of change and suddenly 
the girl's aspirations meshed with a reachable world, like an elevator 
opening onto a penthouse panorama. How do you unlock somebody's aspirations? 
Sometimes, all you need is a gnarled little electric motor. It's not 
pretty, but it moves things along in a meaningful way. Now that's 
beautiful. Cooper-Hewitt National Design Museum, 2 E. 91st St.; (212) 
849-8300. ``Unlimited by Design'' runs through March 21. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>