<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981118.0469 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Most baseball decisions are based on numbers _ productivity, home 
runs, runs batted in. But amateur psychology has played a large role 
in the New York Yankees' decision to pursue the volatile slugger Albert 
Belle. The Yankees won a record 125 games in 1998 with extraordinary 
clubhouse harmony, with the steady Bernie Williams inhabiting a corner 
locker and a leadership role. Because they have been unable to reach 
a new agreement with Williams, who is a free agent, the Yankees may 
sign Belle by the weekend and replace one of the team's most stable 
personalities with another talented player who is well known for his 
explosive temper and perceived selfishness. Club officials have asked 
around and asked themselves: How would Belle fit in? Many members 
of the Yankee organization believe that Belle can be successfully 
indoctrinated into the clubhouse of Manager Joe Torre, and that the 
Yankees and the Boston Red Sox may forward offers for Belle Thursday 
or Friday, with both teams knowing that the slugger _ who drove in 
152 runs for the Chicago White Sox last summer _ wants to command 
the highest salary in the game, at $14 million a season. The Yankees 
might be willing to dangle a three-to four-year deal. Yankee officials 
Wednesday played host to Brian Jordan, another free-agent outfielder, 
at Yankee Stadium, and afterward, Jordan said he was interested in 
the Yankees, in part because of their history and because of their 
dedication to winning. Executives with other teams strongly believe, 
however, that Jordan will sign with the Atlanta Braves. Scott Boras, 
Williams' agent, has asked for a meeting with the Yankees' principal 
owner, George Steinbrenner, a summit that may occur as soon as Thursday 
in Florida. Boras, who could not be reached for comment Wednesday, 
has maintained that there was a vigorous market for Williams' skills, 
though he would not identify the teams involved. But it appears that 
at the very least, the number of teams involved in the bidding for 
Williams has dwindled. And some of those that might have interest 
do not appear to be willing to give Williams anywhere near the $100 
million figure that Boras mentioned when the center fielder became 
a free agent. Williams was expected to meet Thursday with officials 
from the Boston Red Sox, one of three teams known to be in the running 
for his services; the Yankees and the Arizona Diamondbacks, too, are 
fully acknowledging continued interest in him. The Yankees, however, 
have made it clear that they were not willing to give Williams the 
sort of package to which Boras has referred; all along, members of 
the organization have suggested that any offer would contain no more 
than five years and maybe a little bit more than $11 million a season. 
(Neither Boras nor Yankees General Manager Brian Cashman will say 
whether the team has actually made an offer.) Arizona officials are 
saying privately that they would like to have Williams, but that ultimately, 
they might be willing to offer a four-year deal for something in the 
range of $9 million to $10 million a season. It could be that the 
Yankees eventually will have forwarded the best offer for Williams. 
Cashman reiterated Wednesday that in any event, he wants a viable 
hitter in the middle of his lineup. David Cone, the veteran pitcher, 
was asked by club officials about how Belle would fit in among his 
peers. Speaking from his Connecticut home Wednesday, Cone said, ``I 
think everybody feels we've got enough leaders in the clubhouse to 
give him some coverage.'' Apart from the Yankees' Belle-Williams intrigue, 
there continues to be a flurry of negotiations and dealing around 
the game: _ The Boston Red Sox, wary, too, of being unable to sign 
either Williams or Belle, have expressed interest in trading for Montreal 
outfielder Rondell White. _ Rafael Palmeiro, Baltimore's free-agent 
first baseman, met with the Orioles Wednesday night. Baltimore has 
offered him a three-year, $22.5 million deal. _ The Cleveland Indians 
are in serious talks with the free-agent second baseman Roberto Alomar. 
_ The Indians traded outfielder Brian Giles to Pittsburgh for pitcher 
Ricardo Rincon. _ The Diamondbacks, generally considered the front-runner 
for the services of Randy Johnson, have offered a multiyear contract 
to starting pitcher Todd Stottlemyre. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>