<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981118.0409 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
They are mothers and grandmothers from Africa, Europe, Asia and the 
United States, now scattered throughout New York, and every month 
they meet in a First Avenue conference room across from the United 
Nations. They call themselves the U.N. Family Rights Committee, but 
one woman says ``the dumped wives club'' is more accurate. They are 
estranged or divorced spouses of U.N. employees, women who followed 
their husbands to postings around the world and are chasing after 
them once again. The agenda at their meetings rarely changes. Some 
cannot collect unpaid support orders from U.S. and foreign courts 
because the United Nations blocks them from doing so. Most are not 
entitled to a share of their former husbands' pensions, again because 
of U.N. policy. One woman, a native of the Middle East, lives in a 
Manhattan rooming house. Her husband, a U.N. diplomat, left her after 
40 years of marriage. She won a support order, but knows she may never 
collect. Another woman, Audrey Camp Nekunam, a 71-year-old American, 
has unsuccessfully tried to collect court-ordered support since her 
husband, a native of Iran, left their Westchester County home 26 years 
ago. ``I came out of the marriage an older woman who is no longer 
attractive, either for marriage or for jobs, with a resume with nothing 
I could put on it but housework,'' Ms. Nekunam said. ``As an American, 
I can sue. I have rights to his pension and his wages. I gave these 
American rights up when I married a UNer. I became his ward.'' Divorce 
is rarely simple, nor is it always fair, but these women have discovered 
it can be uniquely devastating for a spouse of a U.N. staff member. 
Had Ms. Nekunam's former husband not worked at the United Nations, 
a court could have garnisheed his wages. But the organization is exempt 
from legal process and refuses to execute family court orders, so 
that while most of its divorced employees do pay their family obligations, 
those who do not enjoy a measure of protection. Diana Boernstein, 
a lawyer formerly with the U.N. legal department who now advises the 
spouses' group, said the United Nations' immunity privileges were 
important and ``were drawn up for a good purpose.'' ``But they were 
never meant,'' she said, ``to protect diplomats from their own families.'' 
U.N. officials fear that waiving immunity, even in family court cases, 
could establish a precedent weakening the organization's independence. 
But they say they have reduced the number of unpaid support cases 
to a handful by threatening problem employees with unspecified ``disciplinary 
actions.'' The precise number of affected spouses is uncertain, and 
a subject of heated debate. The family rights committee and its advisers 
estimate that more than 100, nearly all of them women, live in metropolitan 
New York, and hundreds more are around the world. The attendance at 
the monthly meetings is 20 to 30. They say the United Nations' estimate 
of a handful does not account for women like Ms. Nekunam, whose case 
is considered closed because her husband is retired. Independent international 
organizations like the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund 
and the Inter-American Development Bank have also drawn complaints, 
and other spouses' groups have been organized in Vienna, Geneva and 
Washington. The Clinton administration considers the problem significant 
enough to apply pressure. In July, Secretary of State Madeleine Albright 
took the unusual step of sending a diplomatic note urging international 
organizations to comply voluntarily with family court orders. But 
a State Department official conceded that the United States' credibility 
on the issue was compromised by its own failure to pay its dues to 
the United Nations. For decades, even some U.N. officials now concede, 
the organization essentially ignored divorced spouses. One of the 
few benefits the United Nations did provide these women struck them 
as somewhat callous: a one-way airplane ticket home. The spouses lost 
medical insurance and, in some cases, educational grants for their 
children. Foreign spouses were also vulnerable to immigration laws, 
facing possible deportation within 60 days of divorce, even if they 
had lived in New York for years and had borne children. This month, 
a committee of the U.N. General Assembly has begun considering changes 
that for the first time could provide a small pension to some divorced 
spouses. For 20 years, the voting board, currently 28 men and five 
women, that controls the $20 billion U.N. pension fund had rejected 
all such proposals, even though pensions have become a commonly divided 
divorce asset. ``The whole rules and regulations of the pension fund,'' 
Ms. Boernstein said, ``reflect a view of the world that went out after 
World War II.'' But the current proposal contains a catch. A spouse 
receives a share of the pension only if her former husband, the employee, 
agrees. Many of these women cannot even find their former husbands, 
and few believe they would consent. ``That's like asking the American 
public if they want to pay income taxes,'' said Suzanne Colt, a lawyer 
who represents several U.N. spouses. Audrey Camp Nekunam lives on 
the Bronx River Parkway in a rent-stabilized apartment decorated with 
artifacts like a Persian rug, Danish teak furniture, and a persimmon 
chest and a wooden hatbox from Korea that reflect her life as a U.N. 
spouse. She lived in a three-bedroom house in the Westchester community 
of Hartsdale until 1972, when she returned home from an art class 
and discovered her husband and half of their furniture gone. About 
a year later, she received a document from Iran notifying her that 
her husband, Ali Nekunam, had been granted a divorce in Tehran in 
her absence. The Iranian court had not awarded any support for her. 
The $200-a-week support order she received from a Westchester family 
court in 1973 was useless. Within months, her husband transferred 
to another U.N. agency in Austria. He never paid spousal support, 
nor did U.N. officials garnishee his pay. ``I had greater hopes for 
the U.N.,'' Ms. Nekunam said. ``We joined the U.N. when it was young, 
and everybody had high hopes. That's the last organization that should 
be against women. For heaven's sake, what is the U.N. all about?'' 
With no income or job experience, she rented out the house in Westchester 
and worked as a textile artist in the garment district, never earning 
more than $20,000 a year. Her husband occasionally sent money to their 
three children while they were in school. Without a pension, she survives 
today on a $320 monthly Social Security check and the rent from her 
house, which she would not disclose. Her former husband's lawyer in 
New York, Joseph Marro, called Ms. Nekunam vindictive and said his 
client was an elderly retiree living modestly off his pension in Vienna. 
U.N. records show that Nekunam received a lump sum of $199,362 from 
his pension upon retiring in 1982. He receives a monthly pension payment 
of about $4,700, records show. Because Nekunam has lived abroad for 
25 years, Marro contended that New York courts did not have jurisdiction. 
Wednesday, Ms. Nekunam learned that a Yonkers Family Court judge had 
vacated a $70,000 judgment in her favor on the ground that the court 
did not have jurisdiction. Marro also said both U.N. policy and New 
York law protected his client's pension from any judgment. ``It's 
not really a question of what is right or wrong,'' he said. ``It's 
a question of law.'' The United Nations is above the law, in the eyes 
of Philip Kamaras, a lawyer who took on the case of Marie Sall. Her 
husband, Alione Sall of Senegal, is a staff member of the U.N. Development 
Program, stationed in West Africa. In 1995, the couple divorced, and 
court documents show that Sall fell behind on his monthly support 
payments. U.N. records say Sall is paid about $102,000 a year. Last 
March, a judge ordered a default judgment of $128,000 against him, 
but Kamaras could not garnishee his wages, and Ms. Sall's financial 
situation worsened. Then, Kamaras said, Sall took the two children 
to France under the pretense of a vacation but instead enrolled them 
in school. If Ms. Sall were to leave the United States, her visa would 
not allow her to return and she would be unable to pursue her husband 
in court. But if she stayed, she would not see her children. Kamaras 
says he has not seen Ms. Sall in months. He does not know if she has 
left the country or if she is still in New York. ( Sall's former lawyer, 
Thomas Rome, declined to comment. Sall did not respond to an attempt 
to get in touch with him via e-mail.) Even though they are not U.S. 
citizens, foreign spouses like Ms. Sall are allowed to file for divorce 
and support in New York. Many of them do so because family court laws 
seem to offer them a better chance of receiving a more advantageous 
settlement than the laws in their own countries. One Middle Eastern 
woman said she followed her husband to postings throughout that region, 
entertaining diplomats and royalty at official functions she helped 
organize. Now, she lives alone in a Salvation Army rooming house in 
Manhattan, abandoned without support after 45 years of marriage. She 
said her husband is living in Asia with another woman. She has won 
a support order against him, but she has yet to receive any money. 
Still, she refused to identify herself, not wanting to upset him. 
``I do not want to antagonize him,'' she said. ``He is not stupid. 
He did not make a proper divorce. At least now I have a right to half 
his pension should he die before me.'' For many women from foreign 
countries, the greatest fear is deportation. Many want to stay in 
the country where they have lived for decades, where they have established 
lives and raised children. But while some manage to remain _ through 
sponsorship by U.S.-born children or help from a sympathetic U.N. 
official _ others have no such protection. So, some women remain married 
for little reason beyond fear of divorce and its consequences. A 53-year-old 
woman from Western Europe says she lives ``in limbo,'' as her husband 
of 30 years lives with another woman. She has resided in the United 
States for 20 years, but because her visa and work permit hinge on 
her marriage to a U.N. employee, the Immigration and Naturalization 
Service would deport her within 60 days upon divorce. So she is careful 
not to disrupt the status quo, insisting on anonymity for fear of 
upsetting her husband. She is reluctant to return to Europe, because 
her children live in the United States. Yet she does not qualify for 
Social Security. She has a job teaching in a Roman Catholic high school. 
``Basically, the way it is now,'' she said, ``I feel I'm going to 
have to work until I die in order to survive.'' The elasticity of 
diplomatic immunity is not a new issue in New York City, as anyone 
who remembers last year's uproar over unpaid parking tickets can attest. 
Only the highest ranking U.N. officials enjoy diplomatic immunity 
from civil lawsuits and criminal prosecution. But because U.N. lawyers 
consider pay and pension as immune assets belonging to the organization, 
all employees have de facto immunity from salary garnishment. And 
pensions remain immune after the employee leaves the United Nations, 
either for retirement or another job. In October, another international 
agency, the World Bank, amended its policies to allow many spouses 
to garnishee wages for unpaid support. Between 1993 and 1997, the 
bank says, counselors working with the agency reported handling about 
100 cases involving divorced couples in which financial support was 
an issue. For its part, the United Nations has become more responsive 
to complaints, particularly as spouses have become better organized 
and outside scrutiny has increased. In recent years, Rep. Rick Lazio, 
R-N.Y., has sponsored legislation in Congress on the spouses' behalf. 
Today, the United Nations will not execute a court order, but it will 
recognize one and pressure and cajole a delinquent employee to pay. 
``We have worked very closely with the women involved,'' said Rafiah 
Salim, an assistant secretary general for human resources management. 
``We have taken every possible step to, shall we say, persuade people 
to pay up.'' Ms. Salim said a working group of about 10 officials 
was completing a policy for handling these cases without canceling 
immunity. She noted there are 185 member states in the United Nations, 
each with different customs, attitudes and laws about women and marriage. 
Often, she said, a spouse and an employee may receive conflicting 
divorce decrees from different countries. The laws of each must be 
weighed equally, she said. ``It's not an American institution,'' she 
said. Critics like Ms. Colt and Ms. Boernstein commend Ms. Salim's 
office for acting in good faith, but neither is satisfied. They want 
an ombudsman to act as a representative for spouses within the organization. 
In a meeting last week with U.N. officials, they again lobbied for 
the organization to garnishee wages. They say persuasion is an ineffective 
tool for collecting unpaid debts, particularly since the ultimate 
threat, dismissal, only deprives the family of income. The issue that 
Ms. Nekunam has been paying closest attention to lately is the pension. 
What Ms. Nekunam and other spouses want _ an automatic pension share 
upon divorce, determined by the duration of the marriage _ is a long 
way from what is proposed, a share granted only with the permission 
of the employee. She has spent more than a quarter of her life chasing 
her former husband. She said she simply wants what is fair and what 
she is owed. ``I gave up a lot being married to him,'' she said. ``What 
is a woman worth? Hire me as a chauffeur to take the kids to school. 
Hire me as a nanny, as a cook, as a secretary to do the books. Hire 
me to do all these things a woman does, and a man couldn't afford 
me.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>