<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981118.0465 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After two weeks of bloodletting over their leadership, House Republicans 
sent a mixed message Wednesday about the image they want to project 
in the coming 106th Congress: they kept some leaders and threw out 
others, producing a team with a strong conservative cast that includes 
the party's first black leader. In what was a foregone conclusion, 
the party unanimously endorsed Rep. Robert Livingston of Louisiana 
as its nominee for speaker. He will replace Newt Gingrich, who resigned 
under pressure after the party lost seats in the Nov. 3 midterm elections. 
Livingston is to be elected speaker by the whole House on Jan. 6. 
Republicans kept Dick Armey as majority leader after an intense four-way 
struggle and Tom DeLay as majority whip. Both men, who are strong 
conservatives, are from Texas. But they ejected John Boehner of Ohio 
as Republican Conference chairman, replacing him with J.C. Watts of 
Oklahoma, the first black Republican in a leadership role in modern 
times. And they repudiated John Linder of Georgia as chairman of the 
National Republican Congressional Committee, replacing him with Thomas 
Davis of Virginia. Both Boehner and Linder bore some blame for the 
party's midterm stumble, in which it lost five House seats. The party 
put two women in its lowest leadership positions. The voting by secret 
ballot Wednesday took place behind the closed doors of the ornate 
caucus room in the Cannon Office Building. Emerging midway through 
the day, Livingston stood with some of his new team, including Armey, 
with whom he and DeLay have had frosty relations. Setting a tone of 
low-key conciliation, Livingston pronounced his party ``united,'' 
adding: ``We're all going to have to work together,'' a daunting task 
that will entail ``reaching out to Democrats,'' given the party's 
narrow six-vote majority and the strength of its ideological wings 
on the left and on the right. ``We want the American people to know 
that they are going to get good, clean, honest, efficient government 
from us,'' Livingston added. ``We muffed our message a little bit 
in the last elections,'' he conceded. ``We may have slipped, but we 
haven't fallen.'' The party's priorities, he and others made clear, 
would be to save Social Security and enact tax cuts before the elections 
in 2000. Democrats sitting on the sidelines gloated that the Republicans 
had failed to make a clean sweep of their leadership and put a fresh 
face on their party. ``On the issues, there is no difference between 
Newt Gingrich and the new Republican leaders,'' said Roy Romer, general 
chairman of the Democratic National Committee. The most intense action 
of the day came during the protracted four-way race for majority leader, 
the No. 2 in command. Armey won a majority of votes only after a third 
ballot, and seemed somewhat the bloodier for it. A relieved Armey 
described the ordeal as a ``merry chase.'' But his closest challenger, 
Rep. Steve Largent of Oklahoma, an ardent conservative and charter 
member of the revolutionary class of 1994, brooded after the battle: 
``Steve Largent has been too slow and too small his whole life, and 
this is just one more occasion,'' he said, a reference to criticism 
early in his football career, which was rocky in the beginning but 
culminated in his induction into the Hall of Fame. ``But I will tell 
you that I'm not accustomed to losing, and I don't like to lose.'' 
Also spurned for majority leader was Rep. Jennifer Dunn of Washington, 
the first woman to aim for a top leadership position, who declared 
that even her attempt to run for office was a milestone. And a fledgling 
effort to draft Dennis Hastert of Illinois as majority leader fell 
flat. In the first round of balloting, Armey won 100 votes, Largent 
58, Ms. Dunn 45 and Hastert 18. With no one winning a clear majority 
of 112, the person coming in last, Hastert, was dropped and a second 
ballot was held. On the second, Armey won 99, Largent 73 and Ms. Dunn 
49. On the third, Armey won 127 and Largent 95. Once Hastert and Ms. 
Dunn were eliminated, the moderates had no one to support. They have 
never liked Armey, but some said Wednesday that they found Largent 
too inflexible and inexperienced and had no choice but to support 
Armey. ``There clearly was an anti-Armey sentiment in the conference, 
and people felt it was time to get rid of him,'' said one moderate 
who did not want to be identified. ``But in the end, the moderates 
just couldn't go with Largent. It was more like going with the old 
devil we know.'' Not all moderates agreed. ``He'd look you in the 
eye and act as though he was listening to you, then do the opposite,'' 
said one, reflecting a ``complete puzzlement'' as to how Armey got 
elected. Rep. Rick Lazio of New York, who ran Armey's campaign, said 
the Texan won in part because there was a change above him, a change 
below him and people wanted a steady hand at the tiller. After retaining 
Armey, the party ousted two other incumbents from its hierarchy. In 
what some described as a burst of indignation, Republicans rejected 
Boehner as conference chairman. The chairman is responsible for presenting 
the party's message to the public and communicating leadership decisions 
and party policy. Watts blamed the leaders directly for the party's 
losses in the midterm elections. ``I'm a public relations major,'' 
he said. ``And one of the things I found out in public relations is 
it's very hard to P.R. a bad product. And we had a very bad product 
as Republicans coming down the stretch. And whether it was true or 
not, the perception was the presidential problems and Monica Lewinsky 
became our agenda.'' But this criticism was mild compared with what 
Boehner said on the Sunday after the Nov. 3 elections. He went on 
television and placed the blame for Republican losses foursquare at 
the feet of Gingrich. ``The problems, in terms of managing the House, 
were mostly in the speaker's office,'' Boehner said on the ABC News 
program ``This Week.'' And, he said, the resignation of Gingrich represented 
``enough change.'' But after voting Wednesday to retain Armey, some 
Republicans said they were desperate to present some change in leadership 
and took it out on Boehner. Watts beat him, 121-93. In the race for 
chairman of the campaign committee, Davis beat Linder 130 to 77. Davis 
is a fiscal conservative but one of the few prominent Republicans 
who supports abortion rights. ``The fact that I was chosen this year 
tells you a lot about how we've listened to voters,'' Davis told reporters. 
``Two years ago, I wouldn't have been electable in this conference.'' 
At the bottom of the leadership ladder, Tillie Fowler of Florida was 
elected vice chairwoman of the Republican Conference and Deborah Pryce 
was retained, unchallenged, as secretary of the conference. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>