<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981118.0200 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Philip Michas and Adrian Gamerello are high-school seniors, classmates 
at the prestigious Browning School, just off Park Avenue in the heart 
of Manhattan's silk-stocking district. When it came to picking a college 
to attend next fall, they had the best help money could buy: a highly 
regarded guidance counselor and high-end computer hardware and software 
to aid a senior class of only two dozen. But for the rest of us, here's 
the good news: both Michas, whose ``favorite thing in the world is 
computer stuff,'' and Gamerello, who prints out every paragraph he 
writes because he'd rather read text on paper, said the most valuable 
help they found in selecting colleges was available free, 24 hours 
a day, to anyone with a computer and a modem. Both students took the 
advice of Browning's guidance counselor, Sanford Pelz, and visited 
colleges on the Web. Nearly all colleges have Web sites, of course, 
and those sites have grown increasingly sophisticated over the last 
two years as admissions offices have realized that a good Web page 
can translate into more applications and more tuition dollars. It 
is a good place to start, but the college-bound should think of the 
official Web sites as digital versions of the brochures colleges have 
published for many years. They are reliable in the same way brochures 
about new cars are reliable. Gamerello combined guidebooks, brochures 
and Web pages in looking for a school that valued the arts over athletics 
and was a comfortable size and distance from home. He said Web pages 
``give you some of what the place is about, of the school's ideology.'' 
He mentally adjusted for the pictures ``that are airbrushed and edited 
so they're, like, perfect,'' he said, yet still found them very useful. 
But there is much, much more available than the sylvan scene of the 
campus, the majestic shot of the administration building, the perfectly 
posed pictures of a flawlessly diverse group of students chatting 
amiably about the joys of calculus, the thrill of Chaucer. A different 
kind of information _ less well ordered but often more useful _ can 
be found elsewhere. All over the country, individual faculty members 
have built Web pages of their own, where they post syllabuses, lecture 
notes, old tests _ the nuts and bolts of the classroom. Additionally, 
thousands of students have their own Web pages, where they inveigh 
for and against all manner of details about life at college. ``There 
is a lot of information that has not been cleansed by the admissions 
office,'' Pelz said. Michas, the computer aficionado, couldn't agree 
more. He settled on the University of Pennsylvania as his first choice 
after surfing the engineering department's pages for computer science 
courses. ``I could open up old lecture notes, old tests,'' he said 
with a note of wonder. ``I found that accessing those notes would 
tell me so much about what the courses would really be about.'' And 
don't forget college newspapers. The College Press Network (www.cpnet.com) 
lists links for more than 300 campus papers, arranged alphabetically 
by state. The papers are irreverent, outraged and often outrageous 
_ just what a high school student may need to figure out if everything 
else about a school is as good a fit as the academics. WWW.COLLEGEBOARD.COM 
WWW.PETERSONS.COM WWW.COLLEGEVIEW.COM Visiting a college's Web site 
and the college itself are great ways to make final choices about 
where to apply and enroll, but it's bewildering and too time-consuming 
to begin the selection process there. Most professional guidance counselors 
recommend putting together a list of 10 to 20 schools, then applying 
to perhaps half that number. Some of the factors in school selection 
_ where your parents went and where your heartthrob is going _ are 
serious concerns but are not the sort of things computers can help 
with. But for other considerations, software can be an enormous help, 
provided you use it the right way. College Search, found at cbweb1. 
collegeboard.org/csearch or through a link on www.collegeboard.com, 
is the College Board's online version of its software packages for 
consumers and high schools. Peterson's, a longtime rival to the College 
Board in the big guidebook field, has a search site at www.petersons.com, 
which links to its www.collegequest.com site. College View (www.collegeview. 
com) is a relative newcomer to the online collection. The difference 
between what it offers free on line and what is on the CD-ROMs it 
sells to high-school guidance offices is videos, said the site's managing 
director, Tim Loudermilk. Colleges pay $5,000 to $20,000 and up to 
be included in the videos, which can be thought of as digital versions 
of the slick brochures, called view books, that colleges put together 
to sell themselves. The information on the schools is the same. The 
process of looking for a college is largely the same on all three 
Web sites. On the positive side, the information on the sites is in 
a database, not a narrative, which makes it easy to generate an endless 
set of lists sorted by a wide variety of criteria. If you want a college 
of more than 10,000 students in a city in the Northeast, a school 
with a Division 1A football team, a student humor magazine and a pep 
band that accepts only half of its applicants and offers advanced-placement 
credit for the AP Latin exam, a list of colleges meeting all or most 
of those criteria _ the sites' options vary a bit _ is a few clicks 
away. It can be sorted for your convenience by cost or by other criteria 
important to you. On the negative side, searching a database proves 
that adage about computers: they do what you tell them to do, not 
what you want them to do. If you dream of a small, private, highly 
selective liberal arts college in New England and search with those 
terms in the College Board's database, you will get exactly zero schools 
that meet the criteria. Bennington is too small _ enrollment of only 
450 _ and admits two-thirds of its applicants, so it is not so selective 
after all. Wellesley's 2,200 students make it too big for the ``small'' 
category, which ranges from 750 to 2,000. Colgate is not in New England; 
it is in Hamilton, N.Y. Bates, Amherst and Williams Colleges are all 
perfect examples, but those schools do not provide data on the high-school 
grades of their incoming students, so if that was one of your criteria, 
a reasonable measure of selectivity, those colleges do not make the 
list. You can tinker with the list until you figure out what went 
wrong, but that's going at the problem backward. If you already want 
to go to Amherst, then you do not need to search for it. But if you 
are not well versed about what schools are out there, you won't know 
that you're missing a potentially interesting college that does not 
show up on the list. Don't plan to come up with this list of finalists 
in one sitting or to do it without help from the guidance office. 
PETERSON'S COLLEGE QUEST PERSONAL EDITION (Peterson's Interactive; 
$24.95; bundled with ``Peterson's 4-Year Colleges''; Windows 3.1 and 
higher and NT, and Mac 7.0 and up. COLLEGE EXPLORER (College Entrance 
Examination Board; $25.95; bundled with ``The College Handbook''; 
Windows 3.11 and up and NT.) HIGHER SCORE GUARANTEED ON THE SAT, PSAT 
AND ACT DELUXE (Kaplan Educational Centers; $29.99 after a $20 rebate, 
bundled with test-preparation software; Windows 3.1 and up, and Mac 
7.0 and up.) While some college-selection software carries price tags 
that only a school would be likely to manage, the average consumer 
can still find CD-ROMs that are affordable and helpful. Like the three 
reviewed here, they are often packaged with books or other software. 
With Peterson's College Quest, students enter their personal selection 
criteria, then get lists of colleges that meet those requirements. 
The basic choices, represented by icons on the screen, are made according 
to criteria like region or state, academic majors and difficulty of 
entrance standards, or by whether the schools are public or private. 
Along the way, icons labeled Tell Me offer good, if standard, advice 
on the topic at hand. At any point, the user can click on any of the 
colleges listed to call up a full profile of the campus, the same 
information that can be found in the pages of the accompanying book. 
The software will also generate e-mail letters of inquiry to any of 
the selected schools. The College Board's huge database, packaged 
with ``The College Handbook 1999,'' is called College Explorer. The 
student types in a bit more information than with the Peterson's version, 
rather than selecting categories, but the process is the same and 
the information is very similar. Kaplan, the test-preparation company, 
packages its search software differently, in a five-CD set that includes 
its college search database, based on ``The Kaplan Newsweek College 
Catalog 1999'' (Simon &AMP; Schuster), along with SAT and ACT test-preparation 
software and a scholarship database. Like most test-preparation software, 
this uses a multimedia approach. As perhaps might be expected, the 
information on the colleges provided by the Kaplan software is not 
so thorough as that provided by Peterson's and the College Board. 
Kaplan does offer links to college Web pages, and the friendly tour 
guide recommends that you visit the colleges' Web sites. In the big-ticket 
arena, where packages of CD-ROMs and phone-book-size guidebooks can 
cost school guidance offices roughly $500 a year, there are two major 
players. One is Expan, affiliated with the College Board, and the 
other is a newcomer called College View. Unless you are on a school 
board, you probably cannot influence a given school's decision on 
whether to buy one of them. But from the consumer's point of view, 
in truth, it doesn't matter much because they are comparable. WWW.COLLEGEBOARD.COM 
WWW.FAFSA.ED.GOV WWW.ED.GOV/OFFICES/OPE/STUDENTS Software, unfortunately, 
provides no magic way to get around paying for college, but the Internet 
does offer some help. As the Net matures, however, deceptive practices 
and outright scams abound. Best advice: Stick with the known names: 
Peterson's, the College Board and College View. Sanford Pelz, a guidance 
counselor at the Browning School, recommends the College Board's Web 
site (www.collegeboard.com) as the best place to start. Follow its 
links to the scholarship search. Otherwise, old-fashioned communication 
seems to still be best here, combining the best efforts of the high-school 
guidance office on the one end and the admissions or financial aid 
office of the selected college on the other. Typing ``college scholarship'' 
into an Internet search engine and following what comes up is asking 
for trouble. Experts caution that families should be extremely wary 
of any service that charges a fee _ even just a couple of dollars 
_ for offering to find scholarships. Stay away from businesses that 
guarantee scholarships (they can't) and those that offer to write 
the application essay or otherwise do most of the work for the student. 
And be especially careful of anyone who talks about unclaimed scholarships 
worth huge sums _ $6.6 billion, a wildly inflated number, is frequently 
cited. The best way to get federal student aid forms is directly from 
the government's site, www.fafsa.ed.gov. The full federal rundown 
on student aid, as well as links to other sites, is available at www.ed.gov/offices/ope/students, 
from the Office of Postsecondary Education of the Federal Department 
of Education. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>