<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981118.0211 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the late 1800s, if a patient was thought to have a fever, a nurse 
or doctor might well have wedged a mercury thermometer a foot and 
a half long into the patient's armpit and waited. And waited. When 
doctors started using mercury thermometers in the mid-19th century, 
the instruments were so large that the mercury typically took almost 
a half-hour to heat up for a temperature reading _ unthinkable for 
people today, who have become accustomed to getting a temperature 
reading in just seconds with an instant ear thermometer. Manufacturers 
of ear thermometers say the ear is the best place to measure body 
temperature because the eardrum is a couple of inches from the hypothalamus, 
the area of the brain that, among its many duties, regulates body 
temperature. The ear thermometers are slowly replacing mercury thermometers 
_ the gag-provoking oral thermometer and the squirm-inducing rectal 
one. These two types, also known as contact thermometers, can get 
inaccurate temperature readings because of breathing or saliva, in 
the case of oral thermometers, or poor circulation in the torso, in 
the case of rectal thermometers. But how does an ear thermometer, 
whose probe never actually touches the surface of its target, the 
eardrum, achieve an accurate reading? And how does it do so without 
using a drop of mercury? When something is warm, it gives off energy. 
The hotter an object, the higher the frequency of the electromagnetic 
radiation it gives off. Very hot objects, like light bulbs, radiate 
what people call light _ electromagnetic radiation in the visible 
portion of the spectrum, from violet to red, or 350 to 400 nanometers 
to 750 or 800 nanometers (a nanometer is a billionth of a meter). 
The hotter a light bulb filament gets, the greater the intensity of 
the light. Reducing the heat changes the color of the light. Dimming 
a light bulb, for example, changes the color of the light from yellowish 
to reddish. Just like the filament of a light bulb, the human body 
radiates heat, which can be detected as infrared radiation, or infrared 
light. Although infrared light cannot be seen by the human eye, it 
can be detected by sensors designed to measure the radiation frequencies 
below the visible range. It is possible to determine someone's temperature 
by measuring the amount of infrared radiation being emitted. Ear thermometers 
operate on this principle, calculating temperatures by measuring the 
infrared radiation that emanates from the eardrum and its surrounding 
tissue. The most widely sold ear thermometers for home use contain 
something called a pyroelectric sensor, a detection device that responds 
to infrared radiation. The first pyroelectric ear thermometer, called 
the Thermoscan, was invented by Dr. Jacob Fraden, a biomedical electronic 
engineer in San Diego, and introduced to hospitals and doctors' offices 
in 1990. Now they are in wide use by professionals and in the homes 
of happy parents who never want to pick up another fragile tube containing 
mercury. Of course, the new thermometers can cost three times as much 
as the mercury ones, or more. A pyroelectric ear thermometer works 
like this: When you insert the probe into the ear canal and press 
the trigger button, a shutter in the probe (like a camera shutter) 
snaps open. When the shutter opens, infrared heat from the eardrum 
zigzags down the barrel of the probe and hits the pyroelectric sensor; 
the absorption of the infrared energy warms the sensor and changes 
its electrical conductivity. The sensor then sends an electrical signal 
indicating the amount of heat to a circuit board, where it is amplified, 
converted into a digital signal and sent to a microprocessor, which 
ultimately turns it into a digital temperature readout. Another kind 
of sensor used in ear thermometers, called a thermopile, performs 
a continuous measurement of emitted infrared energy, rather than taking 
a snapshot. Because a thermopile sensor takes an average of five temperature 
readings, it must be left in the ear several seconds longer than necessary 
with a pyroelectric ear thermometer. Manufacturers of thermopile thermometers 
say they are more accurate because they conduct several temperature 
scans. Pyroelectric thermometer manufacturers, however, say that as 
long as the probe is pointing directly at the eardrum when it is in 
the ear canal, several scans are not necessary. Regardless of what 
type of sensor is used to determine body temperature, every ear thermometer 
contains either a four-bit or eight-bit microprocessor. Using a complex 
mathematical approach that takes into account the ambient temperature, 
the microprocessor converts the signal measuring the infrared radiation 
into degrees Fahrenheit or Celsius, and displays the number on a screen. 
The new thermometers have made life easier for sick children and are 
now helping sick animals, too. After Fraden sold Thermoscan to Gillette 
Co. in 1995, he developed a veterinary version, now marketed by Advanced 
Monitors Corp., The thermometer's probe is longer because horses, 
cows and dogs, for example, have deeper ear canals than humans (as 
well as body temperatures that average several degrees higher than 
humans'). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>