<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981118.0083 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Microsoft Corp., whose business practices are being challenged by 
the government in a major antitrust case, suffered a legal setback 
on another front Tuesday when a U.S. judge in California ordered the 
company to stop shipping its own version of Java, a programming language 
owned by a rival, Sun Microsystems Inc. Under a licensing agreement 
signed in March 1995, Sun gave Microsoft the right to ship Java, the 
most popular language for programs that run on the World Wide Web, 
with Microsoft's Windows operating system and its Web browser, Internet 
Explorer. However, in 1997, Microsoft altered parts of the Java language 
so that programs written in Java for other operating systems would 
not run on Windows machines and vice versa. Microsoft said it was 
improving Java, but many others in the industry, including Sun, said 
it was an attempt to ``pollute'' a language that threatened Microsoft's 
operating system monopoly. Sun sued, claiming that its licensing agreement 
did not allow Microsoft to make changes to Java. On Tuesday, Judge 
Ronald Whyte, who is hearing that suit, ruled that Sun was likely 
to prove its claim in a trial next year and ordered Microsoft to begin 
shipping Sun's version of Java within 90 days. If, after that time, 
Microsoft continues to ship its operating system or browser with its 
own version of Java, it will be in contempt of court. Tuesday night, 
Microsoft said the ruling would not require recalls of either Windows 
98 or its World Wide Web browser, Internet Explorer 4.0. Although 
a company spokesman said the changes ordered by the judge would be 
costly, he declined to be specific. What, if any, impact Tuesday's 
preliminary injunction in a private lawsuit in California might have 
on the government's antitrust case, now being heard in Washington, 
is uncertain. But the allegations in the government's suit do include 
the practices that are at the heart of the breach-of-contract case. 
The Justice Department and 20 states suing Microsoft in the antitrust 
case say this is part of a pattern of illegal practices by the software 
giant intended to protect and extend its tight grip on the market 
for personal computer software. If Sun's Java became an industry standard, 
the government asserts, it could pose a serious challenge to Microsoft. 
Java potentially allows developers to write a software program once 
and have it run on a wide variety of computers, regardless of the 
underlying operating system. That is a threat to Microsoft's control 
over the direction of software development. Two factors interact to 
insure the continuation of Microsoft's operating system monopoly. 
First, the vast majority of programmers write their software first 
_ and often exclusively _ for the Windows operating system because 
has a better than 90 percent share of personal computer operating 
systems. Second, Windows users are reluctant to change operating systems 
because switching requires buying all new programs. However, programs 
written in Java could, at least theoretically, run on any operating 
system, meaning that a user could abandon Windows for Apple Computer 
Inc.'s Mac OS or any flavor of the Unix operating system and run the 
same Java programs that he or she had purchased to run on Windows. 
In e-mail exchanges among Microsoft executives made public in both 
the Sun trial and the government antitrust case, this possibility 
was referred to as ``commoditizing the platform,'' meaning that Windows 
would lose its proprietary grip on newly developed programs, a serious 
threat to Microsoft's monopoly. The California ruling is badly timed 
for Microsoft, but the spillover, if any, to the antitrust case in 
Washington is difficult to determine. ``The Justice Department will 
argue that a breach of contract is part of the pattern of bad acts 
by Microsoft and of its intent to monopolize,'' said Robert Litan, 
a former senior official in the Justice Department's antitrust division. 
``It helps the atmospherics of the government's case, but it's not 
clear beyond that what the effect will be.'' The ruling Tuesday is 
a preliminary injunction, Litan noted, and the Sun-Microsoft trial 
is not scheduled to begin until next year. Meanwhile, the antitrust 
trial is already well under way, and Judge Thomas Penfield Jackson 
is expected to rule early next year. ``If there was a final ruling 
in the contract case, it would have far more direct impact on the 
antitrust case,'' said Litan, who is now at the Brookings Institution. 
The California ruling, industry analysts say, is not likely to have 
a significant impact on Microsoft's business anytime soon _ though 
it does raise questions about the company's strategy of trying to 
influence the industry to accept Microsoft's version of Internet software 
standards. ``Because the judge gave it 90 days to comply, there is 
no business interruption for Microsoft,'' said Richard Sherlund, an 
analyst for Goldman, Sachs &AMP; Co. ``Microsoft does not have to 
pull products out of distribution.'' But, Sherlund noted, the ruling 
does ``rein Microsoft in, and it clearly comes at an awkward time 
for the company, given the antitrust case.'' In its lawsuit, Sun accused 
Microsoft of trying to foil any chance for Java to become a universal 
programming language. Microsoft said it was disappointed by the ruling. 
Paul Maritz, a Microsoft group vice president, said: ``We don't anticipate 
any disruption to any products, including Windows 98. Customers need 
not fear any disruption.'' In a conference call Tuesday evening with 
reporters and industry analysts, Maritz said the ``option of not supporting 
Java is open to us.'' But most industry analysts doubt that Microsoft 
would walk away altogether from Java, a popular Internet programming 
language developed by Sun. Sun welcomed the preliminary ruling, and 
Michael Morris, the company's general counsel, said that when the 
case was tried, Sun planned to seek unspecified monetary damages from 
Microsoft. The ruling came as many industry executives had gathered 
at a major computer trade show in Las Vegas known as Comdex. The early 
reaction to word of the ruling was generally favorable, based on the 
assumption that the eventual effect of the decision would be to encourage 
a single, industry-standard version of Java for which software developers 
could write programs. ``A single Java standard is what the industry 
needs,'' said Eric Schmidt, chief executive officer of Novell Inc., 
a maker of software that links computers in networks. Schmidt was 
Sun's chief technology officer at the time Sun introduced Java in 
1995 as a language designed specifically for software that runs on 
the Internet. In his 31-page ruling, Judge Whyte based his preliminary 
injunction on the his judgment that Sun was likely to ``prevail on 
the merits'' in its suit. The dispute between Microsoft and Sun focuses 
on whether the 1996 contract allowing Microsoft to license Java technology 
_ which was gaining a strong following in the industry _ also allowed 
Microsoft to tailor the Java language for use with its own software. 
Microsoft argued that its fine tuning merely improved the performance 
of Java, but Sun countered that Microsoft's real agenda was to undermine 
a challenge to Microsoft by co-opting it. This tactic was described 
in the antitrust trial last week by an executive for Intel Corp., 
who quoted a Microsoft executive as saying, ``embrace, extend and 
extinguish.'' In his ruling, Judge Whyte wrote that Sun has ``demonstrated 
a reasonable likelihood'' that the contract ``does not authorize Microsoft's 
extension of the Java language and its corresponding modifications 
to the Java language compiler.'' Sun, among other things, took issue 
with Microsoft's licensing policies for distributing software that 
includes Microsoft's modified version of Java. Microsoft's licensing 
deals, according to Whyte, require its business partners to exclusively 
distribute Microsoft's Java-based technologies. ``The court finds 
that negotiating for or enforcing the above-mentioned licensing terms 
constitutes an unfair business practice,'' Whyte wrote. ``Microsoft 
does not argue that these licensing provisions bear any utility which 
outweighs the harm asserted by Sun.'' NYT-11-17-98 2248EST 
</TEXT>
</DOC>