<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981118.0377 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Fanning widespread fears that Brazil is plunging into a full-fledged 
recession, the government announced Wednesday that the economy contracted 
by 1.5 percent in the third quarter and said that key indicators pointed 
toward an even more pronounced slump over the next few months. The 
decline in the gross domestic product, sharper than expected, was 
the worst in three years for Brazil. The Brazilian economy, the eighth 
largest in the world, grew 1.4 percent in the second quarter of 1998 
over the preceding three months, and most analysts had predicted further 
advances before the collapse of the Russian economy in August set 
off a stampede of investors from many emerging markets. In its analysis 
of the figures made public Wednesday, the Brazilian Institute of Geography 
and Statistics attributed much of the drop to the ``effects of the 
Russian crisis on the Brazilian economy.'' But the institute, an official 
monitoring agency, also warned that harder times lie ahead, predicting 
that the full impact of the last three months' turbulence ``will probably 
be observed only in the indicators for the final quarter of 1998.'' 
Early in September, the Brazilian government _ hoping to stave off 
a devaluation of its currency and end an outflow of foreign-exchange 
reserves from more than $70 billion in August to about $40 billion 
a few weeks later _ ordered an effective doubling of its minimum lending 
rate, to nearly 50 percent. With consumers now having to pay interest 
rates as high as 150 percent, demand for household appliances and 
other goods is drying up. The $41.5 billion economic rescue package 
that Brazil signed last Friday with the International Monetary Fund 
seems to have reassured investors interested in the country's long-term 
prospects. On Wednesday, the benchmark stock index gained 2.6 percent; 
in the three market days since the aid package was signed, stocks 
have risen 12.2 percent. But the terms of the IMF deal have added 
to the concerns of ordinary Brazilians. The IMF is requiring the government 
to carry out a combination of spending cuts and tax increases totaling 
$84 billion over the next three years, which will squeeze the pocketbooks 
of Brazil's estimated 165 million people. For those reasons, the figures 
announced Wednesday caused little surprise. Companies have been laying 
off employees and families have been tightening their belts for three 
months in anticipation of the austerity package announced last week. 
Stores are already predicting a disastrous Christmas season, after 
a decline in retail sales of just over 5 percent in September. ``I 
think we are already living in a recession, and I don't think the 
IMF loan is going to be a solution,'' said Jose Roberto Ramiz, a university 
physical education professor here. ``It's only a palliative that has 
to be paid some day, and unfortunately the bill for irresponsibility 
and incorrect policies is going to be paid with a lot of sacrifice 
by all of us.'' Government statistics indicate that while agriculture 
and commerce are also suffering, industry, especially manufacturing 
and construction, has been the sector hardest hit in the crisis. Automobile 
manufacturers saw their sales and output drop by nearly 20 percent 
in the second quarter from the first and by almost 40 percent compared 
with the corresponding quarter of 1997. ``Recent figures I have seen 
show industry declining about 6 percent on a September-to-September 
basis, and that is very worrying,'' said Carlos Geraldo Langoni, who 
was president of the central bank when Brazil negotiated its last 
IMF package in 1983. ``That has a lot of social implications, but 
the government is going to have to resist pressures to abandon austerity 
and plunge ahead.'' Debate here centers not on whether there will 
be a recession, but on its strength and duration. Initially, in its 
negotiations with the IMF, the Brazilian government acknowledged that 
a contraction was inevitable, predicting a decline of 1 percent in 
1999. After the IMF agreement was signed last Friday, though, the 
government appears to have changed its tune and now argues that any 
slump will be brief and relatively gentle. ``The combination of external 
support with internal reforms will permit Brazil to resume growth 
during 1999,'' Finance Minister Pedro Malan said in the newspaper 
O Globo over the weekend. But Malan's opinion is a minority one, discounted 
by most outside the government as excessively optimistic. Private 
analysts have been predicting that the economy could contract as much 
as 3 percent in 1999 and shrink again in 2000 unless interest rates 
decline substantially and the government proves to be really serious 
about tackling the huge budget and current-account deficits. ``The 
truth is that we have a difficult year ahead of us, following a year 
that already has not been all that good,'' said Carlos Kawall, chief 
economist for Citibank in Sao Paulo, Brazil's financial capital. ``But 
it won't be a totally lost year if we can get tax reform and reverse 
the negative tendencies we've seen in public accounts.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>