<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981118.0299 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Leaving Washington for an abbreviated five-day trip to Asia, President 
Clinton vowed Wednesday to press Japan to take ``decisive steps'' 
to open its markets and revive its economy in hopes of easing the 
global financial crisis. In a sign of the cool if not downright suspicious 
reception that the Clinton administration has given to the $195 billion 
package of tax cuts and spending announced here Monday, the president 
did not even mention the package. Instead he emphasized the need for 
follow-through on longstanding commitments to such policies. ``Nothing 
is more important to restoring stability and growth in Asia than efforts 
to restart Japan's economy,'' Clinton said before boarding a helicopter 
on the South Lawn of the White House. Declaring that the economy here 
has been ``stalled for five years,'' he said he looked forward to 
``discussing how Japan can promptly and effectively implement its 
commitment'' to reforming its banking system, opening protected industries 
to foreign competitors and priming consumer demand. Clinton canceled 
the first part of the trip, to the annual summit meeting of the Asia 
Pacific Economic Cooperation organization, held this year in Malaysia, 
as he planned and then aborted a military assault on Iraq. He sent 
Vice President Al Gore instead and then left to complete the other 
legs of the trip, to Japan, South Korea and Guam. The decision to 
make the rest of the stops had the incidental benefit of placing Clinton 
out of the country as Independent Counsel Kenneth Starr testifies 
before the House Judiciary Committee, which is weighing possible impeachment. 
Administration officials hope that the trip will display Clinton as 
pointedly removed from Washington wrangling, conducting high-minded 
business _ confronting economic and security worries _ as Starr squares 
off with friendly Republicans and hostile Democrats. But the trip 
was long planned, and White House aides dismissed as preposterous 
any suggestion that Clinton was fleeing at Starr's approach. ``The 
international financial issues have been at the top of the president's 
agenda, and this trip offers him the chance to go and make the case 
for the new global financial architecture that he's been talking about, 
directly to the people of Japan and Korea,'' said White House spokesman 
Joe Lockhart. Clinton will probably not avoid unpleasant matters at 
home altogether. He plans to answer reporters' questions Saturday, 
in a joint appearance with President Kim Dae-jung of South Korea. 
White House aides said Clinton was highly unlikely to take more than 
two questions, however, insisting that the Koreans had set the ground 
rules. As always Clinton tried Wednesday to emphasize the stakes for 
Americans in his financial negotiating abroad. ``If people overseas 
lose their jobs,'' he said, ``they can't afford American products, 
and our workers and farmers pay the price.'' That thought seemed also 
to reflect the administration's increasing worry about the possibility 
of rising protectionist sentiment. Although the U.S. trade deficit 
with Japan fell $1.3 billion, to $14.03 billion, in September, that 
decline was from record levels. In particular, the administration 
has come under great pressure from the U.S. steel industry and steel 
workers to address a surge in steel imports from Japan. ``There's 
no question that there has been a surge and that that is certainly 
causing pain, real pain, in some steel communities in this country,'' 
said Gene Sperling, Clinton's national economics adviser. Clinton 
plans to take his economic message directly to the Japanese people 
Thursday. He is to hold a televised town-hall meeting with what the 
White House is billing as a cross-section of young Japanese, from 
20 to 40. In South Korea, where the administration is pleased with 
economic steps that the government has taken, Clinton is planning 
to deliver a gentler message of encouragement. But he said Wednesday 
that he would also press Kim to reform South Korea's banks and the 
huge conglomerates, whose debt is dragging down the economy. In Japan 
and South Korea Clinton is planning to discuss growing concerns in 
the region and in Washington over North Korea. After some tentative 
signs of lessening tensions on the Korean Peninsula, North Korea is 
resisting U.S. demands to allow the inspection of a vast new site 
that the CIA suspects could be a nascent plant for nuclear weapons. 
Officials in Japan and South Korea worry that the administration, 
distracted by Iraq and domestic politics, has been paying too little 
attention to the problem. Wednesday, Clinton said, ``If Iraq's weapons 
of mass destruction have dominated recent headlines, we must be no 
less concerned by North Korea's weapons activities.'' He cited ``its 
provocative missile program and developments that could call into 
question its commitment to freeze and dismantle its nuclear-weapons 
effort.'' Sunday, Clinton plans to visit at least two U.S. military 
bases in South Korea, in a reminder of the U.S. security commitment 
there. But Joel Witt, a senior associate at the Henry L. Stimson Center, 
a military research organization in Washington, said that Japan and 
South Korea also wanted ``to hear from the president that he's committed 
to seeking peaceful resolution of our differences with the North.'' 
After leaving South Korea on Monday morning, Clinton is to give two 
speeches to residents of Guam before returning to the White House 
on Monday night. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>