<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981118.0424 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Kenneth Starr, the independent counsel, will insist in the House impeachment 
hearings on Thursday that President Clinton not only obstructed justice 
by covering up his affair with Monica Lewinsky, but repeatedly threw 
up ``roadblocks and hurdles'' that slowed the prosecutor's other investigations. 
As Starr's prepared testimony for the House Judiciary Committee's 
first hearing was made public Wednesday night, Rep. Henry Hyde, the 
chairman, announced that Republicans would supboena four new witnesses 
in the investigation of Clinton amid signs that the committee majority 
is now seeking to broaden the inquiry far beyond the Lewinsky matter 
to show a larger pattern of obstruction of justice. Hyde also sought 
a Justice Department report on campaign finance investigations concerning 
Clinton, and the department indicated it was likely to provide it. 
In his prepared statement, Starr ran through a litany of the investigations 
he has conducted since he was first charged with examining the president's 
failed Whitewater real estate venture, and said ``The pattern of obstruction 
of justice, false statements, and misuse of executive authority in 
the Lewinsky investigation did not occur in a vacuum.'' He complained, 
``We have been forced to go to court time and again to seek information 
from the executive branch and to fight a multitude of privilege claims 
asserted by the administration _ every single one of which we have 
won. For the first time, Starr announced in his prepared testimony 
that his investigations have exonerated the Clinton administration 
from any wrongdoing in the firings of seven employees in the White 
House travel office and into whether White House officials used confidential 
FBI files. As for Whitewater, Starr said he had drafted an impeachment 
referral in late 1997 that outlined allegations that Clinton had testified 
falsely at the trial of Jim McDougal and Jim Guy Tucker. But Starr 
said he never sent the referral because he said the evidence did not 
meet the standards required. Much of Starr's testmony dealt with the 
Lewinsky matter, on which he refered 11 potential articles of impeachment 
to the House in September. Starr summed up his view of the president's 
hostility to his investigation in these terms: ``Over the next several 
months, it became apparent that the strategy to win had many prongs. 
``First, the president denied the truth publicly and emphatically. 
Second, he publicly promised to cooperate with the investigation. 
``Third, the president deflected and diverted the investigation by 
telling aides false stories that were then relayed to the grand jury. 
``Fourth, he refused invitations to testify to the grand jury for 
over six months. ``Fifth, his administration delayed the investigation 
through multiple privilege claims, each of which has been rejected 
by the federal courts. ``Sixth, surrogates of the president attacked 
the credibility and legitimacy of the grand jury investigation. ``Seventh, 
surrogates of the president attempted to convince the Congress and 
the American people that the matter was unimportant.'' Hyde said Republicans 
wanted to take depositions from Bruce Lindsey, the Clinton confidant 
who is deputy White House counsel and from Robert Bennett, Clinton's 
private attorney in the sexual harassment case brought by Paula Jones. 
He said the committee would also question Daniel Gecker, the lawyer 
for Kathleen Willey, a White House volunteer who has said the president 
made a sexual advance to her, and Nathan Landow, a Democratic developer 
and fund-raiser close to the White House who counseled Ms. Willey 
on whether she should testify in the Jones case. On Clinton's 1996 
campaign finance practices, Hyde wrote to Attorney General Janet Reno, 
seeking unrestricted access to a memorandum from Charles LaBella, 
the former top prosecutor for campaign finance abuses, in which he 
recommended that an independent counsel be named to investigate the 
president and Vice President Gore. In the letter, obtained by The 
New York Times, Hyde said that because he wanted to wrap up his impeachment 
inquiry expeditiously, ``I do not believe that the committee can or 
should wait for you to finish your preliminary inquiry of possible 
crimes of the president or your campaign finance investigation.'' 
Hyde once again said that he intended to finish his investigation 
by the end of the year. But Democrats and the White House accused 
the Republicans of ranging far beyond Starr's charges of 11 possible 
impeachable offenses in the Lewinsky case and of trying to start a 
battle over attorney-client privilege. ``In an effort to pick a partisan 
food fight they've been reduced to picking up Ken Starr's leftovers,'' 
said Jim Kennedy. a White House spokesman. ``They are even trying 
to out-Starr Starr by breaching the attorney-client privilege.'' ``What 
we have here is an impeachment in search of a crime, and in another 
48 hours we will be reopening the Vincent Foster case,'' said James 
Jordan, the spokesman for Democrats. And Rep. Martin Meehan, a committee 
Democrat, said the fast-moving events meant ``this is going to be 
a long involved process.'' At the Justice Department officials said 
that the department is likely to cooperate with Hyde's request for 
the memo written by LaBella. It must first, however, obtain judicial 
approval to disclose grand jury informaiton in the report. The Justice 
Department could go to court to seek permission as early as Thursday. 
The activity and partisan positioning came on Wednesday, a day before 
Starr will take center stage before Congress, set free for the first 
time in his four year investigation of the president to give a wide-ranging 
public presentation of his case against the president. In his prepared 
testimony, obtained Wednesday night, Starr argued that his case against 
Clinton has nothing to do with sexual liaisons and he protested that 
his office had taken no pleasure in investigating the affair. ``The 
propriety of a relationship is not the concern of our office,'' Starr 
says in his written statement. ``No citizen who finds himself accused 
in a sexual harassment case, or in any other kind of case, can lie 
under oath or otherwise obstruct justice, and thereby prevent the 
plaintiff from discovering evidence and proving her case.'' At the 
conclusion of his prepared statement, Starr subtitled the final section 
``Reflections.'' In it, he defended the work of his office over nearly 
five years. In the Lewinsky investigation, Starr said neither he nor 
his staff ``relished'' the case. ``My staff and I agree with the sentiments 
expressed by Chairman Hyde in the Nov. 9 hearing when he said, `I'd 
like to forget all of this,''' Starr said, adding: ``I mean, who needs 
it?'' He also detailed his legal background, dating back to his position 
as a law clerk in 1973 and attempted to joke about his lack of political 
acumen. ``Every person is, of course, deeply affected by his or her 
experiences,'' Starr said. ``For my part, my experience is in the 
law and the courts. I am not a man of polls, public relations, or 
politics, which I suppose is obvious at this point. I am not experienced 
in political campaigns.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>