<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981118.0305 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When top executives of Lightspeed International, a maker of software 
to manage voice transmission over data networks, walked into the headquarters 
of Cisco Systems Inc. last December, they were expecting to discuss 
a deal to let Cisco license two of the company's products. But Michelangelo 
Volpi, vice president for business development at Cisco _ the leading 
maker of electronic routers and other devices that make up the complex 
hidden plumbing of the Internet _ had something else in mind. He wanted 
to buy Lightspeed. With the fresh backing of Cisco chief executive 
John Chambers, who had earlier opposed a takeover of the company, 
Volpi cut right to the chase. Within three hours both sides had agreed 
to terms. And Lightspeed's managers did not even bother to tell other 
suitors before the buyout was announced a week later. ``We didn't 
feel the need to go to anyone else,'' said Lev Volftsun, then Lightspeed's 
chief executive. And why would they? After all, not only is Volpi, 
who is just 31, uncommonly aggressive in going after what he wants; 
he is also dealing in one of the most valuable currencies in the technology 
business today _ Cisco stock. The shares Volftsun and his colleagues 
received in return for selling their company, worth $160 million when 
they announced the deal, are now valued at more than $320 million. 
Indeed, Cisco's performance in the market the last few years has been 
nothing short of phenomenal: It is up 467 percent since the beginning 
of 1996. That has made Volpi one of the most influential deal-makers 
in technology, in many ways more powerful than the myriad investment 
bankers and venture capitalists plying their trade in Silicon Valley. 
He has been instrumental in negotiations for 27 of the 29 companies 
acquired since 1993 by Cisco _ one of the most active companies in 
pursuing acquisitions. You can bet his phone calls are returned. Investment 
banks peddle him clients, venture capitalists bring start-ups to his 
attention, and entrepreneurs happily trade autonomy for a little piece 
of Cisco. ``His interest or noninterest means a lot to people,'' said 
Vinod Khosla, a venture capitalist at Kleiner, Perkins Caufield &AMP; 
Byers. ``He wields power.'' Cisco's approach to acquisitions is simple: 
Whatever research and development its engineers cannot create in-house, 
it buys. That pays off in a variety of ways. A start-up company on 
the verge of releasing a new product, for instance, will see it explode 
onto the market _ under the Cisco name. Cisco also uses acquisitions 
to gain talent for its entire organization. A case in point is Judy 
Estrin, a founder of Bridge Communications, who became Cisco's chief 
technology officer after the company earlier this year acquired Precept 
Software, where she worked. Volpi was not always so popular. In his 
early days at Cisco _ he started four years ago, an eon in the hyper-speed 
world of Silicon Valley _ Volpi had trouble completing proposed deals, 
said Barry Eggers, who hired Volpi for his staff when he ran the acquisitions 
effort for Cisco. His ``outward confidence,'' said Eggers, now a venture 
capitalist at Weiss, Peck &AMP; Greer Venture Partners, was mistaken 
at times for arrogance. ``The most important part of his development 
is that he learned power doesn't come from telling people you are 
powerful,'' Eggers added. ``He went from being a guy driving the deal 
from his side of the table to the guy who understood the deal from 
the other side.'' Consider Cisco's recent acquisition of Selsius Systems, 
a Dallas-based affiliate of Lagardere, a French military and media 
holding company. When Volpi walked into Selsius' small conference 
room the morning of Oct. 13 to complete the deal, the lawyers were 
still bickering over minor points, such as what would happen to shares 
of stock held jointly by an employee and spouse in the event the employee 
died. ``There was a lot of frustration,'' said Daniel Scheinman, vice 
president for legal and government affairs at Cisco. Volpi spent the 
morning on the phone with Scheinman, who was in Washington for meetings 
with the Federal Trade Commission, and with the company's accountants. 
But as the discussions with the other side became testier, Volpi finally 
pulled aside Jacques Payer, an executive representing Largardere, 
for a private conversation. ``I said something like, `Jacques, we 
have a handshake,''' Volpi recalled. ``Let's get over this and sit 
down and get this deal done.'' Within a half-hour, Volpi compromised 
on some points, signed the documents and was back home in time to 
attend his wife's childbirth class. Volpi is refreshingly candid, 
a welcome surprise at a corporation that zealously guards its public 
image. A spokeswoman for Cisco, for example, initially demanded to 
listen in on interviews with some of Volpi's personal friends. When 
that failed, these friends were counseled by e-mail on how to answer 
questions. By contrast, Volpi encouraged his friends to speak freely. 
Not that he had anything to worry about. Jane Schuchinski, who met 
Volpi on their first day of orientation at Stanford Business School 
in 1992, was gushing in her praise. ``He makes the best risotto in 
the world!'' blurted Ms. Schuchinski, who is chief executive of a 
small software start-up in New Jersey and stays frequently with Volpi 
and his wife, Toni, at their Los Altos home when she visits Silicon 
Valley. Volpi spent an evening recently advising her on how to handle 
the next day's business meetings. ``Mike said, `The best you can do 
is go in and be true to yourself and everything will be fine,''' she 
recalled. ``That is how he runs his life, too.'' Volpi was born in 
Milan, Italy. His father is a bank executive, his mother a journalist. 
When he was 6, his family moved to Japan, where he attended a private 
Roman Catholic boys school. There he perfected the two additional 
languages _ Japanese and English _ that he knows besides Italian. 
In 1984, he left Japan for Stanford University to study mechanical 
engineering. (He got bachelor's and master's degrees.) After a brief 
stint at Hewlett-Packard, he went to business school and ended up 
at Cisco. Despite his first-class American higher education, Volpi 
is not fully acculturated. ``One funny thing is all the innuendos 
about American television shows he doesn't get,'' said Gene Frantz, 
a business school friend. ```The Brady Bunch'? He has no ability to 
relate to it at all. Cartoons? He does not get it.'' When told of 
the comment, Volpi, still an Italian citizen, laughed in response. 
``That's OK; they don't get my cartoon, either.'' In general, Volpi 
avoids Silicon Valley's trendier byways. ``Mike just does his job 
and goes home and lives a reasonable life,'' said Gregory Waldorf, 
an institutional money manager at Pacific Edge Investment Management 
in Palo Alto, Calif. ``That's a powerful contrast to investment bankers 
in Silicon Valley.'' In the last couple of years, Volpi and his team 
have been on an acquisition spree, buying eight to 10 companies each 
year. The companies are typically small in size, usually valued between 
$50 million and $300 million. And many of their recommendations for 
acquisitions come from customers. The March acquisition of Netspeed, 
a maker of products that give users high-speed Internet access at 
home, is an example. Solomon Trujillo, chief executive of US West, 
the regional phone company, called Chambers earlier this year to suggest 
he buy Netspeed, Volpi said. US West wanted to buy Netspeed's products, 
but did not want to rely on a small supplier. ``Chambers said our 
customer is willing to write a purchase order,'' Volpi recalled. ``You 
have to do it.'' The acquisition was announced in March. Volpi also 
keeps open a constant dialogue with Silicon Valley venture capitalists. 
``The tough part is figuring out whom you trust and whom you don't,'' 
he said. ``If you can't trust them the first time around, you quit 
sharing information.'' And he practices what he preaches. Recently, 
Khosla of Kleiner Perkins asked Volpi why he had not talked to one 
of his companies before acquiring Netspeed. Instead of dodging the 
question, Volpi explained the US West connection. ``Even when I'm 
competing I can trust him to be straight,'' Khosla said. But while 
Volpi is straightforward, he does not volunteer competitive information. 
``If you see he hasn't returned your calls for a few days and then 
you read in the newspaper he bought your competitor,'' said Rob Soni, 
a partner at Bessemer Venture Partners, ``then you probably don't 
care for him too much.'' Not all of Cisco's acquisitions have been 
home runs. For instance, Granite Systems, a company started by Andreas 
Bechtolshiem, founder of Sun Microsystems, and which Cisco paid $220 
million in stock to buy, has not turned out to be a blockbuster. And 
Cisco's unusual decision to back a start-up with the express intent 
of buying it has not worked out as well as expected. ``We had an idea 
about the product, and we wanted it fast and in Cisco mode,'' Volpi 
said. Cisco made an early investment in the company, Ardent Communications, 
a maker of integrated voice, video and data equipment to hook up company 
branches with headquarters. It garnered two seats on the board and 
worked closely with Ardent's engineers. Volpi acknowledges now that 
Cisco micromanaged the company too much. ``It's a tricky balance between 
telling them what you want and letting them act as a start-up,'' he 
said. ``We tried to keep it too tight and the product doesn't have 
the spark of a typical start-up.'' Recently, Cisco ran into trouble 
with the Federal Trade Commission, which is investigating whether 
talks Cisco had with Lucent Technologies and Northern Telecom Ltd. 
in 1997 constituted an illegal effort to carve up the market for Internet 
equipment. Scheinman said that Cisco, which denies any wrongdoing, 
was fully cooperating with the investigation and had delivered two 
boxes of documents to the FTC, including e-mail exchanges among the 
companies. Despite his attempts to stay out of the limelight, Volpi 
seems to attract a following all his own. At a charity auction last 
year, a pair of Tigger the Tiger slippers he liked to wear at home 
sold for $600. And the mother of one of his best friends bought Cisco 
stock after Volpi told her over dinner in 1994 that he was taking 
a job there. ``I don't know what Cisco does,'' said Vivian Schuchinski, 
the mother of his friend Jane. ``But I wanted to buy a piece of Mike.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>