<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981118.0057 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Lawrence Ellison, chairman of Oracle Corp. and longtime foe of Microsoft's 
chairman, Bill Gates, failed in his first effort to undermine the 
dominance of the Windows family of operating systems with a concept 
called the network computer. Now, he has struck upon a new strategy 
that would do away with the operating system almost entirely on the 
powerful computers known as servers that act as the control centers 
of large networks. At this year's Comdex computer industry trade show, 
which opened here Sunday, Ellison plans to introduce a new version 
of his Oracle database program, code-named ``raw iron,'' that he hopes 
will be sold by companies that make network servers, including Compaq, 
Sun Microsystems, Hewlett-Packard and Dell Computer. Because the new 
database program will require only a small stub of an operating system, 
known as a kernel, the system will be faster and more reliable, Ellison 
said. His network computer, or NC, was an earlier attempt at simplifying 
the task of corporate PC managers by offering them simple and inexpensive 
hardware that would run a World Wide Web browser program. NCs failed 
to catch on, however, largely because of the rapidly falling cost 
of the personal computer. Refusing to give up, he is now arguing that 
the NC is any device that incorporates a Web browser. These can range 
from something as simple as a cellular phone to a television set or 
a personal computer. In introducing what he calls the Oracle Data 
Base Server Appliance, Ellison will be trying to open a back door 
to realizing the NC and laying out a new strategy in his three-year-long 
war for the high ground in the increasingly bitter software marketing 
wars. The Oracle Data Base Server Appliance is a refrigerator-sized 
computer that will store all of a company's data, including e-mail, 
text files and accounting information. Such a server, he maintains, 
will require much less management and be simpler to use than a standard 
server, which often has to run dozens of different applications. Computer 
industry executives said Ellison's server appliance might prove more 
difficult for Microsoft to defuse than the network computer was. ``There 
is a large market for dedicated appliances on computer networks,'' 
said Eric Schmidt, chief executive of Novell Corp., which sells network 
server systems. ``It is a real revenue opportunity, and it minimizes 
the role of the operating system.'' In recent months, Ellison has 
criticized Microsoft's strategy to place millions of servers running 
Windows 2000 _ the new name for Windows NT _ in small businesses and 
large corporations. Ellison says the strategy will prove costly and 
unmanageable for businesses. And he accuses Microsoft of worsening 
the shortage of high-technology workers in the United States because 
its systems require so many people to administer. An alternative vision 
of computing, Ellison's system would centralize the storage of information. 
His critics call it a look backward toward the era of the mainframe 
computer. ``Leave the files where they are,'' said Janet Perna, general 
manager of IBM's database business. IBM's rival DB2 system, she said, 
employs pointers on the central server that lead people to data distributed 
among many computers in a corporation. The battle over the database 
market is crucial because these enormous electronic filing cabinets 
are the increasingly essential software programs that permit large 
and small corporations to track and control all aspects of their business. 
Applications can range from running a corporation accounting system 
to e-mail servers that act as electronic post offices. The battle 
for market share in the $8.6 billion database industry has become 
a crucial beachhead for software companies that offer one-stop shopping 
for the business world. Until now, says Dataquest, a market research 
firm, almost 53 percent of the market for corporate databases has 
been controlled by Oracle and IBM, which created the most popular 
format, the relational database. However, Microsoft, which has only 
a 4.5 percent market share, is preparing to enter the business. But 
Ellison, who has taunted Microsoft and Gates for years with barbed, 
often humorous attacks, may have found a way to confound his opponent. 
By dispensing with all but a tiny portion of the operating system, 
Ellison argues, he will be able to offer a faster, cheaper and more 
stable product than Microsoft's SQL Server 7, a database for Windows 
2000 that will be announced at Comdex. Meeting with reporters at his 
home in San Francisco, Ellison said, ``I don't know why Microsoft 
should be threatened; we're just saying that you don't need an operating 
system.'' Nevertheless, Oracle's strategy could offer direct competition 
to Windows. The Oracle 8i database can run multiple Java programs, 
and it includes its own file system for storing and retrieving documents 
_ functions typically performed by an operating system. Oracle is 
still negotiating with computer companies about bundling the new 8i 
database program with powerful server hardware, Ellison said. Pricing 
details have yet to be worked out, but he said he expected the appliance 
databases to be on the market by the end of the first quarter of next 
year. NYT-11-15-98 2156EST 
</TEXT>
</DOC>