<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981118.0475 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Two points away from being bounced out of the opening round of the 
Chase Championships for the second consecutive year, Lindsay Davenport, 
assured of finishing the year at No. 1, reminded herself how irritable 
she would be if she let her year finish on an unflattering note. So 
pride prevented a first-round fall Wednesday night as Davenport, who 
trailed Sandrine Testud by 6-4, 5-4 before restoring order, scrambled 
into the quarterfinals at Madison Square Garden with a 4-6, 7-6 (7-4), 
6-0 comeback. Davenport's close encounter with premature defeat at 
this year-ending event was far less painful than Monica Seles' opening 
night ordeal. Unable to eat since Sunday night, when a flu bug took 
up residence in her stomach, and unwilling to do much of anything 
except sleep ``for the last 50 hours,'' Seles, who had not won a match 
at the Chase Championships since compiling her triplex of titles here 
from 1990 to 1992, somehow raised herself from her sickbed Wednesday 
night and punched in for work. After enduring first-round defeats 
in 1996 and 1997, the fifth-seeded Seles wasn't about to let a virus 
ruin this year's campaign. Nor was she about to allow her opening-round 
opponent, Anna Kournikova, get away with a performance marred by 17 
double faults. So Seles, grunting more out of discomfort than habit, 
soldiered her way to a 6-4, 6-3 victory that put her in a quarterfinal 
meeting with five-time champion Steffi Graf, whose resurrection after 
her seventh bout with surgery, this time on her wrist, has been nothing 
short of masterly. But Graf's two-tournament winning streak has not 
surprised Seles. ``Steffi's such a perfectionist,'' said Seles, whose 
determined 65-minute disposal of Kournikova provided further evidence 
that she, too, is blessed and cursed by that trait. ``I don't think 
people have given her enough credit for that,'' Seles said of Graf, 
who leads their career rivalry, 8-4. The 17-year-old Kournikova, the 
Corel WTA Tour's resident glamour girl, led her incipient rivalry 
with the 24-year-old Seles, 1-0, after defeating the former No. 1 
by 7-5, 6-4 this year at Key Biscayne, Fla., where Kournikova eventually 
bowed to Venus Williams in the all-teen-age final. But Seles was a 
distracted player then, wasting away from the worry of watching her 
father, Karolj, slowly losing his battle with stomach cancer. After 
his death in May, she vowed to put her tennis blinders back on, and 
stormed to the French Open final just three weeks later. And Wednesday 
night, despite feeling lethargic from her illness and pessimistic 
about the bad luck that seems to strike her here of late, Seles put 
herself in harness with such discipline that she committed just five 
unforced errors, 31 fewer than her healthy opponent. As usual, Kournikova 
cut a dashing figure on the court: she wore a daisy barrette on the 
crown of her head, and thanks to an abbreviated cropped top that didn't 
quite meet the waistband of her navy tap pants, she flashed her tanned 
midriff with every shot. But her flawless appearance was undermined 
by her paralysis at the service line. A purveyor of bruising ground 
strokes and graceful volleys, Kournikova was inefficient when the 
task turned to holding serve. She lost the opening set with her ninth 
double fault, and quadruple double faults in the next-to-last game 
of the second set gave Seles the opportunity to serve out the victory 
at 5-3. Besides the 17 double faults that made Seles' life a fraction 
less difficult Wednesday night, Kournikova pumped out 22 others in 
Moscow and 17 in Zurich. ``I think if I'd served better, the match 
could've went a different way,'' said the loser, who seemed unaware 
that Seles was under the weather. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>