<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981118.0497 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Following are excerpts from the opening statement of the independent 
prosecutor, Kenneth Starr, prepared for delivery before the House 
Judiciary Committee on Thursday as it considered impeachment proceedings 
against President Clinton. The material was made available to news 
organizations. It bears mention that well before January 1998, the 
President used Government resources and prerogatives to pursue his 
relationship with Monica Lewinsky. The evidence suggests that the 
President used his secretary Betty Currie, a government employee, 
to facilitate and conceal the relationship with Monica Lewinsky. The 
President used White House aides and the United States Ambassador 
to the United Nations in his effort to find Ms. Lewinsky a job at 
a time when it was foreseeable _ even likely _ that she would be a 
witness in the Jones case. And the President used a government attorney 
_ Bruce Lindsey _ to assist his personal legal defense during the 
case. In short, the evidence suggests that the President repeatedly 
used the machinery of Government and the powers of his office to conceal 
his relationship with Monica Lewinsky from the American people, from 
the judicial process in the Jones case and from the grand jury. . 
. . I want to emphasize that our referral never suggests that the 
relationship between the President and Ms. Lewinsky in and of itself 
could be a high crime or misdemeanor. Indeed, the referral never passes 
judgment on the President's relationship with Ms. Lewinsky. The propriety 
of a relationship is not the concern of our office. The referral is 
instead about obstruction of justice, lying under oath, tampering 
with witnesses and misuse of power. The referral cannot be understood 
without appreciating this vital distinction. This case raises the 
following initial question: Is a plaintiff in a sexual harassment 
lawsuit entitled to obtain truthful evidence from the defendant and 
from associates of the defendant, in order to support her claim? That 
should be easy to answer. No citizen who finds himself accused in 
a sexual harassment case, or in any other kind of case, can lie under 
oath or otherwise obstruct justice and thereby prevent the plaintiff 
from discovering evidence and proving her case. Paula Jones, a former 
Arkansas state employee, filed a Federal sexual harassment suit against 
President Clinton in 1994. The President denied those allegations. 
We will never know whether a jury would have credited Ms. Jones' allegations. 
We also will never know whether the ultimate decision maker would 
have found that the alleged facts, if true, constitute sexual harassment. 
When the President and Ms. Jones settled the case last week, the Eighth 
Circuit Court of Appeals was still considering the preliminary legal 
question whether the facts as alleged could constitute sexual harassment. 
After the suit was first filed in 1994, the President attempted to 
delay the trial until his Presidency was over. The President claimed 
a temporary Presidential immunity from civil suit. The case proceeded 
to the Supreme Court. At oral argument, the President's attorney specifically 
warned our nation's highest court that if Ms. Jones won, her lawyers 
would be able to investigate the President's relationships with other 
women, as is common in sexual harassment cases. The Supreme Court 
rejected the President's constitutional claim _ and did so by a 9-to-0 
vote. The Court concluded that the Constitution did not provide such 
a temporary immunity from suit. The idea was simple and powerful: 
No one is above the law. The Supreme Court sent the case back for 
trial with words that warrant emphasis: ``Like every other citizen 
who invokes'' the District Court's jurisdiction, Ms. Jones ``has a 
right to an orderly disposition of her claims.'' After the Supreme 
Court's decision, the parties started to gather the facts. The parties 
questioned relevant witnesses in depositions. They submitted written 
questions. They made requests for documents. Sexual harassment cases 
are often ``he said-she said'' disputes. Evidence reflecting the behavior 
of both parties can be critical _ including the defendant's relationships 
with other employees in the workplace. Such questions can be uncomfortable, 
but they occur every day in courts and law offices around the country. 
Individuals take an oath to tell the truth, the whole truth and nothing 
but the truth. And no one is entitled to lie under oath simply because 
he or she does not like the questions or because he believes the case 
is frivolous or financially motivated or politically motivated. The 
Supreme Court has emphatically and repeatedly rejected the notion 
that there is ever a privilege to lie. The Court has stated that there 
are ways to object to questions; lying under oath is not one of them. 
During the fact-gathering process, Judge Susan Webber Wright followed 
the standard principles of sexual harassment cases. Over repeated 
objection from the President's attorneys, the judge permitted inquiries 
into the President's relationships with Government employees. On Jan. 
8, 1998, for example, Judge Wright stated that questions as to the 
President's relationships with other employees ``are within the scope 
of the issues in this case.'' In making these rulings, Judge Wright 
recognized that the questions might prove embarrassing. She stated 
that ``I have never had a sexual harassment case where there was not 
some embarrassment.'' She also stated that she could not protect the 
parties from embarrassment. Let me summarize the five points that 
explain how the President's relationship wLth Ms. Lewinsky _ what 
was otherwise private conduct _ became a matter of concern to the 
courts. This is critical to fully understand the nature of the Committee' 
s inquiry. One. The President was sued for sexual harassment, and 
the Supreme Court ruled that the case should go forward. Two. The 
law of sexual harassment and the law of evidence allow the plaintiff 
to inquire into the defendant's relationships with other women in 
the workplace, which in this case included President Clinton's relationship 
with Ms. Lewinsky. Three. Applying those settled legal principles, 
Judge Susan Webber Wright repeatedly rejected the President's objections 
to such inquiries. The Judge, instead, ordered the President to answer 
the questions. Four. It is a Federal crime to commit perjury and obstruct 
justice in civil cases, including sexual harassment cases. Violators 
are subject to a sentence of up to 10 years imprisonment for obstruction 
and up to 5 years for perjury. Five. The evidence suggests that the 
President and Ms. Lewinsky made false statements under oath and obstructed 
the judicial process in the Jones case by preventing the court from 
obtaining the truth about their relationship. . . . On at least six 
different occasions _ from Dec. 17, 1997, through Aug. 17, 1998, the 
President had to make a decision. He could choose truth, or he could 
choose deception. On all six occasions, the President chose deception 
_ a pattern of calculated behavior over a span of months. On Dec. 
5, 1997, Ms. Jones' attorneys identified Ms. Lewinsky as a potential 
witness. Within a day, the President learned that Ms. Lewinsky's name 
was on the witness list. After learning this, the President faced 
his first critical decision. Would he and Monica Lewinsky tell the 
truth about their relationship? Or would they provide false information 
_ not just to a spouse or to loved ones _ but under oath in a court 
of law? Eleven months ago, the President made his decision. At approximately 
2:00 A.M. on Dec. 17, 1997, he called Ms. Lewinsky at her Watergate 
apartment and told her that she was on the witness list. This was 
news to Ms. Lewinsky. And it bears noting that the President _ not 
his lawyer _ made this call to the witness. During this 2:00 A.M. 
conversation, which lasted approximately half an hour, the President 
could have told Ms. Lewinsky that they must tell the truth under oath. 
The President could have explained that they might face embarrassment 
but that, as a citizen and as President, he could not lie under oath 
and he could not sit by while Monica did so. The President did not 
say anything like that. On the contrary, according to Ms. Lewinsky, 
the President suggested that she could sign an affidavit and use _ 
under oath _ deceptive cover stories that they had devised long ago 
to explain why Ms. Lewinsky had visited the Oval Office area. The 
President did not explicitly instruct Ms. Lewinsky to lie. He did 
not have to. Ms. Lewinsky testified that the President's suggestion 
that they use the pre-existing cover stories amounted to a continuation 
of their pattern of concealing their intimate relationship. Starting 
with this conversation, the President and Ms. Lewinsky understood, 
according to Ms. Lewinsky, that they were both going to make false 
statements under oath. The conversation between the President and 
Ms. Lewinsky on Dec. 17 was a critical turning point. The evidence 
suggests that the President chose to engage in a criminal act _ to 
reach an understanding with Ms. Lewinsky that they would both make 
false statements under oath. At that moment, the President's intimate 
relationship with a subordinate employee was transformed into an unlawful 
effort to thwart the judicial process. This was no longer an issue 
of private conduct. . . . The legal process continued to unfold, and 
the President took other actions that had the foreseeable effect of 
keeping Ms. Lewinsky ``on the team.'' The President helped Ms. Lewinsky 
obtain a job in New York. His efforts began after the Supreme Court's 
decision in May 1997 _ at a time when it had become foreseeable that 
she could be an adverse witness against the President. These job-related 
efforts intensified in December 1997 after Ms. Lewinsky's name appeared 
on the witness list. Vernon Jordan, who had been enlisted in the job 
search for Ms. Lewinsky, testified that he kept the President informed 
of the status of Ms. Lewinsky's job search and her affidavit. On Jan. 
7, 1998, Mr. Jordan told the President that Ms. Lewinsky had signed 
the affidavit. Mr. Jordan stated to the President that he was still 
working on getting her a job. The President replied, ``Good.'' In 
other words, the President, knowing that a witness had just signed 
a false affidavit, encouraged his friend to continue trying to find 
her a job. After Ms. Lewinsky received a job offer from Revlon on 
Jan. 22, Vernon Jordan called the President and said, ``Mission accomplished.'' 
As is often the situation in cases involving this kind of financial 
assistance, no direct evidence reveals the President's intent in assisting 
Ms. Lewinsky. Ms. Lewinsky testified that no one promised her a job 
for silence; of course, crimes ordinarily do not take place with such 
explicit discussion. But Federal courts instruct juries that circumstantial 
evidence is just as probative as direct evidence. And the circumstantial 
evidence here is strong. At a bare minimum, the evidence suggests 
that the President's job assistance efforts stemmed from his desire 
to placate Ms. Lewinsky so that she would not be tempted _ under the 
burden of an oath _ to tell the truth about the relationship. Monica 
Lewinsky herself recognized that at the time, saying to a friend, 
``Somebody could construe or say, `Well, they gave her a job to shut 
her up. They made her happy.' '' And given that the President's plan 
to testify falsely could succeed only if Ms. Lewinky went along, the 
President naturally had to be concerned that Ms. Lewinsky at any time 
might turn around and decide to tell the truth. Indeed, some wanted 
her to tell the truth. For example, one friend talked to Ms. Lewinsky 
about the Dec. 28 meeting with the President. The friend stated that 
she was concerned because she didn't want to see ``[Monica) being 
like Susan McDougal'' and did not want Monica ``to lie to protect 
the President.'' Needless to say, any sudden decision by Ms. Lewinsky 
to tell the truth, whether out of anger at the President or simple 
desire to be law-abiding, would have been very harmful to the President. 
That helps to explain his motive in providing job assistance. . . 
. After the public disclosure of his relationship with Ms. Lewinsky 
and the ongoing criminal investigation, the President faced a decision. 
Would he admit the relationship publicly, correct his testimony in 
Ms. Jones' case and ask for the indulgence of the American people? 
Or would he continue to deny the truth? For this question, the President 
consulted others. According to Dick Morris, the President and he talked 
on Jan. 21. Mr. Morris suggested that the President publicly confess. 
The President replied ``But what about the legal thing? You know, 
the legal thing? You know. Starr and perjury and all.'' Mr. Morris 
suggested they take a poll. The President agreed. Mr. Morris called 
with the results. He stated that the American people were willing 
to forgive adultery but not perjury or obstruction of justice. The 
President replied, ``Well, we just have to win, then.'' Over the next 
several months, it became apparent that the strategy to win had many 
prongs. First, the President denied the truth publicly and emphatically. 
Second, he publicly promised to cooperate with the investigation. 
Third, the President deflected and diverted the investigation by telling 
aides false stories that were then relayed to the grand jury. Fourth, 
he refused invitations to testify to the grand jury for over six months. 
Fifth, his Administration delayed the investigation through multiple 
privilege claims, each of which has been rejected by the Federal courts. 
Sixth, surrogates of the President attacked the credibility and legitimacy 
of the grand jury investigation. Seventh, surrogates of the President 
attempted to convince the Congress and the American people that the 
matter was unimportant. The first step was for the President to deny 
the truth publicly. For this, political polling led to Hollywood staging. 
The President's California friend and producer Harry Thomason flew 
to Washington and advised that the President needed to be very forceful 
in denying the relationship. On Monday, Jan. 26, in the Roosevelt 
Room, before members of Congress and other citizens, the President 
provided a clear and emphatic public statement denying the relationship. 
The President also made false statements to his Cabinet and aides. 
They then spoke publicly and professed their belief in the President. 
The second step was to promise cooperation. The President told the 
American people on several television and radio shows on Jan. 21 and 
22 that ``I'm going to do my best to cooperate with the investigation.'' 
The third step was the President's refusal to provide testimony to 
the grand jury despite six invitations to do so and despite his public 
promise to cooperate. Refusing invitations to provide information 
to a grand jury in a Federal criminal investigation authorized by 
the Attorney General of the United States _ and one in which there 
is a high national interest in prompt completion _ was inconsistent 
with the President's initial January promise to cooperate and with 
the general statutory duty of all Government officials to cooperate 
with Federal criminal investigations. As a fourth step, the President 
not only refused to testify himself, but he authorized the use of 
various Governmental privileges to delay the testimony of many of 
his taxpayer-paid assistants. The extensive use of Governmental privileges 
against grand jury and criminal investigations has, of course, been 
a pattern throughout the Administration. Most notably, the White House 
cited privilege in 1993 to prevent Justice Department and Park Police 
officials from reviewing documents in Vincent Foster's office in the 
days after his death. In the Lewinsky investigation, the President 
asserted two privileges, executive privilege and a government attorney-client 
privilege. A subordinate Administration official, without objection 
from the President, claimed a previously unheard-of privilege that 
was called the protective function privilege. The privileges were 
asserted to prevent the full testimony of several White House aides 
and the full testimony of the sworn law-enforcement officers of the 
Secret Service. In asserting executive privilege, the President was 
plowing headlong into the Supreme Court's unanimous decision 24 years 
ago in United States v. Nixon. There, the Supreme Court ruled that 
executive privilege was overcome by the need for relevant evidence 
in criminal proceedings. And thus, it came as no surprise that Chief 
Judge Norma Holloway Johnson rejected President Clinton's effort to 
use executive privilege to prevent disclosure of relevant evidence. 
In asserting protective function and government attorney-client privileges, 
the Administration was asking the Federal courts to make up one new 
privilege out of whole cloth and to apply another privilege in a context 
in which no Federal court had ever applied it before. And thus it 
again came as little surprise that the Federal courts rejected the 
Administration's claims. Indeed, as to the government attorney-client 
claim, the D.C. Circuit and the District Court, like the Eighth Circuit 
a year ago, stated that the President's position not only was wrong 
but would authorize a ``gross misuse of public assets.'' The Supreme 
Court refused to grant review of the cases notwithstanding the Administration's 
two strongly worded petitions. This point bears emphasis: The Administration 
justified its many privilege claims by claiming an interest in protecting 
the Presidency, not the President personally. But that justification 
is dubious for two reasons. First, Presidents Carter and Reagan waived 
all Government privileges at the outset of criminal investigations 
in which they were involved. The examples set by those two Presidents 
demonstrate that such privilege claims in criminal investigations 
are manifestly unnecessary to protect the Presidency. Second, these 
novel privilege claims were quite weak as a matter of law. . . . The 
fifth tactic was diversion and deflection. The President made false 
statements to his aides and associates about the nature of the relationship 
_ with knowledge that they could testify to that effect to the grand 
jury sitting here in Washington. The President did not simply say 
to his associates that the allegations were false or that the issue 
was a private matter that he did not want to discuss. Instead, the 
President concocted alternative scenarios that were then repeated 
to the grand jury. The final two tactics were related: (I) to attack 
the grand jury investigation, including the Justice Department prosecutors 
in my office _ to declare war, in the words of one Presidential ally 
_ and (II) to shape public opinion about the proper resolution of 
the entire matter. It is best that I leave it to someone outside our 
office to elaborate on the war against our office. But no one really 
disputes that those tactics were employed _ and continue to be employed 
to this day. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>