<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981118.0177 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The joke about Bill Clinton is: When he drives through a car wash 
in a convertible with the top down, somebody else gets wet. The president 
turned the White House into Motel 1600 for rich donors, but Al Gore 
was the first one to get into trouble for making a few fund-raising 
calls from his office. The president had his way with a young intern, 
but it was Newt Gingrich who got tossed out. The president told one 
of the biggest, fattest lies in history, but the public wants to impeach 
the press. New York magazine took a poll this week and concluded that 
it is the journalists covering the scandal who are all wet. ``If there 
were justice, Cokie Roberts would resign, too,'' writes Michael Wolfe, 
in a cover story titled ``Impeach the Media.'' ``It was her morality 
and personality that people voted against.'' (Last I checked, she 
wasn't toying with an intern.) Some talking heads have been giving 
themselves a lashing. After the election, George Stephanopoulos, the 
former Clinton adviser who is an ABC commentator, apologized, ``We 
were all wrong, all the time.'' To paraphrase President Clinton, it 
depends on what you mean by ``were'' and ``wrong.'' It was not smart 
for journalists to predict at the beginning of the Lewinsky scandal 
that the president would be gone within days. And it was wretched 
excess for the cable channels in search of another celebrity death 
watch to turn into vultures with daily ``White House in Crisis'' shows. 
But the obsessiveness of the media does not justify the wrongheaded, 
vituperative consensus that has been building in the wake of the elections. 
Myself, I was heartened by the way the voters weighed in with common 
sense and proportionality, reacting allergically to inquisitions and 
the prospect of impeachment. But in the weeks since the election there 
has been too much gloating from the White House and its supporters. 
And there has been too much self-lacerating journalistic commentary 
misconstruing the public reaction as a vindication of the president. 
He won. The press lost. The press should get lost. Game over. In a 
nation ruled by polls and ratings, where even newspapers hire focus 
groups to see what kind of news readers want, we are losing sight 
of something we should have learned as teen-agers: Just because something 
is popular doesn't mean it's right. At the White House, the truth 
is employed only to the extent that it's useful. When the Monica story 
broke, the president asked Dick Morris to do a poll to tell him what 
would play better, the truth or a lie. Morris said that he told his 
old pal he couldn't tell the truth and survive, and Clinton replied, 
``Well, we'll just have to win.'' New York magazine, which included 
me among its mug shots, rains a cascade of poll numbers showing that 
by big margins the public is fed up with hearing about the scandal. 
I know exactly how the public feels. I'm sick of hearing about it, 
too. But the fact is that the scandal is there, and the president 
did what he did and said what he said, and the consequences of what 
he did and said have preoccupied the executive, the legislative and 
the judicial branches of government for a year. To pretend otherwise, 
to submit robotically to the polls, to take one's professional instructions 
from the wishes and whims of a fickle electorate would be to abdicate 
the role the public says it wants the press to play: covering the 
news. If the president had told the truth immediately, the story would 
have died. But it is our job to undo the spin and look into the lies 
and go the extra skeptical mile to see that there is no cover-up. 
Moreover, all journalists are not like all other journalists in the 
wild and woolly and recklessly fast era of the 24-hour news cycle 
of cable, the Internet and high-decibel know-it-alls and gossips. 
The impure history of American government _ Vietnam, Watergate, Iran-Contra 
_ proves that reporters have a duty to dig for the truth, whatever 
the public thinks. There is a danger of making false equations between 
popularity and rightness, between what is liked and what is true. 
The danger is that next time, when the cover-up takes place in a less 
gray area, reporters will look at the numbers and go home early. Next 
time, it may not be about sex and lies. It may be about life and death. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>