<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981118.0269 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The government finally unveiled the winning design for the most controversial 
part of the long-delayed expansion of the Prado Museum, but on the 
day of the announcement last week, the winner, Rafael Moneo, was out 
of town. He was in New York to present his addition for the Museum 
of Fine Arts in Houston, one of his big U.S. projects, which also 
include the $100 million Our Lady of the Angels Cathedral under construction 
in Los Angeles. Moneo, 61, is arguably Spain's best-known architect, 
and now he must enlarge Spain's most famous museum, a treasure chest 
of art plagued by years of official indecision over modernization. 
He says he and the museum are a perfect match. ``I have visited the 
Prado since I was a child and know well its problems, so for me it's 
a great source of satisfaction and responsibility,'' he said on a 
recent one-day stopover in Madrid before flying to Rome to receive 
an award. ``I'd like to put my architectural experience at the service 
of this project.'' The Prado's project, after two decades of debate, 
is more modest than earlier drafts. But it still aims to expand the 
179-year-old museum from two buildings to five in the next several 
years, in hopes of better showcasing its unparalleled collection of 
Velazquez, Goya, El Greco, Rubens and Hieronymus Bosch. It will also 
allow the museum to display hundreds of paintings now in storage. 
After a revolving-door succession of museum directors, the parliament 
promised in 1995 to remove politics from the state-run Prado and to 
start by fixing the leaky roof of the neo-classical rectangular main 
building. It was designed by Juan de Villanueva and has been used 
since the museum opened in 1819. The $14 million roof work has forced 
the 1656 Velazquez masterpiece ``Las Meninas,'' a star attraction 
at the Prado, to change galleries twice. But in the process, new space 
was created on the remote third floor to exhibit 18th-century European 
art. Moneo will guide the expansion's most closely scrutinized phase, 
to cost at least $25 million. In the first major addition in decades 
to the main building, he will add, along the red-brick rear facade, 
a glass-roofed foyer that will contain the museum's shops and cafeteria, 
removing them from the main building to make more room for galleries. 
The wedge-shaped foyer, in turn, will connect the main building to 
Moneo's planned Prado addition on the street behind, up a gentle slope. 
That new structure, with two underground levels topped by a four-story 
cube of red brick, will house temporary exhibitions, the library and 
the restoration workshops. The addition will incorporate the stone 
ruins of the 17th-century cloisters that Spanish royalty once used 
as a spiritual retreat. The Roman Catholic Church ceded the cloisters 
to the museum, but the adjacent Jeronimos Church will stay open for 
worship and for royal ceremonies and society weddings. The architectural 
competition's jury lauded Moneo's plan as ``discreet and controlled'' 
in linking the main building to the cloisters in the aristocratic 
neighborhood. Moneo has designed half a dozen other museums, including 
the rehabilitation in Madrid of the Villahermosa Palace for the Thyssen-Bornemisza 
Museum, a spacious building the Prado once coveted for its own expansion. 
He beat eight other competitors in the contest run by the conservative 
government. Like him, they were finalists in the international design 
contest for the Prado started by the former Socialist government. 
Despite 480 entries, the jury declared there was no winner. After 
that, the once-grandiose plans were scaled back, and the Prado board 
later set new expansion guidelines, which some architects complained 
were too restrictive. But not Moneo. In 1996 he defended his ``ambitious'' 
plan that included an elevated glass walkway for the Prado expansion. 
But this time he said he found liberty within the rigorous rules, 
and he designed ``something more realistic.'' He must submit his final 
plans in the coming months; construction could take a few years. Miguel 
Angel Cortes, the secretary of state for culture, who oversees the 
Prado, said the museum had entered ``a stable horizon,'' even as the 
other work continues that does not involve Moneo. In July, for instance, 
the Prado annex in the nearby 17th-century Cason del Buen Retiro was 
closed for a $10 million two-year overhaul that will include three 
new underground levels. The Cason has displayed the 19th-century collection 
and, until 1992, Picasso's ``Guernica,'' which the Prado lost to the 
20th-century collection of the Queen Sofia Art Center. The final part 
of the Prado's expansion program involves the neighboring Palacio 
del Buen Retiro, home to the Army Museum. When all the projects are 
complete, the Prado wants at least 2,600 of its most valuable 4,500 
paintings to be on permanent display, up from just 1,200 on view now. 
The Prado also has nearly 1,000 sculptures among its collection of 
20,000 artworks, including sketches and decorative arts or paintings 
on loan to Spanish embassies. Moneo said his focus was to move auxiliary 
services out of the original Villanueva building, making it the centerpiece 
for the permanent collection, which last year had 1.7 million visitors, 
down from the 2 million several years ago. ``The Prado is the Villanueva 
building,'' Moneo said. ``I don't want to lose that.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>