<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981118.0413 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Asian, Latin American and Russian imports are pouring into the United 
States, trapping the Clinton administration in an embarrassing trade 
hypocrisy. Last week, President Clinton promised to stop the ``flooding 
of our markets'' with low-priced steel and other imports that he said 
threatened U.S. workers. This week, he sent Vice President Al Gore 
to Malaysia to preach open borders to a gathering of Asian-Pacific 
countries, many of which are clawing their way out of recession. Apparently 
it is acceptable for Russia and other countries to export their way 
to recovery as long as those exports do not land in the United States. 
Clinton is right to seek protection from a deluge of temporarily cheap 
steel imports. But there are good and bad ways to go about this task. 
So far the administration has not chosen wisely. U.S. steel manufacturers 
have accused Japan, Russia and Brazil of ``dumping'' steel in the 
United States, or selling it for less than it costs them to make it 
at home. But anti-dumping rules too often amount to protectionism, 
shutting out legitimate exports and provoking trading partners to 
retaliate. The better course would be for the administration to exploit 
a different provision of international trade rules, known as the safeguard 
clause, which permits countries to impose quotas or tariffs in order 
to block a sudden rush of cheap imports. That would give the United 
States a principled and constructive way to insulate workers from 
the temporary ravages of trade. The steel industry's complaints center 
on imports of hot-rolled steel, which account for more than half of 
all steel products. These imports are soaring in part because Japanese 
and Brazilian mills are selling steel to the United States because 
buyers are evaporating in neighboring countries mired in recession. 
Russian steel is flooding America in part because the ruble has collapsed, 
cutting the dollar price of Russian goods. The price of steel in the 
United States has fallen by up to a third, and imports have risen 
about 80 percent since last year. Layoffs have already started. The 
steel industry's answer is to accuse Japan, Russia and Brazil, which 
account for all of the explosive rise this year, of dumping. The one-third 
price drop ``is out of bounds,'' said Keith Busse, president of of 
Steel Dynamics Inc. of Indiana, one of the 12 companies that brought 
the dumping charges. ``Right is right and wrong is wrong,'' he said, 
and ``import prices are crazy and will take out not just inefficient 
producers.'' But to many economists, invoking international anti-dumping 
rules lies somewhere between a joke and protectionist fraud. The Commerce 
Department, which determines whether dumping has occurred, not only 
gets to decide what another country's costs are but also gets to tack 
on a nifty profit. In the case of Russia, the Commerce Department 
can determine that its markets are too primitive to yield reliable 
cost estimates and substitute figures based on higher production costs 
in, say, Turkey. The process is designed to insure that the domestic 
industry wins. An independent agency then decides whether the dumped 
imports have caused the aggrieved industry ``material harm,'' a low 
threshold. If the steel industry gets its way, the United States will 
then impose prohibitive tariffs. Americans' overuse of dumping charges 
is now taking a large toll. The rest of the world is catching on to 
the charade. The dumper now often claims to be the dumpee _ last year 
the United States was a defendant in about as many cases as it was 
the plaintiff. Start from first principles. Low-cost imports are a 
gift to U.S. consumers if they can be expected to last. If foreigners 
want to give us $2 worth of steel for $1 year in and year out, the 
country would be foolish to turn down the largess. But if the something-for-nothing 
is only temporary _ as is almost certain in the current case _ then 
the gift can turn sour. The temporary influx would trifle with the 
livelihoods of ordinary steelworkers, throwing them out of work one 
year only to lure them back in another. That is why international 
trade rules include a safeguard clause. It allows nations to impose 
quotas or tariffs in an effort to hold off a sudden rush of cheap 
imports. But the safeguard clause is better tailored than anti-dumping 
rules to prevent abuse. The safeguard clause can only be invoked temporarily 
and must be phased out. An independent agency must determine that 
imports impose ``serious harm'' to the domestic industry rather than 
merely ``material harm'' under the anti-dumping rules. And if countermeasures 
are left in place for an extended period, then the United States, 
in the steel case, would be required to compensate Russia, Japan and 
Brazil. That is the right principle. Americans protect their steelworkers 
from needless ravage but do so in a way that minimizes harm to suffering 
workers in Russia and Brazil. The administration is right to pursue 
relief for the domestic steel industry. But how it pursues that relief 
also matters. If the domestic industry successfully exploits anti-dumping 
rules in this case, the semiconductor, apparel and scores of other 
industries will follow suit. Then watch retaliatory measures take 
hold by America's trading partners around the globe. The steel mills 
that brought dumping charges cannot be blamed for resorting to a legal 
device stacked in their favor. But Congress and the president are 
obligated to take a wider view. Under the law, each can initiate use 
of the safeguard clause on behalf of steelmakers. There is, despite 
the continuing dumping case, still time. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>