<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981118.0420 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Livent Inc., the Broadway theater company, filed for bankruptcy protection 
Wednesday, just six months after the company was taken over by Michael 
Ovitz, once widely considered the most powerful person in Hollywood. 
At the same time, Ovitz, former president of Walt Disney Co., and 
his new management team filed a lawsuit against the company's founders, 
the flamboyant impresario, Garth Drabinsky, and his partner, Myron 
Gottlieb. The lawsuit accuses the two men of having fraudulently misled 
Ovitz, who invested $20 million in Livent, by hiding the fact that 
the company was losing millions of dollars on its expensive productions 
of shows like ``Ragtime,'' ``Showboat'' and ``Phantom of the Opera.'' 
The lawsuit also contends that Drabinsky and Gottlieb had fraudulently 
given themselves more than $7.5 million in ``kickbacks'' by funneling 
some of Livent's money to another corporation in Toronto that Gottlieb 
owned. Ovitz and the company's new managers maintain that Drabinsky 
and Gottlieb had ordered Livent's accountants to manipulate the financial 
books so that more than $60 million of extravagant spending on advertising, 
salaries for the shows' huge casts and elaborate sets were hidden 
and never cut into the profits the company reported in its financial 
statements. The lawsuit further contends that to try to keep the matter 
covered up, Drabinsky and Gottlieb went to Livent's senior financial 
executive and tried to gain his cooperation in keeping the fraud hidden 
by offering him greatly increased compensation. The company's severe 
financial straits are already taking a toll on the many theater productions 
that the company now has in major cities in the United States and 
Canada. On Tuesday night, the cast of one of the company's productions 
of ``Ragtime,'' which has been touring in the United States and is 
now playing in Minneapolis, was told that the rest of the tour, including 
the many weeks of shows scheduled for Seattle and Boston, had been 
canceled. In response to the allegations, Drabinsky and Gottlieb, 
who were suspended from their jobs in August and formally dismissed 
Wednesday by the company's board of directors, said in a written statement 
that Ovitz and Roy Furman, Livent's new chief executive and a former 
Wall Street investment banker, were trying to blame them for their 
own business decisions and miscalculations. Drabinsky and Gottlieb 
said they would vigorously defend themselves against the company's 
allegations. In addition, Drabinsky filed his own lawsuit against 
Ovitz, Furman and other Livent executives charging that they had acted 
together ``in a conspiracy to injure him.'' This is the second time 
that Drabinsky, 48, a man long known for his artistic vision, abundant 
confidence and high-spending ways, has built a sprawling entertainment 
company, only to be dismissed because of accounting issues. In 1979, 
Drabinsky, a former entertainment lawyer, founded Cineplex Odeon in 
Toronto and went on to build it into an 1,800-screen chain sprawling 
across the United States and Canada. But in 1989, MCA, one of the 
company's big investors, dismissed him in 1989 amid questions of aggressive 
accounting. Drabinsky and Gottlieb said in their statement Wednesday: 
``This is a sad day for live theater and a sad day for Livent shareholders. 
New management is facing the consequences of their actions of recent 
months. Rather than growing the company, they have wasted resources 
on accountants and lawyers in a protracted campaign to inflict injury 
to our reputations.'' The statement continued: ``Instead of nurturing 
the creative potential of the company, they have diminished it. Instead 
of focusing on growing the company and building shareholder value, 
they have relentlessly focused on descrediting us.'' They added that 
Ovitz and Livent had filed the lawsuit against them on the same day 
that the company filed for protection from creditors under Chapter 
11 of the federal bankruptcy act ``to deflect attention from their 
own ill conceived decisions.'' The filing Wednesday in Manhattan will 
give the company many months to reorganize its finances while it continues 
to produce shows. With the protection from creditors that comes with 
filing for a business reorganization under Chapter 11, Livent will 
not have to make its scheduled payments of interest and principal 
on almost $200 million of debt until it can renegotiate the terms 
with its creditors. Now, the debt, which was mostly used to pay for 
the construction of new theaters in New York, Chicago, Vancouver, 
British columbia, and Toronto, is eating up most of the company's 
cash, leaving the company unable to keep up with its daily expenses. 
The company is desperately trying to arrange some new short-term financing 
so that it can meet its payroll and other day-to-day costs. After 
months of delay, the company released corrected financial statements 
Wednesday for 1996, 1997 and the first two quarters of 1998. They 
show that the company's entire equity has been eaten up by its bills. 
That means that the company's debts are now greater than the value 
of its theaters and other assets. The corrected statements were the 
first financial details that Livent has publicly released since Aug. 
10, when it announced that it had discovered serious accounting irregularities 
and was suspending Drabinsky and Gottlieb while it investigated the 
scope of the problems. Because of the lack of financial information, 
securities regulators in both the United States and Canada suspended 
trading in Livent's stock. It is not clear whether the regulators 
will now let the stock trade again with the release of the corrected 
financial statements. In addition to the civil suits and countersuits, 
Livent is under investigation by securities regulators in both the 
United States and Canada, and the Royal Canadian Mounted Police have 
begun a criminal investigation into the company's activities. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>