<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981118.0406 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Iraqi dissident groups are weak, divided and in many cases thoroughly 
penetrated by Iraqi agents, making it uncertain how they could ever 
topple Saddam Hussein, Clinton administration officials said Wednesday. 
Some of the groups also have misgivings about U.S. support. Leaders 
of some of the smaller groups say the United States might do little 
but revive discredited projects that have lost the support of people 
inside Iraq. President Clinton caught the dissident groups and even 
some U.S. officials off guard last weekend, when he said the best 
way to avoid another crisis with Iraq would be a change in Baghdad's 
government. After calling off a planned air strike, he said the administration 
would do more to support ``forces of change in Iraq.'' Clinton also 
embraced a new law that many in the Pentagon and his administration 
had criticized as a waste of money. It calls for Washington to provide 
$97 million worth of military equipment and other resources to the 
dissidents. Administration officials acknowledge that the president's 
address suddenly revived a policy that many critics believed had been 
on the back burner. Indeed, the president's announcement came weeks 
after the top U.S. military commander in the Gulf, Gen. Anthony Zinni, 
dismissed the new law, saying, ``I don't think these things have been 
thought out.'' Now, the White House and State Department are moving 
quickly to try to fill in the blanks. Soon after the president's address, 
Martin Indyk, assistant secretary of state, met with Ahmed Chalabi, 
the leader of the Iraqi National Congress, which has been out of favor 
with the administration since its operations in northern Iraq were 
decimated by the Iraqi army two years ago. Chalabi lobbied Congress 
to pass the $97 million funding plan, and now hopes to push the administration 
to designate his group as a prime beneficiary. The administration's 
support ``represents a policy reversal,'' said Chalabi. ``They have 
opened their arms.'' The administration also is accelerating efforts 
to help unite feuding Kurdish and other groups into a cohesive opposition. 
These include an influential Iranian-backed Shiite Muslim group. That 
group, the Supreme Assembly of the Islamic Revolution of Iraq, met 
privately with Clinton administration officials in Washington three 
months ago, according to other dissident leaders. It is the largest 
among Iraqi Shiite groups in southern Iraq and may now be willing 
to take part in a U.S.-sponsored military action against Saddam, if 
Tehran approves. Meanwhile, more than a dozen opposition groups in 
London were asked to meet with a British government official the day 
after Prime Minister Tony Blair said Britain supported the efforts 
to undermine Saddam's regime. But altogether, the sheer number of 
dissident groups and the fact that they have competing interests, 
have hampered Washington and London in their search for a way to topple 
Saddam. Clinton administration officials acknowledged Wednesday that 
they are not yet ready to decide which groups would receive American 
support, and if any would receive arms. Under the terms of the law, 
called the Iraq Liberation Act, the president has until the end of 
January to announce which groups will receive U.S. support, but it 
does not require him to actually turn over arms to them. ``We are 
intensifying our engagement with the opposition groups by strengthening 
our economic and political support for them,'' said the State Department 
spokesman, James Rubin. ``With respect to arming them, we haven't 
ruled that out, but we think it is premature to do that, until we 
work on the political side, and until then we are not unduly risking 
people's lives.'' Another senior State Department official was equally 
cautious. ``We have to be realistic about how we go forward,'' he 
said. ``Working with the opposition to help them unify to create an 
alternative is a critical first step.'' Republicans in Congress say 
they aren't convinced that the White House is serious. ``They have 
taken a step towards support for the Iraq Liberation Act, but I don't 
see that they have really made a commitment to overthrow Saddam,'' 
said a senior Republican Senate aide. ``And that's the purpose of 
the act.'' Some Iraqi dissident groups, which are divided across ethnic 
and sectarian lines, worry about U.S. and British intentions, saying 
that any plan that provides support for the Iraqi National Congress 
will have little support inside the country. ``From the beginning, 
I realized that this is not for changing the regime in Iraq,'' said 
Sami Faraj, who writes a weekly column for a London-based weekly newspaper, 
Free Iraq. Saad Jabr, the publisher of Free Iraq and the son of a 
former prime minister of Iraq when it had a British-installed monarchy, 
recommended an indictment of Saddam for crimes against humanity and 
total diplomatic isolation for his regime, among other measures. He 
also recommended spending ``big money'' on an effective satellite 
system for broadcasting to Iraq. A number of exiles mentioned that 
the Radio Free Iraq broadcasts that the United States has now begun 
are too little, too late. ``We don't think America is serious, unfortunately, 
about removing Saddam Hussein,'' Jabr said in an interview. And if 
the Clinton administration wants to count on any serious support within 
the country, the Iraqi middle class living mostly in Baghdad or other 
towns in the country's Arabic, Sunni Muslim heartland, need a psychological 
boost, he said. In Minnesota, Abbas Mehdi, a university professor 
who is chairman of the Union of Independent Iraqis, a group linking 
about 30 small groups, said the United States has embraced sanctions 
that cut into the living standards of the Iraqi middle class, the 
very group whose cooperation Washington would need. ``Sanctions are 
destroying the people and the country,'' he said. ``They have weakened 
the people who now have to depend on Saddam Hussein more than ever. 
It pains me to see how people talk about the U.S. in the Middle East, 
not only in Iraq. People are angry.'' Despite the new interest, many 
U.S. officials have grown wary of investing too much _ in time or 
resources _ into groups that often seem more intent on fighting each 
other than unseating Saddam. Since the end of the Persian Gulf War, 
Saddam has exploited the differences among the groups and managed 
to subvert them, rather than the other way around. U.S. options have 
been so limited that the Central Intelligence Agency has been secretly 
funding one group that agency officials know has been betrayed by 
Iraqi agents, U.S. officials said. The Iraqi National Accord, a group 
made up of former military officers and other defectors from the Baghdad 
regime, is still receiving CIA backing more than two years after Iraq 
revealed that it knew all about the group's covert efforts to subvert 
Saddam's rule. In June of 1996, Iraq rounded up and executed about 
100 army officers and others suspected of involvement with the group, 
making it clear that the government had agents inside the group. Wednesday, 
U.S. officials say they strongly suspect that the group of defectors, 
with offices in Amman, Jordan, and London, is still riddled with double 
agents spreading disinformation. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>