<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981118.0289 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Jakarta belonged to the students Wednesday as traffic stopped and 
security forces fell back to allow two large processions to mourn 
some 16 students killed by gunfire last Friday. To the sad notes of 
an anthem called ``Falling Flowers,'' and in the shiver of a sudden 
evening breeze, members of one procession stepped through a line of 
stolid riot policemen to lay red paper flowers at the gates of the 
parliament building. This had been the destination of a student demonstration 
that was halted a mile away on Friday by volleys of gunfire, tear 
gas and beatings. A second procession Wednesday laid wreaths outside 
Atmajaya University, where most of the killings took place. The gunfire 
on Friday has shocked Indonesia at a time when hopes were rising for 
a less repressive government after President Suharto's resignation 
in May. And the anger of the students has challenged a dawning consensus 
between the government and its political opponents to move slowly 
toward democratic reforms and general elections next year. While the 
killings have shaken the reputation of the already-unpopular military, 
they have raised the moral standing of Indonesia's politically restive 
students. Having helped force Suharto out, the students are gaining 
momentum in their demands for more political change, in particular 
a reduction of the pervasive political role of the military. ``This 
is the one force the government cannot control,'' said Daniel S. Lev, 
an expert on Indonesia at the University of Wisconsin, speaking of 
the students. ``They are dangerous because everyone understands that 
they are the one group that is not out for themselves, and they seem 
to have the fate of Indonesia in mind. The army is afraid of them. 
In a sense, the whole elite is afraid of them.'' In full retreat now, 
Wiranto, the chief of the military, placed an advertisement of ``sincere 
condolences'' in several newspapers Wednesday over the Friday killings. 
``We hope that their souls are accepted at God's side,'' he wrote 
of the student victims, ``and for all the families that they left 
behind, may God give them patience and strengthen their souls to face 
this hardest of situations.'' But for all its momentum, the student 
movement remains an enigma here. With no unified leadership, without 
a clear agenda, without allegiance to any political faction, it seems 
an undirected, unfocused force of nature, like a typhoon. After years 
of quiescence under Suharto's repressive rule, the student movement 
was only beginning to coalesce on Indonesian campuses in May. Perhaps, 
some people say, it succeeded too quickly in pushing him from office 
and its gales have yet to blow themselves out. Some people see the 
students now as spoilers of Indonesia's fragile stability, with their 
insistence on rapid, disruptive change at a time of emerging tentative 
consensus within the political establishment. One foreign diplomat 
spoke with exasperation of the students' ``myth of purity'' in which 
no compromise of ideals is acceptable. Some of the students, on the 
other hand, speak passionately about the need for true reforms in 
a nation where the only concrete change so far is the removal of one 
man, Suharto. His entire government structure has been left in place, 
promising to reform itself. ``That was not a real victory, only an 
illusion of victory,'' said Ki Joyo Sardo, 22, a political science 
student at the University of Indonesia. ``The old system is still 
here. The new regime is still controlled by the old regime.'' Dewi 
Astuti, 20, a history major at the university, said she had joined 
the demonstrations because ``I see that our political system is not 
right; I don't see any democracy.'' She conceded that the government 
of President B.J. Habibie had taken some steps toward democracy and 
openness but said: ``They only made those changes because we pushed 
them. And anyway, the changes are only on the surface. Fundamentally 
nothing has changed.'' Aity Sukidjo, 21, a psychology student at Atmajaya 
University, said most students place little faith in the electoral 
process that is being put in place by the government. ``The students 
are afraid that most seats are going to be bought off by the Habibie 
and Suharto supporters,'' she said. ``Before we elect them, they'll 
be paid off. That's why we won't have a chance.'' But when it comes 
to a program for the future, the picture becomes more complicated. 
Like almost everything else here in the post-Suharto era, the students 
are fragmenting into ever smaller slices of opinion, from those who 
support the measured reform agenda of Habibie to those who want to 
hang him. The dominant demands are the abolition of the military's 
political role and an investigation and trial of Suharto. Many students 
are calling for an interim council and new presidential elections 
to replace Habibie's government. But it may be beside the point to 
try to pin down a specific political agenda. Like most student movements, 
this one is driven more by passion than calculation. As they dance 
and chant on the roofs of their slow-moving, overcrowded buses, the 
students suggest a more optimistic future for the country than the 
holdover politicians in their parliamentary meetings, calibrating 
the necessary tradeoffs between reforms and personal power. ``We want 
democracy; we want freedom!'' Ega Arsilla, 18, said, summing up her 
political views as she marched Wednesday with her friends from the 
freshman class at the Jakarta Institute of Management. She said her 
aspirations in life were ``to be a successful woman; to be someone 
useful.'' If the police begin shooting again, she said, ``we'll run!'' 
As they walked, the students sang an army marching song, with derisive 
new words: ``The army is useless. Dismiss them. Better to replace 
them with Boy Scouts. They never pay on the bus. They never pay at 
food stalls. They rape people's wives and they beat people in the 
marketplace.'' But it seemed they could not stay angry for long. After 
laying flowers in front of the Parliament building, at the feet of 
the riot policemen whose comrades had shot at them last Friday, the 
students turned ebullient again. They exchanged cigarettes with soldiers 
and shook their hands, and one group of freshmen gathered around a 
police officer to have him autograph their blue school jackets. ``Aqil,'' 
he signed, laughing in surprise, as the students handed him a black 
marker pen. Why did they want his signature on this day of mourning? 
``We want to be friends with the police,'' said Yoke Rosaline, 20, 
an accounting student. ``Especially this one. He's nice. And he's 
good looking.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>