<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981118.0484 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Washington and Wall Street may be breathing a sigh of relief now that 
a rescue package for the Brazilian economy has been stitched together. 
But the political leaders who will have to hold up Brazil's end of 
the bargain have suddenly become preoccupied with another troublesome 
question: who fabricated the mysterious tapes and documents that implicate 
Brazil's president in potentially impeachable offenses? Shortly before 
the re-election of Fernando Henrique Cardoso last month, potentially 
compromising recordings of intercepted telephone calls between senior 
government officials, including Cardoso, were left under a highway 
underpass here. About the same time, an anonymous person sent a series 
of faxes highly unfavorable to the image of the president to a government 
minister, who made them available to the press in recent days. The 
faxes purport to show that since 1994, Cardoso and three allies have 
maintained a secret offshore bank account and slush fund in the Cayman 
Islands with a balance of $368 million. In coded language, the faxed 
correspondence describes deposits and transfers made by a company 
in the Bahamas, CH, J&AMP;T Inc., whose initials correspond to those 
of its supposed owners. The audiotapes, on the other hand, raise questions 
about the propriety of the government's handling of the $19 billion 
privatization of the state telephone company. Edited transcripts published 
this week indicate that those who were tapped talked with embarrassing 
and even vulgar frankness about friends and enemies: the minister 
of communications, for instance, has acknowledged that he referred 
to a senior aide to the treasury minister as ``a blockhead,'' though, 
he asserted, only ``in an affectionate manner.'' The matter has quickly 
become a distraction for the Brazilian Congress at the precise moment 
that Cardoso had been hoping to focus the attention of legislators 
on the $41.5 billion loan and credit package agreement reached with 
the International Monetary Fund last week. The agreement is contingent 
on the Brazilian government adopting a series of budget cuts and administrative 
reforms, most of which would need to be approved by both houses of 
the Congress. ``Suddenly the president is confronting something no 
one expected, something that can consume the energy of his government,'' 
said Alexandre Barros, a political analyst and commentator in Brasilia. 
``Clearly someone is trying to pull the rug from under his feet, and 
whether the charges are true or false, there is an element of wear 
and tear in this.'' Cardoso's spokesman, Sergio Amaral, has dismissed 
the entire dossier as a crude forgery. ``Of course he does not own 
any companies abroad,'' Amaral said at a news conference in Brasilia 
last week, adding that the only assets the president has overseas 
are two bank accounts in New York City with a total of about $23,000. 
Indeed, nearly everything about the documents seems to indicate they 
are fraudulent. Though officials in the Bahamas have confirmed the 
existence of the company named in the correspondence, questions have 
arisen about the authenticity of signatures, and the letters contain 
misspellings and very awkward syntax, as if written by someone whose 
native language is not English. For that reason, press accounts here 
have been openly skeptical about the effort to make Cardoso, who has 
a reputation for personal rectitude, look like the Brazilian equivalent 
of Carlos Salinas de Gortari of Mexico. Nevertheless, the incidents 
have provoked several rounds of finger-pointing and speculation as 
to who is attempting to do in the president, who is scheduled to be 
inaugurated for his second four-year term in January. Last week, a 
senator said that former president Fernando Collor de Melo offered 
to send him a copy of the dossier and suggested to him that he make 
the information public. Collor, who resigned in 1992 just as the Congress 
was about to vote to impeach him on corruption charges, has denied 
making any such proposal. On Friday, Cardoso angrily attacked those 
behind the intrigue, calling them ``farceurs and forgers'' and indirectly 
pointing a finger at Collor. ``It is necessary to express to the nation 
the indignation I feel at seeing people with no credibility whatsoever 
returning again to the public scene with insinuations,'' he said. 
More enigmatic is the role played by Paulo Maluf, a former mayor and 
governor of Sao Paulo, the country's largest city and state. Maluf 
is nominally an ally of the president, but has long harbored presidential 
ambitions of his own, and admitted that his daughters also had a copy 
of the dossier and offered it to leaders of the main opposition party, 
who rejected the overture. Maluf asserted that the women ``acted on 
their own account'' and without his knowledge. But he has also lashed 
out at members of Cardoso's Cabinet, saying their aim was to discredit 
his party. The president's supporters have had to mute their criticisms 
of Maluf's conduct, though. The reason: If the financial rescue package 
crafted by the Cardoso government and the IMF during two months of 
difficult negotiations is to pass in the Congress, the support of 
legislators loyal to Maluf is essential. Antonio Carlos Magalhaes, 
the Senate majority leader and one of Cardoso's closest political 
associates, last week appeared to rebuke Maluf, saying the plot against 
Cardoso was ``reprehensible'' and that if Maluf was involved in any 
way, ``obviously it is an attitude that is disconcerting and does 
not dignify him.'' But, he continued, ``I am not going to break with 
Maluf.'' Sensing a political opportunity, opposition parties are now 
demanding a full-scale parliamentary investigation, which could drag 
on for months. Cardoso's supporters have resisted that effort, but 
then the head of the federal police announced the start of an official 
investigation and said he would call on all those whose names are 
mentioned in the affair, including Cardoso, to testify. Amaral, the 
presidential spokesman, said Cardoso was willing to cooperate ``because 
it is necessary to bring an end to this infamy based on rumors.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>