<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981118.0471 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Livent Inc., the Broadway theater company, filed for bankruptcy protection 
Wednesday, less than six months after Michael Ovitz, once widely considered 
the most powerful person in Hollywood, took over the company. At the 
same time, Ovitz, former president of Walt Disney Co., and his new 
management team filed a lawsuit against the company's founders, the 
impresario Garth Drabinsky and his partner, Myron Gottlieb. The lawsuit 
accuses the two men of having misled Ovitz, who invested $20 million 
in Livent, by hiding the fact that the company was losing millions 
of dollars on its expensive productions of musicals like ``Ragtime,'' 
``Showboat'' and ``Phantom of the Opera.'' The lawsuit also contends 
that Drabinsky and Gottlieb gave themselves more than $7.5 million 
in ``kickbacks'' by funneling company money to another corporation 
in Toronto that Gottlieb owned. Ovitz and Livent's new managers maintain 
that Drabinsky and Gottlieb had ordered the company's accountants 
to manipulate the financial books so that more than $60 million of 
extravagant spending on advertising, salaries for the shows' huge 
casts and elaborate sets were hidden and never cut into the profits 
the company reported in its financial statements. The lawsuit further 
contends that in an effort to keep the matter covered up, Drabinsky 
and Gottlieb tried to gain the cooperation of Livent's senior financial 
executive, Gordon Eckstein, by offering him greatly increased compensation. 
The company's severe financial straits are already taking a toll on 
the many productions that the company now has in major cities in North 
America. On Tuesday night, the cast of one of its productions of ``Ragtime,'' 
which has been touring the United States and is now playing in Minneapolis, 
was told that the rest of the tour, including stops of several weeks 
that had been scheduled for Seattle and Boston, had been canceled. 
In response to the allegations, Drabinsky and Gottlieb, who were suspended 
from their jobs in August and formally dismissed Wednesday by the 
company's board of directors, said in a statement that Ovitz and Roy 
Furman, Livent's new chief executive and a former Wall Street investment 
banker, were trying to blame them for their own poor business decisions 
and miscalculations. Drabinsky and Gottlieb said they would vigorously 
defend themselves against the allegations. In addition, Drabinsky 
filed his own lawsuit against Ovitz, Furman and other Livent executives 
charging that they had acted together ``in a conspiracy to injure 
him.'' This is the second time that Drabinsky, 49, a man known for 
his artistic vision, abundant confidence and high-spending ways, has 
built a sprawling entertainment company, only to be dismissed because 
of accounting issues. In 1979, Drabinsky, a former entertainment lawyer, 
founded Cineplex Odeon in Toronto and built it into an 1,800-screen 
chain across the United States and Canada. But in 1989, MCA, one of 
the company's big investors, dismissed him amid questions of his accounting 
practices. Critics had accused the company of understating expenses. 
Drabinsky and Gottlieb said in their statement Wednesday: ``This is 
a sad day for live theater and a sad day for Livent shareholders. 
New management is facing the consequences of their actions of recent 
months. Rather than growing the company, they have wasted resources 
on accountants and lawyers in a protracted campaign to inflict injury 
to our reputations. ``Instead of nurturing the creative potential 
of the company, they have diminished it. Instead of focusing on growing 
the company and building shareholder value, they have relentlessly 
focused on discrediting us.'' They added that Ovitz and Livent had 
filed the suit against them on the same day that the company filed 
for protection from creditors under Chapter 11 of the federal bankruptcy 
act ``to deflect attention from their own ill-conceived decisions.'' 
The bankruptcy filing Wednesday in Manhattan will give the company 
many months to reorganize its finances while it continues to produce 
shows. With the protection from creditors that comes with filing for 
a reorganization under Chapter 11, Livent will not have to make scheduled 
payments of interest and principal on almost $200 million of debt 
until it can renegotiate the terms with its creditors. The debt, which 
was mostly used to pay for the construction of new theaters in New 
York; Chicago; Vancouver, British Columbia, and Toronto, is now consuming 
most of Livent's cash, leaving the company unable to keep up with 
its daily expenses. The company is scrambling to arrange some new 
short-term financing so that it can meet its payroll and other day-to-day 
costs. After months of delay, the company also released corrected 
financial statements Wednesday for 1996, 1997 and the first two quarters 
of 1998. They show that Livent's entire equity has been eaten up by 
its bills. That means that the company's debts are now greater than 
the value of its theaters and other assets. The corrected statements 
were the first financial details that Livent has released since Aug. 
10, when it said it had discovered serious accounting irregularities 
and was suspending Drabinsky and Gottlieb while it investigated the 
scope of the problems. Because of the lack of financial information, 
securities regulators in the United States and Canada suspended trading 
in Livent's stock. It is not clear whether, with the release of the 
corrected financial statements, the regulators will now let the stock 
trade again. In addition to the civil suits and countersuits, Livent 
is under investigation by securities regulators in both the United 
States and Canada. The Royal Canadian Mounted Police have begun a 
criminal investigation into the company's activities. As a result 
of their own investigation, Ovitz and his managers in their suit detailed 
a trail of unusual business transactions that they say were handled 
by Drabinsky, a lawyer, and Gottlieb, an accountant. With the transactions 
and secret side deals attached to some Livent contracts, Ovitz's lawsuit 
says, the two men were able to enrich themselves by millions of dollars. 
At the same time, the lawsuit says, the two men told the company's 
accountants to hide the millions of dollars the company was losing 
on shows either by shifting the costs to other accounts so that they 
never affected the bottom line or by excluding the amounts entirely 
from the company's official set of books. Drabinsky had directed the 
company's accountants to keep a separate set of ledgers from the company's 
official books so that he could track Livent's ``real'' expenses, 
the suit said. The lawsuit says that Drabinsky and Gottlieb were able 
to make improper payments of more than $7.5 million to themselves 
by asking an engineering company working on a theater construction 
project to inflate the bills it sent to Livent. The engineering company, 
the suit says, would then pass the amounts to Drabinsky, Gottlieb 
or to a Toronto company, King Commodity Services Ltd., which is controlled 
by Gottlieb. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>