<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981118.0408 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Seeking to upgrade its aging military hardware, South Africa announced 
Wednesday that it would spend about $5 billion to buy warships, submarines, 
helicopters and jets from Britain, Germany, Sweden and Italy. As part 
of the deals, South Africa will insist that some of the equipment 
be built here, and officials assert that 65,000 jobs will be created 
in a country where the official unemployment rate is 33 percent. Trade 
Minister Alec Erwin said the $5 billion price tag would generate $17 
billion in ``industrial benefits.'' Opponents of the deal argue that 
the nation does not need expensive new weapons when half the country 
still lacks indoor plumbing. They also argue that South Africa faces 
no military threat that submarines or jets can defeat. There were 
reports that Finance Minister Trevor Manuel opposed the deals as too 
expensive, but Deputy President Thabo Mbeki took pains to deny them. 
The government is touchy about the criticism, and Defense Minister 
Joe Modise said Tuesday that anyone who opposed the arms deals was 
``opposed to progress'' and ``not friends of South Africa.'' Wednesday 
the Cabinet authorized him to negotiate the purchases with companies 
it named as leading bidders. Delivery is expected to begin in 2002 
and take seven years. Military expenditures have fallen drastically 
from their 1989 peak, when the apartheid government was battling the 
African National Congress. In that year, they were almost 5 percent 
of gross domestic product. Until Wednesday's deals, they have been 
about $2.3 billion, or 1.5 percent, well below the World Bank recommendation 
of a 2 percent limit for developing countries. The country is seeking 
three submarines and four light frigates called corvettes. Thyssen 
AG and Preussag of Germany were the leading bidders. It wants 28 Gripen 
fighters and 24 Hawk 100 trainers. British Aerospace builds the Hawk 
and makes the Gripen jointly with Saab AB of Sweden. This would be 
the first sale outside Sweden for the JAS-39 Gripen, which has suffered 
from crashes during airshows and on television. Agusta of Italy, a 
unit of Finmeccanica, is favored to supply 40 light utility helicopters, 
while Westland Ltd. of Britain is favored to supply four helicopters 
for the frigates. An army request for 108 new tanks was turned down 
for the moment. Much of South Africa's hardware is badly outdated. 
The Cheetah, its principal fighter jet, is based on the French Mirage 
and uses 30-year-old technology. Its three Daphne-class submarines 
are frequently laid up for repairs. Its strike craft, acquired about 
25 years ago from Israel, were built for the placid Mediterranean 
Sea. Their hulls are weakening from the pounding they take off the 
Cape of Good Hope, and particularly when venturing down to South African 
islands near Antarctica. The navy complains that it does not have 
enough ships to prevent foreign trawlers from illegally overfishing 
thousands of miles of South African, Mozambican, Namibian and Angolan 
coastline. In less complex weapons, South Africa is a net exporter. 
Its G-5 and G-6 artillery pieces are rated among the best in the world 
and heavily marketed in the Middle East. It sells assault rifles, 
mortars and armored cars to other African nations. Its Rooivalk helicopter 
gunship is said to be the only helicopter in the world that can do 
a barrel roll, but it has found few customers. The United States was 
conspicuously absent from Wednesday's list of suppliers. It did not 
even appear among the also-rans. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>