<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981118.0189 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
No matter how many rooms or closets you have in the house, there is 
seldom enough space for time. That's one reason why architecture continues 
to evolve. Architects have but a brief interval to go out and greet 
the present before time slips away. In the outskirts of Bordeaux, 
Rem Koolhaas has designed a house for the millennium. It is a space 
for facing the unknown: for risk, mystery, surprise and suspense, 
a house where floors and walls disappear, and inside merges with outside 
in a sparkling play of reflections. The place is haunted by flickering 
memories of Edgar Allen Poe and his fearless, youthful descendants, 
the Hardy Boys, Frank and Joe. At any minute, Nancy Drew will pull 
up in her roadster, looking for her boyfriend, Ned, or to ask directions 
back to River Heights, the town she left behind. But the place has 
already become a prime destination for architecture fans who look 
toward Koolhaas to find a way to the here and now. To get into the 
spirit of this building, it helps to go back to the symbolists, the 
poets and artists who, at the end of 19th century, reacted against 
realism and began exploring moods, atmospheres, perversities, fears 
and other subjective realms. The movement as such did not penetrate 
far into architecture. The swirls and tendrils of Art Nouveau designers 
evoked some symbolist motifs: Edvard Munch's and Redon's graphic splashes 
in the waves of the subconscious. Some later work by Le Corbusier 
(the chapel at Ronchamp) and a few landscaped buildings by Luis Barragan 
are arguably symbolist in their use of color, light, shadow and form, 
to evoke emotional depth. It is surprising, however, to see such qualities 
surfacing in a contemporary house. But this house was conceived under 
unusual circumstances. The owner, a newspaper publisher, had already 
decided to build his family a new home when he was injured in an automobile 
accident that caused internal injuries and cost him the use of his 
legs. At the time, the client had already decided to move from a town 
house in the center of Bordeaux and had asked several architects to 
compete for the design of a new home in the city's lush suburbs. After 
the accident, he decided it would be easier to work with one architect, 
and awarded the commission to Koolhaas, who is based in Rotterdam, 
the Netherlands. The result, though not yet fully furnished, has already 
become a mecca, one of those rare buildings people feel they must 
visit to see what the present looks like. You approach the house through 
a forecourt enclosed on three sides by Barragan-like walls, thin, 
horizontal slabs of concrete pierced by wide rectangular arches. A 
moon gate is on one wall. In front of the house, the driveway spirals 
in on itself and tapers to a sharp point. The shape brings to mind 
the Saul Bass title sequence for a Hitchcock thriller, and if James 
Stewart got out of the wrong side of the car he might well swoon, 
since the ground drops off abruptly along one edge of the drive. The 
house is three stories tall, a glass sandwich served between two slices 
of concrete, garnished lightly with furniture and art. There are two 
entrances on the ground floor. One leads through a cavelike hallway 
of molded concrete to the children's wing upstairs, the second into 
a large, open-plan space with a kitchen and dining area at one end. 
The floor is lined with a polished, cool green resin. Here, one also 
first encounters the building's most exceptional feature: a large 
platform the size of a small room, designed to move at the touch of 
a button between the three floors. This elevator is the core of the 
house. Furnished with the owner's desk, the 10{-by-11-foot platform 
is mounted atop a column of polished steel and driven by machinery 
buried beneath the ground floor. In addition to providing the disabled 
owner with mobility, it keeps the house in a state of visual flux. 
The platform occupies just enough of the building's floor area so 
that, when it moves from one level to another, it changes the house's 
spatial composition. The movement alters the dimensions of each floor 
and enlarges or impedes the flow of space between them. The platform 
is open on three sides, with the fourth enclosed by glass book shelves 
that rise through all three floors. Guard panels slide into place 
as it ascends from the ground-floor kitchen to the living area on 
the second floor and a bedroom on the third. On whatever level, the 
desk assumes the symbolic presence of a control panel for the entire 
house. The backdrop of books, illuminated by a skylight and accented 
by a Gilbert and George painting mounted between the second and third 
floors, imply that control will be brilliantly exercised. Stairs, 
partly screening a laundry, ascend from the kitchen to the main floor, 
a living area unlike any other: a piano nobile with a piano mobile. 
Aluminum panels, buffed to a matte finish, cover the floor and intensify 
the light pouring in from three glass walls. The furniture, a mix 
of modern classics (Breuer, Bertoia) and French Provincial comfort 
pieces, was carefully chosen and just as carefully disarranged. Along 
one wall, there is perimeter seating on a cushioned stone bench that 
also contains a fireplace. About a third of this floor is an outdoor 
terrace, paved with travertine. An earth berm, banked against the 
rear of the ground floor, rises to meet the terrace in a gentle grass 
slope. The glass wall facing the slope and the view is mechanized 
and slides open to unite the living area with the outdoors. The terrace 
is sheltered beneath the concrete slab of the building's top story. 
A large cylinder, of concrete wrapped in polished steel, houses a 
spiral staircase leading from the floor below to the children's quarters 
above while providing structural support. Reflections in its convex 
surface dematerialize the column, and a low stack of firewood stretches 
along one side of the terrace. The counterpoint between these materials 
_ the raw and rustic against the polished industrial _ gives the terrace 
the serene simplicity of a Japanese garden. On the top floor, concrete 
walls, stained brown and punctured only by porthole windows, project 
the privacy of a harem, so I will let the floor keep its secrets except 
to say that the bedrooms are cozy, that the portholes are not arbitrarily 
placed but correspond to the height of the owner, his wife and their 
three children in seated, standing and reclining positions. Besides 
providing views and light, the windows inject effervescence into what 
might otherwise recall a 1960s Brutalist housing block. I would call 
this house a shelter from shelter, a concept I've earned the right 
to defend. I bumped my head in one spot and scratched my thumb on 
another, leaving a bloody smear on the light blue taffeta curtain 
being fitted for one of the living room's glass walls. The thought 
crossed my mind that Koolhaas had designed a house in which only the 
disabled could safely live. But the place brought back memories of 
``The Disappearing Floor,'' a Hardy Brothers mystery that features 
a nutty inventor who lives in an old house equipped with such grotesqueries 
as a mechanical ghost and a bedroom whose floor drops away, leaving 
the furniture suspended in midair. In the Bordeaux house, you can't 
completely escape the tension between the concrete slabs and the light 
open space between them. If the platform can descend, why not the 
roof? Yet, the atmosphere throughout is breezy, the building's connection 
to land and sky arcadian. On the second floor, the general effect 
is of life lived as a picnic, and you don't have to run for shelter 
if it rains. But there's scant refuge here for normalcy. The building 
does much more than accommodate the owner's physical disabilities. 
It uses them as a springboard to imagine ways of being in the world. 
While Koolhaas uses the industrial materials and uncluttered spaces 
favored by architects of the modern movement, he employs them toward 
radically different ends. Modernists favored standardization, the 
use of structural components and visual forms that conveyed the rational 
ethos of industrial mass production. Koolhaas subverts this entirely. 
It is the ghost in the machine, to use the novelist Arthur Koestler's 
phrase, that haunts him, the dimensions of human experience that cannot 
be standardized, rationalized or predicted. The concrete top floor 
is supported at one end by a large black truss, supported on columns, 
and stabilized at the other end by a counterweight suspended from 
a steel girder mounted atop the roof. This structural arrangement, 
while securing the building, also expresses its inherent instability. 
It assumes the metaphoric values of conflict and balance, of stresses 
met with equipoise and imaginatively resolved. The Russian formalists 
analyzed narrative structure as a process in which a state of equilibrium 
is disturbed by a series of events until a heightened sense of balance 
is finally attained. Anyone who has visited the Eiffel Tower knows 
that buildings can create this kind of narrative. On each stage to 
the top, you catch your breath and pass through fear until gaining 
the summit. (For some of us, the new state of equilibrium isn't felt 
until our feet again touch ground). In ``The Disappearing Floor,'' 
the plot is resolved when Joe and Frank realize that the crazy inventor 
isn't a villain but rather the victim of a group of thieves. What 
they don't fully grasp is that they themselves are not the pair of 
normal lads they present to the reader. They're the Hardy Boys. They're 
freaks. They're never going to grow up and have full lives. They're 
condemned to forever trying to please their father, Fenton, even though 
they're already master crime-busters, while Dad is just a stick that 
smokes a pipe. Koolhaas has embraced the challenge of designing a 
house for a disabled man and his family as an opportunity to say something 
about this millennial moment. We don't know where we'll be tomorrow, 
much less two years hence. Life does throw curves. Floors do disappear; 
planes and stock markets go up and down; tycoons and terrorists conspire; 
life does not go on as before. At 53, Rem Koolhaas is also a freak. 
No architect of his generation is more extravagantly talented. None 
have found more eloquent ways to embody his generation's perplexities 
and ambivalences about its own changing times. His career has been 
a suspense story that has kept admirers enthralled. The opening of 
his retrospective at the Museum of Modern Art three years ago drew 
a pop star's turnout. Two of his books, ``Delirious New York'' and 
``S,M,L,XL'' (Monicelli Press, 1995), have been critical hits. But 
he has also alienated potential clients, written rude letters to editors, 
lost out in competitions to architects of lesser talent, and borne 
the animosity of those with less-blazing gifts. He retains his generation's 
distrust of authority but knows that architecture is not something 
you go off and do by yourself in the woods. Every realized building 
has come to seem like a triumph against great odds: the train station 
at Euralille, a 469-acre communications, financial and entertainment 
hub in northern France, for which Koolhaas designed the master plan; 
the Villa dall'Ava in Paris; the Netherlands Dance Theater in The 
Hague; the Kunsthal in Rotterdam. All of them are courageous, for 
architect and clients alike, but the new Bordeaux project conveys 
particular urgency of Koolhaas' determination to step into the unknown. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>