<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981118.0404 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
While much of America spent its summer vacation lying on the beach 
or relaxing on a mountaintop, some key shareholders of Coca-Cola Enterprises 
spent theirs in a flurry of trading on the stock exchange. Early filings 
for the third quarter show that at least one big mutual fund company, 
a money manager and a trust company with significant positions in 
Coca-Cola Enterprises sold nearly all their shares during that period. 
Another mutual fund is said to have sold 10 million shares, possibly 
in a private deal. And the buyer of at least 14 million of the shares 
on the block was the company itself. Two factors helped prompt the 
selling. In late July, Coca-Cola Enterprises, which is Coca-Cola Co.'s 
main bottler in the United States and parts of Europe, announced a 
$5 billion capital spending plan that alarmed some investors, particularly 
when the company said it would not start showing increased positive 
cash flow until next year. ``A lot of investors just didn't want to 
wait,'' said Jennifer Solomon, an analyst with Salomon Smith Barney. 
Then the stock market, rattled by global economic crises in Russia 
and other regions, fell into an August swoon that carried the stock 
price of Coca-Cola Enterprises south along with those of many other 
companies. The biggest sellers included Prudential Mutual Fund Investment 
Management, which sold slightly more than 6.2 million shares, worth 
$158.9 million, at the end of August. The company had held those shares 
since June, said Tim Biggs, a spokesman for Prudential, but declined 
to say why Prudential had decided to sell. Prudential still has about 
242,000 Coca-Cola Enterprises shares in its portfolio. Another big 
seller was the Bessemer Trust Co., which sold 2.9 million shares, 
worth $73.3 million, according to its most recent filing with the 
Securities and Exchange Commission. The company, which has been a 
long-term shareholder, still has about 46,000 shares. And the word 
on Wall Street is that Putnam Investment Management, the second-biggest 
shareholder in Coca-Cola Enterprises, quietly sold about 10 million 
of its 15.8 million shares during the third quarter as well, possibly 
in a private deal. A spokesman for Putnam, part of Marsh &AMP; McLennan, 
refused to comment. Meanwhile, filings show that Warburg Pincus Asset 
Management sold 901,167 shares during the quarter for $22.7 million; 
the firm kept 9,600 shares. Where did all those shares go? As it turns 
out, 14 million were bought by the company itself, for $404 million 
_ issuing more debt to pay for them at a time when it is already heavy 
with debt from acquisitions of smaller bottlers. The company frequently 
uses its own stock in acquisitions, which can mean tax-free deals 
for the owners of companies it takes over. Interestingly, Coca-Cola 
Enterprises went on its shopping spree without fanfare, though companies 
often publicize buybacks, since the purchases can give the stock a 
lift. The first mention came in late October, at the end of its third-quarter 
earnings release. The company's most recent stock-repurchasing plan, 
aimed at reclaiming 30 million shares altogether, was authorized in 
April 1996, a company spokeswoman said. But until Jan. 1 of this year, 
no shares had been repurchased, because the company was reluctant 
to take on more debt. While 1 million shares were bought in the first 
quarter _ and preceded by a detailed news release _ that move was 
dwarfed by the activity that came in the third quarter, when other 
owners were busy selling. ``To me, that's not the way to use shareholder 
capital,'' said Albert Meyer, an accountant and consultant in Indianapolis 
who has previously criticized Coca-Cola Enterprises. ``And it's capital 
they don't have, because they had to borrow to do it.'' Like merger 
activity, corporate share repurchases are at an all-time high. Last 
year, companies spent $182 billion to buy back their own stock, said 
Laurie Hodrick, a professor of economics and finance at the Columbia 
University business school. They do so to invest in the stock when 
it appears to be undervalued, or for tax advantages, or as a deterrent 
to possible takeovers, she added. ``If you're repurchasing to communicate 
confidence, you'd want to announce it,'' she said. ``But if the purchasing 
is done on the open market, firms need not disclose it and whether 
they do so or not depends on the purpose of the activity.'' Margaret 
Carton, vice president for investor relations and planning at Coca-Cola 
Enterprises, says that share repurchases have long been part of the 
company's strategy, and the third quarter was merely an example of 
that strategy in action. ``We took advantage of the soft share price 
and bought a lot of shares,'' she said, adding that the purchases 
took place in August and September, at prices ``from the mid-30s to 
low 30s all the way down to the mid-20s.'' Some shares purchased were 
part of a 17.7 million block that had been issued in the spring as 
a means of financing the company's takeover of a large Texas bottler, 
Coke Southwest. Some purchases were made on the open market, and others 
were ``privately negotiated transactions that we're not able to disclose,'' 
she said, adding that ``short-term paper'' was used to finance the 
deals. ``If somebody calls us and says we'd like to do this privately, 
we're interested,'' she said, calling a private sale ``a more direct 
transaction'' that permits the company to negotiate the price. The 
company's decision to take on more debt to do that, though, may not 
sit well with every investor. ``If interest rates were to spike, I 
think CCE would be in serious trouble, just to make their interest 
payments,'' Meyer said. In addition, at least one analyst is worried 
that price-cutting in the next few months may further erode earnings. 
``I didn't sense that this significantly improving pricing environment 
is around the corner,'' said Caroline Levy, an analyst with Schroder 
&AMP; Co., who took the stock off her recommended list Wednesday. 
Still, Coca-Cola Enterprises' share price has bounced back. Working 
in the company's favor was its inclusion in the Standard &AMP; Poor's 
500-stock index on Oct. 7. That alone pushed up the stock price somewhat, 
since index funds had to add shares of Coca-Cola Enterprises to their 
holdings. And, as the market in general has risen back to early-summer 
levels, the company's share price has gone up as well. Coca-Cola Enterprises 
stock closed at $38.0625 a share Wednesday, down 93.75 cents. Finally, 
even during the third quarter, there was at least one new big buyer: 
Merrill Lynch Asset Management, which bought 2.9 million shares for 
$73.5 million. Morgan Stanley Asset Management added 2.8 million shares 
to its holdings during the quarter as well. The quarter's single heaviest 
session of trading came July 22, the day Coca-Cola Enterprises released 
its second-quarter earnings and let investors know the details of 
the capital-spending plan. Trading volume, typically less than 1 million 
shares daily, soared to 7,996,100 shares; the price dropped from $38.4375 
to $35.3125. ``Many people who invested in the company have become 
concerned about the divergence between EBITDA and earnings,'' said 
Marc Cohen, an analyst with Goldman, Sachs, referring to earnings 
before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization. ``While EBITDA 
is growing, the big financial commitments they are making to expand 
the business are causing real earnings measures, and most importantly, 
free cash flow, to weaken.'' ``It's a fabulous use of funds as long 
as there's money to borrow,'' said Emanuel Goldman, an analyst for 
Merrill Lynch. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>