<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981118.0379 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When Sun Lilin emerged from Beijing Children's Hospital, her pockets 
bulged with bottles of syrup, her hands juggled a tower of boxes containing 
powders and pills. She had brought her 5-year-old daughter to the 
clinic with a cough. She left with two Chinese cold syrups, a potent 
broad-spectrum antibiotic, an inhaler and a little round device that 
jets powdered medicine into the lungs. The doctor's visit cost less 
than $1. But the medicines cost $60 _ half a month's salary _ almost 
all of it for the three Western drugs. ``The medicine has gotten so 
expensive I really can't afford it,'' said Ms. Sun, a red-cheeked 
cleaning woman in a middle school, echoing a complaint of virtually 
everyone in China these days. ``But, of course, she's my only child. 
And she's sick. I buy her the best.'' Imported Western pharmaceuticals 
have taken China by storm, straining pocketbooks as they hold out 
promises of cure. Indeed, the denouement of nearly every doctor's 
visit in China today is the prescription of a small pharmacy worth 
of this year's hottest medicines, be they non-sedating antihistamines 
or once-a-day high blood pressure pills Such sales have been buoyed 
by a new and unlikely symbiosis: Western drug companies have been 
aggressively courting China's doctors and hospitals not only with 
new pills but also with gifts, money and even kickbacks, practices 
that are banned in the United States. Their goal: to gain access to 
China's 1.2 billion potentially ailing citizens, most with a seemingly 
unshakable belief in the curative power of name-brand Western pills. 
In response, Chinese doctors prescribed hundreds of millions of dollars 
worth of mostly expensive Western medicine last year. But they have 
another motive as well: Cash-strapped Chinese hospitals are allowed 
to sell medicines their doctors prescribe at a profit, and the profit 
is far greater when doctors prescribe expensive Western drugs. ``There 
is a strong interest group forming of drug companies, hospital managers 
and doctors,'' said Qiu Renzong, a professor of bioethics at the Chinese 
Academy of Social Sciences. ``In China we produce some equally effective 
medicines, but doctors don't prescribe them anymore. The result is 
a heavy financial burden on the patients.'' Indeed, drug sales have 
become a cash cow for Chinese hospitals in the past two years, accounting 
for around 60 to 80 percent of their revenues, officials say. Although 
there are hundreds of Chinese drug companies producing traditional 
and Western-style medicine, medicine made by foreign or joint-venture 
companies now accounts for well over 50 percent of prescriptions in 
Beijing, Shanghai and Guangzhou. Today, foreign drug and medical equipment 
companies pay for Chinese doctors to study overseas, buy hospitals 
new furniture and provide airline tickets and hotel vouchers for conferences. 
In an even more controversial practice, the companies commonly pay 
hospital administrators and individual doctors ``commissions'' for 
stocking and prescribing their drugs, though such payments are against 
corporate policies and are illegal in China. ``If a pill sells for 
five yuan, often more than half of that is spent to give little red 
packets containing cash to the hospital director of purchasing, to 
the pharmacy manager and a bit to the doctors themselves,'' said Li 
Ning, the vice president of Beijing's Chaoyang Hospital. ``Of course 
hospitals have regulations banning kickbacks,'' said Li, a young general 
surgeon who studied hospital administration at the University of Minnesota. 
``But this is hard to catch, and we know the rules are not very effective.'' 
The relationship between Western firms and China's doctors has certainly 
helped introduce valuable drugs and equipment into China, which generally 
permits the import of any drug approved by the U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration. But in other cases the high-priced products offer 
only slight advantages. ``Western medicines and medical equipment 
have greatly contributed to medical costs that are rising 35 percent 
a year,'' Li said. Many of the companies operating in China refused 
to discuss their practices, but Thomas Reinert, a spokesman for Bayer 
Pharmaceuticals in Germany, said that his company priced medicines 
lower in China than in most of the rest of the world and that Bayer 
specifically forbids payments to doctors. He said the company follows 
an industry-wide international code of conduct which allows, for example, 
sponsoring medical symposiums, but forbids payments to encourage ordering 
products. Still, he said, ``there is a gray zone in there.'' Privately, 
many in and out of the industry acknowledge that young Chinese sales 
representatives, far from corporate headquarters, often flout conduct 
codes. Indeed, ``hong bao,'' the little red envelopes stuffed with 
cash, are a semi-institutionalized part of Chinese life, at times 
offered to surgeons for operations as well as to journalists in the 
hopes of a favorable story. ``Practices that would not be OK in the 
West are quite common in China,'' said one industry representative, 
``And it's not just international drug companies _ the Chinese companies 
are doing it too.'' But Western companies have more money, and their 
incentives are tempting to doctors who often make $120 a month and 
who, without their help, would have little opportunity to read foreign 
medical journals or go to conferences overseas. And, ever since China's 
hospitals lost the last of their formerly huge government subsidies 
last year, Western drug sales have become essential for balancing 
hospital budgets. While there are tight price controls for Chinese-made 
medicines, hospitals are allowed to set their own price for Western 
drugs. Some state workers still have health plans that cover the cost 
of drugs, but many more now pay for medicines themselves or get only 
a small fraction of the costs paid by their employer. Cities like 
Shanghai and Beijing recently started requiring patients covered by 
state insurance plans to pay themselves for any Western drugs. And 
this month the State Planning Commission announced it was planning 
to issue new regulations to reform the drug pricing system _ for the 
third time in three years _ but added ``the consequences of the hospitals' 
sales business can not be dealt with overnight.'' The Pharmaceutical 
Research and Manufacturers of America opposes China's proposed price 
controls, said Jeff Trewhitt, a spokesman for the trade organization. 
``Virtually all companies are putting into that country much more 
than they are taking out,'' he said. ``Most are not making money; 
they are investing in the future.'' Recently, at the third Great Wall 
International Symposium on Interventional Cardiology, a small army 
of Chinese sales representatives of Western drug and medical equipment 
manufacturers welcomed Chinese cardiologists with slides, wristwatches 
and tote bags _ most promoting drugs that cost more than the average 
Chinese earns in a day, and tests that cost a month's earnings. ``Our 
hope is that by 2001 our sales revenue in China will reach 100 million 
marks,'' said Li Yumin, who was working at a booth promoting Bayer's 
new heart drugs. ``There are 120 million people with high blood pressure 
in this country. Their incomes are rising, and they have better knowledge 
of disease. So we take every opportunity to have contact with Chinese 
doctors.'' He acknowledged that the pill he was promoting, a once-a-day 
high blood pressure pill and heart medicine called Adalat GITS, was 
too expensive for most Chinese to use every day for life, which is 
the recommended way to treat these chronic ailments. He said the average 
Chinese patient takes the medication for only 28 days. It costs about 
$1 a pill, compared to the Chinese-made version of the same drug, 
which costs pennies but must be taken three times a day, and so produces 
less consistent blood pressure levels. About 30,000 Chinese take Adalat 
GITS long term, most all them from the shrinking group of Chinese 
who still have government insurance. To help advertise this and its 
new cholesterol-lowering drug, Bayer helped pay for the heart conference, 
printing programs, name cards and financing a satellite hook-up where 
doctors could watch advanced heart procedures beamed in from operating 
rooms. Bayer also hosted a special seminar, featuring a prominent 
Chinese cardiologist describing some of the latest foreign drug trials, 
the last of which supported the widespread use of drugs like Adalat. 
``I argue that those who can afford it should take more effective 
and expensive drugs,'' said the heart specialist, Dr. Hu Dayi. It 
was a forum that could have been sponsored by any of the dozens of 
Western drug companies operating here _ including giants like Glaxo 
Wellcome, Eli Lilly and Novartis. And most of the 200 or so heart 
specialists in the audience said they appreciated the update, despite 
its heavy editorial overlay. ``I came here to learn about new techniques 
and medicines, although they will be difficult to use where I come 
from because of financial reasons,'' said Dr. Lian Mingfeng, a heart 
specialist from a small hospital in Fujian province. Drug representatives 
who work in China like to emphasize their role as educators. But Western 
doctors who have attended recent Chinese medical conferences say they 
are shocked to see the representatives sometimes giving the central 
lectures at what are billed as impartial scientific meetings. ``It 
is like the Wild West with a lot of flagrantly unethical behavior 
and few rules,'' said one, who spoke on condition of anonymity. And 
Chinese bioethicists have themselves bemoaned the merging of academic 
meeting and sales bazaar. Qiu said that his wife, a stomach specialist, 
had attended English-language medical conferences in Hong Kong, where 
many of the Chinese doctors could not understand a word of the proceedings. 
Drug companies ``pay for their travel and hotel,'' he said. ``The 
doctors go sight-seeing and shopping.'' Li, the hospital vice president, 
said that he disliked the close relationship between hospitals and 
drug companies, even though it now keeps his hospital afloat. ``Now 
the state gives us policies, but no money,'' he said. ``So for survival 
the hospital has to have more patients and prescribe more drugs and 
scans.'' Urban Chinese are avid hospital-goers and have a strong bias 
towards treating ailments with a tonic or pill. Indeed, every sneeze 
in China seems to be greeted with the concerned inquiry, ``Are you 
taking medicine?'' After a spate of newspaper exposes about counterfeit 
pills and the poor quality control at some Chinese pharmaceutical 
plants, many people have grown at least a bit suspicious of domestic 
products. And _ in handbags or in medicines _ the Chinese are extremely 
fond of name brands, leaving Western pills with gangbuster sales and 
Chinese hard pressed to afford them. At a clinic in Yuyao, a city 
in Zhejiang province, Dr. Fu Zhiyin prepared to give 35-year-old Huang 
Yifeng antibiotic pills for her serious pelvic infection. How many 
should she take? ``She should take 36,'' said Fu, matter-of-factly. 
``But it depends how many she can afford.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>