<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981118.0492 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Java, the programming language at issue in the contract dispute between 
the Microsoft Corp. and Sun Microsystems, is fundamentally different 
from other computer languages like C, C(plus plus), Pascal or Basic. 
Other programming languages are dependent on the underlying operating 
system that controls the basic functions of the computer running the 
programs. A program written in C(plus plus) for an Apple Computer 
Macintosh will not work on a personal computer using the Microsoft 
Windows operating system. But Java _ invented by Sun Microsystems, 
which controls Java licensing _ is intended to act as a lingua franca 
of computing. Java enables software to be used over networks _ especially 
over the Internet _ by many kinds of computers running sundry operating 
systems. Thanks to Java, a graphic artist with an Apple Macintosh 
computer running the Mac operating system, an engineer on a Sun Microsystems 
Sparc work station running a version of the Unix operating system 
and a student with a Pentium-chip personal computer running the Microsoft 
Windows operating system can all play poker with one another on the 
Yahoo World Wide Web site. That's because the poker game is written 
in Java, which can operate on those different computers at the same 
time, over the network. But this works-anywhere flexibility also means 
that, from a programmer's point of view, Java makes all operating 
systems equal. And that poses a serious threat to Microsoft, whose 
market dominance is based the fact that its Windows operating system 
is the industry standard _ controlling the basic operations of some 
90 percent of PCs sold. Revolutionary as Java may sound, though, programs 
written in this language are not always impressive. For any given 
computer to use a Java program, each line of code _ or each block 
of reusable code known as an ``object'' _ must be interpreted before 
it can be understood by the operating system, which then must translate 
it yet again for its instructions to be understood by the computer's 
microprocessor chip. Even though Java's speed has improved a great 
deal in the last 18 months, all this translating means that running 
a Java program can still be excruciatingly slow compared with running 
the same program written in a language like C. And yet the Java interpreter, 
known as the ``virtual machine'' or VM software, is also the language's 
greatest strength. It allows for the ``write once, run anywhere'' 
capability that enables programmers to create a single piece of software 
that can be understood by any major operating system. Thus, Java software 
can not only cut development time for individual programs but can 
also result in programs that have a much larger potential market than 
programs written in other languages. In addition, once a user installs 
Java _ which happens automatically when a Web browser is installed 
_ the Java virtual machine resides permanently on the user's hard 
drive. From then on, it stands ready to run a Java program whenever 
it is needed. This is what is known in computer jargon as a ``platform'' 
_ that is, foundation software on which other programs run. The advantage 
this holds for the Internet is that tiny bits of Java code, known 
as applets, can be sent to and used by any kind of computer that has 
a Java virtual machine. The small size of the applets makes them usable 
even on computers with slow Internet links like dial-up modems. All 
of this poses a threat to Microsoft because it marginalizes the importance 
of Microsoft's platform, the Windows operating system. In the conventional 
computing world, in which programs run on only one operating system, 
Microsoft's Windows tends to be a self-perpetuating monopoly. If a 
user has invested several thousand dollars in software that will run 
only on Windows, he is not likely to switch to a Macintosh computer 
or to install, say, a Unix operating system, because in addition to 
the cost of the new machine, he will have to buy all new software. 
But if at some point in the future that same user could purchase all 
Java software, he would have much more freedom to change computers 
and operating systems. While that is not now possible, a number of 
major software developers, including International Business Machines 
Corp., its Lotus subsidiary and Corel Corp. have committed to major 
development of Java software. Sun's lawsuit traces to Microsoft's 
obtaining a Java license from the company in 1996 and then setting 
to work altering parts of the virtual machine. To be sure, some changes 
made Java run more efficiently on Windows machines, but other alterations 
stripped the translator of certain capabilities _ functions that Sun 
contends Microsoft wanted to keep the sole province of the Windows 
operating system. The Sun lawsuit asserts that these changes violated 
the 1996 licensing agreement. And many in the software industry are 
watching this case with great apprehension: If Microsoft is allowed 
to distribute a nonstandard form of Java, the resulting industry fragmentation 
would mean that different Java code would have to be written for different 
operating systems. That might remove a threat to Microsoft, but for 
the lingua franca of computing, the resultant babble of variants would 
destroy the Java language's greatest strength. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>