<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981118.0261 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With an almost palpable sigh of relief, the leaders of Malaysia and 
20 other Pacific Rim countries wrapped up a contentious summit meeting 
here Wednesday by pledging to revive a region they said had been set 
back decades by the Asian economic crisis. In a communique short on 
concrete proposals, the leaders agreed to pursue a ``cooperative growth 
strategy'' that would draw on billions of dollars in fresh financing 
from the United States, Japan, and agencies including the World Bank 
and the Asian Development Bank. But cooperation was notably absent 
from this year's Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation forum, as the United 
States and Malaysia engaged in a war of words over a speech by Vice 
President Al Gore. Gore accused the host country of suppressing freedom 
and threw his support behind protesters who are demanding the ouster 
of Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad. Mahathir had the last word at 
a news conference late Wednesday, but he steadfastly refused to criticize 
the vice president. ``Whatever comments needed to be made about that 
speech have already been made,'' Mahathir said, in a subdued appearance. 
``I don't see any need to comment further.'' On Tuesday, Malaysia's 
foreign minister, Abdullah Ahmad Badawi, condemned the United States 
for an ``abhorrent'' attempt to incite the overthrow of Malaysia's 
constitutionally elected government. Wednesday, though, there were 
efforts on both sides to heal the rift. Mahathir said the vice president's 
speech would not affect relations between Malaysia and the United 
States, and the White House made no further mention of Anwar Ibrahim, 
the former deputy prime minister, whose ouster and arrest ignited 
the protest movement against Mahathir. Instead, a senior Clinton administration 
official said Malaysia had displayed ``vision'' in setting the agenda 
for the meeting and praised Malaysian officials for being `` willing 
to listen to the ideas of others.'' Even before Gore criticized its 
human-rights record, Malaysia had been a contentious site for the 
summit. In September, Mahathir imposed sweeping controls on Malaysia's 
currency and stock markets _ effectively digging a moat around this 
country of 20 million people. Malaysia did not win an endorsement 
of capital controls in Wednesday's communique, and other Asian leaders 
said they would not impose controls on their markets. But the countries 
called for changes in the international financial markets to avoid 
``destructive disruptions'' in the ebb and flow of global capital. 
And Mahathir did manage to insert a passage calling for a review of 
one of his pet peeves: agencies like Standard &AMP; Poors and Moody's 
Investor Services, which rate the creditworthiness of corporate and 
government debt. He has criticized them for what he believes are sloppy 
judgments that drive up a country's cost of borrowing. In perhaps 
another victory for Mahathir, none of the demonstrations against his 
government this week erupted into violence, as some political analysts 
here predicted. With only scattered protests that petered out quickly, 
Kuala Lumpur hardly seemed a city on the edge of anarchy. As he has 
before, Mahathir blamed the foreign news media for exaggerating the 
extent of civil unrest. The government discouraged would-be protesters 
by mobilizing hundreds of riot police and parking water-cannon trucks 
behind trees at the hotels where the leaders stayed. And with Gore 
and other leaders now gone, some people here fear that Mahathir will 
crack down on the dissidents. At his news conference, however, the 
prime minister seemed almost mellow. He acknowledged, for example, 
that Asian countries deserved some responsibility for the crisis _ 
a striking departure for someone who has vilified foreign currency 
traders for causing the meltdown. ``Most of the Asian governments 
are now aware of their own weaknesses, and have undertaken to correct 
those weaknesses,'' he observed. ``So because of that, I think investors 
will feel much more confident to come into the region.'' If there 
were any concrete steps at this summit, they were in the area of reviving 
Asia's financially moribund corporate sector. On Monday, the United 
States and Japan announced that they would join in a plan to contribute 
$10 billion in trade financing to help countries recapitalize debt-swamped 
companies. ``Obviously, it's nothing concrete, but nonetheless it 
is important because the U.S. and Japan are the linchpins in the region,'' 
said Razak Baginda, the executive director of the Malaysian Strategic 
Research Center, a think tank here. The countries also committed to 
create stronger social safety nets. That issue seemed especially urgent 
this week after recent violence and looting in economically strapped 
Indonesia. American officials noted that the World Bank and the Asian 
Development Bank would both multiply their aid for social programs 
in the region. The total by both agencies will be $6 billion between 
1997 and 1999. Unquestionably, the big disappointment of the meeting 
was in trade negotiations. Japan balked at a sweeping deal to lower 
trade tariffs in Asia, forcing the countries to defer the package 
to the World Trade Organization. There is no guarantee that Japan 
will not resist the tariff cuts there, too. Although officials from 
the United States labored to portray this compromise in a positive 
light, Mahathir felt no need to gild the lily. ``Being urgent is one 
thing, getting things done in the international community is another 
thing,'' he said in the tone of a man happy to have his week in the 
spotlight behind him. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>