<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981118.2000.2686 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It's amazing the difference a few months makes. The World's Eddie 
Mayor has sent us another letter from London. Back in February, everyone 
in Britain appeared to have caught Saddam fever. Should we bomb Iraq? 
Is it time to lift sanctions? Why did we help arm Saddam in the first 
place? With the country on the brink of war, Saddam, and what to do 
about him, was top priority. Nine months later, with the international 
consensus stronger than ever, Britain found itself last week in an 
almost identical situation, but with virtually none of the public 
discourse. Yes, every development was being reported. But there was 
little of the wall to wall analysis which had accompanied February's 
Contre Tente. The stakes were just as high, the risks to human life 
just as great. But because there was a sense of Deja Vu about the 
whole thing, people in the media, and I'm as guilty as anyone, felt 
there was little fresh to say. And we chose not to. Even the left 
wing voices, you normally hear in Britain, on the eve of an apparent 
conflict, were strangely silent. As if they too felt fatigued by having 
to go through the whole process with Saddam again. Of course, the 
argument runs, that's exactly what Saddam wants to happen. He knows 
how fickle we are in the West, how today's headlines become yesterday's 
news. And how maybe, just maybe, this tactic will result in us throwing 
our hands in the air and letting him have what he wants. Well perhaps 
not. Last Friday, before the famous letter and annex from Baghdad, 
I spoke to former US weapons inspector Scott Ritter. He suggested 
to me, it was perhaps time President Clinton considered changing the 
rules that stop the US government from trying to get rid of another 
head of state. Strong stuff I thought at the time. Although the remarks 
had to be tempered by the knowledge that Mr. Ritter's recent relations 
with his government haven't been good. Worth noting then, that in 
the House of Commons on Monday, someone stood up and suggested the 
same thing, that the British government should try to overthrow Saddam. 
And make it its policy to do so. This voice didn't belong to some 
rogue back bencher, but to the leader of the opposition, William Haig. 
The government has made it clear it would very much like to see Saddam 
overthrown. And so, from the apathy before the planned attacks, we 
arrive at a renewed vigor and determination to help Iraqi opposition 
groups. People with memories dating back to the aftermath of the Gulf 
War, will have that same sense of deja vu about such intentions. But, 
thankfully, for those behind the policy, public opinion doesn't seem 
to remember further back than February. The World's Eddie Mayor writes 
us weekly from London. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>