<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981118.2000.1254 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is The World, I'm Lisa Mullins. In this episode, TV broadcasts 
of the news of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin's assassination interrupt 
two intense sexual encounters. The scene generated a lot of controversy 
when it was first broadcast in Israel for obvious reasons. But, Florentine's 
creator says the show would provoke equally strong viewer involvement 
in the United States. Atan Fox says, the issues that Florentine deals 
with are universal. People who are 20-something, they deal with their 
relationships, with find themselves in the world, with their sexual 
relationships and identities, with their politics, with what it is 
to move from being a youngster to being a grown up. All those questions 
are questions that we have an issue of course, as well. And, it's 
interesting because it seems as though this series - and correct me 
if I'm wrong - but it seems as though this particular series deals 
with some of those problems more than others have, in Israeli television. 
For instance, a young women who is in her twenties and is curious 
about having sex for the first time. She does, in fact, as we find 
out in the next episode. And she has it with an immigrant, a Ukrainian 
immigrant, who happens to be married. And later on, we meet his wife 
and children in the country. We're talking about homosexuality, which 
I guess is also an issue that you have dealt with before. In terms 
of you created the first homosexual film to take on homosexuality 
in the military. These kinds of problems, are they emerging now, in 
terms of public discussion in Israel? Is this something that is new 
to the culture? I think dealing openly with these subjects is something 
new to Israel. Israel is changing very fast, the last few years. Things 
that were considered taboos, or no one talked about, were not discussed, 
are now discussed openly. Young people are say, we do not want to 
be closeted any more. We want to express our selves. We don't except 
all the things our fathers and our generations who built the country 
believed in. That's one of the reasons I made the series. Because 
people around the world have this wrong impression of what we are 
all about, especially young Israel, the young people of Israel. How 
is that impression wrong? I think what people see, on CNN, they see 
our politicians, they see the extremists on both sides. They don't 
really get the sense of what the people feel and think. And the fact 
that the people are asking questions, the people are confused. A lot 
of them say, we don't want to go to the army any more, which is something 
which was unheard of when I went to the army ten years ago. Talk about 
how the politics of Israel figures into the lives of these young characters 
in Florentine. In particular I am thinking of the scene that we just 
heard a short clip from, in which two couples are having sex just 
as the news of Yitzhak Rabin's assassination comes through. Can you 
describe that scene for us? Rabin's assassination, of course, was 
something that effected everyone in Israel. And what I did, which 
made a lot of people in Israel feel uneasy, with this specific episode 
you are referring to, is I connected between the regular lives of 
young people in Israel, and into these regular lives, their love affairs, 
their sexual affairs, comes in this tragic event. And that is something 
that people in Israel didn't really like, the fact that we have two 
sex scenes, one gay, one straight happening while this assassination 
is taking place. And actually stops the acts of love and sex, and 
these people have to deal with what's happening around them. Tell 
us about the response to, not only scenes like that, but to Florentine 
the series in general. I has become very popular, obviously, in Israel, 
but it has had its critics as well. Yeah, on the one hand it became 
very popular with young people in Israel. It got nice reviews, it 
had very high ratings. But, on the other hand, of course, older people, 
more conservative, maybe right-wingers, religious of course, did not 
really like us dealing with these subjects I had connected between 
things that are considered holy and things that are very secular. 
Like there is one episode where, I think you mentioned, one of our 
characters Tuti loses her virginity on Yom Kippur, which is the holy 
day for Jews and for people in Israel. And that was something that 
made people really upset at me. The network was very nervous, you 
know, how will people react to this. You know, as though people were 
not having sex on Yom Kippur. Since there are so many commonalties, 
that you point to in the series, between Israeli culture and American 
culture, do you think that the series could fly on TV in the United 
States? Maybe not on network TV, also because of, you know, how extreme 
it is, and how explicit it is with different things. But, I hope it 
eventually find its way to maybe cable TV or public TV. I know that 
public television in San Francisco is planning on airing it in the 
near future, after it showed there in the film festival and did very 
nicely. Well, it has been very nice to speak with you Atan Fox, who 
is the director of the Israeli television series, Florentine. Thanks 
again for coming in. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>