<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981118.2000.2016 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is The World, a co-production of the BBC World Service, PRI and 
WGBH Boston. I'm Lisa Mullins. As Israeli and Palestinian officials 
resume talks today about a final peace treaty, there was a reminder 
of an obstacle to any eventual agreement. A group of Jewish settlers 
had to be chased off a hill top near the West Bank Jewish settlement 
of Kedue Mein. About 30 settlers camped there yesterday, declaring 
their intention to establish a new community. Such activities have 
increased since Sunday, when Israel's Foreign Minister Ariel Sharron 
called on Jewish settlers to seize as many hills as possible to insure 
that the land doesn't revert to Palestinian control. The World's Richard 
Myron reports from the West Bank. High on a baron rocky hilltop, a 
man with a Yamulka perched on his head, and sweat on his brow, fixes 
a padlock onto a door. Eliyahu Storavich is making a few adjustments 
to his new home, a fragile looking trailer set amid boulders and brush 
in the West Bank. Storavich moved his wife and baby daughter here 
a few days ago. It is a mile or so from the settlement Ellon Schutt, 
ten miles south of Jerusalem. Since its Jewish land and we didn't 
know for how long we would be allowed to keep settling in such places, 
we thought it's the right time to have this place settled. And to 
come live here to just let the Jewish land have its Jewish people 
on it. We decided to do it, before any translation of the Wye agreements 
will prevent us from doing this. Watching over Storavich's trailer 
is Mosse Raz from Peace Now, an Israeli group that monitors settlement 
activity. In the last four weeks, since the beginning of the negotiations 
at Wye Plantation, we know about seven new points like this, now spread 
all over the West Bank. How much has this been the active encouragement 
of the government, or are people just going out and putting up these 
things where and when they can? I thought there was no encouragement 
from the government, but we have heard Mr. Sharron, the Foreign Affairs 
Minister calling the settlers to act in this unlegal way. And we know 
the army does not stop this unlegal activity, and so I think the government 
is trying to back those unlegal activity. The Israeli government does 
not consider this illegal activity. Senior official David Bar Elan 
says if the settlers follow Ariel Sharron's call to the letter, then 
he sees no problem. Mr. Sharron says that the settlers should make 
sure that the area, that is theirs by law, should be kept that way 
by establishing their rights through placing caravans at every hilltop 
that is theirs. Not hilltop that do not belong to them, but hilltops 
that do belong to the municipal area of the settlement. I don't see 
anything wrong with doing anything legal. I mean, whatever you call 
it, putting markers on the ground, or making sure that the land would 
not be taken away. Whatever it is, as long as it is legal, I don't 
see anything wrong with it. But the Palestinians do. They say the 
Israeli government, the army and the settlers are working to expand 
settlements where ever and how ever they can. Sele Tammari, a member 
of the Palestinian Legislative Council treads carefully over the fallen 
remains of an ancient stone terrace which adjoins a field of green 
vines and tall fruit trees. You can see the vineyards, how old they 
are, and you can see the flanks of vineyards and trees uprooted by 
the Israeli bulldozer. They started ruining this and they ruined that 
part of the road along with the orchard. And you can see the flanks 
of the uprooted trees. Tammari has come to the Palestinian village 
of Hadra on the West Bank to survey the damage done by the Israeli 
army last week, when it widened a track along side a field. The village 
adjoins the Jewish settlement of Affront. The new road is expected 
to move the boundary between the settlement and the Palestinian village. 
The Palestinians believe the road will expand the Jewish settlement 
onto their land. Selle Tammari believes the road, as well as the settlement 
activity elsewhere proves that the Israelis are killing the chances 
for peace. It is a road that cuts through our flesh, as Palestinians. 
We are fed up and sick and tired of this situation. That's why it 
will not pass. They are working like crazy. They have the means, they 
have the money, and they have the protection of the army. And Mr. 
Sharron's statement is an invitation to violence. It is an assumption 
of the war, he and his allies declared against peace. The Wye Plantation 
memorandum was intended to reinvigorate the peace process, by setting 
a schedule for the withdrawal of Israeli forces from parts of the 
West Bank. But in so doing, it has also fueled tensions on the ground, 
as both sides battled to mark their ownership of territory while they 
still have the chance. And as the competition heats up, so does the 
danger of violence. For The World, this is Richard Myron in the West 
Bank. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>