<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981118.2000.0369 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is The World, I'm Lisa Mullins. Once again, today, our top story 
has to do with a pariah nation, which has the world worried about 
its weapons of mass destruction. But, the country in question is not 
Iraq, it is North Korea. Today the State Department said that the 
North Koreans have failed to meet US demands for access to an underground 
construction site which could be part of a revived nuclear weapons 
program. President Clinton said the crisis with Pyung Yang is as serious 
as the one with Baghdad. If Iraq's weapons of mass destruction had 
dominated recent headlines, we must be no less concerned by North 
Korea's weapons activities, including its provocative missile program, 
and developments that could call into question, its commitment to 
freeze and dismantle its nuclear weapons efforts. President Clinton 
spoke just before the beginning of his trip to Japan, and to South 
Korea, where he will meet with President Kim Dae Jung about North 
Korea's nuclear program. This trip will give us an opportunity to 
address this critical issues, where China has also played a very constructive 
role. We also want to support President Kim's strategy of engagement 
on the Korean peninsula. An to insure that our forces are strong and 
vigilant in Korea until there is a just and lasting peace there. James 
Lilly is former US Ambassador to South Korea. Ambassador Lilly, we 
just hear President Clinton talk about two elements of US policy toward 
North Korea, one, support of President Kim's strategy of engagement 
with the North. And two, the presence of 37,000 American forces that 
are there in the south. How would you recommend that the president 
proceed on both fronts? Well first of all, I think that the president 
is beginning to see that our Korean policy in the past has failed. 
And he is adopting a new, broader policy. We have been engaging North 
Korea, and I think right now, we are realizing that it probably wasn't 
the brightest thing we ever did. Because what happened when we started 
engaging in them directly, the South got pushed down, we didn't get 
challenge inspections, and we had to pay an enormous price for that 
engagement, in terms of finance. So we're beginning to rethink that, 
and we're going to make this engagement more conditional on economic 
reform, more transparency in the military, confidence building measures, 
constructive North/South dialogue. That's the way to approach it. 
And that's apparently what Charles Cartman, the United States Special 
Envoy for Korean Affairs has been trying to do in North Korea over 
the past couple of days to try and impress the government to come 
clean on some of its nuclear facilities. Do you think that he is approaching 
this the right way? I think that the pressure from Congress and from 
others had the state department begin to adjust its policy, and this 
was reflected in the Clinton statement today. But let me go on to 
this business of chemical and biological warfare and nuclear weapons. 
They are not going to give up the weapons of mass destruction, because 
these are absolutely essential to their survival, just as Saddam's 
weapons are. They cannot give them up, because that threatens their 
whole regime. It is their only really trump card. Is it their trump 
card in terms of possibly using those weapons to strike the South, 
or Japan or other neighbors? Or because in the financial straights 
that North Korea's in right now, it needs to sell its missile technology, 
as it has, to places like Iran, and Pakistan? And maybe later, Libya 
and Syria, possibly? I think actually both, they have done both. But, 
the prospect of nuclear weapons and long-range weapons and biological 
and chemical warfare, gives them a very good instrument of threat 
to get financial concessions to keep their system going with out changing 
it. That is the game plan. They don't want to use it. Because they 
carry you to the brink - they've been doing this for 40 years - right 
to the brink. And you give them the concession, and then they cool 
off for a while. And then you get a brand new set of concessions. 
You want to see the underground site, 300,000 tons of grain. You want 
four party talks, 500,000 tons. You want this, a million tons. This 
is the way it goes. So if engagement isn't working, should the United 
States pursue a course as it has with Iraq? And possibly commit to 
some sort of military attack, if things like that... No, no I don't 
think that's in the cards. You're military in Korea is used as a credible 
deterrent to North Korean military aggression. There is nothing you 
can do with your military directly in North Korea, to change their 
program without getting into very catastrophic results for the whole 
Korean peninsula. So what's left then? You have to take their military 
option off the table by your credible deterrence. Then you have to 
get the South Koreans in there, to invest, to change, to get access. 
That's the kind of engagement you want, and the North Koreans then 
will began to erode their system, over time. If you move the South 
Koreans and the thousands of tourists going in, engaging their relatives, 
if you get Daewoo and Hyundai going into industrial parks, that is 
what will change North Korea. James Lilly is the former US Ambassador 
to South Korea. We appreciate your speaking to us, Ambassador. My 
pleasure. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>