<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981118.2000.0666 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Ambassador Lilly would be pleased to learn about a group of South 
Korean tourists who are visiting North Korea for the first time in 
their lives. The cruise is the brain child of Chun Joo Yung the founder 
of Hyundai. The World's Andrew Wood takes us aboard. As darkness fell, 
the ship left Tong Hae on the east coast of South Korea, a few minutes 
late, to sail all night to anchor just off the North Korean coast 
before dawn. For many of the 800 or so tourists, it will be their 
first chance to visit a country which has been forbidden fruit for 
a half a century. Koreans are a people torn apart by war. Millions 
lost contact with relatives. Moon Chang Ook now in here 70s, may not 
be able to visit her home town, and catch up with lost friends. But 
for now she was just happy to be on the cruise. My family was separated 
during the Korean War. Until now I could only hope to go to North 
Korea. But now I can go to Mt. Kung Gang which is part of North Korea. 
But apart from the beautiful countryside, she won't see much. The 
rules are strict. No one can break away from the tour groups, They'll 
be no contact with ordinary North Koreans. Zoom cameras are banned. 
Even the roads to Mt. Kung Gang are said to be fenced in. Still Eh 
Kang Yee another tourist didn't mind the restrictions. For him the 
visit has more spiritual and patriotic meaning. Sight seeing on Mt. 
Kung Gang may be pleasurable, but what I really want is to climb to 
the top, and pray for our people's unification. For the company behind 
the trips, it is more down to earth, it wants to make money. Its founder, 
Chung Joo Yung was born in what is now North Korea, and he has been 
courting the North for years. Most famously, earlier this year, he 
gave 1001 cows to the famine stricken country. Eh Yung Kyu, a spokesman 
says the cruises is just the beginning. We don't think we will make 
a big profit through the cruise tourism. But after we have built a 
hotel and entertainment facility, such as casinos, ski resorts, something 
like that, then that will help us to attract more foreign and Korean 
tourists. Earlier this week, the South Koreans held their monthly 
air raid drills. The streets emptied, government workers prepared 
for potential gas and biological weapons attacks. High level defectors 
talk of a bazarre political system. Most North Koreans are kept in 
the dark about the outside world. The elite has a very different comfortable 
life. The leader, Kim Jung Ill is said to have his own special newspaper 
printed every day, to keep him informed. Kim Jung Dok, a former soldier 
who defected, says the difference between the North and the South 
is the way that the Northerners worship their leader. The pattern 
of every day life can be similar, abut the social structure is almost 
religious. Like North Korea has used its turbulent history to brainwash 
people into rationalizing. Although people may die in hunger, North 
Koreans feel it is the right thing to do. And charities estimate that 
perhaps up to 3.5 million may have done just that during the famine 
of the past few years. Luxury cruises to a famine stricken country 
may seem distasteful. But is they generate dollars to help feed ordinary 
people, and open up an encouraged reform in North Korea, they may 
well prove to be worth it. For The World, this is Andrew Wood reporting 
from Seoul. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>