<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981118.2000.2409 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
I was back to business for UN weapons inspectors in Iraq today. Baghdad 
suspended their monitoring activities October 31, and United Nations 
withdrew them from the country last week. But after Iraq backed down 
under the threat of airstrikes, the inspectors returned to resume 
their work. Around the country, Iraqis are apparently unshaken by 
the crisis that almost subjected to them to attack. And with occasional 
exceptions, unwilling to oppose President Saddam Hussein. Maggie O'Cain, 
a reporter for the British newspaper, The Guardian has heard evidence 
of those exceptions. But says the Iraqi capitol couldn't be more quiet. 
The city is absolutely calm, there is no sign of any opposition, and 
in a way, this is not unexpected in Baghdad which is the stronghold 
of the leadership. But what has been happening over the last couple 
weeks to 10 days are reports coming from the site, from the place 
called Omar which is near the Iranian border. And there, we have information 
that there was an attempt on something like a dozen of the Basque 
party, that's the ruling party members, who were actually killed by 
the opposition. And this is the same thing that happened in February 
when there was more talk of airstrikes. It's very brief, it's very 
fleeting. But you feel the need for this country. There is a pulsating 
anger and frustration that begins to come out with these desperate 
actions during a build up to air strikes. And then very quickly seems 
to die down again. Maggie, you've had the unusual opportunity to speak 
with some Iraqis in private outside the watch of the government. What 
can you tell us the difference is between what they are saying in 
public, and what they are telling you behind closed doors? Well in 
public, they say this little terrified mantra of, we will Saddam Hussein, 
and he is our leader, he is protecting us against American imperialism. 
You know, they are repeating what is in the newspapers, what's put 
out by the television. Everything here is controlled by the government. 
No one here speaks out. And I have to say - this is eight trips that 
I've made here - it's taken me literally years to be able to get close 
enough to people where they will say, I mean I was talking to somebody 
yesterday, and they said, "If he says the sun is yellow, then we will 
say the sun is yellow, because the price of saying anything else is 
very, very high." What is the price? Oh, they will be imprisoned, 
and they will be killed. The security apparatus in this country operates 
as a completely separate entity. There is no court system, and anybody 
who threatens any sort of disappears into Abu Gria prison. And that's 
the end. To what extent do the Iraqis that you've spoken with blame 
the United States for their problems? And to what extent do they actually 
blame Saddam Hussein? They don't blame Saddam Hussein. They blame 
the West, and they blame the Americans, mainly. People really don't 
understand why they are being made to suffer to the extent that they 
are. And if you get quite clear, these sanctions do not impact on 
the leadership. I mean, if you go up to the Mazoo district, you can 
go and shop in a Bennington shop, you can buy Boss jeans. And then 
you may see these showrooms that opened. The elite, the people who 
control this country, are completely insulated against the sanctions. 
There is no sign of poverty. You can go and have an Italian meal, 
you can have a Chinese meal. Today, I was looking for a pair of sunglasses, 
and I went into a new sunglass shop which had just opened in the Mantue 
district which has marble floors and Italian sunglasses which were 
very expensive. So people have money, the right people have the money 
to buy these things. So, for ordinary people who are living really, 
really on the bread lines, they blame America. They just don't understand 
why they are being made to suffer. On the other hand, you have gone 
into some hospitals where you say the sanctions are taking their toll. 
Well I expected, because there has been more money made available 
under new UN directorate, I expected there to be a big improvement. 
Although I spent all day in hospitals, I must say when you are standing 
over the bed of a woman who has her fourth child. And who is about 
to die from kidney failure because they don't have any dialysis machines. 
Because of the sanctions, they can't import them. This is this women's 
fourth child, she has lost three children from kidney failure. And 
she said to me, can you do anything to help, I don't want to lose 
the last one? Now that, for me, was probably the most graphic illustration 
of the effect of UN sanctions on these people. This women was going 
to watch her fourth child die. And the doctors said, she probably 
had a month. And she was seven years old, and her name was Sarah. 
So, the mother is not looking at Sarah and saying, she blames it on 
Hussein. She is saying, she blames the West. Guardian reporter Maggie 
O'Cain speaking to us from Baghdad, in Iraq. Thank you very much. 
Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>