<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981118.2000.2994 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is The World, I'm Lisa Mullins. A computer executive is about 
to go on trial for what would appear to be a harmless act, providing 
an on-line publication with e-mail addresses of potential subscribers. 
But the executive is Chinese, and the publication is an electronic 
newsletter put out by Chinese Democracy advocates in Washington. Authorities 
in China charge the computer executive Ling Hai with subverting state 
power, As this case suggests, Beijing considers the Internet a threat 
to its control over political discussion within China. And Chinese 
dissidents consider this case a threat to the access to information 
that is so vital to their cause. Lin Shin Dur is the publisher of 
VIP Reference, the on-line newsletter in question in the trial of 
Ling Hai. It's very surprising for us to find that Mr. Ling Hai, as 
a computer engineer, as one weekly subscriber of our publication was 
arrested some March 25th, this year. And to the trial to him right 
now, threatening the state security, is very ridiculous to us. Because 
we believe whatever we did is bring up the information which is forbidden 
in main land China to those who want to know the truth and the facts. 
So it is very surprising for us to know that Mr. Ling Hai is the first 
case of the Chinese history since 1994, when China went down to the 
Internet. This is kind of political persecution under Internet users 
without any factual charges on their persecution nature. You say it 
is surprising, but I wander to what extent you see the Internet as 
being this kind of ubiquitous, even in China, antagonist to Beijing's 
control over political debate, and access to foreign news. I mean 
the Internet must have really changed the playing field a lot for 
the Chinese. Yes, you are perfectly right. Internet has a very big 
impact on China's, you know, development. Internet, we can say, is 
bringing us real revolution in main land China. That the possibility 
of China's control of all information cannot continue as they were 
before. So, it's a very, very helpful tool for the Chinese people 
to have the right to access information to make their decisions on 
their own judgments. Could the Chinese government shut you down, if 
it had the technical ability to do it. They can't, they can not stop 
us. Because information, the free flow of information cannot be controlled 
unless the Chinese government closed the connection between the main 
land China to the outside world on the Internet. Lin Shin Dur is the 
publisher of VIP Reference, speaking to us from Washington DC. Mr. 
Lin, thank you again. Thank you very much. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>