<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981118.2000.0903 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
NATO's Supreme Commander in Europe today named two things needed for 
peace in Yugoslavia. US Gen. Wesley Clark said a lasting political 
settlement in Kosovo is vital to prevent future blood shed in the 
Serbian province. And Clark added that democratization in Serbia is 
necessary to ease regional security fears. But there have been no 
signs that Serbian's leader Slobodon Milosevic is developing any fondness 
for democracy. After clamping down on the press, Milosevic has clamped 
down on the universities. From Belgrade, The World's Nanet Shebek 
has details. Most good students in Belgrade gather to protest against 
the new University Law, and the repression, they say, it has brought 
about. Bjorn Bistish is a member of the new student organization called 
Resistance. We realize that we don't have very much time. The regime 
here is desperately trying to make everybody silent and make absolute 
control of everything in this country. And so we realize that this 
is the last moment to do something to make things different here. 
Several of Bjorn's professors have been fired since the new University 
Law was introduced in may. One of them Bladitava Yankovich taught 
Greek and Latin literature until last Wednesday, when he was dismissed. 
He says the new law has nothing to do with academic life but everything 
to do with politics. The idea of this new law is to exclude from the 
faculty from the university people who are either politically engaged, 
or who, according to the regime, are poisoning the minds of academic 
youth with anti-regime propaganda. Professor Stanalydich from the 
Helsinki Committee for Human Rights explains the way the new law operates. 
For example, they abolish certain chairs, departments, etc. and all 
subjects, courses according to their own will. Now no argument given. 
Then you have this grotesque situation, for example at the engineering 
school, where the professors were physically carried out and thrown 
out. These are things you don't do at the university. But what's the 
motive for the government's action against academia? Bladitava Yankovich 
speaks of caution and revenge. Whenever there was a protest, street 
demonstrations, it usually started from the university. In other words, 
the university came out as a winner. You know with Milosevic very 
few people ever came out as winners. And he does not forget that sort 
of thing. And he considers it as a personal insult, almost. Whatever 
the insult, most analysts here believe that the troubles in the separatist 
province of Kosovo are the main reason for the recent crackdown on 
the university and the independent media. Professor Stanalydich says, 
the political clout of President Slobodon Milosevic was damaged by 
the humiliation of withdrawing from Kosovo following threats of NATO 
airstrikes. Each crack in the system is a very big blow to the system. 
So now they are trying to cover all the cracks, you know, first of 
all through media and information. And through the university. My 
guess is that the next in line will be non-government organizations 
and even political parties. That they will be next. These days students 
are protesting by walking around and around their faculty in a circle. 
They call it the "jailhouse walk" to show how they feel about living 
in Serbia under this regime. Last week four of them were arrested 
for writing graffiti on the walls and sentenced to ten days imprisonment. 
Is student Bjorn Bistish afraid that this might happen to him as well? 
Will the repression stop the protest? No, we are aware what can happen 
to us. And we are aware that police know us by name and we are faced 
with our destiny. Bjorn and his fellow students say they will try 
to organize a strike this week to include the whole of Belgrade University. 
It is the only weapon we have, he says, to try and fight this law 
which wants to extinguish free thought in Serbia. For The World, this 
is Naned Shebek in Belgrade. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>