<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981118.2000.3149 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the global music world, the hot topic of the day is not a new style 
or artist, it is censorship. The latest issue of the British journal, 
Index on Censorship is devoted entirely to music. And this Friday, 
in Copenhagen, the Danish Center for Human Rights will sponsor the 
first World Conference on Censorship and Music. In the first of three 
reports, The World's Marco Werhman samples some music that will challenge 
even the most passionate opponents of censorship. It's not easy getting 
your hands on a CD of so-called White Noise music. This clip of Swedish 
bank, Swastika was downloaded from the Internet. In case you didn't 
hear them, the lyrics to that Swastika track "Showdown" go, "Look 
to the future, outlaw, storm is coming now, race war." Showdown is 
a popular tune with neo nazis and White Noise fans. The ten or so 
Swedish bands, like Swastika have an audience not just in Scandinavia, 
but in Germany and the United States as well. Mataya Sungquist, the 
leader of Swastika, says those listeners firmly subscribe to the belief 
that the band formed to defend eight years ago. We want to teach the 
youth pride instead of guilt. And we want them to be proud of who 
they are and of the country. And we also want to kick all non-European 
people out from Europe. Morton Querram, the Director of the Danish 
Center for Human Rights watches over both music censorship and minority 
rights issues. In Denmark, Sweden we have a very long tradition for 
protecting the freedom of speech. And in this particular instance, 
the protection of the freedom of speech works detrimental to the protection 
of minorities. Because it actually leaves a lot of room for hate music, 
hate speech, and so forth. It is a very delicate balance which I'm 
not quite sure that we have struck in the right way. The balance has 
not been struck the right way, yet, for two reasons, says Querram. 
One because Nordic countries have been ethnically homogenous for so 
long that they have been slow to recognize their immigrant populations. 
And two, unlike some European countries, Denmark and Sweden do not 
consider it a crime to produce hate music and hate speech. Still, 
mainstream record stores in Sweden and Denmark don't sell CDs by bands 
like Swastika, Fans have to get them through mail order and the Internet. 
Do a web search for Swastika, and you'll come up with links to organizations 
like, "Final Conflict", "White Pride" and the "Dark Sides of Zion" 
as well as neo-nazis music sites. Mataya Sunquist says, that's where 
you can order CDs from the band Swastika and their distribution network, 
Nordland. Thousands of people that get in touch with us, if you compare 
it to, like, the punk rock scene. It's not smaller than that. But 
of course you can't compare it to Madona or Michael Jackson. A 1997 
survey of 12 to 18 year old conducted by Sweden's National Council 
on Crime showed that largest consumers of white noise music were boys 
of Swedish origins, 17% of them claimed to listen sometimes or often 
to hate music, 86% of them claimed they had been introduced to the 
music by friends, while Danish Human Rights activist, Morton Querram 
said those number seemed exaggerated, he is fearful of supporting 
laws that would censer neo-nazi hate music as the German government 
has done in its ban of the group, Werewolf. I'm very much in favor 
of the openness in order that others can confront the statements, 
the views expressed in these songs. And actually having an open discussion, 
instead of putting these people in groups, bands into hiding, and 
I think we would create martyrs. And I think in Europe, we have seen 
too many martyrs in the recent history. Bands like Swastika may not 
be subject to official censorship, but that doesn't mean the public 
approves of their music. And while Swastika band leader Mataya Sunquist 
says his group has a large following in Sweden, he admits that record 
stores don't carry their albums because of popular disapproval. There's 
not any stores that dare to have it, because they know that people 
will destroy the shelves and put the pressure on them. In fact, the 
same freedom of speech that Swastika is benefiting from is also giving 
voice to other Swedish musicians who are confronting hate music. Pop 
musician Egalai Cherry lives in Stockholm and is the son of Jazz trumpeter 
Don Cherry. The racism expressed by bands like Swastika provided a 
cue for Egalai Cherry to compose this track, "Indecision". Cherry's 
CD is sold widely across Sweden and Denmark, and has also been a hit 
on main stream radio. For The World, this is Marco Wehrman. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>