<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981118.0500.0626 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A prominent U.S. Senator, Democrat John Kerry of Nebraska, says the 
United States has an urgent national security interest to help Russia 
reduce its nuclear arsenal ahead of schedule. Senator Kerry spoke 
Tuesday in New York to a private foreign policy interest group. VOA 
correspondent, Elaine Johanson reports. Senator Kerry wants president 
Clinton and the U.S. Congress to agree on accelerating the dismantling 
of U.S. nuclear missiles. This would give Russia, he says, the incentive 
it is looking for to downsize its own arsenal faster, before it loses 
control of it. The Start One Arms Control Agreement obliges each side, 
the United States and Russia to cut its arsenal to 6,000. Many more, 
Senator Kerry maintains, than are needed for security. He recommends 
cutting the weapons at a more rapid pace to a level of about 2,000. 
The U.S. Senator believes the Russians are capable of launching a 
missile or two at the United States accidentally, due, perhaps, to 
a breakdown in discipline or communication within what he describes 
as Russia's underpaid and poorly-equipped command structure. He draws 
a scenario of a peaceful scientific rocket launch by a western country 
mistakenly perceived in Russia as an attack. Senator Kerry says Russia, 
at the moment, is too disorganized politically and militarily to sustain 
a huge arsenal with nuclear warheads on hair trigger alert. If the 
goal of the policy is to reduce the danger to the people of the United 
States of America, it seems to me. It makes no sense for us to maintain 
a level that requires the Russians to have weapons far beyond their 
capacity to control. Especially if unauthorized launch is the new 
danger. Senator Kerry says now is the time to press for a deeper weapons 
cuts, than for the United States to help economically strapped Russia 
pay for it. He says relations currently are good between the two governments. 
But it may not last. We know that our relationship with Russia is 
like what it is like today. We can predict, but we cannot know, what 
it will be like a year to two or five or ten years from now. We do 
not know whether the circumstances for reducing nuclear dangers will 
be as favorable then as they are now. Senator Kerry also fears that 
Russian nuclear weapons might fall into the hands of rogue groups 
or individuals, whether they be terrorist states or a disgruntled 
Russian soldier. He says uncertainty pervades Russia like an accident 
waiting to happen. Senator Kerry, a possible candidate for the U.S. 
presidency in the year 2000, spoke at the council on foreign relations. 
Elaine Johansen, VOA News, New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>