<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981118.1600.3183 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Time now for our weekly look at the most popular films at North American 
theaters. Most critics pan the Water Boy but audiences love the low 
brow comedy that is still number one. There are two new entries on 
the top five chart, and Alan Silberman has the list starting with 
an animated hit at number five. Antz, spelled A-N-T-Z, is a computer-animated 
fable about an ant colony and it features the voices of Woody Allen, 
Sylvester Stallone, and Sharon Stone. The success of this first animated 
feature from the DreamWorks Studio, may have an impact on the audience 
for a computer cartoon feature about insects that opens this week, 
A Bug's Life. The latest collaboration between the Toy Story team 
of Disney and Pixar animation. Antz ends up in fifth place. A tense 
and realistic drama about terrorism drops to number four. In The Siege, 
deadly attacks terrify New York and the government declares marshal 
law in the nation's largest city. Denzel Washington stars as the FBI 
agent trying to stop the terrorists. We had the luxury of having quite 
a few guys from the FBI working with us. Negotiators, hostage terrorist 
experts, and, you know, you start to find out, you know, what the 
writer may have made up. You know, or not, you know, yes, I am a logic 
freak, I like things to make sense. You know, especially if it is 
a role where I have the real example to draw from as was the case 
here. Annette Benning, Tony Shalub, and Bruce Willis costar in The 
Siege, which sinks to fourth place. A romantic drama with a comic 
side makes its debut at number three. Meet Joe Black is a 90s update 
of the 1934 film classic, Death Takes a Holiday. In which death tries 
to learn about people and why they fear him so much. Brad Pitt stars 
as the visitor nobody wants to meet. It has elements of a love story 
and elements of a comedy and even a serious drama. Because we are 
dealing with these themes, these themes of love and themes of loss 
and having to say good bye to your life, when, yes, it is very life 
affirming even though it is death and having to say good bye. It is 
these questions of what have you done with your life? And if you have 
to go at this time, are things in order? And have you made the peace 
with this? And that, and if not, you better. It is these kind of things 
these bigger themes that make it seem all right. Anthony Hopkins costars 
as the mortal who becomes tour guide for the unearthly visitor. Claire 
Forlani plays the woman whose love brings life to Mr. Death. Meet 
Joe Black opens up at number three. Also new this week, a horror thriller 
hits the chart in second place. I Still Know What You Did Last Summer 
is a sequel to last year's horror hit. Continuing the saga of some 
good-looking young people haunted by the specter of their deadly mistake. 
Jennifer Love-Huett and Brandi costar and I Still Know What You Did 
Last Summer debuts at number two. But still in first place, The Water 
Boy, written by and starring Adam Sandler as a good-hearted but slow-witted 
football team water boy who discovers his true talent is on the field 
tackling other players. Wow was not quite the word used by most critics 
who gave The Water Boy negative reviews. One of them compared it to 
having a root canal. But that does not matter to Sandler fans for 
the second straight week, the admittedly juvenile comedy is the most 
popular movie at North American theaters. Alan Silberman for the Voice 
of America in Hollywood. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>