<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981118.1600.2149 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
And I am Tony Riggs along with Erin Brummet. This is VOA News Now. 
European governments and the European Union are trying to stem the 
flood of asylum seekers and refugees seeking haven in Western Europe. 
Displaced Kurds, ethnic Albanians from Kosovo, and Algerians are the 
groups most affected by the tighter policies. Refugee agencies say 
the tighter policies have gone too far. Europe closes its doors is 
the subject of today's Dateline. Here is Pamela Taylor. In January, 
the European Union adopted a plan to curb the influx of refugees from 
Iraq and the neighboring region. Following Iraq's defeat in the 1991 
Gulf War, and Iraqi leader, Saddam Hussein's attack on the Kurdish 
population in the north, the international community decided to deny 
Kurds asylum. Instead they created so-called safe areas for Kurds 
inside Iraq. But Bill Freelick says those havens prove to be not so 
safe. Mr. Freelick, a senior policy analyst with the U.S. Committee 
for Refugees, has examined recent European Union initiatives to stem 
the flow of refugees. He points out that when Iraqi forces moved into 
the Kurdish capital of Arable and killed at least 100 Kurds, Turkey 
closed its borders. BILL FREELICK, SENIOR POLICY ANALYST, THE U.S. 
COMMITTEE FOR REFUGEES. And so we were left with this very troubling 
phenomenon where there is no longer a country of first asylum. We 
have sort of created a precedent where we no longer hold countries 
of first asylum responsible for providing at least temporary protection. 
And there is no safe haven, either. Bill Freelick says the European 
Union has effectively created a tier of barriers to prevent Kurds 
from gaining asylum in Western Europe. The member states of the European 
union are not able to absorb large numbers of asylum seekers because 
of this, Mr. Freelick says, they exert intense pressure on the UN 
refugee agency, the UNHCR, to handle refugees in the region. Mr. Freelick 
says the EU idea of establishing so-called safe areas within the region 
of origin, and thereby denying asylum, has been applied not only to 
Iraqi Kurds, but to Bosnia's Muslims. He cites the case of ethnic 
Albanians internally displaced by the fighting in Yugoslavia's Kosovo 
province. For this reason, the U.S. Committee for Refugees opposed 
a recent proposal by Yugoslav President, Slobodan Milosevic. Milosevic 
in late August came up with the idea of establishing Serb-run, police-run, 
humanitarian centers in Kosovo to provide food and humanitarian assistance 
to displaced people inside Kosovo. He has proposed that to several 
American diplomats who warmly embrace the idea, initially. Said they 
would support it, fund it. There is no glimmer of international protection 
and no suggestion that the U.S. would make any requirements for anything 
other than the most superficial monitoring of safety of people in 
these centers. In July, Mr. Freelick says, Germany proposed a so-called 
regional solution for Kosovo refugees fleeing the province, instead 
of providing asylum for them in the West. He adds that there is also 
intense pressure to keep the refugees in Northern Albania. In August, 
Germany announced again the need for a regional solution. They called 
for reception centers now both in Northern Albania and in Italy as 
well. They reminded Kosovars that they would be expelled from Germany 
if they got into Germany and Germany would not be giving them temporary 
protection. In fact, there is still a readmission agreements with 
Yugoslavia in effect through the month of August. They were still, 
in August, they were deporting Kosovo Albanians to Belgrade. Bill 
Freelick's colleague, Steve Edminster, covers asylum and refugee issues 
in Europe and the Middle East for the U.S. Committee for Refugees. 
Mr. Edminster says many refugees still manage to reach Western Europe 
in spite of the barriers. But once they do so, if they have the misfortune 
to be persecuted by the wrong group. Misfortune to be persecuted by 
the rebel groups, as was the case in Algeria. Then they may well be 
out of luck and they may risk return to their home countries. The 
former secretary general of the European Council on Refugees in Exile 
said, in reference to the European Union, is in many respects defining 
refugees out of the system. Mr. Edminster reminds that the Geneva 
Convention defines a refugee as a person who has a well-founded fear 
of being persecuted for reasons of race, religion, membership in a 
particular social group, or political opinion. What is controversial 
about this definition. It is this. It is that certain countries most 
notably Germany, France, and Switzerland interpret this refugee definition 
to only include persecutions perpetrated by governments or so-called 
state-like authorities. They do not consider the human rights abuses 
committed by non-state actors or third parties to rise to the level 
of persecution unless these abuses are knowingly tolerated or encouraged 
by the authorities in the country concerned. The impact of this interpretation 
of refugee, Steve Edminster says, is to exclude from asylum the victims 
of persecution committed by opposition groups during civil wars. This, 
he adds, has adversely affected people attempting to flee civil war 
in Somalia, Liberia, Afghanistan and Algeria. Mr. Edminster says certain 
at-risk groups in countries like Algeria may no longer be granted 
asylum in Europe. These groups include political activists, journalists, 
young men of draft age, or women whose lifestyle conflicts with Islamic 
values. Germany is one country that has raised the standard for temporary 
asylum to the same level as that for refugee status itself. In 1997, 
Germany granted asylum to only nine Algerian applicants out of a total 
of 2,400. More refugees flee to Germany than to any other country 
in Europe. Attracted by Germany's liberal laws and it generous social 
welfare system. But the government has recently taken a harder line 
on refugees as we hear in this report from Suzanne Kelly in Berlin. 
A new German interior minister, Otto Shilly, touched off a storm of 
protest this week when he said there was no room in Germany for any 
further influx of foreigners. Germany had one of the world's most 
lenient asylum laws until they were tightened in 1993. But is still 
home to 7.5 million foreigners. Berlin's Commissioner for Foreigner 
Issues, Barbara Yohn, says that is it a system that does have its 
flaws. She defends Germany's record of great tolerance toward refugees, 
but says there are limits. We accept about 120,000 refugees per year. 
That is much more than the Unites States accepts per year. So, again, 
we are very open, but of course, there is a discussion are we not 
too open and are we not giving the wrong signals because many people 
come to Germany because here they can receive the highest benefits. 
While the German government is saying the boat is full. The country 
is under pressure to relieve itself of the financial burden of caring 
for so many refugees. That the government was offering refugee families 
from Bosnia up to $5,000 U.S. dollars to go home. Close to 350,000 
Bosnians found refuge in Germany during and after the war. More than 
150,000 have since returned to Bosnia. Germany's inconsistent attitude 
toward foreigners is somewhat influenced by the fact that it is a 
country that was once itself divided. That is according to Humble 
University Professor and Sociologist, Hartmund Halserman. He says 
that in some ways, the fall of the Berlin Wall exposed a huge gap 
in German's attitude toward foreigners. Between the free market West 
and the formerly Communist East. I do not think so that there was 
a change in Germany in general. But I think in Berlin, things have 
changed and especially in the eastern part of the town. You know that 
there have been very few foreigners in East Berlin before the fall 
of the wall and now the percentage of foreigners there is increasing 
from month to month. Mr. Halserman says that learning tolerance is 
something that Germans must still continue to do on an individual 
level. But in a country struggling to tackle a 10 percent unemployment 
rate, foreigners, whether they are refugees or not, are often the 
first to get the blame. Suzanne Kelly reporting from Berlin. Europe 
closes its doors was written and researched by VOA's Judith Latham. 
For Dateline, I am Pamela Taylor. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>