<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981118.1600.2690 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Environmentalists are raising their voices against the presence of 
dangerous chemicals in our air, earth and water. And governments are 
hearing their concerns and acting on them. Jane Hughes has a report. 
In her new book, Living Downstream, biologist, Sandra Steingraber, 
observes that the rate of certain cancers is rising rapidly because 
of environmental factors, rather than genes or unhealthy habits. Historically, 
medicine and science have focused on lifestyle factors as well as 
hereditary factors in looking at cancer. But these do not explain 
the majority of cancers, the origin of those cancers, wherever the 
cancers that are more swiftly rising. Such as childhood cancers, testicular 
cancer in young men, nonhodgeskinson lymphoma, these cancers do not 
have clear hereditary or lifestyle factors. So we are in the midst 
of a real see change now as the medical research community shifts 
its attention to look at how the health of our lives are affected 
by the health of the planet. Ms. Steingraber says that when she began 
her research for Living Downstream, she was amazed to discover that 
cancer is widespread among many forms of wildlife. That is what most 
surprised me actually when I started this book. Wild animals also 
get cancer and, of course, they do not smoke, drink, or hold stressful 
jobs. So when we look at where and what kind of animals had cancer. 
It is clearly related to environmental carcinogens, especially liver 
cancer among fish. Sandra Steingraber herself was diagnosed with bladder 
cancer when she was in her 20s. An illness she calls a classic environmental 
cancer. She is now in remission. So I think for me that experience 
gave me an urgency when I went back to the science to really argue 
that a meaningful program of cancer prevention relies on naming environmental 
carcinogens and eliminating them. That is precisely the task the United 
Nations Environmental Program, UNEP, is undertaking. It is calling 
on member nations to negotiate an international legally binding convention 
on POPs, persistent organic pollutants. During the drafting process, 
which will continue throughout 1999, the UN agency will be looking 
at the extent to which POPs accumulate in the tissues of plants, animals, 
fish, and birds. And their link to a wide range of disorders including 
cancer. UNEP biologist, John Buchini, the lead POPs negotiator, says 
the proposed treaty will deal primarily with 12 substances. What he 
calls the dirty dozen. That UNEP has already identified as the most 
dangerous pollutants. They consist of about 7 or 8 pesticides, a couple 
of contaminants which many people have heard of. Chlorinated dioxin, 
chlorinated geram, and polychlorinated finanals or PCDs, which have 
been used in electrical equipment such as transformers and capacitors 
for about 40 years. At the same time, the United Nations Environmental 
Group will be developing scientific criteria and procedures for identifying 
additional pollutants that require action. John Buchini defines the 
factors that will identify the world's worst environmental offenders. 
Resistance or the length of time that a substance survives in the 
air, water, or soil; bioaccumulation, which is the propensity for 
organisms to absorb compounds like DDT from water from food, things 
of that nature, and toxicity. The United Nations General Assembly 
is scheduled to ratify the International Convention on Persistent 
Organic Pollutants in the year 2000. I am Jane Hughes. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>