<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981118.0500.0381 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Most of the West seems to agree that Iraqi President, Saddam Hussein, 
is a threat and needs to be eliminated, or at least rendered harmless. 
But how? VOA's Ed Warner reports on the views of two analysts struggling 
with this issue. Once again, Iraq's Saddam Hussein has started a crisis, 
then ended it. The West's patience wears then, but what is the next 
step? An occupation army can march into Baghdad and take over says 
Anthony Sullivan, an associate at The Center for Middle Eastern and 
North African Studies at the University of Michigan. But short of 
that, Mr. Sullivan doubts all of Saddam Hussein's weapons of mass 
destruction can ever be found. Even if they are, scientists in Iraq 
can quickly recreate them. Mr. Sullivan says Saddam Hussein has proved 
he can withstand the punishment of bombing and a sustained air campaign 
could cost an estimated 10,000 Iraqi casualties, which would outrage 
the Muslim world. Deterrents worked with the Soviet Union says Mr. 
Sullivan, it should suffice for a lesser figure like Saddam Hussein. 
Any aggressive move on his part would be met with massive retaliation. 
If Saddam invades Kuwait again, that will lead to son of Dessert Storm. 
There is no question about that. And there should be no misunderstanding 
anywhere in the world about that. That would be the worst mistake 
that Saddam Hussein could possibly make. He made it once. And he should 
not make it again. He should also be kept in perspective, says John 
Linchowski, director of the Institute of World Politics, a graduate 
school in international affairs in Washington. Saddam Hussein is an 
undesirable character to say the least. But does that mean that his 
undesirability crosses the threshold of violating our most vital interests? 
And I do not personally possess sufficient knowledge to be able to 
come to that conclusion. In the absence of a more compelling case, 
I would have to conclude that his continued existence in power, however 
unpleasant, is not necessarily a threat to our most vital interests. 
Mr. Linchowski says pressure must be maintained on the Iraqi leader, 
but there must also be some incentive for him to change. If the sanctions 
will not be lifted, no matter what Saddam does, then, in effect, those 
sanctions no longer exercise any leverage whatsoever, because no matter 
what he does, the sanctions will remain. So, the net result is that 
the sanctions end up hurting lots of innocent people in Iraq without 
producing any of the desirable results. It is US policy to preserve 
Iraq as a nation. But if Saddam Hussein is somehow overthrown, can 
that be assured? Mr. Sullivan doubts there is any likely successor 
among the leaders of the fragmented opposition who could hold the 
state together. If this evil regime is destroyed, you are going to 
have a Sheob south, a Sumi center, and a Kurdish north, and all sorts 
of players are going to get involved on the field. The Iranians will 
be delighted. You may have a new Sheob block. Iran, southern Iraq, 
who knows? Are we thinking of these consequences? Anthony Sullivan 
and John Linchowski say the Iraqi status quo is bad enough, but it 
could be worse. Ed Warner, VOA News, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>