<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981118.0500.1829 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Israel's parliament has overwhelmingly approved the Y River Peace 
Accord with Palestinians that will give them control over 13 percent 
more of the West Bank. Approval came after two days of heated emotional 
debate and despite many members, Prime Minister, Benjamin Netanyahu's 
ruling Laku Party, voting against him and 17 lawmakers leaving the 
chamber. But in the end, reports VOA's David Gamas, the agreement, 
hammered out in marathon talks last month near Washington, carried 
the day. There were bitter exchanges in the canasit between supporters 
of the Y Agreement and right wing members who say Israeli troop withdrawals 
under the accord will make some Jewish settlements in the West Bank 
Islands in Palestinian territory. But with the opposition labor party 
joining many of Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu supporters in backing 
the agreement. It was approved easily at the end of the two-day debate. 
In the wake of the vote, Israel is expected to begin a phased withdrawal 
from another 13 percent of the West Bank within a few days. Israeli 
and Palestinian officials are also putting final touches on other 
elements of the Y Agreement, including the release by Friday of 250 
Palestinian prisoners from Israeli jails. The Palestinian authority 
has committed, among other things, to arrest dozens of fugitives linked 
by Israel to terrorist attacks, to confiscate illegally-held weapons, 
and revoke anti-Israel elements of the Palestinian charter. The canasit 
vote came as Israeli leaders welcomed a renewed commitment by Palestinian 
leader, Yasser Arafat, to oppose violence and settle all disputes 
with Israel at the bargaining table. In a speech Sunday, he had again 
raised the prospect of a unilateral declaration of Palestinian statehood 
and said Palestinians might take up arms to press their rights in 
Jerusalem. Prime Minister Netanyahu said he was suspending the troop 
withdrawal because of the comments, but Mr. Arafat, effectively retracted 
the remarks in public statement in Jeraco. Heard through an interpreter, 
he said he is committed to negotiated solutions to all the final status 
issues of the peace process. I reiterate before you that peace is 
our strategic choice. And I also reiterate that any problems concerning 
final status negotiations will be resolved with amicable and peaceful 
ways and through negotiations, but not through any other means. Senior 
officials of the two sides are to convene Wednesday to resume discussions 
on the final status issues. Which, along with the question of Palestinian 
statehood, include Jerusalem and the rights of Palestinian refugees 
outside the West Bank and Gaza. Under the Oslow Peace Accords, those 
negotiations are to be finished by May of next year, but few analysts 
expect the time table to be kept. David Gamas, VOA News, Jerusalem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>