<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981118.0500.2698 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For oil tankers in Alaska's Prince William Sound, icebergs around 
the Columbia Glacier pose a serious hazard. While most icebergs can 
be seen with surface radar and avoided by ships, some icebergs don't 
show up on radar screens. As Doug Schneider reports, researchers are 
looking for ways to detect these undetectable hazards. Although it 
is a clear, sunny day here in Alaska's Prince William Sound, Captain 
Bob Dessatel stares only at the sonar screen as he guides his fishing 
vessel past several large ice bergs. The echo of the sonar pinging 
away on the ice ahead and the ocean floor below, sounds like something 
out of a World War II submarine movie. Dessatel guides his boat slowly 
forward. Using only the sonar images that show the portion of the 
iceberg that lies just beneath the surface of the water. You have 
seen a bunch of icebergs within a short pattern, for instance, but 
you cannot quite see beyond that where an open league may be. You 
might get through one or two of them and then you could actually get 
in a open league. Icebergs can and have caused big problems for ships 
traveling through Prince William Sound. The danger is especially high 
to tankers loaded with millions of barrels of oil from the nearby 
TransAlaska pipeline terminal in Valdez. Especially worrisome are 
icebergs that float beneath the surface of the water. Conventional 
surface radar cannot see such ice bergs. In 1994, the 89,000 ton tanker, 
Overseas Ohio, struck just such and iceberg, tearing a 20-foot hole 
in the bow. Alexander Kotleroff is with the Prince William Sound Regional 
Citizen's Advisory Council. A group that works with the oil industry 
to prevent oil spills. If no one found anything and end up, they smashed 
right into it, then it costs about a $1 million to repair. To keep 
tankers from hitting these so-called neutrally buoyant icebergs, Kotleroff 
is testing sonars used by the fishing industry to see if they can 
be adapted for use in iceberg detection. Originally built to find 
schools of migrating polluk and other fish, the sonar on Bob Dessatel's 
167-foot troller is today being tested to see if it can accurately 
detect submerged icebergs. Dennis Sotoberg is the vice president of 
Wesmar Electronics, the company that makes this state of the art fish 
finder. Right now, we are running the sonar at a range of 250 fathoms. 
That is to the outer edge. We use color in our sonars. The color represents 
a density or the strength of the echo being returned. After a full 
day of field trials, the sonar offered mixed results. It did detect 
icebergs below the water surface, but too often the sonar did not 
provide an accurate depiction of all the icebergs in the ship's path. 
While great at finding schools of fish, the sonar isn't quite what 
Alexander Kotleroff is looking for. But he is not giving up. Later 
this year, he plans to test a new marine radar that is reported to 
be able to pick up objects as small as a bird. When you are looking 
at icebergs, you want to look at the large pieces and the small pieces 
and to be able to distinguish which is which. We would put a unit 
out there that would transmit the data back to the VTS station, the 
vessel traffic system. And then when the tankers would be leaving, 
they would ask for an ice report and instead of having an ice report 
from the last vessel that came in, they would get an ice report from 
that particular moment. Although reliable sonars do exist that could 
detect icebergs, such sonars are available only to the military. So 
until a reliable ice berg detection system is developed for civilian 
use, tankers in the Sound will be limited to just six knots, or about 
seven miles per hour. Tanker captains also will continue to rely on 
lookouts, searchlights, and their own surface radars. For Arctic Science 
Journeys, this is Doug Schneider reporting from Valdez, Alaska. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>