<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981118.1600.0660 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
United Nations weapons inspectors are back to work in Iraq after another 
crisis was averted. But only after a last-minute back down from Baghdad 
in the face of U.S. military action. Andre Denashoner has spoke with 
two former UN weapons inspectors about the crisis and has this report. 
Just a few days ago, Iraqi leader, Saddam Hussein, averted an American 
attack after promising to cooperate fully with United Nations weapons 
inspectors, known as ONSCOM. This is not the first time the Iraqi 
president said he would cooperate fully with the UN and it is not 
the first crisis pitting the United Nations against Baghdad. Last 
February, UN Secretary General, Kofi Annan, diffused tensions after 
traveling to Baghdad. Former UN weapons inspector, Tim Tirvan, says 
that while U.S. military strikes have been prevented once again, the 
fundamental reasons for the continuing crisis are still there. The 
UN obviously supported mainly by the U.S., is still demanding that 
Iraq get rid of all of its weapons of mass destruction. And on the 
other side, you have Iraq, still not cooperating with the UN. They 
may well be saying right, you can unfettered access, but they are 
still not offering the information. Offering up the material and the 
equipment that needs to be destroyed to the UN. So, I should expect 
that this crisis will reemerge in some form or other as soon as the 
military threat in the states diminishes. Mr. Tirvan says what the 
current crisis has done is to get UN inspectors back into Iraq with 
greater support from the Security Counsel. It really is the will within 
the Security Council, and particularly with the U.S. and the U.K., 
to force Iraq to comply through military means, if necessary. So, 
now ONSCOM is in the position to go ahead and do really intrusive 
inspections. Knowing that it has the political and military support 
of the council behind it. You will recall that back in February, there 
really was not the support for military action amongst other members 
of the council. So, I think perhaps by letting this particular crisis 
fester for long enough, the U.S. allowed the other members of the 
council to get so fed up with Iraq, that they will acquiesce to the 
proposal for military action. Another former UN weapons inspector, 
Colonel Terry Tailor, says the presence of inspectors in Iraq is essential. 
He describes the resolution of the current crisis as the least worse 
outcome. There is no good outcome in these circumstances. But I think 
it is better to have inspectors on the ground in Iraq, rather than 
not have anybody on the ground and perhaps some way have Iraq fenced 
in and allowed to get on with whatever it wants to do with its weapons 
of mass destruction programs. Regenerate them and so on, and hope 
to, by standing around the outside, to somehow contain the Iraqi leadership. 
Colonel Tailor says UN inspectors still have a lot of work to do. 
Especially dealing with biological weapons. But the former weapons 
inspector says there are other areas ONSCOM must inspect. There is 
more to be found out about the chemical weapons program, and in particular, 
relating to the, I think it is 4,000 tons of precursor chemicals, 
that is chemicals needed from a manufacture VX nerve agent, would 
have not been properly accounted for. And we now know, of course, 
they did weaponize that particular lethal nerve agent. A little bit 
more to be found, I think about the nuclear program supply network 
and certainly more to understand about the missile program, in particular. 
Not all the missiles, SCUD missiles that is, have been accounted for. 
Colonel Terry Tailor says the ongoing struggle between Iraq and the 
United Nations is a test of wills. And it is a real challenge for 
the leaders of democratic states. He says ONSCOM's work could be done 
relatively quickly if Iraq genuinely decides to cooperate fully. Otherwise, 
he feels there will be more crises ahead, with more threats of military 
action. Andre Denashoner of VOA News, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>