<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981118.0500.1625 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> MISCELLANEOUS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Many of our local FM and medium wave affiliates are about to take 
a short break. Just two minutes, please return to News Now. Well, 
a very happy Wednesday to you. It is November 18. We are going to 
go back a few years to 1936 on this date. Construction workers took 
a moment to celebrate the completion of the main central span of that 
famous Golden Gate Bridge in California, 1260-meter long span was, 
at the time, the longest in the world. Rozano Narrow's bridge across 
the New York Harbor with a span of 2,737 meters, of course a little 
bit longer. Two steel towers that support the main span of the Golden 
Gate Bridge are the tallest in the world. They are 227 meters that 
equal the height of a 75-story building. That bridge connects the 
city of San Francisco to Marrin County, to the north. This bridge 
was built to withstand all kinds of natural forces that come in on 
that harbor that lovely San Francisco is settled around. Boy there 
is vicious pacific storms with winds that batter across the bridge. 
There is really serious tides that swirl through the Golden Gate, 
this is the inlet that connects the Pacific Ocean with the San Francisco 
Bay. And there is earthquakes there, too. And so there is all kinds 
of stuff that goes on, on this. But, you know, when I was out there 
one time, it gets so foggy and San Francisco is known for the rain 
and the fog, and it will just sweep over and reduce visibility on 
that bridge to nothing in no time flat. Just like that. Just like 
that. But you can always see the spires of the bridge. Right. It is 
famous, all the photos-- That is right. Show the fog with the-- We 
have one of those photos, yes, we have one of- You can see the top 
of it, now the red bridge, not golden, by any means. You know, a lot 
of people always ask when you travel around the world, is it truly 
golden? No. You know, one of the natural forces that crossed that 
bridge once was me. I was in a sports car. I almost destroyed the 
bridge. oh, no. I will tell you about that some other time. It is 
universal time. This is VOA News Now. Israel's parliament approves 
the Y River Peace Accord by a wide margin. UN weapons inspectors resume 
their monitoring task after the latest showdown with Iraq. United 
States says it needs more than words to ease concern about North Korea's 
nuclear intentions. And President Clinton leaves for Asia, just at 
the start of impeachment hearings. Those stories plus business and 
more on VOA News Now. Hello again, I am Charlene Porter, along with 
Steve Norman, on News Now, broadcasting from Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>