<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981118.0500.1331 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Population growth, crime, and the changing ethnic character of older 
communities have disturbed the feeling of safety for many Americans. 
As a result, more and more private communities are being developed 
which offer physical protection. Like high walls and fences, guarded 
entrance gates, and alarm systems. Sloditza Hope reports these so-called 
gated communities represent a safe sanctuary for some people, but 
others see them as an isolationist and antisocial system. Nanna Dailey 
lives in Hillendale, a predominantly high-income gated community in 
Washington, D.C. Ms. Dailey, who moved here five years ago from a 
Maryland suburb, says there are many advantages to living in a gated 
community. It has community tennis courts, it has a swimming pool, 
it has open natural areas for walking, and it also has lots of parking, 
which was a main concern. Because the streets of Washington often 
don't afford close parking to your homes. HOPE Nanna Dailey is one 
of more than 8 million people in America who live in some type of 
gated community. Edward Blakely, author of a new book on gated communities, 
titled Fortress America, says there are four main types. You have 
gated communities that are compounds for the elite and these compounds 
are usually lifestyle-oriented. So there is a golfing community or 
a tennis club community or something like that. And they don't live 
in them year around. Then, there is another kind, which I would call 
the executive style. Which are ordinary places where people live year-round. 
And that compound has status. Living there announces who you are. 
Then, of course, there are the senior compounds. Because older people 
are frail, they are easily victimized, and they also are afraid of 
people coming to their door who might, you know, be soliciting and 
things like this, but they are unable to cope. So they are frequently 
gated. And then the last are what you call the inner city areas where, 
because of crime in the neighborhood, because of vandalism and graffiti, 
people gate off their neighborhood. Edward Blakely says about 40 percent 
of all new residential developments in this country are now gated. 
Most of them are built in the so-called sunbelt states of Florida, 
Texas, Arizona, and Southern California. He says it is because those 
states have large populations of older, retired residents. They also 
have had a large influx of immigrants from around the country and 
from around the world. And the earlier residents often feel threatened 
by the new ones, so they move to exclusive gated communities where 
the fence and the gate give them a feeling of security. But many urban 
planners are very critical of gated communities and say they fragment 
our society. I think that gated communities are probably the worst 
scenario for this country because they are based on a concept of an 
affinity group. It is basically saying, let us gather people of similar 
social status, economic status, similar looks, similar orientation, 
similar tastes. Let us all live together in a perceived safety and 
lock the gates to other people to enter. Milanco Mortanovic is the 
founding director of the Pamogranate Center in Issaquah, Washington. 
Which is dedicated to reviving communities through the active participation 
of all residents. Edward Blakely, author of Fortress America, agrees 
that gated communities might have a negative effect because people 
who live in them have to pay monthly fees for services such as landscaping, 
snow removal, and swimming pool and street maintenance and so on. 
So when their city or town wants to raise money for similar services 
for all the other local residents, these people oppose it. Mr. Blakely 
says they are reluctant to pay for things they already have. So, after 
a while, they are seceding from the society. Now, when you have enough 
people seceding from a society, like in the United States, that is 
based almost entirely on volunteerism, and almost entirely on collectivism, 
that is, all of us working together to achieve things, make the schools 
better, improve the streets, and so on. Then there is a erosion to 
the basic fabric of the society. Some cities and states are trying 
to limit the development of gated communities or even ban them. But 
Edward Blakely says America is also a society of individualists. And 
the days when people have time to sit on the front porch and chat 
with their neighbors are getting fewer all the time. For many Americans 
today, security and comfort at home are a priority. And many seem 
to be quite happy chatting with their neighbors at the swimming pool 
or golf course inside their guarded community. I am Sloditza Hope. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>