<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981118.1600.1346 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Between the 1880s and the 1960s, the city of Butte, Montana was known 
as the richest hill on earth. Indeed the copper, which made the hill 
so rich, helped to win two world wars and electrify the West. Most 
of Butte's mines are shut now. But the city of 33,000 is still famous, 
both for the architecture and still vibrant culture of its old mining 
district. And for the environmental disaster caused by the copper 
mines. VOA's Adam Phillips has more. The Victorian red brick houses 
of Butte are grand, but even the mansions built by the copper barons 
in the 1890s are dwarfed by the derrick-like head frames that once 
lowered miners down into the earth. And hoisted copper ore back to 
the surface for refining. I have heard it called gritty, ugly, beautiful, 
I think it is all those things. That is Mark Rebitz, Project Architect 
of the Butte Silver Bow Historic Preservation Office. The more people 
travel, the more people come here and ask the question of what the 
hell happened here? It becomes evident that this was a unique place. 
And it is worth preserving. Between 1882 and the early 1960s, Butte 
produced a third of America's total copper output and a sixth of the 
world's supply. But that wealth came at a huge environmental cost. 
During the early 1950s, the Anaconda Company, which owned most of 
Butte, began to phase out underground mining in favor of open pit 
or surface mining. For nearly 30 years, until 1982, the company dug 
ore out of the mountain. Eventually leaving a hole almost 350 meters 
deep, they call the Berkley Pit. But rains from above and ground water 
from below have come into contact with the sides of this hole, and 
made for a toxic brew. As Don Peoples, Butte's mayor from 1977 to 
1989 explains. Some 30 billion gallons of contaminated water sits 
at the edge of the city and if it is allowed to continue to rise to 
a level that would infiltrate the ground water system. Then you would 
contaminate this entire basin. In this valley is the headwaters of 
the Columbia River. So you can see that you have the possibility of 
contamination hundreds of miles away from this community. This helps 
explain why Butte is the largest U.S. government cleanup site in the 
nation. But the problem is not only with the Berkley Pit. A site everyone 
agrees will have to be tended into perpetuity. Cleaning up the many 
hectiers of residential land just above Butte's old underground mines, 
presents its own unique challenges says John Sesso, Butte town planner 
and county coordinator for the site. Vibrant areas of the community 
are directly adjacent to where we are cleaning up. So to factor in 
where people live in the context of the land use reclamation effort. 
You know, is a lot different than, you know, cleaning up after a strip 
mine in a rural area or what have you where you just throw on some 
natural grass and call it good. The sheer number of interested parties 
makes all this a political challenge as well as a practical one. As 
Mark Revis of the Butte Preservation Office and some visitors look 
out over the scarred earth and brown mining slag, that are so typical 
of Butte today, Mr. Revis likes to remind them that Butte's problems 
are not solely Butte's fault or responsibility. They are the result 
of national and international choices and demands for copper. Everybody 
kind of points at our way that how could you do this and I said how 
can WE do this, as in the entire United States and the rest of the 
world. It was a conscious decision that copper was valuable and it 
was valuable for electrication and for plumbing and those type of 
things. So we are paying the bill ourselves as the citizens here for 
people's desire to have and still have computers and lights and all 
those other kind of neat things. Mr. Revis says that, after a century 
of mining and a rich heritage of ethnic diversity, Butte has more 
than mineral wealth to offer. His goal, he says, is to detoxify the 
land without stripping it of its gritty human history. We do not want 
to erase every sign of what took place here. There is a push to, it 
is bad, it is awful. Let's do not remember it. We have not taken that 
philosophy. Every decision we make as humans has an impact and we 
just try to be really honest in presenting what this town was about. 
We will save the things that are in tact. We will restore the things 
we can. We will acknowledge the change and we will acknowledge the 
future change. It is always going to be a fascinating town. Despite 
many dire predictions, Butte's economy is actually doing fairly well. 
This is fueled partly by many millions of government cleanup dollars 
and a modest research into mining activity around the town. A new 
computer chips factory has just opened, and many new entrepreneurial 
companies are attempting to find a profitable way to mine the mineral-rich 
water in the Berkley Pit. I am Adam Phillips reporting. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>