<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981225.0729 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Cuba granted the Roman Catholic church a rare Christmas wish on Friday: 
authorization to send a national holiday greeting over government-controlled 
radio. Cardinal Jaime Ortega, Cuba's top Catholic leader, received 
permission to read the message Christmas afternoon over the music 
station called Radio Musical Nacional, government and church sources 
confirmed. The authorization was a sign of continued warming relations 
between Fidel Castro's government and the church nearly one year after 
Pope John Paul II visited the communist island. The return of Christmas 
as a permanent holiday ``is a joy for the church and for the Cuban 
people,'' Ortega said in the 15-minute message. ``Now let us hope 
that it doesn't become a day of an imported Santa Claus,'' echoing 
the concerns expressed by church and Communist Party leaders alike 
that the day could become quickly commercialized. ``Let us not talk 
of beautiful festivities but of Jesus Christ.'' The government's rare 
authorization of a nationally broadcast message by the Catholic leader 
came a month after the government declared that Christmas Day would 
become an official permanent holiday. It made Christmas a one day 
holiday last year as a favor to the pope before his January 1998 visit. 
Access to the official media has been one of the church's leading 
demands and was granted on a limited basis before and during the papal 
visit, which was covered extensively by government broadcasts. Ortega 
had asked the government for permission to send a radio message that 
would explain to Cubans the Christian meaning of Christmas. During 
his message, Ortega read passages from the Gospel of St. Luke, recounting 
the story of Jesus Christ's birth. Cubans have embraced the idea of 
having another day off, but the resurgent celebrations remain largely 
secular. Most families in the capital celebrated by decorating a small 
artificial Christmas tree in their home and sharing quiet holiday 
meals of roast pork with their families. Still, as last year, hundreds 
crowded churches for midnight Christmas Eve services _ a tradition 
that has grown in recent years. Early Christmas morning, most residents 
of Havana seemed to be celebrating the holiday by sleeping late. The 
capital's streets were more quiet than an average Sunday. Ortega and 
other church leaders in recent days have emphasized the need to recapture 
the religious traditions of the holiday, largely forgotten here during 
the nearly three decades that Christmas was abolished. Although the 
government declared itself atheist in 1962, Christmas remained an 
official holiday in Cuba until 1969, when the government was throwing 
its resources into an unsuccessful effort to harvest 10 million metric 
tons of sugar. The government argued that holidays interfered with 
the harvest. In late November, the Communist Party said mechanization 
had reduced the need for manpower in the sugar harvest and reinstated 
the holiday. In 1976, Cuba's constitution guaranteed freedom of religion 
and in 1991, the Communists dropped its ban on religious believers. 
A year later, Cuba declared itself a secular rather than an atheist 
state. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>