<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981225.0167 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A Chinese dissident charged with endangering state security could 
face a death sentence for allegedly telling U.S. government-funded 
Radio Free Asia about farmers' protests. Zhang Shanguang, who already 
has served a seven-year-long jail sentence for labor rights campaigning, 
will go on trial Sunday in Huaihua city in the southern province of 
Hunan, a official of the court confirmed Friday. The official refused 
to detail the charges or give his name. But Human Rights in China, 
a New York-based group, said Friday that Zhang was accused of ``illegally 
providing intelligence to overseas enemy organizations and people.'' 
According to China's criminal code, conviction generally is punished 
with a jail term but the court can apply the death penalty if it deems 
that national interests were seriously endangered. Zhang's wife, Hou 
Xuezhu, said he was interviewed by Radio Free Asia in March and discussed 
excessive fees and taxes charged to Chinese farmers by local officials. 
She said he did nothing to break the law and should be released. Human 
Rights in China said Zhang had told the network about a demonstration 
by 70 to 80 farmers in Hunan province's Xupu county and about another 
protest by farmers angered by excessive taxes that turned violent 
and resulted in deaths. Radio Free Asia has angered Chinese officials 
with reports on human rights and other issues. The Information Center 
of Human Rights and Democratic Movement in China, a Hong Kong-based 
group which also reported Zhang's impending trial, said the 45-year-old 
told overseas media and human rights groups about protests by unemployed 
workers. But the group did not mention Radio Free Asia. Human Rights 
in China said Zhang would plead innocent. Prosecutors maintain that 
Zhang is a repeat offender who should be severely punished, it said. 
Zhang was initially jailed after a nationwide crackdown that followed 
the crushing of democracy demonstrations in Beijing's Tiananmen Square 
in 1989. His latest legal case follows the trials of Xu Wenli, Qin 
Yongmin and Wang Youcai, three of China's most prominent dissidents. 
They were charged with endangering state security under different 
clauses of the law and sentenced this week to 13, 12 and 11 years 
respectively for trying to organize the China Democracy Party. Amid 
the arrests and trials, Chinese leaders have declared they will destroy 
challengers to Communist Party rule. President Jiang Zemin ordered 
law enforcement officials Wednesday to eliminate any threats to ``social 
stability.'' Zhang, who had been preparing to set up an association 
to protect laid-off workers' rights, has been detained since July, 
following U.S. President Bill Clinton's visit to China. The Huaihua 
court decided to try him on Sunday to clear a backlog of cases before 
the year's end. The court official said staff at the tribunal were 
working overtime for the trial. In another development, authorities 
in Beijing on Wednesday ordered the China Development Union to stop 
holding Saturday discussion groups about democracy and economic reforms. 
The Hong Kong monitoring center said the group's director, Peng Ming, 
agreed there would be no more discussions effective this week. The 
Hong Kong center also reported two Chinese democracy activists who 
had residency permits in the United States, Zhang Lin and Wei Yongbin, 
slipped into China in early November and have been missing since mid-November, 
possibly because of detention. China has refused to let many democracy 
activists in exile return legally. Zhang and Wei were not members 
of the China Democracy Party and had announced they were breaking 
ties with exile groups advocating democracy, the center said. In the 
recent trials, links to Chinese democracy campaigners in exile were 
viewed as a crime. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>