<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981225.0140 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With the government under mounting pressure to find a way to get Israeli 
troops out of Lebanon, a newspaper reported Friday that the Cabinet 
would be presented this weekend with a plan for a phased withdrawal. 
Government officials denied the report. David Bar-Illan, a top aide 
to Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, said the prime minister had 
no intention to go forward with any withdrawal from south Lebanon 
until security guarantees are in hand. The report came two days after 
Lebanese guerrillas launched a hail of rockets across Israel's northern 
border in retaliation for an Israeli airstrike that killed a Lebanese 
woman and her six children. Israel called the civilian deaths an accident. 
Israel and Shiite Muslim guerrillas have been engaged in a guerrilla 
war in Lebanon since 1985. Guerrillas from Hezbollah, along with the 
Lebanese government and Syria, demand that Israel pull about 2,000 
soldiers out of the Israeli-declared security zone in south Lebanon. 
Bar-Illan denied the report in the daily Maariv newspaper saying that 
Netanyahu and Ariel Sharon, his foreign minister, were intending to 
bring a plan for a gradual withdrawal from the enclave Israel occupies 
in south Lebanon for discussion in the cabinet on Sunday. According 
to the report, Israel would begin such a phased pullout before elections 
are held, probably in the next four months. Opposition lawmaker Efraim 
Sneh called the reported plan an election ploy for the beleaguered 
Netanyahu. Foreign Ministry spokesman Shia Segal issued a flat denial 
of the Maariv story and called Sneh's comments as ``plain evil.'' 
For the last two years Sharon has publicly stated his support of a 
gradual pullout of troops from Lebanon, but Segal said that Sharon 
had no intention of making any new Lebanon proposal on Sunday. The 
Cabinet has been holding ongoing discussions on Lebanon. The daily 
Haaretz reported Friday that Netanyahu and opposition leader Ehud 
Barak had held a round of meetings over the summer at which they agreed 
to make restarting negotiations with Syria a priority. Bar-Illan confirmed 
that discussions took place between the two, but he denied reports 
that the topic of land concessions on the Golan Heights ever arose. 
The public pressure for a pullout from Lebanon has been mounting along 
with a steady increase in the death toll among young soldiers serving 
there. On Friday, 1st Sgt. Doron Benzigri, 26, a border policeman 
who suffered head injuries in a clash with Hezbollah forces more than 
three years ago, died without having ever regained consciousness, 
Israel Radio said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>