<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981225.0466 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Amid a growing British-led evacuation effort in Sierra Leone, the 
West African country's feared rebel alliance on Friday boasted key 
battlefield gains and threatened to storm the capital on New Year's 
Day. Sam Bockarie, a rebel general known as ``Maskita (Mosquito)'' 
by his Revolutionary United Front, said the renegades had captured 
the provincial town of Makeni, about 100 kilometers (60 miles) northwest 
of Freetown and were battling for Kenema, a diamond-mining town about 
100 kilometers (60 miles) to the southwest. Rebels also captured a 
barracks used by the Nigerian-led West African ECOMOG intervention 
force defending Sierra Leone's government about five miles (eight 
kilometers) outside Freetown, Bockarie told The Associated Press in 
a satellite telephone interview from an undisclosed location. His 
claims could not be immediately confirmed and neither government or 
ECOMOG spokesmen were available for immediate comment. ``We are going 
to march into Freetown on New Year's Day unless the government agrees 
to our terms,'' Bockarie said. ``We have the will and the way.'' He 
added that the rebels had captured an undisclosed number of Nigerian 
soldiers as well as large quantities of light and heavy weaponry from 
ECOMOG. The rebel threat followed the evacuation of 81 British and 
European citizens, including nine Italian priests in two British air 
force transport planes from Lungi Airport outside of Freetown on Thursday. 
Another 150 British nationals were also preparing to airlift out, 
although it was unclear when that would happen, a British High Commission 
spokesman said on condition of anonymity. He did not give details. 
In a state radio broadcast, President Ahmed Tejan Kabbah's government 
condemned the airlift, saying it played into the hands of the rebels 
who he said wanted to spread panic. The rebels, an alliance of ousted 
junta gunmen and renegade fighters, have since their ouster from power 
in March launched lightning raids from remote jungle bases with little 
official contact with the outside world. Bockarie was contacted on 
the rebels' portable satellite telephone through an intermediary in 
Burkina Faso who requested anonymity. Bockarie said the rebels demand 
direct talks with the government and the immediate release of Foday 
Sankoh, the inspirational rebel leader who is imprisoned awaiting 
appeal on a death sentence handed down in October in connection with 
a bloody 1997 coup. Kabbah has refused to negotiate with the rebels, 
who are widely blamed of killing, maiming and raping thousands of 
unarmed civilians. The government also refuses to free Sankoh, who 
was imprisoned earlier this year after being extradited from Nigeria, 
although other rebels have been offered amnesty in return for laying 
down their arms. Bockarie, who said rebel troops were advancing on 
Freetown's outskirts through the jungle, denied the government's repeated 
accusation that the rebels were being backed by neighboring Liberia. 
``We are doing this alone. We have 40,000 men and we are capturing 
weapons every day. That is all we need,'' he said. Refugees have poured 
into Sierra Leone's capital this week after fighting intensified between 
rebel forces and Nigerian-led West African intervention troops based 
in nearby towns. Thousands of villagers have lost limbs and others 
have been killed and raped in attacks apparently carried out by the 
rebel troops, seeking revenge for their ouster from Freetown by the 
West African force known as ECOMOG in February. That allowed elected 
President Ahmed Tejan Kabbah to return from months in exile after 
Lt. Col. Johnny Paul Koroma took power in a bloody May 1997 coup. 
ECOMOG, which together with the civilian Kamajor militia has been 
given defense duties by the government, has reportedly sent reinforcements 
to Sierra Leone from Nigeria, and claims the security situation is 
under control. ECOMOG officers has threatened jail terms to journalists 
for unauthorized press dispatches and has blamed the media for spreading 
panic among civilians. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>