<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981225.0706 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Cold winter sunshine splashed the yellow stones of Jerusalem's walled 
Old City at the intersection of the Via Dolorosa and El-Wad Street, 
a jostling, noisy crossroad of faiths. While Christians celebrated 
Christmas on Friday, Muslims were marking the first prayer-and-rest 
day of their holy month of Ramadan, and Jews were preparing to usher 
in the Sabbath at sundown. The Old City street corner scene on this 
day, with its vegetable vendors, police and souvenir sellers, was 
also a snapshot of the three great religions that have deep and indelible 
roots here. Under the watchful eyes of armed guards, pale young students 
in skullcaps streamed out of a yeshiva, or Jewish seminary, blinking 
in the sudden burst of bright sunlight. Just outside the yeshiva's 
doorway, a bearded Islamic cleric appealed for donations for charity, 
and Muslim passers-by dropped coins onto a well-worn prayer rug at 
his feet. Only steps away, Christian pilgrims clustered around a tour 
guide as he gestured toward the spot _ marked by a stain on the curving 
stone wall _ where Christian tradition says Simon was made to help 
Jesus carry his cross. Shopkeeper Hassan Nashishibi, a Palestinian 
Muslim, beckoned tourists toward his store, filled with crucifixes 
and olive-wood Nativity scenes. ``Wow,'' marveled Georges Pereda, 
a visitor from Paris, as he surveyed the scene. ``Muslims, Jews, Christians 
_ everyone is here.'' Jerusalem _ particularly its Old City, which 
was captured by Israel from Jordan in the 1967 Mideast war _ has always 
embodied soaring spirituality and relentless realpolitik. Its crowded 
confines are home to dozens of holy sites, many of them focal points 
for the larger tensions that tear at Israel and the Palestinian lands. 
One such flashpoint is the hilltop revered by Muslims as the Haram 
as-Sharif, or Noble Sanctuary, home to Al Aqsa and Dome of the Rock 
mosques. Jews call it the Temple Mount; in biblical times, the first 
and second Jewish temples stood there. On Friday _ the first Muslim 
Sabbath since the start last week of Ramadan, when observant Muslims 
fast from dawn till dusk _ more than 150,000 faithful packed the compound 
for noontime prayers. In the hours beforehand, Old City streets flowed 
with a human river of worshippers bound for Al Aqsa, the women in 
headscarves and many of the men in long robes. Hundreds of Israeli 
soldiers with M-16 rifles lined the narrow streets and guarded the 
compound's entryway. For Friday prayers during Ramadan, Israel relaxed 
the strict rules that normally keep most West Bank Palestinians out 
of Jerusalem. But men between 16 and 35 _ the age group from which 
ringleaders of violent stone-throwing clashes are most likely to be 
drawn _ were kept away. At Al Aqsa, anger was running high at the 
United States and Britain over last week's bombardment of Iraq. Ikrema 
Sabri, the mufti of Jerusalem, or its highest-ranking Islamic clergyman, 
preached a fiery sermon reflecting the discontent. ``We tell the Americans 
and the British government that Muslims will not kneel down for them!'' 
he told the enormous crowd of worshippers. ``Allahu akbar _ God is 
great!'' came the roared response. Just below, in the Old City's Jewish 
quarter, last-minute preparations for the Jewish Sabbath were under 
way _ shopping, cleaning, cooking. Delicious smells drifted out from 
behind barred windows. With sundown and the start of the Sabbath, 
the enormous yellow-flagstone plaza facing the Western Wall _ Judaism's 
most sacred site _ was filled with Jews who came to pray, sing and 
dance. In dozens of Christian churches scattered throughout Jerusalem, 
the day began with joyful Christmas services. Church bells rang out 
and chants and carols could be heard through the Old City's stone 
streets, mingling with the wail of the Muslim call to prayer. Not 
all the city's Christians were celebrating. Its large contingent of 
Eastern rite churches, including Armenians, Russians, and Greek Orthodox, 
observe Christmas in January. The holiday's passing was a reminder 
of what likely will be a growing worry in coming months, with the 
final countdown to the millennium. Israeli authorities fear that Jerusalem 
increasingly will become a magnet for not only the faithful, but also 
the mentally unhinged. Already, there are about a dozen cases each 
year of what psychiatrists call ``Jerusalem Syndrome,'' in which visitors 
to the city are seized with the conviction they are biblical figures 
or on a mission from God. Israeli police last month began searching 
for members of a Denver doomsday cult called Concerned Christians, 
some of whom already have arrived in the country. The cult's leader, 
Monte Kim Miller, has said he will die in Jerusalem in December 1999 
and be resurrected three days later. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>