<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981225.0496 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Amid a growing British-led evacuation effort in Sierra Leone, the 
West African country's feared rebel alliance boasted key battlefield 
gains Friday and threatened to storm the capital on New Year's Day. 
Sam Bockarie, a rebel general known as ``Maskita (Mosquito)'' by his 
Revolutionary United Front, said the renegades had captured the provincial 
town of Makeni, about 100 kilometers (60 miles) northeast of Freetown 
and were battling for Kenema, a diamond-mining town about 100 kilometers 
(60 miles) to the southeast. Rebels also captured a barracks used 
by the Nigerian-led West African ECOMOG intervention force defending 
Sierra Leone's government about five miles (eight kilometers) outside 
Freetown, Bockarie told The Associated Press in a satellite telephone 
interview from an undisclosed location. His claims could not be independently 
confirmed and neither government or ECOMOG spokesmen were available 
for immediate comment. ``We are going to march into Freetown on New 
Year's Day unless the government agrees to our terms,'' Bockarie said. 
``We have the will and the way.'' He added that the rebels had captured 
an undisclosed number of Nigerian soldiers as well as large quantities 
of light and heavy weaponry from ECOMOG. The rebel threat followed 
the evacuation of 81 British and European citizens, including nine 
Italian priests in two British air force transport planes from Lungi 
Airport outside of Freetown on Thursday. Another 150 Britons were 
expected to be airlifted out, said a British High Commission official 
in Freetown on Friday on condition of anonymity. Essential British 
embassy staff remained in Sierra Leone, officials said. About 50 people 
mostly British, were expected to arrive in London in the second wave 
of the airlift on a British plane later Friday the night, the Press 
Association of Britain meanwhile reported. ``We are doing all we can 
to protect the interests of British people in Sierra Leone,'' British 
Foreign Office Minister Tony Lloyd said in London. In a state radio 
broadcast, President Ahmed Tejan Kabbah's government condemned the 
airlift, saying it played into the hands of the rebels who he said 
wanted to spread panic. But Lloyd said the evacuation did not affect 
British support for Sierra Leone's government, adding that Britain 
would lobby for support on Kabbah's behalf in the U.N. Security Council. 
Britain is Sierra Leone's former colonial ruler and remains the largest 
diplomatic presence in the country. The rebels, an alliance of ousted 
junta gunmen and renegade fighters, have since their ouster from power 
in March launched lightning raids from remote jungle bases, while 
making little official contact with the outside world. Bockarie was 
contacted on the rebels' portable satellite telephone through an intermediary 
in Burkina Faso who requested anonymity. Bockarie said the rebels 
demand direct talks with the government and the immediate release 
of Foday Sankoh, the inspirational rebel leader who is imprisoned 
awaiting appeal on a death sentence handed down in October in connection 
with a bloody 1997 coup. Kabbah has refused to negotiate with the 
rebels, who are widely blamed of killing, maiming and raping thousands 
of unarmed civilians. The government also refuses to free Sankoh, 
who was imprisoned earlier this year after being extradited from Nigeria, 
although other rebels have been offered amnesty in return for laying 
down their arms. Bockarie, who said rebel troops were advancing on 
Freetown's outskirts through the jungle, denied the government's repeated 
accusation that the rebels were being backed by neighboring Liberia. 
``We are doing this alone. We have 40,000 men and we are capturing 
weapons every day. That is all we need,'' he said. Refugees have poured 
into Sierra Leone's capital this week after fighting intensified between 
rebel forces and Nigerian-led West African intervention troops based 
in nearby towns. Thousands of villagers have lost limbs and others 
have been killed and raped in attacks apparently carried out by the 
rebel troops, seeking revenge for their ouster from Freetown by the 
West African force known as ECOMOG in February. That allowed elected 
President Ahmed Tejan Kabbah to return from months in exile after 
Lt. Col. Johnny Paul Koroma took power in a bloody May 1997 coup. 
ECOMOG, which together with the civilian Kamajor militia has been 
given defense duties by the government, has reportedly sent reinforcements 
to Sierra Leone from Nigeria, and claims the security situation is 
under control. ECOMOG officers has threatened jail terms to journalists 
for unauthorized press dispatches and has blamed the media for spreading 
panic among civilians. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>