<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981225.2130.0581 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Iraq has been left behind in the Internet boom. Years of economic 
sanctions and political restrictions have kept web surfing and E-mail 
out of the country. Marsha Walton has more, in this edition of "tech 
trends." The United Nations says war and sanctions have left Iraq's 
communications system in terrible shape. That's one reason the country 
has no E-mail or web sites originating from inside its borders -- 
an assessment echoed by Iraq's ambassador to the U.N. Right now, the 
whole country has no Internet access, given the downgrading of our 
telecommunications systems and the regime of the sanctions. Iraqi 
ambassador nizar Hamdoon says Iraq would like to connect its citizens 
to the wired world. This is essential for the people in this age to 
try to open up to information and get access to all data that are 
available. This is disingenuous. Human rights activist Eric Goldstein 
says Iraqi leaders would never tolerate the free exchange of ideas 
the net makes possible. It's illegal even to own a computer modem 
in Iraq. Iraq is one of the most repressive governments in the region 
and in the world. So the Internet is the natural enemy of this kind 
of intolerance. U.N. sanctions have also kept most computer components 
from entering the country. But Goldstein isn't convinced it's all 
economics. If Iraq had the will, they could have the Internet set 
up in spite of the sanctions. It's clearly not in their interest to 
do that. Iraq's only official web site originates from its U.N. mission 
in New York. But many sites share the voices of Iraqis living in other 
parts of the world. Groups like the Arab-American action network in 
Chicago spread whatever information they can gather. The Internet 
has provided ordinary people with an opportunity to get their story 
out to the world. The most open societies in the Middle East have 
the most Internet usage, like Lebanon, Jordan and the Palestinian 
areas. Other countries such as Syria and Saudi Arabia are lagging, 
but they are starting to catch up. But not Iraq, though ambassador 
Hamdoon says there are plans for some Internet access. Now there is 
an effort to try to establish some uplinks that could provide us with 
a way of connection, at least for the universities. After years of 
sanctions, Iraqi leaders say people are more worried about finding 
their next meal than surfing the net. Marsha Walton, "CNN Headline 
News." 
</TEXT>
</DOC>