<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981225.0080 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The presidents of Russia and Belarus said Friday that they intend 
to begin unifying their currencies and much of their economies next 
year, an action stopping just short of a political merger that would 
again extend Russian territory to the border of Poland. Whether such 
a military or political union could occur later was left unclear. 
Belarus President Alexander Lukashenko, a fervent proponent of merging 
his nation into Russia, said he now hoped that the two countries would 
enter the next millennium as one. But Russian officials were cooler, 
with Foreign Minister Igor Ivanov calling the agreement ``a declaration, 
not a treaty.'' The accord itself specifies that Belarus and Russia 
would remain ``sovereign and equal members of the international community.'' 
Russian President Boris Yeltsin said he and Lukashenko had ``raised 
the issue of uniting our countries into a union state,'' and added, 
``One can be proud of such work.'' Whatever its details, the announcement 
is a victory for Lukashenko, a charismatic dictator who dreams of 
someday returning both Belarus and Russia to socialism _ and, many 
say, of ruling them both. Lukashenko has sought to reunify the two 
impoverished countries since he became president of Belarus in 1994. 
There was talk last year of an agreement for full integration, but 
in the end only a watered-down version was approved. Lukashenko has 
been headed off every time by pro-Western officials in Yeltsin's government, 
such as the economic adviser Anatoly Chubais, who saw Lukashenko as 
a threat to capitalist-style reforms. U.S. officials have quietly 
opposed earlier attempts a greater unity for fear that it would destabilize 
young democracies in Eastern Europe. Chubais and his allies vanished 
with the collapse of those reforms in August. The man now in power 
_ Prime Minister Yevgeny Primakov _ was one of the leading advocates 
of unification with Belarus in his previous job as Yeltsin's foreign 
minister. Yeltsin was the man who shook hands on Friday's agreement, 
but it is commonly assumed that Primakov played a substantial role 
in achieving it. The accord proposes that officials draft plans by 
next spring to unify the Russian and Belarusian rubles, to enact identical 
customs regulations, to agree on measures to protect domestic industries 
from foreign competition and to standardize regulation of monopolies 
such as electricity companies. Among other plans, the nations also 
propose to standardize their labor and securities laws and grant citizens 
equal access to educational facilities. A new elected body would oversee 
these steps. In the end, the accord's fate would lie with the nations' 
Parliaments and with voters, who would consider the measures in a 
referendum next summer. Politically, however, those hurdles are comparatively 
low. Russia's Communist-dominated Parliament is anxious to rebuild 
the old Soviet empire, and the country's fall from superpower status 
has brought a strong nationalistic streak to the surface among many 
voters. That has only increased with the expansion of NATO to Eastern 
Europe and with Russian resentments about its economic tumult. Belarus 
is even less of an obstacle to agreement. Lukashenko installed his 
own handpicked Parliament and rewrote the constitution in 1996 through 
a voter referendum which international observers agree was rigged. 
A leading expert on Russia, Dimitri Simes, president of the Nixon 
Center, in Washington, said in an interview Friday that some form 
of integration between Russia and Belarus probably is inevitable, 
because Russia has frequently ruled much of the country in recent 
centuries. He suggested, however, that Friday's announcement was a 
deliberate signal to other nations _ especially the United States 
_ that Russia can play a transforming role in international affairs. 
``It's very difficult to visualize how a union of two paupers can 
become strategically more a priority to the Russian leadership, especially 
someone as pragmatic as Primakov,'' as opposed to working with the 
United States and the IMF, he said. ``But if they do feel they're 
on their own, that they have little to lose, one could see important 
political and strategic advantages in this,'' Simes said. ``Politically, 
it would be very popular if you want to demonstrate to the people 
that Russia is still a serious power, and do it on the cheap. Internationally, 
the notion that the Russian army, weak as it is, might be going to 
be on the Polish border will get a lot of attention.'' 2 Yeltsin's 
spokesman went out of his way Friday to stress that nobody on the 
Russian side of the talks is considering merging the two nations, 
armies or even their budgets. Still, the greatest obstacle to economic 
unification may well come from Washington, where both the White House 
and the International Monetary Fund may view such a merger with intense 
skepticism. Although the State Department declined to comment, the 
U.S. government has opposed greater unity between Russia and Belarus, 
in large part because most of the young democracies in Eastern Europe 
continue to fear that Russia has designs on their territory. Tiny 
Belarus is barely the size of Kansas and rarely makes headlines. But 
it occupies a crucial geographic spot in Europe, squarely between 
western Russia and Poland. It was such a vicious battleground between 
Germany and the Soviet Union during World War II that fighting there 
killed one of every four citizens. The International Monetary Fund 
is essentially a proxy for the United States, which plays the dominant 
role in deciding how much and whether to lend to troubled economies. 
The IMF is considering whether to proceed with a multibillion-dollar 
bailout of the Russian government which even Primakov's advisers see 
as crucial to Russia's economic and political stability. While U.S. 
influence will weigh heavily in that decision, the IMF would be likely 
to question an economic merger with Belarus in any case. By most measures, 
Belarus is more destitute and far less interested in capitalist remedies 
to its problems than Russia, and unification could saddle Russia's 
bankrupt government with the problems of another 10 million poor people. 
There is a third, more remote concern: that with a foot in the Russian 
door, Lukashenko may employ his nationalistic charm to become a serious 
political force and a powerful enemy of the west. Asked Friday whether 
the proposed agreement would allow Lukashenko to run for president 
of Russia, Yeltsin's spokesman said only that the answer lay in the 
documents that were signed. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>