<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981225.0118 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
See Shea Ralph dive for a pass and land on the floor. See Shea Ralph 
grapple for a rebound and land on the floor. See Shea Ralph rumble 
in for a layup and land on the floor. The basketball laugher between 
Connecticut and St. John's on Dec. 13 was barely 10 minutes old and 
Ralph had already tumbled to her knees three times. See a trend here? 
Each time Ralph sprawled across the floor, fans at Gampel Pavilion 
held onto their breath and their seats. They waited to make sure Ralph 
would pop up and keep playing in her frenetic style. Each time, Ralph 
jumped up. Each time, the fans exhaled. ``That's the way I have played 
all my life and I think it makes the game a lot more fun,'' Ralph 
said. ``It's more fun for me and for the fans. I like playing that 
way.'' Ralph's frequent flops and falls cause trepidation for UConn 
loyalists because she has torn the anterior cruciate ligament in her 
right knee twice in less than six months. The first tear came in the 
first round of the NCAA tournament in 1997. Ralph missed UConn's last 
three games. Five and a half months later, in a pickup game, she tore 
the ligament again and missed all of last season. No wonder Jerry 
Rice, another member of the twice-torn ACL club, is her favorite athlete. 
``You can rationalize the first time because it happens,'' said Geno 
Auriemma, the Connecticut coach. ``But the amount of effort it took 
to get back from the first one, then to have a second one, what can 
you say? Some good will come out of this? Most people in life don't 
deserve one. Who deserves two?'' No one does. But Ralph, 20, has endured 
the double dose of depression and returned after more than a year 
without basketball to help guide the Huskies (8-0) to the No. 1 ranking 
in the country. Ralph, who plays both shooting guard and small forward, 
is second on the team in scoring (16.5 points a game) and is one of 
the candidates to switch to point guard to replace Sue Bird, who tore 
her ACL last week and will miss the rest of the season. Ralph has 
already counseled Bird about what to expect after she has surgery 
next week. She can tell Bird about the six-hour rehabilitation stints, 
the uncertainty over whether she will be the same player and the need 
to stay mentally strong. She might not talk about the discomfort, 
which is more aggravating the second time around. ``She's got constant 
pain from it,'' said Marsha Mann Lake, Ralph's mother, who was an 
all-American at North Carolina in 1975. ``She has to get up and walk 
when she's on a plane, and she can't sit through a movie. People don't 
know these things. She's going to have arthritis and some trouble 
walking when she gets older, but it's all worth it because she can 
play basketball.'' Reckless is the only way Ralph can play. With her 
blue eyes bulging, the veins in her neck straining and a bushel of 
blond hair bouncing behind her like a tail, Ralph bumps bodies, barrels 
up and down the court and grimaces when teammates are out of position. 
She treats each possession as if it may be the last before someone 
closes the gym. And with one nasty twist of her knee, it might be 
for Ralph. ``I appreciate playing a lot more,'' said Ralph, who could 
only watch as UConn expired one victory short of the Final Four in 
each of the last two seasons. ``When you have something you love taken 
away from you and you have to sit and watch other people do it, that 
really, really stinks really bad. That made me realize that I can't 
take anything in life for granted. You need to make the best of what 
you got on any particular day,'' she said. ``When it's over, it's 
over.'' While Ralph still plays the same after the injuries and works 
even harder because she is not as quick, she no longer thinks the 
same way. The injuries caused something to happen to the basketball 
junkie who averaged 33 points a game in her high school career and 
holds 17 state records in North Carolina. Ralph realized that basketball 
is not life. Sure, professional basketball is an attainable goal. 
And it is something Ralph has thought about since she was 7 and already 
had a crossover dribble. But she has perspective now. She has changed 
her major from physical therapy to exercise physiology and wants to 
attend medical school. ``I think that the WNBA is a great opportunity 
and a great way to make money,'' said Ralph, who is a sophomore in 
terms of athletic eligibility. ``If I were to be offered it, I might 
play for a couple of years. But I have plans. I have another life 
I want to live. My whole life has been basketball. I want to have 
a real job. I want to have a big family, kids and a nice house. Like 
what normal people do, that's what I want to do.'' Ralph may have 
changed, but not on the court. She is still one of the most valuable 
players on a talented team that is eager to face Tennessee, the defending 
national champion, on Jan. 10. She could still make history with her 
mother by becoming the first mother-daughter tandem to be named all-Americans. 
Auriemma said intensity is what sets Ralph apart. ``The thing that 
makes Shea so unique and so valuable isn't necessarily her skill level, 
although she has some things that she does that are hard to teach,'' 
Auriemma said. ``Her ball handling, her shooting and her ability are 
not above average in any sense. But, because of the intensity level 
she brings and the way she plays the game, the recklessness and the 
fearlessness that she brings, that's what makes her better than most 
players.'' Ralph is a bubbly sort who chewed on a slice of pizza outside 
Gampel Pavilion after the 91-51 pasting of St. John's and made fun 
of her 24-hour passion for athletics and academics. She said she has 
a boyfriend who plays soccer for Connecticut, but called it a ``whacked-out 
relationship'' because their crammed schedules seldom allow them to 
see each other. Ralph does not eat meat; she has a tattoo of a basketball 
inside a sunflower on her left ankle and she became giddy as she talked 
about an Alan Jackson compact disc that she wanted to play in the 
locker room. But there is a way to turn the sunny Ralph sullen. When 
she was asked if her knee hurt her constantly, she paused a few seconds, 
as if trying to formulate a response that would not sound like a complaint. 
Finally, Ralph admitted that it does. She quickly said that all athletes 
endure pain. Not all 20-year-old athletes, however. ``I can't even 
remember what it was like before I got injured because I didn't have 
any of the pain that I have now,'' Ralph said. ``I had to teach myself 
to come in every day and forget about: `Do my knees hurt? I can't 
bend them and they're swollen.' You have to forget about it.'' ``I'd 
like people to say I play like I really love the game,'' Ralph said. 
``I'm probably never going to be an all-American. The things I do 
are not all-American-type things. I'm not a highlight-film girl. But 
I do play hard and that's what I want people to see.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>