<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981225.0136 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
One of this holiday season's most sought-after books is an out-of-print 
1992 tome on impeachment called ``Grand Inquests.'' Just before Christmas 
it was the 37th most requested title on Amazon.com, the online bookstore, 
and there was a double-digit waiting list at the midtown branch of 
the New York Public Library to check it out. Demand is such that William 
Morrow's Quill division plans to re-issue a paperback version of the 
book next month. This interest probably owes less to the timeliness 
of the book's subject matter than to the job held by its amateur-historian 
author, Chief Justice William Rehnquist. But readers looking for clear 
signals on how the Supreme Court's conservative leader would preside 
over a Senate impeachment trial of President Clinton will probably 
be disappointed. The book recounts the impeachment trials of Supreme 
Court Justice Samuel Chase in 1805 and President Andrew Johnson 63 
years later. Rehnquist sees the acquittals in both cases as major 
constitutional events that preserved the separation of powers between 
the three branches of government. Had the decisions gone the other 
way, he says, it would have undermined the framers' vision of a strong 
presidency and an independent judiciary. At least implicitly, the 
chief justice endorses the principle that impeachment is a momentous 
act that should be reserved for grievous abuses of office. But whether 
he believes that Clinton's transgressions may fall into that category 
is unknowable from the book, and may never be known, given his penchant 
for circumspection. One frustrating aspect of the book is its glancing 
treatment of the role played by Salmon Chase, the chief justice who 
presided unhappily at the Johnson trial. There were bitter fights 
over some of Chase's evidentiary rulings, and he is largely remembered 
for helping to steer the Senate to the right conclusion. Rehnquist 
observes ``how difficult and unwieldy'' it was to have the trial's 
initial procedural questions decided by a 56-member Senate, made up 
of lawmakers who were ``by nature loquacious.'' But he does so without 
shedding light on how actively he might intervene at the Clinton trial 
to resolve procedural and evidentiary questions. Rehnquist wrote the 
court's unanimous 1993 decision in a judicial removal case confirming 
that the Senate's ``sole power to try all impeachments'' includes 
unreviewable discretion to set the rules. He therefore seems apt to 
defer to the Senate on any motion that touches on the merits of the 
charges against Clinton or that calls for dismissing them without 
further consideration by the body. But knowing that any of his rulings 
can be overridden if a majority of senators disagrees may temper concerns 
about intruding on the Senate's turf and embolden the chief justice 
to be more opinionated than his inclination toward minimal judicial 
intervention suggests. Though a genial man, in the courtroom he is 
brusque, impatient and a legendary stickler for enforcing time limits, 
even to the point of interrupting advocates in mid-syllable and ordering 
them to sit down. The Senate chamber and the hybrid political and 
judicial impeachment process are a far cry from the controlled environment 
of the court. But as Rehnquist surely knows, this is the case of a 
lifetime. He can be expected to move the trial along at a crisp pace. 
He can also be expected to use the formidable consensus-building skills 
he has displayed in recent years to try to guide the Senate to conduct 
itself fairly _ even if as a justice he has not shown much concern 
for defendants' rights. Despite the power he exercises on the court, 
many Americans do not even know what Rehnquist looks like. That may 
be about to change. As a student of history, he is no doubt energized 
by the challenge of running a televised impeachment trial. But as 
the person most responsible for preventing television coverage of 
the Supreme Court's oral arguments, he cannot relish losing his cherished 
ability to walk through crowds unnoticed. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>