<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981225.0033 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
At first glance, Ayesha Jalal seems like an unlikely agitator. She 
is a tiny, angular woman whose small frame is accentuated by her flowing 
beige shalwar kameez, a traditional Pakistani outfit consisting of 
a loose tunic and baggy trousers. Her scholarly credentials _ Wellesley, 
Oxford, Harvard _ are purebred establishment. But in recent years, 
Ms. Jalal has taken on the academic and political mainstream in her 
native Pakistan as well as the administration of Columbia University, 
where she taught history for seven years. And while her historical 
work on South Asia has elicited anonymous threats, it also earned 
her a MacArthur Fellowship (commonly called the genius grant) this 
year, worth $265,000, no strings attached, and a reputation as one 
of the most innovative scholars in the history of the region. What 
has angered so many Muslims here and in her homeland is Ms. Jalal's 
assertion that the revered founding father of Pakistan, the slender, 
eloquent Mohammed Ali Jinnah, had feet of clay. She argues that the 
1947 partition of India _ the event that opened the door for the creation 
of Pakistan _ was an accident, a colossal miscalculation. What's more, 
she says that Jinnah never wanted a separate Muslim state; he was 
only using the threat of independence as a political bargaining chip 
to strengthen the voice of the Muslim minority in the soon-to-be sovereign 
India. For proof, she maintains, look no further than Jinnah's reaction 
to the partition. ``The state-sponsored nationalist attitude seems 
to suggest that what Jinnah had dismissed as a mutilated, moth-eaten 
Pakistan is what they were actually fighting for,'' the 42-year-old 
scholar explained in a recent interview, adding that Jinnah twice 
rejected what turned out to be the final model for Pakistan. This 
is heresy to most Pakistanis, for whom the partition is a point of 
pride, a landmark historical event comparable to the declaration of 
the state of Israel for Zionists. And to many Pakistanis, the individual 
most responsible for the partition is nothing less than a Muslim paladin. 
``It's as though you're telling Americans that George Washington wasn't 
a starry-eyed nationalist but a coldblooded, opportunistic militarist,'' 
remarked David Ludden, an associate professor of South Asian history 
at the University of Pennsylvania. India scholars around the world 
have found Ms. Jalal's work no less provocative. ``In Pakistani terms, 
she takes a very pro-Indian perspective, but in Indian terms, she's 
still a Pakistani,'' observed David Washbrook, a professor of modern 
South Asian history at Oxford University in Britain. What may be most 
unusual about Ms. Jalal is that she studies Pakistan at all. There 
are only a handful of scholars of Pakistan in the United States; most 
South Asian specialists here focus on the country's considerably larger 
neighbor, India. And to hear Ms. Jalal tell it, the state of Pakistani 
history in Pakistan is no better. The country didn't even have a free 
press until the late 1980s and four decades of military rule have 
left a legacy of media self-censorship. The country's liberal arts 
colleges, for their part, are controlled by the national government. 
Ms. Jalal uses the word ``tragic''to describe the fate of historical 
scholarship in her homeland. ``There just aren't many Pakistanis who 
are historians,'' she said. ``They're not interested in history, they're 
interested in projecting an ideological position.'' Her three books, 
starting with ``The Sole Spokesman: Jinnah, the Muslim League and 
the Demand for Pakistan'' in 1985, have been credited by scholars 
of South Asia with breaking new ground. ``She is the foremost historian 
of modern Pakistan,'' Washbrook said. Still, her view of Jinnah and 
the partition is hardly conventional. In his biography of Jinnah, 
Stanley Wolpert, a professor of South Asian history at the University 
of California at Los Angeles, painted a different picture of the partition, 
ascribing Jinnah's zealous quest for Pakistani independence partly 
to a religious metamorphosis toward the end of his life. Wolpert's 
perspective conforms much more closely to that of the traditional 
Pakistani narrative. Indeed, when ``The Sole Spokesman'' was published, 
several Pakistani newspapers assailed Ms. Jalal for understating the 
role of religion in Jinnah's push for partition and accused her of 
being under the sway of an Indian academic adviser. Ms. Jalal is teaching 
at Harvard University this year after a bitter fight with Columbia. 
At Columbia, she says, enrollment in her South Asian history courses 
doubled from 1991 to 1995, but she was denied tenure in June 1995. 
Convinced that a cadre of Indian and India-centric faculty members 
who objected to a Pakistani woman teaching Indian history had put 
the kibosh on her tenure application, she sued the university the 
next year, alleging religious and ethnic discrimination. Columbia 
refuted her contentions, and this spring, a federal judge in New York's 
Southern District dismissed the case, labeling the evidence of bias 
``thin,'' though ``suggestive.'' While she was pursuing her claim 
against Columbia, Ms. Jalal was selected for a new chair in modern 
South Asian history at Brown University. But after winning the approval 
of the history department and a tenure review committee, she said 
she was rejected by Brown's administration. So come June, Ms. Jalal 
may find herself unemployed. She plans to stay in the United States, 
where she first arrived in 1970, when her father, a lifelong civil 
servant, was posted to the United Nations in Manhattan. When the family 
returned to Pakistan two years later, Ms. Jalal, then 16, finished 
her studies at the American high school in Islamabad, the capital 
city. She spent much of her senior year in Pakistan trying to persuade 
her mother to allow her to return to the United States for college. 
``At that time, it was very unusual for Pakistani women to come to 
America to study,'' she said. ``The vast majority of women in Pakistan 
don't take to reading.'' But when Wellesley College offered her a 
full scholarship, she finally persuaded her mother to let her go. 
From Wellesley, she went on to pursue a Ph.D. in South Asian history 
at Cambridge University, where she wrote the dissertation that would 
provide the foundation for ``The Sole Spokesman.'' That the individual 
who had set out to puncture the iconic grandeur of Jinnah was a woman 
played no small role in the book's chilly reception in Pakistan. ``There 
is still a great deal of resentment there about that,'' she said. 
Ms. Jalal credits her father with inspiring her to rethink the partition. 
As a child, she would listen raptly as he reminisced about Muslim 
friends who had been left behind in India, which is home to some 120 
million Muslims, roughly as many as in Pakistan. If the division of 
British India and the resulting creation of the Muslim state of Pakistan 
were really events for Pakistanis to celebrate, he wondered, why were 
so many Muslims, including many of his dearest friends, still stuck 
in the predominantly Hindu India? Jinnah's ``Pakistan had to remain 
part of a larger all-India whole in order to raise some safeguards 
for Muslims in the minority areas or those who would invariably be 
left in India,'' said Ms. Jalal, who studied the Koran in Arabic as 
a child and characterizes herself as a secular Muslim with a religiously 
informed identity. Jinnah died of tuberculosis and lung cancer only 
a few days after the first anniversary of independence, leaving a 
leadership vacuum in Pakistan that is often blamed for many of the 
country's subsequent political and financial woes. To Ms. Jalal, though, 
most of those problems can be traced right back to 1947. The proximity 
to India, she argues, has put Pakistan in the untenable position of 
trying to square its considerable security costs with its limited 
economic resources, an imbalance that has in turn taken a toll on 
the democratic process in Pakistan. Years ago, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, 
father of the country's former prime minister, Benazir Bhutto, predicted 
that if India got the bomb, Pakistan would too, ``even if we have 
to eat grass.'' As it turns out, he wasn't far off. With the sanctions 
slapped on Pakistan after the recent nuclear blasts, the flow of international 
capital into the country has slowed markedly. The country now stands 
on the brink of bankruptcy, unable to pay the reservicing costs on 
some $26 billion in external debt incurred largely for military purposes. 
``The country has paid a hefty price to fend off India,'' Ms. Jalal 
said, ``and the price has been Pakistan's democracy.'' Her 1995 book, 
``Democracy and Authoritarianism in South Asia,'' also irked partisans 
of India and Bangladesh, the Muslim nation that splintered off from 
Pakistan in a bloody civil war in 1971. In the book, she argued that 
military nationalism has undermined democracy not just in the two 
Muslim states but in India, which is generally considered the world's 
most populous democracy. And indeed, many Indians are now concerned 
that the Hindu nationalist government, run by the Bharatiya Janata 
party, represents a threat to traditional democratic rights. Nonetheless, 
scholars of India have criticized Ms. Jalal for underestimating the 
country's representative government. ``The comparison makes me uncomfortable,'' 
said Francine Frankel, director of the Center for the Advanced Study 
of India at the University of Pennsylvania. ``I do feel that India 
has accomplished what Pakistan could not accomplish through an authoritarian 
system: It has brought politics to the majority of impoverished humanity.'' 
Ms. Jalal remains unmoved: ``Either you're giving a Pakistani line 
or you're giving an Indian line, which I think is very problematic 
in an academic environment.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>