<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981225.0095 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The shower for the older boys is available after dinner, and those 
few minutes under the falling water are William Foster's favorite 
part of the long day. For when he gets out, dries himself and strikes 
a muscle-man pose or two in front of the steamed-up mirror, William, 
a skinny 14-year-old, knows he can escape into sleep soon. Lights 
out at 10:30. Maybe then his dreams will carry him away from where 
he lives with his mother, his little brother and sister, and on some 
nights as many as 38 other children and their families in an emergency 
homeless shelter on Skid Row. Skid Row is a bottom-of-the-barrel district 
on the edge of downtown to which Los Angeles has consigned its derelicts 
and homeless and many of the agencies that serve them. Here depression, 
despair and wasted human potential flow through the streets. It is 
a place no child should have to walk through, let alone live in. There 
are not many shelters in Los Angeles where a family can stay together; 
even fewer will take in a boy like William, over age 13. On a typical 
night there might be 20 or 30 children among the crowds of single 
men and women at the mission. ``I didn't want to come here,'' William 
said recently. ``I thought there would be just a bunch of dirty, nasty 
adults. But my mom said it wouldn't be so bad. She said there would 
be a lot of other kids around. She was right. There are a lot of kids.'' 
Most of the hundreds who stay at Union Rescue every night are single 
adult men and women. But last year, Union Rescue provided beds for 
10 to 12 children and their families, even though on crowded nights 
some families had to sleep on mats. This year the mission opened an 
expanded space for families. William's 16-year-old brother, Steve, 
lasted one night at the mission before finding a spot on a friend's 
couch, a two-hour bus ride from the rest of his family. ``He said 
the neighborhood was hell on earth,'' William recalled. ``Then he 
left.'' Homeless families are typically headed by a single woman, 
like William's 37-year-old mother, Janice. Mrs. Foster's nightmare 
of being homeless was set in motion last winter when she lost her 
welfare check and papers that she needed to stay on welfare. She quickly 
began to fall behind her rent, and in July she was evicted. At different 
times, various members of the family lived with friends or relatives, 
and for a few days they were all together in a hotel, but by August, 
Mrs. Foster said, she had no choice but Union Rescue. Almost any time 
William leaves the security of the mission, holding on tightly to 
his little brother, Deon, 3, and his sister, Shayla, 4, and walking 
beside his mother, he can see men smoking crack in dank doorways or 
using other drugs. Sometimes he has to step around people sleeping 
in boxes or under sheets of plastic, ``like the stuff they throw over 
dead bodies.'' The other day he smelled something funny. He looked 
around and saw that it was human waste splashed on a wall. He hurried 
Deon along and told him not to look. ``I feel it's my responsibility 
to protect my little brother and sister,'' he said. ``I feel I got 
to be a man.'' But he is not a man. He spent most of the other day 
playing with a green yo-yo, trying to master a ``cat's cradle'' and 
talking about how tough he was and how Skid Row did not scare him, 
unless it was dark, and then ``I'd probably be afraid.'' Of the 151 
programs in Los Angeles County that serve homeless families, 69 do 
not accept boys over 13, and 39 have even lower age cutoffs, said 
Ruth Schwartz, executive director of the nonprofit Shelter Partnership. 
Ms. Schwartz said that the county had 4,890 beds for families but 
that on any given night there were about 12,400 homeless family members, 
most of them children. The sight of children on Skid Row has raised 
some eyebrows in social service agencies, and some criticism of the 
mission. ``Women and children are being sent from all over Los Angeles 
to Skid Row, which is unconscionable,'' said Alice Callaghan, who 
runs an after-school program in the Skid Row neighborhood. ``If you're 
going to serve homeless women and children, why would anyone put those 
services in Skid Row?'' And for years, any time a mother and her children 
showed up on the row, looking for a place to stay, social service 
workers moved quickly to relocate them as far away as possible. The 
row, everyone agreed, was no place for children. The people who run 
Union Rescue agree. Skid Row is an awful place, they say. But that 
is the point. What better place is there for a mission to be to help 
relieve suffering, what better place for a mission to open its doors 
to say, ``Welcome, brothers and sisters and your children,'' even 
if they are 14-year-old boys? ``We have not created this need by opening 
the family shelter,'' said Marty Annette Hill, superintendent of the 
mission's women and family ministries. ``The need was there and we 
are simply responding to it.'' Most of the women and children stay 
at the mission only for a week or two. The other day, William's friend 
David, 13, moved out of the mission with his family to a hotel for 
the homeless. William felt good for David and thought to himself, 
``I hope it's my turn next.'' ``A lot of kids accept being homeless,'' 
William said. ``They act like it's no big deal. Not me. I don't feel 
I'll be living this lifestyle much longer. It's too negative.'' But 
as long as he stays at the mission, William and his family can spend 
their mornings in the new ``Mommy and Me'' room on the fourth floor. 
It is a large playroom, full of toys, stuffed animals and the sound 
of gospel music. ``You don't know you're in Skid Row when you're in 
here,'' said Bridget Wilson, a supervisor at the mission. ``You don't 
know the devastation right outside these walls.'' But the room is 
open for only a few hours each day. The rest of the day, William and 
his family wander the streets, walking a dozen blocks to the library 
or a fast-food restaurant. They do not go to the nearby park, a gathering 
place for drug dealers and their customers. William does not go to 
school, though he says he wants to be a marine biologist. When the 
family goes to the library, he tends to play computer games rather 
than read. Sometimes William catches a bus and returns to the family's 
old neighborhood in the Van Nuys section to spend a night or two with 
his aunt. He tries to recapture his old life, to pretend Skid Row 
is just a dream. He plays basketball or hits the streets to sell candy 
and coloring books as part of an anti-gang youth program. But he returns 
to the mission to be with his mother and his little brother and sister, 
not just to protect them but to be protected. His mother stepped outside 
to talk with a friend in front of the mission recently and William 
did not know where she was. He panicked and almost cried when she 
walked back a few minutes later. At night, after a long day of homelessness, 
William's mother listens to her children sleep on bunk beds in a room 
they share with other families. As she lies there in the dark, her 
mind is flooded with if-onlys. ``If only I could, I would have done 
things differently,'' she said. ``I would have saved more money, but 
really I didn't have any money to save.'' William listened quietly 
to his mother's if-onlys. He listened to her say that she felt terrible, 
that she felt she had let her children down and now the older ones 
were angry with her and that was breaking her heart even more than 
being homeless. Teen-agers, she said, do not adjust well to change. 
He heard her say that once she got back on her feet, she was going 
to get two jobs and even though she might not have time to see her 
children as much, at least they would have economic security. ``I 
don't want to dwell on what happened,'' William said when his mother 
fell silent. ``I just want us to get a place. I just want to go home.'' 
On Dec. 14, William and his family left Skid Row. With the help of 
Beyond Shelter, an organization that provides vouchers for homeless 
families to stay in hotels until they can be moved into permanent 
housing, the Fosters moved into The Deluxe Inn, several miles from 
the row. Still, Mrs. Foster said she had to return to Skid Row soon. 
Some of the missions, including Union Rescue, were giving away toys 
for Christmas. ``It's going to be crowded down there,'' she said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>