<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981225.0065 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The holidays are a time for family gatherings, but as many families 
are discovering, togetherness at Christmas does not have to be confined 
to the home. In fact, because they are determined to preserve family 
ties, a growing number of Americans can be found huddling around Christmas 
trees in the lobbies of distant hotels, or on cruise ships sailing 
the Caribbean. To be sure, the bright lights and holiday decorations 
in cities like New York, Boston and Chicago have long lured vacationers 
at Christmas time. But now hundreds of smaller cities are also eagerly 
trying to lure tourist dollars, and hotels are seeking to fill rooms 
during what has traditionally been a slow season by assembling packages 
tied to Christmas travel. Similarly, many families have long celebrated 
the holidays on ski trails or palm-fringed beaches, especially families 
with both cash and time on their hands. But these days, those of modest 
means and tight schedules are also vacationing during the holiday 
period from Hanukkah through New Year's, not to be alone but to spend 
time with older children, parents or grandparents. This holiday season, 
cruise bookings are up 15 percent over last year, to a record 218,000, 
while hotels nationwide report more guests _ and more families _ than 
ever. ``The last 18 years my wife and I spent Christmas at my daughter's 
house here in town,'' said Al Skrede, a retired National Weather Service 
meteorologist in Overland Park, Kan. This year, Skrede, a widower, 
is spending Christmas and seven other days in Hawaii with his daughter, 
Barbara Jenkins, her husband, Ralph, and their three daughters. ``Everybody 
agreed there would be no Christmas presents,'' he said, ``except for 
Hawaii itself.'' Others travel but still manage to get home to gather 
around the living room tree. ``This is about the only way all of us 
can spend time together as a family,'' said Stacey Williams of Maypearl, 
Texas, shortly after arriving in Carlsbad, N.M., a week ago. She was 
traveling with her husband, Larry, a welder, their two young sons, 
and her parents, Stanley and Pam Bates, also from Maypearl. They spent 
two days in Carlsbad, viewing its ``Christmas on the Pecos River'' 
celebration, before driving to Ski Cloudcroft, a resort near Alamogordo, 
N.M., then headed home in time for Christmas Day. Julie and Don Carroll 
of Knoxville, Tenn., recently spent four days in Williamsburg, Va., 
with their two children. ``We're combining shopping and Santa,'' said 
Mrs. Carroll, who managed to take time off from the auto parts warehouse 
where she works. ``And we want to show the kids a part of their history, 
now that they're old enough to be interested. That's why we don't 
feel guilty about taking them out of school.'' Both the Williams and 
Carroll families are part of another trend _ shorter but more frequent 
vacations, a consequence of the rise of two-earner households, and 
the difficulty of coordinating schedules. And lots of industrial plants 
that once shut down to retool, giving workers time to plan a week 
or two of vacation well in advance, no longer employ so many people. 
By all accounts, the time squeeze is not likely to get better. Last 
month a study for the business council of the World Tourism Organization, 
conducted in the United States and 17 other industrial nations that 
together represent 73 percent of the world's spending on tourism, 
found that economic pressures are likely to lead to a global decline 
in leisure time. ``The effect of this squeeze on leisure time,'' a 
business council official said, ``will be to accelerate the trend 
to shorter, more frequent holidays.'' Smaller cities are vying for 
those holiday travelers. Each year, about a half-million people visit 
Carlsbad to explore parts of the 30-mile-long Carslbad Cavern, 75 
stories below ground. But tourism essentially went into hibernation 
during the winter, until 1992, when the chamber of commerce came up 
with ``Christmas on the Pecos,'' a celebration highlighted by cruises 
up the Pecos River on pontoon boats while viewing the Christmas lights 
of riverside residents. During that monthlong event, 14,000 visitors 
_ an estimated 70 percent of them from out of town _ bought cruise 
tickets. Williamsburg has been a popular Christmas destination for 
years. During their recent visit, the Carroll family stayed at the 
Days Inn Historic Area motel, not only because it is less expensive 
than Colonial Williamsburg, but also because the motel goes all out 
at Christmas, putting candles in all 120 rooms, wreaths on the door, 
Christmas trees in some rooms, lining the staircase with red poinsettias 
and stringing the property with 30,000 lights. ``It takes six to eight 
weeks to decorate it,'' said Nonie Kellogg, the manager, ``but it 
pays off. Our Christmas occupancy has doubled in the past five years, 
and it pays off for our guests. Lots of them even bring their presents 
and have Christmas in our lobby, under the tree.'' Another relative 
newcomer to the Christmas visitor sweepstakes is Leavenworth, Wash., 
a onetime logging town at the base of the Cascade mountains. When 
logging played out and Front Street was left with more than 100 boarded-up 
shops, the 2,200 residents transformed the town into a faux-Bavarian 
village. Today it draws 1.1 million visitors a year, many of them 
for a monthlong Christmas celebration that includes lights, sleigh 
rides, handbell ringers, choirs and concerts. Retail and lodging taxes 
brought in almost $856,000 last year, $103,000 of that in December, 
compared with $478,000 in 1990. Nine towns and villages in the Blackstone 
River Valley of Rhode Island banded together a dozen years ago to 
promote themselves as a region. Now the fastest-growing tourist destination 
in the state, its listing of Christmas events has grown from a four-page 
brochure to a 28-page newspaper insert. And a 103-year-old historic 
carousel in Pawtucket drew more than 3,000 riders on Dec. 5, the only 
day it was open after closing for the season in October. Minden, a 
town of 3,000 residents in southern Kansas, bills itself as ``The 
Christmas City.'' ``We've already had visitors this month from Colorado, 
Iowa and South Dakota,'' said Marvin Mangers, manager of the Pioneer 
Village there. Like many other hotels, Denver's 103-year-old Brown 
Palace also has Christmas packages, going out of its way to accommodate 
families. One such guest is Eda Brannan of Denver, who for years had 
Christmas dinner in her home for as many as 16 friends and relatives. 
But after the death six years ago of her husband, Charles, who had 
been agriculture secretary under President Truman, she said, ``the 
dinner got too much for me.'' Eager to remain in touch during the 
holidays, Mrs. Brannan started inviting nieces, nephews and friends 
for Christmas dinner at the Brown Palace. At least 10 were coming 
this year, including a couple from Montana. Gifts were to be opened 
under a Christmas tree in the hotel, followed by a traditional turkey 
dinner. Mrs. Brannan does not deny that she is sometimes nostalgic 
for when she and her husband had Christmas at home, and she invariably 
topped off the meal with her own creme brulee, which Bess Truman raved 
about the time Mrs. Brannan invited her to lunch at the Brannans' 
Washington apartment. But all in all, Mrs. Brannan said, ``It's a 
wonderful way to spend Christmas with family and friends.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>