<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981225.0152 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For the 10 years that city officials have been working to lure the 
superstores Costco, Home Depot and Stew Leonard's to a complex in 
the northern corner of this distressed city, they have been eagerly 
counting the benefits: new jobs, new tax revenue and even new exits 
on the Gov. Thomas E. Dewey Thruway, partly paid for by the developers. 
But nobody, it seems, ever counted the cars. With two of the stores 
opening in the spring in a huge complex in Yonkers, the city's neighbors 
are in an uproar, furious that tens of thousands of cars will soon 
be clogging their streets. As the municipalities have become locked 
in legal battles with the developers and with one another, all the 
local roads into the development have been closed to through traffic. 
And only at this late hour have state agencies agreed to step in and 
conduct a traffic study. As of now, the only access shoppers will 
have to the retail complex is via Exit 6A of the Thruway, which goes 
directly into the development. Few of the people involved in the project 
believe that this single route can handle the expected traffic: an 
estimated 19,000 cars a day during the week and 28,000 a day on weekends, 
according to one study commissioned by critics of the project. ``Yonkers 
has the development; why don't they open their roads to the traffic?'' 
said Carol Gardner, one of five homeowners in Greenburgh who filed 
suit seeking to keep the developer from reopening the town's portion 
of Sprain Road, a long-abandoned road that runs from the Yonkers development 
to Greenburgh. Ardsley, a village within the Town of Greenburgh about 
three miles north of the development, is suing to reopen Sprain Road, 
saying that if it remains closed all of the local traffic from central 
Westchester will crowd onto Ardsley's small winding roads to get onto 
the Thruway to go to the development. ``Here we are a small village 
several miles away from the site and we don't really have the clout 
or the ability to influence decisions,'' said Samuel J. Abate Jr., 
the mayor of Ardsley. ``We are really getting dumped on.'' The battle 
in Yonkers is not unique. As so-called big-box stores lure more and 
more shoppers, efforts to accommodate the enormous volume of traffic 
they generate have led to complications and acrimony. Port Chester, 
a struggling village on Long Island Sound, has been courting Home 
Depot for more than six years to shore up its tax base. For just as 
long, residents of a neighboring city, Rye, have been fighting the 
development, saying the traffic to the megastore will clog its streets. 
Earlier this month, Port Chester officials signed a contract with 
Costco to build a 140,000-square-foot store six blocks from the proposed 
Home Depot site, in the middle of its downtown, alarming residents 
of Rye. ``This is a new issue all across America,'' said Joe Chira, 
chairman of the Rye Citizens Committee, formed to fight Home Depot. 
``Projects are going up on the borders of two different communities. 
Community A, where the project is located, gets all the benefits. 
Community B, next door, gets all the traffic.'' In Connecticut, where 
Costco, Home Depot and Stew Leonard's stores have been built along 
a busy stretch of Federal Road from the City of Danbury to the Town 
of Brookfield, the state Traffic Commission stepped in and required 
the companies to widen the road, said Charles S. Harlow, a supervising 
engineer for the state Department of Transportation. ``It's a statute 
in state law that any project over 100,000 square feet or with more 
than 200 parking spaces has to go to the state for review,'' Harlow 
said. But in Yonkers, it's every group for itself. In New York State, 
there is no such statewide review of developments. Instead, the state 
Environmental Quality Review Act requires that a municipal agency, 
like a town planning department or city council, consider traffic 
and all other effects of a project before granting or denying approval 
to a developer. In this case, the local review was biased, said Abate 
of Ardsley. ``It strikes me that if we had something at the state 
level long ago, someone would have considered the impact of traffic 
outside of Yonkers and that might have prevented all the problems 
we are going through now,'' Abate said. Everything about the development 
is outsized. The Costco warehouse will be 135,000 square feet, or 
almost the size of three football fields; Home Depot will be 103,000 
square feet, and Stew Leonard's, a Connecticut-based supermarket that 
has turned grocery shopping into a new form of entertainment, will 
be 122,000 square feet. They are expected to draw an estimated 19,000 
cars every weekday and 28,000 cars a day on weekends, according to 
a study by Community Consulting Services, a not-for-profit engineering 
group assisting the Greenburgh homeowners who have filed suit. In 
the early 1980s, Westchester County and Yonkers went looking for a 
developer who could build a project on approximately 100 acres they 
owned jointly alongside the Thruway. They hoped that the development 
would give Yonkers a boost and perhaps help pay for a pair of new 
Thruway exits, one southbound leading right into the development and 
one northbound leading into the county's garbage transfer station 
on the other side of the Thruway. In 1981, Morris Cos. of Secaucus, 
N.J., signed a 140-year lease for the property and planned to build 
an office park with some retail and residential components. Exit 6A 
of the Thruway was built by the county for $12 million and Morris 
Cos. agreed to pay an as-yet-undetermined share of the cost out of 
its profits. By the time the exit opened in 1988, however, the office 
market had dried up. Morris Cos. turned to retail instead. In 1995, 
while the Yonkers City Council was considering the proposal for warehouse-style 
big-box stores, homeowners on the two small streets that led into 
the development, Austin Avenue and Prior Place, successfully demanded 
that their streets be closed to through traffic. Sprain Road, which 
runs from Greenburgh to Yonkers, was cut in half by the development. 
Yonkers had already closed its portion of Sprain Road, because it 
preferred traffic to take the Thruway. Therefore, the only remaining 
local access to the development was from the Greenburgh end of Sprain 
Road. Greenburgh officials believed that its half of Sprain Road was 
permanently closed, but the developers and Yonkers officials counted 
on using it for local access to the development. ``When they spoke 
to me about it, asking for my permission, I said no,'' said Paul Feiner, 
supervisor of Greenburgh, recalling bitter arguments with the former 
Yonkers mayor, Terence M. Zaleski. ``They led me to believe they would 
go elsewhere,'' Feiner said. ``I was under the impression they would 
find another access without going through Greenburgh.'' But Robert 
Morris, chief executive of Morris Cos., recalls things differently. 
He said Greenburgh officials simply did not respond in time to notices 
they had been sent under the State Environmental Quality Review Act 
and therefore forfeited their right to restrict the use of Sprain 
Road. ``Sprain Road was part of this development in every one of the 
environmental studies,'' Morris said. ``Greenburgh was `noticed' and 
Greenburgh never contested. It wasn't as if it wasn't in the news 
and they never said boo. Now they want to get in the back door.'' 
Construction began in 1997. In January of this year, the Town of Greenburgh 
sued Yonkers, Westchester County, the Thruway Authority and Morris 
Cos. to keep the road closed. In February the parties settled, agreeing 
that Sprain Road would be accessible only in emergencies and enclosed 
by a gate. But the settlement led to new problems. Without Sprain 
Road, Ardsley's mayor reasoned, traffic would back up to Ardsley. 
In March, Ardsley sued Greenburgh, Yonkers, the county, the Thruway 
Authority and the developers to reopen Sprain Road. The village lost 
and is appealing. Shortly thereafter, Ms. Gardner and the group of 
homeowners from Clarewood Condominiums, on Jackson Avenue near the 
intersection with Sprain Road, filed their suit to keep the road closed. 
It was dismissed and they have also appealed. Meanwhile, the construction 
continues, with Costco and Home Depot set to open in the spring. ``We 
will seek to find an alternative, but there may not be an alternative, 
unless somebody wants to build a flyway,'' Morris said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>