<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981225.0106 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Insurance companies and employers have found ways to get around a 
1996 law that requires them to offer health-care coverage for mental 
illness that is comparable to that for physical illness. The law, 
the Mental Health Parity Act, was expected to make mental health care 
more readily available to millions of Americans, but, experts on employee 
benefits and health policy say, it has not done so. Under the law, 
which took effect last January, group health plans may not set annual 
or lifetime dollar limits on a member's mental health care that are 
less than any such limits for general medical and surgical services. 
So, many group plans, fearing higher costs, have simply replaced the 
dollar limits for mental health care with numerical limits on outpatient 
visits, treatment sessions or days in the hospital. ``The day and 
visit limits wind up being more restrictive in some cases than the 
dollar limits for which they substituted,'' said Ronald Bachman, an 
actuary at the accounting firm of PricewaterhouseCoopers. ``The net 
impact in these cases is to have less mental health coverage.'' Russ 
Newman, director of clinical practice issues at the American Psychological 
Association, said this was ``definitely an unintended consequence'' 
of the 1996 law. ``The whole purpose of the law,'' Newman said, ``was 
to stop discrimination against mental health services and against 
people who need those services.'' Supporters of the legislation, led 
by Sen. Pete Domenici, R-N.M., and Sen. Paul Wellstone, D-Minn., had 
hoped that it would curb coverage disparities between mental and physical 
illnesses. They said they would fight to broaden and strengthen the 
law next year. The mental health law is one of several recent health-care 
initiatives that have fallen short of the sponsors' expectations. 
Another 1996 law was intended to guarantee health insurance coverage 
for people who change or lose their jobs. But people trying to exercise 
their rights have often been stymied as insurers skirt the law by 
charging them premiums of $10,000 to $15,000 a year _ far more than 
the standard rates for healthy people. Mental health care was long 
relegated to second-class status under private insurance policies, 
but in the last few years it has received more attention from employers, 
insurers and politicians. For one thing, the stigma of mental illness 
is being erased as scientists find physiological causes for a number 
of mental disorders. In addition, some employers now consider spending 
on mental health care a smart investment, on the ground that it fosters 
a productive work force. Federal officials say that 6 million people 
have severe mental disorders and that the nation spends $70 billion 
a year to treat mental illness of all kinds, not counting outlays 
for alcohol and drug abuse. Coverage of mental health care is considered 
a reasonably good indicator of the overall quality of a health insurance 
plan. Studies in several states suggest that the cost of ``parity'' 
for mental health services is minimal, increasing total health care 
costs by less than 1 percent. But group health plans _ the benefits 
for which may be designed by the employer, the insurer or both _ are 
typically distrustful of government mandates in general and apprehensive 
about the costs for a kind of care that they consider particularly 
vulnerable to abuse. Richard Adams Jr., an expert on health benefits 
at Watson Wyatt Worldwide, a consulting concern that advises many 
large businesses, said: ``Many companies have converted the dollar 
limits on mental health benefits into limits on the number of visits 
or days that will be covered. If they had a $1,000 annual limit on 
outpatient visits, it may be replaced with a limit of 20 visits. If 
there was a $10,000 annual maximum for inpatient mental health benefits, 
employers may convert it to a limit of 20 days.'' Joan Esnayra, a 
34-year-old graduate student with manic depressive disorder, said 
her insurance plan previously had a limit of $750 a year on outpatient 
mental health services but recently replaced it with an annual limit 
of 15 visits. Ms. Esnayra, a former teaching assistant who receives 
her coverage through the University of California at San Diego, said 
this limit could make her new coverage just as inadequate as the old. 
``Mental illness can flare up unpredictably,'' she said. ``A person 
with major mental illness may need more than 15 visits with a doctor 
just to find the right mix of medications, and for the most effective 
treatment you often need talk therapy as well as pharmaceuticals.'' 
Mary Clark Jordan, a health benefits consultant at Hewitt Associates, 
said, ``The average consumer would be hard pressed to find an improvement 
in mental health benefits as a result of the changes'' since 1996. 
Rep. Marge Roukema, R-N.J., said: ``The Mental Health Parity Act was 
a significant step in the right direction, but it was not as comprehensive 
as we wanted. The experience of the last two years shows that the 
law has substantial loopholes and that discrimination is still practiced.'' 
In addition to the change in the nature of the limits, some health 
plans set higher co-payments and deductibles for mental health care 
than for other medical services, a disparity allowed under the 1996 
law. In an interview, Wellstone said he would push next year for legislation 
to require ``full parity,'' covering co-payments, deductibles and 
limits on hospital stays and outpatient visits. Aides to Tipper Gore, 
a Clinton administration spokeswoman on mental health issues, said 
she favored such legislation. Mrs. Gore, wife of the vice president, 
has long championed the rights of people with mental illness. Group 
Health Inc. of New York, like many insurers, has revised some of its 
mental health benefits in response to the 1996 law. ``Annual and lifetime 
dollar limitations on mental health benefits will be removed,'' the 
company said in a notice to subscribers in its program for New York 
City government employees. But it said, ``For outpatient care, the 
$900 annual maximum and the $1,800 lifetime maximum will be replaced 
with a limit of up to 30 visits per year and 60 visits per lifetime.'' 
Carmine Russo, director of GHI's program for New York City employees, 
said the plan's mental health benefits were among the most comprehensive 
offered anywhere. But Rep. Carolyn Maloney, D-N.Y., said, ``While 
this level of benefits may be in technical compliance with the Parity 
Act, it clearly violates the spirit of the law, which was intended 
to ensure that physical and mental illnesses would receive the same 
level of coverage.'' Hewlett-Packard Co. illustrates another way some 
businesses have responded to the law. The company had a lifetime limit 
of $1 million on medical benefits for any employee or dependent, and 
no more than $300,000 of that amount could be spent on mental health 
care. ``We still have the lifetime ceiling of $1 million,'' said Paula 
Wallace, the health benefits manager for Hewlett-Packard, ``but the 
$300,000 limit for mental health was eliminated. We now have a single 
lifetime limit of $1 million on physical and mental health benefits 
combined, with no distinction between the two.'' Hewlett-Packard has 
not experienced the sharp increase in costs that many employers fear. 
``Our mental health costs have been stable through 1998,'' Ms. Wallace 
said, in part because the company uses managed-care techniques to 
make sure patients receive appropriate but not excessive services. 
Alfonso Guida Jr., vice president of the National Mental Health Association, 
an advocate for people with mental disorders, said the approach taken 
by Hewlett-Packard was ``consistent with the intent of the law.'' 
But ``many insurers and employers are taking steps to bypass the federal 
law,'' Guida said, ``changing the structure of their benefits to impose 
discriminatory inpatient and outpatient visit limits in place of the 
previous spending caps.'' Nineteen states have laws that require the 
same or similar levels of coverage for mental and physical illnesses. 
Some of the state laws, going further than the federal law, prohibit 
insurers from setting higher deductibles or patient fees for mental 
health care than for other medical services. Bachman, the actuary 
at PricewaterhouseCoopers, said health-care plans often paid a smaller 
share of bills for mental treatment than for other kinds of care. 
For example, he said, if a psychiatrist submits a $90 bill for psychotherapy, 
the plan may count only $50 as an eligible expense and then may pay 
only 50 percent of that, or $25. In contrast, Bachman said, if a family 
practitioner submits a bill for $90, the insurer may pay 80 percent 
of that amount, or $72. The 1996 law does not require employers to 
provide any mental health benefits, but most companies that offer 
health insurance to employees do cover some mental health care. An 
employer may obtain an exemption if it can show, with at least six 
months of data, that compliance with the 1996 law has caused an increase 
of 1 percent or more in the overall cost of its employee health plan. 
But Labor Department officials said that only four companies had requested 
such exemptions. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>