<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981225.0088 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It has all the trappings of a gold rush: the lure of riches, the frisson 
of risk, the headlong dash to stake the claims. The euro, Europe's 
single currency, makes its debut in just a week, creating a vast currency 
zone from the Arctic Circle to the Mediterranean. And to listen to 
the most optimistic of those seeking profit there, the currency's 
birth will unlock a mother lode of wealth that has set American investment 
banks competing to export more of Wall Street's ways to Continental 
Europe. While these great expectations may be overblown, there is 
no doubt that for investors and fund managers, the euro's arrival 
one week from now will mean an unparalleled transformation. Trading 
in 11 separate currencies will disappear, creating a single financial 
bloc with an economic output greater than that of the United States. 
Many financial specialists forecast profound changes in the way Continental 
European markets operate _ and increasing pressure on Europeans to 
emulate the ways of Wall Street. ``There's this wall of money waiting 
to come into the market,'' said Jeremy Isaacs, head of European equity 
business at the Lehman Brothers office here. ``Do I think European 
investors are going to become more like U.S. investors? The answer 
is: absolutely.'' Of course, it is not as if Continental European 
countries have been slouches in positioning themselves for the coming 
euro zone: Think only of megamergers like DaimlerChrysler, the Deutsche 
Bank takeover of Bankers Trust or the pharmaceutical fusion of Hoechst 
and Rhone-Poulenc. And the world's economic spiral and low growth 
forecasts for Europe as a whole have muted some of the more bullish 
voices forecasting a euro bonanza. ``I don't think you are going to 
have a revolution,'' Isaacs said. ``You are going to have an evolution,'' 
he said. ``The question is when, not if.'' Euro coins and notes will 
not be introduced for two more years, but all transactions between 
banks in the 11 participating countries and all operations involving 
equities and bonds will be denominated in euros starting next week. 
With only one currency in play, European companies will increasingly 
be evaluated by equity investors and fund managers across a broad 
field of competition where pricing and performance are no longer disguised 
by national currencies or local scales of importance. The euro zone 
``redefines what is a blue chip,'' said David Bowers, European equity 
strategist at Merrill Lynch &AMP; Co., arguing that, for instance, 
a company regarded as a heavyweight in one of the 11 countries would 
not necessarily make it into a euro index of top companies. In addition, 
11 separate government bond markets will be replaced by a single euro 
debt market in which the divergent yields of the past will be replaced 
by far more subtle calculations of razor-thin spreads between, say, 
euro-denominated bonds issued by Italy and euro bonds issued by Germany. 
Cross-border acquisitions will be simplified by the euro, which will 
eliminate currency risk within the zone because it will have an immutable 
value against national currencies until they are phased out altogether 
in the year 2002. Insurance companies in the 11 euro countries alone 
have around $1 trillion invested in their own governments' bonds, 
according to Crispin Southgate, an analyst at Merrill Lynch. Pension 
funds have a further $350 billion in the same bonds. Both those amounts 
are set to mushroom as fund managers look for higher yields in the 
low-interest euro zone and strapped governments place an ever-larger 
part of the burden for pension provision on private citizens. These 
prospects have sharpened competition among the big American investment 
banks that have their European headquarters here and see themselves 
as best placed to deploy expertise won in the United States. That 
has set alarm bells ringing for big European institutions, which have 
been scrambling to acquire some of the same skills _ and the same 
reach _ as the introduction of the euro nears. ``One of the things 
we have been seeing in the mergers in European banking groups is European 
banks trying to get the critical mass and the expertise to compete 
globally,'' said Madeleine Hall, a European fund manager at Schroders. 
They have not always been successful. For all its size, the giant 
UBS AG, born of Union Bank of Switzerland's merger with Swiss Bank 
Corp., lost out badly in this year's meltdown of emerging and speculative 
markets. Still, big European banks such as Paribas, Deutsche Bank, 
ABN-Amro and Barclays are all hoping to translate strong local ties 
and cultural affiliations into thriving business. ``These firms are 
pretty powerful in their own markets,'' said Robert Morris, a managing 
director at Barclay Capital. While American banks would seek to expand 
corporate bond and other business in Europe, he added, ``it doesn't 
mean to say that they are quickly going to steal the market.'' The 
competition is particularly fierce in the creation of new indices 
for bonds denominated in euros _ a dry-sounding business redolent 
of number-crunching that will still play a central role both in the 
evaluation of fund managers' performance in a changing market-place 
and, more gradually, in the way businesses raise money to finance 
their operations. In the last year, American financial institutions 
including Morgan Stanley Capital International, Salomon Smith Barney, 
Lehman Brothers, Merrill Lynch, Bear, Stearns and J.P. Morgan have 
devised eurobond indices in anticipation of a new, performance driven 
approach to investment in the 11 euro countries. By contrast, only 
Barclays among the European banks has devised a similar index, and 
that one is narrowly based on government bond performance. In the 
last 18 months, the overall number of benchmarks has risen to 14 from 
two _ a proliferation some bankers view as excessive. Such has been 
the rush to new indices that 1998 has become known as the year of 
``the battle of the benchmarks.'' The institutions offering benchmarks 
are hoping not only for the adoption of their indices as gauges for 
managers' and portfolios' performance but also the business that comes 
with it. ``What distinguishes one index provider from another is the 
reach of services,'' said Richard Pagan of Salomon Smith Barney. Most 
of the new euro indices are now heavily weighted toward government 
bonds because corporate-bond issuance, though it has grown rapidly 
over the last year, is still only a fraction of the U.S. level. Government 
bonds in Lehman Brothers' U.S. aggregate bond index, for example, 
take up 47 percent of the index while corporate debt accounts for 
21 percent. The same bank's euro bond index is composed of 67 percent 
government and 12 percent corporate debt. According to Anant Patel, 
a managing director at Bear, Stearns, the government bond market in 
the euro zone is currently worth some 2.25 trillion euros _ more than 
$2.6 trillion _ compared with a corporate bond market now valued at 
some 690 billion euros, roughly $800 billion. The expectation among 
fund managers is that those proportions will change radically as Continental 
European banks re-examine corporate loans and companies wean themselves 
away from reliance on banks for financing. At present, said Merrill 
Lynch's Southgate, 90 percent of corporate financing in Continental 
Europe is provided by bank loans, compared with 50 percent in the 
United States. By some estimates, fewer than 10 percent of Continental 
Europe's 1,700 investment-grade companies _ many of them in Germany 
_ have issued public debt. That is set to change. ``European banks 
are looking more closely at how much money they make,'' said David 
Munves, credit market strategist at Lehman Brothers. ``Corporate loans 
are coming under scrutiny, due to shareholder value in general.'' 
``It's a major opportunity for new index providers,'' he said. One 
indication of the likely shift toward corporate issuance is the prospect 
of stepped-up activity by ratings agencies _ still an unfamiliar concept 
to many European companies. Eric de Bodard, managing director for 
corporate finance in Europe at Moody's Investor Services, said the 
number of European companies to which Moody's ratings had been assigned 
grew by 100 to more than 300 in 1998. ``All the signs point to at 
least as active a year'' in 1999, he said. ``Investors are going to 
be looking for more yield and are going to diversify their portfolios 
without foreign exchange risk.'' Indeed, said Patel at Bear, Stearns, 
with the advent of a single currency for financial transactions, the 
nature of portfolio management will change. ``Traditionally in Europe, 
the way in which portfolio managers have been able to deliver performance 
is to take views on relative currency performance and the performance 
of spread relationships between markets,'' he said. With the arrival 
of the euro, though, ``the currency component will disappear, which 
was one of the biggest components,'' while interest rate spreads will 
shrivel. ``And now all of a sudden, you ask the question: Where do 
I get value enhancement?'' The result, he said, will be ``a very new 
investment dynamic for Europe.'' Banks see their indices playing into 
a European transformation whose precise course is still unclear and 
may, indeed, face many regulatory hurdles. Many fund managers are 
hoping, for instance, that a boom in private pensions will introduce 
vast new sums to the market, as happened in Britain, whose pension 
fund industry is bigger than all of Continental Europe's combined. 
Against that, Continental pensions are a ticking political time bomb. 
Many Europeans regard a comfortable state pension as an inalienable 
birthright and are uncomfortable with the notion of a private pension 
provision familiar to an increasing number of Americans. Moreover, 
European private pension funds, like European mutual funds, face regulatory 
restrictions. On top of that, Russia's meltdown has dampened appetites 
for corporate bonds, particularly high-yield bonds. That has made 
some assessments more cautious. Corporate bonds, said Bowers at Merrill 
Lynch, will provide ``one of the most exciting challenges that the 
euro will bring about.'' But this year's financial problems, he said, 
``have left people a little nervous about rushing into this.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>