<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981225.0104 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Hockey's best goaltenders in this decade will be at opposite ends 
of the rink Saturday night when the Devils and the Sabres play in 
East Rutherford, N.J., at Continental Arena. It will be the first 
meeting of the season between Martin Brodeur and Dominik Hasek, who 
have had a remarkable series of duels over the years. None of their 
previous confrontations stands out more than the sixth game of their 
first-round 1994 playoff series, which went into a fourth overtime 
with neither team having scored. Hasek turned aside all 70 shots he 
faced in that epic game on March 27, 1994, in Buffalo, while Brodeur 
made 49 saves before Dave Hannah beat him on Buffalo's 50th shot after 
65 minutes 43 seconds of overtime. Brodeur lost that battle, but he 
won the war as the Devils eliminated the Sabres in the seventh game 
and he became the first goaltender in Devils history to win all four 
games in a playoff series. Brodeur came back a year later to help 
New Jersey capture the Stanley Cup, a trophy that has eluded Hasek, 
known to hockey people as the Dominator. ``The man is the best,'' 
Brodeur said after Hasek led his native Czech Republic to the gold 
medal in the Olympics last February. ``They don't come any better 
than him.'' The 33-year-old Hasek won the Hart Trophy, as the league's 
most valuable player, for the second straight time last season, becoming 
the first goalie to gain that honor in consecutive years. Hasek leads 
the league's goalies in virtually every important statistic this season. 
His reputation weighs heavily on opponents, shooters often being intimidated 
by his very presence. Dr. Cal Botterill, a Canadian sports psychologist 
who has worked as a consultant for several teams in the league, said 
that Hasek could make even the most gifted goal scorers stop and think 
before shooting. Sometimes, he even makes a save flat on his back, 
without a stick or a glove. The Devils' Dave Andreychuk, who played 
with Hasek in Buffalo in Hasek's first season with the Sabres, 1992-93, 
was asked to describe Hasek's style the other day. ``He has no style,'' 
Andreychuk said. ``He just stops the puck.'' Hasek has done that more 
effectively than anyone else this season. He leads the league in victories 
(18), goals against average (1.66), save percentage (.945) and shutouts 
(6). Five of Hasek's career shutouts have come against the Rangers, 
his latest earlier this month, but a game in which he faced only two 
shots in the first period. ``I could have had a cigar and glass of 
wine,'' he said after the 2-0 victory over the Rangers on Dec. 11 
game at Buffalo. ``It was maybe the easiest shutout I had.'' Hasek 
is the primary reason that Buffalo comes into its game with New Jersey 
at 18-6-5, just about the same as the Devils' 19-8-4. These two teams 
should be playing deep into the spring, making it a strong possibility 
that they could meet each other in the playoffs. Brodeur (two shutouts, 
.901 save percentage, 2.35 goals against average) is not far behind 
Hasek in a season in which the Devils, under Coach Robbie Ftorek, 
are starting to take risks offensively for the first time in six years. 
Their new style has left the defense more vulnerable and, as a result, 
Brodeur's statistics are not as impressive as in previous years under 
Coach Jacques Lemaire. Brodeur feels particularly proud about last 
season's accomplishment, when he joined Terry Sawchuk and Harry Lumley 
as the only NHL goalies to have back-to-back seasons with a goals 
against average below 2.00. He had a 1.88 goals against mark two seasons 
ago, followed by 1.89 last season. Hasek and Brodeur, who has been 
bothered by discomfort in his ribs, will probably face each other 
again Monday night in Buffalo in the return game of the home-and-home 
series that will give the teams a good idea how they measure up against 
each other. Brodeur will face Hasek Saturday night without a loss 
in his last eight games. Hasek comes into the game having registered 
his 39th career shutout three days ago, when he had 38 saves in stopping 
Tampa Bay. That prompted Jacques Demers, the Lightning coach, to say: 
``This guy is God. He's on a different planet.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>