<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981225.0111 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Mike McAlary, whose bulletproof swagger and unyielding reporting about 
the New York City Police Department made him the city's dominant tabloid 
reporter of the last decade, died Friday at Columbia-Presbyterian 
Medical Center. He was 41 and, earlier this year, was awarded the 
Pulitzer Prize for commentary for a series of columns in The Daily 
News on the brutalization of Abner Louima. The cause was colon cancer, 
said his brother, Kevin McAlary. McAlary had been a sports reporter 
in Boston and at The New York Post before he was hired by New York 
Newsday in 1985 to cover the police department. Playing on his Irish 
roots and whisk-broom mustache, he quickly developed a powerful rapport 
with patrol officers, detectives and department brass, spending night 
after night in the bars where they liked to drink, meeting them on 
weekends, and writing about both their heroics and their weaknesses. 
When 13 officers of the 77th Precinct in Brooklyn were charged in 
1986 with a variety of thefts and other felonies in a major corruption 
case, McAlary led the journalistic pack by getting several officers 
to talk to him directly. One officer, Brian O'Regan, killed himself 
a few hours after speaking with McAlary; a copy of McAlary's Newsday 
article was found in a hotel room next to the officer's body. The 
case became the basis of ``Buddy Boys,'' the first of McAlary's three 
nonfiction books about police life. ``Most cops look down on newspaper 
reporters, but they didn't look down on him,'' said John Timoney, 
the police commissioner in Philadelphia and formerly the first deputy 
commissioner in New York, who had become friends with McAlary. ``I 
think it was the toughness. He was a tough guy, physically and mentally, 
and wasn't afraid to go into bad neighborhoods or call somebody a 
dog. And he looked like a cop himself.'' His byline began to sell 
newspapers, and he became the subject of a bidding war between the 
city's tabloids, who prized a strong, preferably Irish, voice in the 
mold of Jimmy Breslin and Pete Hamill. Like other columnists, McAlary 
borrowed some of his syntax and style from Breslin, who had himself 
adopted it from Damon Runyon and others. But friends said a more influential 
model was his Newsday colleague, the late Murray Kempton. ``Jimmy 
was a big shadow to Mike, but Murray was more of a spiritual kin to 
him,'' said Jim Dwyer, another columnist at The Daily News who previously 
worked at New York Newsday. ``He didn't write like Murray, but he 
had the same ability to look someone in the eye and tell the truth 
about what they had done, understanding the difference between the 
sin and the sinner.'' In 1993, he suffered severe injuries in an automobile 
accident, but battled back even as The Daily News and The New York 
Post fought over which paper had him under contract. For the last 
two years, since learning he had cancer, McAlary had undergone surgery 
and chemotherapy and had cut back his columns in The Daily News from 
three a week to one. But during that same period, he seemed to focus 
an energy often described as manic, leaving a chemotherapy session 
in August 1997 to get the first interview with Louima, writing a first 
novel, ``Sore Loser,'' that was just published by Morrow, and spending 
more time with his large family. ``Cancer happens too much,'' he wrote 
in The Daily News a year ago, when his youngest son was born, ``but 
if you are going to live, you have to take a chance on dying. I changed 
the life I had for one I wanted _ fewer bars and newspaper columns, 
for more family and novel writing.'' McAlary's bravado, often expressed 
with a barroom stridency, made him a host of enemies, and sometimes 
got him into trouble. In 1995, he wrote that a woman had fabricated 
an account of being raped in order to publicize a feminist rally. 
Women's groups were furious, and the woman sued him for libel. The 
case was dismissed two years later by a judge who ruled that McAlary 
had accurately reported a series of inaccurate statements from police 
officials. In court, he was forced to admit that several opinions 
expressed in his columns were unfounded. McAlary was born in Honolulu 
when his father was in the Navy, and moved with the family to Flatbush, 
Brooklyn, at age 3. Seven years later, the family moved again to Goffstown, 
N.H., where he graduated from high school with several published articles 
to his credit in the national magazine Tennis Illustrated. He studied 
journalism at Syracuse University before covering sports for both 
Boston dailies. He is survived by his parents, Jack and Ellen McAlary 
of Goffstown; his wife, Alice, and four children, Ryan, Carla, Michael 
and Quinn, ranging in age from 1 to 13, all of Bellport, on Long Island; 
four brothers and three sisters. After learning he had cancer, he 
had hoped to give up writing about the police. But after getting a 
tip about the Louima case, in which four officers were later charged 
with brutalizing the Haitian immigrant, he told friends he had one 
last police story to tell. ``After hearing a story that I wanted to 
be untrue, I was shaking,'' he wrote in the first of his Pulitzer 
Prize-winning columns. ``This is not about the police force. This 
is about a group of cops who are sadistic racists. Be afraid, be very 
afraid if this story is true, and I am afraid it is.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>