<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981225.0046 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good King Wenceslas looked out on the feast of Stephen. When the snow 
lay round about, deep and crisp and even. Feast of Stephen? Those 
lines from a Christmas carol exhaust what most of us know about the 
feast of St. Stephen. In the church calendar followed by Roman Catholics, 
Anglicans and some other branches of Western Christianity, the feast 
falls Saturday, the day after Christmas. In the Eastern Orthodox churches, 
St. Stephen's day is Dec. 27. About Stephen himself, it is easy to 
know a lot more. His story is told in great detail in chapters 6 and 
7 of the New Testament's Book of Acts. He is considered the first 
Christian martyr, a follower of Jesus who, like his departed master, 
was accused of blasphemy and stoned to death. But why celebrate his 
memory now, in conjunction with the story of the baby born in Bethlehem? 
Going by the account in Acts, it would be logical to place his feast 
sometime after Pentecost, when the Jewish followers of Jesus first 
began to preach and organize the embryonic movement that would break 
with the Judaism of their day and form a distinct body of Christian 
believers. Actually, the story of Stephen is filled with lessons about 
the divisions that afflicted that body from the very first. No sooner 
had the number of believers in Jesus begun to grow than, Acts reports, 
``the Hellenists complained against the Hebrews.'' The Hellenists 
were Jewish converts to the Jesus movement who spoke Greek and were 
attached to the wider Hellenistic culture. The Hebrews were the Aramaic-speaking 
majority. The division was possibly theological as well as cultural, 
reflecting a division among Jews at that time between those insisting 
on the Temple as the sole place of Jewish sacrifice and those challenging 
the Temple's centrality. The division also was practical and financial: 
the Hellenist Christians did not think that their needy were getting 
a fair share of the new community's common goods. Rather than ejecting 
the complaining Hellenist minority, they chose ``seven men of good 
standing, full of the Spirit and of wisdom'' _ Stephen most prominent 
among them _ to assure that the needs of the Hellenist minority were 
met. In other words, the first Christians recognized that preserving 
a united community required admitting pluralism. Cultural differences 
and even theological differences about Temple worship could be subordinated 
to a more basic belief in Jesus. Unfortunately, Stephen's story illustrates 
another division that had a far less happy ending, the split between 
the incipient Jesus movement and the Jewish milieu from which it emerged. 
On the one hand, Stephen's aggressive preaching inflamed Jewish ire, 
and the tolerance toward the new sect previously urged by the Pharisee 
Gamiliel gave way to active persecution. On the other hand, Stephen's 
demise contributed to Christian anti-Judaism. Tragically, his dying 
prayer of forgiveness for those who stoned him, as recorded in Acts, 
had less resonance in Christian tradition than the earlier passages 
in which he echoes biblical rebukes of a ``stiff-necked people'' that 
had persecuted its own prophets, rebukes Stephen applied to the death 
of Jesus. But none of this explains why Stephen's feast occurs Dec. 
26. Some people might latch onto the fact that in the Middle Ages, 
according to ``The Oxford Dictionary of Saints,'' St. Stephen ``was 
invoked against headaches.'' That explanation turns out to be circular. 
Was the healer of hangovers appropriately commemorated in the wake 
of Christmas revelry? Or did the saint then commemorated become the 
help of the hung over? ``The Golden Legend,'' a medieval compilation 
of lore about Christian saints and feasts, had a lot to say not only 
about St. Stephen's martyrdom and miracles but also about the recovery 
of his body. Early in the 5th century, a priest near Jerusalem claimed 
to have been directed by a vision to Stephen's tomb and the remains 
found there were ceremoniously transported to the city With remarkable 
precision, the compiler of ``The Golden Legend,'' Jacobus de Voragine, 
a 13th-century Dominican friar who became archbishop of Genoa, recorded 
that St. Stephen was martyred on the morning of Aug. 3 in the year 
of Jesus' death and that the saint's remains were recovered (almost 
four centuries later) on the very same day. Blessed Jacobus, as he 
has been known since being beatified in 1816 by Pope Pius VII, offers 
several reasons why the church set the saint's feast in Christmas 
week rather than Aug. 3, William Granger Ryan noted in his translation 
of ``The Golden Legend'' (Princeton University Press, 1993). None 
of them is truly convincing but one is at least memorable. It links 
St. Stephen's day with the two feast days that follow it, first of 
St. John the Evangelist and then of the Holy Innocents slain by King 
Herod. The key, Jacobus says, is to be found in a line of the Song 
of Songs, ``My beloved is white and ruddy, chosen out of thousands.'' 
In one of those imaginative interpretations of sacred texts that only 
medievals and French post-structuralists can fathom, Jacobus explains 
that ``white'' refers to John the Evangelist, whom tradition considered 
not only Jesus' beloved apostle but the only apostle not to die a 
martyr, while ``ruddy'' refers to the martyred Stephen and ``thousands'' 
refers to the multitude of Holy Innocents! By grouping these three 
feasts together and associating them with Christ's birth, he continues, 
the church is marking three kinds of martyrdom: those like Stephen 
who choose to die for a cause and so meet their death; those like 
John who choose to die for a cause but never actually do so; and those 
like the Holy Innocents who die for a cause without a choice. That 
grouping really does provoke reflection. Not only about religious 
martyrdom, very much a reality in today's world, but about bravery 
and sacrifice of all sorts: men and women who risk their lives for 
others and pay the ultimate price, men and women who risk their lives 
but fortunately survive, men, women and children whose lives are risked 
and lost in the course of worthy struggles but without their own consent. 
Perhaps they should all come to mind as the world looks out on this 
strangely dated feast of Stephen. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>