<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981225.0087 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Western efforts to rescue a crumbling cease-fire in Kosovo province 
achieved modest success Friday when U.S. diplomats persuaded ethnic 
Albanian rebel commanders and Yugoslav Army officers to pull back 
some of their forces from what had seemed certain combat. On Thursday, 
in the worst fighting since a cease-fire was called two months ago, 
government forces mounted a ferocious assault on a rebel stronghold 
here. The rebels of the Kosovo Liberation Army, which is fighting 
for independence for the Serbian province, repelled the attack and 
foreign diplomats had predicted the government would hit again Friday. 
The shaky cease-fire _ and the difficult negotiations that started 
only because the shooting stopped _ were both seriously hurt by the 
fighting on Thursday. It was feared that should combat resume here 
it would spread quickly throughout Kosovo. International monitors 
of the Organization of Security and Cooperation in Europe, who brokered 
Friday's arrangement, cautioned that it was very fragile. ``If someone 
lets off a sniper bullet or a mortar round the whole thing unravels, 
it is not a done deal yet,'' a senior monitor said. Even after the 
negotiations concluded late Friday, the government was reinforcing 
troops in the area, Western officials said. For their part, the KLA 
rebels remained very confident. The local rebel commander said he 
does not believe that yielding ground to the government is necessary 
because he has the complete support of ethnic Albanians, who make 
up the great majority of Kosovo's population, and has the forces needed 
to defend his territory. Renewed combat could mean that the unarmed 
international observers, who are in Kosovo to monitor the cease-fire 
and are considered essential in creating a climate of stability, would 
be in so much jeopardy that they would leave. A team of the observers 
came under fire near here Friday as fighting continued sporadically. 
The head of the observer mission, the U.S. diplomat William Walker, 
and European diplomats have said they will not put the monitors between 
two military forces that insist on fighting. However, senior U.S. 
diplomats said Washington is insisting that the observers will stay 
even if the danger increases substantially. ``Our position is that 
no one in Kosovo is going to make us leave just by intimidating us. 
There is too much at stake there for that,'' an American diplomat 
said. The negotiations that may have stopped the fighting here began 
in earnest early Friday when a team of international monitors set 
out for this village to talk to the rebel commander. Throughout the 
day, other diplomats were talking by telephone to rebel leaders in 
Kosovo and in Europe. In Belgrade, the capital of Yugoslavia, Western 
diplomats were consulting with government officials. Near the village, 
paramilitary police, draped with weapons, ammunition and heavy coats, 
were packed around wood-burning stoves dotted among their armored 
personnel carriers when the international monitors' two Chevrolet 
Suburbans drove up to the most forward of the government positions. 
The Suburbans, painted a bright orange to make them unmistakably part 
of the observer mission, were marked with American flags. The headquarters 
of the KLA commander in this region lay across a valley left smooth 
and white by snow broken only by the tracks of dogs, and leafless 
trees. The police were at the position to which government forces 
had fallen back late Thursday after rebels repulsed their assault 
on the headquarters. The attack, with some 40 tanks and armored vehicles, 
violated the government's commitment not to initiate actions against 
the rebels. A blue armored car, dripping icicles and frozen mud, was 
moved from where it blocked the road and the orange Suburbans set 
out for the rebel headquarters. The scene around the headquarters 
gave evidence of why the rebels are so defiant, both of the government 
and international efforts to induce them to be more flexible in negotiations. 
KLA fighters, who belong to a force that was best described as ragtag 
a few months ago, Friday seemed organized, disciplined and well armed. 
They had beaten back the Yugoslav Army and police on Thursday and 
they were glorying in that. One small group of rebels carried a sniper 
rifle that can penetrate armor from a mile away, a British army assault 
rifle and a new rocket-propelled grenade launcher with Chinese-made 
rounds. In the headquarters, the regional commander, a 27-year-old 
ethnic Albanian of slight build wearing a U.S. Army camouflage uniform, 
sat at a desk with two walkie-talkie radios and a satellite telephone. 
``I am Commander Remi,'' he said. ``I command all our forces in this 
area, including Pristina,'' the capital of Kosovo province. He did 
not seem the least concerned that government forces were less than 
two miles away. ``I am ready for anything, peace or war,'' he said 
blithely. International efforts to make a cease-fire hold are based 
on the notion that both sides want peace enough that they are willing 
to negotiate and give something up. But the rebel commander said he 
saw no reason to give up anything. The government, he insisted, could 
not take his headquarters or win the war. ``We will stop them here 
and we will have our victory,'' he said. ``We have the Albanians from 
Macedonia, and all of Albania, and we have ourselves. We didn't start 
this war for it to last six months, and then lose through negotiations. 
We started this war to liberate our country, `` he said. ``We will 
win or we will turn to dust.'' From the top floor of the two-story 
house that is his headquarters, the reasons for the government's eagerness 
to take this village were evident. Two miles to the west the main 
road out of Kosovo is visible behind a screen of bare trees. Rebels 
have bunkers and trenches near the road and could attack civilian 
vehicles as well as military supply convoys. Just a bit to the northwest, 
the town of Podujevo stands out against a panorama of snow and thick 
fog. Rebels have fortified positions less than one mile from the center 
of town. The rebel commander called these positions ``defensive'' 
and they may well be intended only to keep government forces out of 
his territory. But government officials consider them extremely threatening 
and want them removed, even if this means by force. The dispute about 
rebel positions here is the kind of obstacle to peace that is repeated 
in dozens of ways across Kosovo. Although international monitors may 
have stopped renewed fighting in this area for now, they were not 
optimistic that they will have the same success everywhere. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>