<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981225.0054 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A year ago South Africa was gloating. El Nino was raging from Somalia 
to California, but this little corner of the globe was enjoying some 
of its mildest weather in years. Then came the stormy season. Some 
say La Nina brought it on. Some say hubris. But the weather had, at 
last, struck back. It even seemed to be taking aim. The first serious 
attempt on President Nelson Mandela's life was made _ by a tornado. 
Earl Spencer, the brother of the late Princess of Wales and one of 
the few overseas celebrities who lives in South Africa, saw lightning 
burn down his thatched house. Half a popular soccer team was taken 
to the hospital, after having been struck by lightning. There have 
been four other tornadoes this year, besides the one that just missed 
Mandela. That one killed 18 people, injured 184 and led to the town 
of Umtata's being declared a disaster area. The country is about as 
far south of the Equator as Florida is north of it, and the climate 
is generally Mediterranean. Snowstorms usually stay in the Drakensberg 
Mountains. There are intermittent droughts, but the country has built 
many dams to cope with them. There are hailstorms, but generally they 
do less crop damage than the pretty little quelea birds that descend 
like a plague of locusts. This is the Southern Hemisphere so there 
are hot spells in January and cold spells in July but they do not 
kill as many people as heat and cold regularly do in Chicago. That 
is not to say that it's a milquetoast of a country. There is a hot 
semidesert in the middle called the Karoo and a real desert in the 
west called the Kalahari. Parts of the eastern coast qualify as jungle, 
though much of that has been cut down for sugar cane. Nonetheless, 
South Africa does have one weather distinction. It is one of the spots 
in the world that lightning finds remarkably attractive. The Johannesburg 
region receives an average of 18 bolts a square mile per year. Lesotho 
and Swaziland, two tiny countries inside South Africa, and the Drakensberg 
Mountains that join them, receive even more, an average of 28 bolts. 
About 20 South Africans a year die from lightning strikes. The storm 
season starts in October, and electronics stores always enjoy a brisk 
business in replacing fried telephones and modems and in selling lightning 
protectors to the formerly penny-wise. The lightning problem is so 
extensive that the national power company, Eskom, spent millions to 
build a network of receivers that records the location and strength 
of every bolt that hits the country by detecting disturbances in the 
AM radio band. The worst year for lightning since the system was built 
was 1996. There were more than 650,000 strokes that year, versus about 
400,000 in 1995, Jan Coetzer, an Eskom technologist, said then. But 
there were relatively few deaths. In 1997, lightning killed six elephants 
huddled together in the Kruger National Park. This year has seen an 
average amount of lighting, but it has caused an extraordinary amount 
of havoc. On Dec. 2, a bolt struck a tent where 11 forestry workers 
were sleeping near the town of Ermelo. Five were killed outright, 
and five badly burned, some by lightning and some by the blazing tent. 
On Oct. 26, a soccer championship match in Johannesburg between the 
Moroka Swallows and the Jomo Cosmos was called off when lightning 
struck the field, injuring six Swallows, who were behind 2-0. Only 
two days later an entire team in a village in central Congo had been 
killed by lightning. Its opponents were unhurt, but 30 spectators 
were injured. The two back-to-back reports, in each case with only 
one team hurt, only added credence to a common belief that lightning 
is caused by witchcraft. But lightning has not been the worst of the 
problems this year. Tornadoes have. They are rare here, but there 
have been five so far this season, all in a belt inland from the east 
coast. Last week a cabinet-level committee on disaster management 
held an emergency meeting to evaluate the country's response. The 
worst, in Umtata on Dec. 15, knocked a wall down on a row of street 
hawkers and sent corrugated roofs through the air like flying razor 
blades. Part of the roof of the pharmacy that Mandela was in collapsed, 
and his bodyguards threw themselves on him. The words he chose later 
to laud their dedication were effusive, but macabre. Even if the storm 
had killed all of them, Mandela said, ``their corpses would have dragged 
me to safety.'' The 18 deaths in Umtata were the highest on record 
for a tornado here, said Mike Edwards, deputy director of forecasting 
for the South African Weather Bureau. Since then, other storms have 
drowned about a dozen more people. Flash floods washed cars off roads 
when nearly six inches of rain fell in 24 hours in the Welkom area. 
While lightning has ignited large vacation homes on the south coast, 
rain has washed away whole groups of shacks in poor areas. ``This 
year seems more terrific than previous years,'' said Edwards, who 
was not implying that he enjoyed the chance to ply his trade, but 
was using the word ``terrific'' in its classic sense _ terror. Asked 
to predict the rest of the season, he said he expected above-average 
rainfall for January and February. The likelihood of lightning and 
tornadoes should decrease, he said _ at least until March, which is 
typically another terrific month. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>