<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981225.0121 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial for Saturday, Dec. 26: Chico 
Mendes was not an environmentalist in the traditional sense. It was 
only three years before his murder, which was 10 years ago this week, 
that he met environmentalists and learned with amazement that the 
Amazon Forest mattered to those far away. As head of Brazil's National 
Council of Rubber Tappers, his concerns were the tappers who were 
being forced off their land and killed in disputes with invading ranchers. 
But Mendes probably did more than any other person to preserve the 
Amazon. Although it has been burning faster than ever since his death, 
his ideas and organizational skills have led to new policies and ways 
of thinking about the forest that provide the basis for hope. Mendes 
was a full-time tapper at 11, the son and grandson of rubber tappers. 
He led the local union in his state of Acre at a time when small farmers 
and ranchers from Brazil's south were invading the forest and claiming 
land, which they burned. Mendes and a colleague, the anthropologist 
Mary Allegretti, came up with the idea of extractive reserves _ forest 
land set aside by the government to be managed cooperatively by locals, 
who kept it healthy while gathering its rubber, nuts and other products 
to sell. Mendes was shot to death by two ranchers who had claimed 
some of the land marked for one such reserve. Today, the disputes 
over land and the killings have diminished. The federal government 
has set aside about 7.5 million acres of the Amazon as extractive 
reserves, and some state governments are doing the same. In the state 
of Amapa, which has been run for four years by one of Mendes' colleagues, 
30 percent of the territory is protected and deforestation has virtually 
stopped. Amapa's government buys Brazil nuts from the reserves for 
school lunches and is helping to finance nut processing plants and 
other projects to make the reserves viable. Mendes' allies recently 
won the governorship of Acre state, and hold several Senate seats 
and many state government posts. Mendes also created a lasting change 
in attitudes about the Amazon, in Brazil and all over the world. He 
lobbied the World Bank in a donated, ill-fitting suit, and the bank, 
which once financed roads to make the Amazon easier to cut down, is 
now financing extractive reserves. Brazil's government has ended its 
subsidies for cattle ranchers buying Amazon land. It can now monitor 
forest destruction, and has given more powers to the environmental 
agencies that can protect the forest. Mendes' allies are trying to 
hold back deforestation against tremendous obstacles. One is globalization, 
which has brought a wave of Asian logging companies to the Amazon. 
Brazilian rubber, which now must compete on world markets, is too 
cheap to provide the tappers with a decent living. There is also weather. 
The droughts caused by El Nino _ in turn intensified by the destruction 
of the Amazon _ have dried out the forest, allowing fires to spread 
uncontrollably. While last year's rate of deforestation was a sharp 
drop from previous years, it remains alarmingly high. In the 1990s, 
an area that averages the size of Massachusetts has been burned every 
year. The preservationists must also contend with the clout of ranchers, 
an important part of President Fernando Henrique Cardoso's governing 
coalition. They have been able to gut many new laws to improve forest 
protection and keep ones that have passed from being fully carried 
out. According to Brazil's Catholic Church, Mendes was one of 982 
activists murdered in land disputes in the Amazon between 1964 and 
1988, the vast majority by ranchers' hired guns. Eight people were 
convicted, all triggermen except in Mendes' case. Even his killers, 
Darly Alves and his son Darci Alves, who have since been recaptured, 
walked out of prison two years into their 19-year terms. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>