<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981225.0101 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Pierre Vallieres, a writer and political advocate whose raw, emotional 
manifesto on injustice and violence became the intellectual foundation 
of the early Quebec separatist movement, died on Tuesday in Montreal. 
He was 60. Vallieres never fully recovered from a heart attack last 
year and slipped into a coma last week. A friend, Philippe Duhamel, 
told reporters that Vallieres had died in a hospital surrounded by 
friends. While in custody in a prison in New York awaiting extradition 
to Montreal on manslaughter charges in the 1960s, Vallieres wrote 
``Les Negres Blancs d'Amerique,'' which was published in English under 
the title ``White Niggers of America.'' The book, a collection of 
personal essays and memoirs that expressed pent-up anger at the dominant 
English-speaking class in Quebec and the Roman Catholic Church, became 
a call to arms for the fledgling Front for the Liberation of Quebec. 
``To be a nigger in America is to be not a man but someone's slave,'' 
Vallieres wrote in his book, which was published in French in 1968. 
He and the movement clearly identified with the struggles of blacks 
in the American South, although he was criticized for comparing the 
history of the blacks to the less burdensome travails of French-Canadians. 
In the 1960s, the organization said it was responsible for bombings 
throughout Quebec, but mostly in Montreal, as it attempted to nurture 
a revolution to split the French-speaking province from the rest of 
Canada. The early movement also bore a distinct socialist tint, and 
a goal of many of its most influential members, including Vallieres, 
was to create an anti-capitalist society as much as to form an independent 
Quebec. Divisions appeared in the movement as those goals diverged. 
Vallieres was a revolutionary who personally experienced the inequality 
that he believed crippled capitalist societies. He was born in the 
Montreal slums in 1938, the son of an exhausted railroad employee 
and a doting mother who came to resent his efforts to read and write 
and to avoid finding a regular job to help the family. Vallieres entered 
a Franciscan seminary. But he left after a few years, with an open 
antagonism toward the church. After traveling to France for a brief 
and disillusioning brush with French bureaucracy, he returned to Montreal 
and tried journalism. Vallieres wrote for the largest French-language 
newspaper in the city, La Presse, and was co-editor of a liberal magazine, 
Cite Libre, which Pierre Trudeau and others had founded. In his book 
Vallieres said that from the magazine he was easily led ``to the picket 
lines, the protests against the war in Vietnam ... and the FLQ.'' 
A review of ``White Niggers of America'' by Laurier L. LaPierre, in 
The New York Times Book Review, on its publication in English in 1971, 
referred to Vallieres as ``Canada's Eldridge Cleaver and Malcolm X.'' 
The reviewer found the book, in some sections, ``profound in its assessment 
of men and events.'' The book challenged Quebecers to take up arms 
and toss gasoline bombs in their campaign for independence. Vallieres 
wrote it after he was arrested in 1966 at a demonstration in front 
of the United Nations. He was held at the Tombs prison in New York 
until January 1967, awaiting deportation to Canada on charges related 
to the bombing of a shoe factory in Montreal in the early '60s that 
killed a secretary at the plant. Vallieres was convicted of manslaughter 
in late 1969. He was released pending appeal, and the conviction was 
overturned in 1973. While awaiting the appeal, Vallieres returned 
to Montreal and soon became involved in the separatist movement's 
most violent offensive. On Oct. 5, 1970, the British trade commissioner 
in Montreal, James Richard Cross, was kidnapped. Five days later four 
armed men abducted Pierre Laporte, the Quebec labor minister. The 
kidnappings intensified the insecurity created by bombings and threats 
of violence by the front. At 4 a.m. on Oct. 16, Trudeau, the prime 
minister, invoking the War Measures Act for the first time in peace, 
called the army into Montreal. Under the law the police had the power 
to round up and detain anyone suspected of involvement in the violence 
without bringing formal charges. Vallieres was one of 450 arrested. 
A few days later, acting on a tip from the kidnappers, the police 
found Laporte's body in the trunk of a car. The Front for the Liberation 
of Quebec claimed responsibility. Vallieres was released without being 
charged, although he was later accused of seditious conspiracy because 
of remarks in his book. In 1973 he was cleared of those charges, and 
the manslaughter conviction related to the factory bombing was overturned. 
Despite the declarations in his book, he turned his back on violence 
and dissociated himself from his organization, calling it a ``terrorist 
menace.'' He then threw his support to the political wing of the separatist 
movement, the Parti Quebecois, which had just been formed by Rene 
Levesque, a former journalist. Vallieres eventually grew disenchanted 
with the Parti Quebecois and did not even vote in the separation referendum 
in 1980. By the time of a second separation referendum in 1995, Vallieres 
had grown distant from the movement to which his writing had helped 
give intellectual life. In recent years, Vallieres took up many causes, 
including gay rights, native self-government and mental health. He 
was a founder of the Quebec-Bosnia Solidarity Committee and traveled 
to Sarajevo in 1995. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>