<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981225.0110 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Now that New York state has enacted new standards to improve learning 
in public-school classrooms, the Education Department and the Board 
of Regents are increasing their resolve to have private and religious 
schools follow suit. But what the state sees as encouragement, some 
private and religious schools are calling pressure. The schools say 
they worry that the state is infringing on the independence that allows 
them to develop the nontraditional approaches that they maintain are 
at the heart of their success. Private and parochial schools _ from 
small church-run academies to prestigious Manhattan prep schools _ 
educate about 15 percent of all school-age children in New York State, 
or 485,453 in 1997. While state law requires these schools to provide 
an education at least equal in quality to that of public schools, 
they are largely free to establish their own curriculums and methods 
and do not have to administer state assessment tests. When the regents 
adopted the new standards in 1996, it exempted nonpublic schools, 
with the understanding that the issue would be discussed later. But 
with the state raising the bar for public schools, particularly in 
graduation requirements, state Education Commissioner Richard Mills 
said private and parochial schools should also make sure they meet 
the new standards. Under the new graduation requirements, public-school 
students within the next five years will have to pass five regents 
exams in English, math, American history, global studies and one of 
four sciences. Previously, only college-bound students took such exams, 
and other students took the basic skills competency test to graduate, 
an option that will soon no longer be available. Public schools, too, 
are pressing the state to include the nonpublic schools in the new 
requirements because they fear students will otherwise leave the public 
schools for less demanding private ones. ``The issue has to be joined 
because the law says students in nonpublic schools must get an education 
substantially equivalent to that in the public schools,'' Mills said 
this week. ``And if public schools are increasing their standards 
and increasing their performance, `substantial equivalence' means 
nonpublic schools have to rise as well.'' Carl Hayden, chancellor 
of the Board of Regents, took the opportunity in an interview to throw 
down a challenge. ``One of the things this discussion can expose is 
the myth of high performance among some of the private schools,'' 
Hayden said. ``That is not to say that many are not operating at or 
above regents standard, but many of them get the benefit of the doubt 
without ever having to produce evidence. Those that agree to report 
results to the community using objective standards will have a legitimate 
basis to make the claim of superiority.'' But neither Hayden nor Mills 
felt comfortable predicting how a compromise might be reached with 
the nonpublic schools. The talks among nonpublic schools and the state 
have intensified in the past year, and the Board of Regents will devote 
much of its January meeting to the issue. Mills said he has no intention 
of trying to require private school students to take the regents exams 
(most nonpublic elementary schools have voluntarily agreed to administer 
the new fourth-grade reading test next month). The state has some 
leverage in that it could make the exams a condition for private and 
public schools to grant diplomas. Hayden would not rule out seeking 
to force nonpublic schools to comply with the new standards, but said 
he doubted the Board of Regents would take that course: ``I won't 
say it is totally outside the realm of possibility but I think it 
is unlikely. I don't hear a great push for that and it's certainly 
not going to emanate from me.'' For private and parochial schools, 
the issue is less about standards than about what they perceive as 
a blow to their autonomy. If the state forces them to give the regents 
tests, the reasoning goes, the next step could be mandating a curriculum 
or imposing other controls. Catherine Hickey, the superintendent of 
schools for the Archdiocese of New York, said most of the 293 archdiocesan 
schools have already made the choice to administer various state exams. 
``The key word here is `choice,''' she said. ``We have opted. Schools 
have chosen willingly. This is the culture we are used to and the 
culture we would like to keep.'' Nondenominational schools, too, have 
expressed concern about the state's intentions. Frederick C. Calder, 
executive director of the New York State Association of Independent 
Schools, issued a bulletin last week to its 144 member schools warning 
of state intrusion. ``Everyone knows that the vast majority of private 
schools in New York state easily matches the performance of the best 
public schools,'' said Calder. ``Yet the regents and the state Education 
Department continue to harass the nonpublic school community with 
demands for objective assessments _ read mandated state tests or their 
equivalents _ to prove what is self-evident.'' Indeed, a large number 
of nonpublic schools voluntarily give their students state assessment 
tests, mainly for bragging rights and, in the case of Regents exams, 
because many four-year colleges require them for admission. Of the 
657 high-school level nonpublic schools, 70 percent offer the regents 
exam, and as a whole their students do score higher than public-school 
students, according to the state Education Department. Last year, 
71 percent of nonpublic students who took the regents English exam 
passed, compared with 56 percent of public-school students, according 
to the state figures. That trend held true for all eight of the regents 
exams except for earth science, with 43 percent of public-school students 
passing compared to 37 percent for nonpublic-school students. In addition, 
while 52 percent of public-school students went on to four-year colleges, 
the figure was 74 percent of nonpublic students. Still, in the view 
of the state, the public-school students will stand at a high academic 
achievement level as the new standards take hold. Tom Rogers, associate 
director of the New York State Council of School Superintendents, 
a lobbying group in Albany for public-school administrators, said 
his organization would continue to press the state to hold the nonpublic 
schools to at least the same standards as the public ones. The organization 
contends public-school students who are unable to meet the new standards 
will leave in droves for lesser private and parochial schools that 
eschew the standards. And Mills said he sees their point. ``I see 
independent schools where I have personal experience where the expectations 
are high,'' said Mills, who taught at the prestigious Dalton School 
in Manhattan in the 1960s. ``And I see others that are all across 
the board. There has to be some kind of appropriate parallel accountability 
system in nonpublic schools to match what is happening in public schools.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>