<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981225.0044 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Humidors in fancy oiled-wood bars may be packed this winter with $10 
and $25 hand-rolled cigars from the Caribbean, but to appreciate the 
degree of America's new passion for cigars, one must stand beside 
Tho Henricksen, a Vietnamese immigrant, who is feeding shredded tobacco, 
vegetable paste, rolls of brown tape and birchwood tips into eight 
machines at Havatampa Inc. Clanking, hissing, crimping and slicing, 
her bevy of faded green machines, joined by dozens of others on the 
factory floor, are turning out 1.75 million cigars a day. Described 
on their Havatampa and Phillies packs as ``predominately tobacco,'' 
they are sold five-for-a-dollar at stores like 7-Eleven and Wal-Mart. 
Sales of those cigars, and of brands like Swisher Sweets, White Owl 
and Dutch Masters, have long dominated the market and have surged 
in the last five years on the coattails of the cigar craze. ``There 
was a trickle-down effect from the premiums,'' said Tom Arthur, chief 
executive of Havatampa. ``We made lots of money.'' Yet the boom has 
already peaked, people in the industry say, with a glut at the upper 
end of the market. Retail sales of cigars in the United States rose 
to $1.4 billion in 1997 from $192 million in 1992, but growth is expected 
to be flat this year, according to Cigar Insider, an industry newsletter. 
Even Marvin Shanken, publisher of Cigar Aficionado magazine, who helped 
to stoke the craze, acknowledges that the days of 70 percent growth 
are over. Still, the boom reversed a 30-year decline in the business, 
and the current shake-out has left the survivors richer and wiser. 
``At the end of the day, the market is four times bigger than four 
years ago,'' said Tom Ryan, executive vice president of Swisher International 
Group Inc. in Jacksonville, Fla., the second-biggest cigar maker. 
``There is the opportunity to make very impressive profits.'' Americans 
will buy 4 billion machine-made cigars this year _ 10 times as many 
as hand-rolled premiums _ a 33 percent increase in five years, according 
to the Cigar Association of America, an industry group. In terms of 
dollars, however, the pricier hand-rolled imports now account for 
roughly half the revenue growth. Premium imports quadrupled to 400 
million in the last five years. Indeed, there is a demographical divide 
in the cigar market. The hand-rolled imports have been a fad among 
a young, professional urban set, fostered in part by Shanken's magazine 
and its covers of Demi Moore, Claudia Schiffer and other celebrities 
and by his ``Big Smoke'' parties that draw thousands who pay $150 
to sample premium cigars. Smokers of the machine-made cigars appear 
to be much older and less affluent. Havatampa, for example, says its 
mail indicates that many of its customers are fixed-income retirees. 
For now, Havatampa's machines are running full-tilt with holiday back 
orders. Havatampa, a subsidiary of Tabacalera SA of Spain, is the 
only cigar company with no premium cigars, and is the No. 4 cigar 
maker. In the Tampa plant, 800 workers _ who earn $6 to 9 an hour 
_ take less-than-premium tobacco, clean feathers and other debris 
from it, shred it, add saccharine, beer, rum and vanilla _ depending 
on the brand _ and dump it from dented waste baskets into the gullet 
of machines that wrap it in a paper-and-tobacco homogenized wrapper. 
``Our business was not as robust during the boom as the premiums,'' 
Arthur, the company's chief executive, said. ``But the silver lining 
is so many people got in with so many brands there is now a big shake-out.'' 
Here in Tampa's cigar-making district of Ybor City, the boom and slowdown 
is just a chapter in a long history. Fleeing from Spanish-controlled 
Cuba in 1886, Vincent-Martinez Ybor set up factories that imported 
Cuban tobacco until Fidel Castro came to power. There used to be 10,000 
immigrants rolling cigars. Hand-rolling moved overseas after men like 
Armando Garcia, now 73, installed machines that turned out 4,500 cigars 
a day, displacing 15 rollers. Those same machines are still wrapping 
cigar parts at Havatampa, where Garcia's son and daughter-in-law keep 
them running. Cigar sales spiked at an all-time high of 9 billion 
cigars in 1963 before the surgeon general warned about the health 
dangers of smoking cigarettes. But for the next 30 years the industry 
counted on an annual 4 to 6 percent decline in sales, Ryan of Swisher 
said. The last of Ybor City's hand-rolled brands moved overseas in 
the 1980s, as imports settled at around 100 million cigars and machine-made 
cigars at 3 billion. In 1978, Arthur, an investment banker, bought 
the once-proud name of Havatampa and housed its old machines in a 
modern business park in East Tampa and a former cotton mill in Selma, 
Ala. He later bought the Phillies brand, distributed in the Northeast. 
Arthur said he was the only cigar company with growth before the boom. 
Indeed, executives at other cigar companies acknowledge that they 
were caught flat-footed in the early 1990s by the new tastes of affluent 
martini-drinkers. ``None of us saw it coming,'' said Theo Folz, chairman 
and chief executive of Consolidated Cigar Holdings Inc., the largest 
company with $299 million in sales last year. (On Dec. 16, Seita SA, 
France's largest tobacco company and the maker of Gauloises and Gitanes, 
agreed to acquire Consolidated for $531 million.) Scrambling to fill 
the market, Consolidated, General Cigar Holdings Inc. and Swisher 
bought up imported brands, planted tobacco and opened overseas rolling 
factories. ``What drove the industry was shortages,'' said Eric Newman, 
president of J.C. Newman Cigar Co., a 105-year-old family operation 
that produces the machine-made Rigoletto brand here and imports 16 
million hand-made Cuesta-Rey and Arturo Fuente brands. ``There was 
hoarding,'' Newman said. ``Prices doubled every six months. Then we 
overshipped.'' In the Dominican Republic and Honduras, where Newman's 
offshore partner, Carlos Fuente, produced the cigars, 100 cigar rolling 
operations opened in 1997. Needing little capital, the competitors 
bought tobacco at any price, set up shop in sheds and lured trained 
rollers with signing bonuses of $1,500 _ a half-year's pay _ and gifts 
of mopeds and houses, Newman said. Even in Miami's Little Havana, 
small hand-rolling shops, called chinchales, sprang into existence, 
producing brands with exotic names _ what established manufacturers 
call Don Nobodies _ that were sold through telephone mail orders. 
``With 20 people you can make 20,000 cigars a month,'' said Don Barco, 
a cigar retailer who set up his own chinchal with 30 people in Ybor 
City. ``There were people who got in the business and made millions.'' 
In his own shop he saw the number of cigar brands increase to 1,200 
from 250. ``It was confusing,'' he recalled. ``A customer would come 
in and ask for brands I'd never heard of.'' At the height of the boom, 
General, Swisher and Consolidated sold stock to the public and forecast 
30 percent growth. But their production was so high that this year 
they imported 500 million cigars _ 100 million too many _ according 
to Folz of Consolidated and other officials. Chinchales closed, brands 
disappeared and millions of cigars were dumped for cents on the dollar. 
It may take two years for the premium glut to disappear, said Jack 
Maxwell, a leading tobacco analyst, who calls cigars a fad that will 
grow at a rate of 2 to 3 percent in the future. ``There was so much 
greed,'' said Bob Saitta of El Sol Cigars, whose modest shop on Ybor 
City's main drag sells a family brand made by 15 rollers in Central 
America. ``It was a disservice to loyal customers. Ten years ago it 
was a nice little backwater. The whole world changed. The whole thing 
was very sad.'' Behind a large glass window at his shop, Saitta has 
leased a space to recent Cuban refugees Cira Rodriguez and Felix Huelga 
Jr. who roll 400 fat cigars a day and sell them for $4. The tourists 
who come to the historic district like to watch their hand-rolling, 
said Saitta. Huelga, a former Cuban army sharpshooter who was imprisoned 
and then deported for resisting Fidel Castro, stands in front of an 
enlarged photo of cigar rollers from another era and says history 
is repeating itself. ``Right now I make for me,'' he said. ``In three 
years I will have five people.'' He waves a cigar at the photo. ``They 
are my people.'' But nothing is likely to stay the same in the volatile 
world of cigars. Cuba may eventually open, touching off battles over 
trademarks and tobacco supplies. And the boom has aroused government 
regulators and antismoking advocates who had pretty much left cigars 
alone. A National Institute of Health study this year found that cigar 
smoke is just as toxic as cigarette smoke, said Dr. John Slade, the 
study's editor. He warned that children can afford and more easily 
obtain machine-made brands. Dr. Greg Connolly of the Massachusetts 
tobacco-control office, another author of the NIH report, predicted 
that Massachusetts and other states would begin requiring cigar testing 
for tar and nicotine levels. Ultimately the issue will be forced into 
Congress where anti-tobacco advocates hope to trade a uniform warning 
label for restrictions on advertising and marketing, he said. Industry 
officials maintain that other than to experiment, children do not 
smoke cigars. In reports to the Federal Trade Commission, the five 
top cigar companies reported $40 million in advertising and promotion 
in 1997, said Norman Sharp, president of the Cigar Association of 
America. The industry also has created a program with retailers to 
stop underage sales. Despite the health concerns and a poor performance 
on Wall Street, executives emphasize that their business is stronger 
than it has been for decades, with thousands of new cigar-friendly 
bars and restaurants and a different attitude toward cigars. ``People 
in general and women in particular are more tolerant of cigars and 
cigar smoking than ever before,'' Shanken, the cigar magazine publisher, 
said. Women ``are allowing husband and boyfriends to smoke in their 
presence,'' he noted. ``That has had a big impact.'' According to 
Arthur of Havatampa, ``Overall, people feel better about smoking cigars. 
There's less social stigma.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>