<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981225.0056 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A couple of years back, I was invited to a party for a conceptual 
artist and decided to dress in theme. Because the artist does the 
kind of work that leaves most people scratching their heads, I wore 
a Moschino dress with the neckline appropriately configured as a question 
mark. Introducing myself to an unshaven guy in a beat-up motorcycle 
jacket whom I recognized, I assumed he would know my name because 
we were both art critics for many of the same magazines. Instead, 
he gave me the once-over and snarled, ``You must be in fashion,'' 
before abruptly turning his back. His disdain was typical of many 
in my field, that is to say, art history, and it is one of the reasons 
that I long kept my love for clothes where many think it belongs _ 
in the closet. Throughout my childhood, I was indoctrinated into the 
belief that fashion was frivolous. As a girl, I would doodle ball 
gowns in the margins of my notebook, shielding them with a hand so 
my parents and teachers wouldn't discover my forbidden desire. When 
I professed a wish to dress the mannequins in Bergdorf Goodman's windows, 
my mother would say, ``Fashion is too tinselly.'' In my house, no 
one was more revered than my paternal grandmother, who had put herself 
through law school working as a maid. The legend inspiring the greatest 
awe was that her wardrobe consisted of a mere four housedresses, and 
that she never noticed when her long red locks turned gray, because 
she was above such superficialities as makeup and hair color. I spent 
a lot of time twirling in front of mirrors, imagining myself being 
transformed by a dress or hat into someone far grander. But when I 
confessed a desire to be in the fashion business, my mother intervened. 
``You drive down Seventh Avenue and see racks of clothes being pushed 
down the street,'' she said. ``Where is the intellectual part? I see 
you behind a pushcart and think, what will happen to your mind?'' 
So I chose art history as a career. Now that was something Mom could 
be proud of. She herself is an artist. Not only could she add a bit 
of polish to her own calling by having a daughter as an art historian, 
she could also boast, ``My child is going to Rome to study the Sistine 
ceiling.'' I went to graduate school at New York University's Institute 
of Fine Arts, an ivory tower situated in the James Biddle Duke mansion 
on Fifth Avenue at 78th Street. Amid the oak paneling, marble floors 
and crystal chandeliers, I dedicated myself to lofty interpretations 
of high culture. But clothes were always on my mind. I devoted equal 
effort to studying for an exam about post-Impressionism and deciding 
what to wear to it (something low-cut and flouncy with black stockings, 
very Moulin Rouge). Despite the fact that my repressed desires were 
obvious, I suffered from the same prejudice that afflicts so many 
art historians. Valerie Steele, chief curator of the museum at the 
Fashion Institute of Technology, calls it fear of ``fashion _ which 
most academics see as anti-intellectual, sexist, bourgeois and materialist.'' 
The art historian Ann Hollander, who has devoted her career to studying 
clothing in art, says the problem is much deeper. ``The idea that 
a serious woman is not interested in earrings is a pernicious one 
afflicting our puritanical society, and others before ours,'' she 
said. ``It is a tradition going back to the Bible. It starts with 
the whole idea that the material world and our bodies are bad. Clothes 
and the body are ephemeral. They don't last. This makes people think 
that fashion is on the surface of it all.'' Which is why, as a young 
art historian, I squirreled away my fashion magazines beneath a pile 
of Artforums, buying the latest Vogue in newsstands in the depths 
of the New York subway system. But gradually, a series of experiences 
convinced me I had to own up to the truth _ that how I looked was 
as important to me as what I was looking at. At a 1997 Museum of Modern 
Art retrospective of Willem de Kooning, I was one of the art historians 
hired to lecture for a corporate event. Banana Republic, the sponsors 
of the evening, insisted we wear store-issued pants, a white shirt 
and black sweater around our shoulders. While my colleagues didn't 
seem to mind, I was mortified. You couldn't trade me one of the de 
Koonings to sport something as conformist as chinos. But at the last 
minute, I was let off the hook. The dress code was modified to all-black, 
an acceptable alternative that I was able to accent with a pair of 
red velvet Manolo Blahniks. Discovering other like-minded art historians 
helped me to come clean about my sartorial longings. ``I have always 
adored bold fashion,'' said Linda Nochlin, Lila Acheson Wallace professor 
of modern art at the Institute of Fine Arts, who favors Yohji Yamamoto 
outfits with Oilily socks. ``I'm interested in the sensual, artistic 
and gorgeous part of it. Since I'm not a painter, I'm a clothes person. 
It's a creative expression.'' Ms. Nochlin sees no contradiction between 
her reputation as a feminist academic and her passion for clothes. 
``I wore miniskirts before I had tenure'' she exclaimed. ``What is 
contradictory to feminism is standard, nice-lady mall fashion. I hate 
little suits. Excessive fashion breaks through the domineering sameness 
of fashion. Understatement is not my cup of tea.'' Amy Fine Collins, 
who has been called a muse to Geoffrey Beene, started as a scholar 
of American impressionism before writing about fashion for Vanity 
Fair. ``It's a secret society, art historians who love fashion,'' 
she said. ``Academics are so fearful of things that are useful or 
pleasurable. But I'm simply mad for clothes. My conversion occurred 
after the Geoffrey Beene retrospective at the National Academy of 
Design in 1988. I date my life from that time on.'' Emboldened, I 
started making timid forays into a career in fashion writing, extolling 
a scarf here, a shoe there. Recently, after going to Europe to interview 
a designer, there was no turning back. At the Guy Laroche showroom, 
I met the creative director Alber Elbaz (who has since been named 
the designer for Yves Saint Laurent ready-to-wear). I marveled at 
the details of his designs. I found myself standing ogling a hibiscus-colored 
dress. Mesmerized, I ran my finger along the trompe l'oeil stem of 
a flower constructed out of a seam. That someone could care so much 
about something so small as a stitch was overwhelming. That I was 
in his very presence was too much for me. I started to cry. That was 
the moment I knew I was where I belonged. To be in Paris, the capital 
of haute couture, in a designer's studio, in a room filled with his 
radiant dresses was not only exhilarating, it was liberating. I called 
my mother to tell her all about it, announcing I'd given up my double 
life. All these years I had been a secret cross dresser, a lover of 
finery posing as an intellectual. It was time to burst out of the 
closet. She sounded slightly worried. ``Maybe you'd like to take up 
sewing,'' she said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>