<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981225.0038 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
He had done time in jail and been through the Army and he was closing 
in on the middleweight boxing crown when race riots convulsed the 
nation. He ran afoul of police and was railroaded into prison for 
life for a triple murder he did not commit. (And that's only the back 
story.) Now, 13 years after he was freed through dedicated sleuthing 
and lawyering, Rubin ``Hurricane'' Carter is reaping the ultimate 
vindication. They are making a movie about him. The $30 million feature, 
filmed on location in his former haunts in Paterson, N.J., and Rahway 
State Prison and in Toronto where Carter, 61, now works to free others 
as wrongly convicted, is being directed by Norman Jewison and stars 
Denzel Washington as the ferocious fighter who became a testament 
to corrupted justice and unquenchable faith. The cast so far also 
includes Dan Hedaya, Deborah Unger and David Paymer. With no shortage 
of action to film, the movie has an unusual focus: the relationship 
of the imprisoned fighter and a 16-year-old youth from the Brooklyn 
slums who, 14 years into Carter's captivity, came across a book the 
fighter had written in prison and ended up mobilizing a group of Canadian 
social activists on Carter's behalf. How fully and accurately the 
film will portray the gritty life of Carter and the broader-based 
struggle to free him from the grip of a Javert-like police lieutenant 
will not be known, of course, until its release by Universal late 
next year or early in 2000. ``To me the miracle of this piece, and 
the excitement and connective tissue, is Rubin and this young man,'' 
Jewison said during a break in the filming recently in Paterson. Himself 
a Canadian who directed such powerful race-themed films as ``A Soldier's 
Story,'' also with Denzel Washington, and ``In the Heat of the Night,'' 
Jewison said he had been captivated by Carter's story. Armyan Bernstein, 
the film's co-producer, whose credits include ``The Commitments'' 
and ``A Thousand Acres,'' said he too had been instantly gripped by 
``the second half of the story,'' and about five years ago paid another 
producer more than $1 million for the film rights. Rudy Langlais, 
an executive producer, said the film would not gloss over Carter's 
violent life. To see the fighter now, still limber, solidly built 
and laugh-ready, is to glimpse little of the tormented yet defiant 
figure who spent 19 unnecessary years behind bars. Sitting recently 
in the Manhattan office of his chief constitutional lawyer, Leon Friedman, 
Carter said he was ``honored and proud'' to be the subject of a movie. 
``Yes, I was bitter when I was kidnapped from my family,'' he said. 
``Yes, when my career was torn apart. But bitterness only consumes 
the vessel that protects it.'' Still, his jokes have a sardonic edge 
and one eye is glass, the legacy of botched prison care. ``I have 
one eye that sees out and the other that sees in, and you can't imagine 
what's in there,'' he said. Carter's turbulent life would seem to 
afford material for many movies. ``The kindest thing that I can say 
about my childhood is that I survived it,'' he wrote in his 1974 prison 
autobiography, ``The 16th Round: From Number 1 Contender to Number 
45472.'' At age 11, after nearly stabbing to death a white man who 
he said had tried to sodomize him, he was sent to a state home for 
boys. Halfway through his 10-year sentence, he escaped and joined 
an Army paratroop unit, where he put his fearsome street-fighting 
skills to work as a boxer. Barely out of the service, he landed in 
prison again for purse snatching. But by early 1964, having turned 
pro with only three losses in 23 bouts, he had become the leading 
middleweight challenger, renowned for the fury of his assaults that 
earned him the nickname Hurricane. With racial tensions at a boil 
around the country, off-the-cuff remarks to a reporter that turned 
up later in The Saturday Evening Post cast him as violently anti-police. 
In the early hours of June 17, 1966, two black gunmen invaded a Paterson 
night spot, killing the bartender and a patron and fatally wounding 
a second patron. Carter, out driving with friends, was stopped for 
questioning but released when witnesses did not connect him to the 
shootings. He voluntarily took and passed a lie-detector test. Yet 
four months later, exploiting the accounts of two career thieves who 
said they were witnesses, a relentless police lieutenant charged Carter 
and a driving companion, John Artis, with the slayings. Despite many 
discrepancies in the six-week trial, both were quickly convicted. 
Eight years later, in 1974, the two crucial witnesses recanted, telling 
a reporter for The New York Times, Selwyn Rabb, that police had pressured 
them to frame Carter and Artis. Justice for the two became a cause 
celebre, mobilized by a Bob Dylan anthem, ``Hurricane.'' A new trial 
in Paterson was ordered, but the two witnesses changed their stories 
again, and Carter and Artis were re-convicted. In 1979, as Carter 
continued to maintain his innocence, shunning prison food and garb, 
a group of Canadians doing anti-pollution research at a laboratory 
in Brooklyn met 15-year-old Lesra Martin in a summer job program. 
The Canadians persuaded Lesra's family in Bushwick to let them take 
him to Toronto for schooling. His real name was Lazarus, but pronounced 
with a Southern inflection that became Lesra, and Lesra he remained. 
In 1980, at a library book sale, Lesra discovered a copy of ``The 
16th Round'' and, identifying with the fighter, wrote Carter in prison 
and became his first visitor in five years. ``He found my bottle floating 
in the ocean of life and got the message,'' Carter said recently. 
The Canadians, too, rallied to Carter's cause, as two of them, Sam 
Chaiton and Terry Swinton, later recounted in a 1991 book, ``Lazarus 
and the Hurricane,'' which became a basis (and the working title) 
for the movie. Meanwhile, with new exculpatory evidence tracked down 
by the lawyers Friedman and Myron Beldock and the Canadians, the lawyers 
decided, riskily, not to try to present the new evidence to New Jersey 
courts, but rather to re-argue the old record to a federal judge for 
a writ of habeas corpus to compel New Jersey authorities to explain 
why they were holding Carter. On Nov. 7, 1985, U.S. Judge H. Lee Sarokin 
in Newark ruled that the case had indeed been fatally tainted by corrupted 
evidence and appeals to racial prejudice and ordered Carter released. 
(Artis had already served his sentence.) ``They didn't even say sorry,'' 
Carter said. ``But they didn't make a mistake. They knew what they 
were doing.'' Carter subsequently resettled in Toronto and married 
one of the women in the Canadian group, Lisa Peters, his earlier marriage 
having dissolved while he was in prison. He also became executive 
director of a Toronto group called the Association in Defense of the 
Wrongly Convicted. For the filming in Paterson in November, the clock 
was turned back to the '60s and some chronology was rearranged. A 
scene in the film takes place in the cocktail lounge where Carter 
actually hobnobbed the night of the murders. A black and white television 
set flickers over the bar, the announcer's voice cutting through the 
smoky fog: ``When police moved in to quell the unrest, a riot broke 
out in Harlem and is now spreading to other cities in the Northeast.'' 
At the bar, a black-clad Carter (Washington) with a smooth-shaven 
skull and a circle of whiskers around his mouth and chin, glowers 
at the screen. ``What do they expect?'' he mutters. ``Of course a 
riot broke out. Every time a black man tries to protect his own neighborhood, 
they come in and bust our heads.'' A white reporter goads him on: 
``If you feel so strongly about all this, Hurricane, then why aren't 
you out there instead of sitting in here drinking?'' Carter regards 
him with contempt and says: ``Maybe you're right; maybe I should go 
grab my gun and get me some of them nigger-hating cops. I know I could 
probably get four or five, six, of 'em before they get me. What do 
you think? You want to join us?'' The reporter blanches. ``I guess 
that's a no, huh?'' Carter gibes. ``That's off the record, man. OK?'' 
The reporter is quick to agree, but his face hides a smirk. ``Sure, 
champ, sure,'' he promises. Across the bar, Jewison, in a black turtleneck 
and black baseball cap, looks up exultantly from a video screen. ``Print 
it!'' he orders. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>