<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981225.0085 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After flying more than half way around the world and skirting storms, 
mountain ranges and hostile airspace, three veteran balloonists aboard 
the ICO Global Challenge were forced to ditch Friday in the Pacific 
Ocean. Their landing at sea, 10 miles north of Kahuku Point, Oahu, 
in the Hawaiian islands, marked the end of the most nearly successful 
attempt by any balloonist to achieve the sport's last great goal _ 
a nonstop trip around the world. More than 20 attempts have been made 
during the last two decades, and at least seven other balloons currently 
await launching. While it did not set a distance record, this flight 
had a notable success in crossing Asia from one end to the other. 
The big ICO Global Challenge and its sturdy and waterproof crew capsule 
splashed down gently, and within minutes the three-man crew was picked 
up by a Coast Guard team that included two helicopters, an airplane 
and a cutter. There were no injuries, and the aeronauts smiled and 
waved at onlookers when they arrived on land. The balloon's crew, 
Richard Branson, Per Lindstrand and Steve Fossett, chose to end their 
flight Friday after their meteorology team in England told them that 
an impenetrable low-pressure trough that was stalling them would continue 
to block the winds they had hoped would carry them to America's west 
coast and beyond. The balloon could have remained in the air for another 
week, but would only have had to ditch in the open sea later, nowhere 
near land, according to the team's operations center in England. Ditching 
was nothing new for the crew. All three men were forced down at sea 
in previous attempts at setting distance records. In the most recent 
of these, Steve Fossett, piloting his Solo Spirit last August, was 
blown down into the Coral Sea in the South Pacific by a storm that 
ripped open his balloon. Fossett was nearly killed but was rescued 
by a yacht that providentially happened to be in the area. He had 
flown 14,232 miles from Mendoza, Argentina _ a distance that remains 
the world record. Friday's sea landing was piloted by Lindstrand, 
the most experienced balloonist in the group. His company, Lindstrand 
Balloons Ltd., built the ICO Global Challenge. Until early Friday, 
the 160-foot-high balloon had been traveling at 200 miles an hour 
and the crew had high hopes of defying the odds and reaching the United 
States, crossing the Atlantic, and completing its global circumnavigation 
north of the starting point, in England, before New Year's Day. The 
termination of the flight came as a bitter blow to the balloonists 
and their supporters. In his last message from the balloon capsule, 
Branson said, ``I'm sorry that it's now all over. We raced across 
the Pacific in winds up to 200 miles an hour, but ended up hitting 
a solid trough from one end to the other. It has been like hitting 
up against a solid brick wall. All day and all night we battled to 
get through it.'' Addressing the balloon's fans around the world, 
Branson added: ``We are sorry to let you down. We've had a fascinating 
journey and will now try to be back with our family and friends for 
the rest of Christmas.'' An indication of the interest the balloon 
flight aroused was the number of Internet connections made to the 
team's Web site. By Thursday the site had received more than 40 million 
hits. Branson recognized years ago that one of the main obstacles 
to long-distance ballooning is the closed airspace that bars balloon 
flights over the some North African and Middle Eastern countries, 
as well as Russia and parts of Asia, including China. To smooth the 
way in recent years Branson's team has included protocol experts who 
have brought diplomatic persuasion to bear on inhospitable countries. 
But this has had only limited success. During his latest flight, which 
began eight days ago at Marrakech, Morocco, Branson's team was initially 
denied permission to fly over Libya. After Libya was persuaded to 
let the balloon pass, it had to avoid storms over Turkey, and then 
had to steer a difficult course avoiding Iraq, Iran and Russia. Finally, 
after the balloon had already begun its crossing of the Himalayas 
from Nepal to Tibet, China withdrew it overflight permission and ordered 
the balloon to land at Lhasa, Tibet. By then, the balloon was past 
any place where it could safely land, and China reluctantly gave permission 
to proceed. But on Thursday the Beijing government announced that 
it would permit no more balloon overflights. The ban brought protests 
from balloon teams waiting to join the round-the-world race, including 
the Swiss Breitling Orbiter 3, Britain's Cable and Wireless Balloon, 
and America's J. Renee and Spirit of Peace balloons. China's refusal 
to grant overflight permissions may have ended further round-the-world 
attempts in the northern hemisphere, because China stands athwart 
virtually all usable jet stream winds. However, three other balloon 
teams hope to circle the world next July by flying routes confined 
to the southern hemisphere. The ICO Global Challenge represented a 
high level of technology. With a pressurized, heated crew capsule, 
it was easily capable of cruising above 30,000 feet in jet-stream 
winds. Like all the latest long-duration balloon types, it was a Rozier 
balloon _ a hybrid using both helium gas and hot air for lift. The 
balloon could gain extra lift, particularly during the cool of the 
night, by turning on its big propane burners to warm the air in its 
hot-air compartment. The balloon, which was estimated to cost $1 million, 
was equipped with the latest satellite navigation and communication 
systems and many technical devices for improving safety and comfort. 
Attempts to circle the globe in recent years have all used balloons 
made by two rival British companies _ Lindstrand's company and Cameron 
Balloons Ltd. These companies have jealously concealed their technical 
secrets, including the cost of their long-distance balloons. Ballooning 
has been compared with yacht racing, in that it is primarily a rich 
man's sport. Branson, who has flown or financed many long flights, 
is the billionaire chairman of the Virgin Group of Companies, which 
include Virgin Atlantic Airways. Fossett, a millionaire commodities 
broker who lives in Beaver Creek, Colo., races ocean sailing yachts 
and dog sleds, and competes in swimming and mountain climbing. Ballooning 
is extremely dangerous. Since the first manned balloon took to the 
air in 1783 hundreds of aeronauts have disappeared or been killed, 
but attempts to achieve record altitudes and distances have never 
flagged. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>