<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981225.0073 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
On the East Coast, truck stops offer detective stories on tape for 
drivers to rent at one stop and to return further up the road. In 
Blair, Neb., the public library rents audio versions of best sellers 
to commuters who want to listen while driving into Omaha. In Austin, 
Texas, a retail store that specializes in audio book rentals caters 
to joggers elevating their heart rates as they circle the Town Lake 
Hike and Bike Trail. In the last five years, full-length audio books 
_ as distinct from two-cassette abridged versions _ have grown in 
popularity, but they are expensive, typically $120 for a 12-cassette 
unabridged volume, and that has given rise to a new cottage industry: 
stores that rent them out. All told, the rental industry takes in 
$33.5 million in annual revenues. One reason for renting, instead 
of buying is that most people want to hear a book only once, and ``it's 
not the same appeal as having a beautiful hardcover book on your shelf,'' 
said Katrin Bandhauer, a spokeswoman for Books on Tape Inc., a Costa 
Mesa, Calif., company that both rents and sells audio books through 
the Internet and direct mail. The Audio Publishers Association estimates 
the sales industry's revenues at $2.1 billion, a number bloated by 
including self-help cassettes and the like. The rental industry is 
in rather a state of disarray, resembling the early days of video 
rental, when thousands of stores with names other than Blockbuster 
flourished. But unlike the early video rental companies, the disparate 
audio rental groups all appeal to distinct demographics. The Audio 
Publishers Association plans to release its first study of the sundry 
rental markets in the summer. Now, the market comprises two companies 
that rent to truckers; two major retail rental chains; three direct 
mail and Internet companies that generate at least $1 million each 
in rental revenues; two companies that rent audio books directly to 
libraries, and about 60 independently operated retail rental stores 
responsible for around $150,000 apiece in revenues. As recently as 
1991, when Paul Rush opened his first Earful of Books store in Austin, 
a third of the people who walked in the door thought audio books were 
only for the blind or visually impaired, he said. The chain now has 
eight stores, where customers pay $6 to rent a 12-hour unabridged 
audio book for three days. ``It's a life style business,'' Rush said. 
``People are looking for ways to use their time. If you're stuck in 
traffic, how much talk radio can one rational person listen to?'' 
Indeed, traffic gave rise to the rental concept, which was first successful 
with the ultimate commuters _ long-haul truck drivers. For almost 
a decade, John Rishell has been listening to audio books while he 
hauls paper products for Milton Transportation of Milton, Pa. Two 
companies, Audio Adventures of Boulder, Colo., and Books in Motion 
of Spokane, Wash., maintain display racks of mystery and adventure 
stories that truck drivers can rent at one stop and return at another. 
Both employ Rishell to check their display cases. ``The drivers are 
a very captive market for us because they're on the long haul, they're 
tired, they're bored with the radio,'' said Don Gruidell, president 
of Audio Adventures, which also deals with libraries. At first, Audio 
Adventures sold only its unabridged audio books to libraries. Then 
Anne Keenan, a librarian in Blair, Neb., told a salesman that patrons 
in her town of 6,860 had already heard all of the books on the shelves, 
so no one was checking them out. Instead, commuters were going to 
truck stops for new audio books. So, Ms. Keenan arranged to pay $720 
every six months for a supply of 80 audio books. Every 90 days, she 
exchanges around 40 books her patrons have already heard. ``They come 
in and ask, `All right, when are the new ones coming in?' '' she said. 
Ms. Keenan's practice led to a separate business for Audio Adventures' 
Landmark division, which now has similar agreements with around 1,600 
libraries. Elsewhere, the founders of several rental businesses are 
former traveling salesmen who figured that educated, upper-middle-income 
commuters who spend hours a day in their cars must be as bored with 
the radio as they were. Craig Black, founder of Blackstone Audiobooks 
in Ashland, Ore., said he caused three minor car crashes while trying 
to read and drive simultaneously before a friend gave him the recorded 
copy of George Orwell's ``1984.'' Listening to it inspired him to 
start his business. As Americans jog more and drive more, it may appear 
there is a stable future for the rental market. But there is one caveat: 
Audio book customers tend to be readers who are pressed for time. 
Customers who spend a lot of time in their cars but would not read 
a book if they had the time are unlikely to rent audio books. ``To 
enjoy audio books you have to be literate by nature,'' said Henry 
Trentman, president of Recorded Books Inc., of Prince Frederick, Md., 
noting that some people have an attitude of, ``Reading wasn't any 
fun in school, so why should it be fun now?'' That makes it unlike 
the home video market, which appealed to a much broader audience, 
he said, because more people enjoy movies and television. Still, the 
books on cassettes are growing. As the retail chains Talking Book 
World, based in West Bloomfield, Mich., and Earful of Books expand 
toward each other's turfs, new Internet and direct mail companies 
continue to pop up across the country, and most major publishing companies 
are releasing audio versions concurrently with hardcover books. While 
changing technology may soon allow a cheaper way to sell unabridged 
audio books, publishing companies are keeping watch on the rental 
industry in acknowledgment that unabridged audio books cost too much 
and, as Rush flatly said, ``Two-cassette abridgments are dead.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>