<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981225.0047 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It was a day of healing and cautious hope in this ancient Javanese 
town, a town that ``almost died,'' in the words of one resident, when 
it suffered the worst damage anywhere in the riots that swept Indonesia 
in May. On this day of hope, a recent Saturday, hundreds of people 
flocked to the grand opening of a modest two-story Matahari department 
store, the first to reopen since all three of the city's Matahari 
stores were burned down seven months ago. Noisy columns of motorbikes 
buzzed back and forth through the streets in a new weekly ritual, 
the riders cheering and waving the banners of a welter of political 
parties in what amounts to the unofficial start of a campaign for 
national elections next June. But the optimism of that sunny Saturday 
was short-lived. Half a year after the riots and the resignation of 
President Suharto, Indonesia is a nation heading down two diverging 
paths: toward stability and a democratic future, and toward chaos, 
violence and social disintegration. With the unexpected resignation 
of Suharto in May, during a tumult of riots, demonstrations, political 
defections and military feuds, Indonesia was suddenly released, rudderless, 
from the grip of the strongman who had ruled for 32 years. He left 
behind a hated political structure that no longer commanded the respect 
or fear of the public, desperately trying to reform itself as the 
country heaved and quaked around it. As midnight fell in Solo a few 
hours after the parades ended, the darker side of Indonesia's perilous 
future reasserted itself. As they had for several weeks, scores of 
youngsters staged late-night motorbike races up and down the main 
streets. On this night, responding to the complaints of neighbors 
and perhaps to the euphoria of the day's events, the police made the 
mistake of asserting their authority: They ordered the youngsters 
to stop. The result, in retrospect, was predictable: a riot, the first 
in Solo since May. It was a painfully familiar scene in today's Indonesia: 
police posts were burned, telephone booths and stop lights were smashed, 
ornamental plants were uprooted, cars were overturned and set on fire, 
and windows and storefronts were vandalized. One person died; dozens 
were hospitalized, including four police officers. Only by firing 
warning shots into the air did security forces prevent the mob from 
burning down the newly opened Matahari store. ``The Indonesian situation 
is very fragile,'' said Mulyanto Utomo, the young editor of the daily 
newspaper Solopos. ``We are vulnerable to unrest. Indonesian people 
have been in chains for 30 years and now everyone wants to shout. 
Nobody is in control, nobody obeys the authorities.'' The tight grip 
of Indonesia's strongman has been replaced by a fever of ``reformasi,'' 
a shapeless term for reform that leaves room for everything from nation-building 
to ruin here, in the fourth-most-populous nation, with more than 200 
million people. Soehardi, who heads the anthropology department at 
the University of Gadja Mata in nearby Jogjakarta, described the national 
mood as anomie: the disorientation and disorder that follow the collapse 
of standards of behavior. ``Things are more chaotic,'' he said. ``People 
don't care whether what they do disturbs other people. Even the traffic 
has become more chaotic. Things used to be controlled from the top 
down. People never learned to impose their own internal controls. 
Nobody knows the limits anymore.'' If all goes well, the coming year 
will see the country's first free election since the 1950s, leading 
to an electoral assembly that will name a new president, with the 
flourishing new political freedom reported by a free press. The main 
political figures who have emerged this year have generally embraced 
this process and are committed to a democratic future. At the same 
time, Indonesia appears to be facing one of the most dangerous years 
in its history, more unstable and more volatile than it has been in 
decades. The economy is shrinking faster than it ever has, giving 
rise to anger and outbursts of violence. Crime is rising, along with 
a general sense of lawlessness and fear. Continuing student demonstrations 
in the capital are threatening the peace and testing the patience 
of a weakened and resentful military. In recent weeks the country 
has seen the first eruptions of what could grow into violent religious 
conflicts. A host of issues remain unresolved, each carrying with 
it a threat of violence: the political role of Islam in this overwhelmingly 
Muslim nation; the role of the ethnic Chinese, who control much of 
the wealth and have been the targets of much of the violence, and 
the issue of whether to try Suharto and how to clean up the tangled 
mess of corruption he left behind. Some analysts now say Indonesia 
could ride out the economic crisis, which has brought a wave of joblessness, 
inflation, bankruptcies and bank closings. Though prices have risen, 
the widespread food shortages that were predicted earlier this year 
have not materialized. There has not so far been an explosion of food 
riots or riots by unemployed workers. But an epidemic of violence 
has shaken the country, touched off, as in Solo, by an unsettling 
variety of causes. Many riots are spontaneous, but some seem, at least 
in part, to have been fomented by competing forces whose goals often 
remain obscure. ``There are those who want to keep the situation unstable, 
but we don't know who they are,'' said Mulyanto, the editor. Most 
fearful are the ethnic Chinese, who often face abuse in the streets. 
Many wealthy families have fled Indonesia this year. Others have barricaded 
their neighborhoods and formed armed patrols. One young Chinese resident 
is constantly asked, here in her own hometown, where she comes from. 
``I wish I could have an operation on my face,'' she said. With the 
loosening of the grip of the central government, many in Indonesia 
have come to fear the unpredictable violence of the masses. Echoing 
the comments of some editors in Jakarta, Mulyanto said newspapers 
now tread carefully so as not to offend a restive readership. ``We 
have to be very cautious about what we write,'' he said. ``There are 
some things we decide not to publish. For example, if we offend a 
village chief he may send some men to us to complain. Sometimes they 
bring machetes with them.'' Among the dangers is the push toward democracy 
itself and the power struggles that will accompany the year of political 
transition. The slow pace and uncertainties of the process almost 
invite turmoil in a nation that has no tradition of electoral winners 
and losers, only of winners. ``Things are surely going to get dangerous 
before the election,'' said Herman Untoro, the owner of a tiny hardware 
store. ``I'm afraid of the campaign, afraid we'll have May all over 
again. People in Solo are frightened and confused.'' Like others here, 
he said, he has learned the habit of hoarding staples in anticipation 
of unrest: rice, noodles, cooking oil, soap, detergent. And he was 
reminded on this recent Saturday night that just about anything can 
set off a riot. He said he pulls down his metal shutters whenever 
the election campaigners come by on their motorcycles, whenever there 
is a public holiday, and even on junior high school graduation day. 
Part of the problem is that Indonesia is trying to move forward while 
dragging its past along with it. As if in a political science experiment, 
the dictator was plucked from the tip of the pyramid, but his power 
structure remained intact and was given the task of reforming itself. 
The new election laws, aimed at opening the political system to free 
competition, are being drawn up by legislators who owe their own seats 
to Suharto's monopoly on power. The painful withdrawal of the military 
from its dominant role in politics can come only with the cooperation 
of the military itself. Suharto's corrupt wealth is being investigated 
by people who grew wealthy along with him. And the man overseeing 
this destruction of Suharto's political legacy is the former president's 
hand-picked former deputy and best friend, President B.J. Habibie. 
Much of the tension in the streets today comes from this paradox. 
Student demonstrators, carrying the banner of the country's idealists, 
are refusing to accept a new order built on the foundations of the 
old one. ``You cannot wash a dirty shirt in dirty water,'' said Chrisma 
Albandjar, a graduate student. The demonstrations, which have led 
to repeated violent clashes in Jakarta, have begun to exasperate some 
middle-class Indonesians, who see them now as a destabilizing factor. 
The exasperation is fueled by the fact that the students have no clear 
agenda and seem motivated more by the enthusiasms of youth than by 
reason. And yet it is their continuing pressure _ along with an aggressive 
new free press that broadly reflects public opinion _ that is forcing 
Suharto's heirs to move forward with reforms, like it or not. ``I'm 
amazed by the extent to which the students continue to be almost the 
only impetus for change,'' said David Timberman, director of the Jakarta 
office of the National Democratic Institute. ``It is interesting to 
think that what is sustaining this process, as halting and fragile 
as it is, still has such a small base.'' The students' power seems 
to come from the fact that they represent the desire of Indonesians 
for change, vague as that notion is. ``We support the students as 
long as they are not violent,'' said Dono, 33, who sells T-shirts 
in the Klewer Market in Solo and who like many Indonesians uses just 
one name. ``It was the students who forced Suharto to resign. Now 
they want clean government and also the rule of law and human rights.'' 
Outwardly, Suharto wrung out politics from the daily lives of his 
citizens, barring political activity except for rare and carefully 
controlled places and times. But a passion for reform seems to have 
built among his people as they grew better informed. If Suharto's 
men thought they were making a tactical retreat when they embraced 
reformasi in the early days after his resignation, they have been 
forced by an overwhelming national will to proceed with real reforms. 
Signs of reformasi fever are everywhere in Solo, a slogan spray-painted 
on storefronts all around town by merchants hoping to save their shops 
from vandals and rioters. ``I Want Freedom,'' reads a full-page announcement, 
embellished with a clenched fist, on the back page of a newspaper. 
It is an advertisement for Djarum cigarettes. The same vendor who 
sells Solopos offers a fistful of slim paperbacks, each bearing a 
different caricature of Suharto on the cover. Their titles are ``Suharto's 
10 Biggest Sins,'' ``Suharto's 20 Biggest Stupidities'' and ``Suharto's 
30 Biggest Lies.'' All along the batik stalls in the Klewer Market, 
people study a questionnaire in the newspaper Bangkit. ``Name the 
most corrupt ministers in Suharto's cabinet,'' the newspaper commands. 
``The first 75 respondents will win valuable prizes.'' Bangkit said 
18,549 people had responded to the previous questionnaire, ``Does 
Habibie have the guts to put Suharto on trial?'' The respondents were 
not optimistic: 85.6 percent said no. This is heady stuff in a population 
that grew up being treated by their leaders like children, seen but 
not heard. Now they are raising their voices, and for most of the 
people in Solo, from poor laborers to middle-class shoppers, reformasi 
really means economic revival. It was the economic crisis, after all, 
that roused this nation to push Suharto from office. It was the destruction 
and reopening of the Matahari store that symbolized the near-death 
and rebirth of Solo. For Sutarni, 37, who lives in a Solo slum where 
people sort garbage for resale, the meaning of reformasi is simple: 
lower prices. She wants to be able to continue sending her only son, 
Mulyadi, 13, to school. Asked what she would do if she had to feed 
three or four children, like her neighbors, she responded, ``Yah! 
Stress!'' For Supardyo, 62, who has farmed the same fields near here 
since he was a boy, ``the most important thing is the price of fertilizer.'' 
Climbing down from a breadfruit tree where he was hacking off leaves 
to feed his goats, Supardyo said the issues of corruption, democracy 
and reform are city issues. ``In the village, nothing changes,'' he 
said. ``We go to the fields, we plant rice, we plant cassava, we go 
home, we wait for the harvest.'' But in these hard times, other farmers 
said, people have been stealing harvested rice from sheds and pulling 
cassava plants right out of the ground. Even among some students here, 
personal livelihood takes precedence over politics. ``I have a bigger 
challenge,'' said Engel, 25, an anthropology student. ``Job, money. 
I'm going to have to make a living.'' And at the newly opened Matahari 
store the subject was, of course, shopping. ``Well, I like to buy 
a lot of lipstick, and since Matahari burned down I haven't been able 
to get any Revlon,'' said Siahaan, 55, the wife of a retired government 
official. ``It's so important to have it back, so important, because 
we need it. But it's so small! No designer clothes! The one we had 
before was complete, complete, complete-plete-plete.'' No one knows 
whether, or for how long, the window of democratic freedoms will remain 
open. Many reforms, like freedom of assembly and freedom of the press, 
are flourishing only because of the mood of the government; no laws 
have been changed. Already one of Habibie's ministers, Juwono Sudarsono, 
has suggested that Indonesia may be reforming too much, too fast for 
its own good. And Habibie himself has shown some anti-democratic tendencies, 
arresting respected former generals and other officials who criticized 
him, and backing a tentative plan to raise a civilian security force 
of 40,000, an idea that makes human rights advocates shudder. ``It's 
like a war,'' Andreas Harsono, a local journalist, said, speaking 
of the reform movement and the need to build new institutions. ``You 
have soldiers winning battle by battle or losing battle by battle. 
But if these fighting soldiers have already occupied territory, you 
need another unit to secure the territory you have taken. This is 
not happening.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>