<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981225.0143 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The seasonal rituals of the music world continue apace: having come 
through the weeks of ``Messiah'' performances, concerts of orchestral 
and choral carols and secular but bright-spirited Baroque works, all 
pointing the way to Christmas, it is time for the inexorable rush 
to the New Year. Musically, that means leaving Baroque times behind 
and leaping to the late 19th century for a surfeit of waltzes and 
polkas by Johann Strauss and his extended family. ``Die Fledermaus,'' 
with new dialogue by Betty Comden and Adolph Green, returned to the 
Metropolitan Opera on Christmas Eve, and its run includes a New Year's 
Eve performance. Strauss waltzes will ring in the New Year at the 
New York Philharmonic as well. The appeal of this music at a time 
of the year when one inevitably ponders both past and future cannot 
be simply that it is frothy and light. Perhaps Strauss' evocation 
of the waning years of Hapsburg Vienna produce a nostalgia for a moment 
in Austro-Germanic culture in which elegance and decadence mingled 
and in which the horrors of the 20th century were still unimaginable. 
The catalytic figure in the Comden-Green reconception might find this 
nostalgic impulse interesting, in a beard-stroking way. In this new 
version, the character heretofore known as Dr. Falke has become a 
Dr. Fledermaus, although listeners will recognize him as Freud long 
before he adopts the name. Other characters keep their names but have 
new occupations. Rosalinda, formerly a wealthy housewife, is now an 
opera singer with a weakness for tenors, a condition for which she 
was being treated by Fledermaus. Her husband, Eisenstein, though a 
friend of Fledermaus, has maligned the doctor in print as a quack. 
Prince Orlovsky remains a melancholy figure at his own glittering 
party, but he too is now a patient of Dr. Fledermaus. In truth, Ms. 
Comden and Green were constrained by the fact that the original arias 
were retained, meaning that the major plot points, characterizations 
and relationships were already in place. Still, there is a long tradition 
of updating the dialogue in ``Fledermaus.'' Ms. Comden and Green join 
that tradition and uphold it by filling their text with puns that 
are good or bad enough to elicit groans. But they have freshened the 
work nicely. Their major innovation, apart from turning Falke into 
Fledermaus/Freud, was taking a scalpel to the third act. In their 
telling, Frosch, the jailer, is a chronically unemployed actor. Instead 
of a drunken scene, he enacts his own pun-filled play, ``The Bell-Ringer 
of Notre Dame.'' The principals in the cast handled the new dialogue 
gamely, in English, and brought considerable charm to most of the 
arias, which are sung in German. The Danish baritone Bo Skovhus, making 
his company debut as Eisenstein, proved a charismatic actor and sang 
with both power and playfulness. As Rosalinda, Carol Vaness was excessively 
melodramatic at first but slipped into the role nicely once she arrived 
at Orlovsky's party incognito. Vocally she was in fine shape. It was 
announced that Elizabeth Norberg-Schulz was singing Adele with a sore 
throat, but her malady seemed to take a toll only on her speaking 
voice. The Met's idea of casting a countertenor, Jochen Kowalski, 
as Orlovsky is interesting in principal, but it doesn't work. When 
a mezzo sings the role, it has an androgynous quality that goes a 
long way toward making the Prince's sadness seem touching. Kowalski's 
bright, spirited rendering of the role seemed out of place, as did 
the occasional breaks between his upper and lower registers. Michael 
Schade appeared to relish the chance to sing bits of famous tenor 
arias (including a couple by Puccini that had not yet been composed 
by 1899, the announced setting of this version of ``Fledermaus''). 
And Earle Patriarco (Fledermaus), John Del Carlo (Mittelmann, the 
prison warden previously known as Frank) and Max Wright (Frosch) contributed 
to the proceedings amusingly. The production is essentially the one 
that Otto Schenk staged in 1986, with sets by Guenther Schneider-Siemssen 
and costumes by Peter J. Hall, but it has been restaged by David Kneuss, 
with new choreography (a lot of dancing waiters in Act II) by Robert 
La Fosse. Patrick Summers, who will become the music director of the 
Houston Grand Opera next season, made his house debut with a sparkling, 
gracefully paced performance that had both the warmth and rhythmic 
fluidity that the style demands. PRODUCTION NOTES: `DIE FLEDERMAUS' 
Operetta in three acts by Johann Strauss, libretto by Carl Haffner 
and Richard Genee, after a French vaudeville ``Le Reveillon'' by Henri 
Meilhac and Ludovic Halevy; conductor, Patrick Summers; production 
by Otto Schenk; staged by David Kneuss; sets by Guenther Schneider-Siemssen; 
costumes by Peter J. Hall; lighting by Gil Wechsler; choreography 
by Robert La Fosse. At the Metropolitan Opera. With: Carol Vaness 
(Rosalinde), Elizabeth Norberg-Schulz (Adele), Jochen Kowalski (Prince 
Orlofsky), Michael Schade (Alfred), Anthony Laciura (Dr. Blind), Bo 
Skovhus (Eisenstein), Earle Patriarco (Dr. Fledermaus), John Del Carlo 
(Friedrich Mittelmann), Max Wright (Frosch), Jennifer Welch (Ida) 
and Richard Holmes (Footman). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>