<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981225.0070 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Sometime during the year, when I was intent on picking tomatoes or 
trying to stay ahead of the weeds in the annual flower beds, the mountain 
ash died. It had seemed healthy going into summer, fully leafed out 
and looking sturdy on its spot above the foundation of an old ``bank 
barn.'' The barn had burned to the ground decades ago, leaving a partly 
collapsed stone wall holding back a mound of earth that had been banked 
up to permit access to its upper level. The earthen mound was a scenic 
overlook for much of the farm, and the ash tree was planted there 
more than a decade ago with the idea that one day it would provide 
shade and something to lean against while contemplating the scenery. 
It was ready to do that, having reached a height of 20 feet, with 
a beautifully symmetrical framework of branches. Borers, I decided, 
after dejectedly digging around the tree's base. Ash trees are susceptible 
to the destructive insects, which do their work out of the gardener's 
sight. Moths lay eggs at the base of the trunk and larvae burrow into 
the wood, creating tunnels that interrupt the flow of nutrients and 
weaken the tree. If the larvae are numerous enough, or there are other 
stresses, the tree can die. I might not have been able to destroy 
the borers, which requires chemical weapons that I don't use, but 
I could have helped the tree in other ways. Wrapping the lower trunk 
with strips of burlap would have prevented some egg-laying. Watering 
the tree during the summer's drought might have helped it survive. 
It seemed well enough established not to make that necessary, but 
the borers clearly sapped its ability to fend for itself. So the ash 
becomes one of the year's disappointments, and a particularly painful 
one. Every gardening season brings a mixed bag of successes and failures. 
A stroll through the garden at year's end brings them back to mind, 
like the monkshood that finally achieved the glory envisioned when 
it was planted three years ago. Its stalks are blackened now by frost, 
but to remember those lofty spires of blue turban-like flowers is 
to yearn for it to be autumn again. But not too soon, because skipping 
ahead to autumn would mean bypassing spring and the blooming mounds 
of cheddar pinks, fortuitously planted in a sandy site that they love. 
Their needle-fine blue-green foliage still looks good in December. 
Behind them, the inelegantly named pigsqueak (Bergenia cordifolia) 
is not as happy with its plot. Drought-tolerant it may be, but tolerance 
is not the same as really liking it. So along with the reflections 
comes a mental memo: Move the pigsqueak next spring. The German irises, 
too, need attention. They should have been divided after blooming 
in late June, but I must have been distracted by something else. The 
foxgloves, maybe, which were putting on a spectacular show. The foxgloves' 
rosettes of foliage are still green and healthy-looking, and I dare 
hope for a repeat performance next year. But a good year for foxgloves 
means a cool and rainy spring, which might not be so good for tomatoes. 
This year's struggled early with blight, and were late to ripen. They 
righted themselves when spring's rain turned to summer's drought, 
and developed the deep flavor that home-grown tomatoes ought to have. 
So the tomatoes were flavorful, but at a price. Drought is not good 
for the wild asters, jewelweed and goldenrod that decorate autumn. 
The ridge behind the farm, usually blazing crimson, orange and yellow 
through October, was somber this year. To conserve moisture, many 
trees shed their foliage early, or the leaves simply turned brown 
and clung despondently until a stiff wind stripped them away. It is 
thus every year. A garden is ruled by the vagaries of weather as much 
as by the gardener's ambition or lack of it. Each year the combination 
of heat or cold, of moisture or drought, is perfectly suited to one 
thing growing in the garden and perfectly antagonistic to another. 
This assumes that the entire space has not been given over to roses 
or columbines or some other single species, in which case the season 
is likely to be an utter disaster more often than it is a smashing 
success. My lavender this year bloomed as never before, and even now 
the lower foliage shows no sign of the late-season mildew that forces 
me to prune it back heavily each year to encourage new, clean growth. 
It could not have felt more at home if I'd had troubadours singing 
Provencal melodies to it. My Japanese primroses, however, slipped 
quietly into what I hope is dormancy and not death. Even the perpetually 
damp spot where the primroses are planted dried out this year. There 
were no catastrophic weather events of the sort that wreak instant 
havoc _ no limb-shattering ice storms, no foliage-shredding hailstorms, 
no residual hurricane rains that can turn a glorious bed of zinnias 
into a patch of fungus-blackened sticks practically overnight. For 
the lack of such disasters, I am grateful, and the year's reprieve 
will leave me better able to be philosophical about them when they 
happen next year. But I mourn the mountain ash. It was a fine tree, 
and I will miss it. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>