<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981225.0105 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
On a frigid, gray December 28th in 1958, Alan Ameche, the Baltimore 
Colts 6-foot 222-pound fullback, blasted 1 yard over right tackle 
to score a dramatic overtime touchdown in the 1958 National Football 
League championship game at Yankee Stadium. The Horse's 1-yard run 
pulled the entire NFL into the end zone with him. Baltimore's dramatic 
23-17 overtime victory against the New York Giants, which was televised 
nationally for the first time, was the first sudden-death overtime 
game in NFL history and generally is credited with catapulting the 
appeal of the NFL. Forty years later, the new Giants, now working 
out of New Jersey in Giants Stadium, face a different kind of sudden 
death. On the final week of a bittersweet season, the Giants travel 
to Philadelphia for a game that may be instant elimination or that 
could be slow, torturous agony. Or, it may not be a death at all, 
but a rejuvenation. The Giants go to Philadelphia needing one victory 
and two miracles to reach the playoffs. First, the Giants need to 
beat the Philadelphia Eagles. And that won't be easy on a day that's 
sure to be filled with emotion. Sunday may well be Ray Rhodes' final 
game as head coach of the Eagles (3-12). He expects to be dismissed 
after the season. Sunday will also be the final game in the meandering 
15-year career of Irving Fryar, an Eagles wide receiver. And the Giants 
need help. They need Cincinnati to beat Tampa Bay, then they need 
the lowly Chargers to upset the Cardinals, who are looking for their 
first playoff appearance in a non-strike season since 1975. Giants 
defensive end Michael Strahan said, ``It feels good to be in the playoff 
hunt, compared to a couple of weeks ago. Only problem is, our fate 
not only rests in our hands, but in other teams' hands, too.'' At 
least one pair of hands are injured. Bengals quarterback Jeff Blake 
fractured his wrist in last week's victory over Pittsburgh and won't 
play in Tampa Bay. But that may not be as bleak as it appears. The 
Bengals haven't had a winning record since 1990, but they have won 
their final home game in each of the last 5 years and in 9 of the 
last 10. There's also the issue of cold weather. Tampa Bay is 0-16 
when the temperature is under 40 degrees at kickoff. The Bucs have 
won only six road games in December in franchise history. A cold spell 
hit Cincinnati last week, sending wind chills below zero just in time 
for Sunday's game. But even if the Bengals win, the Giants need yet 
another miracle: they need San Diego to upset the surging Cardinals 
in Arizona. Given the spiritual morass of the Chargers, this might 
be a greater stretch than the Bengals defeating Tampa Bay. Back in 
September, the Arizona-San Diego game was scripted as a battle between 
a pair of wealthy, high-gloss young quarterbacks: Jake Plummer and 
Ryan Leaf. Plummer is the NFL's second-richest player, and Leaf has 
been called a $31.25 million mistake. Plummer has been on fire, Leaf 
has been like a fire raging out of control. Leaf cursed a TV cameraman 
in the locker room after a dismal performance early in the season, 
then went into a tirade at a reporter for writing the story. Leaf 
threw a football at the head of the same reporter, but, like most 
of his passes this season, that one missed its mark. Leaf, who went 
to the University of Washington, went to Pullman, Wash., and was accused 
of throwing beer on two students, spitting on the outside window of 
one place and then saying, ``I can buy you all.'' That bravado was 
in contrast to his reaction after a horrific game against the Giants 
when he threw four interceptions. Afterward, he wondered whether he 
was good enough to play in the NFL. ``It kind of feels like someone 
ripped my heart out of me,'' he said. Dec. 28, 1958, is regarded as 
the day that professional football took a major step toward becoming 
the signature sport in the United States. It was the day that pro 
football and network television were married. Leaf, sadly, typifies 
the character of so many of the grandchildren of that union: spoiled, 
brash, reckless. Far from the relative glory of 1958 _ when players 
were underpaid, shackled to the team and thankful for it _ the young 
players' only frame of reference is the sort of payment-first, performance-later, 
if ever, attitude embodied by Leaf. The Giants' season, in many ways, 
is a byproduct of that attitude: a great season in 1997 followed by 
unfounded overconfidence in 1998. Now, humility has finally set in 
as a young generation of Giants faces another Sudden Death scenario 
40 years later. The season could miraculously continue or it could 
come to a screeching halt. What a way to celebrate an anniversary. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>