<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981225.0093 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
All 13 are lawyers, with legal degrees from universities as diverse 
as Yale and Brigham Young. More than half have worked as prosecutors, 
targeting people ranging from street punks to soldiers, militia members 
to elected officials. But despite that breadth of knowledge and experience, 
the Republican congressmen appointed as managers of President Clinton's 
impeachment trial in the Senate have as many questions as answers 
about the historic roles they are set to play. It is their job to 
argue and present the case for removing the president from office, 
but they have yet to decide how best to do that, in part because they 
are still dusting off the rules and rummaging through history for 
relevant guideposts. The only Senate trial of a president was 130 
years ago, when President Andrew Johnson was acquitted. ``There's 
not much precedent,'' Rep. Christopher Cannon, R-Utah, one of the 
managers, said. ``I think we're all trying to figure it out as we 
go.'' The managers, all from the group of 21 Republicans on the House 
Judiciary Committee who voted on Dec. 11 to send articles of impeachment 
against Clinton to the full House, plan to return to Washington from 
their home districts on Tuesday, a week before most other lawmakers 
come back, for their first meeting to discuss trial strategy. In interviews 
with six of them over the last few days, it became clear that if a 
trial does take place, Rep. Henry Hyde, R-Ill., chairman of the Judiciary 
Committee, would essentially be the lead lawyer, and that each of 
the other 12 managers might focus on a given witness or area of evidence. 
``So if I had Vernon Jordan, I'd have him all the way through,'' said 
Rep. Bill McCollum, R-Fla., referring to a close friend of Clinton's 
who tried to help Monica Lewinsky find a job. Rep. Steve Chabot, R-Ohio, 
envisioned a similar allocation of responsibilities, saying he expected 
that ``each of us will become an expert on a given aspect of the case.'' 
``You may have somebody who focuses on perjury and somebody who focuses 
on obstruction of justice,'' Chabot added, referring to the two articles 
of impeachment that were voted by the House last Saturday. ``You may 
have one focus on the history of `high crimes and misdemeanors,' what 
the historical basis of that is.'' The managers said there would be 
outside lawyers helping them to prepare the case, and that David Schippers, 
who served as chief investigative counsel for Republicans on the Judiciary 
Committee, would be among them. But they added that the congressmen 
themselves would probably be the only members of the management team 
to make oral remarks in the Senate. The impeachment managers, in addition 
to Hyde, Cannon, McCollum and Chabot, are Reps. Bob Barr of Georgia, 
Ed Bryant of Tennessee, Steve Buyer of Indiana, Charles Canady of 
Florida, George Gekas of Pennsylvania, Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, 
Asa Hutchinson of Arkansas, James Rogan of California and F. James 
Sensenbrenner Jr. of Wisconsin. While the fact that all belong to 
the same political party distinguishes this group of managers from 
the groups that prosecuted the most recent judicial impeachment trials 
in the Senate, those prosecutions were bipartisan from the start. 
Trial managers usually comprise only House members who supported impeachment. 
Those interviewed said they were chosen from the pool of Republicans 
on the Judiciary Committee because they expressed an interest in serving. 
Like that pool, they are generally more conservative than a random 
sampling of Republicans in the House, particularly on social issues. 
Nelson Warfield, a Republican political consultant, characterized 
them as ``ideologically driven conservatives with a legalistic background.'' 
They are all white, all men and, as a group, they are relatively new 
to Congress, reflecting the surge of conservative Republicans in the 
House in the 1990s. Only four of the 13 _ Hyde, Sensenbrenner, McCollum 
and Gekas _ have served in the House for more than six years. Seven 
have served less than four. Two managers _ Rogan and Canady _ began 
their political careers as Democrats, then switched parties. Four 
of them _ McCollum, Buyer, Bryant and Graham _ have worked as military 
lawyers. And three of them _ Barr, Bryant and Hutchinson _ are former 
U.S. attorneys. Hyde, Sensenbrenner and Gekas participated in Senate 
trials of impeached judges in the 1980s, but those cases were argued 
mainly in front of small Senate committees. It is presumed that the 
president's trial would be argued in its entirety before the full 
Senate. But because they are moving into unexplored territory, the 
trial managers are still trying to determine such basic matters as 
the procedure for calling witnesses and the proper way to divide tasks 
among different members of the team. In some instances the rules are 
fuzzy; in others, it is up to the Senate to tell the managers how 
to proceed. It is clear that perhaps the most important decision they 
face is how much direct testimony to present. The Judiciary Committee 
itself did not call witnesses directly involved in the case, relying 
instead on evidence gathered by the independent counsel, Kenneth Starr, 
as well as constitutional scholars and other legal experts. The trial 
managers could choose not to call many witnesses and to rely instead 
on the existing record of depositions and other materials, as long 
as either the president's lawyers agreed or the Senate ruled to admit 
that record as evidence. The managers said they were cognizant of 
the limited public appetite for a prolonged proceeding. ``We do not 
want to circus-ize this, to coin a word,'' Gekas said. Cannon added 
that from a tactical perspective, it could be in the managers' best 
interests to show the senators a succinct itinerary. ``If we go in 
there with an eight-month prosecution plan and witnesses they find 
offensive,'' he said, ``that will strengthen the hand of those who 
don't want to deal with this and want a censure.'' All of the managers 
interviewed noted that one of the many oddities of this process, which 
casts them as prosecuting attorneys of sorts, is that a deal or plea 
bargain could be struck without their consent, by a simple majority 
vote in the Senate. Among the managers, Hutchinson finds himself in 
a particularly interesting situation that has prompted some Democrats 
to complain that he should not be a manager. His brother, Tim, is 
a Republican senator from Arkansas who will sit in judgment of the 
president, should the case come to the point of a Senate vote on a 
verdict. But Hutchinson said that this coincidence was only one of 
many ways in which a Senate trial is exempt from the rules and norms 
of a usual legal proceeding, and noted that three of the newly elected 
senators who will act as jurors had already cast votes on impeachment 
as members of Congress. He also said he has deliberately avoided talking 
with his brother about the evidence against Clinton, and would continue 
to do so when he sees his brother over the holidays. ``There are a 
lot of other things to talk about,'' Hutchinson said. ``You can talk 
about the politics of it without talking about the facts of it.'' 
Few of the managers said they would be able to purge impeachment from 
their minds until their first team meeting; all left town after the 
impeachment vote carrying research materials on Senate trials. Canady 
said in a telephone interview that he planned to devote some time 
in the coming days to reading ``Grand Inquest,'' a 1992 book about 
two Senate trials written by Chief Justice William Rehnquist of the 
Supreme Court, who would preside over Clinton's trial. Canady said 
he would also root for his wife, who is due to have a child on Jan. 
19, to push up the schedule. ``It would be a blessing if this child 
came a bit early, like this year,'' Canady said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>