<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981225.2000.2010 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
So, how did you do this year? Did you survive the holiday onslaught 
of commercial advertising? The deluge of products, bargains, last 
minute holiday sales. 'Tis the season when the message to spend, spend, 
spend hits many of us like a blinding snowstorm. Madison Avenue advertisers 
have been working especially hard this past year to try and target 
the Spanish speaking customer. The World's Jeb Sharp reports in the 
rise of the Hispanic consumer. Take the subway to Jackson Square in 
Boston's Jamaica Plan and you'll find yourself in the heart of an 
Hispanic neighborhood with Spanish and Caribbean influences all around 
you. Radios are tuned to Spanish language stations and advertisers 
exploit to the fullest the celebrity status of Baseball Star Sammy 
Sosa. Sosa's selling power is also visible at the Tropical Market 
where a large red and white Budweiser banner flaps outside, congratulating 
the Dominican slugger in English and Spanish. Manager Marian Genleno 
says the Bud ad makes Spanish speakers feel welcome. If you have somebody 
who doesn't speak English and they see that you speak Spanish, then 
it makes a big difference, because they'll be able to communicate. 
If somebody doesn't know what they're talking about or if they don't 
think people speak their language, then they're going to feel a little 
more shy, probably. Up and down the street, it's the same. If you 
look closely, or if you live here, you notice many of the signs are 
in English and Spanish. Not only in the small Badagas, but also in 
the chain stores like Payless Shoes, where the new fall styles are 
touted in both languages. Demographic change is driving the trend 
toward ethnic marketing. Hispanics now make up 11 percent of the US 
population. Early in the next century, they are expected to overtake 
African-Americans as the country's largest minority. That's why national 
companies, like McDonald's, are going after Hispanic customers so 
aggressively. Other national companies targeting the Hispanic market 
with millions of advertising dollars include Sears, AT&T, MCI, Avon, 
and the big three automakers. The operations manager of Boston-based 
Radia Landia is Alberto Basio III. His family also owns El Mundo, 
a regional Spanish language newspaper. Basio says American companies 
are just now learning how to tap into the lucrative Hispanic market. 
They're finally realizing that the way to reach this market is in 
its own language. They cannot reach this market using mainstream and 
general media. They've got to use specialized market and ethnic marketing 
tactics that sometimes are totally different from their general game 
plan. Ethnic marketing means finding out what people are reading, 
watching, and listening, what they drive, eat, and wear, where they 
come from, what languages they speak, what images, voices, and products 
make them feel at home. Collette Philips, a native of Antigua, who 
runs a Boston-based marketing and consulting company that specializes 
in ethnic advertising, says it's essential to appreciate and play 
to the many different groups of Hispanic consumers. You have to use 
certain picture with your ads that are representative. Mexicans have 
a distinct to people who come from Santo Damingo, people who are from 
Cuba have a different look from people who come from Puerto Rico. 
And in the Hispanic culture, you can have white-Hispanic, and black-Hispanic, 
but they're all Hispanics. And you have to understand region and the 
nuance of the language. Philips says advertisers who simply translate 
slogans from English will get into trouble. Sometimes the literal 
translation can be offensive to the very people you are trying to 
reach out to. Like Frank Perdue found out when he had his "It takes 
a tough man to make a tender chicken" and it was literally translated 
into Spanish and it says, "It takes a sexually aroused man to make 
a chicken affectionate". One of Collette Philip's clients is the supermarket 
chain Stop and Shop. Philips helped Stop and Shop with advertising. 
But she also stresses the company should educate employees about how 
to market items with special appeal to Hispanic customers. In this 
new Stop and Shop in Jamaica Plans, Store Manager Bill Sumner clearly 
caters to the neighborhood. We expand on an item. We picked the Maradol 
papaya because it does sell so well in this area, because that's what 
our customers are really looking for. Things like that. Mangoes sell 
very well here. A lot of coconuts sell well here, figs, guava sells 
very well here, amarilloes, another Hispanic item, a swivvle stick 
with sugar cane sells well here. People use that. It use to be that 
ethnic advertising expertise was the sole realm of independent consultants; 
such as Collette Philips. Now, even traditional big name ad agencies 
are creating special departments to handle the growing demand. But, 
the strategies of ethnic marketing are not exactly new. In fact, tobacco 
companies mastered the art a long time ago, according to Collette 
Philips. Virginia Slims was created for women. The Marlboro Man was 
for the rugged kind of macho man. The Joe Camel was definitely targeted 
to its teenagers. And Salem and Kool were targeted to urban, African-American 
people. Here in Jamaica Plan, Alberto Basio of Radia Landia, thinks 
Boston area companies still have a way to go before they catch up 
to the big national companies that already advertise on his radio 
station. If they don't he says, they'll pay the price. In the long 
run, it's going to catch up to them because Hispanics have showed 
to be very brand loyal. So, whoever usually jumps in first usually 
enjoys and reaps the benefits. For The World, I'm Jeb Sharp. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>