<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981225.2000.1180 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is The World. I'm Lisa Mullins. As part of our Christmas Day 
broadcast today we are re-airing a few of the highlights from this 
past year's programs. This entry from Tony Kahns journal explores 
the sometimes magical, often volatile nature of the union when love 
brings together people from very different cultures. This is a little 
painting that a friend of ours gave us when Perastroika began. Lynn 
Sahn, a native New Yorker and interpreter from the Russian United 
Nations, has spent most of her life bridging the gap between Russia 
and the United States. Her Manhattan apartment is full of souvenirs 
from that adventure, including her dearest prize, her Russian husband 
Boris. For her new book, "Wedded Strangers", Lynn explored the strains 
and satisfactions, the break downs and breakthroughs of more than 
100 Russian-American marriages including her 20 year union with Boris. 
What's amazing is that even in years when it was extremely difficult 
for Americans and Russian to get married in getting exit visas from 
Russia and entry visa into the United States. And despite the image 
of the enemy on both sides, there were an enormous number of these 
marriages taking place. Nowadays, with a booming post-Perastroika 
trade and match-making, the main problem facing Russian-American couples 
isn't getting together, it's staying together. Take this rough start 
between a Russian woman and an American man who were introduced over 
the Internet. The woman as soon as she moved into the man's apartment 
sewed all his sheets together to form the kind of little packet into 
which a Russian puts the blanket. He was not terribly amused. In another 
case, a Russian woman, whenever the man went to the store and bought 
something, would criticize whatever he had bought, because her idea 
was a man couldn't possibly to buy food in a store and obviously any 
salesperson would cheat him and he was probably getting the worst 
things in the store. Lynn says the difference crop up in every aspect 
of married life. Take sex.. One Russian man said to me that his wife 
treated sex not like an intimate love relationship, but like a woodworking 
class. And that she was telling him every minute what to do, when 
to breath, how to do it, and when to stop. Russian feel that people 
do have a certain right to their own mystery, to a little inner core 
and that there is no point in analyzing all of this to death. That 
it's the best way to kill a relationship. Take money. Most everyday 
American financial transactions are for Russians voodoo economics. 
Many Russian still find it basically a somewhat mystical concept why 
if I write you a check, by some very weird process that check eventually 
finds it way home to me. The same is true for savings and financial 
planning of any kind. I know at least one couple where when the American 
wife suggested the Russian husband buy life insurance, he was horrified. 
He said, "what's the matter? You want me dead?". Or making a will 
in which you decide who will get what. There was the same reaction 
of are you trying to murder me? Then of course, there's that minefield 
of married life, just spending time with a friend of your own. There 
was a misunderstanding with a couple we know in New York where the 
man said that he was going to go out with a friend for a drink at. 
When he wasn't back by 4:00 in the morning, the wife was calling up 
all her friend to see where he was. And when came in at quarter to 
6, he was perfectly nonchalant. Well, you knew I was with my friend. 
What could have happen to us. What am I a small boy, I have to call 
mommy every two minutes. A Russian feels that a friend is someone 
to whom you can say anything. Whom you can call and will come over 
at 3 in the morning, much sometimes to the distress of the American 
spouse. You may have few friends, but they are real friends. While 
an American say I have 50 friends, but none of them will be up to 
snuff in terms of the Russian definition. In a sense, there's a specter 
haunting the Russian-American marriage, far more threatening than 
any ex-lover and far more ominous than any in-law, the ghost of the 
Russian past. Survival in Russia demanded qualities of Russian that 
many Americans find dogmatic, sneaky, even self-defeating. Lynn says 
this Russia obsterousness shows up in every aspect of the marriage 
from the rearing of children to the meaning of honesty. In Soviet 
Russia, what was a Russian to do if there was a party meeting coming 
up and your best friend was suppose to be given a reprimand or be 
censure at that meeting. To go and vote to censure your friend, is 
not very nice. To vote against it, you were subjecting yourself to 
a possible loss of job and all kinds of penalties. What was the best 
thing to do? Call in sick. Is that a lie? Yes. Was it moral? Yes. 
And this kind of attitude permeated the entire country. Bosses lied 
to subordinates; subordinates lied to the people under them. Husbands 
lied to wives; wives lied to husbands. Parents lied to children. One 
Russian said to me about his American wife. "My wife is incapable 
of lying and it makes her very difficult to live with". Ten years 
of Parastroika have done nothing to change a national character baked 
deep into Russian bones and the cultural and historical weight of 
Russia in all its contradictions from the Russia of the Czars to the 
Russia of the commasars, from the Russia of stupendous brutality to 
the Russia of some of the greatest writers who ever lived is a burden 
ever Russian carries in his soul. Given all that, it's a miracle a 
Russian knows what means to say I am to his own identity much less 
I do to a Russian-American marriage. And yet, these marriages survive, 
sometimes even thrive. Before I left their Manhattan apartment, I 
asked Boris and Lynn one last question If I were to ask each of you, 
if there is one quality in the other to which attribute the longevity 
of your marriage 20 years or so, what would it be? Boris? Boris offered 
an answer, Lynn agreed with wholeheartedly- a very deep friendship. 
I would say exactly the same thing. In our case, as in any really 
true marriage, the spouse is not just a spouse, but your best and 
your number one friend for whom you have the kind of feelings you 
don't have for anybody else in the world. As many couples would testify 
what ties your together isn't seeing eye-to-eye but deep into each 
other hearts, strengths, and weakness. Russians are drawn to our freedoms 
and yet feel we're superficial. We're drawn to Russian's passion, 
yet feel they're dogmatic. Clearly, there's a lot to learn and to 
gain from each other. Or as a Russian might put it, since we're going 
to fight anyway, why not fight about something really important. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>