<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981225.2000.2474 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Not all Christmas traditions make for good memories as The World's 
Boris Maximoff recalls. Ahh, Christmas, always brings mixed feelings 
to me. I just can't forget those years when as a child in Moscow I 
was scared stiff of this time of year. You see, the great majority 
of Russian males do enjoy their drink. One of the unfortunate results 
is that all through December streets of every city are full of man 
in red coats and white beards barely able to stand up right, staggering 
about and reeking of alcohol. And of course, a Russian drink is a 
melancholy one. So, these superous Santas are also, shall we say, 
on the aggressive side of life. On the other hand, as you grow up 
among the illebriated, you slowly realize that these solemn dispenses 
of gifts are a rather nice symbol of confusions reigning in the Russian 
mind. Consider this, first of all, the very idea of celebrating Christmas 
in this pagan way with evergreen trees bedeck in cheap trickets with 
Santas, gifts, and other merry making which was imported wholesale 
from Germany about a century ago. Not long after, the communists came 
to power and in their untireless religious zeal, closed churches, 
murdered scores of priests, and outlawed Christmas celebration for 
good measure. When my mother was growing, simply having a Christmas 
tree in your home could lend you in some spectacularly unpleasant 
bit of Siberia. But then even zealots do grow up and so did the communists. 
In the general drabness of Soviet life, they had to come up with an 
idea of cheering up the people and relented on the Christmas celebration, 
except it was no longer Christmas. That would be too simple. No. The 
Russian celebrate New Years Eve with a pre-festive dinner, gifts, 
and of course Santa. Though, Santa has been renamed and authorities 
couldn't come up with a better name than Grandpa Frost. That name, 
of course, reflects a colder side of human relationships. So, just 
in case he gets too lonely, he has a sidekick, a girl in the blue 
winter coat called appropriately The Snow Maiden, who's duties seem 
to consist of holding the bag, a perfect anti-feminist gesture. And 
there is more, some people not happy to celebrate the simple progression 
of the calendar insist on celebrating Christmas itself, except there 
are choices here. Orthodox's Christmas falls on January 7th. So, the 
tradition in mind put out their tree in late December and celebrate 
twice. The westernizers in time honor way insists on copying the west. 
Sorry, it is not at all unusual to see December 25th being marked 
as a special occasion as well. But regardless of what exactly they 
celebrate, the Russians prefer to do it with a bottle or two. And 
the sudden profusion of Christmas brings nothing but joy to these 
drinking hearts. One more reason to open yet another bottle. Thoughts 
on Christmas from the one and only Boris Maximoff. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>