<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981225.2000.2898 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is The World. I'm Lisa Mullins in Boston. In this Christmas Day 
archival edition of the World, we are revisiting some of this past 
years more memorable moments. And speaking of memories, let's see 
if you can recall any of these names; "Union Square", "Jenny", or 
how about "The Tony Danza Show". Ring a bell. Well, if not, it's probably 
because these comedy shows came and went faster than you can say that's 
all folks. But cross the border into Canada and you'll find a more 
enduring kind of comedy television, one that has captivated Canadians 
for years. TV viewers there can't seem to get enough sketch comedy. 
From Montreal, The World's Philip Sporow reports. Every now and then, 
like most Canadians, it occurs to me that wouldn't it be great if 
the United States of America had a great big switch on it and you 
could just reach out, flick it off. They'd just disappear. Each week 
on Canada's popular political satire show, "This Hour Has 22 Minutes", 
four irrelevant news hounds take aim at the latest headlines and sometimes 
at America's president. Is it really necessary to wake up on a Saturday 
morning, pick up the newspaper, and read the exact dimensions of the 
president's parts. No, but we all did it because there's no switch. 
Apparently, it's the circumference of a quarter. And I know without 
even thinking, you reached into your pocket, took out a quarter, stared 
at it. American politics isn't the only but of Canadian humor, so 
are Canadian Prime Minister Jean Catian, the weather, and of course, 
hockey. Mike Boone, television critic for the Montreal Gazette, says 
current affairs have always inspired Canadian humor. I think there's 
a tradition of excellent journalism in this country. I think people 
tend to be generally well informed. And that in turn our level of 
political sophistication and knowledge of what's happen to us informs 
our humor to a very great extent. Well-informed or not, Canadians 
are also as likely to laugh at themselves as anything else. For instance, 
in this routine from another popular comedy troop, the Royal Canadian 
Air Farce, the joke pokes fun at one of Quebec's hottest issues-language. 
After 25 successful years on Canadian TV, you'd think the members 
of the Royal Canadian Air Farce would have headed south to Hollywood, 
after all plenty of other funny Canadians, like Dan Akroyd, John Candy, 
and Jim Carrey have done so with great success. But, Air Farce Member 
Roger Abbott explains that there's different lure to staying put. 
I guess to some extent in both in England and The United States, we 
probably felt we were a very small drop in a very large bucket. Whereas, 
I guess we felt we could just do something more useful and probably 
more ourselves here. I think to a large extent we stayed here so that 
we could be ourselves and not try to be someone else. But, being someone 
else is often what sketch comedy is all about. In this sketch from 
Canada's comedy trio " The Vestibules", members poke fun at the latest 
trend in advertising where a celebrity either dead or alive appears 
as spokesperson for a commercial product. Coming up with this material 
isn't all fun and games. In fact, it requires a lot of ego-less teamwork. 
The Vestibules sometimes take hour to work out a short comedy sketch. 
Unlike other Canadian comedy troupes the group generally stays away 
from political humor says member Terence Bowman and instead focuses 
on current trends in pop culture. A lot of the successful groups have 
been very politically oriented, but we don't do that just because 
we feel as though it's a well covered area and it's kind of an easy 
laugh. Bowman sees one advantage that Canadian comics have is their 
multi-cultural view on the world, one that keeps the United States 
in perspective. Because we're exposed to other kinds of cultures; 
such as British culture and in Montreal your French culture as well, 
we have a bit more of a global view and we sort of see American culture 
as a separate thing, not as everything. It doesn't define our entire 
existence. One thing that does define Canadian sketch comedy is a 
healthy dose of skepticism that allows Canadian comics to moke just 
about everything. But there's another reason sketch comedy is so popular 
in Canada, it's affordable. It affordable, because you don't have 
to do a full half hour of anything. You can do 3 or 4 or 5 minutes 
and then you can change to a new idea. Don Ferguson, a veteran comedy 
performer and producer of a new show called 'Sketchcom", says sketch 
comedy's low cost helps to employ a wide range of writers and performers. 
Everybody I think wants to be able to do work they enjoy and they 
want to get paid for it. You know, you have to move to where the action 
is. And the action is Canada these days is undoubtedly in sketch comedy. 
With or without a disclaimer, Canadian audiences are accustomed to 
just about anything when it comes to Canadian humor. And this fall, 
shows such as "This Hour Has 22 Minutes", "The Royal Canadian Air 
Farce", and "Sketchcom" will provide them with plenty of chances to 
sit back and laugh. For The World, this is Philip Sporow in Montreal. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>