<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981225.2000.2643 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Now, for the answer to today's geography quiz. Our mystery island 
celebrates Christmas with a rich variety of traditions including Parada 
Davagdia. That's where revelers go door-to-door serenading their neighbors 
with carols. Of course, there's plenty of food and drink to go around 
as well on Christmas, including one hearty chicken soup with kick. 
It's called asopol. And here to give us her own family's recipe is 
Esmeralda Santiago, who has written a number of books about our mystery 
island. Esmeralda, first of all, Merry Christmas to you. Feliz Navidad! 
Thank you. And tell us where we're spending this holiday. In Puerto 
Rico. And chicken soup, I have to say, is not the first thing that 
comes to mind when I think about Christmas or Puerto Rico for that 
matter. So, tell us about this tradition of serving chicken soup or 
asopol at Christmas time. The asopol is a traditional soup that is 
served not only at Christmas, but actually any time that you've a 
little bit too much to drink. And we prepare, ideally you prepare 
with a fresh chicken, but in these days of supermarkets, you can also 
use store bought chicken. And the whole idea is to have a whole chicken 
and make it go as far as it possible can, because very frequently 
if you come to a Puerto Rican home during Christmas in Asanto Beranda, 
you really don't know how many people are going to be in this group 
of people who appear at your door. So, the one chicken has to go a 
very long way. Which means what? You simply use all parts of the chicken? 
You use every part of the chicken, if possible. In the United States, 
of course, you can make the low-fat version with just the chicken 
breast. But ideally, you use the whole bird. And it is first marinated 
in two interesting spices. That's right. If you know you're going 
to be making the asopol at some hours before, then you cut up the 
chicken and you marinate it in the solfrito and the adobo, these are 
the two special mixtures that are very typical of Puerto Rican cooking. 
The solfrito is made up with garlic and onions and green peppers, 
and cilantro. And the adobo, literally means a rub, and it's salt 
and pepper and garlic and sometimes other spices or for using the 
alchurto oil. And these are very traditional basics of Puerto Rican 
cooking. And then, when you begin to cook it, you heat the oil and 
saute the chicken a little bit so that it seals in the flavors. And 
then, you start making your soup. Ok. And then, when you start making 
the actual soup, it's not that difficult, is it? It's very easy and 
in fact that's the whole idea. The hardest part of it probably is 
just cutting it up and getting in the marinate and then get the soup 
going. Then you go back to the dancing of the beranda. Because meanwhile 
all these people are down in your living room or in your porch and 
you go back and you dance a few numbers. And then you come back and 
test the chicken. And if it's not done, you go back and dance another 
one and do it again. Do you have your own kind of family memories 
surrounding this family recipe? Well, one of my favorite things about 
the asopol is that in that in our family, of course, it's always served, 
no matter what the holiday, just before everybody leaves. After you've 
had the main meal, and you've had a chance to talk and play games 
and the other things that you do and dance. The asopol goes on the 
stove and you serve it. So, it becomes a way of saying goodbye to 
people you love. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>