<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981225.2000.0372 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is The World. I'm Lisa Mullins with a special Christmas archival 
program. New Years is just one week away. For much of Europe, 1999 
means a new currency; the euro. The legal tender will eventually replace 
pounds, lira, and the like creating a sort of single financial language. 
But, the European Union is far from speaking a single spoken language. 
The World's Margaret Evans tapped into the cross-cultural communications 
going on at EU central in Brussels. The fact that there is a modern 
day Tower at Babel, the European Capital of Brussels is it. To walk 
down the corridors at power here at the European Union Headquarters 
treats visitors to a smorgasbord of languages from Swedish to Greek 
to Portuguese. The European Union has 11 official languages all entitled 
to equal treatment. That means of the daily meetings here need enough 
interpreters on hand to handle 110 possible language combinations; 
Finnish to Spanish, Italian to French, Danish to Greek, English to 
German, and so on. Nola Lila is the head of the EU's Interpretation 
Services. He says things were a lot simpler when he first came to 
Brussels as a young interpreter. Arriving myself in '64, I think we 
had more isterdient interpreters around because we had six countries 
and four languages. Now, we have 15 countries and 11 officials languages. 
So, to manage all this is quite a job I must confess to look for the 
quality, to control it, to find it, to train the people, and so forth. 
The EU employees the largest interpretation staff in the world, larger 
than even the United Nations which limits its officials languages 
to just six. The Union also translates more than 1 million pages a 
year into all 11 languages. As well as being extremely costly, there's 
no doubt the language may slow things down. One way the Europeans 
are trying to cope is by turning in part to machines. Machine translation 
is there for officials to use on a help yourself basis. Dorothy Senas 
oversees a services called Cystron. It's a translation systems developed 
in the United States in 1950's and first used by the US Air Force 
to translate Russian into English. The EU has updated it so it can 
handle 17 different language pairs. Officials here log onto the Internet, 
send in their document, and a rough translation comes back within 
minutes. Of course, as Senas points out, it's not perfect. The problem 
with the machine is that machine to know that the word Avicar is a 
lawyer or an avocado. So, we have to tell the machine, we're working 
in this language please select this diction. It's only used for rough 
drafts so people can find out faster just what their colleagues in 
different departments are up to. The officials translations are carried 
out by a staff of over 1000 translators who tend to work almost around 
the clock. Much of the EU's decision making process depends on how 
quickly the translators can turn their documents around. Translators 
like David Mucham, singing here, say European officials don't make 
it any easier by writing the originals in such heavy-handed, long-winded, 
and bureaucratic prose. Mucham is spear-heading a campaign called 
Fight The Fog. He and a troop of translators hold writing seminars 
for the bureaucrats here, starting them all out with this song, a 
plea to keep it simple. You wrote something long, that is wrong. It 
will not do. Keep it plan and short and the message will get through. 
Just write with clarity. But, the European Union's language problems 
are about to get even bigger. The Union is planning to expand eventually 
adding up to 10 new countries where the languages will be Estonian, 
Polish, Hungarian, the list goes on. Head Interpreter Noel Lulas says 
that finding people with the right language combinations will pose 
a major challenge. To put an example, where would fine people with 
Greek having Czech, Romanian, and Polish. Some people here argue that 
there is no way the European Union can cope with more than 20 languages 
that it will be too expensive, and may even harm its relations with 
outside trading partners by slowing down decision making even further. 
But, the question of language is a highly political one. The Europeans 
might be on their way to becoming a United States of Europe, but they're 
still sovereign states and the core of nationhood often revolves around 
language. That means few countries will be willing to sacrifice their 
mother tongues for the sake of old fashion efficiency. Reporting for 
The World, the is Margaret Evans in Brussels. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>