<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981225.2000.0674 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The holiday season is filled traditions; festive lights, the spirit 
of giving, and last but not least food. Whether its potato Latkes 
for Hannakah or mom's butter cookies, family recipes make for warm 
memories. The World's Frank Contraus has a particular favorite. His 
current home is Mexico City, but the food he craves at Christmas time 
has more to do with his roots just north of the boarder. Christmas 
time never feels quite right without red chile tamales, with shredded 
beef, and green olive. The red and green make them just right for 
Christmas. And just thinking about them, makes me hungry. Tamale vendors 
are everywhere in Mexico City. The tamales are stuffed with either 
seasoned meats, vegetables, or sometimes fruits. But the tamales this 
guy were selling were nothing like the ones I remember eating back 
home in Tucson, Arizona. These vendor's tamales are wrapped in a banana 
tree leaf in the tradition of the southern state of Wahaka. The taste 
was different from the tamales I remembered. Suddenly, I was consumed 
with the longing for my culinary past. I decided to call my dad. I 
figured he was probably think about tamales, too. Christmas is not 
Christmas without tamales, without the smell in the air, you know. 
It was just part of the festive season for us. Our family's tamale 
memories go all the way back to 1912 when my grandparents first crossed 
the border from northern Sanora State fleeing the violence of the 
Mexican Revolution. Every Christmas, when dad was a boy, his mom, 
Carlotita, would make red chile or sweet bean tamales with cinnamons, 
cloves, and raisins. She would cook all night long and then we would 
walk to the midnight mass. We couldn't have anything to eat until 
we got back from the midnight mass about in the morning. By that time, 
dad was pretty hungry. He'd run home and quickly unwrap some steaming 
hot tamales. MMM, that's just what I want to do this Christmas. But, 
it's not going to happen. The kind of red chile tamales that were 
always on Christmas table in Tucson are a tradition of Northern Mexico 
and the Southwestern United States. They are no where to be found 
in Mexico City. So on this Christmas Day, as I sit down for dinner 
with my Mexican friends, I'll be eating salty dry fish call Bakalau, 
a tradition in this part of Mexico. But if I want to sample the red 
chile tamales I love so much, I guess I'll have to head north to Tucson. 
For The World, this is Frank Contraus in Mexico City. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>