<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981225.2000.0842 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A few months ago, one of our correspondents toured a town of living 
history, more specifically Civil War history. Americans on the losing 
side of the war between the states moved there to build a new life 
for themselves. Today, the town's code of arms incorporates the Confederate 
Flag and its residents are engaged in an effort to reconstruct their 
130-year history. The city is called Americana and it's in the south, 
the south of Brazil. The World's Alahadra Martines takes us there/ 
Americana is a small textile center with a population of 200,000 about 
100 miles from the city of Sao Paulo. English names are common here. 
One neighborhood is called Villa Jones, a part of town named in honor 
of Alisson Jones' ancestors. They came after the Civil War at the 
end of 1886. Jones is a successful business man in Americana and a 
member of the Fraternity of American Descendants, a group dedicated 
to keeping alive the memory of the town's American founders. Jones 
still speaks English at home. His was one of the 270 American families 
from south more than 2000 people in all who integrated to Brazil soon 
after the end of the war. Well, they were very disappointed with the 
outcome of the Civil War. They had most of their property burnt. What 
couldn't burn was stolen. A lot of the women were raped. And they 
had to start their life all over, so they decided that they just might 
as well start elsewhere. American families were welcomed by the Brazilian 
ruler at the time, Emperor Pedro II. There was a worldwide cotton 
shortage and the emperor was hoping to attract Americans because of 
their agricultural expertise. He offered them cheap land and even 
subsidized their journey. Slavery was still allowed in Brazil, but 
Jones says very few of the settlers brought slaves with them. They 
set up a colony where they grew not only cotton, but also watermelons, 
peaches, and pecans. The rolling hills in this part of Brazil reminded 
the settlers of their native Georgia and Alabama. A few remnants of 
their lives are on display in a small museum in a village just outside 
Americana. Well, on this exhibit that we have some of the things that 
were used by the Americans and they were brought with them, like a 
coffee grinder and waffle iron and butter churner, a hand butter churner. 
Americans brought with them everything they would need to start a 
new life, including their own doctors, pastors, and teachers. The 
museum offers unique glimpses into the early days of Americana, the 
Resa wedding dress. There are telegrams, letters, and even photographs 
of the first settlers. This is the picture of General William Norris, 
which was the leader of the group of immigrants to this part of the 
country. He left when he was right in '60s, so it must have been pretty 
hard for him to leave the US. Yes, it was very difficult. And when 
he called his son, Robert Norris, and told him "son, I need you to 
go with me to Brazil". His son replied, " father, I would go with 
you to hell, if necessary". It wasn't exactly hell, but life was hard 
for American families as they settled in a country not only with a 
different language, but also with a different religion. The cemeteries 
in Brazil were owned at the time by the Catholic Church, which didn't 
allow the burial of Protestants. When the first settler died, American 
immigrants established a small cemetery on a hillside a few miles 
from Americana. The cemetery's one of the most poignant reminders 
of the American presence here. This is where we have a lot of the 
families represented. Some of them are Carr, and we have some Macknites, 
and we have Fergusons. Jones has visited the US only twice. And says 
that people are always amazed to learn that there is a town in Brazil 
with a confederate flag in its code of arms. I have an interesting 
experience by people trying to place me by my accent. So, they would 
keep saying different names of southern states and I would say further 
south until they got to Florida. And they say there's nothing south 
of Florida. I say you're mistaken, there's some big countries south 
of Florida and that's where I come from. The Florentine American descendents 
wants more people in the US to learn about their history. The Contentem 
University in Alabama, which have already expressed interest in carrying 
out research here, but much work remains to be done to reconstruct 
the lives of American settlers in the remote south of Brazil. For 
The World, this is Alahadra Martines in Americana. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>