<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981225.1600.2153 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The story of Christmas and the birth of Jesus Christ is told in the 
Bible. But other stories reflecting the meaning of Christmas have 
been written, using words and music. On this special Christmas edition 
of Dateline, Neil Levan looks at the stories behind the words and 
music of Christmas. "Silent Night" may be the most popular Christmas 
song of all time. Known throughout the world, its universal appeal 
is due to its beautiful portrayal of the nativity, or birth of Christ. 
It was written in 1818 by a Catholic parish priest named Joseph Mohr. 
Who lived in Obendorf, a small town near Salzburg, Austria. As Christmas 
week arrived in the tiny village, it was discovered that the church 
organ was broken. And would not be ready for the usual program prepared 
for midnight mass on Christmas Eve. Thus, Father Mohr was forced to 
compose a new song. And in the absence of the organ, he looked to 
his friend Franz Gruber the church organist, and the teacher in the 
village for help in completing the song. In a moment of inspiration, 
Gruber almost immediately came up with the melody on his classical 
guitar to accompany Mohr's words. "Silent Night" was performed for 
the first time that Christmas Eve. "Stille Nacht, Heilige Nacht" has 
been translated into 90 different languages and dialects. And is sung 
around the world. A true story has been told for years about the international 
popularity of the song. The year is 1914. And for the first time since 
the beginning of World War I, all was quiet on the western front. 
America had not yet entered the war. The trenches were inhabited by 
French and English soldiers, whose Christmas holiday promised to be 
cold and lonely. Then, the stillness of the frigid night was broken. 
Not by gunfire, but by the voice of a German soldier singing "Stille 
Nacht, Heilige Nacht." Soon French voices were heard responding with 
the joyous "Noel, Noel." Within minutes, soldiers on both sides raised 
their voices in the Christmas songs of their homelands. And soon fierce 
enemies were sharing food and drink. Exchanging cigarettes, and sharing 
pictures of their families. This holiday peace lasted until New Year's 
Day. When the guns of war sounded once again. Forcing the soldiers 
back to the trenches. The religious significance of the Christmas 
season was perhaps best described in the gospel of Luke in the Holy 
Bible. Sometimes referred to as "the greatest story ever told," the 
story tells of the birth of Jesus Christ. 'Fear not. For behold, I 
bring you tidings of great joy. Which shall be to all people. For 
unto you is born this day, in the city of David, a savior. Which is 
Christ the Lord. And this shall be a sign unto you. You shall find 
the babe wrapped in swaddling clothes, lying in a manger. Glory to 
God in the highest. And on Earth, peace, goodwill toward men.' Phillips 
Brookes was 32 years old, and a minister in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 
when he wrote "Oh, Little Town of Bethlehem" for a Christmas Day Sunday 
school service in 1868. The week before Christmas, he had been searching 
for a new hymn. When he remembered an experience three years earlier, 
on vacation in the Holy Land. On the day before Christmas, he traveled 
from Jerusalem to Bethlehem on horseback. At the conclusion of the 
journey, he attended a Christmas service in the fields where shepherds 
watched over their flocks. Reverend Brookes was deeply moved. And 
there, overlooking the town of Bethlehem, he jotted down some words 
in a notebook. That would become "Oh Little Town of Bethlehem." It 
was performed that year. But forgotten for nearly 20 years. Then it 
was rediscovered. And the song was printed in a local newspaper. Today, 
every Christian hymnal contains the song. That's popular American 
actor and singer Bing Crosby, with Marjorie Reynolds in a scene from 
the 1942 film, "Holiday Inn." The song "White Christmas" was written 
by the late Irving Berlin, specifically for that motion picture. And 
it conveys the hope of a snowy winter holiday. One of the premier 
entertainers of his time, Bing Crosby at first refused to perform 
the song. He felt that the song glorified the crass commercialism 
of Christmas. And left out its true meaning. Berlin, a genius who 
was said to have been the most prolific songwriter the world has ever 
known, quickly modified part of the lyric. And convinced Crosby to 
perform the song for the movie. Later that same year, Bing Crosby 
recorded a version of "White Christmas" that has since become the 
biggest-selling Christmas recording. "White Christmas" was the number 
one song in the United States at Christmas time in 1942. When World 
War II was raging in Europe and the Pacific. Millions of American 
men were far from home. And the entire nation eagerly followed the 
news of how the war was going. CBS reporter Edward R. Murrow broadcast 
a nightly series of reports on the war, from London. On Christmas 
Eve in 1942, Murrow's report was touching. This is London. And this 
is, of course, Christmas Eve. The beef-eaters may have become Spam-eaters, 
but no one has seemed scrooged about tonight. Our men have been giving 
parties for British children. They have made toys made of harvested 
wood and metal. Big, tough sergeants have played Santa Claus. Thousands 
of British children, especially the orphans, and the poor, have had 
a memorable time, thanks to the Americans. Our men are the best-fed, 
best-paid, and best-uniformed soldiers in this war. And this Christmas 
they have certainly maintained the American tradition of good-natured 
generosity. Some of them are a little homesick. You couldn't tell 
it by looking at them. I've asked many of them what they'd like to 
say if they were talking to America tonight. And most of them have 
said: "Well, you see, it's really tough to know what to say. You know 
how it is." I have an idea most of them would tell you: "Don't worry 
too much. We're all right. And we're amongst friends." And some of 
them on this dark night might repeat the words written along time 
ago: 'May there be darkness, it shall end the morning. And all shall 
be secure. Because there is hope.' Christmas is a time when families 
and loved ones come together. Often traveling hundreds, even thousands 
of kilometers to be home for the holidays. Even those separated from 
their families during Christmas, think of home. It is a time of family 
gatherings. Of festive parties, and of centuries-old traditions. Storytelling 
has been an important part of Christmas lore through the ages. Through 
all parts of the world, the story is told of a character who has come 
to be most closely known with Christmas. In Spain, he is known as 
Papa Noel. In Denmark, he is called Sinter Claus. In many countries, 
he is Saint Nicholas. In the United States, he is known simply as 
Santa Claus. Many believe that the legend of Santa Claus can be traced 
back to 1822. When a professor of Greek and Oriental literature from 
the state of New York, named Clement C. Moore wrote a poem called 
"A Visit from St. Nicholas." Dr. Moore was intrigued by a passage 
in Washington Erving's history of New York that told of a dream visit 
by St. Nicholas. A kindly, fourth-century Turk, known as the patron 
saint of children. He wrote the poem for the amusement of his children. 
And each Christmas, Moore's family and friends would gather together 
to hear it read. As the story goes, a close relative named Harriet 
Butler copied the poem down in the family album. And passed it on 
to a friend, who then gave it to the editor of a local newspaper. 
Moore's poem, which has come to be known by it's famous first line: 
"Twas the Night Before Christmas," was published anonymously for the 
first time on December 23, 1823. It quickly became popular. And was 
widely published in journals and national almanacs. The poem was never 
copywritten. Thus, Moore did not receive a penny for his work. In 
fact, he didn't take credit for the poem until 1844, when he told 
his version of the poem's origin. Moore tells of having written "Twas 
the Night Before Christmas" while returning home from a shopping trip 
in New York City. It was a cold and snowy Christmas Eve in 1822. Riding 
in a horse-drawn sleigh loaded with holiday gifts, Moore set out for 
his home in upstate New York. During the trip, the steady sound of 
the jingling bells on his sled and horse seemed to suggest a background 
for a poem he had been working on to entertain his children. He began 
to scribble down the 56 lines that would become the most widely-read 
Christmas poem in the English language. 'Twas the night before Christmas 
When all through the house, Not a creature was stirring, Not even 
a mouse. 'The stockings were hung By the chimney with care. In the 
hopes that St. Nicholas Soon would be there. 'The children were nestled 
All snug in their beds. While visions of sugarplums Danced through 
their heads. 'And Mama in her kerchief, And I in my cap, Had just 
settled our brains For a long winter's nap. 'When out on the lawn 
There arose such a clatter. I sprang from my bed To see what was the 
matter. 'Away to the window I flew like a flash. Tore open the shutters 
And threw up the sash. 'The moon on the breast Of the new-fallen snow 
Gave the luster of midday To objects below. 'When what to my wondering 
Eyes should appear But a miniature sleigh And eight tiny reindeer. 
'With a little old driver So lively and quick. I knew in a moment 
It must be St. Nick.' Moore then went on to name the reindeer: Dasher, 
Dancer, Prancer, Vixen, Comet, Cupid, Donner, and Blitzen. He told 
of their landing on the roof. And of St. Nick bounding down the chimney. 
His most important contribution to Christmas folklore was his vivid 
description of St. Nick, alias Santa Claus. For the first time, the 
world knew what he looked like. 'His eyes, how they twinkled His dimples, 
how merry. And his cheeks were like roses His nose like a cherry. 
'His droll little mouth Was drawn up like a bow. And the beard of 
his chin Was as white as the snow. 'The stump of a pipe He held in 
his teeth. And the smoke it encircled his head like a wreath. 'He 
had a broad face And a little round belly That shook when he laughed 
Like a bowl full of jelly. 'He was chubby, plump And a right jolly 
old elf. And I laughed when I saw him In spite of myself. 'A wink 
of his eye And a twist of his head Soon gave me to know I had nothing 
to dread. 'He spoke not a word But went straight to his work. And 
filled all the stockings Then turned with a jerk. 'And laying his 
finger Aside of his nose And giving a nod, Up the chimney he rose. 
'He sprang to his sleigh. To his team gave a whistle. And away they 
all flew Like the down of a thistle. 'But I heard him exclaim Ere 
he drove out of sight: Merry Christmas to all And to all a good night!" 
Since the United States is such a diverse country, it's not a surprise 
that one of our most well-liked Christmas carols comes to us via the 
Ukraine, Slovakia, and Passaic, New Jersey. "The Carol of the Bells" 
is a great choral work. And much beloved by audiences not only in 
the United States, but around the world. In it, part of the chorus 
imitates ringing bells. While the rest sing simple but powerful words. 
Like "Christmas is here, time for good cheer." "The Carol of the Bells" 
was created through the work of two men. One was a Ukrainian composer 
named Mikola Leontovich. He was a teacher and conductor who was born 
in 1877. He was not trained as a musician. But he did work as a singing 
teacher and director of amateur choirs. In 1904, he had completed 
classes at the St. Petersburg Court Chapel, and soon began arranging 
exciting and vibrant versions of Ukrainian folk songs for unaccompanied 
choral ensembles. A Ukrainian tradition, and a popular staple of early 
20th century Ukrainian music. His arrangements often went far beyond 
his beloved Ukrainian folk melodies. He embellished them with rich 
counter-point and contrasting harmonies. In fact, musical scholars 
say he helped establish a new musical form: the folklore poem miniature. 
"The Carol of the Bells" is such a folklore poem in miniature. It 
remained a Ukrainian carol until 1936. When another popular composer 
and choral director who also had roots in what is today's Slovakia, 
put English words to it. Peter J. Wilhousky, who was born in Passaic, 
New Jersey in 1902, translated numerous Slavic works into English 
and popularized them. In 1936, he assembled an all-city chorus of 
1500 students. Who appeared before an audience of 16,000 people at 
New York's Madison Square Garden to great acclaim. That same year, 
he also put English words to Leontovich's "Carol of the Bells" and 
a new tradition was born. "Carol of the Bells," performed by the Roger 
Wagner Chorale. In the late 1940's, Santa Claus was the subject of 
a song written by a popular American movie star, the late Gene Autry. 
With his songwriting partner, Oakley Halderman. Known as the "singing 
cowboy," Gene Autry, a very successful businessman, remembers how 
the idea for the song came about. I had met the parade for the Hollywood 
Christmas Parade. And I was the grand marshal. And as I rode along, 
with the kids were all lined up on the sidewalk, and they would yell 
to each other: "Here comes Santa Claus! Here comes Santa Claus!" So 
I made it over to that. And when I got back to the office the next 
day, why, I talked to Oakley about it. And I said: "I've got an idea 
for a song." And he said: "What's that?" And I told him the story 
about the kids that were yelling: "Here comes Santa Claus." So, we 
sat down and both of us wrote the song, "Here Comes Santa Claus." 
And I recorded it. And the next year it became a big hit. It sold 
over a million records the first year. The next year, Autry was asked 
by his record company to come up with a new Christmas song. He knew 
it was going to be hard to top the success of "Here Comes Santa Claus." 
And he wasn't sure he would ever find the right song. According to 
Gene Autry, he was accepting ideas from anyone. I began to get acetates 
and liege seats, and old recordings of songs from all over the country. 
And Johnny Marks in New York sent me a demo that he had made at home 
of "Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer." Rudolph, the outcast reindeer, 
who later got to lead Santa's sleigh by virtue of his glowing nose. 
Went on to become one of the most popular, and best-loved Christmas 
songs in history. The tales and songs of Christmas, so diverse in 
their plots and messages, communicate the joy, the hope, the expectancy 
of the season. And we've been happy to share them with you. Our program 
on the words and music of Christmas was written by Michael Dawson. 
I'm Neil Levan. Our program was produced by Robert Doty. A Merry Christmas, 
and Happy Holidays to all. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>