<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981225.0500.1329 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
One of the most popular stories told at this time of the year in the 
United States, was written more than 150 years ago by British author 
Charles Dickens. "A Christmas Carol" tells the story of a miser, who 
on Christmas Eve is visited by three ghosts, as well as the spirit 
of his deceased business partner. Dickens himself toured the United 
States, giving readings of "A Christmas Carol." Since then, countless 
versions of the holiday classic have been produced for film and television, 
and on stage. VOA's Susan Loag takes us to historic Ford's Theater, 
here in Washington. Where Ebeneezer Scrooge makes an annual appearance. 
Marley has been visiting Scrooge at Ford's Theater, here in Washington, 
for many years. But the current production of "A Christmas Carol" 
dates from 1987. And was adapted by David Bell, who was at the time, 
artistic director of Ford's Theater. Initially, he says he hoped to 
find a production that he could bring from another theater to Ford's. 
But he says his nationwide search was unsuccessful. There are many 
very spectacular productions. Where they have big effects and so on. 
And what I love about the Ford's: it's a restoration of a period theater 
built about the time when Charles Dickens was writing. So that the 
idea of kind of a Victorian postcard that celebrated the authenticity 
of the period seemed appropriate to me. And so I kind of came up with 
a concept that essentially had two sets. And that had some interesting 
effects, but not the dazzling special effect. And really focused on 
the language of Dickens. David Bell did make one change in the story. 
In his version, Marley is more than a ghost. He is the person most 
responsible for transforming Scrooge from a kindhearted and fun-loving 
youth, to a cold-hearted miser. I have Marley actually meeting Scrooge, 
the moment when they first meet at a Fezziwig party. And then our 
following scene, I had Scrooge and Marley, who are then in partnership, 
evicting Fezziwig for non-payment of debt. And that really does it, 
I think, a nice kind of continuity or unity to the end of the act. 
And I think it is unique to the Ford's version. Other than that inclusion 
of Marley in scenes from Scrooge's past life, David Bell's adaptation 
is faithful to the original. More than 150 years after Charles Dickens 
published "A Christmas Carol," it remains popular. Both adapter/director 
David Bell and Ron Parity, the actor who had portrayed Scrooge for 
the past seven years at Ford's, say part of the play's appeal is that 
it deals with the true meaning of Christmas. It is about redemption. 
And the ability for all of us to be transformed and redeemed. By the 
spirit of good will at any point in our life. I think the thing that 
brings them back is the heart of it. The feeling of joy toward the 
end of the play. When Scrooge awakes and realizes he's got another 
chance. And his utter happiness at having figured this out. That our 
main business in life should be mankind. You might think actors would 
get tired of doing the same role every year. But Ron Parity says he 
looks forward to coming to Washington to do "A Christmas Carol." As 
does David Bell, who is now with the Alliance Theater in Atlanta. 
He says he never dreamed his adaptation would still be going strong 
12 years after he first staged it at Ford's Theater. But he's glad 
it is, because it gives him the opportunity to return to Washington. 
I'm Susan Loag. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>