<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981225.0500.0359 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A Pacific weather system is endangering the progress of the Ico Global 
Balloon, as three adventurers attempt to become the first team to 
pilot a balloon around the world. A slowdown in the winds has put 
the breaks on the flight, according to David Partridge, project manager 
of the Ico Global Balloon Project. Speaking to News Now, from the 
Project's headquarters in London, Mr. Partridge told us the team was 
making good speed across the Pacific for some while. But as the flight 
approached Hawaii, the winds dropped to what may be a dangerously 
low speed. The balloon, at the moment, is just north of Hawaii. And 
traveling rather more slowly than we'd wish it to travel. And the 
direction's changed to the south. So nail-biting moments at the Ico 
Global Control Center. Now, we have heard some reports that there 
is a possibility that they may have to ditch the flight. Absolutely, 
project director Mike Hendrichs, just half an hour ago, made a statement 
that he felt that the possibility of ditching was 50/50. The reason 
that we're considering that is that the islands are really the only 
available land mass in the whole of the Pacific Ocean. And if we're 
able to get out of this particular weather tract, we still have something 
like 2,500 miles to go before we reach the coast of America. So the 
project team take safety is really our very first issue. And if you're 
very close to Hawaii and there's good rescue and possibility of being 
picked up from the sea very quickly. Then, really this is a very big 
point for us and a big decision time. So what are the factors that 
are going to be brought to bear on that decision? Well, there are 
a number of factors. The first, of course is the weather. And whether 
we can actually succeed in getting through this trough. At the moment, 
the pilots have found the wind, which is taking them in an easterly 
direction. But very slowly, they're only doing about 14 miles an hour 
up at 25,000 feet. Their second factor is the determination of the 
pilots. And there, there's no question. Steve Fawcett and Richard 
Pair are just absolutely determined to really make this flight go 
into the record books. And they're determined to get as far as they 
can. And there's no question about that determination. They've been 
maneuvering down as low as 6,000 feet. And up to 35,000 feet. Looking 
for any breath of wind which is going to keep them going across the 
water to the States. So that's why we're taking this so seriously. 
If we can't find those winds, then we will look to make a good and 
safe landing as close as possible to the coastline. Or possibly even 
on land itself. And that's an extraordinary thing to be able to do 
in the middle of the Pacific. The whole thing has been an adventure. 
They're great adventurers. And we all live on the edge of our seats 
following their progress. We're getting millions of people tuning 
into the website to see how the balloon is doing. And I think it's 
an adventure that's just gripped the world. And everybody's in these 
times of bad news, just how these adventurers are getting on. And 
I think it's the last great aviation record. The world's becoming 
a smaller place. We're making geography history at the moment. And 
our ambition and our need is really to do as much as we can. And I 
think the guys are out there trying to do that on behalf of everybody. 
We had some discussion here in the news room, that we really were 
hoping that once the dicey business past China was surpassed, that 
it was home free after that. Did you have that feeling? And.. Well, 
we were very pleased to be out and across the Pacific. And we were 
very pleased that the balloon was beginning to track at high speed. 
We had speeds through the night of 180 miles an hour. Which is what 
we've been looking for, these strong jet stream winds. That we're 
only just over halfway around the globe. There's still an awful long 
way to go. The Ico Global Project was never an easy one. And I think 
all of us assure that what we're trying to achieve here is not easy. 
If it was easy, we'd all be flying around the world in balloons every 
day. That's the truth, yes. So you don't think they'll run into Santa 
Claus, who might give them a tow up there today? Well, it would be 
kind of nice if there are any free reindeer floating around in the 
Hawaii region. Just direct them our way. We could do with a little 
tow at the moment. And get the balloon back on track. I think that 
would be the best possible Christmas present for the pilots. David 
Partridge spoke to News Now from London. Where he is project manager 
of the Ico Global Flight. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>