<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981225.0500.1826 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Serbian forces backed by tanks and artillery have swept through ethnic 
Albanian villages in northern areas of Serbia's Kosovo Province. Ethnic 
Albanian officials say government forces set fire to homes and sent 
civilian residents fleeing villages near the town of Portevo. International 
monitors reported heavy shelling before the operation concluded in 
the late afternoon. An estimated 1500 people have been killed in the 
violence in Kosovo in the past year. Another quarter of a million 
people have been driven from their homes. Correspondent Art Chimes 
frequently traveled to Kosovo this year from our regional news bureau 
in Prague. In this background report, Correspondent Chimes looks at 
some of the major events of this past year in the province. Kosovo 
is a province of Serbia, the dominant part of what's left of Yugoslavia. 
Kosovo's population is 90 percent ethnic Albanian. Until 1989, the 
province enjoyed considerable autonomy. But since then, has been ruled 
from Belgrade. The most prominent politician in Kosovo, Ebruhema Gova 
had long advanced a non-violent negotiated settlement. Like most ethnic 
Albanians in the province, he wants an independent Kosovo. He's even 
been elected president of the self-proclaimed Republic of Kosovo. 
But after wars elsewhere in the former Yugoslavia, observers have 
expected the volatile ethnic mix and long-standing grievances to trigger 
an outbreak of violence in Kosovo. That happened early this year. 
A rebel group called the Kosovo Liberation Army began staging hit-and-run 
attacks against Serb police patrols. Serbian authorities responded 
in March, with a crackdown against what they described as the "terrorists." 
Although in the first wave, the dead were mostly women, children, 
and old men. As the year progressed, fighting ebbed and flowed. The 
rebels, at one point, controlled much of the province. But Serb police, 
Yugoslav army troops, and special forces regained control in what 
some have described as a "scorched earth campaign." Looting and burning 
countless homes, farms, and fields. Officials said the widely condemned 
offensive was aimed at depriving the guerrillas of civilian support. 
The brutal campaign drove vast numbers of residents from their homes. 
Many left the province, but tens of thousands lived for months out 
in the open. With little shelter in remote areas, making deliveries 
of humanitarian aid extremely difficult. The October agreement that 
has allowed many of the displaced to return home has apparently averted 
the threat of mass starvation. But a permanent solution remains elusive. 
The agreement fails to address underlying political issues. The international 
community has repeatedly said it does not support the ethnic Albanians' 
demand for independence. Alternative proposals include a restoration 
of the autonomy Kosovo enjoyed until 1989. Or enhanced status as a 
Third Republic of Federal Yugoslavia. Officials in Belgrade have indicated 
they would consider granting Kosovo limited self-rule. But after the 
conflict of the past year, many Kosovo Albanians say they've earned 
nothing less than full independence. Art Chimes, VOA News, Prague. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>