<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981225.1600.0361 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Years of pent-up anger erupted in 1998 in Yugoslavia's Kosovo Province. 
Where ethnic Albanian guerrillas battled Serb forces in violence that 
claimed an estimated 1500 lives. And drove more than a quarter-million 
residents from their homes. Word comes today that nine ethnic Albanian 
guerrillas, or rather, ethnic Albanian civilians were reportedly killed 
by Serbian forces in renewed fighting this Christmas holiday. Correspondent 
Art Chimes frequently travels to Kosovo from our regional news bureau 
in Prague. Where he reviews some of the past year's developments. 
Kosovo is a province of Serbia. The dominant part of what's left of 
Yugoslavia. Kosovo's population is 90 percent ethnic Albanian. Until 
1989, the province enjoyed considerable autonomy. But since then, 
has been ruled from Belgrade. The most prominent politician in Kosovo, 
Ebruhema Govo had long advanced a non-violent negotiated settlement. 
Like most ethnic Albanians in the province, he wants an independent 
Kosovo. He's even been elected president of the self-proclaimed Republic 
of Kosovo. But after wars elsewhere in the former Yugoslavia, observers 
have expected the volatile ethnic mix and long-standing grievances 
to trigger an outbreak of violence in Kosovo. That happened early 
this year. A rebel group called the Kosovo Liberation Army began staging 
hit-and-run attacks against Serb police patrols. Serbian authorities 
responded in March with a crackdown against what they described as 
the terrorists. Although in the first wave, the dead were mostly women, 
children, and old men. As the year progressed, fighting ebbed and 
flowed. The rebels at one point, controlled much of the province. 
But Serb police, Yugoslav army troops, and special forces regained 
control in what some have described as a "scorched earth campaign." 
Looting and burning countless homes, farms, and fields. Officials 
said the widely condemned offensive was aimed at depriving the guerrillas 
of civilian support. The brutal campaign drove vast numbers of residents 
from their homes. Many left the province, but tens of thousands lived 
for months out in the open. With little shelter in remote areas, making 
deliveries of humanitarian aid extremely difficult. The October agreement 
that has allowed many of the displaced to return home has apparently 
averted the threat of mass starvation. But a permanent solution remains 
elusive. The agreement fails to address underlying political issues. 
The international community has repeatedly said it does not support 
the ethnic Albanians' demand for independence. Alternative proposals 
include a restoration of the autonomy Kosovo enjoyed until 1989. Or 
enhanced status as a Third Republic of Federal Yugoslavia. Officials 
in Belgrade have indicated they would consider granting Kosovo limited 
self-rule. But after the conflict of the past year, many Kosovo Albanians 
say they've earned nothing less than full independence. Art Chimes, 
VOA News, Prague. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>