<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981225.0500.3194 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The observance of Christmas often has a lot of family traditions, 
gifts, and lots of music, too. But sometimes, if your birthday is 
on Christmas, well, there's a good chance that your celebration is 
overshadowed. You won't get any gifts. That's right. So with that 
in mind, Ray Freeman profiles three popular musicians who were all 
born on Christmas Day. And have also spent a good part of their lives 
singing Christmas songs on their birthdays. Country singer Barbara 
Mandrell was born on Christmas Day in 1948 in the city of Houston, 
Texas. Her dad owned a music store, and her mother was a music teacher. 
Barbara played many instruments from a young age. And by the time 
she was 13, began touring with such stars as Johnny Cash, Patsy Kline, 
and George Jones. Barbara Mandrell went on to great success. With 
hit records, a TV show, and numerous awards. Including six consecutive 
People's Choice Awards for favorite all-around female entertainer. 
December 25, 1946 was a big day in Paskagoula, Mississippi. Because 
that's the day and place singer/songwriter Jimmy Buffett was born. 
Buffett, known for his humorous and unusual music, attended Auburn 
University, and the University of Southern Mississippi. He moved to 
Nashville in the late 1960's with the intention of becoming a country 
singer. By 1972, Jimmy Buffett left Nashville and a failed marriage, 
and headed to the very Southeastern tip of the United States: called 
Key West, Florida. Success started to peek through the clouds in 1973, 
with the release of an album called: "A White Sport Coat and a Pink 
Crustacean." But his big breakthrough came in 1977, with a platinum 
album, and the hit single: "Margaritaville." Today, Jimmy Buffett 
has made a successful career of being laid back and relaxed. While 
he performs to sell-out crowds and fans that call themselves: "parrotheads." 
One of today's most unusual performers was also born on Christmas 
Day, 1954. Born in Aberdeen, Scotland, Annie Lenox was lead singer 
for the group called The Eurythmics. She won a scholarship to the 
Royal Academy of Music in London because of her piano and flute-playing 
skills. She quit on the eve of final exams, and spent three years 
working odd jobs and playing with various musical groups. Lenox teamed 
with musician and composer Dave Stewart, and formed The Eurythmics. 
In a makeshift studio, they recorded "Sweet Dreams are Made of This" 
which was the beginning of Annie's popularity on a large scale. It's 
Merry Christmas and Happy Birthday to Jimmy Buffett, Barbara Mandrell, 
and Annie Lenox. This is Ray Freeman. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>