<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981225.1600.1370 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For most American Christians, Christmas celebrations begin with a 
religious service. It is hard to find sitting room in any church on 
Christmas Eve and Christmas Day. And the most popular places of worship 
give out tickets for Christmas services in order to limit the crowds. 
Many churches have to schedule additional services to accommodate 
all who wish to attend. Tzolatsa Hoke asked three Christian church 
leaders in the United States: what message they have this Christmas 
for the many people who want to hear it. Washington National Cathedral, 
an almost 100 year old Gothic structure, is the seat of the Bishop 
of the Episcopal Dioceses of Washington. Although a Protestant Church, 
it also hosts euchanerical services and is considered to be a house 
of prayer for people of all faiths. Dean of the cathedral, Nathan 
Baxter, says about four thousand people attend each of the two Christmas 
Eve services in the cathedral. The nine o'clock Christmas morning 
service is televised nationally, and carried to some other countries. 
Nathan Baxter says his Christmas message to people all over the world 
is that God loves us all, regardless of what religion you practice. 
And He continues to give of Himself. I am so moved that in the midst 
of many of the tragedies around our world, that the wonderful stories 
that inspire us are the modern Christian stories. Christmas stories 
are stories that remind us of how, when people reach out to others. 
Either as governments, or as individuals, or as organizations that 
it brings joy. It brings peace. It brings understanding. And that's 
what the Christmas story is about. It's saying that God cares. God 
gives of God's self to the world. And we have to do the same. The 
basilica of the National Shrine of the Immaculate Conception is the 
largest Catholic church in America. It is the seat of the Archbishop 
of Washington, James Cardinal Hickey. Cardinal Hickey celebrates the 
shrine's solemn mass of Christmas Day at noon. Which is broadcast 
around the world by the Eternal World Television Network. In his Christmas 
message, Cardinal Hickey wants to console those whose hurt feelings 
separate them from their loved ones. Even if we can't be home for 
the holidays, we can open our hearts to Christ. And to ask Him to 
bring us closer to our Father in Heaven. We can ask His help in overcoming 
the anger and the estrangements we may experience in our lives. And 
in the power of His grace, we can reach out to others in love. Even 
if we are far away from home, let us be closer to our Father in Heaven. 
And to one another in Christ Jesus during this Christmas season. God 
bless you all. The Orthodox Church of America traces its origins to 
work began in Alaska by missionaries of the Russian Orthodox Church 
two hundred years ago. Its leader, Archbishop of Washington, Metropolitan 
Theodocious, says for many people, the traditional joy of Christmas 
is challenged by the realities of the world around them. The Christmas 
message has always been one of hope. Today in the person of the little 
child born in Bethlehem, we are called to receive and to share true 
peace, true joy, true life. In Him, all things are made new. Human 
nature is renewed. We are no longer shrouded by turmoil, confusion, 
or even death. No matter what our human condition, we are given to 
know that through the saving activity of Jesus Christ, we are clothed 
in eternal life. In churches throughout the country this Christmas 
Day, Christians are celebrating good tidings of great joy, the birth 
of Jesus. And the message of peace on earth, good will toward men. 
I'm Tzolitsa Hoke. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>