<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981225.1600.0587 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
South Africa's twin tiny mountain monarchies, Lesotho and Swaziland, 
rarely make news. But both experienced serious political turmoil in 
1998. VOA's Southern Africa Correspondent, Alex Belida reports. It 
was grim voice Prime Minister Pakalitha Mosisili, who took to Lesotho's 
national radio in late September. The mutiny in the armed forces following 
months of civil unrest sparked by a disputed election, prompted his 
government to request military intervention by troops from South Africa 
and Botswana. Mr. Mosisili said the decision to seek help from fellow 
members of the Southern African Development Community, or SADAC, was 
not taken lightly. I can assure you all that the mission to feed external 
military intervention is not one that government reached with ease. 
And for self-interest. But, that the compelling and engaged overriding 
consideration in inviting SADAC military forces into Lesotho was strictly 
to install law and order. Peace and stability to the kingdom. And 
thus, rescue the people of Lesotho from impeding crises. Mr. Mosisili 
accused Lesotho's main opposition parties of engineering the unrest 
in a bid to topple his government. Which had won re-election by a 
landslide in voting held in May. But the opposition claimed the voting 
was rigged. Its protests erupted into violence when the Southern African 
troops intervened. Some 60 people were killed in the clashes that 
ensued. Looting and arson reduced much of the capitol Maseru to rubble 
before the peace was finally restored. Eventually, a deal was hammered 
out between the government and the opposition to stage new elections 
within 18 months. But the opposition failed in its bid to get Mr. 
Mosisili's government to step down in favor of an interim broad-based 
government of national unity to rule Lesotho until the voting is held. 
Meanwhile, the nearby country of Swaziland ran into political troubles 
of its own during 1998. A previously unknown terrorist group calling 
itself the Black Tigers claimed responsibility for a series of bomb 
blasts. One of which left a security guard dead at the offices of 
the deputy prime minister. The group said that what it termed "fear 
and terror" would rein in Swaziland unless there was political change. 
It specifically demanded that King Mswati and his government review 
the royal decree banning all political parties in the tiny Southern 
African kingdom, sub-Saharan Africa's last traditional monarchy. The 
bombing campaign led to stepped-up security at government buildings 
around Swaziland. As authorities launched a manhunt for the suspected 
terrorists. Police raided the homes of dissident political and trade 
union leaders in connection with the bombings. But these opposition 
figures denied having any hand in the attacks. And dismissed the police 
raids as harassment. Alex Belida, VOA News, Southern Africa Bureau. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>