<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981225.0500.0655 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Here in the U.S., President Clinton's impeachment trial in the U.S. 
Senate is expected to begin in early January. When it does, Supreme 
Court Chief Justice William Renquist will serve as the presiding judge. 
As outlined under the rules for presidential impeachments set forth 
in the U.S. Constitution. As VOA's Jim Malone reports, it's a role 
for which Chief Justice Renquist seems uniquely qualified. William 
Renquist is 74. He was appointed to the Supreme Court by President 
Nixon in 1971. And chosen as the court's chief justice in 1986 by 
President Reagan. Under the U.S. Constitution, it will be Chief Justice 
Renquist's role to preside at President Clinton's impeachment trial 
in the Senate. Although Justice Renquist has no experience as a trial 
judge, he may be uniquely qualified to preside over only the second 
presidential impeachment trial in U.S. history. Justice Renquist is 
one of the country's leading experts on impeachment. Having written 
a book in 1992 called: "Grand Inquest." A look at the 1868 impeachment 
trial of President Andrew Johnson, and the 1805 impeachment trial 
of Supreme Court Justice Samuel Chase. In an interview a few years 
ago with the C-SPAN public affairs network, Justice Renquist said 
Andrew Johnson's acquittal by a single vote in the Senate in 1868 
set a positive precedent for relations between the president and Congress. 
The president's tenure of office would have been less secure by -- 
marginally less secure. I don't think there would have been a lot 
more impeachments. But the Congressional authority to impeach would 
have acted more like a sort of Damocles. A design not to fall, but 
to hang. And to threaten the president. In writing his book on impeachment, 
Justice Renquist did extensive research on the 1868 trial of President 
Johnson in the Senate. Which lasted nearly three months. He says newspapers 
from that time period reported on the impeachment trial and little 
else. Leading him to conclude that much of the nation's official business 
would grind to a halt while the President was on trial. It just really 
significantly impairs, if it doesn't cripple a president, to be the 
subject of an impeachment trial. And it also takes up a tremendous 
amount of time on the part of Congress. So that Congress is not able 
to do very much. It's just a very time-consuming procedure. Even though 
he will serve in the role of a judge during the impeachment trial, 
Justice Renquist will have limited powers. He may make rulings on 
motions or procedures during the trial. But at any time, members of 
the Senate can ask for a debate and vote on any of the motions the 
chief justice makes. It would only take a simple majority vote of 
51 senators to overturn any of the rulings made by the chief justice. 
Attorney Alan Barren has been the lead prosecutor in two impeachment 
trials in the U.S. Senate. Involving Federal judges. He considers 
the chief justice's role in the upcoming impeachment trial involving 
President Clinton more ceremonial than legal. Indeed, he really, his 
role is to some extent really ceremonial. Any decision that he makes 
can be overridden by a simple majority of the Senate. But he doesn't 
own the place. This is not his courtroom the way we think of a judge 
running his courtroom. This is really not his balueg. Under the impeachment 
rules established by the U.S. Constitution, the 100 members of the 
Senate are supposed to participate in the trial as silent jurors. 
Occasionally passing written questions to the chief justice to be 
asked of witnesses. At the end of the trial, they would individually 
render a verdict of either guilty or not guilty when their name was 
called by the chief justice. It takes a vote of two-thirds of the 
Senate, or 67 of the 100 senators to convict the president of high 
crimes and misdemeanors. The vague Constitutional standard for impeachable 
offenses. Conviction in the Senate would lead to the president's immediate 
removal from office. Jim Malone, VOA News, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>