<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981020.1145 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Salem Rajab Sarsour doesn't fit the typical profile of a Palestinian 
likely to stage attacks against Israel. Too old, too settled, too 
stable _ not like the young firebrands who'd walk into crowded cafes 
and marketplaces and blow themselves up. But the wave of attacks to 
which Israeli authorities said Tuesday he has confessed _ hurling 
grenades at a bus stop and an Israeli military jeep, stabbing an elderly 
rabbi to death in a Jewish settlement _ could be part of a new pattern 
of violence by Islamic militants against Israel. It's been more than 
a year since the radical group Hamas has staged a suicide-bombing 
in the heart of an Israeli city. Since then, sophisticated large-scale 
attacks by tightly organized cells of fighters have given way to a 
different kind of operation, smaller in scope but deadly in intent. 
Such attacks _ stabbings, shootings, grenade-throwing _ are relatively 
easy to stage and extremely difficult to prevent. That could bode 
ill for peace hopes at a time when Israel is demanding almost airtight 
security guarantees from the Palestinians. The Israeli army said Sarsour's 
rampage came at Hamas' behest, even though he goes against type as 
one of its foot soldiers. He is married, about to turn 30, the father 
of five small children. He had steady work. His family lives in a 
relatively well-off neighborhood in the West Bank town of Hebron, 
not a squalid refugee camp. Like so many Palestinians of his generation, 
though, he has battle scars and baggage: the family home was demolished 
by Israeli troops when he was 12; he went to jail while a teen-ager, 
during the intefadeh, and again in his early 20s. Neighbors described 
Sarsour as more devout than most, dubbing him ``Sheik Salem'' for 
the large white prayer cap he always wore. His family denied knowledge 
of any Hamas links, but his brother Jamal said if he indeed carried 
out attacks against Israel, ``we would be proud of him.'' The attacks 
attributed to Sarsour, like others blamed on Islamic militants this 
year, made use of either common implements _ knives, nails for bombs 
_ or of items freely available on the weapons black market like guns 
and grenades. They tended to target either the Israeli military or 
Jewish settlers, rather than the random urban passers-by hurt and 
killed in Hamas suicide-bombings in the mid-1990s. Under past norms, 
someone Sarsour's age was more likely to be a behind-the-scenes mastermind 
than a field operative. His active role as an attacker could raise 
fears in Israel, where many security measures are based on profiling 
meant to pinpoint those who pose the greatest risk. For example, it 
is almost impossible for an unmarried Palestinian man in his early 
20s to get a permit to work in Israel, because suicide-bombers were 
almost always young, single and jobless. Another change: some of Sarsour's 
actions were opportunistic and impulsive, as opposed to the clockwork 
planning that has generally characterized Hamas attacks before. Authorities 
said he approached a Jewish settlement in Hebron in August intending 
to throw firebombs at soldiers but seized the opportunity to stab 
an elderly, unarmed rabbi. When attackers in such hit-and-run episodes 
escape, as they often do, it is difficult for investigators to determine 
whether they acted under orders from Hamas or were inspired by its 
hard-line ideology. The group opposes any peace with Israel. Sarsour 
told Israeli authorities that Hamas had trained him in use of grenades, 
and the group's military arm claimed responsibility for his attack 
on a bus stop frequented by soldiers in the desert town of Beersheba. 
Sarsour's attacks, and others like it, are harder for Israeli intelligence 
or Palestinian police to anticipate than a major bombing, but that 
doesn't fully explain the apparent shift in tactics. Hamas may not 
have renounced suicide attacks or car bombings; it may simply be having 
trouble pulling them off. For the past five weeks _ ever since Israeli 
troops gunned down two top Hamas fugitives _ Israel has been on high 
alert for a large-scale Hamas action, and authorities have reported 
a number of foiled attempts to make and transport explosives. Army 
radio quoted the head of army intelligence, Maj. Gen. Amos Malka, 
as saying Tuesday that recent action against Hamas by both Israeli 
and Palestinian security forces had hampered its ability to carry 
out mass attacks. But he told lawmakers the group's infrastructure 
still exists and its motives are unchanged. Some observers, though, 
see signs of a tacit deal between Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat 
and Hamas. ``Hamas is operating low-level field men, to carry out 
relatively primitive attacks, and Arafat can claim that these are 
'local initiatives' which the Palestinian Authority security apparatus 
... is helpless to prevent,'' commentator Ron Ben-Yishai wrote Tuesday 
in the Yediot Ahronot daily. Palestinian leaders call it a no-win 
situation, saying Israel is using violence they can neither predict 
nor prevent as an excuse for refusing to cede more territory. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>