<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981020.0806 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Time is running out before the year 2000, but not ideas for clothes. 
From hip minimalism to some romantic ideas and couture touches, the 
summer of 1999 should not be dull, viewed from last week's ready-to-wear 
shows. It wasn't the greatest season ever, but there were plenty of 
ideas. Young doesn't mean a kind of vestal virgin anymore. It means 
practical, wearable, rather sophisticated and expensive clothes, if 
you are thinking beyond jeans and running shoes. The younger designers, 
like Michael Kors at Celine and Peter Speliopoulos at Cerruti _ both 
Americans _ definitely had the high-tech, minimalist touch, along 
with other younger stylists like Grit Seymour at Daniel Hechter. Kors 
tore up lots of fabrics and wove them into rustic threads for luxury 
turtleneck sweaters to wear over shiny short skirts. He added beautiful 
real crystals and amethysts to simple, sleeveless evening wear _ ``Why 
have jewelry when it's in the clothes?'' he asked. Speliopoulos for 
Cerruti showed sharp but easy lines and cuts. Some soft drawstring 
touches, stitching on leather, and linear silver embroidery gave the 
cachet here. In the still young but more romantic group, Israeli-American 
Alber Elbaz was admired by many for his couture-suave Guy Laroche 
collection, though he's destined to design ready-to-wear for Yves 
Saint Laurent next season. At Vuitton, Marc Jacobs made a hit with 
his offhand, breezy ponchos, shorts, little leather belts and backpacks, 
and wrapped skirts, easy but chic styles for fashionable travelers. 
John Galliano at Dior was noted for his great show of wearable, chic 
clothes. They included wide, handsome olive-green pants, slick couture-style 
jackets with touches of red, umbrella-skirted suits, and some fabulous 
draped and backless dresses _ all marched out in the Bolshevik or 
Chinese Red Guard theme, with linear touches of 1920s Constructivist 
art. At Givenchy, Alexander McQueen straightened out his penchant 
for freakish touches to show toned-down but handsome clothes with 
plenty of bared skin, lean lines and good geometric touches, mostly 
in black and white. Though he's now ``establishment,'' Jean-Paul Gaultier 
went back to rather crazy styles based on Japanese ideas. But there 
there was exotic opulence in the kimonos, and ideas to choose from. 
Also confusing was Karl Lagerfeld at Chanel, who zipped into high-tech 
after the total chic of long looks last season. Mixed results included 
everything from skimpy bathing wear to pants with flying panels _ 
and not enough classic Chanel jackets. Valentino was admirable in 
his lighter clothes, like fluid beach pants or luxury full skirts 
and exquisite gypsy-peasant blouses. The biggest hit for sheer class 
of show and brilliant clothes was Yohji Yamamoto, whose witty strip-tease 
of bridal clothes at the Moulin Rouge nightclub had the fashion crowd 
on their feet with joy. To sum up the tendencies: The general outline 
is feminine, with longer skirts, though knee-lengths showed up among 
the modernists. Pants can be anything from cropped to full palazzo 
style, straight or flared. While designers brought out some transparency 
and stretch- column styles, sexy was hardly the word for the mood 
of most of these shows. Tops may be easy, unstructured blazers, very 
beautiful at Ungaro when worn with pants or light, lacy dresses. Jackets 
everywhere can come out fitted, boxy, zipped or blouson style. The 
cache-coeur or wraparound is also popular. The clingy-fit tee-shirt 
or tank top is essential for summer. That also goes for sleeveless 
sheaths, strapless tops, the low-draped cowlbacks or other backless 
looks crossed by straps. Fabrics practically make the clothes this 
season, and besides the beautiful sheer linens and poplins, watch 
for the new synthetics: sheer chiffon-like blends, evanescent crepes, 
some stretch fabrics, glazed or waterproofed fabrics and taffeta-like 
microfibers. Colors to look for are all the whites, from sand and 
ecru or cream to squeaky-clean new white linen. Black follows right 
along, especially for evening. Grays edge into dusty pastels like 
parma violet or sea green, with corals to pep things up. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>