<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981020.0522 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Relief convoys rolled again Tuesday in Kosovo after a one-day halt 
due to renewed violence, and a 20-member U.N. team arrived to assess 
efforts to end the fighting in the tense, separatist province. Following 
attacks by ethnic Albanians on Serb police last weekend, the government 
has moved tanks and troops to a front line in central Kosovo, raising 
fears for the future of a U.S.-brokered agreement to end the crisis. 
While the Serbs accused the guerrillas of another attack on police 
Tuesday, Kosovo appeared mostly calm and efforts resumed to get help 
to tens of thousands of displaced residents before the onset of winter. 
Mercy Corps International and other humanitarian groups sent some 
150 tons of food, clothing, mattresses and other items to Djinovce, 
75 kilometers (45 miles) southwest of Pristina, delivering them in 
a convoy to an aid warehouse for distribution. Other aid was being 
delivered elsewhere. The U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees on Monday 
had called off two convoys of relief supplies headed to western Kosovo 
in the wake of a Serb military buildup that followed weekend violence 
in which at least three Serb police were killed. Hundreds of people 
have been killed since Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic launched 
a crackdown Feb. 28 on ethnic Albanian separatists in Kosovo, a southern 
province in Yugoslavia's dominant republic of Serbia. As winter approaches, 
officials fear a humanitarian disaster if the estimated 300,000 people 
displaced by the fighting, thousands still living in the open, are 
not allowed to return home. NATO commander Gen. Wesley Clark was expected 
in Belgrade later Tuesday to discuss how far Yugoslav authorities 
still have to go to meet the alliance's Oct. 27 deadline to pull troops 
out of Kosovo or face airstrikes. Under an agreement forged last week 
between U.S. envoy Richard Holbrooke and Milosevic, Yugoslavia must 
cease hostilities, withdraw troops, begin peace talks with ethnic 
Albanians and allow monitors into the province. The agreement led 
NATO to delay its original pullout-or-airstrikes deadline by 10 days. 
The newly arrived U.N. team, led by Staffan de Mistura of Sweden, 
is to serve as the ``eyes and ears'' of Secretary-General Kofi Annan. 
The representatives of human rights, humanitarian, political and peacekeeping 
offices are expected to stay for about a week to gather information 
on efforts to halt the fighting in the province. Yugoslav authorities 
and radical Albanians have traded accusations about who was to blame 
for the weekend's surge of bloodshed. Western officials, concerned 
about the skirmishes, indicated that ethnic Albanian rebels as well 
as Serb forces were to blame. On Tuesday, the official Yugoslav news 
agency Tanjug claimed a Serb policeman was wounded Tuesday morning 
when ``terrorists'' attacked a police patrol near Klina, 50 kilometers 
(30 miles) southwest of Pristina. The incident could not be verified. 
Many Kosovo Albanians who support secession from Serbia were distressed 
that the Holbrooke-Milosevic agreement averted NATO airstrikes against 
Yugoslavia, which they hoped would help their goal of independence. 
British Foreign Secretary Robin Cook reiterated Tuesday that Western 
nations oppose independence for Kosovo for fear that a border change 
in the volatile Balkans would lead to problems elsewhere in the region. 
``One of the reasons why it is so important that we resolve the instability 
in Kosovo is to make sure that it doesn't spread over into wider insecurity 
in the region,'' Cook told reporters in Sofia after talks with Bulgarian 
Premier Ivan Kostov. As part of last week's agreement, a 2,000-member 
international verification force is being organized by the 54-nation 
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe to ensure that 
Yugoslavia honors its promises. About 25 members of an advance team 
for the monitors are in Kosovo. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>