<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981020.0486 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Russian Prime Minister Yevgeny Primakov said Tuesday that the government 
might print new money to pay off its huge debts, but pledged that 
any boost in the money supply would be backed by hard currency reserves. 
The government will pay off its wage debts to state workers before 
the end of the year and resolve all back wages to the military by 
the end of January, Primakov said after meeting with President Boris 
Yeltsin. He said the debts owed to pensioners could not be paid until 
the end of next year. While Primakov said the government might need 
to print new money to cover the debts, he insisted the amount would 
be ``very insignificant'' and would be fully backed by gold and hard 
currency reserves. He dismissed warnings that printing money would 
lead to high inflation. ``If we properly back the money supply (with 
gold and hard currency), it isn't that dangerous, and sometimes not 
dangerous at all,'' Primakov said. The government has been promising 
to pay off wage arrears for years, yet millions of workers still receive 
their salaries months late. The government has been unable to collect 
taxes to pay off the debts, and its latest two-month-old economic 
crisis has made the situation worse. Primakov is trying to develop 
a plan to deal with the crisis, and a draft budget for the final three 
months of the year has a deficit of around 100 billion rubles (dlrs 
6 billion). Deputy Finance Minister Oleg Vyugin told investors that 
the government will have to ask the Central Bank to print new money 
to plug holes in the budget. The practice led to high inflation in 
1992-94. But in recent years the had pursued tight money policies 
that brought down inflation and made the ruble relatively stable until 
the crisis hit in August. Inflation in Russia is up about 50 percent 
this year, and could hit 200 percent or even 300 percent by year's 
end, the Central Bank has forecast. The battered Russian currency 
was up slightly on Tuesday, trading at 16.9 rubles to the dollar compared 
to 17.1 the previous day. It stood at 6.2 rubles to the dollar before 
the crisis. Farm production, meanwhile, has been skewered by the crisis 
and slid by 9.4 percent in the first nine months of 1998 compared 
with the same period last year, Interfax cited the State Statistics 
Committee as saying. Russia has fewer sheep, goats, cattle and pigs, 
and meat production is down 4 percent. Primakov on Tuesday assailed 
the economic policies of the previous governments as the root of the 
current crisis and called for more state control over the economy. 
``The state must assume regulatory functions and ensure order in the 
country before real market relations take root,'' Primakov said at 
a meeting with Russian industrialists. Primakov called for more state 
support to ailing Russian industries and suggested cutting profit 
taxes and value-added taxes to help them. The new government has only 
taken stop-gap measures and has yet to offer a comprehensive economic 
program. ``We could have invented some flashy action, but the government 
is doing serious work and is only going to take real steps to stabilize 
the situation,'' Primakov said at the start of his meeting with Yeltsin. 
The International Monetary Fund wants the government to provide a 
credible economic plan as a condition for the next disbursement of 
a dlrs 22.6 billion bailout package that was frozen when the crisis 
hit. An IMF team was en route to Moscow on Tuesday for more talks, 
but little is expected to come of the visit. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>