<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981020.0495 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Relief convoys rolled again Tuesday in Kosovo after a one-day halt 
due to renewed violence, and a 20-member U.N. team arrived to serve 
as the ``eyes and ears'' of Secretary-General Kofi Annan in the tense 
province. Following ethnic Albanian attacks on Serb police last weekend, 
the government has moved tanks and troops to a front line in central 
Kosovo, raising fears for future of the the U.S.-brokered agreement 
to end the violence in the province. But while the Serbs accused the 
guerrillas of another attack on police Tuesday, Kosovo appeared mostly 
calm Tuesday and the push resumed to get help to tens of thousands 
of displaced residents before the onset of winter. Mercy Corps International 
and other humanitarian groups sent some 150 tons of food, clothing, 
mattresses and other items to Djinovce, 75 kilometers (45 miles) southwest 
of Pristina, delivering them in a convoy to an aid warehouse for distribution. 
Other aid was being delivered elsewhere. The U.N. High Commissioner 
for Refugees on Monday had called off two convoys of relief supplies 
headed to western Kosovo in the wake of a Serb military buildup that 
followed weekend violence in which at least three Serb police were 
killed. Hundreds of people have been killed since Yugoslav President 
Slobodan Milosevic launched a crackdown Feb. 28 on ethnic Albanian 
separatists. As winter approaches, officials fear a humanitarian disaster 
if the estimated 300,000 people displaced by the fighting, thousands 
still living in the open, are not allowed to return home. NATO commander 
Gen. Wesley Clark was expected in Belgrade later Tuesday to discuss 
how far Yugoslav authorities still have to go to meet the alliance's 
Oct. 27 deadline to pull troops out of Kosovo or face airstrikes. 
The newly arrived U.N. team, led by Staffan de Mistura of Sweden, 
consists of representatives of human rights, humanitarian, political 
and peacekeeping offices. They are expected to stay for about a week 
to gather information on efforts to halt the fighting. ``We are here 
to assess the situation on the ground after the Holbrooke-Milosevic 
agreement, and to report to the secretary-general,'' said de Mistura, 
commenting on last week's breakthrough agreement brokered by U.S. 
envoy Richard Holbrooke. More Yugoslav army troops were positioned 
southwest of Pristina, the Kosovo capital, after a surge of weekend 
violence that left three Serb policemen dead and led to mutual accusations 
between authorities and radical Albanians on who started the bloodshed. 
On Tuesday, the official Yugoslav news agency Tanjug claimed a Serb 
policeman was wounded Tuesday morning when ``terrorists'' attacked 
a police patrol near Klina, 50 kilometers (30 miles) southwest of 
Pristina. The incident could not be verified. Western officials, concerned 
about the recent skirmishes, indicated that ethnic Albanian rebels 
as well as Serb forces were to blame. But the KLA's political representative, 
Adem Demaci, maintained Tuesday that the rebel force had adhered to 
the cease-fire it proclaimed Oct. 8, and accused the Serbs of continued 
shelling of ethnic Albanian villages. ``The UCK avoids conflicts and 
reacts only when forced to,'' he said, referring to the KLA by its 
Albanian acronym. ``The regime, on the other hand, did not cease its 
actions for a single day.'' Many Kosovo Albanians who support secession 
from Serbia, the dominant republic in Yugoslavia, were distressed 
about the Holbrooke-Milosevic agreement. British Foreign Secretary 
Robin Cook reiterated Tuesday that Western nations oppose independence 
for Kosovo for fear that a border change in the volatile Balkans would 
lead to problems elsewhere in the region. ``One of the reasons why 
it is so important that we resolve the instability in Kosovo is to 
make sure that it doesn't spread over into wider insecurity in the 
region,'' Cook told reporters in Sofia after talks with Bulgarian 
Premier Ivan Kostov. As part of last week's agreement, a 2,000-member 
international verification force is being organized by the 54-nation 
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe to ensure that 
Yugoslavia honors its promises. About 25 members of an advance team 
for the monitors are in Kosovo. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>