<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981020.2100.0087 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
First the case of Jones versus Clinton. Back in court, but why and 
for how long? Amid continuing talk of a deal of some sort as of tonight, 
there is no deal, just the same lingering court case that's been in 
the background for much of this presidency? A. for a look at today's 
court proceedings and what if anything has changed this time around, 
we're going to begin with NBC news correspondent Lisa myers. It was 
another high-stakes showdown in the builterly fought case that has 
brought the president to the brink of impeachment. And this time the 
outcome could be crucial not only for the president and paula Jones 
but for other women who claim they've been sexually harassed. The 
key question inside this courthouse today, assuming the president 
did what Jones claims, expose himself and ask for sex, is that severe 
enough to be considered sexual harassment under the law? Judge pasco 
Bowman asked, how bad is bad enough? The president's lawyer Amy sabrin 
replied, yobbling there is a sliding scale of offensiveness, but she 
insisted if trial judge got it right when she said Clinton's conduct, 
while offensive, was not sexual harassment. However, Jones' lawyers 
argued that Clinton's alleged conduct did amount to sexual harassment 
and worse. We claim that what Mr. Clinton did in that hotel room is, 
in fact, a Violation of criminal law, it is indecent exposure. Judge 
Donald Ross asked why Jones didn't leave the room when Clinton began 
making advances. Her lawyer, Jim Fischer, said women in that position 
face a difficult choice. We all agree that if she had performed oral 
sex, she would have had a solid gold case, so why have less of a case 
for refusing? Quts why most feminist groups have shunned Jones and 
her case, one group has now come to her support. If this is not severe 
conduct which is alleged, then I don't know what is. Most apeoples 
like this fail, and many expertings say Jones' case is weak because 
she can't prove she suffered any significant harm. But her lawyers 
were encouraged that the judges themselves brought up the issue of 
Monica Lewinsky and whether the trial judge made a mistake at excluding 
her evidence from the case. The lawyers say that alone is reason enough 
to reinstate Jones' case. Yet after battling it out in court, both 
sides made it clear they still are eager to settle this case out of 
court. The president's lawyer was emphatic. It is time to get all 
this behind us, to get this behind the American people. If there's 
no settlement, the appeals court is expected to rule within two or 
three months, just when the president is likely to be busy fighting 
impeachment. That's one more worry the president does not need and 
one Jones believes he'll pay a high price to avoid. Lisa Myers, NBC 
news, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>