<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981020.2100.2262 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the upcoming trial in the commonwealth of Virginia, a top efficient 
of the K.K.K. will be defended by a lawyer who it is sastes no one 
would have expected to take the case, making for a very unlikely match 
here. NBC news correspondent Bob Kur filed this report for today on 
NBC. On a Saturday night back in August at this Virginia farm near 
the North Carolina border, the Ku Klux Klan held a rally and with 
the farmer's permission set fire to a cross. But Virginia law prohibits 
cross burnings, so just after these pictures were taken, police moved 
in. All you clans men -- The clansmen they arrested is barrie black, 
a self-described racist. Yes, I am a racist, why? Because I look at 
the pigmentation in my skin, and I see white or caucasian people are 
more -- I guess that makes me racist. But look who signed up to be 
the clansman's lawyer? I'll never be a member. They're not my favorite 
people. The K.K.K. has a dreadful, a horrifying reputation. Lynchings, 
burnings, bombings, a history of racial violence. Like burning that 
cross. I interpret it to say he hates me and people like me. Never, 
never, ever -- So, why is attorney and law school lecturer David ball 
willing to defend an imperial wizard of the K.K.K.? Burning a cross 
is speech, is expressive conduct. I believe under the case law you 
can't regulate content and that this statute clearly does. To klansmen 
barrie black, it's a constitutional issue, not a racial one. He says 
he couldn't find a white lawyer willing to take the case and was glad 
the American civil liberties union was glad to help. I have to go 
with the one person I feel is going to do the best job. And in this 
case, attorney ball, even though he's a black man, I believe he will 
give me 151%. But don't you and the K.K.K. believe in real racial 
separation, even that blacks should be sent back to Africa? I'm not 
a white supremacist, but I am for separation of the races. I don't 
believe we should be mixing our gloods because the Bible says that's 
a destruction of that race. Would you invite your lawyer into your 
home? Would I ask him to come to my house? I have a lot of black friends 
who do stop at my house occasionally. I don't invite them in. I'm 
not going to say I'd invite him in to spend the night at my house, 
because I wouldn't. That's a fact. That's reality. So far, they've 
never even met, only spoken by phone. The Ku Klux Klan imperial wizard 
and the man many would consider his unlikely lawyer, who's fighting 
to protect the clan's right to burn crosses. Personally, I believe 
this man has a right to hate me. Professionally, I know he does. I 
have much more fear of the courts than I do of Barry black and his 
friends running around in sheets. Bob Kur, NBC news, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>