<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981020.2100.0862 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
T minus nine now until the space shuttle discovery flight that will 
send senator John Glenn back into orbit as astronaut John Glenn. Today 
the White House announced the president is planning to be in Florida 
to watch the launch live. NASA has enjoined months of largely positive 
publicity surrounding the mission, so much so Glenn himself has asked 
the press to pay more attention to the science of the mission, and 
focus less on him. But the "New York Times" has learned that for undisclosed 
reasons as far as we know Glenn has been dropped as a subject of one 
of the major experiments planned for the mission. The byline on the 
exclusive story belongs to Dr. Lawrence altman, who's with us tonight 
from New York. Doctor, walk us through your story. What has he been 
dropped from? And what is the best guess as of this hr as to why? 
Senator Glenn has been dropped from the portion of the sleep experiment 
in which he was to take melatonin to assess its value in sleep loss 
in space. People as they're older have -- people have been studied 
for this. NasA has publicized the fact that he would take this as 
another member of the crew who did it on a previous shuttle flight. 
He is still going into space. He is still participating in the sleep 
experiment and another protein experiment, but the melatonin portion 
of the experiment has been dropped. And it raises some questions as 
to why this has happened since the conditions for which somebody would 
be excluded have been well known by the -- And cited and written by 
the principal investigator for several years and they've known that 
senator Glenn has been going up for several months, but he was only 
dropped without announcement in late August. Was there any guess at 
it, any speculation today? And what does this do to the overall integrity 
of his mission? Does this lessen in a substantial degree the amount 
of work he'll do up there? no. All it means is that he won't be taking 
a pill in a few nights. It doesn't interfere with that. It means that 
in his particular case they will not be able to test two hypotheses, 
two out of four, regarding melatonin and the effects on sleep. But 
it will not affect the study on five other people before that's been 
done and another member of the crew. I guess what I'm trying to get 
at here is what might be at work? Why would this particular experiment 
be taken away from from John Glenn? Simply because there are rigid 
criteria set by the investigator and senator glenn had some condition, 
presumably preexisting, that will not interfere with his flight, will 
not interfere with any other part of it, but will exclude him from 
that portion of the experiment that relates to melatonin. And it relates 
to why they've made so much of his participating in the melatonin 
and now have to withdraw him. Mission suddenly getting a lot of press 
and media attention. The story in tomorrow's "New York Times" as wrirn 
by Dr. Lawrence altman. Always good to have you on the broadcast. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>