<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981020.2100.0260 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With us tonight to talk about the legal ramifications of today's developments 
and the continuing investigation of the president as a Backdrop, Paul 
rothstein, former special counsel to the house and Senate judiciary 
subcommittees, currently professor at Georgetown University law center 
and Stuart Taylor, senior writer for "the national journal" and a 
Contributing editor to "Newsweek". Both gentlemen with us from our 
NBC news bureau in Washington. Paul, to begin with you, correct me 
if I'm wrong, is the only reason we are back in court the fact that 
the president has since we've learned said things in the Monica Lewinsky 
case that may shed light on his behavior and truthfulness in this 
case? I don't think so. In fact, that question is irrelevant to what 
the court of appeals is deciding. The court of appeals is assuming 
that the president did what Paula Jones alleges, assuming it for the 
sake of argument. And, therefore, the Lewinsky matter, which goes 
to the question of whether he did make a pass at Paula Jones similarly 
to the one he made at Lewinsky, that question is really out of the 
picture. So, the Lewinsky matter has nothing to do with it. The question 
before the court of appeals was was the trial judge right when she 
said this doesn't amount to federal workplace sexual harassment because 
she suffered no job detriment and because it wasn't frightening enough 
to affect the terms and conditions of her employment. And Stuart, 
what can happen to the president in this case, potentially? Well, 
if it's not settled, then the question is will the appeals court rule 
that judge Wright did err and was wrong to throw the case out, will 
it rule that she has a right to a jury trial. I think there's a fairly 
good chans it'll do that all though it was hard sto read the judge's 
oral argument today. There's a good argument to be made that judge 
Wright was mistaken in throughing out the case and the facts alleged 
by Paula Jones do amount to a Violation of her legal rights. If true, 
then the case could go forward, it could go to trial, the president 
in the impeachment context would lose the argument that this is a 
Dismissed lawsuit. He might also lose the argument depending on how 
the court rules that monica Lewinsky was not relevant to the lawsuit 
anyway, and he would face a Higher risk of being held in contempt 
of court by judge Wright, which she's hinted she might do, certainly 
if the case was alive. Paul rothstein, to quote my friend, Lisa Myers, 
this is a Y the president doesn't need right now. Why isn't the White 
House settling? Well, I think he's afraid it'll be read as admitting 
something and that that might affect the impeachment process. But 
frankly, I think he should settle. He's got to get rid of the battle 
on that front so he's not fighting on two frontings, impeachment and 
the Paula Jones case. And also I think he should settle so that he 
can say, look, the only person who possibly could have been husht 
by my alleged perjury in the Paula Jones case is Paula Jones herself, 
and I've taken care of her, if he settles, i've paid off. Therefore, 
nobody's hurt. It's water under the bridge. It's moot. It's passed. 
It's not an impeachable offense. I think he ought to settle this. 
And Stuart, do you think it would have an impact on the current case? 
Isn't there an argument to be made that minds are made up as to the 
president's truthfulness or lack of it and how germane it is to the 
lewinsky case and what would Ken Starr do with kind of an admission 
by the president in the form of a settlement in hand? Well, I don't 
think Ken Starr would do anything with it. I don't think it would 
be relevant to his responsibilities. Some minds are made up, but I 
think -- I don't really think they're made up in a final way. The 
best evidence of that is the same polls that show most people don't 
want the president impeached now also show a lot of them, sometimes 
a Majority, saying that the he committed perjury, then that might 
be different. Well, I think the evidence shows compellingly that he 
did commit perjury and not merely lie to the American people but commit 
perjury. And I think as the proceedings continue that will be brought 
home to the american people at a more immediate way than it has been 
so far. Paul, let's conduct a reality check here. Where does this 
case leave us as future presidents come into office? As a result of 
Bill Clinton, what can you now do to a sitting president that you 
couldn't get away with before? Well, I think regardless of the truth 
or falsity of these current charges, i think people in the future 
who have a political agenda will be encouraged to make charges, be 
they true or false, to paralyze the president. So, that is perhaps 
the legacy that Clinton has left us by opening himself up to these 
charges and that Starr and the Congress perhaps have given us. I would 
point out by the way that under the law, if a person settles a Lawsuit, 
it is not to be taken as an admission. That's a strong rule of evidence. 
It is just a buying of your peace. So, it's not saying I did the stuff. 
It's just saying I don't want to have all this trouble and have to 
go to trial. And he might lose this appeal, and he might even lose 
at trial, in which case then for impeachment it looks very bad. It's 
like he did yet another piece of sexual wrongdoing and lied in the 
an important case. So, settlement seems to me to be the better part 
of wisdom here. Stuart Taylor, the secrecy surrounding Ken Starr's 
off is almost like that of the papacy. What's preventing Starr from 
coming out in either a casual setting or through formal correspondence 
and saying here's what I've got, here's what i've shown you so far, 
and just a heads-up, here's what I'm working on, and we could be looking 
at X, Y, and Z future evidence? Well, he was asked to do that by chairman 
Hyde in a letter, and the letter went back saying I'm still looking. 
Maybe I'll have something, maybe I won't. That wasn't very helpful. 
He should try and provide an answer that shows us whether something's 
coming or not. The only conceivable reason I can think that would 
justify in him being so ambiguous at this point is if he's really 
got something important brewing and it's impossible to foresee how 
it will end. But if I were the house Judiciary committee, whether 
republican or democratic, I would press Starr to do that. I don't 
think he should do it in a casual way. I think he should do it in 
a formal way by notifying Congress where he is. Taletale, Paul rothstein, 
great to have you on the broadcast. Thanks. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>