<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981020.1830.0456 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Now to the search for peace in the Middle East. For days, in a secluded 
location on Maryland's eastern shore, the talks have been heated and, 
at times, close to falling apart. But now, NBC's Andrea Mitchell reports, 
some high-level intervention could save the day. Tom, there is new 
hope tonight that a summit deal may be possible, partly because of 
a dramatic late entrance into the talks by a Unique figure in the 
Middle East, Jordan's ailing king Hussein. The king came to the summit 
during a break in months of cancer treatments at the mayo clinic in 
Minnesota. After meeting last week with Israel's new foreign minister 
ariel Sharon, the king is now ready to play what all sides agree is 
a unique role, Middle East survivor, wise man, mediator trusted by 
all. We hope that king Hussein can help both leaders understand the 
needs and limitations and requirements of the other. For the president, 
a fifth full day leading the talks late into each night. Even canceling 
today's scheduled political fund-raising trip to California. The president 
is determined and focused on helping the parties make the tough choices 
they need to move the peace process forward. The king and the president 
shuttled between the two sides trying to close gaps on the key issues. 
Palestinian demands, for more land from Israel. Israeli demands, for 
a Palestinian crackdown on terrorism, including an agreement to turn 
suspects over to Israel for trial. There has to be an agreement on 
security and monitoring of all the aspects of a very detailed new 
security regime that will be set up in the West Bank. Underscoring 
the problem -- today, the terrorist group Hamas claimed responsibility 
for yesterday's grenade attack on commuters at an israeli bus stop, 
an incident that almost derailed the summit. They are trying now to 
avoid a breakdown. And therefore, that can be projected as sort of 
a breakthrough. Tonight, U.S. officials say there has been progress 
on specific issues. Lawyers have even written the outlines of a draft 
agreement. But what is still unknown? Whether the two leaders trust 
each other enough to sign it. tom? What are the chances that a deal 
can be enforced? That is the big questions. And also, the fact that 
they have tough issues ahead. Who controls, juz lem, what would be 
the backgroundries. But if they don't reach an agreement here, the 
whole region could blow up. That is what is really at stake, Tom. 
Thanks, very much. Andrea Mitchell at the state department tonight. 
There is a chance that they may arrive at some kind of an agreement 
before the week is out. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>