<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981020.0009 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It was a snapshot for the ages. There was Venus Lacy, the 6-foot-4-inch 
center of the American Basketball League's Nashville Noise, with an 
arm draped around the 5-1 Michelle Kwan, the 1998 Olympic silver medalist 
in figure skating. Jackie Joyner-Kersee, the two-time Olympic decathlon 
winner, took one look at that pair and wiggled into the frame. Then 
former Olympic swimmer Donna de Varona, who helped establish the Women's 
Sports Foundation 24 years ago, and thus was partly responsible for 
this gathering, was coaxed into the shot. Together they were a pictorial 
history of women in sports _ past, present and future. The celebratory 
moment came Monday at a news conference in Manhattan as the foundation 
announced its award winners and inducted four women into its International 
Sports Hall of Fame. Kwan was named sportswoman of the year in an 
individual sport. Cynthia Cooper, who plays for the Houston Comets 
and was the Women's National Basketball Association's most valuable 
player for the second consecutive year, was named sportswoman of the 
year in a team sport. Among the Hall of Fame inductees was the late 
Florence Griffith Joyner, who won three gold medals at the 1988 Olympics. 
She died last month at age 38. Also inducted was Shirley Strickland 
de la Hunty, an Australian hurdler, who in 1952 and 1956 became the 
first woman to win track and field gold medals in successive Olympics. 
``I never imagined being in the same room with so many talented athletes,'' 
de la Hunty said. The third inductee was Margaret Osborne duPont, 
who won 37 Grand Slam tennis titles from 1946 to 1962, including three 
consecutive U.S. Open singles titles and singles titles at the French 
Open in 1946 and at Wimbledon in 1947. Named to the Hall of Fame in 
the coaching category was Tara VanDerveer, who has guided Stanford's 
women's basketball team to two National Collegiate Athletic Association 
titles and led the 1996 U.S. Olympic team to a gold medal. All the 
winners and inductees were honored at a foundation dinner at the Waldorf-Astoria 
Hotel on Monday night. The most poignant moment of Tuesday's news 
conference was provided by Al Joyner, Griffith Joyner's widower. He 
said he made the trip from Los Angeles to be among those Griffith 
Joyner most revered: her fellow female athletes. ``She always felt 
that women were the best between male and female because, she said, 
she proved that to me every day,'' Joyner said to more than 50 athletes 
seated before him. ``She had been looking forward to attending the 
awards dinner because she believed in the things the sports foundation 
was doing.'' The nonprofit foundation, which Billie Jean King established 
with de Varona, has grown in stature, prestige and mandate since its 
modest beginning as an organization dedicated to increase opportunities 
for women in sports and fitness. Last year it handed out more than 
700 grants totaling more than $1 million. ``In 1992 the foundation 
gave me funds for travel and clothes to compete,'' Kwan said. ``Figure 
skating is a very expensive sport, and I'm not sure I would be where 
I am today were it not for the support of this foundation.'' In 1973, 
King chipped and charged her way into tennis history by defeating 
Bobby Riggs in an exhibition match billed as the Battle of the Sexes. 
The victory shattered long-held perceptions of women's roles in sports, 
and provided the impetus for the organization that has now become 
a part of King's legacy. ``A lot has happened since then, but our 
battle isn't over,'' said Dr. Linda Bunker, an instructor at the University 
of Virginia and this year's recipient of the Billie Jean King Contribution 
Award for her research on women and athletics. ``The foundation is 
not only doing the right thing, but doing things right for women in 
sports.'' The Wilma Rudolph Courage Award was given to Willye White, 
who overcame segregation in her hometown of Greenwood, Miss., to win 
a silver medal in the long jump at the 1956 Olympics. White, who as 
a girl picked cotton and now coaches children in Chicago, said she 
had to pinch herself to make sure this new chapter of her life was 
real. In case her mind was deceiving her, she brought along a disposable 
camera to capture it. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>