<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981020.0171 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Asia's economic woes have hit that region's airlines particularly 
hard, and many are slashing fares in a desperate attempt to attract 
passengers. For example, the regular full coach fare between New York 
and Seoul, South Korea, this time of year is about $2,500 round trip, 
while full coach fare between Newark and Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, is 
about $3,600. But bargain hunters can fly from New York to Seoul on 
Korean Air from $749, including five nights in a hotel, or between 
Newark and Kuala Lumpur for $739 on Malaysia Airlines, including four 
hotel nights. While Australia has been spared most of Asia's troubles, 
this is also a good time to travel to Sydney from Los Angeles or San 
Francisco. Qantas has a package starting at $1,098, including five 
nights' accommodations. ``There are fabulous bargains out there for 
travelers to Asia,'' said Michael Boult, an international air travel 
specialist for Rosenbluth International, a travel management company 
based in Philadelphia. ``They're the deals of the century.'' Because 
Qantas is financially sound, after a record profit of $183 million 
for the fiscal year ending June 30, its package deal is more in the 
nature of the occasional fare sale than a fire sale. But because of 
their weakened economies and devalued currencies, Korean Air and to 
a lesser extent Malaysia Airlines have been hemorrhaging money, as 
have China Airlines (Taiwan), All Nippon Airways and Thai Airways. 
Saddled by strikes and more than $2 billion in debt, 57-year-old Philippine 
Airlines shut down Sept. 23, ostensibly for good. But a week later 
the carrier's employees and management voted to give it another try, 
although with a reduced fleet and route system. International flights 
have not yet been restored. While Philippine Airlines had been in 
the red for years, and Garuda Indonesia Airlines has had problems 
since well before Asia's woes, the more recently weakened carriers 
have no illusions that they will strengthen their balance sheets much 
with rock-bottom fares. They are mainly trying to buy time while they 
jettison unprofitable routes, cancel or delay orders for new planes, 
shift to smaller aircraft and forge international alliances. For example, 
Qantas and Cathay Pacific recently joined American Airlines, British 
Airways and Canadian Airlines to form the Oneworld Alliance, which 
is expected to be up and running in February. Oneworld has also invited 
Japan Airlines, Iberia and Finnair. On Jan. 1, Air New Zealand, Ansett 
International and Ansett Australia will join the Star Alliance, which 
includes United, Lufthansa, Air Canada, Varig, SAS and Thai Airways. 
Singapore Airlines is also expected to join the Star Alliance next 
year. While alliances enable passengers to book on any partner airline 
and offer convenient connections, they also allow pooling of frequent-flier 
miles and extend the reach of each airline partner. Meanwhile, Cathay 
Pacific _ which through the six months ending June 30 recorded a net 
operating loss of about $22.6 million, its first such loss through 
the midyear in more than 20 years _ will soon begin pulling back from 
weaker Asian markets by suspending service to Sapporo, Japan, and 
reducing flights to Indonesia. Qantas is not the only Asian-Pacific 
airline in the black, although the Asian economic downturn eroded 
the profits of Air New Zealand as well as those of Singapore Airlines, 
the longtime favorite in airline passenger polls. Japan Airlines, 
after restructuring its unprofitable nonaviation businesses and writing 
off large losses, expects to return to profitability this fiscal year 
(ending March 31, 1999). Japan Airlines' wholesale-tour arm, Pacifico 
Creative Service, has several packages to Japan for travel through 
March 31, 1999: round-trip air fare, airport transfers and five nights 
in Tokyo starting at $1,015, departing from New York, Chicago, Los 
Angeles or San Francisco; air fare and three nights from $5,050, flying 
business class from the above four cities plus Atlanta, including 
hotels, and five-night package starting at $1,850 that includes hotels 
in Tokyo, Kyoto and Nara. United States airlines have been bruised 
by the Asian economic downturn, but far from battered. Asia constitutes 
only about 10 percent of their revenues, said Boult, the international 
air travel specialist at Rosenbluth International. In fact, the Department 
of Transportation reports that the major passenger airlines worldwide 
this year have had the best net profit ever for a second quarter. 
United Airlines dropped its San Francisco-Manila nonstop in February, 
while Northwest has suspended service between Honolulu and Nagoya, 
Japan, Minneapolis-St. Paul and Hong Kong, and Minneapolis-St. Paul 
and Osaka, Japan. American Airlines has daily nonstops to Tokyo from 
Chicago, Dallas-Fort Worth and Seattle, and will begin daily service 
from Dallas-Fort Worth to Osaka on Dec. 20. ``Our Tokyo routes remain 
profitable,'' said Tim Smith, an American spokesman. Airline officials 
estimate that Asia's airline industry will recover in two to three 
years. By then traffic is expected to rise about 5 percent annually 
rather than the 7 to 8 percent that the International Air Transport 
Association forecast only a little more than a year ago. Meantime, 
from Bangkok to Bali, there are still bargains galore. For example, 
Singapore Airlines and Asian Affair Holidays are offering a $928 package 
to Bali through March 31, including round-trip air fare from the East 
and West Coasts, plus five nights at a hotel. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>