<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981020.0312 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Symphony conductors are forever exhorting their troops to play like 
chamber musicians: to achieve immediate, intimate and constant communication 
by listening intently to one another and learning to react symbiotically. 
Only a few of the best ensembles, notably the Vienna Philharmonic 
and the Cleveland Orchestra, seem to have assimilated this style of 
performance as second nature through long decades of good, hard work. 
For at least one band, however, far more modest in its scale and history 
to be sure, that sort of communication has never been a problem. The 
Orchestra of St. Luke's was born as an outgrowth of the St. Luke's 
Chamber Ensemble, whose 21 players still form its core. A chamber 
style of performance is first nature. ``We pay attention to each other 
when when we're playing, sometimes more than we pay attention to the 
conductor,'' said Stephen Taylor, an oboist and an original member 
of the chamber ensemble. ``That's a defining character of the orchestra.'' 
However it may relate to conductors, and most who have worked with 
it offer only praise, the organization, now cumbersomely called Orchestra 
of St. Luke's/St. Luke's Chamber Ensemble, has enjoyed a consistent 
run of successes. In 1979, it began a residency at the Caramoor Festival 
in Katonah, N.Y., which resulted in the founding of the orchestra 
and helped put both institutions on the map. In 1985, it took part 
in high-profile series of Bach and Handel choral performances led 
by John Nelson at Carnegie Hall. In 1986, a night after the glittery, 
unmemorable opening of the newly renovated Carnegie Hall, the orchestra 
wowed a listener in its own right for the first time, with a riveting 
performance of Beethoven's ``Eroica'' Symphony, among other things, 
led by Michael Tilson Thomas. In 1990, it established a permanent 
relationship with the conductor Robert Shaw, as part of his annual 
choral workshop at Carnegie Hall. Yet it is not without problems of 
its own. Shuttling between the worlds of orchestral and chamber performance, 
and heavily invested in education as well, it presents to the world 
a certain vagueness of image, identity and purpose. Until it named 
Charles Mac-kerras music director, recently, it had had only one other: 
Roger Norrington, from 1991 to 1994. It has no permanent hall. In 
addition to its own concerts, it works for hire in a variety of settings. 
Even the name has become a red herring, since the many locations in 
which the organization performs rarely include the Church of St. Luke 
in the Fields, in Greenwich Village, where it gave its first chamber 
concerts, in 1974. ``I know that it befuddles people on the outside,'' 
said Myron Lutkze, a cellist and stalwart of the group, ``but we love 
all the things we do.'' This season the organization is trying to 
address the world's befuddlement and bring its image into sharper 
focus through the odd expedient of attaching itself to another name: 
Haydn. The chamber ensemble plays the composer's Symphonies Nos. 6, 
7 and 8 (``Morning,'' ``Noon'' and ``Night''), conductorless, Sunday 
afternoon at the Brooklyn Museum of Art and on Wednesday evening at 
Weill Recital Hall. The orchestra plays a program of Haydn conducted 
by Frans Bruggen on Thursday evening at Carnegie Hall. And apart from 
special series and concerts for hire, for the rest of the season _ 
two more orchestral concerts, two more chamber programs, a choral 
concert, a puppet opera, even musically accompanied dinners at Lutece 
_ it's Haydn all the way. In itself, a preoccupation with Haydn's 
music is nothing new for St. Luke's. ``Haydn was central to the conception,'' 
said Michael Feldman, who created the ensemble in 1974, partly as 
an outlet for his conducting ambitions, and left it in 1995. Versatility 
was also a goal, and it may have become the orchestra's hallmark. 
But in a repertory that has ranged freely from Bach to newly commissioned 
works, Haydn has always held his own. The orchestra recorded three 
CDs of his symphonies with Mackerras from 1988 to 1992 for Telarc. 
Now, again, the identification with Haydn is pervasive: a sense that 
the multifarious activities of St. Luke's, as they have evolved, reflect 
the composer's own activities and the flexible resources available 
to him during his Hungarian employment, from 1761 to 1790. ``The mix 
of orchestra and chamber music is reminiscent of Haydn's situation 
at the Esterhazy court,'' said Elizabeth Ostrow, who, as director 
of artistic planning for St. Luke's since 1996, conceived the Haydn 
festival. Between them, the orchestra and ensemble perform 75 to 100 
concerts a year. They also offer 25 performances of free opera and 
dance a year, reaching about 25,000 students in New York schools. 
The players, typically some 55 strong in the full orchestra, represent 
the cream of the extraordinary pool of freelance musicians in New 
York. Because it invariably plays with a vigor evident to eye as well 
as ear, the orchestra gives an impression of youth that may no longer 
be entirely accurate. Turnover is small. Krista Bennion Feeney, a 
violinist and frequent concertmistress who joined the group in 1983, 
calls herself ``a relative newcomer.'' Morale appears to be high not 
only for musical reasons but also because, to an extent rare in American 
orchestras, the players take a hand in governing themselves. For all, 
it is a part-time situation. A member of the elite chamber ensemble, 
and thus a principal player in the orchestra, might make from $8,000 
a year (for a brass player seldom used) to $40,000 (for a string player 
in constant demand). Most have many commitments elsewhere but typically 
refer to St. Luke's as a family. ``It's like coming home,'' said Ms. 
Feeney. Eriko Sato, another violinist, whose effervescent spirit seems 
to infect other players and audience alike, said: ``It's more than 
that. It's an inspiration. There's such commitment and respect for 
each other.'' As for the orchestra's sound, Ms. Sato cited a tradition 
of a strong bass line, owing much to Lutzke, the cellist. ``It's an 
unspoken rule,'' she said. ``The bass line determines the rhythm, 
and this orchestra has fantastic rhythm, I think.'' She is not alone 
in thinking so, and she may underestimate her own role in producing 
it. The players themselves were the instigators of the refocusing 
of recent years. The feeling was evidently widespread that the orchestra 
had strayed somewhat from the Haydn ideal as it grew. When the founder, 
Feldman, ever ambitious, pushed for the performance of large-scale 
works like symphonies by Bruckner and Mahler in the orchestra's own 
concerts, or for the use of period instruments in early music, he 
met with resistance from the players. In fact, when it plays for hire, 
the orchestra can easily expand as needed, if, for example, Shaw mobilizes 
a Verdi Requiem. What's more, many St. Luke's members play period 
instruments on other gigs, but crucial wind players do not, and a 
sense of solidarity prevailed. ``For right or wrong, period is where 
it's at in early music today,'' Feldman said. ``I encouraged St. Luke's 
to work with period instruments, too, but I couldn't get them to do 
it.'' Feldman, who left St. Luke's three years ago in cloudy circumstances 
that those in the know declined to discuss, is now forming the New 
York Collegium, a period orchestra and chorus to be directed by the 
venerable early-music specialist Gustav Leonhardt, which recently 
opened an office in Manhattan and plans to give its first concert 
in January. And Feldman is already talking about developing a period 
orchestra of Romantic proportions to play Wagner and the like in perhaps 
three years. But both he and Marianne C. Lockwood, who is the executive 
director of St. Luke's and his ex-wife, say they anticipate an amicable 
rather than competitive relationship. Indeed, the collegium roster 
includes several veteran St. Luke's hands, like the ubiquitous Lutzke. 
``We're trying very hard not to get in each other's way,'' Ms. Lockwood 
said. St. Luke's would seem to have a hard enough time not tripping 
over itself, as it keeps its many balls in the air. For beyond Haydn, 
starting in February, the chamber ensemble presents its ``Second Helpings'' 
series of contemporary music at the Dia Center for the Arts in Chelsea, 
with Eric Ewazen as composer in residence and host. (Next season, 
it was just announced, Joan Tower will take over and compose a work 
celebrating the 25th anniversary of St. Luke's.) And in May, it offers 
``Masters of the Baroque,'' a free festival at Temple Emanu-El, on 
the Upper East Side of Manhattan. ``For a long time we tried to find 
a permanent home,'' Ms. Lockwood said. ``But we've changed our minds. 
We feel that we've made a home for ourselves all over New York in 
a variety of different communities.'' As unconventional as it may 
be in its operations, St. Luke's has had its ups and downs, and it 
is not immune from the difficulties now facing larger orchestras, 
financial and otherwise. Despite surpluses in recent years, the organization 
retains an accumulated deficit of $240,000 on an annual budget just 
under $4 million. And the orchestra's extensive recording projects, 
including a major Stravinsky venture conducted by Robert Craft on 
Musicmasters, have been forestalled. Both problems, Ms. Lockwood said, 
are being addressed by a fund-raising campaign intended not only to 
erase the deficit and create a permanent endowment but also to provide 
subsidies for recordings. Meanwhile, Arabesque is recording at least 
some of the chamber ensemble's Haydn programs. And St. Luke's is looking 
for other ways to raise its profile outside New York. It is formulating 
plans for the first of a series of mini-residencies, a stint of perhaps 
five days next season at Cornell University in Ithaca, N.Y., including 
master classes as well as chamber, orchestral and educational programs. 
``We are as healthy as we could expect to be,'' Ms. Lockwood said. 
Certainly, when it comes to the sound of things, few seem inclined 
to argue. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>