<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981020.0289 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Palestinian arrested in the grenade assault on Monday that wounded 
67 Israelis, including 24 soldiers, has confessed to a spate of recent 
terrorist incidents, Israeli army officials said Tuesday. The suspect, 
Salem Rajab al-Sarsour, 29, an Islamic militant, admitted the assault 
on the Beersheba bus terminal, a similar grenade attack late last 
month on an army post in Hebron and the fatal stabbing of an elderly 
rabbi, also in Hebron, in late August, the Israeli officials said. 
Sarsour described the attack on the bus station, which disrupted the 
Israeli-Palestinian peace talks in Maryland and became the subject 
of international attention, as an impulsive act born of frustration, 
the officials said. The grenades were intended for a terrorist attack 
in Jerusalem, the Israeli officials said. But Sarsour, who had traveled 
to Beersheba to seek construction work, was so frustrated by his failed 
search that he hurled the grenades at the terminal, where he was to 
have caught a bus home. He was caught and pummeled by a bus driver, 
who turned him over to the police. The Israeli officials said Sarsour, 
a father of five who lives in the Palestinian-controlled sector of 
Hebron, has been active for years in Hamas, the Islamic fundamentalist 
group. Also Tuesday the armed wing of Hamas claimed responsibility 
for the attack. In a fax to Reuters here the group, the Izz el-Deen 
al-Qassam Brigade, said, ``One of our heroic fighters carried out 
a heroic operation on Monday morning in the town of Beersheba which 
targeted a crowd of enemy soldiers.'' A senior Palestinian security 
official, Jibril Rajoub, however, said Sarsour had committed ``an 
individual act.'' Rajoub said the bombing should not reflect negatively 
on the Palestinians' commitment to cracking down on terrorists. The 
Israelis say that is the deal-breaking issue in the peace talks. In 
Beersheba, officials said, Sarsour lobbed two grenades at the terminal 
in the morning rush hour, wounding the soldiers, who were returning 
to their base, and 43 civilians. One victim, 47, remains in critical 
condition Tuesday. Four others were in serious condition, and 20 remained 
hospitalized for superficial shrapnel wounds. In late August, in another 
act that officials said had not been planned, Sarsour killed the rabbi, 
Shlomo Raanan, 67, in the Tel Rumeida settlement, they said. The officials 
added that Sarsour had told interrogators that he had planned to throw 
Molotov cocktails at an army post near Tel Rumeida, but found it vacant. 
Climbing the fence of the Jewish settlement, he spied the rabbi through 
the window of his mobile home, broke in, stabbed Raanan to death and 
fled back to Palestinian-controlled Hebron, the Israelis said. Days 
later, the Israeli officials said, Sarsour reported the killing to 
Hamas officials, who inducted him into the elite military wing and 
taught him grenade throwing. On Sept. 30, Yom Kippur, Sarsour launched 
a grenade attack on an army post in Hebron, wounding 14 Israeli soldiers 
and 8 Palestinian passers-by, the Israelis said. The Israelis have 
arrested four suspected accomplices. The Palestinians said they had 
arrested two more. In another twist the Palestinians asserted that 
Sarsour, even if he had acted independently in Beersheba, was a double 
agent for Hamas and for Israeli security, Israeli army radio reported 
Tuesday evening. The Palestinians said two of his accomplices had 
revealed his double role in videotaped interrogation. The videos have 
been flown to the peace talks in Maryland, the army radio said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>