<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981020.0333 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Before I start examining their edges and undersides, let me lay my 
cards on the table. Harvey Lichtenstein _ who turns 70 next spring 
and who recently announced his retirement, effective June 30, after 
31 years as head of the Brooklyn Academy of Music _ has been the most 
innovative and influential performing arts administrator New York 
has known. This is not a game, so there's no point in ticking off 
the not-so-long list of his recent competitors, icons like Joe Papp, 
Ellen Stewart and Morton Baum. But Papp, for one, is better known 
to the general public than Lichtenstein, even now. So it's worth trying 
to explain why Lichtenstein has been so important not just to the 
cultural life of New York, but to the country and the world. Before 
Harvey (as anyone who even vaguely knows him calls him), the performing 
arts in this city and nation were very different from what they are 
today. There was the establishment uptown and the experimental downtown, 
with Brooklyn so far downtown as to have slipped off the map of Manhattan 
altogether. After Harvey, or more precisely since Harvey, because 
Lichtenstein is still very much with us, the scene has been altered 
irrevocably. It's not that the avant-garde has become the establishment, 
exactly, as the neo-conservatives so love to argue; there's plenty 
of marginal weirdness still bubbling away. But Lichtenstein has presided 
over a shift in taste whereby the establishment-hailed innovators 
of yesteryear have receded into history, to be replaced by a new generation 
_ one is tempted to say a new or next wave _ that now infuses the 
establishment. That generational shift has often been called the move 
from modernism to post-modernism: from stern austerity to generous 
eclecticism, from abstraction to socially engaged humanism, from word 
to image, from meaning to meditation. In part, Lichtenstein has been 
Hegel's destiny-driven hero, like Napoleon surfing the energies of 
the French Revolution, who caught a larger historical shift and just 
happened to be the person who epitomized that shift. No doubt, but 
Lichtenstein also had the passion and the smarts to be that person, 
and to give particular artists their key career chances, and to sustain 
his support for those artists year after year, until the larger midtown 
Manhattan cultural institutions finally caught on. He didn't just 
support local artists like Robert Wilson and Steve Reich and Philip 
Glass and Merce Cunningham and Trisha Brown and Bill T. Jones and 
Laurie Anderson and Mark Morris. He opened up New York to the world. 
Of course Lichtenstein was not the first to import foreign artists. 
But his alertness to what was going on, not just in all corners of 
Europe but in the rest of the world as well, brought fresh energy 
to this self-satisfied and curiously provincial city. We live in an 
era of jet travel and casually portable recorded music and videos 
and Internet communication. But it is important to give more than 
a few jet-setters and back-packers the chance to see major foreign 
performing arts live, because live performance still offers an immediacy 
that recordings can never match. Lichtenstein has been a leader in 
the importation not just of small-scaled chamber ensembles and exotic 
ethnicity, but of the major performing arts institutions of foreign 
countries. As such he has been a catalyst for the development of similar 
cultural centers and alternative spaces around the country, encouraging 
through example, development deals and co-productions the formation 
of a viable touring circuit in their native land for the artists he 
has fostered at BAM. And in showcasing native talent in New York, 
he has facilitated the international careers of American artists. 
Lichtenstein transformed not just local artists but local public taste, 
and hence the nature of audiences first in New York, then in the country 
at large. The image of the black-clad, hipper-than-thou trendies crowding 
the BAM lobby at yet another premiere has become an affectionate (or 
in some cases, derisory) cliche of contemporary performing arts. But 
Lichtenstein didn't just make it hip to go to these kinds of performances; 
he made these kinds of performances downright popular, and hence alerted 
the custodians of the safe, richer, maybe duller institutions across 
the East River, ever eager for younger audiences, that something was 
happening and they'd better find out what it was, to paraphrase Bob 
Dylan. One other little accomplishment must be mentioned. Lichtenstein 
did all this in Brooklyn. Sure, production costs are lower there than 
in midtown Manhattan, and sure, in retrospect one can see how Brooklyn's 
very marginality helped fuel BAM's outsider status. But hindsight 
is easy; hardly anyone from Manhattan regularly attended Brooklyn 
performing events in the 1960s, when Lichtenstein arrived at BAM. 
He helped restore some measure of cultural pride in that borough _ 
not that it had been bereft of culture, what with the Brooklyn Museum 
and other worthy institutions _ and he also managed the seemingly 
impossible: making Brooklyn seem trendy, its outer-borough isolation 
no longer square but hip. How did he do it? Aside from catching the 
Hegelian wave of destiny, that is. The short answers are, through 
taste and passion, through personal charisma, through a managerial 
style that by all reports oscillates between the inspirationally collegial 
and the petulantly dictatorial, and by brilliant strategizing and 
marketing. Let us dispense with the first two with some haste. Everything 
any one person goes to see at BAM has not invariably been perfect, 
perfection usually being defined as congruence with one's own taste. 
Sometimes Harvey actually does make mistakes, and sometimes he seems 
to bow too overtly to the availability of foreign financial support 
or simple budgetary expedience. I recall a recent season on the most 
recent BAM pattern of presenting three operas or vaguely operatic 
music-theater pieces each spring under the rubric of BAM Opera. The 
BAMbudget (see how easily one falls into BAM's marketing nomenclature?) 
was clearly devoted almost in its entirety to William Christie and 
Jean-Marie Villagier's ravishing production of Rameau's ``Hippolyte 
et Aricie,'' and rightly so. But how to afford two more operas, in 
order to sustain the BAM Opera series? Bring in two bare-bones, cheap 
productions, one a Jonathan Miller common-man staging of Bach's ``St. 
Matthew'' Passion in which everyone, even the women, seemed to be 
wearing plaid shirts, and the other an Irish chamber-opera company's 
no doubt worthy but by all reports irreducibly provincial production 
of a Handel opera. Harvey, bless his heart, stoutly insisted that 
he (italics)loved(end italics) all three productions. But anyone with 
any experience at all in the producing business could see where the 
budgetary corners had been cut. That all said, BAM's artistic track 
record in the Lichtenstein era has been mightily impressive. The main 
reason people go to BAM, and to Brooklyn to get to BAM, is not that 
they crave to be hip but that they have come to trust Harvey's taste; 
they've seen enough there that they have enjoyed that they are willing 
to risk unknown offerings in the reasonable expectation that they 
will enjoy them too. As far as managerial style is concerned, Lichtenstein 
can indeed be bossy and hot-tempered and petulant and unreasonable. 
(``Cut the production budget in half; I don't care how you do it'' 
may or may not be something he actually said, but it accurately evokes 
the aura he created.) He pinches pennies until they bleed, dunning 
foreign governments and companies and co-producers for the best possible 
deal, and often refuses to commit to contract until the last possible 
moment, in part for added negotiating leverage. People complain but, 
with a few exceptions, they keep working with him. And ultimately, 
so what? Harvey gets things done, he brings more to BAM within budget 
than he could otherwise, and he has won the loyalty of a highly talented 
staff, two of whom _ Karen Hopkins on the administrative side and 
Joe Mellilo on the artistic side _ will succeed him. He has also managed 
to retain the affections of some of the great artists of the city 
and world, and to build and sustain a board of directors that has 
supported him through thin (mostly in the past, but Lichtenstein still 
takes risks) and thick (which usually means the deficit is only as 
bad as predicted). With strategy and marketing, Lichtenstein has made 
some key choices that have helped BAM establish its remarkably potent 
brand image. For starters, one should remember that he did not create 
the ``downtown'' arts scene. Throughout his career, with a very few 
exceptions, he has been a presenter, not a producer, in the sense 
of directly overseeing the creation of new work. Still, there is a 
very fine line between creative presentation, co-production and production 
in this directly creative sense. Artists themselves are the true creators, 
and at the outset they were fostered by all manner of smaller, mostly 
Manhattan performing-arts spaces, pre-eminently the Kitchen in the 
early 1970s. From the first, Lichtenstein was a shrewd observer of 
an extant late 60s-early 70s scene and drew upon it. Wilson did ``The 
King of Spain'' first in Manhattan in 1969. It then moved to Brooklyn 
in altered form as ``The Life and Times of Sigmund Freud'' and was 
subsequently incorporated into ``The Life and Times of Joseph Stalin,'' 
again at BAM, in 1973. Glass and Reich and Ms. Anderson and the rest 
mostly got started in Manhattan, then moved to BAM and beyond. But 
in some quarters in lower Manhattan, Lichtenstein was regarded as 
an interloper, a capitalizer on others' pioneering work. BAM was the 
mid-stage in an artist's development: what came after the funky lofts 
and before Europe and the Metropolitan Opera. Does this besmirch Lichtenstein's 
achievement? Hardly. First of all, he had the eye to recognize talent. 
Second, with engagements and commissions and personal support, he 
has done more than his share in fostering careers of artists he admires. 
So what if he usually comes upon them after they have presented their 
earliest work elsewhere? BAM's brilliant marketing extends beyond 
cute acronyms and slogans (starting with BAM itself, and the Next 
Wave) and beyond arresting advertising campaigns to have become a 
model of intelligent brand-name positioning in New York's crowded 
arts market. By now, BAM's aura can seem all-powerful: the Lincoln 
Center Festival staff was bemused by the occasional letter complaining 
that its ticket prices were so much higher than BAM's, when in fact 
they were almost precisely equivalent in every category. So much for 
the feeble power of reality compared with carefully crafted image! 
Lichtenstein's very dogged loyalty to a core group of artists, mostly 
of his generation or a decade or two younger, may be as much about 
marketing as art. To names like the locals listed above, one must 
add Peter Brook (who had an entire BAM theater, the Majestic, retrofitted 
in his honor), Ingmar Bergman, Pina Bausch, the Kronos Quartet, Peter 
Sellars, Robert Lepage, Zingaro and Christie. Lichtenstein needs at 
least some of the mainstream to fill his 900-seat Majestic Theater 
and 2,100-seat Opera House, let alone such venues as the Park Slope 
Armory he used for Ariane Mnouchkine's ``Atrides'' or the Battery 
Park big top for Zingaro. And mainstream audiences _ maybe any audience 
_ need to be comforted as well as challenged. Potential BAM ticket 
buyers may want to encounter the hip and to be hip. But they are more 
likely to buy a Next Wave or BAM Opera series if they recognize a 
few names. Brook, Wilson and Morris are Lichtenstein's Bach, Beethoven 
and Brahms. The downside is that such repetition cuts into BAM's innovativeness, 
in the sense that these by-now familiar names crowd out newcomers 
who might offer New York audiences something truly unknown and unexpected. 
But the reiteration of the familiar has made BAM's innovation possible. 
Let us not overdo the notion that Lichtenstein exploited the ground-breaking 
work of others and has beyond reason hammered home the familiar. He 
should be admired because along with his survivalist shrewdness, he 
is also a brave risk-taker. Not only did he re-create and sustain 
BAM for more than three decades; he constantly sought new work and 
new directions for an institution that at most any point might have 
seemed to be working pretty well already. Sometimes, his bold leaps 
got him into trouble, as in the twice ill-fated BAM Theater Company 
or the BAM Opera Company, chopped off in an abrupt and slightly messy 
manner. BAM's effort to connect with the surrounding black community 
and to redevelop its immediate surroundings awaits full realization. 
Lichtenstein's endeavor to redefine the Brooklyn Philharmonic from 
a mostly stodgy outer-borough orchestra (despite the intermittent 
good work of Lukas Foss et al.) into a model classical-music institution 
for the next millennium has so far stumbled, at least at the box office; 
perhaps that reflects the fact that Lichtenstein's tastes run stronger 
and truer in dance and theater than in music. Most recently, we have 
his decision to gut two longstanding venues, the Leper Space, which 
was a ballroom and is now a cafe, and the Carey Playhouse, which is 
to reopen next month as an art-film quadriplex. One sees the positives: 
Lichtenstein wants to turn BAM into a European-style arts center, 
with younger film audiences spilling into the performing arts, and 
everyone exchanging ideas and enthusiasms in the cafe. But the cost 
in innovative flexibility is steep, and one hopes that the neighborhood 
redevelopment plans can include a new, mid-sized performance space 
located, say, between BAM proper and the Majestic. There are also 
inevitable questions about the future. Will Ms. Hopkins and Mellilo, 
individually and in consort, come close to matching Harvey's charisma, 
and if they don't, will it matter? Do they have the depth of talent 
and skill to steer BAM into the future, reinventing as Lichtenstein 
has done all along? Will the model of dual leaders, each reporting 
directly to the board, work in the long run? All unanswerable questions. 
At this point, and for the rest of this season, it is time to celebrate 
Lichtenstein and his extraordinary tenure at BAM. Beyond all the achievements 
mentioned thus far, one should add tenacity. It's hard being an arts 
administrator, at least if you care as passionately about the arts 
as Lichtenstein so evidently does. To see brilliant work poorly attended 
hurts. Uncomprehending reviews hurt. Compromises hurt. ``Opportunity 
is the enemy of commitment,'' Jerry Brown once intoned, quoting one 
of his Jesuit teachers. To New York's great good fortune, Mr. Lichtenstein 
made BAM his life's work. He stayed the course, through all the disappointments, 
and overcame them. What makes Harvey Lichtenstein our premier performing 
arts administrator _ more important than all his worthy competitors, 
I would argue, since his influence has extended so far beyond Brooklyn, 
New York and America _ is that he changed the way we think. And he 
did it through his overwhelming love for what he does, and for the 
artists he has given us. I remember, time and again, Harvey standing 
at the back of the center aisle of the BAM Opera House, his face beaming 
with childlike pleasure. The pleasure is in the artists' work, not 
in his pride in presenting it. Not for him the jaded routine, not 
for him _ for all his success in translating personal passion into 
institutional policy _ the cynical calculation of box-office appeal 
over artistic worth. And when the show is over, even if some of us 
think it maybe isn't so hot that night, there is Harvey clapping and 
cheering like a fan. He is a fan, and it is the pureness and passion 
of his enthusiasm that has defined his accomplishment. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>