<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981020.0199 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Even though I am a pastry chef, I think in terms of three-course menus. 
When I'm creating a dessert tasting menu, the ``appetizer'' is always 
light, cool and fruity like this pear. Then there's the middle sweet, 
maybe something vanilla- or coffee-flavored, sometimes another fruit, 
perhaps a tart or a napoleon. And finally, the main dessert: usually 
it's chocolate, as much because people love it as because it is, by 
its nature, a finisher. It dulls the palate for anything but a strong 
espresso. But this pear is a dessert that can stand alone. It's formidable 
_ even though it's low in calories and has no butter or cream _ because 
it has three parts: a pear poached in a fresh blackberry syrup, the 
syrup, which becomes the sauce, and a pear-verbena sorbet. My dessert 
is inspired by the classic pear poached in spiced red wine, but it 
doesn't have the strong _ make that overpowering _ flavor of the spices 
and wine. By using pureed blackberries (black currants are great, 
too, but they're harder to find) I have kept the wine's depth of flavor 
but eliminated its heaviness. And blackberries are terrific with pears. 
I use Bartletts because they're sweet and have good texture. What's 
more, once they're poached and macerated overnight in the syrup, they're 
gorgeous red on the outside and still pale ivory on the inside. I 
serve the pear upright in a martini glass surrounded by its syrup, 
and then I tuck a little scoop of sorbet inside the pear as a surprise. 
Actually, everything about the sorbet is surprising. First of all, 
I make it with canned pears. Canned fruit, pureed with its syrup, 
is perfect for sorbet. Then I add verbena, a subtle herb that I use 
as an infusion. In fact, the same verbena that you buy in the health-food 
store to make infusions or tisanes can be used in this sorbet. As 
good as it is, the sorbet is not an absolute must. You can use store-bought 
pear sorbet, or even lemon sorbet, or you can just skip it. The poached 
pear in blackberry sauce is appetizing enough on its own. BLACKBERRY 
PEARS WITH PEAR-VERBENA SORBET Time: 30 minutes, plus overnight chilling 
For the pears: Pinch vitamin C powder (available at pharmacies) or 
1 tablespoon lemon juice 4 perfectly ripe Bartlett pears 3 pints fresh 
blackberries 1\ cups sugar For the sorbet: \ cup boiling water 5 fresh 
verbena leaves or 1 tablespoon dried 1 15-ounce can pear halves in 
light syrup 3 tablespoons sugar { teaspoon lime juice Poire William 
eau de vie, optional. 1. To make the pears, dissolve the vitamin C 
powder in a large bowl of cold water or add lemon juice to the water; 
keep close at hand. One by one, peel the pears, leaving their stems, 
and drop them into the water. 2. Puree the blackberries in a blender 
or food processor, and strain them into a pot deep enough to hold 
pears in one layer. Add 1 quart water and the sugar, and bring to 
a boil. Lower the heat so that the syrup simmers, and add the pears. 
If the pears aren't submerged in the syrup, weight them down with 
a saucer or colander. Poach the pears 10 to 15 minutes, or until a 
sharp knife pierces them easily. Remove from the heat, cover the pot 
with a kitchen towel, and cool to room temperature. Chill, still covered, 
overnight. 3. To make the sorbet, pour the boiling water over the 
verbena. Cover with plastic wrap, and infuse 10 minutes; strain, and 
reserve the liquid. Drain the canned pears, reserving the syrup. Puree 
the pears in a blender or food processor, then add the reserved syrup, 
sugar, lime juice and verbena infusion. Pour the mixture into an ice 
cream maker, and freeze, following the manufacturer's instructions. 
4. To serve, cut each pear crosswise at the point where the neck of 
the pear meets its round belly. Use a melon baller to scoop out the 
core in both top and bottom pieces. For each serving, stand the bottom 
part of a pear upright in a martini glass or dessert bowl. Pour some 
of the blackberry syrup around the pear, then place a scoop of the 
sorbet on the pear and set the top of the pear on the sorbet. Serve 
immediately. Yield: 4 servings. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>