<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981020.0406 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With King Hussein of Jordan joining President Clinton at the Middle 
East peace talks, optimism rose on Tuesday that some kind of settlement 
will be reached between Israelis and Palestinians after more than 
19 months of stalemate and 6 days of talking here. The Americans and 
the Palestinians are pushing for a comprehensive interim accord, so 
that a final round of peace talks can start now. But the Israelis 
have at different points suggested the possibility of a partial accord, 
with later talks on some disputed issues. Some officials said the 
parties were working on a comprehensive accord that would involve 
trade-offs on the key sticking points. Having identified the disputed 
issues for both parties, the Americans are working on a single package 
of mutual concessions that could produce a comprehensive interim settlement. 
American officials said the talks, originally scheduled to end on 
Sunday night, would go late into the night again on Tuesday and then 
into Wednesday. Clinton met on Tuesday with Yasser Arafat, the Palestinian 
leader, and then with Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel, 
and the three were expected to have dinner together. Hussein met with 
Arafat and Netanyahu separately on Tuesday, in meetings of about 45 
minutes. One sticking point is the Israeli demand for putting on trial 
on charges of attacks against Israelis a specific list of Palestinians, 
including some members of the Palestinian police and self-defense 
forces. Another is the method by which Israel will guarantee safe 
passage for Palestinians between the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. 
The Israelis are offering regularly scheduled trains and busses, while 
the Palestinians are insisting that individuals be allowed to travel 
in cars. The Israelis also say they must have a firm commitment from 
Arafat that the full Palestine National Council will meet at some 
point to amend publicly the Palestinian charter, formally removing 
clauses that call for Israel's destruction. Israeli officials complain 
that apparent Palestinian commitments on specific security moves, 
like the confiscation of excess weapons and the reduction of Palestinian 
forces to levels laid out in the Oslo accords, suddenly seemed to 
disappear during the talks. ``Now that they have their territorial 
requirements met, the Palestinian interest has been to erode Israel's 
security positions,'' Dore Gold, Israel's chief delegate to the United 
Nations, said on Tuesday night. ``But Prime Minister Netanyahu remains 
firm in not letting that happen.'' For their part, the Palestinians 
want clear assurances that a third Israeli withdrawal from West Bank 
land, as required under the Oslo agreement, will take place and be 
of a certain percentage. The issue will be handled by the border commission 
of the so-called final-status talks, but the Palestinians want American 
guarantees of the outcome, officials say. Clinton left the talks just 
after midnight on Tuesday morning after making ``significant progress,'' 
officials said, on key aspects of the security package that Israel 
demands from the Palestinians in return for 13 percent more of West 
Bank land. He returned here just after noon on Tuesday for another 
long round of meetings, continuing his investment of 45 hours over 
six days. Final-status talks under the Oslo umbrella are to produce 
a peace agreement between Israel and the Palestinians that will settle 
the hardest remaining issues: whether the Palestinians will have a 
state, what its borders will be, the rights of refugees and the status 
of Jerusalem. After interim steps, the final talks were supposed to 
have concluded by next May 4. Clinton's spokesman, Joe Lockhart, said 
the president would fly to Los Angeles on Saturday, on a fund-raising 
trip for Democratic candidates that he had postponed to continue these 
negotiations. The willingness of Hussein to come, despite his serious 
illness, adds moral pressure on both sides to make the political sacrifices 
required for peace. The king, 62 and battling non-Hodgkins lymphoma, 
arrived at midday and is expected to remain overnight at the Wye Conference 
Center near here. In recent days Hussein has been in touch with all 
parties by telephone. The Americans intend to ask him to work with 
both parties when serious obstacles appear. Clinton has also spoken 
to Egypt's president, Hosni Mubarak, to bring him up to date. The 
State Department spokesman, James Rubin, said on Tuesday night: ``This 
is the certainly the most intensive phase yet. But there are significant 
gaps of substance and the linkages between them. An inch is as good 
as a mile in terms of closing.'' A senior American official said the 
work between the two sides had turned serious in the last 12 to 15 
hours, especially after Clinton and his team had a two-hour meeting 
with Netanyahu and Arafat before dinner Monday night, and then afterward. 
``But I've seen this before, and I've seen this phase not lead to 
an agreement,'' the official said. ``It's better than before, but 
by no means enough to close.'' Another American official said the 
Palestinian grenade attack on an Israeli bus stop in Beersheba early 
Monday, wounding more than 60 people, ``acted as a sort of shock therapy 
to get them moving.'' But the official noted a degree of luck, saying, 
``If 10 or 12 Israelis had been killed in the attack, the Israelis 
would have had to pack up and leave these talks.'' The talks here 
have followed a familiar pattern, another official said. ``In the 
beginning, both sides came in with their demands and won't move and 
repeat them and repeat them and repeat them until everyone's sick 
of it, and then they begin to discuss bridging ideas,'' the official 
said. Hussein, who flew to his Maryland home on Monday after being 
discharged from the Mayo Clinic in Minnesota, was asked by the Americans 
to come here on Tuesday. ``We think the king will help bring home 
to the two delegations the necessity of making the tough choices that 
lead to peace,'' Rubin said. The king has proved indispensable to 
peacemaking in the past, making a peace treaty with Israel in 1994 
and helping the Americans to get the Israelis and Palestinians to 
agree to the Hebron accords of January 1997. Then, the king traveled 
to Netanyahu's office in Tel Aviv to work out the last details of 
that agreement, by which Israeli troops pulled out of most of Hebron 
and set a schedule, since abandoned, for other troop withdrawals. 
But his support for the invasion of Kuwait by President Saddam Hussein 
of Iraq nearly caused the United States to break relations with Jordan 
seven years ago. King Hussein's army has fought both the Palestinians 
and the Israelis, beating back a Palestinian revolt in 1970 and taking 
part in Middle East war in 1973. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>