<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981020.0154 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Baskets full of end-of-season bounty from the garden left me with 
a delightful problem: how to make the most of it? My assistant, Sarah 
Carey, and I wanted to make something a little different, and first 
considered baking vegetable breads. But then I started to think about 
biscuits. Aside from the sweet-potato biscuits that have long been 
a tradition in the American South, I had never really eaten vegetable 
biscuits or seen recipes for them, so I began to get excited about 
creating new ones. A few of our experiments failed, and we had to 
play around with temperature, with the proportion and kind of fat, 
and with the timings. We finally came upon techniques that work (and 
that are easy for anyone to follow) and that result in beautiful, 
delicious biscuits. We made beautiful ruby red beet biscuits, bright 
green sweet pea biscuits and for a special treat, banana biscuits. 
I don't expect anybody to make all of these biscuits at once, but 
the array of colors is smashing, and arranged together on a platter 
they would make a spectacular addition to a buffet. With any of these, 
a bit of leftover puree can be creamed with a little butter and some 
seasonings and spread on the hot split biscuits. All would be good 
with chowders and vegetable soups. The beet biscuits are slightly 
denser than the other two, and do not rise as high. With the pea biscuits, 
using frozen peas works just fine. The banana biscuits, when made 
in the smaller, two-inch-diameter size, would be good served with 
curries or with the chicken and peanut butter soup that is popular 
at Kwaanza celebrations. In the larger three-and-one-quarter-inch 
size, they make a lovely base for a banana short cake; split the biscuits 
and slather them with a combination of sliced bananas and whipped 
cream. Now for our baking tips: In the recipes here, pureed vegetables 
or fruit serve to partially replace the flour and the liquid in regular 
biscuit recipes. As these semi- or non-starchy purees have no gluten, 
the stretchy protein that develops when dough is kneaded, it is better 
to use all-purpose flour, which develops more gluten, than the softer 
cake flour normally used for biscuits. Although expert bakers _ or 
seasoned biscuits makers _ might be able to whip these up effortlessly 
to achieve a flaky result, those of us who are less practiced should 
keep in mind that it is important to keep the butter cold by working 
quickly; after adding the butter to the flour, place it in the freezer 
for 10 to 15 minutes. And once the dough and vegetable puree are combined, 
the dough should be kneaded lightly on a flour-dusted surface. The 
kneading wakes up the gluten. The dough should be patted out rather 
than rolled, as one might have to add too much flour to roll it, making 
the biscuits heavy and cakey. The dough can be patted out and cut 
ahead of time, then refrigerated until just before baking. If the 
biscuits are refrigerated, especially if they are baked on a cold 
tray, they will take slightly longer. Conventional baking pans are 
shiny and reflect a lot of heat at the bottom of the biscuit, which 
can easily over-brown. Alternatives are black pans or the air-cushioned 
sheets often recommended for cookies, which result in more even baking. 
BEET BISCUITS Time: 1{ hours 3 small beets (two-thirds pound), scrubbed 
\ cup buttermilk 2 cups all-purpose flour 1 teaspoon kosher salt { 
teaspoon baking soda 2 teaspoons sugar 8 tablespoons (1 stick) cold 
unsalted butter, cut into \-inch cubes. 1. In a medium saucepan, cover 
beets with water by 2 inches. Bring to a boil, lower heat and simmer 
for 30 to 45 minutes, or until tender. Add water as necessary to keep 
beets covered. Remove from water and cool until easy to touch. Rub 
off the skins and cut beets in quarters. In a food processor, puree 
beets; there should be 1 cup puree. Whisk in the buttermilk. 2. Place 
a rack in center of oven and preheat oven to 450 degrees. In a medium 
mixing bowl, sift dry ingredients. Cut in the butter; the largest 
pieces should be the size of small peas. Place bowl in freezer or 
refrigerator until butter is hard, 10 to 15 minutes. 3. Scrape beet 
puree into flour mixture and stir with a wooden spoon, just until 
the dough comes together around the spoon. This will be a very moist 
sticky dough; there should be whole pieces of butter visible in the 
dough. 4. Turn dough out onto a well-floured surface. Knead about 
10 to 15 times, until smooth, incorporating enough flour so that dough 
no longer sticks. Keep board well floured. 5. Pat dough out {-inch 
thick. Cut into 2-inch rounds. Gather up scraps of dough and gently 
press them together, and cut again. Place on an ungreased air-cushioned 
cookie sheet or a heavy sheet pan, preferably black. Bake for 13 to 
15 minutes, or until cooked through. Remove from oven. Let sit for 
a few minutes, then serve. Yield: 16 biscuits. BANANA BISCUITS Time: 
45 minutes 2 medium bananas, peeled \ cup buttermilk 2 cups all-purpose 
flour { teaspoon baking soda 2 teaspoons sugar 2 pinches kosher salt 
8 tablespoons (1 stick) cold unsalted butter, cut into \-inch cubes. 
1. In a blender, puree bananas with buttermilk; there should be 1\ 
cups. 2. Heat oven to 450 degrees. In a medium mixing bowl, sift together 
the dry ingredients. Cut in the butter; the largest pieces should 
be the size of small peas. Place in freezer or refrigerator until 
butter is hard, 10 to 15 minutes. 3. Scrape banana puree into the 
flour mixture and stir with a wooden spoon, just until the dough comes 
together around the spoon. There should be whole pieces of butter 
visible in the dough. 4. Turn dough out onto a well-floured surface. 
Knead 10 to 15 times, until smooth. Keep board well floured so that 
the dough doesn't stick. Pat the dough out {-inch thick. Cut into 
2-inch or 3\-inch rounds. Gather up scraps and press them together 
to be cut again. Place on heavy ungreased sheet pan, preferably black, 
or an air-cushioned cookie sheet. Bake 12 to 15 minutes for small, 
13 to 16 minutes for large, or until top browns and biscuit is cooked 
through. Yield: 16 small or 4 to 5 large biscuits. PEA BISCUITS Time: 
45 minutes 1 10-once package frozen tiny peas, defrosted in a sieve 
under warm running water 3 tablespoons milk 2 cups all-purpose flour 
{ teaspoon kosher salt 1 tablespoon baking powder 1 teaspoon sugar 
8 tablespoons (1 stick) cold unsalted butter, cut into \-inch cubes. 
1. In a blender, puree peas with milk. There should be 1\ cups. 2. 
Place a rack in the middle of the oven and heat oven to 450 degrees. 
In a medium mixing bowl, sift together the dry ingredients. Cut in 
the butter; the largest pieces should be the size of small peas. Place 
bowl in freezer or refrigerate until the butter is hard, 10 to 15 
minutes. 3. Scrape pea puree into the flour mixture and stir with 
a wooden spoon, just until the dough comes together around the spoon. 
There should be whole pieces of butter visible in the dough. 4. Turn 
dough out onto a well-floured surface. Knead 10 to 15 times, until 
smooth. Keep board well floured so that the dough does not stick. 
5. Pat dough out {-inch thick. Cut into 2-inch rounds. Gather up scraps 
and press together to be cut again. Place on heavy ungreased sheet 
pan, preferably black, or an air-cushioned cookie sheet. Bake for 
12 to 15 minutes, until the top browns and the biscuits are cooked 
through. Yield: 16 biscuits. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>