<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981020.0286 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Remember the so-called throwaway plastic culture of the 60s? Well, 
no one threw it away, and 30 years later, pristine artifacts from 
that period are already turning up in exhibitions. The 160 objects 
on view in ``Pop Goes the Plastic: The Visual and Cultural Esthetic 
of a New Technology 1960-1975'' at the Katonah Museum of Art document 
the revolution in industrial design fostered by the coming of age 
of plastics. Through the centuries, similar creative leaps followed 
the development of newly discovered materials from iron and bronze 
to steel and aluminum. Plastic presented new opportunities for designers 
because of certain of its properties: It is lightweight, translucent 
and sometimes transparent; it can be molded or cast into quirky shapes 
as well as drawn into filaments for textile fibers. ``With the invention 
of plastic, a whole new esthetic developed with shapes and forms in 
synthetic colors that were commercially viable,'' said Scott Reilly, 
the show's guest curator. Founded on the wave of Pop art and the emerging 
space age, designer plastic mimicked features of both (remember the 
television set in the shape of an astronaut's helmet?). Designers 
turned to plastic to create furniture, lighting fixtures, decorative 
household products, electronic equipment and women's fashions. For 
a decade, the manufacture of such lively and idiosyncratic objects 
burgeoned both in this country and abroad, but it came to an abrupt 
end with the oil crisis of 1973. Petroleum was the raw material of 
plastic, and the cost of production, already high as manufacturers 
struggled to recover start-up investments and shipping charges, pushed 
the price of many of these objects beyond the means of the average 
consumer. The museum's designer, Shauna Mosseri, has created an installation 
that emphasizes each object's peculiarities. The walls are painted 
a luminescent pale green, and some of the wares are displayed on shelves 
of three-dimensional aluminum grids; other objects are suspended from 
the grids. And Reilly has organized the objects around themes that 
relate to their functions. The first group, modular designs, may be 
viewed as a kind of Lego for adults: objects made of interlocking 
parts that can be arranged as an owner sees fit. One modular room 
divider, designed by Pierluigi Spadolini and Paolo Felli, is composed 
of white cylinders arranged vertically. It doubles as a screen of 
light when certain cylinders are uncapped and light bulbs are inserted. 
A shelving unit by Olaf Von Bohr, consisting of 11 elements in yellow 
and orange plastic, and a stackable tableware service for six by Massimo 
Vignelli are both examples of space-saving compact units. Chairs from 
this period are molded to conform to the human body in ways their 
cousins in wood or steel do not. Viewers are invited to sit in Eero 
Aarnio's low Pastil chair, a cross between an oversize M&AMP;M and 
a miniature spacecraft, to judge for themselves its comfort. His red 
tomato chair would be a perfect foil for a woman dressed in the red 
vinyl jumper, exhibited nearby, which Courreges designed in 1969. 
Nyguen Manh Khanh's transparent bubble of a chair is actually called 
Aerospace, and it allows its occupant to be completely enveloped and 
visible at the same time. And Verner Panton's orange Cantilever chair 
was one fluid organic design from back to seat to base. Light fixtures 
of this period were ingenious combinations of translucent and opaque 
materials. Vico Magistretti's table lamp called Mezzachimera has vertical 
folds of opaline Plexiglas that appear like waves of light, while 
in his Telegono lamp, a half globe swivels to serve as either shade 
or diffuser. Umbrella stands inspired many different designs, from 
a series of rings attached to a post to a dome-shape object with holes, 
which in smaller sizes could be used as a vase or a pencil cup. But 
nothing in the show is as outrageous or endearing as Ettore Sottsass' 
red typewriter for Olivetti called Valentine. Fashion designers followed 
suit with entire dresses and coats made of plastic. A runway of mannequins 
dressed in these designs completes the picture of this experimental 
era. The couture outfits were selected by another curator, Susan Rubin, 
to show how even the cheapest plastic could also be used artistically. 
Pierre Cardin was in the forefront with his red vinyl coat that also 
looked like a tomato. Like the furniture on view, Rudi Gernreich's 
hot pink wool ensemble with a fetching clear plastic insert down the 
middle and matching leggings was playful and practical at the same 
time. In 1967, he summed up the period and its innovative fashions 
by saying, ``A woman can be anything she wants to be _ a Gainsborough 
or a Reynolds or a Reynolds Wrap.'' Actually, he meant Saran Wrap. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>