<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981020.0223 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There is no bad food in Italy. That may be an exaggeration, but after 
three weeks of traveling there, I have come to believe it is true. 
In small towns and big cities, in tiny trattorias and even tourist 
restaurants, we ate well everywhere. It was not what I expected. When 
I told friends I was heading to Italy in the month of August they 
were all incredulous. August, they assured me, was a stupid time to 
go. The whole country would be closed; the place would be packed with 
tourists. Indeed, my best Italian friend was planning to spend the 
month in Bali. ``I don't care,'' I said. Defiantly, I did not take 
a single restaurant guidebook and made no reservations. We would eat 
wherever we happened to be when we got hungry; if we ate badly for 
a few weeks we would certainly survive. I have learned, the hard way, 
that you can no longer count on serendipity in France; although it 
is still home to many of the world's greatest restaurants, if you 
leave your meals to chance, you may end up eating terribly. I expected 
Italy to be the same. But it was not. Italy is still what France used 
to be: a fabulous feast, a place where good food is always just around 
the corner. We started out in a rented house in Umbria, the pastoral 
region just south of Tuscany. The brochure had made it sound so splendid 
that I had allowed myself to fantasize an elegant palazzo high on 
a hill. There was a hill all right, and the house was very pretty, 
surrounded by fruit and olive trees, with an extraordinary view. There 
was a pool and a large outdoor oven. The romance, however, ended at 
the gate _ the town beyond it was a jumble of ugly new buildings. 
It took awhile to find a grocery store, but we finally discovered 
that the supermarket was in the middle of the housing project near 
the railroad station. It did not look promising. When the electric 
doors opened I nearly gasped: the shelves were lined with artisanal 
pastas, the cheese and prosciutto looked terrific, the butcher was 
friendly, and the fruits and vegetables that winked and glistened 
beneath the fluorescent lights were as fresh as anything you find 
in New York's Greenmarkets. I bought melons and prosciutto, I bought 
an entire loin of pork, I bought local potatoes, tomatoes and arugula. 
Our first dinner, cooked in the outdoor oven, was splendid. The next 
day I headed for Narni, a nearby hill town that seems to have been 
slumbering since the 12th century. Cobbled streets twisted up to the 
fortress at the top of the village and the morning market was in a 
covered loggia. Everything _ from the melons casually tossing their 
fragrance into the air to the glowing peaches _ were at the perfect 
point of ripeness. ``Where should we eat?'' I asked the old lady who 
sold us figs. She pointed a gnarled finger up the hill to the Hotel 
dei Priori, where we had a wonderful lunch on the terrace of manfrigoli, 
the thick square-cut strands of local pasta, with a fresh wine that 
tasted like cherries. And so it went, everywhere. Italians still eat 
simply, locally and very well. It is telling, I think, that in two 
weeks in Umbria I did not stumble upon a single McDonald's. I did, 
however, stumble upon a great many unforgettable meals. In Todi, desperately 
trying to find a place to park, I got stuck at the end of a cobbled 
dead-end street. As I tried to back up the 45-degree incline, the 
car stalled. The proprietor of the nearest restaurant watched me, 
shook his head and then motioned for me to get out of the car. He 
backed it all the way up to the top of the street and handed it back, 
without a word. The least I could do, I thought, was patronize his 
restaurant. Ristorante Umbria turned out to have a romantic grape-shaded 
terrace overlooking the valley. We ate a thick, powerful soup of local 
lentils and sweet little lamb chops grilled over a roaring fire. It 
was beautiful there, and by the time I had finished the better part 
of a bottle of Orvieto I had gathered the courage to thank the owner 
for rescuing me from my car. ``It was nothing,'' he said graciously. 
``But how did you like the food?'' Two days later, in Spoleto, I happened 
into a small dusty grocery store with shelves that stretched all the 
way up to the ceiling. ``How long has this store been here?'' I asked 
the cheerful proprietor. ``Oh,'' he replied, ``since 1620.'' I bought 
cheese, local salami made of boar, and a bottle of thick, old balsamic 
vinegar. ``Is it good?'' I asked. The proprietor shook his head. ``It's 
not good,'' he replied. ``It is extraordinary.'' And so was the restaurant 
we found in nearby Pigge, on the road to Assisi. From the outside, 
the Taverna del Pescatore doesn't look like much; its beauty unfolds 
so slowly that it has an almost magical quality. Bit by bit, you discover 
a terrace overlooking a clear stream and then the island in the center 
of it. Only when you are seated do you hear the chirping of birds 
and the droning of bees. But the moment you open the menu you discover 
how truly fortunate you are to be there. It is filled with local specialties 
like strangozzi di magro, homemade pasta tossed with tomatoes and 
peppers, and salads of wild greens topped with smoked trout. Crayfish 
are steamed simply with local olive oil and peppers, and goose is 
cooked with local chestnuts. The vegetables come from the garden, 
the fish from the stream. But the real treat here is the beef; the 
local Chianina cattle, fed on grass, produce lean and flavorful meat. 
The wine list is extraordinary, too. And very reasonably priced. We 
began with grechetto, a pleasant, light white Umbrian wine that is 
perfect in the summer, and went on to a riserva Montefalco rosso, 
a powerful red regional wine made from sagrantino, sangiovese and 
trebbiano grapes. Lunch took a long time, and when it was done we 
lingered in the shade of the terrace, eating biscotti and fruit and 
watching children playing in the water. It was a perfectly languid 
Umbrian afternoon. After such peace, Florence was traumatic. It was, 
as promised, packed with tourists. And all the famous restaurants, 
were, as promised, closed for the month. When I asked a shopkeeper 
where we should eat, he said, ``Try Il Latini; tourists seem to like 
it.'' It wasn't much of a recommendation, but we were hungry. The 
room, with its rustic communal tables set beneath hanging prosciuttos, 
was certainly attractive. It was also filled with Florentines, so 
when the man on my right asked the waiter for a recommendation, I 
leaned in to hear his response. ``Have the bean soup,'' the waiter 
said. So I did. It was big, thick, filling and served with a cruet 
of good olive oil. It was impressive. He recommended the veal chop 
even more highly, and no wonder; the oven-roasted chop turned out 
to be the best piece of veal I had ever tasted. With a simple salad 
of greens, tomatoes and the grated carrots that all Italians seem 
to put on insalata mista, it made an extremely satisfying meal. I 
had been having amazing luck, but when I got to Venice I lowered my 
expectations. I had never eaten particularly well there, and I certainly 
did not expect to do so in the height of the tourist season. But after 
spending a morning rambling through the fish market by the Rialto 
Bridge I was suddenly very hungry. There was not one fish that was 
not gorgeous, and I was eager to find a restaurant that cooked seafood 
with style. I went to Corte Sconta, a former working class trattoria. 
Since my first visit, 13 years ago, it has become very popular with 
Americans. My Venetian friends assured me that it was no longer very 
good. They were wrong. We began with the house appetizer, which arrives 
in many small courses. The first consisted of fillets of marinated 
salmon topped with chopped arugula and fresh red currants. It was 
a beautiful plate, but it tasted even better than it looked. Then 
there were steamed vongole verace _ clams so delicious I scooped up 
every drop of sauce. They were followed by sardines in saor _ the 
sweet and sour sauce that is typical of Venice. Then the waitress 
set down freshly picked spider crab, in the shell, with herbs, olive 
oil and lemon. And finally, a platter covered with squid, sea snails, 
anchovies, octopus, scallops and a variety of shrimp, from tiny sea 
crickets to giant gamberi. We went on to pasta tossed with fresh sardines 
and a single, exquisitely grilled sole. It was my last day, and I 
felt sated and happy. More than that, I felt optimistic. Italy is 
a thoroughly modern country, despite its government's instability, 
which has moved forward without sacrificing all the good things of 
the past. At its highest level the country's cuisine is not as imaginative 
as that of France, but at every level it is has remained true to itself. 
Italian cooking sticks to its basic principles: You can count on finding 
excellent ingredients that are treated with enormous respect. Sipping 
my espresso and munching on lemony little biscotti I thought what 
a pleasure it was to be in a country where it is still possible to 
eat well, without reservations. La Loggia-Hotel dei Priori, Vicolo 
del Commune 4, Narni; 011-39-0744-726-843. Ristorante Umbria, Via 
San Bonaventura 13, Todi; 011-39-075-894-2737. Taverna del Pescatore, 
Strada Statale Flaminia, Pigge; 011-39-0742-780-920. Fax: 011-39-0742-381-599. 
Il Latini, Via dei Panchetti 6 r, Florence; 011-39-055-210-916. Corte 
Sconta, Calle del Pestrin, Castello 3886, Venice; 011-39-041-522-7024. 
Fax: 011-39-041-522-75-13. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>