<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981020.0320 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The somewhat wistful word on the street here is that this year's governor's 
race is a bore, a plodding match between two candidates who are so 
decent and civil that they cannot summon the almost mandatory vitriol 
that has traditionally made Rhode Island politics a full-contact sport. 
Heck, people say, there isn't even a good scandal brewing. The race 
between the incumbent Republican, a former U.S. attorney named Lincoln 
C. Almond, and the Democratic challenger, a former state senator named 
Myrth York, is close enough for both to have summoned help from outside. 
Tuesday, New York City Mayor Rudolph Giuliani stumped for Almond in 
the Italian-American communities in and around Providence, while Hillary 
Rodham Clinton stopped by to praise Ms. York at four events. And those 
who complain about a narcolepsy-inducing campaign might just be spoiled, 
for autumn has once again brought touches of the bizarre. Forget that 
a third-party candidate for governor, Robert Healey, running on the 
Cool Moose ticket, countered the visits of Giuliani and Mrs. Clinton 
with a celebrity of his own: Barney the dinosaur. Forget that the 
state senate majority leader recently pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor 
charge that he hit his wife, or that the recently deposed Democratic 
state chairman was just arrested, at gunpoint, on a charge that he 
assaulted his girlfriend. Instead, consider the curious courtship 
of Providence Mayor Vincent A. ``Buddy'' Cianci Jr., a case study 
in political resurrection. After taking a lengthy sabbatical from 
office _ prompted by a 1983 conviction for assaulting his estranged 
wife's boyfriend _ he was re-elected in 1990, again in 1994, and now 
is running unopposed for his sixth term. The campaigns for both the 
Republican and Democratic candidates for governor have asked for Cianci's 
endorsement, an otherwise routine request if it were not for the ever-lurking 
past. Ms. York is best known as a reform-style politician, a niche 
not normally associated with Cianci. Almond spent years leading a 
federal investigation into corruption within the earlier manifestations 
of the Cianci administration, and succeeded in securing more than 
a dozen convictions. The mayor's rough edge, it seems, is now seen 
as part of his roguish charm. Tuesday, Cianci, an independent, came 
to the Statehouse to present Giuliani with a key to the city and a 
jar of marinara sauce that bears the Cianci surname. While his eyes 
hunted to make contact in a crowded room, Cianci acknowledged being 
honored by the attention. ``They both called and said they would like 
the support of the organization of the city of Providence,'' he said, 
using a euphemism for the Cianci organization. But Cianci dodged questions 
about his endorsement plans. ``I always said that I would do the best 
thing for my city,'' he said. In addition to wanting to glory in a 
city in the midst of revitalization _ symbolized by the steel skeleton 
of a mall being built just down the hill from the Statehouse _ the 
two gubernatorial candidates see an endorsement from Cianci as one 
way to counter voter apathy, which political consultants attribute 
to the cautious campaigns being conducted by the two moderates and 
to the paucity of scandal. ``This is a state where politics has always 
been a great spectator sport,'' Darrell M. West, a professor of political 
science at Brown University, said. ``But this year voters are disengaged.'' 
Several years have passed since outraged citizens gathered on the 
Statehouse lawn one night and, with flickering candles in their hands, 
prayed for an end to corruption. Although the former Republican governor, 
Edward D. DiPrete, is awaiting trial on charges that his administration 
in the 1980s was essentially for sale, the recent news in Rhode Island 
has largely been positive: The economy is percolating, the state recently 
realized a surplus, and the development in Providence has boosted 
morale. All this would seem to benefit Almond, 62, who defeated Ms. 
York by a very close margin in 1994. He has taken credit for bringing 
back businesses that had fled to the South and for creating 25,000 
jobs. At a political rally Tuesday morning, state Republican Chairman 
John Holmes added a uniquely Rhode Island accolade: ``And he's done 
it scandal-free!'' But recent polls indicate that Ms. York trails 
by only a few percentage points, in a state where Democrats outnumber 
Republicans 2 to 1, and where nearly half the 630,000 registered voters 
consider themselves to be independent. And Ms. York, 52, has focused 
on the poor standardized testing scores of Rhode Island students, 
as well as the state's notoriously bad roads, in courting a voting 
bloc that her campaign has christened ``working families.'' Still, 
her aides are concerned that Cianci is running unopposed, meaning 
that Ms. York might not receive maximum benefit from the traditional 
Democratic stronghold that is Providence; they also acknowledge that 
a decision by Cianci not to endorse anyone would constitute a benign 
endorsement for Almond. ``It is past the days when anyone even as 
popular as the mayor can transfer his support to another candidate,'' 
her campaign manager, Rob Horowitz, said. ``But the mayor could be 
helpful to us in boosting turnout in Providence.'' Holmes agreed. 
``These guys were not bosom buddies,'' he said. ``But the governor 
has always believed that because he's the governor and Buddy Cianci 
is the mayor of the largest city, there needed to be a good working 
relationship. If he endorses us, it's a win, and if he doesn't endorse 
anybody, it's a win.'' As the candidates continued to await word from 
Cianci, they set out Tuesday _ with celebrity guests in tow _ to cut 
into each other's perceived base of support. Ms. York introduced Mrs. 
Clinton to 1,000 senior citizens at a stadium in Woonsocket, a city 
in the mostly Democratic area of the Blackstone Valley. Almond is 
a native son of the valley who carried his home turf in 1994; its 
residents know that they are as likely to see him at a local diner 
as at the Statehouse. Almond escorted Giuliani to places where the 
governor hoped to steal the affections of a few Italian-American Democrats. 
Those visits began at Luigi's Restaurant in Johnston, and ended at 
the Mediterraneo Caffe, on Federal Hill in Providence. Upstairs, Almond 
and Giuliani shook hands, dodged bouncing campaign balloons and shouted 
above the music of an Italian band. Downstairs, Cianci sat down at 
a table with some friends. He sipped a glass of white wine, dragged 
on a cigarette, and laughed and laughed. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>