<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981020.0236 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Salvatore Anzalone, the chef at Caffe Bondi in Manhattan, had a banged-up 
pan heating on the stove and just six ingredients in front of him. 
He reached for one of them _ a few brown grains that smelled powerfully 
salty and pungent. ``This is the bottarga,'' he said of the cured 
tuna roe that is at the heart of true Sicilian cooking. He sprinkled 
it into the pan with extra virgin olive oil, chopped garlic and parsley, 
then in a matter of seconds, tossed it with a mound of spaghetti and 
piled it into a bowl. As a finishing touch, he scattered bread crumbs, 
rather than cheese, over the top. ``Sicilian cooking is really simple,'' 
he said. But it is not plain. The dish was coarse from the bread crumbs, 
toothsome and tasted of the sea. It was true Southern Italian cooking 
and it was extraordinary. It is no secret that Italian cuisine has 
experienced a renaissance in American kitchens over the last decade. 
But it is just recently that chefs have turned their attention to 
the far regions of the south _ like Puglia, Calabria, Campania, Sicily 
and Sardinia _ where the foods are earthy, the flavors are lusty and 
the fresh, candid style is a world apart from the heavy monotonous 
red sauces familiar in the United States. Americans, raised on the 
idea that Southern Italian food is all about dishes like eggplant 
Parmesan and spaghetti with meatballs, are about to be enlightened: 
Genuine Southern Italian food has finally arrived. Slowly, grocers 
around the city have begun to stock ingredients like salted capers, 
fresh sardines, bucatini and bottarga, and chefs are placing traditional 
Southern Italian dishes like orecchiette with broccoli rape _ and 
caponata, a sweet and sour eggplant dish _ prominently on their menus. 
It is not entirely new, of course. For generations, there has been 
a small underground network of Southern Italians who have preserved 
their cuisine by re-creating touches of it here in New York. Anzalone, 
whose family is from Ventimiglia in Sicily, smuggled in wild fennel 
seeds from Italy so his family could grow it in their back yard in 
Brooklyn. (He still uses that wild fennel, picked from his aunt's 
back yard, in a pasta dish he serves at Caffe Bondi on West 20th Street.) 
He also smokes his own tuna in the Sicilian style with basil, mint 
and lemon peel. Likewise, Dora Marzovilla at I Trulli on East 27th 
Street has been making traditional Pugliese pasta shapes like ear-shaped 
orecchiette and shell-shaped cavatelli by hand for years _ first at 
home, and now at the restaurant. And there are countless dedicated 
home cooks who have been preserving their own meats, growing vegetables 
and foraging for wild greens like broccoli rape and dandelions. Nicola 
Marzovilla, Mrs. Marzovilla's son and the owner of I Trulli, said, 
``The cooking in Southern Italy, if there's one simple way to describe 
it _ the ingredients are the focal point of everything.'' But when 
Southern Italian food was first introduced in America, its purity 
was somehow lost. ``When I came to America in 1963, I found a cuisine 
I neither knew nor understood,'' said Tony May, who is from Naples 
and is the owner of San Domenico on Central Park South. At the beginning 
of this century, the United States experienced a great surge of Southern 
Italian immigrants. Most of them came to escape impoverished conditions 
in Southern Italy. When they arrived here, they got jobs as laborers, 
they formed closely knit communities and they tried to preserve the 
simple cooking they knew. But in America, the tomatoes weren't the 
same. Staples like sardines, octopus and anchovies were hard to find. 
Great olive oil simply wasn't available. So they adjusted, making 
the most of what they did have, using inferior tomatoes, replacing 
broccoli rape with spinach and making do with fewer herbs. As the 
years passed, younger generations, now born in America, did not have 
the original cuisine in their memory. Slowly, the cuisine was reduced 
to large portions of long-cooked sauces and bland pastas. The once-light 
cuisine based on fish and vegetables was transformed into one based 
on meat, and heavy on cheese and garlic. And for decades, Americans 
believed it to be true Italian food. It was not until the 1970s that 
Americans first began realizing that there was another cuisine lying 
beneath the stodgy layers of veal parmigiano and the everything pizza. 
Marcella Hazan, whose book ``The Classic Italian Cookbook'' was published 
in 1973 (Harper's Magazine Press), gave many Americans their first 
clue. ``Marcella introduced us to classic Italian food,'' said Nancy 
Verde Barr, the author of ``We Called It Macaroni'' (Knopf, 1990). 
But Ms. Hazan was from Emilia-Romagna, in the north. And in the north, 
the cuisine seemed more sophisticated, more elegant and it had French 
influences _ which gave it an automatic stamp of approval in Americans' 
minds. So the initial rebellion against the red sauce of the south 
was fought by exploiting the regional cuisines of the north. Chefs 
put risotto and polenta on their menus and then marched their way 
south through the salty and rustic gastronomic terrain of Tuscany 
to the real pizzas of Naples. Meanwhile, determined students of Italian 
gastronomy and food writers had dispersed through the countryside, 
taking copious notes, seeking out home cooks and tracking down that 
last undiscovered spot. They, too, eventually headed south. Over the 
past decade, the slow trickle of cookbooks on Southern Italian cooking 
has increased to a steady pour. Books on Sicily, Naples and Puglia 
have revealed the riches of these neglected regions. ``Your palate 
will be richly rewarded by an exploration of the vast variety of Italian 
culinary treasures waiting to be found in Southern Italy,'' wrote 
Carlo Middione in ``The Food of Southern Italy'' (William Morrow), 
which was published in 1987. In the years that followed, cookbook 
writers familiarized readers with farro, a nutty tasting grain, and 
fregola, a pellet-shaped pasta from Sardinia, as well as dishes like 
bread soup; pasta with anchovies, red pepper flakes and bread crumbs, 
and spaghetti with fried eggs and garlic. Southern Italy also began 
to recognize its potential in America. It is a largely poor area, 
and food producers there did not market their products or even think 
to export them. But with improved transportation and the assistance 
of newly affluent Italian-American immigrants, they began to export 
their products. ``They're all made in an artisanal fashion and they 
have an integrity about them,'' said Emily Balducci, a product developer 
at Balducci's. She has even imported unusual products like Calabrian 
fig syrup, which is used all over the south of Italy on toast and 
in cookies. ``It's incredible stuff,'' she said, ``and there are no 
preservatives, and it's not exorbitantly expensive.'' Because the 
products are so integral to the cuisine, some have become highly sought 
after. At Urbani Truffles USA Ltd., in Long Island City, N.Y., sales 
of bottarga, for instance, have increased by 50 percent in the last 
three years. And Eurama Foods Inc., in Brooklyn, which imports Sicilian 
products like capers packed in salt from Pantelleria and a sun-dried 
tomato extract _ a thick paste that makes commercial tomato paste 
seem unpalatable _ has doubled its sales over the last five years. 
Many restaurateurs want to prove just how extraordinary Southern Italian 
food can be _ how an ingredient as humble as the fava bean can be 
transformed into an ethereal puree, as it is at I Trulli. Or how the 
unlikely combination of saffron, pine nuts, currants and anchovies 
over bucatini at Caffe Bondi can surprise you by the range of flavors 
that can be paired with pasta. Even in restaurants that aren't specifically 
Southern Italian, the influences are palpable. At Union Square Cafe 
on East 16th Street, for instance, Michael Romano, the chef, is enamored 
with bottarga. He has served it tossed with spaghetti and bread crumbs. 
(Bread crumbs are a typical condiment for pasta in the south where 
cheese was considered a luxury.) And on his current menu, he incorporates 
bottarga into a grapefruit salad with fennel, arugula and a lemon 
vinaigrette. It's not a Southern Italian dish, but it has the feel 
of one, with ingredients that could readily be found there. Mario 
Batali, the chef at Babbo, on Waverly Place, prefers to rely on southern 
Italian ingredients that may be found here. Then he designs dishes 
that are more Southern Italian in spirit than form. For instance, 
he sautees tuna steaks medium rare, rather than well done as they 
would be in Italy, and serves them with orange segments, wilted radicchio 
and a blood orange vinaigrette. It is a dish with American skin and 
Southern Italian soul, and it strikes just the right balance. Even 
at Monzu on Mercer Street, which touts itself as a Sicilian restaurant, 
Scott Gerow, the chef, tweaks the classics. He makes a fennel caponata, 
for example, rather than the traditional eggplant version. ``We're 
not making mango caponata,'' Gerow said. ``I mean, we're still staying 
sincere to Sicilian tradition.'' As this movement gains strength, 
the regional differences of the south will surely become clearer. 
For now, only Sicily seems to stand apart in the minds of Americans. 
During Sicily's history, which is rich with conflict, nearly every 
conquering people _ the Arabs, the French, the Spanish _ left its 
stamp on the cuisine. In Sicilian cooking, couscous, blood oranges, 
wild fennel, capers, pungent olives and even exotic spices like saffron 
all fit into the intricate culinary fabric. Sweet and sour flavors 
are commonly paired, and rich, sweet desserts like cassata, a layered 
cake of marzipan, ricotta and spongecake, are much more refined than 
the desserts found in other parts of the south. Perhaps what is so 
compelling about the south is this confluence of peasant food and 
sophisticated cooking. Americans are indeed taking to it, but the 
truth is that the door to these cuisines has merely been cracked. 
In reality, America is far from losing its red sauce roots. Even in 
New York, Little Italy remains almost entirely untouched; red sauce 
practically flows through the veins of its cooks. And it would be 
a shame if it were to stop. DANDELION AND FAVA PUREE Adapted from 
I Trulli Time: 1 1/2 hours, plus 6 hours for soaking the beans 1/2 
pound dried, split, skinless fava beans Kosher salt 1 small bunch 
flatleaf parsley, finely chopped 1/2 cup extra virgin olive oil 1 
pound dandelion greens, trimmed and coarsely chopped Freshly ground 
black pepper Loaf of rustic Italian bread, cut diagonally into thick 
slices. 1. Place the beans in a medium-size bowl, and cover with warm 
water. Soak for 6 hours, and drain. 2. In a medium saucepan, combine 
the drained beans with enough fresh water to cover them, and 1 teaspoon 
of salt. Place over high heat and bring to a boil. Reduce heat to 
medium-low, and simmer until tender, 45 to 60 minutes. Drain well. 
In the bowl of a food processor, combine the beans, parsley and 1/4 
cup of the olive oil. Puree until smooth, then set aside. 3. Bring 
a large pot of salted water to a boil. Add the dandelion greens, and 
cook for 4 minutes. Drain well, and pat lightly with paper towels. 
4. Place a medium saute pan over medium heat. Add the remaining 1/4 
cup oil and the dandelion greens. Saute for 30 seconds, and add the 
fava puree. Mix well. Season to taste with salt and pepper. Transfer 
to a serving bowl, or divide among individual plates, and serve with 
the bread. Yield: 6 servings. PASTA WITH ANCHOVIES AND BREAD CRUMBS 
Adapted from ``Pomp and Sustenance,'' by Mary Taylor Simeti (Knopf, 
1989) Time: 45 minutes 1/3 cup plus 1 1/2 tablespoons extra virgin 
olive oil 2 cups dried bread crumbs, grated from stale bread 2 garlic 
cloves, peeled \ cup tomato extract (available in specialty food markets) 
or 1/3 cup tomato paste Kosher salt 1 1/2 pounds spaghetti 12 to 14 
anchovy fillets packed in oil, drained 1 1/2 tablespoons chopped flatleaf 
parsley. 1. In a large heavy skillet over low heat, heat 1 tablespoon 
of the olive oil. Add the bread crumbs, and stir constantly until 
they are toasted and golden brown. Transfer to a small serving bowl, 
and set aside. 2. In a medium skillet over medium heat, combine 1/3 
cup of the olive oil with the garlic cloves. Saute until lightly browned. 
Remove and discard the garlic. Add the tomato extract and 1 cup of 
warm water. Stir until the extract is dissolved. Reduce heat to low, 
and simmer for 10 minutes. Set aside. 3. Fill a large pot 3/4 full 
of water; salt lightly and bring to a boil. Add the spaghetti, and 
cook until al dente, 7 to 9 minutes. While the spaghetti is cooking, 
select a skillet large enough to fit over the top of the pot. Using 
the skillet as a double boiler, combine the anchovies and remaining 
1/2 tablespoon of olive oil. Place the pan on top of the spaghetti 
pot, and stir the anchovies until they are dissolved and creamy. Remove 
the skillet and, using a rubber spatula, scrape the anchovies into 
the tomato mixture. Simmer together for 2 minutes. 4. Reserve 1 cup 
of the spaghetti cooking water, and set it aside. Place the spaghetti 
in a large serving bowl, and top with the tomato sauce. Mix thoroughly, 
adding a little of the reserved liquid if necessary. Sprinkle with 
the parsley and some of the bread crumbs. Serve immediately, passing 
the remaining bread crumbs on the side. Yield: 6 servings. TUNA AL 
TAROCCO Adapted from Babbo Time: 45 minutes 1/2 cup blood-orange juice 
1/2 teaspoon Dijon mustard 1 tablespoon red wine vinegar Kosher salt 
1/2 cup plus 3 tablespoons extra virgin olive oil 1 orange 2 scallions, 
thinly sliced 1/2 pound wild mushrooms (or a mixture of flavorful 
cultivated mushrooms), cut into 1/4-inch slices Pepper to taste 1 
medium head radicchio, cut into 2-inch chunks and the leaves separated 
2 tablespoons toasted pine nuts 1/2 cup chopped fennel fronds, or 
a mixture of parsley and mint leaves 4 6-to-8-ounce tuna steaks Freshly 
ground black pepper. 1. First make the vinaigrette. In a small pan 
over high heat, bring the blood-orange juice to a boil, and reduce 
by half. Remove from the heat, and allow to cool. 2. In a small mixing 
bowl, combine the reduced orange juice, mustard, vinegar and salt 
to taste. Whisk to blend, and slowly whisk in 1/2 cup of the olive 
oil until emulsified. Set aside. Grate and reserve the zest from the 
orange. Cut any remaining peel and pith from the orange. Over a bowl, 
cut the orange into segments, reserving the segments and juices released 
into the bowl. 3. In a 10-to-12-inch saute pan over high heat, heat 
1 tablespoon olive oil, and add the scallions. Saute until the scallions 
are softened, 30 to 45 seconds. Add the mushrooms, and season with 
salt and pepper to taste. Saute until the mushrooms are softened, 
2 to 3 minutes. Add the radicchio, orange segments and any juice. 
Toss to wilt, 30 to 45 seconds. Transfer to a platter, and keep warm. 
4. In a small bowl, combine the orange zest, pine nuts, and fennel 
fronds; set aside. In a 12-inch saute pan over high heat, heat the 
remaining 2 tablespoons olive oil until smoking. Season the tuna steaks 
with salt and pepper to taste, and add to the pan. Saute for 4 to 
5 minutes, then turn the steaks and saute for another 2 to 3 minutes, 
for medium rare. Transfer to the serving platter, laying the steaks 
on top of the radicchio mixture. Sprinkle the blood orange vinaigrette 
over the steaks, and top with the orange zest mixture. Serve immediately. 
Yield: 4 servings. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>