<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981020.0305 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Responding to a wave of grousing in the nation's military about President 
Clinton's affair with Monica Lewinsky, military leaders have taken 
the unusual step of warning officers and enlisted personnel that they 
could face punishment for denouncing the commander-in-chief. There 
has hardly been a groundswell of public criticism among the nation's 
1.4 million soldiers, sailors, airmen and Marines. But the furor surrounding 
Kenneth Starr's report to Congress last month accusing Clinton of 
impeachable offenses has prompted military personnel to write a number 
of public rebukes of the president, mostly in articles or letters 
in newspapers and magazines. The rumblings have raised enough concern 
at the Pentagon that military authorities have on at least two occasions 
in recent weeks responded by warning that Article 88 of the Uniformed 
Code of Military Justice explicitly prohibits officers from speaking 
``contemptuous words'' against the president, the secretary of defense 
or other civilian leaders of the armed services. Each of the services 
has similar rules that apply to enlisted personnel. The assistant 
commandant of the Marine Corps, Gen. Terrence Dake, sent an electronic 
memorandum to all generals in the service on Oct. 9 urging them to 
remind Marines of the prohibitions. ``It is unethical for individuals 
who wear the uniform of a Marine to engage in public dialogue on political 
and legal matters such as impeachment,'' he wrote. In September, days 
after Starr's report saturated the news, an article in the official 
newspaper at F.E. Warren Air Force Base in Wyoming delivered a similarly 
stern reminder. The article, which officials said the Air Force has 
since circulated informally to other bases, warned Air Force personnel 
that they ``aren't allowed to discuss the president in the same manner 
as civilians,'' citing Article 88. The wave of public criticisms of 
Clinton was first reported Tuesday in the The Los Angeles Times. Dake's 
memorandum was first reported in The Washington Times on Friday. By 
all accounts, the affair has consumed the nation's military in much 
the same way it has consumed the nation in general: in other words, 
with the same mixture of fascination and revulsion, derision for Clinton 
and contempt for the independent prosecutor, Kenneth Starr, a feeling 
of outrage and a desire that it would all just go away. But within 
the rigid world of military discipline, the scandal has a deeper undercurrent, 
since a series of officers and enlisted personnel have been punished 
under the Uniformed Code of Military Justice for the same behavior 
Clinton has acknowledged with Ms. Lewinsky: an extramarital affair 
with a subordinate in the workplace. From the start of his presidency, 
Clinton has had a strained relationship with the military, whose members 
viewed his evasion of the draft and his policies on matters like gays 
in the military with suspicion, if not resentment. Now the scandal 
that has brought him to the brink of an impeachment inquiry has revived 
long-simmering feelings, held by some in the ranks, that Clinton is 
not fit to lead. ``How can anyone in the military defend President 
Clinton?'' Master Sgt. Stephen Kapp, stationed at Misawa Air Base 
in Japan, wrote in a letter to the editor of Air Force Times, published 
on Sept. 28. He went on to call for Clinton's resignation, saying, 
``This president has made a mockery out of our country.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>