<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981020.0388 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Some weeks ago an article appeared in this newspaper in which various 
people were asked to comment on how presidential libraries should 
deal with embarrassing episodes in an administration's record. As 
I recall, no one suggested that the embarrassing episode should be 
the major focus of such institutions. But maybe that's the way to 
go. Perhaps the Nixon Library, for instance, could have adopted as 
its mission the creation of a public forum on paranoia. There could 
have been a Bush Library of Weird Locutions, a Kennedy Library of 
Shady Connections, a Carter Library of the Malaise of Power. Is it 
too late to propose a Clinton Library of Indiscretion? For that matter, 
do we need to call it a library? We already have a National Archives 
in Washington for storing presidential books and papers pertaining 
to the public record. Wouldn't it be more useful to create centers 
for the study of cultural issues that a presidency throws into relief? 
Joost Elffers, a Dutch graphic designer who conceived the picture 
book ``Play With Your Food,'' remarked recently that if you grew up 
in a mansion, or a Hyannisport-like compound, you could probably figure 
out at an early age how to get some privacy. But if you were raised, 
say, in a trailer, where at night you had to pull a piece of cloth 
across a string, you might have quite a different conception of solitude. 
In most parts of the world the question ``Were you alone?'' would 
be an occasion for uncontrollable mirth. We ought to laugh at it also. 
For social space in the modern world may well consist, as the sociologist 
Norbert Elias suggests, in the recognition that a self, unlike a body, 
is not bounded by the skin; that there is no clear distinction between 
the individual and society; that we are at all times invaded by ideas, 
perceptions, emotions and demands from the social environment; and 
that this environment is subject to the thoughts, words and actions 
of individuals as well. Such ideas have driven architecture throughout 
the 20th century. Frank Lloyd Wright's use of the open floor plan 
and corner windows, his elimination of basements and attics, blurred 
the borders that traditionally contained individual privacy. In his 
de Stijl Manifesto, Theo van Doesburg called for designs that would 
strike ``an equal balance between the individual and the universal,'' 
an ambition that Gerrit Rietveld hoped to achieve by using abstract 
geometric forms in projects like the Schroeder House in Utrecht. Mies 
van der Rohe's glass curtain walls and free-standing partitions further 
eroded the distinction between interior and exterior. He used I-beams 
to express the building's steel-frame structure on its facade, a device 
taken to baroque extremes by Renzo Piano and Richard Rogers in their 
``exoskeletal'' design for the Pompidou Center in Paris. More recently, 
Eric Owen Moss, Frank Gehry and Rem Koolhaas have used flamboyantly 
subjective forms to challenge architecture's traditional appeal to 
external authority. Elizabeth Diller and Ricardo Scofidio have incorporated 
surveillance cameras and video screens into their work. But glass 
walls, the open plan and idiosyncratic shapes are only part of the 
story. In her book ``Privacy and Publicity'' (MIT Press), the historian 
Beatriz Colomina argues (at exasperating length) that modernism is 
``the publicity of the private.'' Using Le Corbusier as a case study, 
she explores the extent to which he was inspired by photography, advertising 
and other media techniques, and used them to promote his vision in 
journals, books and pamphlets, in which buildings served as illustrations. 
Private houses, like the Villa Stein at Garches, became public images, 
to be replicated by others, either physically or in the mind. The 
public airing of private lives didn't begin with Jenny Jones and Sally 
Jesse Raphael, in other words. Long before talk shows, Le Corbusier 
grasped the power of the media to turn architecture inside-out. The 
media are doing something similar to politics. Clinton's televised 
grand jury turned the president inside out, and the same thing is 
likely to happen to members of the House Judiciary Committee. Who 
will show self-awareness? Who will try to hide behind stone facades 
that everyone else can see through? (The Clarence Thomas hearings 
offered a preview of what's in store.) And while we're reconceptualizing 
the presidential library, we might as well end the suspense over which 
architect will design it. Actually, there's no need for an architect. 
We can buy some old Airstreams and put in some desks, chairs and computers. 
They could travel around the country in a convoy, set up camp in shopping 
mall parking lots. Inner-city vacant lots. Fallow farm fields. Small-town 
squares. Or they could split up to form mobile video studios. They 
could pull into a whole street of private driveways unannounced, like 
Publishers Clearing House, and broadcast live video feeds of neighborhood 
life to pay-per-view cable channels. Some trailers could have real 
people living in them, the way Loretta Young lived for a week in that 
department store window on her 50s television show. Others could have 
mimes pretending to be wax figures. There could be a tableau vivant 
of Walter Annenberg's remarks on being presented to Queen Elizabeth: 
``We are living in the embassy residence, of course, subject to some 
of the discomfiture as a result of the need for elements of refurbishment 
and rehabilitation.'' Another trailer could be devoted to the semiotics 
of the term ``trailer trash,'' the relationship between privacy and 
class and the exploration of alternative concepts, like New Urbanism 
trash, Hamptons trash and cell phone trash. Or there could be online 
access to the literature and visual art forms that have traced the 
waving contours of the line between public and private. The four-volume 
``A History of Private Life'' by Philippe Aries and George Duby. ``Ulysses.'' 
``Mrs. Dalloway.'' ``Civilization and its Discontents.'' Weegee's 
photographs. Ozzie and Harriet. Gilbert and George. ``When Push Comes 
to Shove.'' With these flexible arrangements, the Clinton Library 
could demonstrate as well as document the interaction of public and 
private affairs. Elias used the term ``homo clausus'' to describe 
the misconception of the individual self as a core within a shell 
that separates inside from outside. (The Unabomber could be an extreme 
manifestation of this idea and its deluded consequences.) His book, 
``The Civilizing Process,'' argues in favor of the open personality 
who is ``fundamentally oriented toward and dependent on other people 
throughout his life.'' We don't need a homo clausus type of presidential 
library, just as people don't really want a homo clausus president. 
We may flinch from revelations of presidential indiscretions, but 
at the same time we've gained as a society from getting rid of the 
fear and manipulation that were sustained by oppressive notions of 
the indiscreet. Architecture, an art that has often supported that 
oppression, has also been part of the process of shedding it during 
this century. If architecture is called for in the building of a new 
presidential library, there's a lot more shedding to be done. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>