<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981020.0157 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
I always love it when I can apply a simple formula to a broad range 
of dishes. And it seldom works as well as it does with creamy vegetable 
soups. The soups have three basic ingredients, and their proportions 
form a pyramid: three parts liquid, two parts vegetable, one part 
dairy. The pyramid's foundation is chicken stock (you can substitute 
vegetable stock or water, but the result will be somewhat less substantial). 
The middle section is any vegetable, or combination of vegetables, 
that will puree nicely and produce good body and flavor. The peak 
is cream, milk, yogurt or sour cream. To make four servings, the pyramid 
works out to three cups stock, two cups vegetables and one cup dairy: 
six cups is the perfect amount of soup for four people. Aromatic vegetables, 
like onions, carrots, and celery, count as part of the vegetable portion, 
but seasonings like salt, pepper, herbs, spices, garlic or shallots 
are additional, and pretty much to taste. The procedure is nearly 
as straightforward as the formula: Simmer the vegetables in the stock 
until they're quite tender. Puree in a blender, in batches if necessary 
(make sure the blender lid is on securely to avoid being scalded). 
Stir or blend in the dairy and seasonings, and reheat gently (especially 
gently if you're using yogurt, which will curdle if it boils). It's 
worth noting that these soups are also good cold. There are shortcuts. 
Leftover cooked vegetables are super candidates for this soup. Rinse 
off any remnants of sauce with hot water; then combine with stock, 
and puree. If you think ahead, you can intentionally cook extra vegetables 
for just this purpose. Some vegetables, like winter squash, are so 
dense that they create their own creaminess, reducing the amount of 
dairy needed. But these are matters of judgment, perhaps best left 
until after you've experimented within the basic rules. Keep the proportions 
in line. If there are too many vegetables, your blender won't be able 
to puree the mixture; too much liquid will cut the flavor of the vegetable 
and thin the soup, too much dairy will reduce the intensity of flavor 
and make it too rich. Always cook the vegetables until very tender, 
but no more than that. Spinach is tender in a couple of minutes; potatoes, 
even cut into chunks, will require 15. Almost nothing will take longer 
than that. Cover the pot while the vegetables cook to prevent too 
much of the stock from evaporating. Seasonings that require cooking, 
like onion, should be added with the vegetables. But those that do 
not, like herbs and spices, are best added before reheating the mixture 
so they retain their freshness. And there's obviously a difference 
in the amount of richness added to the soup by cream, sour cream, 
yogurt or milk. So, stir in the dairy element gradually by hand after 
pureeing, and adjust the consistency as you like. CREAMY BROCCOLI 
SOUP Time: 20 minutes 2 cups broccoli florets and peeled stems cut 
into chunks 3 cups chicken stock 1 clove garlic, peeled and cut in 
half 1 cup milk, cream or yogurt Salt and freshly ground black pepper 
to taste. 1. Combine the broccoli and the stock in a saucepan. Simmer, 
covered, until the broccoli is tender, about 10 minutes. During the 
last minute or so of cooking, add the garlic (this cooks the garlic 
just enough to remove its raw taste). 2. Puree in a blender, in batches 
if necessary, until very smooth. Stir in the milk, cream or yogurt, 
and reheat gently; do not boil. Season to taste and serve. Yield: 
4 servings. The possible combinations for this kind of soup border 
on the infinite. Here are some suggestions for different vegetables 
to simmer in the stock: _ Potato and onion. Use 1 cup each potato 
and onion (or leek). Omit the garlic, and garnish with parsley, dill 
or chives. _ Spinach. Start with 10 to 16 ounces of leaves (remove 
thick stems). Cook quickly, adding a clove of garlic if you like. 
_ Turnip and parsnip or turnip and potato. Cook with a small onion 
and 1 teaspoon of fresh thyme leaves (or { teaspoon dried thyme). 
_ Carrot. Nice with a pinch of cayenne pepper and a teaspoon or more 
of minced ginger, added, like the garlic, during the last minute of 
cooking. _ Celery or fennel. Cook 3 or 4 cloves of garlic along with 
the vegetable. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>