<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981020.2000.2415 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This week, public television is exploring the history of slavery and 
its role in shaping American identity in the series "Africans in America." 
Well, we were interested in how the legacy of slavery has affected 
other countries involved in the Trans Atlantic slave trade, including 
Brazil, Cuba, and Great Britain. Today, we go to Jamaica. Most Jamaicans 
are descendants of Africans brought to the island as slaves between 
the 16th and 19th centuries. And as THE WORLD's Boris Maksimov reports 
from Kingston, you can hear it I the language. If and when you open 
any book in Jamaica, one of the first things you notice is that it's 
proudly proclaimed to be the biggest English-speaking country in the 
West Indies. So you leave all your dictionaries behind and arrive 
in the country, turn the radio on, and for the buzz and hiss, you 
hear... That sounds like anything but English, and it actually isn't. 
It's a local language but to Jamaican Creole. As for the radio commercial, 
mercifully for the likes of myself, it was translated into English 
as well. That's haughty haughty gal, Ward Theater, Sunday, 11th ofOctober 
at p.m. sharp. See you. Now that is something quite new. And so recently, 
Patua , the Jamaican Creole was seen as jargon, as bad English, as 
a corruption of the language of culture. Until very recently, you 
would never hear it spoken on the air waves. Even though all Jamaicans 
speak it, the middle classes educated in English aspiring to cultural 
models from Britain or the states still consider Patua as broken English. 
So is it, or is it a quite different separate language? Hubert Downish, 
Linguistics Department, University of West Indies, The issue of what 
constitutes a language is a matter of perception and politics, really. 
Hubert Downish, the head of the Linguistics Department of the University 
of West Indies in Kingston, Jamaica. In the Jamaican context, the 
thing that is called Patua is very different from standard Jamaican 
English. And in certain context and situations, if the politics is 
right, would be considered to be two fairly distinct languages even 
though there is as well a great deal of overlap between the two. But 
then that is true for German and Dutch. At the University of West 
Indies in Kingston, there is only one course that all the students 
are required to take. It's called the Use of English. In principle, 
it is supposed to teach the students the basics of academic English. 
In practice, they spend almost the entire time studying Creole. The 
question is why? Karen Russell teaches the course. This course is 
to sensitize them that English is a different language from Creole. 
At the beginning, it's such a discovery for them. It's such an exciting 
thing for them. So unheard of to hear that Creole is a language. And 
so I think they gain a respect for their own mother tongue. And do 
they? Here's what students like Karen Mullins and Para Freitas have 
to say. We usually speak Patua when we're among our friends or in 
a particularly city. I speak English at home sometimes. And sometimes 
I speak broken English where I don't talk real Patua. Kingstonians 
don't speak - They would say we speak proper English but when we work 
within the classroom setting, we're not speaking standard English 
according to the teacher. You don't have to simply accept the academic 
assertions that Patua, Creole is a proper language in its own right. 
Just go out on the street or tune into any talk show and listen to 
how people speak. Understand anything? Not quite. So where does this 
language come from? We know under what circumstances Creole appeared 
out of the meeting of English as spoken by the European colonists 
and the African languages of the slaves. The hotly debated question 
is, of course What happened as a result of this meeting? Corruption 
of English, corruption of African languages, or something else? Hubert 
Demenesh. There's a big argument in linguistics between the universalists 
who are saying that what happened is that in circumstances where these 
people of West Africa origin were thrown into a situation with no 
common language, they reverted back to that which is most universal 
in human language. On the other hand, the people who favor the African 
substratum constantly point to the parallels with African languages. 
I will not bore you with detailed descriptions of the use of verbs 
and adverbs in Patua, which are quite different from the English or 
general in the European pattern. But the question of the African roots 
of the Jamaican language of Patua is not just a linguistic point. 
It is also a question of looking at one's own past, as Carolyn Cooper, 
a specialist in Jamaican literature and music explains. People have 
been told that "You have no language, you have no culture, your function 
is as beasts of burden, your place is on the plantation making profit 
for me." And what black people, African people have said, "But this 
is nonsense. This is our mother tongue, and whoever says it's not 
a language. But we know it's a language and we use it. So there's 
nothing stopping us from celebrating that African heritage except 
what Bob Marley called mental slavery. For centuries, the African 
roots of local culture were denied, suppressed, ignored. Things are 
changing slowly. Music, reggae, dance all celebrate the blackness, 
the Africanness of Jamaican culture, and language, the mother tongue, 
is suddenly becoming more audible. Until recently, Patua was heard 
mainly at home in poor neighborhoods, in the markets. Now, as you 
have heard, you get it on the radio. Baba Tunde is one of Jamaica's 
most popular talk show hosts. He uses Creole in his show quite consciously. 
I speak Patua, the people's language, and the people identify with 
the language that I speak, a language that they understand, and a 
language which they can interpret very easily. And understand and 
interpret they do. Language is not only means of communication. Sure, 
speaking the way common, everyday folk do actually does improve understanding. 
But language is also an affair of the heart. Carolyn Cooper. Most 
of their life is lived in that language. A definition of the mother 
tongue is a language you speak when you are in distress and it's also 
the language you speak to your grandmother, you know. And most Jamaicans 
in situations of distress are going to speak in Jamaica, you know. 
That is a language of the unconscious. And language is also a living 
monument to history, to the roots of a culture. And in Jamaica, those 
phonetical and grammatical roots are coming alive and blooming and 
history is coming full circle like in this poem by Jamaican poet Louise 
Bennett. What an island. What a people. Men and women all are young, 
just. What an island. What a people. Men and women all are young just 
pack their baggage and turned history upside down. For THE WORLD, 
this is Boris Maksimov. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>