<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981020.2000.0756 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The United States is a safe haven for tens of thousands of political 
refugees, but for a handful of Iraqis, America has become a nightmare. 
They were among some 6,000 opponents of Saddam Hussein's regime who 
were spirited out of Northern Iraq by the U.S. military two years 
ago. The U.S. Immigration Service gave the vast majority of these 
dissidents political refugee status, but U.S. authorities imprisoned 
seven of them, accusing them of working undercover for Saddam Hussein. 
In more than a year, the seven were denied access to their own files, 
which the U.S. government considered too sensitive to release. That 
made it impossible for them to mount a defense of their own according 
to Hadil Hadiawad, one of the Iraqi prisoners. Our case is the kind 
of very unique case. I guess nobody had ever heard of our people being 
detained for no reason. And when those people asked for the reason 
of their detention, they got answers of, "We can't because it's separate." 
With us to discuss recent developments in the case is the lawyer for 
the seven Iraqis, former CIA Director James Woolsey. Mr. Woolsey, 
it's rather interesting that as one time head of the CIA, you have 
now chosen to take on this case. Can you start off by telling us why 
are you defending these men? Well, the public council, which is the 
large public interest law firm in Los Angeles that represents the 
men, came to me because they did not have security clearance, and 
they thought that perhaps some lawyer with a security clearance might 
be granted access to the secret material which the government had 
put unilaterally before the immigration judge. I looked into the case, 
and the more I learned about it, the more disturbed I was at how these 
men had been treated and also the procedural situation that in this 
tiny corner of immigration law makes it possible for the immigration 
service to incarcerate people indefinitely and perhaps even deport 
them to their death based on classified information that they won't 
let anyone else review. And what specifically, when you say you're 
bothered by the treatment of these men, what bothered you primarily? 
Well, this is exactly out of Koska's - the trial. This is exactly 
the situation Joseph Kaye was in in which he's accused of something 
but he doesn't know what, when, in fact, the men are accused of entering 
the country without visas and without work permits. Well, of course 
they entered without visa, they went without work permits because 
the U.S. government didn't give them any when it brought them here 
from Iraq to Turkey to Guam to California. And since that is the real 
charge, then all they have to say is that, well, they believe they 
have some evidence that they be a threat to the security of the country 
in order to keep them locked up indefinitely. And so do they have 
any evidence at all that they are security threats. I mean, they must 
have something that they're holding them on. Well, I believe the information 
- They say they've turned loose about 90 percent or more of the formerly 
classified information after we complained that they were holding 
on to the classified information. And that 90 percent is extremely 
flimsy. And it consists almost entirely of allegations about them 
by other people in camps on Guam. Well, there are a lot of people 
who made allegations of one sort or another, but the immigration service 
never permits in their regulations the FBI to follow up these allegations 
and actually do an investigation. So when you get this classified, 
formerly classified transcript, it has in it FBI agents complaining 
that all they're able to do is present to the court something that 
some other person in the camp said they're not permitted to do an 
investigation. So it's based on finger pointing and not much more 
than that? It's based on finger pointing so far. Is there any evidence 
on the other side that your clients were indeed working for the CIA 
in Iraq? Well, that's not the position we would take or argue insofar 
as the question is, Were they struggling against Saddam Hussein and 
doing so quite courageously? There's a lot of evidence that they were 
doing that. Two of these men are physicians, three I think had been 
wounded in combat, two of them had at least three assassination attempts 
each against them by Iraqi intelligence. Two, maybe three of them 
have broadcast against Saddam out of Northern Iraq. There is I think 
rather good evidence that these men all fought strongly against Saddam's 
regime. Iraq is, of course, an enemy of the United States. Is it not 
prudent for U.S. authorities to perhaps err on the side of caution 
when allowing thousands of people who claim that they are dissidents 
into this country? It is one thing to err on the side of caution when 
you're doing so with evidence that has been tested and examined. It's 
another thing to do it based upon raw allegations that you refuse 
to investigate. This is the same procedure they used if someone shows 
up unannounced and without a visa having, say, smuggled himself aboard 
an airline or he lands at Kennedy airport. That's not what we have 
here. Here, we have a case that these people have been brought to 
the United States every step of the way by the U.S. government. What 
is likely to happen to these men if the U.S. goes ahead with its plan 
to deport them back to Iraq? If it deports them to Iraq, I think they 
will all be killed and they'll be killed probably rather slowly. Is 
the United States not obliged by the Torture Convention which the 
U.S. signed not to deport anybody who could be tortured on the other 
end? I think they are coming to understand that, and I think they 
- although the deportation orderees to be sent to Iraq since that's 
where they came from, I think it's unlikely, frankly, as long as the 
Saddam regime is in power, first of all, because the U.S. wouldn't 
have diplomatic relations with it, but also out of a simple sense 
of humanitarianism. I think it's unlikely that they would be deported 
to Iraq any time in the near future. What this order in practical 
terms means is that they are incarcerated indefinitely. In summary, 
I wonder if for you, Mr. Woolsey, it's difficult to be a part of a 
case that if you do win puts the CIA, the agency that you used to 
head in a rather bad light. Well, this doesn't necessarily put the 
CIA in a bad light. We don't know what the information is that is 
leading them to hold on to these individuals. But if it does come 
from the CIA and it proves not to be accurate, then the CIA, like 
any other part of government shouldn't be able to get people incarcerated 
for possibly the rest of their lives without that evidence being able 
to be tested on cross-examination by a counsel who has security clearance. 
The government acknowledges that I have a security clearance, but 
they say that I don't need to know. And if we ask why, they say, "Well, 
it doesn't serve a government purpose." And if we say it isn't treating 
people fairly in immigration proceedings, the purpose of the U.S. 
government, they just sort of stand silent. Former CIA director James 
Woolsey, thank you very much for speaking with us. Thank you. Those 
seven Iraqis' appeal against their deportation order is expected to 
be heard early next year. Meanwhile, immigration authorities are not 
commenting publicly on the case. This is PRI, Public Radio International. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>