<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981020.2000.2027 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Spain's foreign minister said today that his government would back 
efforts to bring Chile's Augusto Pinochet to Madrid if Spanish courts 
formerly request it. This removes a key obstacle to Pinochet's extradition 
to Spain. Augusto Pinochet was arrested in London on Friday in response 
to a request from a Spanish judge who wants to question the former 
Chilean dictator in connection with the deaths of 94 people during 
his rule in the 1970s and '80s. As THE WORLD's Andrew North reports, 
international lawyers are divided about whether the arrest will set 
a precedent for bringing other people to justice who are wanted for 
crimes against humanity. For years, lawyers in Spain and the United 
States have wanted to question General Pinochet about his alleged 
role in human rights crimes committed during his 17-year rule. At 
home, he enjoys immunity from prosecution and is a frequent visitor 
to Britain in the past. He thought he was safe there, too. In fact, 
just days before he was detained at a London hospital, he was having 
tea with former Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher. His arrest has some 
lawyers heralding a new era. It's not only a precedent, I think it's 
an extremely important message that must go to anyone who would engage 
in these types of crimes against humanity that there are no safe havens. 
Samuel Bafone is a Washington based lawyer who represents victims 
of a 1976 car bomb attack in the U.S. capital allegedly carried out 
by Pinochet's secret police. The attack was directed at a former minister 
in the Allende government which Pinochet overthrew in 1973. Both the 
minister and his American assistant were killed and Bafone says he 
has brought almost everyone involved in the attack to justice. The 
only person who has escaped in that proceeding is General Pinochet. 
Information that is publicly available indicates that General Pinochet 
was actively involved in the planning and ordered, we believe, that 
the assassination be carried out. Bafone is hoping that the Spanish 
judge seeking Pinochet's extradition from the U.K. will be able to 
question the former Chilean leader about that and other attacks, but 
he's not the only legal expert applauding the arrest. I think it's 
really quite a historic occasion. Dirk LaVatz is professor of international 
law at Harvard University. He says it shows judicial authorities in 
the West are getting more serious about bringing people to justice 
who are accused of crimes against humanity, crimes such as torture 
and mass murder. There have been some attempts to reach these people 
before in other ways, but this breaks new ground. Why does it break 
new ground? First of all, because it's not a country. Britain hasn't 
been in this business before. We have taken some steps in the United 
States against former dictators like Marcos, and of course, our man 
in Panama, but it hasn't been common in Europe. But not all lawyers 
are convinced. It would be wonderful if courts decided to take upon 
themselves the obligation in each country to really pursue the enforcement 
of international human rights. That's Peter Rosenbloom, project's 
director at Harvard Law School's Human Rights Program. He welcomes 
Pinochet's arrest but he doubts it sets a new pattern. What makes 
me, I guess, skeptical and one who would not yet celebrate this is 
the context in which it comes. This comes as a result of an interesting 
coincidence of political events, of an activist court and judges in 
Spain at a time when in Britain, those in power are willing to seek 
ways to find a more ethical international approach to human rights 
and foreign relations. But Rosenbloom has a deeper fear, that this 
high profile arrest, as well as raising expectations, could actually 
damage Chile's delicate efforts to heal the wounds left by Pinochet's 
rule. This is the West exercising the muscle of its courts against 
a country in the South that's come through a very delicate transition. 
It's come through it well. It should be congratulated for it. But 
perhaps also it should be allowed to make its own way into the transition. 
How would we feel if this were a country that weren't quite as stable? 
That was the line taken by state side France in hosting Zaire's late 
leader, Mobutu Sese Seko, in the 1980s and 1990s. Although he was 
accused of human rights crimes, it was believed that his arrest would 
only destabilize the country. Chile's ambassador to London, Mario 
Tresa, says that Pinochet's arrest poses a very real threat to the 
country's stability. I have spent 17 years myself outside my country 
because of Mr. Pinochet. But it's nothing to do with what we are discussing 
today. We are not discussing his record during his period of dictatorship 
that at the present government do not support at all. We have a very 
difficult transition. We are saying that this does not help the transition 
that has been applauded all around the world as a model. While international 
lawyers are still debating the possible precedence created by Pinochet's 
arrest, his legal advisers are saying they will fight his extradition 
to Spain, and they have just over a month to make their case. For 
THE WORLD, I'm Andrew North. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>