<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981020.2000.1257 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is THE WORLD. I'm Lisa Mullins. A despotic leader, a campaign 
of repression, dissidents seeking political asylum in America. Sounds 
like something out of the Cold War but it's actually happening in 
post Soviet Russia. A series of unexplained murders in a tiny autonomous 
Republic of Kalmykia have many pointing a finger at the republic's 
own leader. And today, two Kalmykian families are on their way to 
New York because they're afraid they might be next. David McGuffin 
tells us their story and the story of their homeland where the transition 
to democracy is meeting serious, even deadly obstacles. In the 1940s, 
Joseph Stalin exiled and killed nearly all of the Mongolian descendants 
of Genghis Khan living in Kalmykia, a tiny Russian republic that sits 
on the northern shorts of the Caspian Sea. Once an ancient frontier 
of the Mongol Empire, after 70 years of Soviet repression, it's now 
more populated with sheep than people. Today, social activist Lydia 
Dorjeva and her daughters are fleeing another despotic ruler, this 
time one of their own, an ethnic Talmic whose actions could cause 
another exodus from their republic. Thanks to our President Kifsani 
Uzima, we are losing our mother land forever. It's very hard for me 
now. I love my country and would like to stay there. Instead, she 
and another family of Kalmyks fled to the U.S. Embassy here in Moscow. 
They've been granted political asylum after receiving death threats 
for criticizing Illium Genoff. The two families' problems began when 
their criticism of the republic's president appeared in the small 
opposition newspaper run by Kalmykia's leading investigative journalist, 
Narisa Yudena. Yudena was murdered in June while trying to uncover 
corruption in the president's regime. In the last interview she gave 
before her death, Yudena said she no longer felt safe under Illium 
Genoff. He abuses human rights like nowhere else in Russia. He's introduced 
laws which are against the Russian Constitution. I live in Russia, 
but I'm not sure Russian laws can protect me here. Yudena's murder 
remains unsolved, but her friend believe it was a state-sanctioned 
act, and that their own lives are in danger. Baseely and Nadejda Galashev 
were also granted asylum in the United States. They fled Kalmykia 
with their two young children. Baseely Galashev explains what finally 
prompted him to get his family away. They started saying that we would 
be the next victims. We were receiving open threats that they would 
kill us. We are afraid to live in a country where the authorities 
feel free to kill people. While waiting in Moscow for their U.S. Visas, 
the death threats continued. Last Thursday, according to the families, 
an intermediary delivered them a message from Illium Genoff that they 
can't hide not even in America. American immigration officials say 
they don't comment on specific cases, but since the fall of the Soviet 
Union, it's been very rare for Russians to be granted refugee status 
in the United States. Human rights officials say the unusual move 
by the U.S. is in itself a tacit indictment of the regime in Kalmykia. 
Meanwhile, Illium Genoff continues to prosper ruling with an odd blend 
of Buddhist principles and Soviet style leadership. A self-proclaimed 
multi-millionaire with a fleet of Rolls Royces, Illium Genoff also 
heads the International Chess Federation and is talking about running 
for president of Russia in the year 2000. He just hosted a tournament 
of the world's leading chess champions despite pressure from human 
rights groups to boycott the tournament after Yudena's death. And 
for his part, he denies having anything to do with the murder and 
insists there is democracy in Kalmykia. Anybody who wants to talk 
can talk. We have several radio stations. Anyone can be on the air. 
We prohibit fascism and violence. But two of the four men arrested 
with Yudena's murder were closely associated with Illium Genoff and 
analysts say in such a small republic, nothing ever happens without 
the president's knowledge. Both families arrive in New York today. 
They say they have no plans to return to their home in Kalmykia. For 
THE WORLD, I'm David McGuffin in Moscow. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>