<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981020.1700.1350 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Cowboys are familiar to Western song and legend but how do real cowboys 
actually live? VOA's Adam Phillips recently traveled to a ranch in 
Montana in the heart of the American West to find out, and here's 
his report. With his tall black hat, handsome, well-lived-in face, 
and longish salt and pepper hair blowing in the mountain wind, Arthur 
Robinson could easily past for a Hollywood cowboy. But as he corrals 
his horses at the end of a 16-hour workday, it's clear his life is 
no movie. We'll ride 30, 40 miles a day a lot of days. We have a lot 
of work here, but there's never a day that I am not appreciative of 
nature itself and just the beauty of it. There is certainly a lot 
of nature to appreciate on the Robinson ranch. It's 24,000 hectares 
of open pasture land stretched clear to the horizon, where jagged 
purple gray mountains meet a roiling sky. Mr. Robinson climbs off 
his horse and releases it to the herd. In among it is a spirited young 
horse. Mr. Robinson's wife and partner, Vicky Robinson, hopes will 
someday help them work all that land. The red roan that's kicking 
and bucking, that's the one I'm going to start to break. What does 
that mean, to break? To train them so that you can sit on them and 
ride them. Have you ever gotten hurt with a horse? Of course. Ms. 
Robinson, who is originally from England, opens a metal gate for her 
husband. Mr. Robinson points to some 20 cows and their calves just 
beyond. They're terntays and they originated in the French Alps, and 
we got into them because they're such good range cattle. Some say 
that they're the only cattle that will get tender on grass. What makes 
a good range cattle, range cow? She has to be a real good mother, 
look after her calf, calf by herself. And then have the natural ability 
to go into the steeper, rougher country for forage where the better 
feed is. Although many ranchers now use trucks and even helicopters 
to reach the cattle for doctoring or herding, the Robinsons use the 
more old fashioned horse and lasso method. We doctor everything out 
on the range, and then we move cattle along. That way, the land always 
gets a chance to recover. In the winter, we wait till the coldest 
day of the year, and then we trail to a canyon outside of Dillon, 
and it takes seven days. Would you sleep under the stars when it's 
happening? We don't. We do not. It's too cold to sleep out. We come 
home and soak in a hot bath and eat and then go out in the morning. 
Why do we pick the coldest night to trail, the coldest day of the 
year? That's just the way it happens. Inside their cozy home, Vicky 
Robinson has cooked some meat from an animal they raised. Her husband 
says he blessed and thanked the steer before slaughtering it. Just 
something I believe in. Thank the animal for his life, for meal. The 
Robinsons say that it is this sense of spiritual and practical connectedness 
to one's herd, one's horse, and the land itself that makes a true 
cowboy or cowgirl. Cowboys can somehow have an instinct just to know 
what an animal is thinking just like a musician has a natural ability 
to pick out a tune. Some people have it, some people will just never 
get it. Being able to lead the land and lead the way that the animals 
will travel the best. Probably the one most important thing is the 
communication between you and your horse. You're just like one. And 
you have to just feel it. In recent years, land prices in the West 
have shot up. At the same time, beef prices are at a record low. Although 
these developments pose critical threats to the cowboy way of life, 
Vicky Robinson for one promises "not to give up till the end of the 
fight." This is Adam Phillips reporting. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>