<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981020.1700.2155 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Serbian lawmakers have approved a new information law banning what 
authorities call propaganda broadcasts funded by foreign governments. 
The law bans broadcast in Serbia programs produced by such foreign 
outlets as the Voice of America, Deutchavella, and the BBC. Last week, 
Serbian authorities suspended publication of three independent dailies 
for allegedly violating a government order against spreading fear. 
Serbia's media crackdown is the subject of today's dateline. Here's 
Pamela Taylor. Uniformed and plain clothes police moved into the offices 
of two daily newspapers, "Donnus" and "Denevni Telegraph" in the early 
hours of Wednesday morning last week. They sealed the offices of both 
papers and posted private security guards from a company with close 
ties to the government of President Slobodan Milosevic. The following 
day, a third newspaper, "Nasha Borbo," was shut down. We have more 
in this report from correspondent Art Chimes in the Yugoslav capital. 
Serbian Information Minister Alexander Vutchrich sent letters to both 
papers warning they were violating the decree and forbidding them 
to publish the letter. One of the papers, "Donnus," published the 
full text of the warning in its Tuesday edition. The letter charged 
the papers are spreading fear, panic, and defeatism. The other paper, 
"Denevni Telegraph," has been featuring a daily box at the top of 
page one headlining prohibited stories it said it was not publishing 
but giving just enough information to suggest what was being censored. 
The managing director of "Donnus," Deuchon Felitch, says his paper 
was shut down for the offense of what he called being journalist and 
publishing news. Part of the news about the deal between Milosevic 
and Holbrooke was published, I thought, you know, they may forget 
about us, but they didn't. They just want to use this situation to 
get rid of independent press. It is practically the only real opposition 
in this country because opposition parties really have disintegrated, 
and the real - the only real voice of opposition are independent papers. 
The Information Ministry did not respond to a request for an interview. 
A reporter for independent radio station B92 reached Minister Alexander 
Vutchrich by phone Tuesday evening when he denied any knowledge of 
the closure. The United Nations criticized the government action. 
The top U.N. human rights official in Belgrade pointed out that and 
until recently, Belgrade enjoyed a free newspaper press with more 
dailies than New York. But Barbara Davis says she sees the loss of 
the two newspapers as not as bad as the erosion of the rule of law. 
Far more pernicious for the implementation of human rights standards 
is the government's decision which presents broad and as yet undefined 
powers to administrative organs who themselves become arbiter of what 
is or is not acceptable expression. The order closing the newspapers 
did not clearly indicate the legal basis for the closure. Lawyers 
for the papers are reviewing possible legal action, and 15 independent 
media organizations have asked the Supreme Court to intervene. Leading 
the charge against the media is Deputy Prime Minister Voyaslov Chechall, 
who heads the Serbian Radical Party. Mr. Chechall has been particularly 
critical of international broadcasters including VOA, Deutchavella, 
and the BBC. Local media have been ordered to stop rebroadcasting 
programs from the foreign stations. VOA correspondent Art Chimes reporting 
from Belgrade. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>