<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981020.1700.0695 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In this country, clean up has begun in Texas following devastating 
weekend floods and tornadoes which claimed 17 lives. Thousands of 
people have fled their homes as waterways swollen from torrential 
rains flooded much of the south and central Texas regions. One of 
the hardest hit communities was the city of San Antonio. Carmen Vasquez 
Gonzales is the Public Information Manager at the San Antonio City 
Hall. Well, we haven't had any more torrential rain since Saturday 
night. The rains really have subsided. We've just had some drizzle. 
So a lot of the water is receding in many of the low lying areas. 
This was a flood of record. We have never had this much rain at one 
time in such a short amount of time. And so what the city is doing 
now has established mobile command centers in those neighborhoods 
that were hardest hit by the flood, and these command centers will 
give residents access to a range of services and information, because 
right now, our top priority is to help those families in need. Now 
what kind of needs are they experiencing? I know some of these people 
had to be evacuated and put up elsewhere. Well, some of them do need 
temporary shelter because they have lost their homes. So we're looking 
at things like clothing and food as some of the more immediate needs, 
and like I said, temporary shelter. How much damage was done in terms 
of damage to homes and to commercial properties? I don't have a dollar 
figure on that as yet, but there were neighborhoods that where homes 
were completely destroyed or mostly destroyed. So we're still assessing 
that damage. We have teams of assessment folks out in the entire city. 
We have pockets of the cities where there was a lot of damage. And 
some other parts - Every part of the city got a lot of rain, but some 
areas of the city was just so much where the creeks just went over 
the banks and had nowhere to go but into homes. We're told at least 
14 people died in Texas. Were any of those casualties, those fatalities 
in San Antonio? We had seven fatalities in San Antonio. Why so many 
in that one particular area? We had - We experienced flash floods. 
Like I said, in San Antonio, there are some areas, some low lying 
areas that quickly filled with water, and so some of that happened 
where people went through a low lying area and were not aware that 
the creek had - the water crossing had just filled so quickly and 
were swept away by the current. Carmen Vasquez Gonzales, the public 
information manager at the San Antonio, Texas City Hall. She says 
an underground flood diversion system put into operation a year ago 
helped keep much of the flood water out of the central part of the 
city. The town of Quero, about 100 kilometers southeast of San Antonio 
was less fortunate. It was devastated by the overflowing Guadalupe 
River Tuesday. Dozens of houses were swept away and farmland was destroyed. 
Emergency crews and boats are floating through soaked neighborhoods 
to rescue residents. Officials are considering evacuating about 1300 
inmates from a nearby medium security prison which is surrounded by 
water. In all 60 counties, about a fourth of Texas are flooded. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>