<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981020.1700.3182 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
And it's time for our weekly look at the most popular films at North 
American theaters. A romantic fantasy casts a spell on audiences to 
open up in first place. It's among three new entries on this week's 
top five list. Alan Silverman has the rundown starting with a former 
number one film that ends up in fifth place. East and West collide 
for comedy and action in "Rush Hour," a police adventure appearing 
American Chris Tucker with Hong Kong super star Jackie Chan. "Rush 
Hour" slows down to number five. New in fourth place, a sentimental 
historical epic of black Americans. "Beloved" is adapted from the 
acclaimed novel by Tony Morrison, the story of Sethy, a former slave 
literally haunted by memories of the brutality and the unthinkable 
choice she had to make to stay free. Oprah Winfrey stars as Sethy 
and produced the film after a ten-year struggle to bring "Beloved" 
to the screen. I felt like I had to tell it. And if I'd known it was 
going to take this long, I probably would have made another decision. 
I was very naive in the beginning. I thought, well, I'll just get 
a screenplay and then we'll find a director and I'll just go to a 
movie company and then we'll get it done. I never - I had no idea 
that it would be a decade. Danny Glover, Tandy Newton, and Kimberly 
Elise, co-star, and "Beloved" opens up in fourth place. The numbers 
are a bit deceptive though. "Beloved" actually sold more tickets per 
theater than any other film in wide release this week, but a couple 
of factors keep it from top rank in the box office tally. Its almost 
three-hour running time limits the number of showings per day. And 
"Beloved" is playing at several hundred fewer theaters than the others 
in the top five. The other two new entries this week pushed the former 
number one film into third "Antz," spelled A-n-t-z, is an animated 
adventure set in a teeming ant colony starring the voices of, among 
others, Woody Allen, Sylvester Stallone, Sharon Stone, and Gene Hackman. 
The witty family fable crawls down to number three. New in second 
place "Bride of Chucky." The return of the homicidal doll first introduced 
a decade ago in the horror hit, "Child's Play." In this fourth thriller 
of the series, diabolical Chucky gets a curvaceous and equally dangerous 
playmate. "Bride of Chucky" gets lucky cutting in at number two. The 
new first place film mixes romance, mystery, and a touch of witchcraft. 
"Practical Magic" co-stars Sandra Bullock and Nicole Kidman as sisters 
who come from a long line of witches. For Bullock, the appeal is not 
the spells and potions but the romance. Human nature is such that 
no matter how successful we become, no matter how much money we make, 
no matter how much we do in life, it all comes down to one basic thing 
is that we just want to find a great partner, one that we respect, 
admire, love, can have a wicked good time with, dance the funky chicken 
with when we're, you know, 70 years old, and just who gets our joke. 
And everyone aspires to that. And that's why I think romances do so 
well in Hollywood because it gives you that fantasy, that maybe it 
can happen to me. And I play into that. I'm sitting on set watching 
this film at the end going, "You know what? It's not who she expected 
but it's everything that she needs." The Warner Bros. release also 
features Aidan Quinn, Diane Weist, Stockard Channing, and Gorin Vishnich. 
And "Practical Magic" conjures up first place in its first week out, 
the new most popular movie at North American theaters. Alan Silverman 
for the Voice of America in Hollywood. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>