<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981020.1700.2372 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Political opponents of President Slobodan Milosevic say the media 
crackdown is part of his campaign to consolidate power and silence 
opposition. Student leaders in Belgrade have called for another series 
of street demonstrations similar to the ones nearly two years ago 
which lasted three months but failed to bring down the Milosevic government. 
Since last Thursday, protesters have again demonstrated in Belgrade 
with whistles and noisemakers to protest the silencing of the independent 
media. This time, however, the demonstrators have numbered only a 
few hundred compared with tens of thousands two years ago. On Friday, 
a rally organizer asked the crowd: If you work at a newspaper which 
has not been banned, ask yourself what's wrong with you and your paper. 
Earlier this month, Deputy Prime Minister Voyaslov Chechall, told 
Belgrade independent B92 radio station that continuing to broadcast 
foreign programs will result in confiscation of broadcast equipment. 
Mr. Chechall, a hard line nationalist and former paramilitary leader, 
warned that the government will soon treat foreign broadcasts as acts 
of espionage. The U.S. agency which oversees America's international 
broadcasts, the Board for International Broadcasting, called the media 
crackdown an attempt to restrict the Serbian people's access to uncensored 
news. Europe's top security agency, the Organization for Security 
and Cooperation in Europe, said the action was a declaration of war 
against Serbia's struggling independent news media. And a private 
New York based Committee to Protect Journalists appealed for Western 
support for Serbia's besieged journalists. Kathy Martin, who's married 
to Richard Holbrooke, the U.S. envoy to the Balkans, is one of the 
committee's directors. It's an enormous step backward for Serbia and 
for President Milosevic and is completely against the spirit of the 
understanding that he reached with Ambassador Holbrooke and the NATO 
allies. And I know because I'm in touch with people in the State Department 
that they're very disappointed, and that it's going to be a big subject 
in the next round of meetings that will be carried on by Ambassador 
Hill in Belgrade, because this is really unacceptable to have this 
kind of a Stalinist crackdown. Kathy Martin said the timing of President 
Milosevic's media crackdown is also a worrying development. He did 
it only after he had agreed to the Holbrooke mission and waited until 
after that delegation had left so that they didn't have an opportunity 
to really hammer him on this issue. Kathy Martin of the Committee 
to Protect Journalists believes the crackdown came when it did so 
that ordinary Serbs would not hear about the concessions Mr. Milosevic 
made to avoid NATO air strikes, concessions such as agreeing to pull 
back some of his troops from Kosovo. What he agreed to is not going 
to please the extremists in his own party, the people who back him, 
because he was forced to make concessions to stop the bombs which 
were ready and still are ready, in fact. Ms. Martin took particular 
exception to repeated claims in the Serbian state controlled media 
that the West is conspiring against the Serbian people. She repeated 
what many U.S. officials, including Ambassador Holbrooke, have said 
that the West's actions are aimed at Mr. Milosevic not the people 
of Serbia. The Democratic forces within Serbia should not lose hope, 
should not lose faith, and should not feel that the world is against 
them, that America, that Washington are turning on the Serbia nation 
because that could not be farther from the truth. You know, two years 
ago, I marched in the streets of Belgrade with the anti-Milosevic 
opposition and I saw then the seeds of democracy trying to take root 
in Serbia. And tragically the opposition was too divided and Milosevic 
outsmarted them. I'm hoping that lessons have been learned by the 
Serb people and that the Serb people realize that their future is 
not with repression and with the past, but with democracy and with 
rejoining the European nation. Kathy Martin, former chair and now 
a director with the Committee to Protect Journalists. She spoke with 
VOA Serbian Service Chief Meyer Druker. Serbia's media crackdown was 
the subject of today's dateline. I'm Pamela Taylor. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>