<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981020.1700.0468 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Meanwhile, the delegation from the International Monetary Fund is 
in Russia for talks with senior officials as Prime Minister Primakov's 
government continues to work on an economic plan. VOA correspondent 
Andre Deneshner is in Moscow and he has provided us with a look at 
some of the problems facing the Russian economy. Most Russian analysts 
say the government has so far provided few concrete measures to help 
the country out of its crisis. Mr. Primakov said his priorities include 
restructuring the banking system, revamping the tax collecting mechanism, 
and repaying overdue wages to millions of workers. But analysts say 
Mr. Primakov has yet to explain how he will tackle those problems. 
The director of Moscow's Political Science Foundation, Andre Katunov 
believes the Primakov government is shying away from making what he 
calls painful decisions in other important areas. For example, the 
defense reform. It's go nowhere as far as I can see from the outside, 
or if you take the agrarian reform, again this is crucial. We need 
to have an agrarian reform. However, little has been done here in 
the field. We have to make some changes and sudden decisions. Those 
changes and decisions, says Mr. Katunov are not yet forthcoming. By 
all accounts, the life of the average Russian is not getting any better. 
Soaring prices, rising unemployment, unpaid wages, lowering living 
standards, uncertainty about the future, the list goes on. But Mr. 
Katunov points out that when the Communist Party and trade unions 
called on Russians earlier this month to come out in force and demonstrate 
against their lot in life, relatively few did. Mr. Katunov says there 
are various explanations why so few people turned out in countrywide 
demonstrations October 7th. One of them is that people have become 
tired of politics, and it is therefore difficult to mobilize a meaningful 
opposition. Our information is that everyone basically, or almost 
everyone was able to cut his or her own small deal with life. So they 
are somehow coping without difficulties. Another explanation is that 
if you take the last crisis, it really hit Moscow harder than the 
provinces, and there was even a sense of satisfaction, maybe bitter 
satisfaction outside of Moscow that basically "You guys are so affluent 
and we are starving right now. It's time to really to get it straight." 
In the months ahead, Mr. Katunov foresees more rough times, especially 
in those regions facing problems with food and energy supplies. He 
believes inflation will increase and the ruble will continue its downward 
spiral. But he also says in the next six months, despite increasing 
hardships, the government will still be run by Prime Minister Yevgeny 
Primakov. Andre Deneshner of VOA News, Moscow. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>