<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981020.1700.2696 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The World Health Organization warns of the rising incidents of a deadly 
disease that until recently, was rare in industrialized countries 
and virtually unknown in developing countries. Jane Hughes has a report. 
The World Health Organization estimates that diabetes now affects 
143 million people worldwide and predicts that that number will more 
than double by the year 2025. According to the latest WHO statistics, 
the three country with the largest number of diabetes victims are 
and will continue to be India, China, and the United States. India 
is the current leader with 19 million cases of adult diabetes and 
57 million expected by the year 2025. China's current 16 million cases 
will more than double to 38 million. And the United States with 14 
million is predicted to stay third highest with 22 million by 2025. 
The World Health Organization reports that the main reason for the 
rise in diabetes is the substantial increase in obesity around the 
world, even at a relatively young age. Other reasons for the expected 
sharp increase in diabetes cases are unhealthy diets, lack of exercise, 
and the fact that people are living longer. Dr. Michael Pfeiffer, 
author of "The Uncomplicated Guide to Diabetes Complications," says 
there are three major types of the disease. The gestation diabetes 
is when you get diabetes during your pregnancy but weren't diabetic 
before you got pregnant. Type two diabetes is basically a supply and 
demand problem. The body demands so much insulin but the pancreas 
just does not supply enough to meet the demand. And in type-one diabetes, 
which often hits teenagers, it usually is because the body has destroyed 
the cells that make insulin so there's an absolute insulin deficiency. 
Most diabetes victims suffer from type two diabetes, also known as 
NIDDM, Non-Insulin Dependent Diabetes Mellitus and often as adult 
onset diabetes. Dr. Pfeiffer describes the four major complications 
of diabetes. Heart disease. It's the leading cause of blindness in 
the United States. It's the leading cause of kidney failure in the 
United States, and it's the leading cause of non-traumatic amputations. 
What happens there is the foot becomes numb, unable to feel at all, 
and as a result, you can damage it and not know it, and that can progress 
and eventually lead to an ulcer. And those ulcers can get infected 
and often end up amputation. Of the 16 million diabetics in the United 
States, 180,000 are expected to die this year alone. Dr. Michael Pfeiffer 
says because there is no cure for diabetes, the best hope is to prevent 
or greatly slow its complications. He says this is best done through 
the appropriate medication in combination with proper diet and exercise. 
Insulin injections are the standard treatment for diabetes, however, 
a new insulin delivery system similar to an asthma inhaler promises 
to be a useful alternative. Tests on the insulin inhaler start in 
November at the University of Miami in Florida. Many diabetes victims 
are not even aware that they have the disease. The three major warning 
signs are frequent urination, unusual thirst, and unexpected weight 
loss. Other symptoms are frequent infections, blurred vision, cuts 
or bruises that are slow to heal, tingling or numbness in the hands 
or feet, and recurring skin infections. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>