<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981208.1830.1031 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Pretty clear, right? Once again today, the president stated a need 
to save social security. Once again, Mr. Clinton failed to support 
any specific proposal. ABC's John Cochran reports now that while saving 
social security is certainly a popular slogan, its the ways of actually 
doing it that causes the pain. Can we stop social security from going 
broke? Sure, but it will mean inflicting pain or taking risks. For 
example, we could cut back on benefits for future retirees, like Lynne 
adamczyk, a medical administrator. The government just sent her an 
accounting of what her benefits will get when she retires. She was 
shocked to see how little it was. And now they're talking about cutting 
benefits? That is very scary to me. Here's another idea. The government 
could require people to work a little longer until they collect social 
security -- until, say, 70. But most people have been working hard 
all their lives and find it's tough enough making it to 65. I just 
can't see myself doing what I'm doing now at 70. That would be a stretch. 
His wife, Suzanne, agrees. She thinks 70 is too old for a lot of jobs. 
I don't think I would want a brain surgeon who's 70 years old working 
on me. Another idea -- increasing the amount of money taken out of 
your paycheck for social security. The under-40 crowd will love that. 
Young people already feel their payroll taxes are eating them alive 
and think older folks do not pay their fair share. Younger workers 
are a sitting target for politicians who want to be able to preserve 
this program at all costs. There is one way to avoid the pain of salvaging 
social security, but it means taking a Gamble. Each of us would be 
given control of some of the money we give to uncle Sam for our retirement, 
and we could choose our own investments in stocks and bonds. Other 
countries have done that -- Chile, Great Britain, Australia -- and 
a Lot of smart people think we should, too. When it comes to risk, 
over the long term, there's relatively little risk in investing in 
stocks. Over the what term? Over the long term. Yes, but not in the 
short term. That why social security funds have been invested in safe 
but low-paying government bonds. It's a psychological thing. Social 
security was set up during the depression, after many Americans lost 
everything in the 1929 crash. The country did not trust Wall Street. 
This is not going to be easy for Washington's politicians. If it had 
been, they would have done something long ago. John Cochran, ABC News, 
Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>