<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981208.1830.0071 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
On Capitol Hill today, the lawyers for President Clinton settled in 
to make a last stand on his behalf. They have two days before the 
house Judiciary committee to make the case why Mr. Clinton should 
not be impeached for perjury, obstruction of justice or abuse of power. 
Many members of the committee are some of the most partisan in Congress. 
First, here's ABC's Linda Douglass. For 15 minutes. Facing republicans 
who seem bent on impeaching the president, the White House lawyer 
began by apologizing on the president's behalf. The president wants 
everyone to know -- the committee, the Congress and the country -- 
that he is genuinely sorry for the pain and the damage that he has 
caused and for the wrongs he has committed. But Craig insisted nothing 
the president has done warrants removing him from office. As surely 
as we all know that what he did is sinful, we also know it is not 
impeachable. Craig stuck to the White House line that when the president 
testified about his relationship with Monica Lewinsky, he may have 
played word games, but he never lied under oath. The president's testimony 
was evasive, incomplete, misleading, even maddening, but it was not 
perjury. That was like a red flag to republicans. Mr. Craig, in the 
president's deposition last January, he was asked this question -- 
"at any time were you and Monica Lewinsky alone together in the oval 
office?" He answered -- "I don't recall." Is it your position here 
today he was telling the truth? That's correct, congressman. It was 
evasive, it was misleading, he tried to be narrowly accurate. This 
is an amazing thing that you now sit before us and you're taking back 
all of his apologies. It was oral sex, it was not real sex. Now, is 
that what you're here to say to us today, that he did not have sex 
with Monica Lewinsky? Sexual relations is defined in every dictionary 
in a certain way and he did not have that kind of sexual contact with 
Monica Lewinsky. The White House brought in constitutional experts 
who argued impeaching this president is unwarranted and unwise. Even 
if the charge, Starr's charges, are true, they don't even begin to 
outweigh the enormous damage of removing the president. This body 
will go down in the history books that it was dominated by vindictiveness 
and by vengeance and by partisanship. I resent the fact that some 
accuse us of vengeance. If anybody thinks that vengeance is involved, 
I'll meet them in the parking lot later on tonight. The president's 
lawyers will address the facts tomorrow. The handful of undecidedded 
republicans who will determine the outcome of the vote when it reaches 
the full house. Linda Douglass, ABC News, Capitol Hill. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>