<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981208.1830.0865 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We're going to take "A closer look" at social security tonight because 
there are not many people in the country who are not interested in 
the status of the social security trust fund. In Washington today, 
the president opened a two-day conference on the future of social 
security. A variety of politicians, economists and interest groups 
were in attendance. The challenge for the government is to see that 
social security doesn't run out of money before the baby boom generation 
qualifies. And unless something is done to replenish the trust fund, 
they tell us it will begin to run out by 2032. In a moment, some suggested 
solutions. But first, what is the nut of the problem? Here's ABC's 
Robert Krulwich. One way to think about the social security problem 
is to imagine yourself as a squirrel, 'cause if you think about it, 
while you pay a small social security tax in most of your paychecks 
during your working years, squirrels also put a little something aside, 
bury it actually, for the coming winter of their lives. But imagine 
what would happen if every time a squirrel buried a nut in the ground, 
the government were to come along, remove the nut, then eat the nut 
and substitute an official I.O.U. that says -- "when you get hungry, 
we'll replace your nut." Well, when winter comes, the squirrel has 
to wonder, how is the government going to turn this I.O.U. back into 
a nut? 'cause if they haven't -- oops, the squirrel is going to get 
ve earning interest. But, in fact, says analyst Ray devoe -- It's 
the same thing as the squirrel. The money you've paid in all your 
life, the government has spent. What's it been spent on? Everything 
the government spends. Our social security money has paid not only 
for today's retires, but also the salaries of FBI agents, bureau of 
prisons, drug enforcement agents, head start programs, what's left 
in our social security accounts now are I.O.U.s. how much money do 
these I.O.U. represent? Many trillion dollars. Many what? Many trillion 
dollars. Trillions? Oh, yes. So like the squirrel who has to have 
his I.O.U. turned into something he can eat, we need to figure out 
how to turn those trillions of dollars of I.O.U.s into money we need 
when we retire. There are lots of ways to do that -- all being discussed 
at today's conference. But we have to choose pretty soon, 'cause for 
millions and millions of baby boomers, nter is getting closer. Robert 
Krulwich, ABC News. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>