<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981208.1270 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the latest disagreement between Poland and Israel, Prime Minister 
Jerzy Buzek's government on Tuesday scrapped a deal reached last year 
to buy Israeli-made missiles for the Huzar helicopter. The reversal 
drew a terse response from Israel's Defense Ministry, which hinted 
at possible legal and political fallout from the decision by Buzek's 
Cabinet. It also continued a series of disputes between Israel and 
Poland that reveal strained relations rooted in Jewish perceptions 
of Polish anti-Semitism dating back to the Holocaust and decades of 
communist rule in Poland while Israel was closely allied with the 
United States. Announcing the decision after Tuesday's weekly Cabinet 
meeting, Buzek accused Israel of reneging on an agreement by Prime 
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu to allow Poland to field test the NTD 
missile under local conditions. Buzek also called the missile deal 
signed by Poland's previous leftist government a preliminary agreement. 
He said scrapping it will have no legal or financial consequences, 
the state news agency PAP reported. Israel's Defense Ministry disputed 
Buzek's position in a brief statement. ``From Israel's point of view, 
the agreement that was signed in October 1997 is still in force,'' 
the ministry said. ``Israel is now considering its response _ political 
and legal.'' Following five years of negotiating with several potential 
partners, Poland last year awarded the dlrs 800 million contract to 
Israel's Rafael and Elbit Systems Ltd. companies to equip the Huzar 
helicopters in line with NATO requirements. Under the deal, which 
required approval from both governments, Rafael was to supply the 
Huzar with anti-tank NTD missiles and Elbit was to provide electronic 
integrating systems. But Buzek's Solidarity-led government, which 
took office shortly after the agreement was signed, criticized the 
handling of the tenders by its ex-communist predecessors and demanded 
missile tests. It also decided to seek another tender for the integrating 
systems, but has set no date for it. Grzegorz Holdanowicz, who writes 
for the Polska Zbrojna military magazine, noted the 1997 agreement 
with Israel made no mention of field tests. ``So the other side can 
say you demanded things that were not mentioned in the agreement,'' 
he said, adding that Netanyahu's deal was made verbally in April and 
therefore may be a non-issue. With Poland scheduled to join NATO next 
year, it is trying to bring its military arsenal up to NATO standards 
to meet all requirements for membership. The NTD missile experienced 
problems when tested in Israel from February to July, according to 
Jane's Defense Weekly, a respected military magazine. It reported 
in August that some missiles tested in southern Lebanon went awry, 
with one killing a civilian. Buzek said Tuesday that Israel wanted 
an eight-month postponement in testing the missiles in Poland, which 
he called ``unacceptable.'' Holdanowicz noted that scrapping the deal 
with Israel further delays equipping the Huzar with anti-tank weapons, 
but he added: ``If there are so many questions around this missile, 
some of them real, some imagined, then we do not know how in the end 
it could work out.'' In the United States, one of the unsuccessful 
bidders for the Huzar contract _ the Boeing Company _ said in a statement 
it would make a new offer when Poland opens the tender process again. 
Poland's decision adds to a list of disputes with Israel. Earlier 
this year, the Israeli government-run Yad Vashem Holocaust museum 
formally complained to Poland's government about crosses erected on 
a property adjoining the Auschwitz Nazi death camp, now a museum. 
On Monday, Poland announced that Israel refused to extradite a Polish 
Jew who allegedly committed atrocities against German prisoners in 
1945. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>