<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981208.0905 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Friends who called on Dariush Foruhar and his wife one afternoon in 
late November grew worried when no one answered the doorbell for hours. 
Since the husband and wife had the flu, it was odd for them to be 
out for so long. Then a close friend climbed over the iron gate of 
the house to see if all was well. He came out running, his face ashen. 
The couple, longtime critics of the Iranian government, had been slain. 
Foruhar had been stabbed some 15 times in the heart with a knife. 
His blood-soaked body was slumped behind a desk. His wife, Parvaneh, 
also stabbed to death, was dressed as if she was just about to go 
out or had just come home. There was no sign of burglary. It seemed 
like a professional killing. Both husband and wife had been sprayed 
with some unknown substance, knocking them out so they couldn't scream 
for help. The slayings were chilling in their familiarity: Nine political 
activists whose actions angered Iran's clerical rulers have been killed 
over the past decade, at least half stabbed to death like the Foruhars. 
They include a Tehran University professor, a magazine editor, a publisher, 
three Christian priests and two Sunni Muslim preachers who spoke out 
against Iran's Shiite Muslim leaders. The day the Foruhars were buried 
marked the 10th anniversary of another killing. Kazem Sami, leader 
of a liberal Islamic movement opposed to the mullahs, was stabbed 
to death at his Tehran office on Nov. 26, 1988. In none of the earlier 
slayings are the perpetrators known to have been found or brought 
to justice. Police said they have made several arrests in the slaying 
of the Foruhars, after President Mohammad Khatami condemned the killings 
and ordered an investigation. So far, the findings have not been made 
public. Dissidents and newspapers are beginning to question the spate 
of slayings, emboldened by the promise of political freedoms offered 
by Khatami, a moderate cleric elected last year. The National Front, 
an umbrella group that included Foruhar's Iran Nation Party, noted 
that the couple's every movement was closely watched by the intelligence 
and security agencies. ``Everyone is asking, `How could one or more 
persons have gone through this permanent intelligence watch and murdered 
the Foruhars in cold blood,''' the group said in a statement. New 
York-based Human Rights Watch expressed concern ``that the killing 
of the Foruhars is part of a longstanding pattern of harassment and 
persecution of government critics in Iran.'' Parvaneh Foruhar had 
told Human Rights Watch that she and her husband feared for their 
lives. At the end of every day, she said, they thanked God for granting 
them another day to live. The political killings have not been limited 
by Iran's borders. More than 60 Iranian exiles have been slain abroad 
since 1979, but few countries have tried to trace the source of the 
killings for fear of upsetting relations with Iran. But last year, 
when a German court convicted an Iranian secret agent and three other 
men of murdering a dissident in 1992, it said the men carried out 
the assassinations on the orders of Iran's top leaders, a declaration 
that soured German-Iranian relations. When Khatami was elected, the 
majority of Iranians hoped he would bring genuine change, ending the 
heavy-handed rule of the last 20 years. But Khatami's efforts have 
been frustrated by powerful hard-liners like Ayatollah Ali Khamenei. 
As supreme leader, he has the last word on all matters. More and more, 
Khatami's hard-line rivals are using violence to deal with opponents. 
Over the past year, vigilantes have attacked dissidents, liberal newspapers 
and even a reformist Cabinet minister. They have also broken up pro-democracy 
rallies. None of the thugs has been arrested, leading to suspicions 
that they are backed by powerful hard-line clerics like Khamenei and 
Ayatollah Mohammad Yazdi, the head of the judiciary. Despite Khatami's 
promises, prominent dissidents continue to be subjected to arbitrary 
detention and restrictions on their freedom of expression. On Monday, 
the Zan newspaper reported that poet and writer Mohammed Mokhtari 
left his Tehran house the previous Thursday and disappeared. His family 
searched morgues, hospitals and police stations but found no sign 
of him. The Iranian Writers Association has appealed to authorities 
to investigate. In November, four journalists from the daily Tous, 
a daily that was ordered to close in recent months along with a handful 
of others for its outspoken views, were freed after a month in jail. 
In July, during the corruption scandal surrounding Tehran Mayor Gholamhossein 
Karbaschi _ a close ally of Khatami _ officials arrested along with 
the mayor claimed they were held and tortured in secret prisons run 
by the Intelligence Ministry. Moderates have said that the arrest 
of Karbaschi, who is appealing his corruption conviction, was meant 
to undermine Khatami. Newspapers reported that the mayor's aides told 
of their torture before a parliamentary committee. In September former 
deputy prime minister, Abbas Amir-Entezam, was detained following 
his public criticism of the treatment of political prisoners. Amir-Entezam 
had been freed in 1996 after 17 years in prison on charges of spying 
for the United States. A year ago, thugs attacked the home of Grand 
Ayatollah Hossein Ali Montazeri, a senior cleric, after he publicly 
questioned the rule of the clerics. Montazeri, 75, was once heir apparent 
to the late Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, Iran's spiritual guide, but 
fell from grace for criticizing human rights abuses. He has been under 
house arrest since 1989. Still, Ayatollah Yazdi _ the judiciary chief 
who operates beyond Khatami's control _ insists there are no political 
prisoners in the Islamic Republic. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>