<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981208.0557 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Before firing his deputy for immorality, Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad 
called in a man who alleged he was sodomized by the former No. 2 leader, 
Anwar Ibrahim, a trial court was told Tuesday. Azizan Abu Bakar testified 
at Anwar's corruption and sexual misconduct trial that police asked 
him to go to Mahathir's Kuala Lumpur residence late at night for a 
meeting which lasted more than one hour. But as the testimony continued, 
defense lawyers threatened to launch proceedings against Azizan for 
allegedly lying about Anwar's illegal sex acts. ``The police told 
me that the prime minister wanted to know the true story,'' said Azizan, 
a former employee of Anwar who alleged the then-deputy prime minister 
repeatedly forced him into sodomy, a crime in this predominantly Muslim 
nation. The witness said he had told Mahathir during the Aug. 24 meeting 
that the allegations against Anwar were true. Anwar is on trial on 
four counts of abuse of power, and will be tried later on another 
charge of corruption and five charges of committing illegal sex acts. 
He has denied any wrongdoing, calling the charges part of a high-level 
conspiracy to ruin his political career. Mahathir fired Anwar on Sept. 
2, saying he had determined Anwar was morally unfit for office. The 
sacking led to demands for political reforms and massive anti-government 
protests in the normally placid Southeast Asian capital. Soon after 
Anwar was dismissed, Mahathir told reporters he had personally spoken 
to many people with whom Anwar was alleged to have illegal sex so 
that he could gauge the accusations for himself. But he had not disclosed 
details of such meetings. Azizan, a former driver for Anwar's wife, 
startled the court Monday by agreeing with a defense lawyer who said 
Anwar had never sodomized him. But as the cross-examination continued 
Tuesday defense lawyers did not press him on the retraction. It was 
not clear whether Azizan had gone back on his testimony or he had 
simply misunderstood the defense lawyer's question. On Tuesday, a 
defense lawyer said he was going to ask the court to disregard Azizan's 
entire testimony on grounds that he was telling lies. ``We wish to 
institute impeachment proceedings against Azizan,'' Gurbachan Singh, 
the lawyer, told the trial judge, Augustine Paul. If impeachment proceedings 
are permitted, the defense team is expected to bring its own witnesses 
to testify against Azizan in an attempt to prove he is lying about 
being sodomized by Anwar. Azizan had accused Anwar of forcing him 
into sodomy in 1992. He told the court last week that shame and guilt 
kept him from making Anwar's repeated homosexual acts public until 
1997. Before the court adjourned for the day, Judge Augustine Paul 
told defense lawyers that any impeachment proceedings against the 
prosecution's chief witness, Azizan, would have to wait until prosecutors 
have wrapped up their case against Anwar. He added, however, that 
both the prosecution and defense should prepare their respective submissions 
on the matter. Defense lawyer Gurbachan Singh told the court he planned 
conclude his cross-examination of Azizan on Wednesday. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>