<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981208.1600.0017 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It may be wrong, but the Monica Lewinsky matter is no Watergate. That's 
what presidential witnesses are telling the house Judiciary committee 
today. This comes as White House lawyers conduct the first of two 
days of presenting their case against impeachment. In his opening 
statement, White House special counsel Greg Craig admitted mr. Clinton's 
testimony may have been misleading, but said there is no proof the 
president intentionally lied under oath. Craig also questioned Lewinsky's 
credibility. He said he believes the former White House intern may 
have given "erroneous testimony" in some areas. Meanwhile, republicans 
questioned whether Watergate and the Lewinsky scandal are really that 
different. I pulled out your questioning of Gerald Ford when he was 
before this committee having been nominated to be vice president by 
President Nixon, who was still in office at the time, and you talked 
to Mr. Ford about Nixon lying, allegedly, about the bombing of Cambodia. 
Mr. Ford responded that he didn't think President Nixon had been 100% 
truthful on that matter, and then insisted that all presidents had 
given some false and deceptive statements. You then said there was 
a difference between keeping a secret and falsifying information. 
And you said "I think all of us understand that difference very. Could 
you tell us then, is there not a major difference between historical 
falsehoods, as opposed to lies before a federal court proceeding or 
grand jury? Mr. Sensenbrenner, I hate to answer a question with a 
question, but don't you think there's an enormous difference between 
keeping a dual set of books about bombings of a foreign country without 
the authorization of congress, and not telling the truth about a private 
sexual misconduct? I think there should be no difference because our 
perjury and false statement statutes, you know, do not have various 
levels of perjury. When do you make a false statement, you have to 
live by the consequences. A second panel of witnesses is now making 
anti-impeachment presentations before the Judiciary committee. Among 
the participants are several former members of Congress who voted 
for the impeachment of President Richard Nixon. Former representative 
Elizabeth Holtzman says impeaching President Clinton would punish 
the nation. And former representative Robert Drinan, now a law professor 
at Georgetown university, says the Watergate vote was deliberate, 
bipartisan and measured. He says this time, that's not the case. Earlier, 
former attorney general Nicholas katzenbach contended that impeachment 
is essentially a political process, rather than a legal one. And Yale 
law professor Bruce Ackerman offered a possible legal challenge to 
impeachment. He argued that if the house votes before the year's end 
to remove the president from office, the new Congress could not act 
on them. People seem to be assuming that once the present committee 
and the full house vote for a Bill of impeachment, the stage will 
be set for a trial in the Senate in that coming year. Nothing could 
be further from the truth. As a constitutional matter, the House of 
Representatives is not a Continuing body. When the 105th house dies 
on January 3rd, all its unfinished business dies with it. Is the conduct 
of the president such that he should be removed from office because 
as a consequence of that conduct the public no longer has confidence 
that he can perform the duties of that high office? Remember, impeachment 
is a political process, a political remedy to preserve confidence 
in that political process, not to punish a perpetrator. Following 
the conclusion of today's hearings, White House counsel Charles ruff 
will present closing arguments tomorrow afternoon. Judiciary chairman 
Henry Hyde says the committee will begin considering a Resolution 
containing articles of impeachment late Thursday afternoon, and debate 
will continue Friday. A Judiciary committee vote on impeachment could 
come Friday or Saturday. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>