<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981208.0130.0015 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After the release of boxes of documents from independent counsel Ken 
Starr, a report to Congress and hours of testimony, it is now the 
White House's turn. Tuesday morning, President Clinton's attorneys 
will begin a two-day defense against impeachment. Bob Franken has 
more from Capitol Hill. Judiciary chairman Henry Hyde says his committee 
has gone through boxes of the independent counsel's referral, which 
make a compelling case for impeachment. Up until now, Hyde argued, 
the president and his lawyers have not disputed the evidence. The 
White House and the democratic committee members' response to the 
allegations, to the referral, has been shakespearian -- full of sound 
and fury, signifying nothing. Meanwhile, republican committee members 
are debating whether to allow debate over a censure resolution as 
a less severe alternative to impeachment. It's under discussion. It 
isn't ruled out, but it's not a dead-bang certainty, either. Republican 
sources say they're tilting toward allowing the committee to consider 
censure. But democrats are skeptical. They are already working on 
the articles of impeachment. They know where they're going, know they're 
not going to allow any censure motion. It does not care -- they do 
not care, rather, what evidence is presented by the White House or 
anybody else. So republican and democratic party sources tell CNN 
they're involved in private efforts to avoid what one called, "the 
abyss of impeachment." These sources say that republican party elders 
who are not members of congress are indirectly advising the White 
House that President Clinton should make a nationally televised TV 
address in which he makes one more effort to go above the heads of 
Congress and really apologize. Even as the Judiciary committee's final 
week begins, members are already working on articles of impeachment, 
drafting at least three -- perjury, obstruction of justice and abuse 
of power -- and considering perhaps even lesser charges. Bob Franken, 
CNN, Capitol Hill. Hearings will begin at 10:00 A.M. Tuesday, with 
an opening statement from clinton attorney Greg Craig. The 14 witnesses 
will include lawyers, professors and former members of congress who 
will offer expert testimony on the legalities of perjury and impeachment 
and historic context. White House deputy counsel Charles ruff is scheduled 
to deliver closing arguments Wednesday. Debate would begin Thursday, 
and a Judiciary committee vote on impeachment could come on Friday 
or Saturday. The White House says its defense will be legal and factual. 
It's not my expectation that they will come in and try to make a particular 
case one way or the other on a particular fact. These panels, as described 
in the letter, are more speaking to issues of historical precedent, 
constitutional standards and how each of these allegations as they've 
been laid out there in the three categories that the committee has 
discussed articles in. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>