<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981208.2130.0195 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
One of those moderate republicans apparently has made a decision. 
CNN has learned Amo Houghton is planning to announce his opposition 
to impeachment publicly tomorrow. The New York congressman is expected 
to call for the president to be censured instead. The White House 
is hoping Houghton's announcement will influence other GOP moderates, 
especially since the party is far from united on the question of impeachment. 
Mark Potter reports. Joe Carollo is Miami's first republican mayor. 
He thinks the impeachment inquiry in Washington should stop immediately. 
This is not gonna do our country any good. This is not gonna do the 
republican party any good. This is just gonna be something that's 
going to be very harmful to America. Across town, republican Florida 
state senator Mario Diaz-balart disagrees. He says the investigation 
is necessary and is Bill Clinton's fault. The only reason this is 
being discussed is because the president of the United States has 
done something in our house, in the people's house, that he should 
have never done. Across the country, republicans were similarly divided 
on the subject of impeachment. In Atlanta, Fulton county commissioner 
Mitch skandalakis says voters are fed up with Congress. Americans 
know what Bill Clinton is all about, they just don't care. And when 
they reach that point, where the people don't care about what the 
president is, it's time to move onto another issue. My view is that 
the wrongdoing that's been found with regard to the president does 
not rise to the level of removing a president, who was legally elected 
president of the United States, from office. But near Detroit, Oakland 
county executive L. Brooks Patterson, a Former prosecutor, says the 
impeachment proceeding is right on target. I think lying under oath 
and perjury -- although I think they're kissing cousins, I don't see 
any distinction, frankly -- is a very serious offense -- Serious enough 
to go to prison for and serious enough that the leader of the free 
world ought not engage in it. Back in Florida, republican party vice 
chairman alberto Cardenas agrees Congress is bound by the constitution 
to pursue its inquiry, even though it is unpopular. There will be 
anger in the country facing the republican party and our leaders. 
I believe that our work will be cut out for us and that we'll have 
a tough battle in the year 2000. One point on which many republicans 
outside Washington agree is that the impeachment inquiry, whatever 
the outcome, should end as soon as possible. Mark Potter, CNN, Miami. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>