<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981208.0130.1459 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Grauman's Egyptian theater in Hollywood is arguably as famous as any 
of the films it has screened. Dennis Michael reports on its glamourous 
reopening. Once, grauman's Egyptian was the most glamorous cinema 
in the world. Five years older than sid grauman's Chinese, it was 
the first movie house in Hollywood, home to glamorous stars and costumed 
ballyhoo. And it is again. A $14 million restoration was celebrated 
at the Egyptian on Friday night. After years in darkness, the legendary 
theatre has been reconstructed to its former glory and to a new purpose, 
to become the home of the American cinematheque. We represent filmmakers 
worldwide, but we'd like to be the ultimate, maybe the Getty museum, 
if you will, of cinema, but for the entire country. And Hollywood 
is where -- the word when you talk about the entertainment industry, 
you hear the word "Hollywood." And that's where we are. The new Egyptian, 
along with the new theatre a block away that will eventually become 
the home of the academy awards, are the foundations of a revival of 
once glittering Hollywood. The entertainment business and the arts 
currently employ more people in this region than the defense industry 
does, which is quite a switch over what it was just a decade ago. 
So this is not only important for our soaring souls and imagination, 
it's also important for the economy. As new Hollywood walked in the 
footsteps of ancient Hollywood, modern filmmakers praised the American 
cinematheques efforts to show films in a palace instead of a monitor. 
When you watch a film -- a film as opposed to video, there's an excitement. 
It's almost like a living, breathing animal and the projector is an 
alive thing. It's how it's supposed to be. While Gloria Stuart, who 
attended some other glittering nights at the Egyptian theatre many 
years ago, had her eyes fastened on the theatre's future with the 
American cinematheque. Especially when they're going to run experimental 
films and modern films, people will get a chance to see them where 
usually just film society people get to see. The silent Cecil B. demille 
version of "the ten commandments" was the film chosen to Christen 
the new Egyptian. The original opened there 75 years ago to the day. 
And for a few weeks, the Egyptian is going back to being a working 
movie house. We're going to show "the prince of Egypt" for a month, 
because we couldn't pass that up. It's just too perfect that we and 
the movie were opening at the exact same. The Egyptian theatre may 
not be too perfect for the American cinematheque, but it certainly 
seems perfect enough. Dennis Michael, "CNN Entertainment News," Hollywood. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>