<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981208.1830.1597 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Tonight, the Sinatra files. The justice department released hundreds 
of pages of FBI files on old blue eyes, the legendary entertainer 
who died last spring. Sinatra was a man of many connections including 
friends in organized crime. But as Pete Williams reports, these files 
are more of an indictment of the fBI than they are of Sinatra. It's 
1963, and Sinatra personifies the swinging '60s. But the FBI's top 
man on the west coast wants to plant a hidden microphone in Sinatra's 
Palm Springs house. The agent says, given the singer's association 
with organized crime figures. Headquarters says no, but keep us informed. 
That's the thread connecting the 1,275 pages of files out today. The 
FBI, eager for every scrap on Frank Sinatra, but never doing much 
with it. It starts in 1944. Gossip monger Walter winchell passes on 
an anonymous letter, suggesting that Sinatra bought his way out of 
military duty. The FBI investigates and finds the allegations untrue. 
In turns out, Sinatra flunked his physical. The FBI's attention then 
shifts to Sinatra's outspoken advocacy of civil rights and his membership 
in dozens of groups, some tipsters allege are communist fronts. When 
Sinatra denies on a passport that he's a communist, a top justice 
department official orders an investigation to see if Sinatra can 
be prosecuted for making a false statement. But nothing ever comes 
of it. As for allegations that Frank Sinatra was closely tied to organized 
crime figures, the files contain hundreds of rumors, tips, and press 
clips, but little of substance. When a Chicago mob boss stayed at 
a hotel in Hawaii, a report says Sinatra picked up the tab. And a 
giancana lieutenant is quoted, telling the FBI that if attorney general 
Bobby Kennedy wanted to talk to giancana, he should go through sinatra. 
A Sinatra biographer says he's not surprised there's no damning evidence. 
I really don't think it goes beyond that kind of social connection. 
He certainly didn't need them. And they needed him a lot more than 
he needed them. And the files clearly show what J. Edgar Hoover thought 
of sinatra, responding to a complaint that teenaged fans at a Sinatra 
concert were missing school. Hoover scribbles on a memo, "Sinatra 
is as much to blame as are the moronic bobby soxers." Proof that from 
the beginning, the director of the FBI never trusted the chairman 
of the board. Pete Williams, NBC news, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>