<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981208.1830.0893 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
NBC news "in depth" tonight, saving social security. The White House 
today began a two-day smut on protecting your retirement dollars. 
Gaining momentum, controversial proposals to take dollars out of their 
hands and make investments. President Clinton was clear tonight, he 
does not want to take any risks. I believe we must construct a system 
where social security can be counted on, regardless of the UPS and 
Downs of the economy or the markets. And the number of people who 
count on social security is enormous. More than 44 million Americans 
receive a monthly social security check. But there's an entire generation 
waiting in the wings. Will the money be there when they need it. Here's 
Claire Shipman tonight, "in depth." Far from the White House, Rob 
Levine, a paint salesman near boston, worries about social security. 
I fear it's just not going to be around in 30 or more years when I'm 
ready to retire and need my benefits. Joan Howard, an aerospace engineer 
in Colorado, thinks she could handle her retirement money better than 
the government. We need to take control of it ourselves, to invest 
it ourselves, to watch it ourselves, so that we know what our future 
will be. Those concerns about the future are front and center at the 
White House social security summit today, and for good reason. For 
two-thirds of the population. Or so, it will only have enough money 
to pay 75% of the benefits. So what can be done? The choices come 
down to raising taxes, or cutting benefits, or the most widely discussed 
proposal, getting a better return on social security investments. 
I think everybody, no matter what side of the debate they're on, would 
like to get some market returns into the social security system. Market, 
as in the stock market, which historically yields almost twice as 
much as conservative treasury bonds that social security invests in 
now. Under one new proposal, the government would invest some social 
security funds in the stock market. The government would set up a 
board, and that board would hire private investment managers. It's 
a controversial idea the government investing in the markets that 
it regulates. But even more controversial, a plan to get employees 
invest some of the money themselves in their own accounts. How would 
it work? Currently, a young couple with a combined income of $52,000 
will get $450,000 in benefits during retirement. But, according to 
the conservative heritage foundation, if the couple invested half 
this money in stocks, they would end up with almost $1 million. Sounds 
good, but diverting to accounts would create a short fall for current 
retirees. But Joan Howard has questions about the risks. I think there 
needs to be very strict rules on how to invest it to keep it safe. 
And while everyone agrees the market can help, experts insist that 
any realistic reform plan would have to include some unpopular measures 
like raising the retirement age or hiking taxes. Tough solutions for 
Joe Levine and Joan Howard. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>