<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981208.0394 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The increasingly unruly process of determining who won last month's 
election for state attorney general ground to a standstill Tuesday, 
as both sides resorted to arcane bureaucratic maneuvers in a broadening 
battle that has now ensnared the courts, the Giuliani administration 
and even the New York City Police Department. By the end of the day, 
Republican incumbent Dennis Vacco had been stymied in his highly unusual 
bid to get the police to verify the registration of tens of thousands 
of people in the city who his lawyers assert may have been ineligible 
to vote. But Vacco's allies on the city Board of Elections responded 
by throwing up their own obstacles, refusing to validate the results 
in the city _ where Democratic challenger Eliot Spitzer holds a huge 
lead _ and send the figures to the state, as is customary. Over all, 
the complete, unofficial count showed Spitzer with a statewide margin 
of 26,011 votes, out of 4.2 million cast. Vacco has refused to concede, 
contending that there may have been widespread abuses in the city 
that gave Spitzer his edge. The wrangling over the results, in one 
of the closest statewide races in New York in this century, has raised 
the extraordinary prospect that neither man will be anointed the next 
attorney general by the time Vacco's term ends Dec. 31. That would 
leave a void that could affect the entire state government. Some officials 
in both parties have questioned privately whether the Democrats might 
consider blocking the certification of Gov. George Pataki's re-election 
if Spitzer's apparent victory is delayed or overturned. Much of the 
confusion Tuesday arose from differing interpretations of a court 
hearing held Monday by a state judge who is handling Vacco's challenge 
to the results. The incumbent's allies had sought to invoke a rarely 
used state law that allows the election authorities to deploy police 
officers to check voter registrations. The Vacco camp seemed to believe 
that the judge had ordered the Board of Elections to use the police 
officers. But the judge apparently did not issue such an order, and 
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani said that until there was one, he would not 
deploy the police. The Democrats on the city board, which is divided 
evenly between the two parties, said they would block a move to turn 
to the police in the absence of an order, asserting that Republicans 
were trying to intimidate voters in minority areas. Both sides are 
to meet Monday before the judge, state Supreme Court Justice Thomas 
Keegan. Under state law, the state Board of Elections is required 
to certify the results of the election Tuesday. At the hearing Monday, 
Keegan is expected to determine whether there is merit to the attorney 
general's complaints, and then to either delay the state certification 
or dismiss the case, a move that Spitzer's lawyers say they will seek. 
Late Tuesday, the Giuliani administration requested a conference call 
among Keegan, the city and the two campaigns to clarify what the role 
of the city and the police should be. Meanwhile, when the city board 
met to verify the totals from the Nov. 3 election, the Republicans 
refused to comply. As a result, lawyers for Spitzer said that they 
would go to state Supreme Court in Albany on Wednesday to force the 
city board to reconvene to certify the results. ``The Republicans 
are playing the certification game at their own peril,'' said Steven 
Goldstein, a spokesman for Spitzer. ``If the city board will not certify 
Spitzer, then you're talking about not certifying Pataki as well.'' 
The prospect of police officers conducting door-to-door investigations 
of voter eligibility drew sharp protests from several prominent black 
and Hispanic Democrats, who maintained that the the proposal reflected 
the Republicans' insensitivity to minority voters. ``This isn't about 
voter fraud, because there was none,'' said Assemblyman Keith Wright, 
a Harlem Democrat who is chairman of the Black, Puerto Rican and Hispanic 
Legislative Caucus. But Republican State Committee chairman William 
Powers issued a statement saying that the comments by Spitzer's allies 
were an ``outrageous and desperate'' attempt to divert attention from 
what he said was widespread fraud. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>