<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981208.0320 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The edges were rounded and the arguments were more finely honed, but 
at bottom the defense offered by President Clinton's team Tuesday 
was essentially old legal arguments in new bottles. He did not commit 
perjury, although he misled. He did not obstruct justice, although 
he sinned. And, whatever he did or didn't do, none of his actions 
warranted impeachment. The president's lawyers did offer a more detailed 
and serious effort to rebut the impeachment charges referred to Congress 
by Kenneth Starr and repackaged by the House Judiciary Committee's 
chief counsel, David Schippers. In a 184-page legal brief, they provided 
lengthy and specific denials to the charges that the president perjured 
himself, obstructed justice and abused the powers of his office. By 
the end of a first, marathon day of testimony, the results of this 
last- stand defense appeared to be mixed. The more specific and detailed 
rebuttal to the impeachment charges appeared to quell mounting criticisms 
from Republicans, particularly the Judiciary Committee's chairman, 
Rep. Henry Hyde, R-Ill., that the president was arrogantly refusing 
to address ``the facts'' arrayed against him. At the beginning of 
the day, Rep. James Sensenbrenner, R-Wis., criticized the White House 
for a witness list that was top-heavy with legal experts instead of 
witnesses with first-hand knowledge of the evidence. ``I'm disappointed 
that there are no fact witnesses,'' he said. For some Judiciary Republicans, 
White House lawyer Gregory Craig's genial manner also appeared to 
be a welcome tonic to the more combative style of the president's 
personal lawyer, David Kendall. Kendall's aggressive cross-examination 
of Starr before the committee last month amounted to an attack on 
the independent counsel rather than a defense of the president. The 
impassioned arguments of several panels of historians, eminent lawyers 
and former members of the Judiciary Committee, did not appear to change 
the minds of the panel's members. Responding to the first panel of 
lawyers and historians, Rep. George Gekas, R-Pa., clearly disagreed 
with the witnesses' conclusions. ``All of these could be impeachable,'' 
he said, calling perjury ``a direct affront to the judicial process.'' 
It will fall to Charles Ruff, the White House counsel, to make a comprehensive 
rebuttal to the impeachment charges in his closing arguments Wednesday. 
But the 184-page brief will be the backbone of his 90-minute summation. 
The brief takes apart the case for impeachment piece by piece, offering 
strong and detailed denials that the president committed perjury, 
obstructed justice or abused the powers of his office. It also blasts 
Starr and the Judiciary Committee for purposely mischaracterizing 
the president's testimony and leaving out 11 pieces of exculpatory 
evidence. Craig picked up some of these themes in his public testimony, 
but Republican members of the Judiciary panel pressed him hard on 
the issue of whether or not the president lied. His answers evoked 
the same incredulity and anger that Clinton's critics expressed last 
August, when he decided to admit to an ``inappropriate, intimate'' 
relationship with Monica Lewinsky, but had denied the affair under 
oath during his deposition in the Paula Corbin Jones sexual misconduct 
lawsuit. Craig continued to insist Tuesday that the president believed 
his denials were truthful. The president's insistence that he did 
not commit perjury rests on the same legalisms that have enraged his 
critics for months. In the legal brief and in Craig's testimony, the 
president's lawyers argued, as they have for months, that Clinton 
believed that sexual relations meant sexual intercourse. Since he 
and Ms. Lewinsky did not have sexual intercourse, the president believed 
he was giving the Jones legal team and Starr's investigators a truthful 
denial of having had sexual relations. It was clear this explanation 
did not satisfy the majority of the Judiciary Committee. Craig termed 
the president's testimony ``evasive, incomplete, misleading, even 
maddening, but it was not perjury.'' ``You may judge he crossed the 
line,'' Craig said. ``But in fact there is no testimony, no proof, 
that President Clinton knew he was wrong ... and intentionally lied.'' 
He added that the president had moved last summer to correct his misleading 
public denial in January of a relationship with Ms. Lewinsky and that 
he had admitted to egregious conduct and apologized. Although they 
seemed to appreciate Craig's willingness to address the specific evidence 
against the president, Republicans still expressed irritation throughout 
the day over the White House's legal semantics. At one point in the 
afternoon, Rep. Asa Hutchinson, R-Ark., warned Craig, ``Don't give 
me word games.'' Rep. Bob Inglis, R-S.C., pressed Craig to the wall 
on whether the president had lied to the American people when he said 
he had never had sex with ``that woman,'' Ms. Lewinsky. ``He does 
not believe that he did,'' Craig responded. ``He does not believe 
he lied.'' ``This is an amazing thing,'' Inglis groused. ``You are 
taking back all of his apologies.'' Rep. Elton Gallegly, R-Calif., 
also was clearly unpersuaded by Craig's colloquy on how the president's 
evasions did not amount to perjury. ``How could his testimony be those 
things without being a lie?'' he asked incredulously. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>