<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981208.0153 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
I never thought it would be like this. Somehow, in my fantasy of the 
world's greatest jobs _ professional sleeper, professional vacation 
taker, professional ice-cream taster _ I never thought the last would 
include lab coats, cubicles and green lights. But it does here at 
Ben &AMP; Jerry's headquarters, where I'm being trained by Shawna 
Parizo, the company's sensory analyst, the person whose job it is 
to decide how the ice cream tastes _ and how to keep it that way. 
Ms. Parizo, 26, is a serious woman who seems puzzled by my romantic 
notions of ice cream. She has no problem remaining a size 4. She refers 
to the ice cream's ``hedonic rating scale'' in a purely scientific 
manner. When she says that the company had to change the name of Chunky 
Monkey ice cream in Japan because it was being taken literally, I 
laugh. She does not. Ms. Parizo's job is a new one, 3 years old. In 
1978, when Ben Cohen and Jerry Greenfield opened their first scoop 
shop in a renovated gas station here, they made eight flavors and 
$180,000. Twenty years later the business has grown internationally 
to 11 countries and in 1997 it made $174 million. As Ms. Parizo says: 
``Research and development used to consist of Ben and Jerry, but the 
company's too big to do it that way anymore. We know our customer 
likes a rich and creamy ice cream that's filled with stuff that's 
kind of taboo or restricted, like candy and cookies.'' Ms. Parizo's 
job is twofold: to work with in-house experts and consumer focus groups 
to test new flavors (the company creates at least six a year) and 
to guarantee continuity in the taste and quality of flavors that already 
exist. That includes not only the ice cream but the ``stuff'' that 
goes into it, everything from marshmallow to cookie dough. The 1998 
brands are the only ones so far that have been subject to the full 
sensory evaluation procedure. Jim Barrett, a food and beverage analyst 
at the brokerage firm of Josephthal &AMP; Co. in New York, says that 
along with the company's new chief executive, Perry Odak, and new 
advertising campaign, the more sophisticated testing process could 
account for a rise in sales that amounted to 16 percent in the most 
recent quarter alone. Ms. Parizo takes me to the Sensory Room, outfitted 
with window partitions facing the kitchen. We start with something 
called a difference test, using the chocolate sandwich cookies for 
Mint Chocolate Cookie ice cream. (The green light disguises the fact 
that the colors of the cream filling vary, which should not influence 
how I think they taste.) Difference testing is used when an ice cream's 
ingredient must change; in this case the company has switched cookie 
suppliers. In another instance _ if, say, Cherry Garcia is made with 
a different type of cherry _ ``the juices might bleed differently 
than what the consumer already knew,'' Ms. Parizo says, ``and even 
though the taste is the same, the consumer might be alarmed by a change 
in appearance.'' I have been instructed not to eat, chew gum or smoke 
for one hour before the tasting, and I sit down with my response form, 
ready for action. Ms. Parizo pulls down a partition to block light 
from the kitchen and offers a tray with three randomly numbered paper 
cups holding cookies. I am told to taste from left to right and sip 
water in between, and to identify which cookies are the same and which 
different. Easy. The one in the middle is different. Ms. Parizo nods. 
``Once the cookies are in the ice cream, the panelists are not reliably 
detecting the difference, which is in the level of fat in the cream, 
not the cookie,'' she says. ``The mint has an almost numbing effect, 
so we have to taste individual components separately, to control the 
quality.'' Not so easy is the job of Ben &AMP; Jerry's descriptive 
panel _ staff members who volunteer for the job _ which meets at least 
once a week to quantify flavors so they can be reproduced. Ms. Parizo 
puts a dipstick into a bottle and hands it to me. ``We use these to 
learn individual aroma notes,'' she says. ``That is caramel.'' I seem 
to smell only alcohol. ``Take quick little bunny sniffs,'' she instructs. 
``Now, on a scale of 1 to 15, we'll rate the intensity of the caramel 
note, and keep doing that until we know that a 7 rating of caramel 
tastes like this, a 3 rating of butter tastes like that. We develop 
a common language so our base of knowledge is the same.'' Boy, this 
is really a barrel of laughs, isn't it? She smiles. ``The consumer's 
taste can be subjective. It's our tastes that have to be objective. 
When a product's been launched, then my job is to guarantee uniformity 
of taste. When we have new products with no set standard, then my 
job is to figure out what about these products consumers like or dislike, 
so when we launch it, it's at its best.'' Well, what about the emotional 
taste, the way you feel lying in bed with a pint at the end of a bad 
day? Does that count? Or, more to the point, can she count it? She 
nods. ``Ice cream is a comfort food and we are aware that our products 
will be responded to with more emotion than, say, testing bread. Our 
hedonic scale of 1 to 9 says you either like it extremely or dislike 
it. With breads, if you score 5, you're golden. With ice cream you 
might as well forget about that product. There's not a magic hedonic 
number but there is a magic range, above 7.'' Thankfully, it's time 
for lunch, which we have with three flavor developers and Mary Kamm, 
the company's director of research and development, to whom they all 
report. You can tell these are people who make their living from dessert 
_ none of them orders any. Instead, they stick to fish and chips and 
beer. ``I usually crave potato chips,'' Ms. Parizo acknowledges. ``Anything 
with salt.'' Ms. Kamm gives a brief overview of their yearly work 
cycle: Each January, Ben &AMP; Jerry's marketing department gives 
them a list of products that are selling and those that are not. The 
flavor developers then look at flavor trends, at the restaurant industry 
for dessert ideas, and at the beverage industry, a pioneer in new 
flavors. Using this information, the flavor developers come up with 
about 200 product concepts. Ms. Parizo then works with consumers to 
screen them. By May, they are narrowed down to 40 or 50 and are developed 
further before being tasted by consumers again. Using those results, 
the marketing department decides which flavors will be put into full 
commercial development. These are tested again, and if they duplicate 
their first approval scores, survive. Samples are sent to retailers 
in December, and the product goes on the shelves the following March. 
Dale Conoscenti is the flavor developer in charge of pints, who takes 
an annual culinary trip to spot trends. Three years ago it was to 
New York City, where he ate 70 desserts in a weekend. In 1997, his 
eight-day trip to California yielded 157 desserts, and there was a 
comparable number in Miami in 1998. But what seems to have excited 
him more than the desserts was the trade he made at O'Hare Airport 
after being bumped from a flight. ``There was a nice woman at the 
ticket counter I was talking to who wanted a free merchandise coupon 
for our ice cream,'' he recalls. ``She said, `My grandmother made 
fresh potato knishes this morning,' so we traded. They were great.'' 
Conoscenti also regularly trades 5 pints to get a haircut. He smiles. 
``It's amazing what people will do for ice cream.'' He refuses to 
name any of the flavors that interested him in Miami, which consumers 
will not see on the shelves until 2000. Ms. Kamm laughs. ``The ice-cream 
business is not that different from fashion,'' she says. ``One designer 
launches something and the next thing you know there are knockoffs 
in every store. It's the same with flavors.'' Historically, Ms. Parizo 
says, Ben &AMP; Jerry's new products have done well, but those introduced 
in 1998, tested by her sensory evaluation procedure, have done even 
better. Perhaps most successful has been Phish Food, a sticky sweet 
combination of chocolate ice cream, marshmallow, caramel swirl and 
fudge fish, which has taken off with teen-agers, on whom it was tested. 
There have been disappointments, too, of course. Holy Cannoli, a flavor 
dear to Conoscenti (on his New York trip he consulted Ferrara in the 
Little Italy neighborhood on how to make cannolis), failed to find 
a mainstream audience. ``It was a complicated flavor, maybe too complicated,'' 
he says. ``Pistachio, butter, rum, ricotta, cannoli. It was expensive, 
too.'' Back in the test kitchen, Ms. Parizo sets out numerous cartons 
of vanilla ice cream, and we proceed to ``isolate aroma notes'' like 
cooked milk and vanilla, and rate them. One part of being a taster 
I hadn't counted on was having to taste flavors I loathe, vanilla 
topping the list. After the fourth sample, all I want is to brush 
my teeth. Clearly, my fantasy of this job has hit a dead end. I like 
what I like and that's it. A perfect consumer, a rotten taste tester. 
When I finally bid Ms. Parizo and her crew farewell, they kindly offer 
me a free merchandise coupon. I decline with thanks. Knishes would 
have been another story. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>