<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981208.0170 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There are people out there who are the anti-Scrooge. Ga-ga about giving, 
they dash into the malls, prance through crafts fairs and jingle all 
the way. You may suspect they have been too long in the eggnog or 
doubt their enthusiasm, since it is more popular to be cynical, to 
decry crass commercialization and grump along with everyone else. 
Yet, I met one the other day who is fully, happily, giddily and even 
sometimes expensively into shopping. She was wrapped in a raincoat, 
throwing back a cup of coffee and gearing up to join the swarm, hot 
on the trail of a certain potpourri. She's modest. She doesn't want 
any attention and if she could she'd drop off her gifts and disappear 
like Santa Claus. I'll call her Scarlet because when she was a little 
girl her favorite Christmas gift was a Scarlet O'Hara doll in a green 
velvet dress, which is pretty much all she'll say about being on the 
receiving end. She's clearly about giving, our Scarlet. She does not 
shop out of guilt, dread or obligation. She may be the only one in 
a long checkout line who is humming along with the store's loudspeaker, 
celebrating her purchase. Scarlet insists she loves shopping for other 
people. And by shopping she does not mean grab, charge, and move on 
down the list. She means seriously looking for the one item that will 
delight or surprise, that winks to her as she walks through stores 
and says ``Doesn't this look just like Harry? Isn't this just perfect 
for the neighbor who collects glass penguins?'' But what, I wonder, 
about all this conspicuous consumption? What about the pressure to 
buy furry little dolls with big eyes and home exercise equipment? 
Oh, piffle, she says. ``I like to make people happy. I don't think 
there is anything better.'' She eavesdrops all year, like one of the 
elves, to hear what people want. ``I'll hear someone say `I always 
wanted,' or `I wish I had,' and it clicks in my head. Then I'll go 
to great lengths to find it. It's what I like to do. It's fun for 
me.'' Friends have ended up with service for eight, plus color coordinated 
tablecloth and napkins, after Scarlet has overheard them longing for 
a nice set of dessert plates. And they don't even have to be close 
friends. Mention that you know someone looking for yellow mittens 
and they'll likely be stuffed in your mailbox a few days later. Her 
friends tell stories about her generosity, how even if you mention 
a craving for lasagna she'll be bringing by a hot dish the next day. 
I heard about her, tracked her down and asked if she had a secret 
to pass along and perhaps ward off the December lunacy. Scarlet doesn't 
have time to analyze much. After all, there's only three weeks before 
Christmas and she has about 40 people on her list. But she makes it 
clear that she doesn't give gifts to win someone's friendship, forgiveness, 
eternal gratitude or get on their list for next year. She can even 
do without shows of appreciation. Recipients say sometimes she'll 
leave something at the door and before you can say thanks she's off 
down the sidewalk, waving goodbye over her shoulder. ``I get embarrassed. 
I really don't do it for the thanks. It just gives me pleasure.'' 
When she was little she thought it would be a nice idea to give her 
parents a Christmas stocking so she and her brother wouldn't be the 
only one with goodies on Christmas morning. She put in some peanut 
brittle and a ring for her mother from the dime store. They were thrilled. 
She loved doing the thrilling. So, that is what the giver gets. The 
thrill of providing some wonderful surprise, like Darren McGavin who 
gives his little boy a BB gun in the movie ``A Christmas Story'' and 
then stands there grinning and chuckling as the kid squirms with glee. 
``I just feel lucky to be able to give to people,'' says Scarlet. 
She is not a rich person. She works part-time and admits to running 
up some whopper bills before Christmas. But they're paid off for the 
next round of gift giving, which generally happens around Valentine's 
Day. ``I don't begrudge one penny of what I spend.'' I think what 
Scarlet is talking about is spontaneous, volunteer giving, what some 
schmaltzy scribe would say is giving from the heart. ``I know, people 
are always moaning about Christmas getting so commercial. They say 
it every year. But, you do have a choice if you want to buy or not. 
No one's making you do it.'' And if no one is, and it's just because 
you adore someone and suddenly see this music box that plays his song 
and the personal thrill is beyond ``great, I can cross him off my 
list,'' then you get to sing ``Joy to the World'' all the way home. 
(Susan Swartz is a columnist for The Press Democrat in Santa Rosa, 
Calif. Her e-mail address is sfswartz(AT)pressdemo.com) 
</TEXT>
</DOC>