<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981208.0230 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
American proposals for a broad new strategic concept for NATO, to 
counter the global threat from chemical, nuclear and biological weapons, 
received quizzical responses Tuesday from European allies. Many allies 
also resisted U.S. suggestions that the alliance could intervene in 
regional crises even when it did not have explicit authority from 
the United Nations. Secretary of State Madeleine Albright told other 
foreign ministers at a meeting in NATO headquarters here that it was 
hogwash to suggest that possible new missions for the alliance, like 
building up intelligence on weapons of mass destruction held by countries 
outside the NATO area, might contradict the original self-defense 
goals of the North Atlantic Treaty. Albright was not suggesting, other 
officials who heard her remarks said, that NATO extend its area of 
operations to Iraq or Iran or take on the problem of development of 
nuclear weapons by North Korea, for example. ``I made very clear,'' 
she said later, ``that we are not trying to get NATO to go global.'' 
But the American initiative on weapons of mass destruction, an assertive 
post-Cold War strategy for an alliance whose primary mission has always 
been to defend its members' territory, raised questions nonetheless. 
Foreign Minister Hubert Vedrine of France said Tuesday that he was 
concerned that if NATO broadened its mission ``we would run the risk 
of diluting the alliance and dividing the allies, which, of course, 
should not happen.'' Foreign Minister Joschka Fischer of Germany said 
it would be a mistake to make a rule out of the exception that the 
allies made this fall in Kosovo. NATO threatened bombing to halt government 
attacks against ethnic Albanian civilians in the Kosovo province of 
Serbia, even though the U.N. Security Council had not explicitly authorized 
military action. Beyond self-defense, France and Germany insisted, 
NATO missions should have Security Council approval. Albright said 
the U.S. view was that NATO should address the issue case by case. 
But, she agreed, ``NATO will in all cases act in accordance with the 
principles of the United Nations Charter.'' President Clinton has 
invited allied leaders to a summit meeting in April in Washington 
to welcome Poland, the Czech Republic and Hungary as new members, 
to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the alliance and to approve a 
new post-Cold War strategy for the new total of 19 members. The allies 
agreed that a new strategic concept would take many more intensive 
discussions. Their primary concern remains European security, guaranteed 
by the United States as leader of the alliance. All the allies welcomed 
an agreement by Britain and France last week that European countries 
should have the means to act militarily on their own trouble-prone 
continent and to take military action, even when the United States 
or other allies do not want their own troops involved. Foreign Secretary 
Robin Cook of Britain, which has long argued that NATO provides all 
the defense that Europe needs, conceded that in trouble spots like 
Bosnia or Kosovo, Europeans might want to act on their own before 
regional insecurity developed into a threat to their own territorial 
integrity. Britain and France said last week that they were aiming 
for a capacity for autonomous military action by the European Union, 
whose common foreign and security policy has so far been a toothless 
tiger. ``The United States welcomes a more capable European partner,'' 
Albright said, ``with modern, flexible military forces capable of 
putting out fires in Europe's own back yard and working with us through 
the alliance to defend our common interests.'' The United States would 
prefer the European defense identity to develop in NATO, though. Washington 
agreed three years ago to a new command structure that would allow 
its European allies to conduct peacekeeping and other military operations 
under NATO auspices with their own commanders and without U.S. troops. 
The United States agreed with the allies Tuesday to complete the new 
command structure _ long delayed by disagreements over who should 
control headquarters _ by the 50th anniversary celebrations. All the 
allies expressed great concern about security in Kosovo and faulted 
the rebels and Serbian authorities in Belgrade for increased tension 
following Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic's decision, under 
allied pressure, to stop attacks. Serbia is one of two republics that 
remain in Yugoslavia. Albright said fighting could resume in the spring 
unless there was a political settlement. The allies also warned that 
their 32,000 peacekeepers could not stay in Bosnia forever. Even after 
three years with the peacekeepers, the allies said, peace is not yet 
self-sustaining. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>