<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981208.0351 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A secret Pentagon report concludes that Hughes Space and Communications, 
without proper authorization, gave China several pieces of technological 
insight that are crucial to successful launches of satellites and 
ballistic missiles. Hughes provided a ``defense service'' to China 
that violated American standards regarding helping Beijing make better 
satellites and missiles, the report said, adding that prior review 
by the State Department was required in this case. The company's assistance 
to China ``raises national security concerns both with regard to violating 
those standards and to potentially contributing to China's missile 
capabilities,'' the report said. According to the report, in 1995, 
Hughes scientists helped Chinese engineers to improve the sophisticated 
mathematical models necessary to predict the effects of wind, high-atmosphere 
buffeting and other natural forces on a rocket launch. These formulas 
are important to designing nuclear missiles and launching satellites 
that do not explode or break apart. They help technicians calculate 
the appropriate angle of launch, the shape of the nose cone of the 
rocket, the tolerable limits of weather and other factors. The Chinese, 
the Pentagon said, had been using an ``oversimplified'' mathematical 
analysis that resulted in a series of failed satellite launches. Hughes 
pointed out the shortcoming to the Chinese in 1995, when its scientists 
helped investigate the failed launch of a Hughes commercial communication 
satellite atop a Chinese rocket. The company, and other American aerospace 
concerns, were eager to use Chinese rockets because they are cheaper 
than American or European competitors, but only if they could be made 
reliable. The Pentagon report said that contact between Hughes engineers 
and Chinese scientists allowed the Chinese to gain ``specific insight 
into specific launch vehicle design and operational problems and corrective 
actions.'' The report also says Hughes showed Chinese scientists flaws 
in the way they were attaching the cargo to the rockets themselves, 
including the strength of the rivets they used and the shape of the 
nose cone. In the case of the Chinese launches, the cargo was satellites, 
but the technology is also applicable to attaching a nuclear warhead 
to a missile. An unclassified version of the Pentagon report was made 
available by a government official who favors tighter controls on 
satellite technology. A spokesperson for Hughes, which has denied 
any wrongdoing in the case, said that the company's actions were approved 
at the time by the Commerce Department, which she said was the ``appropriate 
licensing authority.'' The Pentagon report did not say whether China 
had used the information for military purposes but it said it was 
not likely thay the transfer had altered the strategic military balance 
between China and the United States. ``What it taught them how to 
do, which they evidently didn't know how to do, is analysis on the 
stresses on a launch vehicle as it goes into the upper atmosphere,'' 
said one administration official, who added that what Hughes taught 
the Chinese ``could be directly applicable to military systems, although 
we have no information that it has been.'' The Justice Department 
has been examining whether Hughes and Loral Space and Communications 
violated export laws when they helped Chinese rocket scientists understand 
the causes of another failed launch in 1996. That investigation has 
now been expanded to include whether Hughes violated export control 
laws in 1995. The Pentagon report is the first indication that Hughes 
gave China valuable information in 1995 about another failed launch 
and provides the most detailed account to date of what the Chinese 
might have gained from their contacts with the American aerospace 
companies. The Pentagon did not see the entire picture. Some relevant 
Hughes documents, unavailable for the Pentagon review, are being analyzed 
separately by intelligence officials as part of the criminal investigation, 
which subpoenaed them. Despite its limitations, the Pentagon report 
is likely to provide fresh ammunition to critics of President Clinton's 
1996 decision to loosen controls over satellite exports to China, 
a decision for which Hughes officials campaigned heavily within the 
administration and which Congress reversed this fall. ``Our suspicions 
that technology can be transferred in these situations, that you can 
improve the reliability of Chinese rockets/missiles, were well founded,'' 
said Sen. Thad Cochran, R-Miss., who is chairman of a Senate committee 
that has examined the issue. The story of technology transfers has 
its beginnings in 1992, when a Chinese-launched satellite exploded 
and Hughes conducted an investigation for China. At the time, however, 
the investigation was monitored by a Pentagon official who restricted 
the flow of information. Three years later, when the next rocket exploded 
for what the Pentagon said were identical reasons, the Commerce Department 
approved an accident review by Hughes without consulting the State 
Department. The Commerce Department has acknowledged that this was 
a mistake. As a result no Pentagon monitors attended the sessions 
with the Chinese. The Commerce Department has acknowledged that this 
was a mistake. In addition, in 1995 the CIA ignored warnings by one 
of its scientists, Ronald Pandolfi, that Hughes may have provided 
crucial ballistic missile technology to China. Pandolfi has now emerged 
as a key witness in the criminal investigation. A Hughes document 
obtained by investigators in connection with the 1995 review indicates 
that Hughes officials disliked the idea of government monitors, according 
to an administration official. In 1995 the chairman of Hughes, C. 
Michael Armstrong, led a lobbying effort to ease controls over satellite 
exports by shifting authority from the State Department, which requires 
monitors, to the less restrictive Commerce Department. President Clinton 
named Armstrong to head his prestigious export council. At the council's 
first meeting, on Feb. 13, 1995, Clinton said ``I don't think we've 
done nearly enough'' on easing export controls, according to a White 
House e-mail. That same day Hughes provided its first ``failure presentation'' 
to Chinese officials. By July, the company had completed its final 
report. A month later the Commerce Department gave its blessing to 
Hughes. But Pandolfi, the CIA analyst, didn't like what he saw when 
he visited Hughes' scientists in 1995. ``What they told him they were 
sharing and how far the company had been willing to go, he thought 
it was questionable from the standpoint of national security,'' said 
an associate of Pandolfi. But the agency killed Pandolfi's study and 
no one in Washington paid any more attention to the issue. The Hughes 
report, though, was carefully read in China. According to an administration 
official, the Chinese adopted the recommendations contained in the 
Hughes report. The issue of satellite exports to China became the 
subject of increased scrutiny last spring, after The New York Times 
reported on the Justice Department inquiry into the 1996 review by 
Loral and Hughes. Last July, the Senate subcommittee on proliferation 
looked into the 1995 Hughes launch. William Reinsch, the under secretary 
of commerce for export administration, told the panel that Hughes' 
release of its report to the Chinese was ``appropriate and without 
risk to national security,'' but his department should have referred 
the matter to the State Department for prior review. Pentagon officials 
told the committee that they had just received the Hughes material 
from the Commerce Department a few hours earlier so they could not 
yet assess the impact. Steven Dorfman, the vice chairman of Hughes, 
assured the committee ``no material technology was transmitted to 
the Chinese that would help them build missiles.'' Last summer, in 
the wake of Congressional inquiries, Pandolfi told his superiors that 
he had relevant information, including detailed contemporaneous notes 
taken during his trip to Hughes in 1995. He was questioned by agents 
of the U.S. Customs Service and aides of the Senate Intelligence Committee. 
Investigators say they next wanted to question officials at Hughes 
about what Pandolfi had learned on his trip. But before those interviews 
took place someone at the CIA alerted Hughes _ a major supplier of 
spy satellites to the intelligence community _ to the investigators' 
next move. As a result, the interviews at Hughes never took place. 
But now the agency's tip-off is part of an investigation into whether 
the CIA obstructed the investigations of Hughes. Agency officials 
deny the CIA intended to obstruct any investigation. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>