<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981208.0438 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Following are excerpts from an 184-page legal defense of President 
Clinton submitted by his counsel to the House Judiciary Committee 
on Tuesday, as provided by the White House and with subheads taken 
from the original: In addition to the factual, legal and Constitutional 
defenses we present in this document, the President has asked us to 
convey a personal note: What the President did was wrong. As the President 
himself has said, publicly and painfully, ``There is no fancy way 
to say that I have sinned.'' The President has insisted that no legalities 
be allowed to obscure the simple moral truth that his behavior in 
this matter was wrong, that he misled his wife, his friends and our 
Nation about the nature of his relationship with Ms. Lewinsky. He 
did not want anyone to know about his personal wrongdoing. But he 
does want everyone _ the committee, the Congress and the country _ 
to know that he is profoundly sorry for the wrongs he has committed 
and for the pain he has caused his family, his friends, and our nation. 
But as attorneys representing the President in a legal and Constitutional 
proceeding, we are duty-bound to draw a distinction between immoral 
conduct and illegal or impeachable acts. And just as no fancy language 
can obscure the fact that what the President did was morally wrong, 
no amount of rhetoric can change the legal reality that the record 
before this committee does not justify charges of criminal conduct 
or impeachable offenses. The framers, in their wisdom, left this body 
the solemn obligation of determining not what is sinful, but rather 
what is impeachable. The President has not sugar-coated the reality 
of his wrongdoing. Neither should the committee ignore the high standards 
of the Constitution to overturn a national election and to impeach 
a President. ... THE PRESIDENT DID NOT COMMIT PERJURY Will Rogers 
is reported to have said of a contemporary: ``It's not what he doesn't 
know that bothers me, it's what he knows for sure that just ain't 
so.'' Defending what the President actually said under oath is much 
easier than defending phantom allegations based on what some claim 
the President said. In analyzing the allegation of perjury, we urge 
the Committee and the Congress to focus only on what is actually in 
the record, not on popular mythology, conventional (but incorrect) 
wisdom, or political spin. For example, it has variously been asserted 
that in the grand jury the President denied that he had a ``sexual 
relationship'' with Ms. Lewinsky and that he broadly reaffirmed his 
earlier deposition testimony. In fact, in the grand jury, the President 
admitted to an ``inappropriate intimate relationship'' with Ms. Lewinsky 
that was physical in nature. In other words, any consideration of 
charges of perjury requires a focused look at the actual statements 
at issue. Again, we ask the committee: Please, do not assume the conventional 
wisdom. Look, instead, at the actual record. Specific Claims of Perjury 
With these principles in mind, it is apparent that there is no basis 
for a charge of perjury here, either with respect to the President's 
Jones deposition or his subsequent grand jury testimony. 1. CIVIL 
DEPOSITION of JAN. 17, 1998 a. Nature of Relationship The primary 
allegation of perjury arising from President Clinton's deposition 
testimony of Jan. 17, 1998, appears to be that he lied under oath 
about the nature of his relationship with Ms. Lewinsky when he denied 
in that civil case that he had a ``sexual affair,'' a ``sexual relationship,'' 
or ``sexual relations'' with Ms. Lewinsky. In the deposition, President 
Clinton asserted: (1) that he did not have a ``sexual affair'' with 
Ms. Lewinsky within the undefined meaning of that term; (2) that Ms. 
Lewinsky was correct in her statement that she did not have a ``sexual 
relationship'' with the President within the undefined meaning of 
that term, and (3) that he did not have ``sexual relations'' with 
Ms. Lewinsky as that term was defined by the Jones lawyers and limited 
by Judge Wright. The allegation that President Clinton perjured himself 
with respect to any of these deposition statements is without merit. 
First, it is by now more than clear that the undefined terms ``sexual 
affair,'' ``sexual relations'' and ``sexual relationship'' are at 
best ambiguous, meaning different things to different people, and 
that President Clinton's belief that the terms refer to sexual intercourse 
is supported by courts, commentators, and numerous dictionaries _ 
a point ignored in the referral and Mr. Schippers' presentation to 
the committee despite the obvious problem with premising a perjury 
claim on such ambiguous terms. As one court has stated, ``(i)n common 
parlance the terms `sexual intercourse' and `sexual relations' are 
often used interchangeably.'' Dictionary definitions make the same 
point. For example, Webster's Third New International Dictionary defines 
``sexual relations'' as ``coitus;'' Random House Webster's College 
Dictionary defines ``sexual relations'' as ``sexual intercourse; coitus;'' 
Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary defines ``sexual relations'' 
as ``coitus;'' Black's Law Dictionary defines ``intercourse'' as ``sexual 
relations;'' and Random House Compact Unabridged Dictionary defines 
``sexual relations'' as ``sexual intercourse; coitus.'' The President's 
understanding of these terms, which is shared even by several common 
dictionaries, could not possibly support a prosecution for perjury. 
How would a prosecutor prove these dictionaries ``wrong?'' Irrespective 
of the view that ``sexual relations'' means intercourse, the evidence 
is indisputable that this is indeed what President Clinton believed. 
Perjury requires more than that a third party believes President Clinton 
was wrong about the meaning of these terms (a point on which the allegation 
plainly founders); it also requires proof that President Clinton knew 
he was wrong and intentionally lied about it. But the evidence demonstrates 
that the President honestly held that belief well before the Jones 
deposition. The genuineness of President Clinton's beliefs on this 
subject is even supported by the O.I.C.'s account of Ms. Lewinsky's 
testimony during an interview with the F.B.I.: ``(A)fter having a 
relationship with him, Lewinsky deduced that the President, in his 
mind, apparently does not consider oral sex to be sex. Sex to him 
must mean intercourse.'' And finally, Ms. Lewinsky herself took the 
position that her contact with the President did not constitute ``sex'' 
and reaffirmed that position even after she had received immunity 
and began cooperating with the O.I.C. For example, in one of the conversations 
surreptitiously taped by Ms. Tripp, Ms. Lewinsky explained to Ms. 
Tripp that she ``didn't have sex'' with the President because ``(h)aving 
sex is having intercourse.'' Ms. Lewinsky reaffirmed this position 
even after receiving immunity, stating in an F.B.I. interview that 
``her use of the term `having sex' means having intercourse.'' Likewise, 
in her original proffer to the O.I.C., she wrote, ``Ms. L(ewinsky) 
was comfortable signing the affidavit with regard to the 'sexual relationship' 
because she could justify to herself that she and the Pres(ident) 
did not have sexual intercourse.'' In short, the evidence supports 
only the conclusion that the President's responses with respect to 
these undefined terms were truthful and at worst good faith responses 
to indisputably ambiguous questions. The referral and the committee 
have adduced no evidence to the contrary. Second, the President's 
statement in his deposition that he had not had ``sexual relations'' 
with Ms. Lewinsky as that term was defined by the Jones lawyers and 
substantially narrowed by Judge Wright also is correct. Neither the 
O.I.C. in its referral nor Mr. Schippers in his presentation to the 
Committee laid out the sequence of events that led to the limited 
definition of ``sexual relations'' which was ultimately presented 
to President Clinton and which he was required to follow. At the deposition, 
the Jones attorneys presented a broad, three-part definition of the 
term ``sexual relations'' to be used by them in the questioning. Judge 
Wright ruled that two parts of the definition were ``too broad'' and 
eliminated them. The President, therefore, was presented with the 
following definition (as he understood it to have been amended by 
the court): ... For the purposes of this deposition, a person engages 
in ``sexual relations'' when the person knowingly engages in or causes 
(1) contact with the genitalia, anus, groin, breast, inner thigh, 
or buttocks of any person with an intent to arouse or gratify the 
sexual desire of any person; (2) contact between any part of the person's 
body or an object and the genitals and anus of another person; or 
(3) contact between the genitals or anus of the person and any part 
of another person's body. ``Contact'' means intentional touching, 
either directly or through clothing. This definition substantially 
narrowed the meaning of the term as it was used by the Jones lawyers. 
It rendered an overly broad definition bizarrely narrow and contorted. 
But despite that narrowing, and the resulting peculiarity of what 
was and was not covered, the Jones lawyers chose to stick with it 
rather than ask direct questions, as they were invited to do by the 
President's counsel. When they asked the President about ``sexual 
relations'' with Ms. Lewinsky in the deposition, they did so with 
explicit reference to this definition. (``And so the record is completely 
clear, have you ever had sexual relations with Monica Lewinsky, as 
that term is defined in Deposition Exhibit 1, as modified by the Court?'') 
It is plain that this narrow definition did not include certain physical 
acts _ an interpretation shared by many commentators, journalists, 
and others. See, e.g., Perjury Hearing of December 1, 1998 (Statement 
of Professor Stephen A. Saltzburg at 2) (``That definition defined 
certain forms of sexual contact as sexual relations but, for reasons 
known only to the Jones lawyers, limited the definition to contact 
with any person for the purpose of gratification.''); MSNBC Internight, 
August 12, 1998 (Cynthia Alksne) (``(W)hen the definition finally 
was put before the president, it did not include the receipt of oral 
sex''); ``DeLay Urges a Wait For Starr's Report,'' The Washington 
Times (August 31, 1998) (``The definition of sexual relations, used 
by lawyers for Paula Jones when they questioned the president, was 
loosely worded and may not have included oral sex''); ``Legally Accurate,'' 
The National Law Journal (August 31, 1998) (``Given the narrowness 
of the court-approved definition in (the Jones) case, Mr. Clinton 
indeed may not have perjured himself back then if, say, he received 
oral sex but did not reciprocate sexually''). This interpretation 
may be confusing to some. It may be counter-intuitive. It may lead 
to bizarre answers. But it certainly was not objectively wrong. And 
it was not the President's doing. Moreover, the Jones lawyers had 
the opportunity to ask questions which would have elicited details 
about the President's relationship with Ms. Lewinsky but chose not 
to develop the issue. As an alternative to relying on the definition 
provided by the Jones lawyers, the President's counsel invited the 
Jones lawyers to ``ask the President what he did, (and) what he didn't 
do.'' Dep. at 21. The Jones lawyers ignored the invitation and stuck 
with their definition even as it was limited. As the Supreme Court 
has explained, ``(i)f a witness evades, it is the lawyer's responsibility 
to recognize the evasion and to bring the witness back to the mark, 
to flush out the whole truth with the tools of adversary examination.'' 
Bronston v. United States, 409 U.S. 352, 358-59 (1973). President 
Clinton's deposition testimony regarding whether he was alone with 
Ms. Lewinsky at various times and places does not constitute perjury. 
The fundamental flaw in the charge is that it is based on a mischaracterization 
of the President's testimony -- the President did not testify that 
he was never alone with Ms. Lewinsky. Both the Starr Referral and 
Mr. Schippers' presentation to the Committee start from the incorrect 
premise that the President testified that he was never alone with 
Ms. Lewinsky. See Ref. at 154 (``(T)he President lied when he said 
'I don't recall' in response to the question whether he had ever been 
alone with Ms. Lewinsky.''); Schippers Presentation at 29 (``(T)he 
President may have given false testimony under oath regarding his 
statement that he could not recall being alone with Monica Lewinsky.''). 
In fact, the President did not deny that he had been alone with Ms. 
Lewinsky. For example, the President answered ``yes'' to the question 
``your testimony is that it was possible, then, that you were alone 
with her?''. Dep. at 53. Whatever confusion or incompleteness there 
may have been in the President's testimony about when and where he 
was alone with Ms. Lewinsky cannot be charged against the President. 
The Jones lawyers failed to follow up on incomplete or unresponsive 
answers. They were free to ask specific follow-up questions about 
the frequency or locale of any physical contact, but they did not 
do so. This failure cannot be used to support a charge of perjury. 
Bronston, 409 U.S. at 360. c. ``Minimizing'' Gifts that Were Exchanged 
A separate perjury charge is based on the assertion that in his deposition 
the President ``minimized'' the number of gifts he exchanged with 
Ms. Lewinsky. Ref. at 151; Schippers Presentation at 29. Again, the 
evidence simply does not support this allegation. To start with, even 
the charge of ``minimizing'' the number of gifts concedes the only 
potentially material issue -- the President acknowledged that he did 
exchange gifts with Ms. Lewinsky. There is not much that is safe from 
a perjury prosecution if mere ``minimization'' qualifies for the offense. 
As weak as the ``minimization'' charge is, it is also wrong. A fair 
reading of the President's deposition testimony makes clear that, 
when asked about particular gifts, the President honestly stated his 
recollection of the particular item. See Dep. at 75 (``Q. Do you remember 
giving her an item that had been purchased from The Black Dog store 
at Martha's Vineyard? A. I do remember that.''). Moreover, when the 
President could not recall the precise items that he had exchanged, 
he asked the Jones lawyers to tell him so that he could confirm or 
deny as the facts required. See ibid. In essence, this allegation 
is yet another complaint that President Clinton was not more forthcoming 
(or that he did not have a more precise memory on these issues), which 
is plainly not a ground for alleging perjury. d. Conversations with 
Ms. Lewinsky About Her Involvement in the Jones Case Both the Referral 
and Mr. Schippers' presentation allege perjury in the Jones deposition 
with respect to President Clinton's conversations with Ms. Lewinsky 
about her involvement in the Jones case. See Ref. at 160; Schippers 
Presentation at 32. Specifically, it is alleged that the President 
committed perjury in his deposition when he failed to (1) acknowledge 
that he knew that Ms. Lewinsky had been subpoenaed at the time he 
had last seen and spoken to her; and (2) acknowledge that he had spoken 
to Ms. Lewinsky about the possibility that she would testify in the 
Jones case. Ibid. Once again, the charge of false testimony is based 
on a wholly inaccurate reading of the President's deposition. The 
President acknowledged that he knew that Ms. Lewinsky had been subpoenaed, 
that he was not sure when was the last time he had seen and spoken 
with her (but that it was sometime around Christmas), and that he 
had discussed with her the possibility that she would have to testify. 
(1) The allegation that the President denied knowing that Ms. Lewinsky 
had been subpoenaed the last time he spoke to her illustrates the 
problem of taking selected pieces of testimony out of context. Messrs. 
Starr and Schippers isolate the following exchange in the deposition: 
Q. Did she tell you she had been served with a subpoena in this case? 
A. No. I don't know if she had been. Dep. at 68. From this incomplete 
excerpt, they claim that the President perjured himself by denying 
that he knew that Ms. Lewinsky had been subpoenaed the last time he 
had spoken with her. See Ref. at 163. The charge is unsupported by 
the evidence. First, the testimony immediately following this exchange 
demonstrates both that the President was not hiding that he knew Ms. 
Lewinsky had been subpoenaed by the time of the deposition and that 
the Jones lawyers were well aware that this was the President's position: 
Q. Did anyone other than your attorneys ever tell you that Monica 
Lewinsky had been served with a subpoena in this case? A. I don't 
Q. Did you talk to Mr. Lindsey about what action, if any, should be 
taken as a result of her being served with a subpoena? A. No. Dep. 
at 68-70. It is evident from the complete exchange on this subject 
that the President was not generally denying that he knew that Ms. 
Lewinsky had been subpoenaed in the Jones case. The questions that 
the Jones lawyers were asking the President also make clear that this 
is what they understood the President's testimony to be. Second, the 
President's testimony cannot fairly be read as an express denial of 
knowledge that Ms. Lewinsky had been subpoenaed the last time he had 
spoken to her before the deposition. Most importantly, the President 
was not asked whether he knew that Ms. Lewinsky had been subpoenaed 
on December 28th, which was the last time he had seen her. When the 
President answered the question, ``Did she tell you she had been served 
with a subpoena in this case?'', he plainly was not thinking about 
December 28th. To the contrary, the President's testimony indicates 
that he was totally confused about the dates of his last meetings 
with Ms. Lewinsky, and he made that abundantly clear to the Jones 
lawyers: A. I'm trying to remember. Probably sometime before Christmas. 
She came by to see Betty sometime before Christmas. And she was there 
talking to her, and I stuck my head out, said hello to her. Q. Stuck 
your head out of the Oval Office? A. Uh-huh, Betty said she was coming 
by and talked to her, and I said hello to her. Q. Was that shortly 
before Christmas or - A. I'm sorry, I don't remember. Been sometime 
in December, I think, and I believe -- that may not be the last time. 
I think she came to one of the, one of the Christmas parties. Dep. 
at 68 (emphasis added). His statement that he did not know whether 
she had been subpoenaed directly followed this confused exchange and 
was not tied to any particular meeting with her. By that time it is 
totally unclear what date the answer is addressing. The Referral ignores 
this confusion by selectively quoting the President as testifying 
``that the last time he had spoken to Ms. Lewinsky was in December 
1997 `probably sometime before Christmas.''' Ref. at 163 (quoting 
Dep. at 68). Given his confusion, which the Jones lawyers made no 
attempt to resolve, it is difficult to know what was being said, much 
less to label it false and perjurious. (2) The claim that President 
Clinton did not acknowledge speaking with Ms. Lewinsky about whether 
she might have to testify similarly is not a fair or accurate reading 
of the deposition. In response to the question, ``Have you ever talked 
to Ms. Lewinsky about the possibility that she might have to testify 
in this lawsuit?'', the President's answer did not end with the statement 
``I'm not sure.'' Instead, the President continued with the statement 
``and let me tell you why I'm not sure,'' at which point he described 
his recollection of having spoken with Ms. Lewinsky about how Ms. 
Jones' lawyers and the Rutherford Institute were going to call every 
woman to whom he had ever talked. Ibid. It is evident the President's 
answer referred to the time period before Ms. Lewinsky was on a witness 
list -- i.e., when her participation was still a ``possibility'' only. 
Indeed, Ms. Lewinsky confirmed the accuracy of the President's recollection 
of this conversation in her testimony, a fact that also is missing 
from the Referral. See App. at 1566 (8/24/98 FBI 302 Form Interview 
of Ms. Lewinsky) (``LEWINSKY advised CLINTON may have said during 
this conversation that every woman he had ever spoken to was going 
to be on the witness list.''). Thus, the President did in fact accurately 
describe a conversation with Ms. Lewinsky about potential testimony. 
That the Jones lawyers failed to follow-up with questions that would 
elicit whether that was the only conversation, or whether there were 
additional conversations once Ms. Lewinsky was on the witness list 
and her testimony was no longer a mere possibility, is not perjury. 
It is simply a confused deposition record that could have been clarified 
contemporaneously. e. Conversations with Mr. Jordan About Ms. Lewinsky 
The pattern of mischaracterizing the President's deposition testimony 
to construct a perjury charge is repeated in a final perjury allegation 
regarding the President's deposition answers to questions about conversations 
with Mr. Jordan about Ms. Lewinsky. The Referral alleges that the 
President was ``asked during his civil deposition whether he had talked 
to Mr. Jordan about Ms. Lewinsky's involvement in the Jones case'' 
and that he ``stated that he knew Mr. Jordan had talked to Ms. Lewinsky 
about her move to New York, but stated that he did not recall whether 
Mr. Jordan had talked to Ms. Lewinsky about her involvement in the 
Jones case.'' Ref. at 186; see also Schippers Presentation at 40. 
The problem with this allegation is that President Clinton was never 
asked ``whether he had talked to Mr. Jordan about Ms. Lewinsky's involvement 
in the Jones case,'' and he did not deny doing so. In support of the 
charge, the Referral quotes the following exchange from the President's 
deposition about who told the President that Ms. Lewinsky had been 
subpoenaed: Q. Did anyone other than your attorneys ever tell you 
that Monica Lewinsky had been served with a subpoena in this case? 
A. I don't think so. Ref. at 186 (emphasis added in Referral). This 
exchange does not address whether the President spoke with Mr. Jordan 
about Ms. Lewinsky's involvement in the Jones suit. And the excerpt 
is itself misleading. The Referral omits the President's next answer, 
even though it is obvious from the text, and the O.I.C. was told by 
the President in his grand jury testimony, App. at 518-19, that this 
answer was intended to finish the President's response to the previous 
question: A. Bruce Lindsey, I think Bruce Lindsey told me that she 
was, I think maybe that's the first person told me she was. I want 
to be as accurate as I can. Plainly, the President was not testifying 
that no one other than his attorneys had told him that Ms. Lewinsky 
had been subpoenaed. The Jones lawyers did not pursue this by asking 
logical follow-up questions, such as whether, if Mr. Lindsey was the 
first person were there others, or whether Mr. Jordan had subsequently 
shared that information with him. The bottom line is that President 
Clinton did not deny, in the quoted passage or elsewhere, knowing 
that Mr. Jordan had spoken to Ms. Lewinsky about the Jones matter. 
Nor do the other two cited passages of the President's deposition 
testimony help the O.I.C.'s case. In response to a question about 
whether in the two weeks before January 17 anyone had reported to 
him that they had had a conversation with Ms. Lewinsky about the Jones 
case, the President replied ``I don't believe so.'' Dep. at 72. The 
President was not questioned specifically about whether he had ever 
spoken to Mr. Jordan or anyone else about Ms. Lewinsky's involvement 
in the Jones case. The President's response, accordingly, did not 
rule out all conversations with Mr. Jordan about Ms. Lewinsky's involvement 
in the case, as the Referral suggests, but only in the two-week period 
prior to the deposition and only conversations relaying accounts of 
conversations with Ms. Lewinsky. Even conversations with Mr. Jordan 
about her involvement in the case would not have been covered. The 
Referral does not identify any reports to the President about any 
conversation that Mr. Jordan had with Ms. Lewinsky in that time period 
-- instead, it recounts only that, ten days before the deposition, 
Mr. Jordan may have told the President that the affidavit was signed. 
See Ref. at 187. 2. Grand Jury Testimony of August 17, 1998 Proponents 
of impeachment repeatedly contend in the most general terms that President 
Clinton committed perjury in the grand jury on August 17, 1998. When 
this allegation is framed in specific terms, it is often based on 
the false belief that President Clinton denied in the grand jury having 
had any sexual contact with Ms. Lewinsky. For example, in the Committee's 
perjury hearing held last week, Chairman Hyde discounted the Referral's 
charge that President Clinton had lied to the grand jury about the 
commencement date of his relationship with Ms. Lewinsky and then stated, 
``I don't rank that up with lying to the grand jury, saying he didn't 
have a sexual relationship.'' Remarks of Chairman Hyde at Perjury 
Hearing of December 1, 1998; see also Statement of Judge Charles Wiggins 
at 2 (``the President was called as a witness before the grand jury 
and he repeated his story that he did not have a sexual relationship 
with Monica Lewinsky. Subsequently the President acknowledged that 
his story was false or misleading and that he in fact had such a relationship 
with Ms. Lewinsky.'') These accounts of President Clinton's grand 
jury testimony are not accurate. In his August 17, 1998 grand jury 
testimony, President Clinton acknowledged that he had engaged in ``inappropriate 
intimate contact'' with Ms. Lewinsky. Section II.C, supra. He also 
acknowledged that his conduct was ``wrong.'' Ibid. What the President 
denied in the grand jury was having ``sexual relations'' with Ms. 
Lewinsky only as that term was defined by the Jones lawyers and substantially 
restricted by Judge Wright. He did not go into the details of those 
encounters because of privacy considerations, although he did testify 
that they did not involve either sexual intercourse or ``sexual relations'' 
as defined at the Jones deposition after Judge Wright struck two-thirds 
of it. Ms. Lewinsky, on the other hand, was forced by the O.I.C. to 
describe in graphic detail her recollection of these encounters. See 
Schippers Presentation at 27. This simply is not a case of perjury. 
In addition to the inconsequential subject matter of the allegation 
-- the precise nature of the admitted physical contact between the 
President and Ms. Lewinsky -- the factual record would not support 
a prosecution for perjury. That record is one essentially of ``oath 
against oath,'' a formula that centuries of common law jurisprudence 
has rejected as the basis for perjury. As the Supreme Court has stated, 
``equally honest witnesses may well have differing recollections of 
the same event,'' and hence ``a conviction for perjury ought not to 
rest entirely upon 'an oath against an oath.''' United States v. Weiler, 
323 U.S. 606, 609 (1945); see also Griswold v. Hazard, 141 U.S. 260, 
280 (1891) (Harlan, J.) (``The difference in recollection of gentlemen 
often happens, without any reason to suspect that any of them would 
intentionally deviate from the line of absolute truth.''). Mr. Starr 
admitted in his testimony before the Judiciary Committee on November 
19, 1998, that the O.I.C. credited Ms. Lewinsky's testimony only where 
there was corroboration. Transcript of November 19, 1998 Hearing at 
235-36. On the narrow point at issue here, however, there can be no 
independent corroboration. In sum, the facts do not support a perjury 
count based on the President's grand jury testimony. It is hard to 
imagine how what is at most a difference of recollection over the 
precise details of the admitted physical contact between President 
Clinton and Ms. Lewinsky could be considered grounds for a perjury 
charge, much less grounds for impeachment. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>