<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981208.0287 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In an early campaign spot in his 1994 run for the U.S. Senate, Michael 
Huffington quoted from William Bennett's ``Book of Virtues'' on the 
virtues of family. Soon to come were bucolic, sun-dappled spots highlighting 
Huffington's togetherness with his celebrity wife, Arianna, and their 
kids. But not long after he lost narrowly to the Democratic incumbent, 
Dianne Feinstein, the Huffingtons separated and then divorced. And 
this week, on his own volition, Huffington decided to make his intimate 
life public by declaring to Esquire magazine that he is homosexual, 
in a detailed confessional to a writer friend, David Brock. When the 
story broke over the weekend, journalists correctly pointed out that 
Huffington, unlike such past closeted gay Republicans from Roy Cohn 
to the Jesse Helms adviser Arthur Finkelstein, didn't abet gay-bashing. 
Though his campaign was cloaked in hypocritical imagery and rhetoric 
that included Huffington's disparagement of ``the gay lifestyle'' 
(which he first led himself, he now says, in the 1970s), he often 
did support gay civil rights. The Esquire piece makes clear that Huffington 
was more a tortured victim of GOP homophobia than a perpetrator of 
it. Inspired by Oral Roberts and his party's high priest, Pat Robertson, 
he tried to will himself into heterosexuality through prayer _ with 
predictably futile, self-annihilating results. But a full reading 
of the article also makes it clear that Huffington's sexual orientation 
isn't the real news in his story, as far as the quality of our public 
life is concerned. What is most disturbing are the damning non-sexual 
revelations that may now get lost in the prurient buzz. By his own 
account, Huffington emerges as a man with no political convictions 
and no achievements. Yet his vast personal fortune _ once hooked up 
to the omnipotent medium of TV advertising, especially negative advertising 
_ was able to give him a fake identity and smear his opponent until 
he came within 2 percent of representing the nation's largest state 
in the U.S. Senate. Only a last-minute illegal-nanny scandal defeated 
him. Huffington spent $30 million _ by far a record-breaking amount 
for a Senate race. Two years earlier he had broken the national spending 
record in a House race too _ successfully deploying negative ads to 
unseat a well-regarded, nine-term Republican congressman, Bob Lagomarsino, 
in the primary. So loudly did Huffington's money talk that he overcame 
the seemingly insurmountable handicap of being a complete unknown 
who had moved to California only six months before. In his race against 
Feinstein, he was derided as an empty suit by many commentators, with 
the notable exception of George Will, who vouched for Huffington's 
intellectual prowess and mocked rumors about his sexuality. But even 
the candidate's tough press critics may not have been probing enough. 
In Esquire, we learn that Huffington only reluctantly pursued his 
pre-political career in his father's oil business, and that he sleepwalked 
through his Reagan administration appointment in the Pentagon (``He 
remembers virtually nothing of his year there'') and his accomplishment-free 
term as a congressman (``He found the minutiae of crafting laws boring''). 
The only reason he ran for the Senate is that he ``would do anything'' 
not to face another tedious term in the House. As the real corruption 
of our time is the spiraling effect of unchecked special-interest 
money, not sex, on governance, so the real lesson of the Huffington 
case is the corrosive effect of an unlimited private fortune, not 
sex, on a political culture where paid ads can drown out less-moneyed 
opposition and a free press. A complete nonentity _ so rudderless 
he isn't sure today if he's a Democrat or a Republican _ pulled the 
wool over the eyes of millions of voters with the media blanket unlimited 
cash now buys. Any empty suit so easily merchandised on TV to all-too-credulous 
voters can be merely a front for unseen ideologues pulling the strings. 
Luckily for the country, both Huffington and the more overtly dangerous 
Ross Perot were derailed before they bought their way to the top. 
But the as yet scantly examined Steve Forbes is already spending whatever 
it takes of his bottomless fortune to win the presidency in 2000, 
and as the Huffington saga proves, only a fool would dismiss him as 
a joke. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>