<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981208.0433 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For someone with a great chunk of property in the middle of a resurgent 
Times Square, it looked like a perfect deal. Charles Moss Jr., whose 
family roots in the theaters, burlesque houses and nickelodeons of 
Times Square go back to the 1930s, was going to sell Random House 
the right to build a new office tower on a platform over his property 
for $92 million. He would keep the billboards in front of the tower 
and a valuable ribbon of storefronts on the east side of Broadway 
between 44th and 45th streets, which could generate $12 million more 
a year in profit. Random House would get a nice home, albeit an expensive 
one, across 45th Street from its new parent company, the German media 
giant Bertelsmann AG. But as often happens in a city crisscrossed 
with as many oversize real-estate personalities as looming skyscrapers, 
a seemingly sure thing can unravel over new demands or second thoughts. 
That is apparently what happened to this deal on Broadway shortly 
before Thanksgiving, though who is at fault depends on which side 
is doing the talking. ``New York is full of examples where the most 
favorable deals were derailed by the personality traits that seem 
peculiar to this island,'' said Peter Hauspurg, chairman of Eastern 
Consolidated Properties. ``Neither Moss nor Bertelsmann is going to 
be able to duplicate a deal like this.'' Some people say that Moss, 
53, who has backed out of at least two other deals in the past, was 
suffering from separation anxiety as he got closer to selling his 
grandfather's legacy, and asked for more money. Others say the Bertelsmann 
executives were in over their heads and tried to gobble up some of 
Moss' precious retail space at the last minute. The tough real-estate 
mechanics who don blue suits say they were irked by Moss' casual, 
unprofessional wardrobe: open-collared shirts, khakis and no jacket. 
His friends say the soft-spoken Moss was not about to let the corporate 
deal makers take advantage of him. Everyone involved, however, agreed 
that a deal made sense for both Moss and Random House. Neither Robert 
Sorrentino, operating chief at Bertelsmann, nor Moss returned calls 
requesting comment. A dozen other people involved in the project spoke 
on the condition that their names not be used. Just before Thanksgiving, 
Moss and Random House and Bertelsmann suddenly broke off more than 
six months of negotiations, to the horror of the executives, lawyers, 
real-estate brokers, architects and construction bosses who mill around 
such projects. No formal death notice has been issued by either side. 
In New York real estate, one person involved in the talks cautioned, 
``there's no concept of the fat lady singing.'' So maybe there will 
be a resurrection. But Moss flew home to Aspen, Colo., on Nov. 30 
and Bertelsmann quickly opened talks with other landlords, including 
one with a project on Broadway and another with a project on Avenue 
of the Americas. The two sides have not talked since. ``That's called 
a New York closing,'' said Henry Elghanyian, whose family owns Rockrose 
Development Corp. ``Some wise guy comes in at the last minute saying, 
`We've gone too far to back out now, so I want another 2 percent.' 
And the deal doesn't close.'' Both sides say that Moss and Bertelsmann 
found common ground early in the negotiations over the largest remaining 
development site in Times Square. But when it came to the final details, 
the bottom seemed to drop out of a deal they both thought had been 
pretty much completed. A tanned, athletic man who, as one friend said, 
``looks like he just got out of a convertible on Hollywood Boulevard,'' 
Moss bought the property on Broadway for $4 million in 1977, when 
Times Square had fallen on hard times. He had a sentimental attachment 
to the building because his grandfather and father had opened the 
Criterion movie theater there shortly after the three-story structure 
was built in 1936. At various times it housed the International Casino, 
a Bond's clothing store and, more recently, the Roundabout Theater. 
During the real-estate boom in the late 1980s, Edward Minskoff and 
then Jerry Speyer, developers, thought they had deals to build an 
office tower on the site. Neither of them came to terms with Moss. 
``He can only get so far and then it dies,'' said one person who has 
negotiated with Moss. ``He thinks he has something so amazingly precious 
that he finds it impossible to think about selling it. He's also dealing 
with his father's ghost.'' But with real-estate values suddenly tripling 
in Times Square in 1997, Moss once again explored the idea of developing 
the site, which is widely regarded as an ideal location on Broadway. 
The billboards atop the building are worth a small fortune. Moss issued 
eviction notices to the tenants. But by year's end, he seemed to drop 
the idea and hired a broker to find some new, high-paying tenants. 
Last summer, he began talking with Bertelsmann, which wanted to move 
its most recent acquisition, Random House, next door to its 44-story 
headquarters on the east side of Broadway, between 45th and 46th streets. 
Someone suggested letting Bertelsmann build a 35-story tower over 
Moss' existing retail space, allowing him to have his cake and eat 
it, too. Moss and his family stood to get more than $90 million _ 
22 times what he paid for the land _ while still holding onto retail 
space that could produce $12 million a year. By October, people involved 
in the negotiations expected the deal to close no later than Halloween. 
But the talks dragged into November. Nevertheless, Bertelsmann's new 
chairman, Thomas Middlehoff, felt confident enough to hire a construction 
manager (Plaza Construction) and an architect (Hellmuth, Obata &AMP; 
Kassabaum) and to begin negotiations with the city over a tax break 
and a neon-lighted pedestrian bridge between the Bertelsmann Building 
and what would be known as the Random House Building. But the deal 
started to unravel in mid-November, people involved with Bertelsmann 
said, when Moss made a new proposal: Demolish the whole property, 
build Moss the retail space without charge, and pay him for the space 
while the project is under construction. It would have raised Bertelsmann's 
costs by $30 million or more, they said. Moss eventually retreated 
from that position, but then began to question Bertelsmann's proposal 
to shut down his building while six support columns were built for 
the tower overhead. The columns, Moss contended, would take up valuable 
retail space. Bertelsmann executives felt that Moss was reneging, 
while Moss' side believed that the media company was grabbing for 
more. ``We had a handshake deal,'' said one person on the Bertelsmann 
team. ``Moss was making unreasonable demands. He said he would lose 
a fortune in income because of those columns.'' The gulf between the 
two sides seemed to widen at a Nov. 24 meeting that was supposed to 
bring them together. They stopped talking. Moss left town. A day later, 
one person said he expected Sorrentino at Bertelsmann to call Moss 
in Aspen, but the phone never rang. Another executive said that Moss 
was raising ``reasonable issues'' that top executives at Bertelsmann 
failed to appreciate, in part, because they ignored the real-estate 
experts. ``I think it blew up because these neophytes at Bertelsmann 
tried handling it themselves,'' he said. For its part, Bertelsmann 
began discussions with developers about at least two other sites nearby. 
The logic of the Bertelsmann-Moss deal remains, however, and real-estate 
executives say it is not impossible for the two sides to get back 
together. ``I've never seen a significant deal that didn't die several 
times along the way to being completed,'' said Stephen Siegel, president 
of Insignia/ESG, a real-estate company. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>