<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981208.0166 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In food as in life, the truly remarkable often lurks among the merely 
ordinary. Take, for example, the top blade steak. It comes from the 
chuck or forequarter of the cow, which usually produces cuts that 
are flavorful but very tough. Full of connective tissue, these are 
best cooked by slow, moist cooking methods like braising or stewing. 
But the top blade breaks this mold. It is actually the second most 
tender cut of meat, surpassed only by the butter-soft tenderloin. 
This underappreciated cut of beef is a culinary hidden gem just waiting 
to be discovered. The top blade steak's position in the pantheon of 
beef tenderness is not based on mere supposition. In Texas, where 
beef is truly king, measuring tenderness is serious business. And 
while attending a course at Texas A &AMP; M University called Beef 
101, we saw meat scientists measure beef toughness with a piece of 
equipment called a Warner-Bratzler, after its inventors. This gizmo 
measures the amount of pressure required to break apart a piece of 
meat. When the top blade was put up against all other cuts of beef, 
it came in second only to the extremely pricey tenderloin. A blind 
tasting of 10 cuts of beef held at the end of the course confirmed 
the machine's evaluation, since the top blade was rated extremely 
tender by all tasters. Despite this, the top blade is only about half 
the price of other steaks like the Delmonico and the sirloin, which 
are generally regarded more highly by consumers. In fact, in most 
supermarkets top blade is only a few cents more a pound than tough 
steaks like the top round. So, why is this meltingly tender, flavorful 
and inexpensive steak not the darling of chefs and home cooks alike? 
Well, like a tragic hero, it does have a flaw: running smack down 
the center of each steak is a line of inedible cartilage. This poses 
a problem, for sure, but hardly an insurmountable one. To our minds, 
tenderness and flavor make it worth simply eating around the cartilage 
and leaving it on your plate. For the more fastidious, though, there 
are excellent options. One is to remove the line of cartilage, cut 
the raw steak into chunks and then use them in stir-fries or on skewers. 
Another possibility is to cook the steak whole, remove the offending 
gristle and cut the cooked steak into thin slices before using it 
in salads or other composed dishes. One word of caution: do not mistake 
the top blade steak for what is sometimes called the chuck blade steak. 
The chuck blade is about three levels further down on the tenderness 
scale and is better suited for moist, slow cooking methods that melt 
the stringy collagen that it contains. Though the top blade steak 
is usually clearly labeled in supermarkets, it is also recognizable 
from its chunky triangular shape, which resembles that of an old-fashioned 
iron. This likeness has given the steak the moniker of ``flatiron 
steak.'' As is typical in the often-confusing world of butcher terminology, 
the top blade may also be called the book steak, lifter steak and 
butter steak, among other names. Whatever it is called at your local 
market, this is a piece of meat worth seeking out. After all, what's 
a small flaw when you get tenderness and deep beef flavor? ARUGULA 
SALAD WITH SEARED STEAK, CAPERS AND PARMESAN Time: 20 minutes 2 teaspoons 
grainy mustard { cup extra virgin olive oil 3 tablespoons fresh lemon 
juice 3 tablespoons finely chopped parsley Salt and freshly ground 
black pepper 1 pound top blade steak, about 1 inch thick 1 tablespoon 
vegetable oil 1 bunch arugula, cleaned and dried { cup pitted calamata 
or other briny black olives 2 tablespoons capers 4 vine-ripened tomatoes, 
quartered About { pound Parmigiano-Reggiano or other good-quality 
Parmesan. 1. In small bowl, combine mustard and olive oil, and whisk 
to blend. Add lemon juice, parsley and salt and pepper to taste; whisk 
together well, and set aside. 2. Sprinkle steak liberally with salt 
and pepper. In large cast-iron or other heavy saute pan, heat vegetable 
oil over medium-high heat until hot but not smoking. Add steaks, and 
cook until exteriors are well seared and interiors are done to your 
liking (2 to 3 minutes a side for medium rare). Remove from heat. 
When cool enough to handle, remove the gristle from each steak; slice 
each steak thinly crosswise. 3. In large bowl, combine arugula, olives, 
capers and tomatoes. Stir dressing well, add just enough to moisten 
ingredients and toss to coat. Place salad on serving plates, top each 
with \ of the steak slices and shave Parmesan over top. Serve at once. 
Yield: 4 entree servings. ROSEMARY-CRUSTED PAN-SEARED TOP BLADE STEAKS 
WITH TOMATO-GARLIC CONFIT Time: 1{ hours 6 plum tomatoes, halved 12 
garlic cloves, peeled and halved \ cup extra virgin olive oil Salt 
and freshly ground black pepper to taste 4 1-inch-thick top blade 
steaks 2 tablespoons freshly ground black pepper 1 tablespoon kosher 
salt \ cup chopped fresh rosemary needles 2 tablespoons olive oil. 
1. In small ovenproof pan combine tomatoes, garlic, extra virgin olive 
oil and salt and pepper to taste. Place in oven at 275 degrees, and 
roast, stirring occasionally to be sure that the mixture does not 
scorch, for 1{ hours. 2. About 10 minutes before the confit is done, 
rub the steaks all over with the pepper, kosher salt and rosemary. 
In large cast-iron pan or other heavy saute pan, heat olive oil over 
medium-high heat until hot but not smoking. Add steaks, and cook until 
exteriors are well seared and interiors are done to your liking (2 
to 3 minutes a side for medium rare). Remove from pan, and serve, 
topped with a generous amount of warm confit. Yield: 4 servings. GINGERY 
STIR-FRIED BEEF OVER SMOKY CABBAGE WITH LIME-SOY VINAIGRETTE Time: 
20 minutes 1 pound top blade steak 1 tablespoon ground white pepper 
\ cup soy sauce \ cup fresh lime juice 1 teaspoon sugar { small head 
green cabbage, cut into long thin strips { red onion, sliced thin 
{ red bell pepper, cut into long thin strips 2 tablespoons cracked 
coriander (or 1 tablespoon ground) 1 tablespoon sesame oil 4 to 7 
dashes Tabasco 2 tablespoons olive oil 1 tablespoon minced garlic 
2 tablespoons minced fresh ginger { bunch scallions, roots trimmed 
off, white and green parts thinly sliced crosswise \ cup roughly chopped 
toasted unsalted peanuts. 1. Rub steaks all over with white pepper, 
remove line of gristle running down center of each steak, and slice 
meat into thin strips. 2. In small bowl, combine soy sauce, lime juice 
and sugar; mix well, and set aside. 3. In large bowl, combine cabbage, 
onion, bell pepper and coriander. Heat sesame oil in large saute pan 
over high heat until it just begins to smoke. Add cabbage mixture 
immediately, and stir furiously for 90 seconds. Add Tabasco, and remove 
from heat. Stir soy-lime mixture vigorously, add to cabbage mixture, 
and toss well. Place on serving platter or individual serving plates. 
4. Wipe out the saute pan, add olive oil, and heat over high heat 
until it just begins to smoke. Add beef strips, and stir furiously 
until well seared, about 2 to 3 minutes. Add garlic, ginger and scallions, 
and stir furiously for 30 seconds. Place over the cabbage, garnish 
with peanuts, and serve. Yield: 4 servings. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>