<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981208.0349 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In something of a surprise embrace, Time Warner Cable and CBS Corp. 
announced Tuesday that they had signed an agreement for Time Warner's 
cable systems to carry the digital television signals of CBS' 15 television 
stations, by adding extra channels to the cable systems. Although 
the agreement will affect few customers now, it is the first such 
pact. The television industry is just now starting the transition 
from an analog to a digitalized system of signal broadcasting. It 
comes in the midst of a feud between the cable industry and some broadcasters 
over whether cable systems should be required to carry broadcast stations' 
digital signals during what is expected to be a lengthy transition. 
Federal law already requires cable operators to carry the analog signals 
of broadcast stations in their local markets. Eventually all television 
will be transmitted digitally, enabling networks to offer either high-definition 
pictures _ which are vividly clear and detailed _ or additional channels 
of programming or data. Time Warner, the United States' second-largest 
cable-systems operator, has agreed to carry CBS' digital feed in either 
format. CBS is producing five National Football League games in high-definition 
format and is exploring transmission of added channels. Only four 
of the 14 CBS-owned stations are transmitting digitally now; eight 
more are expected to be doing so by the end of 1999. CBS hopes the 
agreement will serve as a model for its affiliated stations to form 
similar agreements with Time Warner systems in their markets, a network 
spokesman said. The agreement involved no financial considerations. 
Cable operators, faced with the threat of federal ``must carry'' rules 
forcing them to carry local broadcast stations' digital offerings, 
have argued that there is not enough bandwidth to do so without dropping 
popular cable networks. But Time Warner has been upgrading the carrying 
capacity of its system, and will be able to carry both the analog 
and the digital signals of CBS in areas that have been upgraded, without 
dropping anything else, Michael Luftman, vice president for corporate 
communications, said. Upgraded systems will reach about 70 percent 
of Time Warner's 12 million customers by the end of this year, he 
said, and the company expects all its systems to be digitally capable 
by the end of 2000. In upgraded areas, customers with digital television 
sets will receive a slightly clearer picture on that CBS station, 
and a greatly enhanced picture on NFL games (or whatever else CBS 
eventually decides to broadcast in high-definition format). Customers 
with analog TV sets will receive the normal picture. In New York, 
where about half the system has been upgraded, CBS' analog channel 
would keep its normal place on the dial at Channel 2, and on upgraded 
systems an additional channel, at the high-numbered end of the dial, 
would be added for CBS' digital fare. ``If digital television is to 
flourish, broadcast television and cable companies must work together 
to make sure that the signal makes it to the people who count, our 
viewers,'' Jonathan Klein, president of CBS' stations unit, said in 
a statement. The Federal Communications Commission has been pressing 
both industries to work out an accord, so that viewers can receive 
digital television, particularly in its high-definition form, as soon 
as possible. In a statement, William Kennard, chairman of the FCC, 
said, ``I am encouraged by this news and hope that other digital carriage 
agreements will follow.'' ABC and NBC have also been in discussions 
with cable-system operators, and both those networks have extensive 
cable holdings themselves, so there had been expectations that they 
would have come to an agreement before CBS. Luftman of Time Warner 
said the company expected the first buyers of high-definition televisions 
to be its ``best customers.'' He added, ``The last thing we want is 
to have people call saying they spent $8,000 to $10,000 on an HDTV 
set and they want to be hooked up, and for us not to be in a position 
to do it.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>