<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981208.0144 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Louis P. Daniel's death on Oct. 29 at age 77 did not really end an 
era in New York restaurant life; that happened years ago. But it did 
bring back a host of memories, especially for wine lovers. For nearly 
two decades, Daniel owned Le Chambertin, a French restaurant at 348 
West 46th Street. To its regulars, Le Chambertin was a special place. 
Daniel, known to all of them by his first name, was a hands-on restaurateur, 
constantly moving from the front door to the bar to the kitchen to 
the customers' tables. Few of his customers were famous, but he knew 
many by name. It was not by accident that Daniel, a Breton, named 
his restaurant after one of Burgundy's most famous vineyards. He was 
passionate about wine. He knew every bottle in the converted coal 
bin that was Le Chambertin's cellar and, long before computers, he 
knew what he sold and exactly what he wanted to buy. He could and 
would terrorize hapless wine salesmen who knew less than he thought 
they should. This was unusual because French restaurateurs were rarely 
wine enthusiasts. Even famous restaurants often depended on wine salesmen 
to choose the wines, keep their cellars stocked and put together their 
wine lists. Some still do. Not only did I learn about wines from Daniel, 
but I learned how they were sold. Before it was fashionable, he offered 
wine dinners. Looking through his cellar, he would find wines that 
had reached their peak, then offer them as part of special dinners. 
I remember one in the early 1970s that included a bottle each of Chateau 
Margaux 1953 and Chambolle-Musigny 1969. The price for four people: 
$125. In the postwar years and well into the 1970s, Le Chambertin 
was one of many small French restaurants in the west 40s and 50s. 
They were fashioned after working-class bistros in France and were 
run mostly by Normans and Bretons, many of whom had worked on French 
ships. With the French Line piers only a few blocks away, the West 
Side became a small but thriving French community. Daniel came to 
New York in 1950 from Bermuda, where he had been part of a team of 
cooks, waiters and waitresses that reopened the Castle Harbour Hotel 
there. Most of the Bermuda crowd migrated to New York. Daniel had 
become involved in the restaurant business as a teen-ager, when he 
worked in restaurants in Paris. In 1942, during the German occupation 
of the city, he was taken prisoner and sent to Germany to work in 
war plants. Years later, rocking with laughter, he would tell how 
he sneaked from the workers' barracks one Christmas Eve, stole a pig 
from the Germans' kitchen and cooked it for his fellow prisoners. 
Back in Paris after the war, he worked at the brasserie that the author 
Georges Simenon used as the model for the Brasserie Dauphine, a favorite 
of his fictional Inspector Maigret. Here in New York, Daniel worked 
for several French restaurants, including Les Pyrenees, before opening 
Le Chambertin in the late 1950s. He also bought four acres in Phoenicia, 
N.Y., in an area known then as now, as the French Catskills. There, 
on weekends and vacations, he was the consummate farmer, and would 
fill his station wagon with fresh produce to serve his customers during 
the rest of the week. Dinner at Le Chambertin was a treat, but dinner 
at his home in the Catskills was always something special. Often, 
there was game he had shot, and always, vegetables from the garden. 
As for the wine, he would emerge from his cellar grinning happily 
and carrying a magnum of Burgundy, perhaps a 1959 Gevrey Chambertin 
or a 1971 Le Corton. ``Not so bad for a country dinner, eh?,'' he 
would say. No, it wasn't, particularly after the white wines, Puligny-Montrachet 
or Meursault Perrieres, which had started the meal. Daniel closed 
Le Chambertin on December 31, 1975, worn out, he said, from trying 
to maintain a classic French restaurant in a city where fast food 
seemed to be taking over. But retirement was not for him. At the age 
of 55, he became a wine salesman. Ignoring warnings that his old friends 
_ restaurant owners and bartenders _ might be less congenial when 
he came calling with his wine list, he built a successful second career, 
selling in Manhattan and the Hudson Valley. The idea of a moderately 
priced French restaurant like Le Chambertin, with a staff of 20, all 
of them French except the busboy, and a classic menu and a decent 
wine list, is only a fond memory now. Of course, New York is hardly 
lacking in good restaurants. But how many of them or their owners 
will evoke similar memories 20 years from now? 
</TEXT>
</DOC>