<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981208.0310 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Zeneca Group PLC, the third-largest British drug maker, and Astra 
AB of Sweden said Tuesday that they were discussing a merger that 
would be worth at least $30 billion and would create the world's fourth-largest 
pharmaceutical company. If completed, the merger would be the largest 
ever in the pharmaceutical industry and would transform two second-tier 
drug makers into a global powerhouse with $14 billion in sales. The 
combined company would have a formidable product line, including Astra's 
Prilosec, an ulcer drug that is the world's leading prescription medication, 
and Zeneca's Zestril, the second-leading hypertension remedy. The 
details of the deal could be announced as early as Wednesday, analysts 
said, continuing a sudden wave of European drug mergers sweeping across 
Europe. Last week, Germany's Hoechst AG and Rhone-Poulenc SA announced 
they would merge to form the globe's second-largest drug maker, while 
Sanofi SA and Synthelabo, both of France, agreed two days later to 
combine in a $10.4 billion stock swap. The deal is expected to be 
a merger of equals and would divide the key management positions between 
the two companies. Analysts confirmed Tuesday that Haaken Mogren, 
Astra's chairman, would be the chairman of the combined company, and 
Tom McKillop, Zeneca's chief executive, would retain that post. A 
spokeswoman for Zeneca declined to comment on the new company's proposed 
management structure. The likelihood that Zeneca and Astra would combine 
won applause from analysts and investors. Trading in the companies' 
American depository receipts was halted Tuesday, but not before Zeneca's 
ADRs had increased $4.25, to $45. Astra's ADRs rose $3.625 before 
being halted at $21.875. ``When the two companies combine, they will 
have a good management team and a strong pipeline,'' said Tom Brakel, 
an analyst with Mehta Partners, a biopharmaceutical investment research 
firm in New York. ``By pooling their resources, they can be even stronger.'' 
If the deal is completed, it will end one of the most bizarre episodes 
to take place in a pharmaceutical merger. In March, Mogren shocked 
the pharmaceutical industry by announcing to Swedish newspapers that 
he wanted to merge Astra with a company of similar size. Raising industry 
eyebrows further, he went on to name Zeneca, Schering-Plough of the 
United States and Germany's Bayer AG as ideal partners, a remark that 
sent all three stocks spiraling. Executives at pharmaceutical companies 
are generally as well versed in politeness as well as pills, making 
Mogren's remarks particularly surprising. David Barnes, the chairman 
of Zeneca, dismissed Mogren's comments by repeatedly stressing that 
he was not interested in a merger. Several weeks ago, however, Barnes 
reversed his position, stating in a telephone interview that he was 
indeed ``open'' to a merger. He refused to identify a potential partner. 
Even though the remark surprised several analysts in Europe, they 
thought Barnes had become more receptive to a merger after he saw 
how the proposed deal between American Home Products and Monsanto 
would have challenged Novartis' lead in agricultural products. That 
deal collapsed in October. Analysts noted Tuesday that Mogren had 
been under intense pressure from the Wallenberg family, which owns 
about 12 percent of Astra's stock, to improve the company's return. 
Last year, Astra's stock price was up only 10 percent, compared with 
a 42 percent gain for the Standard &AMP; Poor's health-care index. 
One particular hindrance to a merger for Astra was its joint venture 
with Merck to sell Prilosec in the United States. Under the terms 
of the arrangement, Merck could have gained sales and marketing rights 
to any products resulting from a merger. In June, Mogren paid Merck 
about $7 billion to end the deal. Analysts were happy with Mogren 
as chairman, even though most thought he would serve largely as the 
company's statesman while McKillop would position the company as a 
more effective player, especially in the United States. Even though 
Zeneca and Astra would be the world's fourth-largest drug seller, 
with $9.54 billion in sales _ ahead of Bristol-Myers Squibb, Johnson 
&AMP; Johnson and American Home Products _ its presence in the United 
States would be relatively small. The two companies have only 11,300 
employees in the United States, about one-ninth of the number Johnson 
&AMP; Johnson has. Still, analysts think that Zeneca and Astra would 
have enough top-selling drugs to spark some sales momentum in the 
United States. Astra should have Perprazole, an improved version of 
Prilosec, on the market by 2000, while Zeneca has products in several 
profitable drug classes. Aside from Zestril, Zeneca makes Accolate 
for asthma and Zomig, a leading migraine medication. Analysts think 
that the likely alliance between Zeneca and Astra will spark more 
deals and stoke merger speculation on both continents. ``You shouldn't 
ask, `Which company is going to be next?''' said Viren Mehta, a partner 
at Mehta Partners. ``It's better to ask, `Who's not going to be next?' 
Now everybody wants to play.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>