<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981208.0273 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A Yale University law professor who is a student of impeachment procedures 
suggested Tuesday that even if the House of Representatives voted 
this year to impeach Bill Clinton, the House that takes office in 
January would have to cast at least one more vote on the matter. The 
suggestion by the professor, Bruce Ackerman, in an Op-Ed article in 
The New York Times and in testimony before the House Judiciary Committee, 
added a complication to the impeachment maneuvering. Republicans were 
unimpressed, but Democrats said the Ackerman argument bolstered their 
case that the lame-duck House should not vote for impeachment. In 
a memorandum to the Judiciary Committee, Elizabeth Bazan of the American 
Law Division of the Library of Congress wrote that the precedents 
indicated that a new vote would not be necessary on impeachment itself 
but that the House would probably have to vote in January to select 
members to prosecute the case in the Senate trial. Thomas Mann, director 
of government studies at the Brookings Institution and an expert on 
Congress, said that even a vote on appointing managers, as the prosecutors 
are called, could provide an opportunity for the new House to review 
the case and decide not to try to remove the president from office. 
If the House votes for impeachment this month, there will not be time 
for a trial in the Senate to begin until the 106th Congress convenes 
in January. A majority vote of the House is required to impeach the 
president, while a two-thirds majority of the Senate is necessary 
to convict. Ackerman made the case that a bill of impeachment was 
no different from a piece of legislation passed by the House that 
would die at the end of the 105th Congress if the Senate had not acted. 
The Library of Congress study took issue with that analysis. Ms. Bazan 
found examples of impeachment cases involving federal judges that 
had been carried over from one Congress until the next. But she also 
found that in each instance, most recently in the case involving Judge 
Alcee Hastings in 1988 and 1989, the House voted anew to appoint managers 
to prosecute the case in the Senate. What that means in the current 
situation is that representatives dissatisfied with a House vote this 
year to impeach the president could fight the appointment of managers 
when the 106th Congress convenes. Without prosecutors, the trial in 
the Senate could not proceed. With the narrower Republican majority 
in the 106th Congress, said a Democrat on the Judiciary Committee, 
Rep. Thomas Barrett of Wisconsin, ``we do have the real possibility 
that we could have this Congress impeach this president, and three 
weeks later the case completely fall apart.'' Mann said this was not 
beyond the realm of possibility if the House voted to impeach Clinton 
and the public reacted angrily. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>