<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981208.0368 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
While President Clinton's lawyers presented a conciliatory defense 
to the House Judiciary Committee, the White House on Tuesday night 
released a detailed, 184-page legal brief that portrays both the independent 
counsel and the impeachment process as politically biased and blatantly 
unfair. The document, which was prepared by a team of the president's 
personal lawyers and the White House counsel's office, attacks familiar 
targets while it lays out the most complete and fervent defense of 
Clinton's behavior in the Monica Lewinsky case, offering an exhaustive, 
point-by-point rebuttal to the allegations of perjury, obstruction 
of justice and abuse of power. ``The President of the United States 
has not committed impeachable offenses,'' the lawyers wrote in the 
document, which was delivered on Tuesday night to the House Judiciary 
Committee. ``He repeatedly has acknowledged that what he did was wrong, 
he has apologized and he has sought forgiveness. But his apologies, 
his acceptance of responsibility and his contrition do not mean either 
that the President committed criminal acts or that the acts for which 
he is accused are impeachable offenses.'' The White House defense 
brief repeatedly attacks the independent counsel Kenneth Starr's tactics 
and motives. And it questions the accuracy of statements made in the 
hearing room by Rep. Henry Hyde, the chairman of the House Judiciary 
Committee. ``Patently false,'' the brief calls Hyde's summary of the 
president's testimony before the grand jury last August. For his part, 
Hyde on Tuesday night dismissed the document, saying it contains no 
new evidence'' and ``more legal hairsplitting and semantic gymnastics 
that we have come to expect from this White House.'' The White House 
lawyers argue that the Office of Independent Counsel's long-running 
Whitewater inquiry had run into an ``investigative dead-end'' and 
that in 1997 Starr turned his attention to the president's sex life. 
``In January 1998,'' the president's lawyers wrote, ``the OIC finally 
succeeded in transforming its investigation from one focused on long-ago 
land deals and loans in Arkansas into one involving a different topic 
(sex) and more recent events in Washington, D.C.'' The brief contrasted 
the Judiciary Committee's examination of the evidence against President 
Nixon in 1974 with Starr's 445-page referral sent to the House of 
Representatives on Sept. 9. The president's lawyers said that, during 
the Watergate inquiry, the committee interviewed witnesses and developed 
its own evidence. But, the lawyers said, the current panel is relying 
solely on Starr's report and its interpretation of the facts, without 
benefit of interviewing critical witnesses or developing independent 
evidence. ``Unlike the impartial presentation to the Watergate committee 
from Special Prosecutor (Leon) Jaworski, the referral is a document 
advocating impeachment,'' the lawyers' brief states. ``It sets for 
Mr. Starr's best case for impeachment, not a neutral presentation 
of the facts. It reflects a careful selection and presentation of 
the evidence designed to portray the President in the worst possible 
light.'' The brief also says that Starr omitted 11 examples of exculpatory 
evidence on issues including the concealment of gifts to Ms. Lewinsky, 
the accusation that Clinton sought to find Ms. Lewinsky a job in exchange 
for her silence and on the question of whether Clinton coached Betty 
Currie, his secretary, to testify falsely in the Paula Jones sexual 
misconduct lawsuit. The president's lawyers also argue that Starr 
slanted the evidence about Clinton's knowledge of Ms. Lewinsky's false 
affidavit in the Jones suit and in his assertion that Clinton falsely 
claimed to be unaware of the invocation of executive privilege by 
his aides. ``The referral repeatedly and demonstrably omitted or mischaracterized 
directly relevant evidence that exonerates the President of the very 
allegations leveled by the OIC,'' the lawyers wrote. Charles Bakaly, 
the spokesman for Starr, said on Tuesday night that his office was 
reviewing the document, but he declined to say whether prosecutors 
would respond. The immense task of searching for fissures in the public 
record was taken on by a team of a dozen lawyers from the White House 
and Williams &AMP; Connolly, the law firm representing Clinton. It 
was a product of many weeks of work by a team led by David Kendall, 
the president's lawyer, a White House senior aide said on Tuesday 
night. The rewriting and editing of the 184-page document continued 
until late Tuesday. Even at 6 p.m on Tuesday, six pages had been rushed 
to the offices of Williams &AMP; Connolly for final review before 
being released to the Judiciary Committee and news organizations. 
The White House lawyers repeatedly challenge members of the House 
of Representatives to carefully study the record ``to separate fact 
from myth, the record from the rhetoric and the sinful from the impeachable.'' 
``Any consideration of charges of perjury requires a focused look 
at the actual statements at issue,'' the lawyers wrote in their brief. 
``Again, we ask the committee: Please do not assume the conventional 
wisdom. Look, instead, at the actual record.'' That record begins 
with perjury, the allegation believed to be the most likely article 
of impeachment to be approved by the House Judiciary Committee. The 
White House lawyers argue that a high standard of proof is needed 
to prove perjury. A defendant, while under oath, knowingly must make 
a false statement about material facts, they argued. ``A vast range 
of testimony that is imprecise, unresponsive, vague and literally 
truthful, even if it is not completely forthcoming, simply is not 
perjury,'' the lawyers wrote. ``The law is aware of human foibles 
and shortcomings of memory. Dissatisfaction with the president's answers 
because they may be narrow, `hair splitting' or formalistic does not 
constitute grounds for alleging perjury.'' The White House lawyers 
disputed the allegation that Clinton lied under oath about the nature 
of his relationship with Ms. Lewinsky. The said Clinton acknowledged 
before the grand jury that he had engaged in ``intimate contact'' 
with Ms. Lewinsky, which he said was ``wrong'' and not appropriate. 
They said the president denied having had ``sexual relations'' with 
Ms. Lewinsky, as it was defined by the federal judge in the Paula 
Jones lawsuit. ``This simply is not a case of perjury,'' the lawyers 
wrote. ``In addition to the inconsequential subject matter of the 
allegation _ the precise nature of the admitted physical contact between 
the President and Ms. Lewinsky _ the factual record would not support 
a prosecution for perjury. That record is one essentially of `oath 
against oath,' a formula that centuries of common law jurisprudence 
has rejected as the basis for perjury.'' The largest section of the 
brief is devoted to rebutting charges that the president obstructed 
justice. These allegations, so redolent of Watergate, have long troubled 
Clinton's lawyers the most and they devoted 65 pages to trying to 
knock them down. In an elaborate dissection of Ms. Lewinsky's grand 
jury testimony, the White House lawyers argue there is no evidence 
that the president obstructed justice by discussing what should be 
done with gifts the president gave the former intern and that were 
subpoenaed in the Jones case. They also vigorously denied that the 
president obstructed justice by aiding Ms. Lewinsky in a job search. 
Clinton's lawyers criticized the independent counsel for presenting 
a ``misleading picture,'' since those efforts began months before 
Ms. Lewinsky appeared on the witness list in the Jones case. The brief 
rebuts four other obstruction charges as well. The White House also 
challenged the assertion by Starr that Clinton abused the power of 
his office by invoking executive privilege claims to conceal personal 
misconduct. ``The independent counsel's allegation that the President's 
assertions of privilege constituted an abuse of power is baseless 
and disingenuous,'' the lawyers wrote. ``The record demonstrates that 
the White House acted at all times based upon a good faith belief 
that its narrow assertions of privilege were appropriate and its claims 
were well founded in existing law.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>