<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981208.0380 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A federal judge on Tuesday struck down a New Jersey law banning what 
abortion opponents call partial-birth abortion, saying the measure 
was unconstitutional because it would threaten the health of women 
by denying them access to the safest medical procedures. In issuing 
a permanent injunction against the law, which legislators passed in 
1997 over the veto of Gov. Christie Whitman, the judge ruled that 
the measure was so vaguely worded that it would ban some of the most 
common abortion procedures at any point during a pregnancy and failed 
to make exceptions for cases in which the health or life of the mother 
was at risk. U.S. District Judge Anne Thompson said the law also violated 
the rights of health care providers because it would have allowed 
the state to fine doctors and strip them of their licenses if they 
performed certain procedures protected under the Supreme Court's landmark 
Roe vs. Wade decision. ``The court has concluded that the act threatens 
a woman's constitutional right to terminate her pregnancy,'' the judge 
wrote in her 48-page decision. ``It is in the public interest to prevent 
the act from taking effect and thereby protect the woman's right to 
choose.'' Similar laws have been struck down by federal courts in 
at least 10 states. Sponsors of the law said it was intended to outlaw 
only one specific procedure, known as the intact dilation and extraction, 
or D&AMP;X. In the procedure, doctors pull the fetus' legs into the 
uterus, then use a sharp object to puncture its skull so it can fit 
through the cervix. ``The law prohibited only those cases in which 
the babies are partially delivered, then killed,'' said Marie Tasy, 
legislative director for New Jersey Right to Life. ``Once the baby 
is out of the womb, it's no longer covered by Roe. To us, this is 
a human rights issue.'' The law would have placed the first restrictions 
on abortion in New Jersey since the Roe vs. Wade decision in 1973, 
and the battle illustrates how abortion rights opponents have gained 
influence in the state during the past decade. After lawmakers approved 
the ban last year, Whitman, a Republican notable for her longtime 
support of abortion rights, tried unsuccessfully to persuade legislators 
to adopt her approach, which would have allowed the procedures in 
cases when the mother's life or health were endangered. But abortion 
opponents argued that her plan offered too big of a loophole. And 
the Republican-controlled Legislature, led by two possible candidates 
for governor in 2001, voted to override Whitman's proposal. Whitman, 
whose ambitions for national office have been hampered by her support 
of abortion rights, ordered her attorney general not to defend the 
law in court when it was challenged by Planned Parenthood. But Assembly 
Speaker Jack Collins and Senate President Donald DiFrancesco set aside 
$300,000 from the Legislature's general fund to pay the lawyers' fees, 
and after Tuesday's ruling they released a joint statement indicating 
they might appeal the matter. Whitman applauded Thompson's ruling, 
but restated her willingness to sign legislation that would ban late-term 
abortions except in cases where the life or health of the mother was 
at risk. As written, the New Jersey law would have outlawed ``an abortion 
in which the person performing the abortion partially vaginally delivers 
a fetus before killing the fetus and completing the delivery.'' Thompson's 
ruling was handed down following a four-day hearing conducted in October, 
in which medical professionals presented sharply contrasting views 
of how the statute would affect health care providers. The proceedings 
also included many of the polemics that have characterized the nationwide 
debate over so-called partial-birth abortions. Twenty-eight states 
have enacted bans similar to New Jersey's and Congress has twice passed 
national bans on the procedure, only to have President Clinton veto 
them both. Lenora Lapidus, legal director for the American Civil Liberties 
Union of New Jersey, argued the case before Thompson and described 
the measure as a virtual ban on abortions because most abortion procedures 
could result in medical complications that would be outlawed by the 
statue. Talcott Camp, staff attorney for the ACLU's Reproductive Freedom 
Project, said the law would have had a chilling effect on doctors 
who perform abortions by pressuring them not to perform the safest 
forms of abortion for fear that they might be fined or stripped of 
their licenses. ``That's what's so sad about this,'' Ms. Camp said. 
``They're trying to restrict abortions but they're doing it in a way 
which endangers the health of the women involved.'' But Richard Collier, 
the lawyer hired by the Legislature to defend the law, argued that 
the statute was clearly intended to ban only a small subset of abortions 
in which the fetus was intentionally killed after it had moved partially 
through the birth canal. ``That's not abortion,'' he said, ``that's 
infanticide.'' Collier said he hoped to appeal the decision and argue 
that the judge erred by interpreting the law too broadly. ``She has 
a judicial obligation to interpret the Legislature's words in the 
most narrow way possible,'' he said. ``But she interpreted them in 
the broadest way possible, the way Planned Parenthood asked her to. 
She took the easy way out.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>