<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981208.0432 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A red bandanna is pinned over his bed, but 17-year-old Richard C. 
does not hang with the Bloods anymore. After five arrests and a probation 
violation, Richard was taken away from his gang a year ago and sent 
to the Edwin Gould Academy. Now the onetime gang member, tall and 
lanky with delicate features that disguise a hair-trigger temper, 
is a peer group leader. His 12 new ``brothers'' are a lot like the 
guys he knew on the street: truants and graffiti makers, drug dealers 
and addicts, car thieves and shoplifters. But the new group is striving 
to reform. And while staff members at the residential treatment facility 
support their efforts, it is the students who lead. ``If you have 
kids who are growing up like you, telling you what to do, it makes 
more sense,'' said Richard, who plans to join the Marines after graduating 
in June. ``Right now, they call me a juvenile delinquent,'' he said, 
``but soon they'll be calling me lieutenant.'' Conversions like Richard's 
have won national praise for the Edwin Gould Academy, home to about 
175 troubled New York City adolescents from 12 to 21. About a quarter 
of the students had been charged with one or more misdemeanors. The 
remaining students were sent there by the city's Administration for 
Children's Services, at a cost of $79,000 a year per child. Most of 
the youngsters were placed on an emergency basis, after their parents 
or guardians died, or because they were abused or neglected. Others 
had already been in foster care families, other group homes or juvenile 
detention centers. They were placed at the academy by social workers 
as a final option before being sent back to a detention center or 
a psychiatric institution. Last month, the academy, which opened eight 
years ago in a cluster of hills in Rockland County, was one of 10 
programs to win the Innovations in American Government Award. The 
honor, which includes a $100,000 prize from the Ford Foundation and 
Harvard University, recognizes government programs that have developed 
new ways to fight America's most critical problems. While most residential 
treatment homes have two staffs and two directors, for education and 
for social services, Edwin Gould has just one. Drug counselors, child 
psychologists and educators all work for Tom Webber, superintendent 
and executive director. ``This way, turf battles don't get in the 
way of serving the kids,'' Webber said. In another departure from 
traditional practices, students run their own group counseling and 
motivational sessions. On a recent Wednesday, Edgar M., 16, who lives 
in the Malcolm X House dormitory, asked the group there for help in 
recovering from a phone call from his mother, who had abused and abandoned 
him. The last time Edgar saw her, he was 4. She left him at an aunt's 
house and said she would be back after running a few errands. He never 
heard from her again. Edgar, a native of Guatemala, said he thought 
he was over the pain. But a few weeks ago, he said, his mother called. 
She was living in California, and now has a 4-year-old daughter. The 
call sent him into a depression. He was sad and did not want to go 
to his Narcotics Anonymous meetings. ``I worry that my mom is raising 
that little girl the same way she raised me,'' said Edgar, slumped 
forward. ``I can't seem to stop thinking about that little girl.'' 
Otis R., 18., said, ``Maybe you are mad because your mother is able 
to raise her, and she didn't have nothing to do with you.'' His idea 
was echoed by others in the group. Because most of the residents are 
juveniles, they are identified only by their first names and last 
initials. The room turned silent. Edgar rocked back and forth. ``You're 
just going to have to let this go, because there's nothing you can 
do about it,'' advised Otis, who was sent to the academy after a couple 
of arrests, and who worries about his 9-year-old brother, who lives 
with his abusive father. Administrators at Edwin Gould said that although 
they did not have the money to track how many graduates go on to become 
self-sufficient adults, the majority at least make a promising start. 
Within the first eight months, the average student improves reading 
and math skills by more than 1.2 years. More than 50 percent of those 
who get high school diplomas here go on to college. And each year, 
Edwin Gould administrators said, the situation on the campus improves. 
From 1992 to 1993, students injured staff members 66 times, and half 
of the girls became pregnant. Last year, staff injuries were down 
to eight and pregnancies down to three. The campus is surrounded by 
trees, and swarms with Canada geese. There are no security guards, 
bars or barbed wire. The 45 girls live in two whitewashed three-story 
dormitories. The campus for the 128 boys, set on a hill to the west, 
is a series of two-story red brick cottages named for figures like 
Muhammad Ali, Tito Puente and Malcolm X. There are proms, assemblies 
and holiday meals, although the students say ``the food stinks.'' 
There are basketball, track and football teams. At the end of each 
year, the school publishes a yearbook and holds a graduation. Webber 
said: ``We make it very clear to the kids. We are not a treatment 
center. We are not a juvenile justice facility. We are a school. We're 
here to educate. I really believe that education is the best treatment 
for these kids.'' Each dormitory's residents, 12 or 13 students, gather 
in their living room each day for a meeting students call ``group,'' 
focusing on the person who seems to be stumbling the most. A counselor 
speaks only to keep the discussion going. During the day, students 
can also call informal meetings to confront someone who is misbehaving 
or who seems withdrawn. They do not go easy on one another. The sessions 
are blunt and serious. ``It's something new to me,'' Onasia B., 15, 
said of the peer sessions. She came to the academy last year after 
living in a group foster home on Staten Island, where she was sent 
by her mother for smoking marijuana, skipping school and staying away 
from home for days at a time. ``When adults tell you things,'' Onasia 
said, ``it's all about consequences, like you either do what they 
say or you get detention. But when peers talk to you, it's different.'' 
Webber, a wisp of a man who says he grew up the only white child in 
his East Harlem neighborhood, once ran a storefront high school for 
dropouts and gang members kicked out of other schools. Those are the 
kinds of young people he wants at the academy, he said, although the 
school is not equipped to treat adolescents who are suicidal, heavily 
addicted to drugs or suffering from severe mental illness. ``Kids 
who have been pushed out of school,'' Webber said, ``and who have 
gotten themselves into a gang, or who are getting into trouble, those 
are kids who are trying to make something happen in their lives.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>