<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981208.0312 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Scientists in Japan have cloned eight calves from cells they gathered 
from a slaughterhouse, creating eight identical copies of a single 
cow. Though half of the calves died, some biologists say the results 
indicate that the cloning of cows may be at least as efficient as 
in vitro fertilization with these animals. Cows are the third adult 
animal to be cloned. The first was a lamb named Dolly whose birth 
was announced in February 1997. She had been cloned from an udder 
cell. Then came mice, announced last July. And suddenly cloning, which 
just two years ago had been thought biologically impossible, is looking 
like it might be entirely feasible, if not easy, according to cloning 
experts. It still seems surprising to some scientists. After all, 
an adult cell, like an udder cell, has reached its final destiny in 
the body and under normal circumstances never changes into something 
else. But with cloning, an adult cell would have to reverse its development 
somehow and become an early embryo cell, able to direct the development 
of an entirely new animal that was the identical twin of the adult 
that provided the original cell. But now, ``cloning is becoming routine,'' 
said Dr. R. Michael Roberts, a professor of animal physiology at the 
University of Missouri and the chief scientist for the Department 
of Agriculture's competitive grants program in Washington. A paper 
by the Japanese scientists, led by Dr. Yukio Tsunoda of Kinki University 
in Nara, Japan, describing their cloning of a cow, will be published 
on Friday in the journal Science. Science lifted its usual restrictions 
on announcing the results before publication of the scientific paper 
after The Express in London wrote about the results. Tsunoda and the 
others say that one reason to clone cattle would be to reproduce exact 
copies of animals that are superb producers of meat or milk. In fact, 
said Roberts, on a recent visit to Japan he saw a calf that other 
researchers asserted they had cloned from cells taken from the ear 
of a prize bull. The scientists who created that clone have not yet 
published their results, Roberts said. Roberts said that several Japanese 
groups say they are successfully cloning adult cows and bulls, although 
Tsunoda's group is the first to publish results. Dr. Randall Prather, 
a cloning researcher at the University of Missouri, said that he and 
others are predicting that more than 50 calves that are clones of 
adults born in Japan by the end of the year. But what surprised many 
cloning experts was not just the fact that a cow was cloned but the 
ease with which Tsunoda's group accomplished its task. ``If this is 
true, it's startling,'' said Dr. Barry Zirkin, a reproductive biologist 
at Johns Hopkins University School of Hygiene and Public Health. To 
begin the cloning process, the Japanese scientists gathered two types 
of cells from a Japanese beef cow whose entrails had been discarded 
in a slaughterhouse: cumulus cells, which cling to eggs and nurse 
them, and cells from the lining of the cow's Fallopian tube. Then 
they used these cells to create embryos, slipping either a cumulus 
or Fallopian tube cell into another cow's egg from which the genetic 
material had been removed. The researchers attempted to add cumulus 
cells to 99 cow's eggs, of which 47 took up the cumulus cells. Eighteen 
of the resulting embryos survived in the laboratory for eight to nine 
days until they were ready to be transferred to surrogate mothers. 
With the Fallopian tube cells, the researchers used 150 eggs, got 
94 of them to take up cells, and ended up with 28 embryos. Tsunoda's 
group transferred 10 of their 46 embryos to cows that could serve 
as surrogate mothers. Eight calves were born. Four of the calves died 
at or soon after birth; the others survived and appear perfectly normal, 
the scientists state. In contrast, when Dolly was created, Dr. Ian 
Wilmut and his colleagues at the Roslin Institute in Scotland began 
with more than 400 eggs, ended up with just 29 embryos that they could 
transfer to surrogate mothers and just one live lamb, Dolly. The Japanese 
investigators assert that although half of their calves died, the 
deaths appeared to have nothing to do with the fact that they were 
clones. One died of pneumonia stemming from heat stroke, two others 
died from aspirating large amounts of amniotic fluid at birth, the 
fourth died from complications during delivery. Other scientists say 
they are not convinced those four calves were entirely normal. Nonetheless, 
they say, they are impressed with the astonishing efficiency of the 
cow cloning _ 80 percent of the embryos transferred to surrogate mothers 
survived until birth. With in vitro fertilization, said Dr. George 
Seidel, an animal physiologist at Colorado State University in Fort 
Collins, about 50 percent of transferred embryos survive until birth. 
``They have great results, no doubt about it,'' said Dr. Mark Westhusin, 
a reproductive physiologist at Texas A&AMP;M University who is working 
on the cloning of cattle and dogs. Of course, scientists say, there 
is much more work to be done to understand how cloning works, and 
why. But, some say, with successful cloning in three species, and 
with the process becoming more efficient exponentially, it is hard 
to doubt that humans will be cloned, sooner rather than later. Others 
urge caution. ``Is it possible with humans? Perhaps,'' Zirkin said. 
``But I'm not sure this speaks to that. Different species are just 
very very different. And the ethical issues on whether it should be 
tried remain the exactly the same. Until those issues are appropriately 
debated and discussed, it would be a mistake to think in those terms.'' 
But, said Dr. Lee Silver, a molecular biologist at Princeton University, 
he already knows of two qualified fertility specialists who want to 
clone. And so, he says, ``anyone who thinks that things will move 
slowly is being very naive.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>