<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981208.0321 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For most people who grew up in postwar America, China was invisible. 
One of the world's poorest, most populous and politically most powerful 
countries, it was certainly (italics)there,(end italics) but only 
as an enigma, a four-million-square-mile Forbidden City. No one from 
the outside (the superstition ran) could get in; no one on the inside 
could get out. A battened-down version of Marxist communism, culminating 
in the fanaticism of the Cultural Revolution of the 1960s and 70s, 
was in place, as elaborate in its hierarchies and protocols as any 
religion or imperial dynasty. Devotion was obligatory; dissent could 
be lethal. Within a few years of Mao's death in 1976, things started 
to change. The political orthodoxy held firm; Tiananmen proved that. 
But with the arrival of a capitalist economy, cultural innovations 
kicked in and everyday urban life turned surreal. Kentucky Fried Chickens 
hatched in Beijing; once-reviled imperial monuments were rehabilitated 
as theme parks; Cultural Revolutionary campfire songs were set to 
a rock beat. And bit by bit, China came West. During the 1980s and 
90s, contemporary Chinese culture, sometimes tailored to non-Chinese 
tastes, gained an international presence. Fiction by mainland writers 
regularly appeared in English. The opera ``Marco Polo'' by Tan Dun 
was produced in New York last season. Films by Chen Kaige (``Farewell, 
My Concubine'') and Zhang Yimou (``Raise the Red Lantern'') have picked 
up awards and played at Manhattan theaters. One much-anticipated import 
never arrived. The classic Ming-dynasty drama ``The Peony Pavilion,'' 
performed by the Shanghai Kungju Opera under the direction of Chen 
Shi-zheng and billed as the centerpiece of last summer's Lincoln Center 
Festival, was derailed at the 11th hour by the Chinese government. 
Rumors of official muscle-flexing also buzzed around the Guggenheim 
Museum's ``China: 5,000 Years'' last spring, when the show's selection 
of avant-garde art, much of it produced since 1989 and marked by Western 
contemporary influences, was suddenly jettisoned, for lack of floor 
space, the museum said. (The Guggenheim subsequently issued a press 
release announcing that a separate show of contemporary work was planned 
for the summer of 1999, though no such show, in fact, has been scheduled 
so far for that time.) As it happens, vanguard work made it to New 
York this fall in ``Inside Out: New Chinese Art,'' an exhibition organized 
by the Asia Society in Manhattan and installed there and at the P.S. 
1 Contemporary Art Center in Long Island City, N.Y. (through Jan. 
3). It is the largest gathering of its kind in the West to date, and 
the first to take a broad-spectrum look at new work from across the 
Chinese-speaking world, including the mainland, Taiwan, Hong Kong 
and artists living abroad. The result is a sprawling affair, a pileup 
of media, styles and philosophies, from brush and ink painting to 
installation art, mock-propaganda to Pop, Dada to Daoism, exemplary 
of a ``global'' art that promises to have increasing visibility in 
the years to come. The question is: How well does it play in the West? 
There are problems. Hard-core admirers of the Chinese classical tradition 
_ a tradition entirely (italics)about(end italics) tradition, about 
transmitting a cultural ideal intact from one generation to the next 
_ are likely to dismiss much of the new work out of hand as trendy, 
irresolute, barely Chinese at all. But anyone coming from deep inside 
Western contemporary art, with its fixation on ceaseless novelty, 
may find the art uncool for other reasons, seeing, at first glance 
anyway, only familiar Western styles _ Surrealism, Conceptualism and 
so on _ warmed over and, here and there, updated with post-modern 
tics. Neither view is entirely wrong. But they both miss the wider, 
more complicated, often contradictory story of an art that has only 
been around for a decade and a half and is changing at lightning speed. 
Emerging from a country that is juggling a communist government and 
capitalist economy, the new Chinese art seems increasingly to be looking 
backward as well as forward, interweaving styles that the impatient 
West feels it knows all too well with traditions that it barely understands 
at all. As to how this new Chinese work emerged, some comparative 
history is helpful. In America, the decades after World War II were 
an explosively inventive time for art, with Abstract Expressionism 
giving way to Happenings, Minimalism to Earth Art, in a kind of fever-chart 
sequence. In China during roughly the same years, and particularly 
during the decade-long Cultural Revolution, the officially sanctioned 
art style was Socialist Realism, along with certain folk and popular 
styles. Traditional painting was tolerated, sometimes even avidly 
encouraged, though it was often politically tinged. With doors to 
the West effectively shut for more than 20 years beginning in 1950, 
updated information on modern art, which had had an impact on China 
earlier in the century, was scant. With the collapse of the Cultural 
Revolution, outside information arrived fast, giving a generation 
of artists born after 1949 _ which means almost all of the artists 
in the Asia Society show _ a crash course in Western art history from 
Giotto to Jeff Koons. Contemporary work in particular offered exhilarating 
possibilities: fresh formal options, a shot at the international mainstream, 
and _ initially, at least _ a vehicle for political resistance. Art 
in China has always been about power. Its aura of timeless, near-mystical 
authority has been called upon by every ruling class _ imperial or 
Communist _ to advertise legitimacy. It has insured social advancement 
for artists and patrons alike. To a degree only sporadically true 
in the West, it has been a primary medium of intellectual discourse. 
Whether artists were attached by appointment to the court or by profession 
to the academy, or were living in disaffected retreat from both, they 
were expected to comment critically, if obliquely, on the world around 
them through a narrow vocabulary of coded images, most of these drawn 
from nature. This ``commentarial'' impulse was much evident in the 
new art of the 1980s. With the Cultural Revolution still fresh in 
memory, young artists began filtering its esthetic preferences through 
off-the-rack Western models. Socialist Realism was retooled as an 
ambivalently debunking style known as Political Pop, with Mao as a 
central image. For decades, Mao's droopy, pear-shaped face had loomed 
over China like an all-powerful Oz, intimidating and reassuring, a 
revered but crotchety parent, subject to mood swings and with a dangerous 
mean streak. In a well-known triple oil-on-canvas portrait by the 
early Political Pop artist Wang Guangyi, Mao is seen as a gray marmoreal 
presence set behind a grid of solid black lines, as if he or the viewer 
were confined behind, and perhaps protected by, prison bars. Paintings 
like this have been popular in the West and taken as proof that all 
Chinese avant-garde work is, by definition, ``dissident'' and counter-revolutionary, 
though this is not the case. Wang Guangyi's painting, with its debt 
to Warhol, is an ambiguous image, reflecting to some degree the general 
popular attitude toward Mao in China: critical but, as the horrors 
of the Cultural Revolution are softened by time, also deeply nostalgic. 
A 1990s painting trend known as Cynical Realism shifts its attention 
away from a revolutionary past to an equally, if differently problematic 
present: a rapidly Westernizing China of stampeding commercialism, 
bureaucratic corruption and social inequities. Interestingly, Cynical 
Realism _ represented by artists like Cao Yong and Song Yongping, 
both of whom appear in the show at the Asia Society _ sells well on 
the Western-based market and so has become part of the capitalistic 
system it rebukes. And at least one of its most visible exponents, 
Fang Lijun, a member of the early 1980s avant-garde, has become a 
wealthy man. Fang's signature images of yawning, bald, look-alike 
men originated as a version of peasant figures and may convey a sense 
of existential ennui to Western eyes. But among some of his colleagues, 
he is regarded as a sell-out, producing rote, sure-fire pictures for 
money, while enjoying the rewards of haute-bourgeois privilege in 
Beijing. An entrepreneurial avant-garde of the kind Fang represents 
has long been familiar in the West, perhaps most recently in the high-priced 
``consumer critique'' Neo-Geo of the 1980s. And it is fast gaining 
ground in China. But few vanguard artists at the moment share his 
luxe life style. Art still falls into officially approved and disapproved 
categories, with certain forms _ installation art, in particular, 
with its often disruptive physical presence and hard-to-read open-ended 
meanings _ seen as especially likely to convey problematic messages. 
That suspicion is often well founded, as it was in the case of a 1996 
public installation by Wang Jin in Zhengzhou City. In response to 
a commission by the city government to create a sculpture for a new 
shopping mall, the artist froze a trove of high-end consumer items 
_ cellular phones, jewelry _ into big blocks of ice, then stacked 
the blocks to form a wall (itself a resonant symbol throughout China's 
isolationist history). When the wall was completed, a near riot ensued 
as a frenzied crowd hacked through the ice to get at the goods locked 
inside. Because the current government is anxious to look liberal 
and with-it in the world's eyes, it may not suppress such work outright. 
But it does its best to make life difficult for the artists by controlling 
access to public exhibition spaces, including those at art schools, 
almost all of which are state owned. One solution has been to create 
ephemeral public works. Wang Jin's ice wall is an example; so is a 
piece entitled ``To Raise the Water Level in a Fishpond'' by the conceptual 
artist Zhang Huan, one of the outstanding figures in the Asia Society 
show. For this work, Zhang rounded up dozens of itinerant urban male 
workers _ China's newest disenfranchised class _ and photographed 
them standing at shoulder height in a Beijing pool, isolated from 
one another and from the city itself, to suggest their political inconsequentiality 
in post-Maoist China. In a solo performance at P.S. 1 in October, 
the artist subjected himself to a physical endurance test with spiritual 
and political implications. The main prop was a Chinese-style bed 
with a ``mattress'' made of ice on which he lay naked and face down 
for 10 minutes or so, as if symbolically trying to melt a cultural 
permafrost with his body heat. Other artists have started holding 
exhibitions in their homes to an audience made up largely of peers. 
Two installation artists, Wang Gongxin and Lin Tian-miao, husband 
and wife (she is one of the few women in the Asia Society show), have 
been credited with initiating so-called ``apartment art'' when, in 
1994, they arranged a one-night-only show in Wang's parents' home 
in Beijing. News spread by word of mouth; hundreds of people showed 
up. The format has been widely copied. The police appear to be aware 
of the exhibitions but so far have interfered only in cases where 
the material shown is either sexually explicit or directly critical 
of the government. (The gender-bending nude performances by the charismatic 
young artist Ma Liuming, who also made a memorable appearance at P.S. 
1 in October, have been raided and closed down. Both Ma and Zhang 
Huan will have exhibitions in Manhattan galleries this season.) A 
domestic context for art has a long history in China. For centuries, 
classical forms _ ink and brush painting and calligraphy _ were produced 
in a roughly comparable ``open studio'' environment. Scholar-artists 
created their work in private for a few friends, never intending public 
display. In ``apartment art,'' a traditional idea has become avant-garde. 
The mingling of new and old may well prove to be the wave of the future. 
Where, in the early 1980s, much new Chinese art sought to shake itself 
free from tradition by looking Westward, in the 1990s, artists are 
reclaiming those traditions, if only to question them closely. Much 
new art takes as its subject one of the most cherished of China's 
high-art forms, the written word, with its history of obsessive, ritualistic 
copying from century to century. The Beijing-based artist Qiu Zhijie 
has copied out a classic text called the ``Orchid Pavilion Preface'' 
a thousand times on a single scroll until the surface of the paper 
has turned black. Another Beijing artist, Song Dong, writes with plain 
water on a flat stone. The words evaporate within seconds. Both artists 
have work at P.S. 1. So does the conceptualist Zhang Peili, an influential 
figure with a solid and growing international reputation. He is represented 
by a 1992 video that takes a sly, iconoclastic, new-media look at 
the authority invested in words. He hired the star newscaster of China's 
state-controlled television station, Xin Zhibin, who had been the 
first to report the Tiananmen massacre, and filmed her reading a dictionary 
definition of water as if it were a news report. Sometimes playing 
with language has touched an official nerve. Wenda Gu began his career 
in China in the mid-1980s as an academically trained calligrapher 
and ink painter. But when in 1986 he exhibited pieces that incorporated 
invented Chinese characters, the government closed the show. The work 
was perceived as subverting a sacrosanct tradition, and (the authorities 
suspected) as carrying coded political messages. Gu moved to the United 
States a year later and has since produced fictional versions of both 
Western and non-Western languages. His spectacular P.S. 1 installation, 
``Temple of Heaven,'' commissioned by the Asia Society for the show, 
amounts to a kind of visual Babel, with floor-to-ceiling scrims of 
invented letters and pictograph characters shaped from human hair. 
Another Chinese emigre to the United States, Xu Bing, also deconstructs 
language. His monumental installation, ``A Book From the Sky,'' was 
an avant-garde landmark when it first appeared in Beijing in 1988. 
Reconstituted at P.S. 1, it consists of hundreds of hand-printed books 
filled entirely with Chinese-looking nonsense characters. In an art 
world much concerned at present with questions of cultural identity 
and diaspora, both artists are quintessential global figures, a role 
with advantages as well as pitfalls. On the one hand, their work gets 
attention on the expanding circuit of international biennials and 
triennials. At the same time, their positioning between cultures requires 
that they sustain a careful balancing act, neither playing down their 
``Chineseness'' too much nor turning it into an exoticizing chinoiserie. 
(Although both artists exhibit in mainstream New York institutions 
_ Xu has an installation at the New Museum in SoHo through Jan. 10 
_ they seem to occupy a social position at the periphery of the local 
art world, keeping close ties to friends and colleagues in China. 
A third artist, Cai Guo-qiang, a veteran of two Venice Biennales and 
short-listed for the Guggenheim's Hugo Boss prize two years ago, is 
now based in New York but speaks no English.) Similar negotiations 
of identity are evident in vanguard art emerging in Taiwan and Hong 
Kong, where artists are trying to create work that both acknowledges 
but disengages itself from Chinese tradition. And the conflict is 
increasingly evident in China itself. Zhang Peili _ who has a very 
funny video piece currently on view at the Museum of Modern Art _ 
recently observed that although a decade ago he wanted only to escape 
from tradition, he has revised his view. ``It's like living with your 
father and grandfather in the same house,'' he said. ``You have different 
life styles; you probably won't get along very well. There will be 
many problems. But once you start to live apart, your feelings change. 
Affection develops. You miss each other. After all, this is a bond 
of blood.'' It is a bond that, like all family ties, can take unpredictable 
directions. Historically, every time Western influence has gained 
ascendance in China, a revivalist wave of traditional culture has 
followed. Whether this will prove true once again remains to be seen. 
(In fact, traditional styles are still widely practiced, as in the 
case of a strain of ``new literati'' painting.) But there is no question 
that some recent Chinese art has a distinctly nationalistic, implicitly 
anti-Western bent. One example is an arresting installation at P.S. 
1 entitled ``Borrowing Your Enemy's Arrows,'' by Cai Guo-qiang. It 
consists of a wooden fishing boat suspended in midair and pierced 
with thousands of arrows, and illustrates the legend of a Chinese 
general who in a naval battle sent an empty boat toward his enemies 
to attract their fire and then used their arrows against them. Is 
China's new art based on such opportunistic strategies, fulfilling 
Mao's famous directive to make foreign things serve China? Some of 
it is certainly geared to turning a fast profit in the Western market, 
especially while ``Chinese'' is hot in the way ``Korean'' was a few 
years ago. But the most original work has more challenging things 
on its mind: How to forge a shaping role within a China that is itself 
in a crisis of change, and in a larger world where multinational business 
and telecommunications have made the very issue of cultural identity 
seem almost as irrelevant as it is urgent. Whatever directions Chinese 
art follows, a Western audience will have to take note of it and learn 
to meet it on its own terms. The China of the Forbidden City may still 
be an enigma, but in a world of shrinking physical size and eroding 
cultural boundaries, it is also the house just across the street. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>