<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981208.0216 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Filmed mostly on location in a tiny, crowded Tehran divorce court, 
Kim Longinotto's extraordinarily intimate documentary, ``Divorce Iranian 
Style,'' reminds you that marital discord knows no geographic boundaries. 
What varies from place to place are only the laws allowing couples 
to officially dissolve their unhappy unions. In Iran, when a woman 
wants a divorce, the only legal grounds are a husband's insanity, 
impotence or inability to provide for her financially. If you imagined 
that Iranian women, following Islamic teaching, tend to be mute, subservient 
acolytes to their conjugal lords and masters, you would be wrong. 
Glowering under their chadors, the women shown petitioning for divorce 
are angry, discontented, thoroughly modern-sounding wives who don't 
mince words when describing their unhappy situations. To the excruciating 
embarrassment of their husbands, they also can be bluntly candid about 
sex. But since insanity is one of the few grounds for divorce, their 
testimony often sounds as if the signs of a husband's hostility have 
been amplified and exaggerated to try to fit a legal definition. This 
is not to suggest that the women who are the focus of the movie, which 
opens Wednesday at Film Forum, don't have every reason to be frustrated 
in their often arranged, loveless marriages to men who appear to be 
a pretty sorry lot. Consider the plight of a wife whose husband is 
pathologically jealous and restrictive. After she describes a situation 
in which she is virtually a prisoner in her own house (she is not 
even permitted to make personal telephone calls), the judge calmly 
instructs her to make herself more attractive for her husband and 
``tempt him back.'' Then there is Ziba, a teen-ager who was contracted 
in marriage at the age of 15 to a man of 37. A year after their wedding, 
she argues that she was too young to foresee the consequences of her 
marriage. Now she is locked into a relationship that is physically 
unsatisfying and frustrating in other ways since her husband refuses 
to let her go back to school. Hoping to find a legal loophole she 
asks the court what the legal age is for marriage in Iran; she is 
told that it is puberty, which can be as young as 9. For as long as 
her husband wants to stay married to her, Ziba appears to be trapped. 
The most complicated case involves Maryam, a fiery young woman who 
successfully divorced her first husband and married for love. Now 
claiming that her first husband is neglecting their young daughter, 
she seeks custody of the girl, who by law automatically remained in 
his care. Maryam pleads, harangues and weeps, and out of sight of 
the camera even physically attacks her first husband. She rips up 
his court order and lies to the judge, saying he was responsible. 
Observing all this turmoil is the very young daughter of the court 
secretary. After a session has been closed, the smart, articulate 
little girl climbs into her father's chair and scaldingly addresses 
an imaginary husband, asking him why he treats his wife so badly. 
When asked if she hopes one day to get married, she says no, because 
she knows what husbands are like. After watching this documentary, 
many will undoubtedly share her distaste for an institution that in 
Iran can be brutally unfair to women. PRODUCTION NOTES: `DIVORCE IRANIAN 
STYLE' Directed by Kim Longinotto and Ziba Mir-Hosseini; in Farsi, 
with English subtitles; director of photography, Zahra Saiedzadeh; 
edited by Barrie Vince; released by Women Make Movies. At the Film 
Forum, 209 Houston St., New York. Running time: 80 minutes. This film 
is not rated. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>