<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981208.0133 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
While I know that there are just four seasons, I cook as though there 
were 12. For me, each month has a certain feel to it, and it's the 
feel, as much as the foods that are available in the market, that 
inspires me to create new dishes. On my culinary calendar, December 
is luxury season, a time to drink Champagne and eat oysters, foie 
gras and cauliflower soup _ at least this cauliflower soup, lavished 
with sea scallops and osetra caviar. Cauliflower, a stalwart in make-do 
cooking, might not leap to mind as the stuff of luxe holiday fare. 
But when I saw it in the Greenmarket, I remembered its virtues, which 
I learned working with Michel Guerard at his spa in France. There, 
we used pureed cauliflower to thicken soups and sauces that would 
normally take cream. Pureed, cauliflower's mild flavor and voluptuous 
texture make it ideal for this sleight of hand. But cauliflower is 
a chameleon; left whole, its flavor is stronger, its texture firm. 
I knew that using it both ways in one dish, as I do in this soup, 
would be exciting. I took hot vichyssoise as my reference and replaced 
the starchy potatoes with the cauliflower, but kept the leeks for 
sweetness. To build in more flavor and texture, I decided to caramelize 
a few florets, so that the soup would taste of cauliflower both subtle 
and strong. Then, looking for something that would make the dish not 
just delicious but also celebratory, I hit upon diver scallops, whose 
season has just begun. These scallops are pristinely fresh and hand-harvested 
in Maine, but they can be hard to find; don't hesitate to use regular 
sea scallops. The scallops' clean sweet taste and silky texture made 
them cauliflower-friendly, but their hint of brininess was a tease 
that left you wanting more. So, in the spirit of the season, I added 
caviar. The combination is perfect _ if served right. First, construct 
a minitower in the center of the bowl. Start with the sliced leeks, 
proceed to the caramelized florets, then the scallops and, finally, 
top it all with the caviar. At the table, ladle soup around the towers, 
keeping the caviar cool and dry on its scallop cushion. Of course, 
everyone _ including me _ is tempted to eat the caviar solo. But show 
restraint. If you break down the tower and swirl the caviar into the 
soup, you'll be rewarded with a little of every luxurious flavor in 
every spoonful. CAULIFLOWER AND LEEK SOUP WITH SEA SCALLOPS AND OSETRA 
CAVIAR Time: 45 minutes 1 tablespoon plus 1 teaspoon canola oil 1 
medium onion, peeled and finely diced 2 medium leeks, white and light 
green parts only, cut into rounds, washed and dried 1 large head cauliflower, 
cored and cut into florets 4 cups chicken stock Salt and freshly ground 
white pepper 4 large sea scallops, preferably diver-harvested 2 tablespoons 
unsalted butter 1 ounce osetra caviar. 1. In a stockpot over medium-high 
heat, heat 1 tablespoon of oil. Add onion and leeks, and saute until 
vegetables soften but do not color, 3 to 4 minutes. Add cauliflower 
and stock, and bring to a boil. Reduce heat to low, and simmer 3 minutes, 
then spoon out 3 large cauliflower florets and 12 rounds of leek. 
Set leeks aside; slice cauliflower into [-inch-thick slices; reserve 
for garnish. 2. Simmer soup until cauliflower is tender, about 18 
minutes. Season to taste with salt and pepper. Working in batches, 
puree soup in a blender or food processor; set aside, and keep warm. 
3. In a small nonstick skillet over medium-high heat, heat remaining 
1 teaspoon of oil. Season reserved cauliflower slices with salt and 
pepper to taste. Saute until lightly browned on both sides, then set 
aside and keep warm. Season scallops with salt and pepper, and add 
to pan. Saute until golden brown on the outside and medium-rare inside, 
about 2 minutes a side. 4. Reheat soup if necessary, and swirl in 
the butter. Divide leek rounds and cauliflower slices among four warm 
soup bowls, mounding vegetables in center of each bowl. Ladle soup 
around vegetables. Top each mound with a scallop and a spoonful of 
caviar. Serve immediately. Yield: 4 servings. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>