<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981208.0371 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The cold night air flowed through the open doorways and circulated 
around the cavernous building, chilling Stephanie Anderson, 20, and 
her co-workers as they recently stood beside the long conveyor belt. 
As packages of various size and shape flowed down the belt, Ms. Anderson 
glanced at the shipping labels. When she saw a ZIP code in North or 
South Carolina, she snagged the package and placed it into a large 
plastic trolley car behind her. Ms. Anderson is one of a few thousand 
people doing the same repetitive work on the midnight to 3 a.m. shift 
at United Parcel Service's sorting center at the Louisville airport. 
But where some might see boredom and wretched hours, she sees opportunity. 
By working this particular shift for this particular company, she 
is getting what she wants most: a free college education. ``It sure 
doesn't seem worth it when I first walk in here,'' she said. ``It's 
so cold, and the late hours and you've just left a warm house to get 
here. But it sure seems worth it when I'm registering for classes 
and I don't have to pay anything.'' Ms. Anderson is one of about 1,000 
night-shift workers at United Parcel's primary sorting center who 
began an innovative program this fall that not only provides tuition 
at three local colleges, but a tailor-made program for workers. In 
what experts say is the first such cooperative arrangement of its 
kind, the company, the three colleges and the state have scheduled 
classes to fit the lives of employees who work in the middle of the 
night. The main goal of the program _ other than the education of 
students _ is to help the company retain workers. ``This isn't simply 
a matter of hiring people and putting them through college,'' said 
John Kinney, human resources manager for United Parcel's Louisville 
sorting center. ``It's a whole new way of doing college.'' Classes 
for the program, known formally as Metropolitan College but more commonly 
as UPSU, are set up for the late afternoon and early evening hours 
at the University of Louisville, Jefferson County Community College 
and Jefferson Technical College. Courses ended for the year by Thanksgiving 
so that students would be free for extra work over the holidays, the 
peak shipping season. Workers enrolled in the program get free bus 
passes for public transit and special bus routes have been set up 
_ paid for by United Parcel _ that run each night from the three college 
campuses to the company's sorting center. The program demonstrates 
the lengths to which companies must go to retain even semi-skilled 
workers in economic good times and how much help state and local governments 
will provide major employers to keep them from relocating. The idea 
came about when UPS, the state's biggest employer, though its headquarters 
are in Atlanta, passed word around Louisville in November 1997 that 
it was thinking about moving its main package sorting center out of 
the state. The company had always had difficulty finding enough workers 
to staff its midnight to 3 a.m. shift, hours mandated by flight schedules 
that United Parcel uses for its overnight delivery service. Indeed, 
in a typical year, turnover among the 5,500 package sorters is 100 
percent. (There is also a three-hour daytime shift.) The wages are 
well above the minimum _ $8.50 an hour _ and the company provides 
full medical benefits. But since the basic work of the center is to 
unload overnight packages from incoming planes, sort the items on 
the basis of their destination and reload them onto outgoing aircraft, 
the work can only be part time. And it takes place in the middle of 
the night, a fact that students _ a group that historically makes 
up a hefty percentage of United Parcel's work force _ soon finds interfering 
with social and school life. ``The student population, the folks who 
are looking for part time work, tend not to want to work from 12 to 
3 in the morning moving packages,'' Kinney said. ``For the same amount 
of money they can work at McDonald's or at a kiosk in a mall selling 
jewelry.'' And United Parcel officials foresaw even more trouble finding 
workers in the years ahead, as their plans call for expanding the 
primary package sorting center, whether in Louisville or elsewhere. 
The idea is to raise the center's handling capacity by the year 2005 
to 300,000 packages an hour from the current 175,000. The center would 
need an additional 6,000 workers for the late-night shift. State officials, 
who had already offered United Parcel a number of other incentives 
to keep the center in Louisville, like tax breaks, came up with the 
idea of helping the company fill its employment needs through the 
college program. Under the plan, United Parcel pays half of a worker's 
tuition at one of the colleges and the state pays the other half. 
``We've a pretty good history of doing things for businesses like 
improving the transportation system or providing tax incentives,'' 
said Kentucky Gov. Paul Patton. ``In this case, none of that mattered 
if UPS couldn't get the employees it needed.'' Though it took some 
persuasion on the part of the governor to get the colleges to go along 
with the program, the heads of the three institutions say it has helped 
them stabilize their enrollments, which, like those of many colleges, 
have been dropping. ``It brought in 450 students this semester,'' 
said Dr. Richard Green, president of Jefferson Community College, 
where enrollment dropped to 10,000 this year from 12,000 in 1992. 
United Parcel officials say they hope the program will attract about 
2,200 of the 6,000 workers they will need in the expanded sorting 
center. Some of the sorters, like Ms. Anderson, were lured to United 
Parcel from other jobs. ``I've had problems in the past with working 
at other jobs where they'll say, `Oh, we'll work with you through 
school,''' she said. ``But when you've got to stay late for class, 
it's, `No, I'm sorry, you've got to come in,' but with this program, 
they're paying for my school. If they're going to do that, they're 
going to want me there.'' Others, like Patricia Carlton, 40, were 
not working at all, but hope to take advantage of the opportunity 
to return to school. Mrs. Carlton, who is married to a retired military 
officer and has two children at home, learned about the program at 
her local unemployment office. ``I had put my education aside because 
of my children, my family, my husband and moving around all the time,'' 
she said, sitting in the cafeteria at Jefferson Community College. 
``I thought this was a good opportunity. It's late. But it's never 
really too late.'' She commutes from her home in Fort Knox, about 
a 45-minute drive. Her new schedule means that her children and husband 
have to fend for themselves more when it comes to things like meals. 
``They're adjusting because it's my turn,'' Mrs. Carlton said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>