<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981208.0220 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
On a soggy afternoon, Julia Hill greets a visitor with a warm hello 
and an invitation to step inside a small tent-like shelter lodged 
in a giant redwood tree 100 feet above the ground. She leaps from 
branch to branch with the ease of a squirrel and then patiently unhooks 
a white-knuckled reporter from climbing equipment as she stands confidently 
on a thick 2-foot-long branch without a safety line or even shoes. 
Julia ``Butterfly,'' as she likes to be called, has lived there for 
nearly a year _ Thursday will mark the anniversary _ in an attempt 
to save a tree state foresters estimate to be 600 years old from the 
chain saws of the Pacific Lumber Co. As the protest has endured to 
become the longest known tree-sit, Hill has received fan mail from 
across the globe. With flowing dark hair and a winsome smile, the 
former Arkansas waitress has attracted coverage ranging from national 
TV to the pages of an Italian fashion magazine. Today the bright-eyed 
24-year-old finds herself at the center of the national debate over 
old-growth timber. ``I don't want to leave a legacy of clear-cuts 
poisoned with pesticides,'' Hill said while sitting on an 8-foot-by-6-foot 
platform rigged with supporting ropes that serves as one of her two 
living spaces. The other is about the same size and covered by blue 
tarps 180 feet above the ground, 20 feet below the tree's top. ``To 
me, the tree-sit is just further expression of my love of humanity,'' 
she said. While comments like those may strike some as corny or quixotic, 
Hill has won over many others, including cantankerous radio interviewers, 
with an articulate defense of her action and a philosophy that blends 
mainstream environmentalism with New Age rhetoric and basic Christian 
tenets. She espouses casting off materialism, becoming one with nature 
and loving one's would-be enemies and tormentors. ``The post office 
box is always full,'' said Robert Parker, a fellow Earth First! activist 
who is coordinating Hill's interviews and helping to supply her. ``I 
think a lot of people are really inspired by what she has done.'' 
Parker himself didn't think much of the effort until he heard Hill 
being interviewed on the radio. Before Hill came along, he had spurned 
Earth First!'s civil disobedience tactics in favor of producing hard 
science challenging Pacific Lumber timber plans. ``She was just speaking 
from the heart in a very real manner,'' Parker said. Shortly after, 
in March, Parker volunteered to help. ``I really saw in her such incredible 
focus and dedication.'' But supporters of Pacific Lumber Co., Humboldt 
County's largest private employer, have derided Hill's undertaking. 
For many, the tree-sit is but the latest in a long line of Earth First!-sponsored 
offenses that hurt the timber industry, which drives the local economy 
by providing hundreds of decent-paying jobs. Humboldt County percolates 
with rumors that Hill has been seen in bars or cafes and that she 
is pregnant. Hill said the rumors are untrue. To John Campbell, the 
president of Pacific Lumber, the tree-sit is an annoyance that has 
aroused misplaced public sentiment. One day, after Hill has left the 
tree, the company will cut the redwood as part of a government-approved 
timber harvest plan for the area, he said. For the time being, Hill 
is trespassing on private property and endangering her life, he said. 
``She could seriously hurt herself or kill herself. We've had a concern 
about that for some time,'' Campbell said, adding that the company 
would surely be blamed in such a scenario. ``We certainly didn't ask 
her to sit in that tree. She is free to go at any time. She is not 
a hostage.'' Campbell denies that the company ever harassed Hill. 
He said Pacific Lumber climbers deemed the tree too dangerous to ascend, 
and since then, Campbell has resigned himself to waiting. However, 
Hill said, Pacific Lumber employees appeared last winter to shout 
obscenities, rouse her from sleep with air horns and floodlights and 
try to cut off her supplies with a 10-day security blockade. Hill 
befriended some of the security personnel by singing them verses from 
a Christian song about love. ``Every time they yelled at me, every 
time they screamed at me, I sang the song,'' Hill said. ``You can 
only hate someone who is singing a song of love to you for so long.'' 
On another occasion, a helicopter used in logging operations buzzed 
the top of the tree, subjecting Hill to a downdraft similar to the 
gale-force winds that rocked her perch during winter storms. Mostly, 
though, the rustic life is a blessing atop the redwood known by locals 
as the ``Stafford Giant,'' Hill said. She affectionately calls the 
tree ``Luna,'' a name environmentalists gave it after climbing it 
during a full moon. On Luna, Hill cooks on a propane stove, relies 
on sponge baths to stay clean and uses a 5-gallon bucket lined with 
plastic bags as a toilet. As part of their duties, supporters make 
the 90-minute hike to Hill's tree twice a week to deliver food, letters, 
warm clothes, art supplies and other items, as well as to retrieve 
the toilet bags. Learning to live without modern amenities and weathering 
storms that bounced her platform like a small boat lost in violent 
seas have strengthened Hill's resolve. ``I was scared at the beginning. 
I was petrified,'' she said. ``I am human. I am not an adrenaline 
junkie. I am not Superwoman.'' While Hill said her message is getting 
out, she chastised the media for focusing on the human interest aspects 
of her life and downplaying the environmental issues that have inspired 
her to act. The plan to protect redwoods in the Headwaters Forest, 
approved earlier this year by the state and federal government, doesn't 
go far enough, she said. For $495 million, the government has agreed 
to acquire 7,500 acres of Pacific Lumber land to create an ancient 
redwood preserve. With only an estimated 3 percent of the ancient 
redwoods that once covered the North Coast remaining, every tree counts, 
she said. Furthermore, she said, the Headwaters deal doesn't adequately 
protect salmon or other endangered species such as the marbled murrelet 
sea bird, which uses old-growth timber to nest in. Not far from Hill's 
camp is the hillside that gave way on New Year's Day 1997 and damaged 
10 Stafford homes in a mudslide. It provides further evidence of Pacific 
Lumber's overcutting, Hill said. ``Every single tree is vital. Every 
single tree is priceless,'' Hill said. ``These are real important 
issues. That's why I'm up here.'' According to state and federal government 
officials who worked for two years to craft the Headwaters deal, the 
resulting protection plan would put the last significant privately 
owned ancient redwood groves off limits to loggers. In total, 84 percent 
of all old redwoods left on Pacific Lumber land would be safeguarded 
under the government plan, they say. About 100,000 acres of old-growth 
redwoods are already preserved in state and federal parks, making 
the redwood the most protected tree species in the world, scientists 
say. Distributed by N.Y. Times News Service. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>