<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981208.0454 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For years, dreams of creating Hollywood-on-the-Hudson have tantalized 
politicians and entrepreneurs, only to collide with the financial 
realities of a high-risk industry. In recent months, it looked as 
if those dreams might finally be realized, as several entrepreneurs 
announced plans for complexes of sound stages like the studio back 
lots in Los Angeles. They conjured up visions of more television shows 
flocking to New York and increasing numbers of filmmakers choosing 
the city for indoor filming as well as outdoor locations. But for 
now, at least, only one of these projects _ the Hudson River Studios, 
five sound stages atop St. John's Center in lower Manhattan _ is viewed 
as a good prospect. The other proposals have not fared as well. In 
January, an independent film production company known as the Shooting 
Gallery announced that it planned to build the largest movie lot in 
the metropolitan area, complete with 15 sound stages, in an old industrial 
park in Harrison, N.J., just outside Newark, at an estimated cost 
of $75 million. Instead, the company has had to scale back its ambitions. 
Last summer, it opened the $5 million Gun-for-Hire Film Production 
Center in a nine-story building at 110 Leroy St. in lower Manhattan. 
The center provides other independent filmmakers and the producers 
of mainstream films like next year's ``For Love of the Game,'' starring 
Kevin Costner, with the space and equipment they need while they are 
working in New York. In June, two young entrepreneurs _ one a computer 
consultant, the other a movie set designer _ announced that they had 
signed a lease with the city to develop the Brooklyn Navy Yard into 
a $160 million complex with a dozen sound stages, to be known as New 
York Studios. But people on Wall Street and elsewhere who follow the 
entertainment industry said it was unlikely that they would be able 
to attract the financing to build a project of that size. To date, 
the developers have been unable to raise any capital, according to 
an investment banker who spoke on the condition of anonymity, and 
they are likely to miss a December deadline set by the city to come 
up with a financing plan. Nevertheless, the developers and the city 
remain optimistic. Louis Madigan, one of the developers, said the 
deadline for financing, now reduced to $140 million, had been extended 
six months, and he expressed confidence that backers would be found. 
City officials say they, too, believe the site will be developed. 
``They are right on target,'' said Curt Ritter, a spokesman for Mayor 
Rudolph Giuliani. Several other, less-publicized proposals are also 
on the back burner, including a television production component at 
Donald Trump's huge Riverside South project on the Upper West Side, 
and the conversion of the city-owned Hudson River piers at 54th Street 
into sound stages. In a report on the entertainment industry issued 
earlier this year, a nonprofit research group, Exploring the Metropolis, 
concluded that ``New York's sound stages are insufficient in terms 
of both size and number to meet today's needs.'' At the same time, 
the report noted that an industry in which television shows go on 
and off the air on short notice and films are generally shot in a 
few months is naturally at odds with the real estate business, which 
demands a higher degree of predictability. A commitment from a major 
Hollywood studio to establish a beachhead in New York would certainly 
satisfy that demand, but there is no sign of such a commitment, especially 
since several movie companies have added sound stages in Los Angeles 
in the last few years. Sony Pictures Entertainment Company will announce 
next week that it has agreed to manage New York Studios, if the Brooklyn 
Navy Yard project ever gets off the ground. But Sony, which has been 
tightening its belt, is not investing in the project, nor has it promised 
to make any movies or television programs there, sources both inside 
and outside the studio said. Meanwhile, Madigan and his partner, Cary 
Dean Hart, are aggressively trying to keep the Navy Yard proposal 
alive. In November, they issued a news release saying the project 
would ``not only be a gigantic, full-service Hollywood-style movie 
lot, but will evolve as a waterfront entertainment hub and movie theme 
park that will attract millions of visitors to a revitalized downtown 
Brooklyn.''. One organization trying to help the film industry expand 
is the New York City Investment Fund, a private company established 
by the financier Henry Kravis to stimulate job growth. The fund decided 
not to invest in the Brooklyn Navy Yard proposal, said Kathryn Wylde, 
president of the fund. ``We would love to be in a position to support 
them,'' she said, ``but unless and until they are able to demonstrate 
that the business makes sense, it's going to be very hard to.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>