<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981208.0362 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
So what IS it with Hillary? The president's head is on the block, 
and the first lady has never looked more radiant. As her husband gets 
dragged through the mud by bone-headed Republicans, she glows. She 
looks as if she's traveling with her own pink baby spotlight. Here 
she is on the cover of Vogue, looking Hallmark happy and Hollywood 
glamorous. Here she is making the flashbulbs pop, with Harvey Weinstein 
and Gwyneth Paltrow at the New York premiere of Miramax's ``Shakespeare 
in Love.'' Here she is at the White House, posing with the Christmas 
gingerbread house, looking totally Norman Rockwell. Here she is doing 
her Barbara Bush imitation, publishing ``Dear Socks, Dear Buddy,'' 
a book of letters from children to the White House pets. But why is 
this woman smiling? Does she think these are her wages for her husband's 
sin? Or is she offering up an emotionally airbrushed version of herself 
in order to help her husband get past his ordeal? Either way, there 
is something a little eerie about that serene smile. A very peculiar 
thing is happening. Just as she becomes the single most degraded wife 
in the history of the world, Mrs. Clinton is being promoted from celebrity 
into iconicity. The power elite is deep into Hillary hysteria, treating 
the glossy, domesticated, upswept, inauthentic version of the first 
lady like a combination of Princess Di and Mother Courage. Dan Rather 
said she'd make a good presidential candidate, and Time is considering 
beatifying her as Person of the Year. Paul Costello, who worked as 
a press secretary for Rosalynn Carter and Kitty Dukakis, said that 
``At any moment, you expect the lights to go up for the Andrew Lloyd 
Webber musical opera `Hillary.''' There is more speculation now about 
what Mrs. Clinton will do in the year 2000 than what her husband will 
do. Will she leave him or stay? Will she run for Senate in New York, 
or take a Supreme Court appointment from President Gore? But her iconicity 
is strangely contentless. There was a time when there were large and 
real accomplishments that she wished to achieve. Most notably, she 
wanted to reform health care and restore the prestige of liberal social 
engineering. But the halo beneath which she now moves has not been 
awarded to her for something that she has done, but for something 
she has endured. She was laid low by publicity, and so she will be 
raised up by publicity. Feminists will long ponder how it was that 
the first lady became wildly popular only when she played the doormat. 
(Excuse me, I mean played Tammy Wynette.) She became a heroine only, 
as Jane Mayer wrote in The New Yorker, when she went from seeming 
too controlling to seeming unable to control her own husband. It was 
easier for many women to identify with that. Why is Mrs. Clinton hailed 
as ``a woman of stature and an icon to American women,'' as the Vogue 
editor Anna Wintour puts it, only after she's been demeaned in this 
gross, horrible, painful way? The tough woman who wanted to be a co-president 
had to be brought down, so that out of the chrysalis could come a 
woman who stands by her man and does not allow any of her real emotions 
to show through. Mrs. Clinton is a hot blond material girl now, hanging 
out with fashion types, movie stars and rich people, showing that 
she is as attuned to the nuances of back-scratching and corporate 
huckstering as her husband. Last Thursday, she repaid the generosity 
of Weinstein, the co-chairman of Miramax who is a big contributor 
to Clinton campaigns and the Clinton legal defense fund. As Alex Kuczynski 
reported in The New York Times, the first lady went to Weinstein's 
premiere and spoke in praise of ``my friend Harvey.'' Sounding very 
Tina Brownish, Mrs. Clinton raved about ``the buzz'' around Miramax, 
and said the company ``has done a great service.'' While in New York 
she also repaid Vogue for the glitzy cover and puff piece, going to 
breakfast with Vogue editors. And she had lunch with editors from 
Time, Teen People and People magazine, talking up her campaign for 
teen-age celibacy _ a campaign that is a little cringe-making, given 
her husband's fling with an intern. Historians will long ponder how 
Mrs. Clinton came in as Eleanor Roosevelt and left as Madonna. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>