<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981208.0372 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Embarrassing mistakes by officials in the National Football League 
did not merely affect something as simple as ``a ball game.'' Each 
error influenced one-sixteenth of a season, which is a compelling 
reason for getting it right. The word from league headquarters is 
that there is a possibility the owners can return instant replay in 
time for the playoffs in January. It's not as if they would be inventing 
the wheel in double time. The league operated with instant replay 
from 1986 through 1991, and has held experiments recently with better 
technology and tighter application. Anything is better than the sight 
of Vinny Testaverde of the Jets failing to get the ball over the goal 
line Sunday only to be given credit for a touchdown. The officials 
did not operate out of arrogance or dishonesty; they merely blew the 
call. However, in pro football, human imperfection can cost 6 percent 
of a season. You want human imperfection? Take Richie Garcia's missing 
a kid sticking his hands over the wall and turning Derek Jeter's fly 
ball into a home run in the 1996 American League playoffs. Garcia 
blew the call, but even then, who told the Baltimore Orioles to lose 
that game in extra innings, and then lose three more games in the 
next four? During the 1969 World Series, Gil Hodges mesmerized the 
umpire by plodding deliberately to home plate, and methodically waving 
a baseball with a smudge, persuading the entranced ump that Cleon 
Jones had been hit on the foot with a pitched ball. The Mets clinched 
the Series almost immediately. Don Denkinger blew a call at first 
base in the ninth inning of the sixth game of the 1985 World Series. 
Who told St. Louis to lose that game, and the next one, too? Instant 
replay might have solved all three of those disputes, but at least 
baseball plays a 162-game season and now has three tiers of post-season 
series. Hockey actually employs instant replay for all 82 games and 
four tiers of Stanley Cup playoffs. The National Basketball Association 
normally has the same structure, but trapped in a lockout, it canceled 
its All-Star Game Tuesday, heading toward oblivion. And none of those 
sports plays a one-game championship, like football. ``Everyone's 
greatest fear is what happened yesterday happening in the Super Bowl,'' 
Greg Aiello, a league spokesman, said on Monday. The Super Bowl is 
a lumbering rush to judgment, with the whole world watching, but, 
then again, so is every football game, with no time for schmoozing 
or common sense. Back when there used to be such a thing as pro basketball, 
I would sometimes see three referees put their little heads together, 
with the two coaches eavesdropping, and sometimes the refs would make 
a common-sense reversal of themselves. In the NFL there are petty 
regulations about the length of socks, and the Emotion Police penalize 
whacked-out monsters for celebrating what they were born to do, create 
a touchdown. This is not the fault of the officials. It is the cumbersome 
charm of pro football. The industry takes itself seriously, and so 
should we. There is already a climate of obedience and regimentation. 
I mean, this is not exactly telling Earl Weaver he can't toss his 
cap, or John Calipari he can't bounce up and down like a 3-year-old. 
The way the story goes, pro football scuttled instant replay because 
it ate up too much time. Ha! In this sport, the ball is in play for 
something like 12 minutes out of three hours. They want faster games, 
they can cut down on substitutions and calling plays from the bench 
and they could keep the clock running like in a real sport, soccer. 
They could also cut down on commercials. Right. Some people say instant 
replay was right only 80 percent of the time. I'd settle. Eighty is 
a higher percentage than most elected public officials tell the truth. 
The physical quality of football allows only one game a week, with 
a finite number of plays. It would be great if the NFL could eliminate 
some of the travesties of recent weeks. The officials did not mean 
to make a mistake, and would not surrender their credibility to the 
replay camera. The league is on the right path in limiting the number 
of challenges to two per game at the cost of a timeout, with added 
discretion for the officials to review their own call in the final 
two minutes. With so much of a season decided by one honest mistake, 
the players and coaches and fans deserve instant replay. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>