<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981208.0397 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Long-Term Capital Management, the troubled hedge fund rescued at the 
height of this fall's stock- and bond-market turmoil, has continued 
to generate profits for the Wall Street banks that injected fresh 
capital in September. But some government regulators are still investigating 
the circumstances surrounding the near-collapse of the hedge fund, 
people directly involved in the matter said. The hedge fund, which 
was almost certain to face bankruptcy in September without a $3.6 
billion rescue package financed by 14 Wall Street banks and brokerage 
houses and orchestrated by the New York Federal Reserve Bank, has 
staged at least a temporary recovery. In November its portfolio rose 
about 20 percent, or more than $700 million, mostly aided by a surge 
in global debt markets. The November rise means that the 90 percent 
equity stake controlled by the banking consortium has earned a healthy 
return since September, in tandem with rises in stock and bond markets. 
But the fund's original investors, who saw the money they put into 
Long-Term Capital almost entirely wiped out by the turmoil of recent 
months, have still recovered only a sliver of their pre-August stake. 
Although the fund's financial situation has stabilized, it still faces 
scrutiny from regulators. The Securities and Exchange Commission has 
been talking to investors who put money in the hedge fund, which is 
based in Greenwich, Conn. The SEC is conducting what was described 
as a preliminary inquiry into whether the fund's partners violated 
any securities regulations in trying to raise fresh money for the 
fund during the August-September crisis. The inquiry was first reported 
Tuesday in The Wall Street Journal. The inquiry appears to stem from 
concerns voiced by investors or potential investors who were approached 
to put up new money when markets turned against the fund in late summer. 
At issue is whether Long-Term Capital partners made clear to potential 
investors that the fund's capital was running dangerously low, and 
whether investors were made aware that any fresh money raised might 
be used to pay mounting margin calls to nervous bankers. The SEC declined 
to confirm or deny the existence of an inquiry into Long-Term Capital. 
The hedge fund issued a statement saying that it had complied with 
all applicable securities laws. A person close to the fund said that 
the SEC had not got in touch with Long-Term Capital in recent weeks 
and that the fund had no knowledge of any official inquiry. Other 
government officials have also explored issues surrounding the troubles 
of Long-Term Capital, including its relationship with banks and investors. 
All these investigations are seen as preliminary, meaning that no 
formal investigation is taking place. One government official described 
inquiries as natural given the large size of the fund and the high-profile 
nature of the rescue. The inquiries could lead to a full investigation, 
or be dropped without any action taken, this person said. People close 
to Long-Term Capital said it was true that the fund was seeking to 
raise money from investors during the period when it faced grave difficulties, 
as has been widely reported. But no money was raised, they said, and 
the need was eliminated when the Wall Street consortium provided funds 
and assumed majority ownership. All investors approached were sophisticated 
and would have been given the opportunity to examine the fund's books 
in detail before committing any money. ``All such prospective investors 
were invited to discuss the situation with authorized persons at Long-Term 
Capital or to visit the office in Greenwich for an in-depth evaluation, 
and many took the opportunity to do so,'' the statement said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>