<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981208.0355 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The evil spell is broken. Or so you may be tempted to think while 
wandering through Gantry Plaza State Park, a new waterfront promenade 
and pleasure ground in Long Island City, N.Y. The curse that reduced 
New York's landscape architects to creating Disney versions of Central 
Park has been at least temporarily lifted. At last, a designer and 
his client have waked up and recognized that people expect cities 
to address a fundamental question. What time is this place? Designed 
by Thomas Balsley, the two-acre park is part of Queens West, the development 
project planned for a stretch of the East River opposite the United 
Nations headquarters. Like Battery Park City, Queens West will be 
a mix of residential and commercial buildings. To date, only one building, 
a residential high rise designed by Cesar Pelli, has been completed. 
The project's public spaces, which will eventually expand to 19 acres, 
are off to a fine start. This is the kind of park that a decade ago 
had people streaming to Barcelona and hailing it as the new frontier 
in urban design. Gantry Park is even better than many of the small 
parks built in Barcelona. Pasqual Maragal, its enlightened mayor, 
encouraged his architects to take risks, and risks do not pay off 
equally well. The miracle of Gantry Park is that it takes risks in 
a city that has long been frightened of them. The payoff is spectacular. 
With the Manhattan skyline as a backdrop and gorgeous light bouncing 
off the river, the site itself is magnificent. Of course, no one wants 
tall buildings to invade Queens. It's a blow to be robbed of the contrast 
between vertical and horizontal boroughs. But if high-rise development 
is in the cards, then we may as well exploit the opportunity it presents. 
Here's a chance to transform this stretch of water into a place, as 
much lake as river, a surface that both joins and separates two pieces 
of the city. Queens West is easily reached by subway from Grand Central 
(get off at the Vernon-Jackson station). Sometime next year it will 
be connected to midtown by ferry. If arriving by subway, you approach 
Queens West via 48th Avenue. The street is bordered by another new 
park, this one technically independent of Gantry Park but also designed 
by Balsley. Here the focus is on active recreation, with areas for 
basketball, handball, and other sports, as well as for sitting and 
board games. The design, too, is sportif, with fixtures _ lights, 
seats and sail-shaped metal canopies of perforated metal _ that subtly 
recall the Nike whoosh. The skyline vista draws you down the street 
to the river and the northern end of Gantry Park. The park takes its 
name from two giant, hulking structures of blackened iron on the site, 
which used to lift freight trains onto river barges. (As a reminder 
of this past, Balsley has embedded lengths of rail track in the paving.) 
The gantries are as powerful as the triumphal arches and classical 
monuments built by the City Beautiful Movement a century ago. So is 
the brick power station, with its quartet of de Chirico stacks, that 
looms nearby. Once it generated the energy to move the trains. Now 
it houses tennis courts. Whack! The industrial city gives way to games. 
Balsley, who designed the park in collaboration with Lee Weintraub 
of Sowinski Sullivan Architects, has packed lots of variety into a 
confined space. We're greeted by a circular area that encloses a fog 
fountain, a shallow cauldron of seething mist that in summer cools 
the air. Tables and chairs surround it. Beyond is a large, hemispherical 
plaza for performances. With that Manhattan backdrop it will be an 
exhilarating place for music. The plaza connects to two of four piers 
that project into the river. Ferries will dock at one of these, on 
axis with 48th Avenue. Or, you can proceed along one of the paths 
that lead away from the plaza's southern edge. The widest path, paved 
with stone, defines the water's edge in a series of graceful, serpentine 
arcs. Along the way, it passes over a bridge that looks down on a 
small river inlet. From there, you can make your way down almost to 
the water. A second path, lined with gravel, takes you on an inland 
ramble, through vegetation and stone blocks clustered in crystalline 
formations. The blocks echo the Manhattan skyline and partly take 
the place of benches. The overall effect is of a Cubist rock garden. 
The piers are marine follies. Each is different in length, shape and 
furnishings. One has a circular lunch bar, with stools and awning. 
Another, the Star Gazing Pier, is outfitted with overscaled wooden 
chaises. On the Fishing Pier, there's a large, free-form table complete 
with running water, for dressing the catch of the day. But the best 
thing about the piers is the views they afford of each other and the 
people using them: images of apartness and togetherness, New Yorkers 
calling or not calling each to each. Why is this place special? Because 
it reveals the unknown. Because Balsley has let himself enter into 
what Gaston Bachelard called ``the poetics of space'' an inner world 
of images, relationships, discovery and surprise. The nest. The shell. 
The miniature. Intimate immensity. The dialectics of outside and inside. 
These are all Bachelard's concepts. One sees them spatialized here, 
in a profusion of forms. These are the qualities that also make Barcelona's 
network of small parks so extraordinary. The city enjoys a robust 
tradition of using buildings to articulate the unknown. It is most 
evident in the Modernismo landmarks of Gaudi, Puig i Cadafalch and 
Domenech i Montaner. The Park Guell, the Casa Mila and the Expiatory 
Church of the Holy Family infused the public realm with a psychological 
dimension. But the same Symbolist energies animate the endlessly varied 
wrought-iron grille designs in the residential buildings of the city's 
19th-century Extension. In the 1980s, Barcelona's architects extended 
this tradition into the post-Franco era. The city became, in effect, 
a vast laboratory for research in social space. Some of the parks 
evoked nightmares, bad memories of Franco's regime. But collectively, 
they showed that design can help lift a city out of a dark chapter 
into light. Projects this important don't happen without the leadership 
of public officials. In Barcelona, designers were supported by Oriel 
Bohigas, Mayor Maragal's consulting architect. For Gantry Park, Balsley 
enjoyed the support of Rosina Abramson, former head of the Queens 
West Development Corp., a subsidiary of the Empire State Development 
Corp. But Ms. Abramson left in 1995. What assurance do we have of 
continued leadership? Gantry Park is the second time in recent years 
that the state development agency has fostered new ways of thinking 
about social space. The first left a mixed legacy. In 1979, the Battery 
Park City Authority created a bold program of parks and other spaces, 
with excellent results. But it left architecture out in the cold. 
Instead, it enlisted the talents of artists like Ned Smythe, Mary 
Miss, Siah Armijani, Scott Burton, and R.J. Fleishman. The experiment 
was worth making, but it set an unfortunate precedent, sending the 
message that artists are superior to architects in the imagination 
department. In doing so, the developers turned their back on New York's 
tradition of engaging architects to think boldly. Nowhere is that 
tradition more evident than in the complex of buildings directly opposite 
Gantry Park. In 1947 an international group of architects gathered 
in New York and asked, What is the United Nations to be? A world capital? 
A temple of peace? ``It is too soon to use such fine phrases, non?'' 
countered Le Corbusier, the group's guiding spirit. ``The U.N. simply 
does not exist yet. The nations are not united. The U.N. is not proved. 
It is simply a poste de combat.'' From this way of thinking evolved 
the idea that the U.N. headquarters should be a place for experiment: 
a workshop for peace. In Barcelona, Bohigas gave his architects a 
similar challenge: We don't know what the post-industrial city will 
be. We don't know how new communications will affect work, home, relaxation 
and the relationships between them. We don't know how public spaces 
should register their impact. We don't know what Queens West will 
become, either. Is it too late for it to be an extension of the United 
Nations? Could it play a part in the city's ambition to act as host 
to the Olympic Games in 2008? Could it become an international showcase 
for the world's greatest architectural talents? Or, like Battery Park 
City, will it become a line-up of dull Business Class buildings? At 
night, Gantry Park's piers are outlined with blue lights that evoke 
airport runways. Are there any fresh ideas out there? Come in for 
a landing. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>