<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981208.0162 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As testament to the modern celebrity of chefs, Mario Batali's name 
appears in larger type than the title of his new book, ``Simple Italian 
Food'' (Clarkson Potter, $30). And there is a full-length photograph 
of Batali clad in chef's whites and orange kitchen clogs, baring hairy 
legs. It's a lot to swallow on a cookbook cover. It's probably best 
to keep it open at all times. ``Perfectly pristine ingredients, combined 
sensibly and cooked properly, are what make Italian food taste so 
good,'' writes Batali, the chef at Po and Babbo in Greenwich Village 
in New York City. This is a truism spouted in various forms by many 
American chefs. But when you're trying to distinguish yourself as 
a chef, it takes courage to serve straightforward food. Which is why 
for many of them, it is more about talking the big game than playing 
it. They slip in that extra, unnecessary ingredient. They use tomatoes 
out of season. They put too much topping on their bruschetta. But 
Batali means what he writes. His recipes deliver the honest flavors 
of Italian cooking. And they do it in tantalizing ways. Mostaccioli 
with fennel, mint and bread crumbs, a simple pasta dish, is pure-tasting 
and delicious. Whole mint leaves, sprinkled in at the very end of 
cooking, give the dish a lively edge and offset the heat from red 
pepper flakes. And it takes no time to cook. Green gnocchi with caduta 
di formaggio (or ``snowfall of cheese'') also had a surprise. A little 
grappa stirred into a cheese sauce made with Gorgonzola, asiago and 
plenty of butter added depth to what could easily be a heavy, monotone 
sauce. Small touches in the recipes, like pomegranate seeds in a fennel 
and blood-orange salad, and a heady black pepper-oregano oil sprinkled 
over crostini with broccoli rape are what make this book great. Though 
there are minor errors, like the omission of salt in the mostaccioli, 
they are merely nicks in an otherwise smooth performance. Batali reminisces 
about his years cooking at Trattoria La Volta in northern Italy and 
in the Village, but I must admit, I was more drawn to the recipes 
than the stories. You may recognize some of the dishes from the menus 
at his restaurants. No matter. Whether they are being served to you 
or you are preparing them, they are smart. They are, as promised, 
simple. And they make Batali a distinguished chef, even without that 
goofy cover photo. GREEN GNOCCHI WITH CADUTA DI FORMAGGIO Adapted 
from ``Simple Italian Food'' by Mario Batali Time: 1 hour 1 pound 
russet potatoes, scrubbed 2 pounds spinach, stemmed, rinsed and partly 
dried 1{ cups all-purpose flour 1 extra large egg, beaten 1 teaspoon 
kosher salt 2 tablespoons sea salt 4 ounces Gorgonzola cheese 4 tablespoons 
unsalted butter, softened 2 tablespoons grappa { cups freshly grated 
asiago cheese \ cup chopped chives. 1. Place the potatoes in a saucepan, 
and cover with water. Bring to a boil, and cook until very tender, 
20 to 25 minutes. Drain. 2. Meanwhile, place the spinach in a deep 
pot with a lid. Cook over medium heat, allowing the spinach to steam 
in its own liquid, 1 to 2 minutes. Transfer the spinach to an ice 
bath to stop the cooking. Drain well, then wrap the spinach in a clean 
dish towel and twist to extact as much liquid as possible. Chop very 
fine. 3. When the potatoes are cool enough to handle, peel them. Using 
the finest setting, run the potatoes through a ricer or food mill 
onto a cutting board. Add the spinach. Sprinkle the flour over the 
potatoes and spinach; make a well, add the egg and kosher salt, and 
knead to form a dough. 4. Divide the dough into 4 balls. Roll each 
ball into 1-inch thick ropes, and cut each rope into 1-inch long pieces. 
Roll each piece off the tines of a fork to form the classic gnocchi 
shape. Place on a lightly floured baking sheet, and set aside. 5. 
In a deep pot, add the sea salt to 6 quarts of water, and bring to 
a boil. While the water heats, in a 12-to-14-inch saute pan, mash 
together the Gorgonzola and butter until smooth. Stir in the grappa, 
and simmer over medium heat for 4 minutes. Keep warm. 6. Drop the 
gnocchi into the boiling water, and cook until they float to the surface, 
about 1 minute. Do this in 2 batches. Drain well, and add to the cheese 
sauce, increasing the heat to medium. Toss to coat the gnocchi. Add 
the asiago and chives; toss again. Pour into warmed bowls, and serve. 
Yield: 4 servings. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>