<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981208.0443 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A new report published Wednesday in the Journal of the American Medical 
Association recommends the expanded use of methadone to treat heroin 
addiction, noting that it can help reduce crime, slow the spread of 
other infectious diseases and reduce the general level of dysfunction 
suffered by addicts. The report counters the policy enunciated by 
New York Mayor Rudolph Giuliani earlier this year that addicts should 
be weaned off their dependence through drug-free programs rather than 
methadone. ``Probably the biggest disservice that has been done to 
getting effective treatment to heroin addicts is the inaccurate statement 
that methadone is a heroin substitute,'' said Dr. Alan Leshner, director 
of the National Institute on Drug Abuse, which helped develop the 
report. ``We think science should replace ideology on how we deal 
with treatment in this country.'' City officials said the new report 
bearing the stamp of approval from the nation's medical establishment 
would not change their position. They said that since the city began 
implementing its policy in September, 20 addicts had been moved from 
methadone to abstinence. ``The more the city focuses on methadone 
use, it becomes increasingly clear that it is not a form of treatment 
that should be emphasized as part of a national drug policy,'' said 
Anthony Coles, a senior adviser to Giuliani. The report, produced 
by a 12-member panel that convened a year ago, says that people addicted 
to heroin or similar opiates should be recognized as having a disease 
and that methadone is the preferred treatment. ``Although a drug-free 
state represents an optimal treatment goal,'' the report said, ``research 
has demonstrated that this goal cannot be achieved or sustained by 
the majority of persons dependent on opiates.'' The report noted that 
one of the most striking examples of the effectiveness of methadone 
was that the death rate of those who received treatment was 30 percent 
of those who did not. A fifth of the 600,000 diagnosed heroin addicts 
in the United States receive methadone. Health care costs tend to 
be lower for addicts on methadone because of the lower incidence among 
them of diseases like tuberculosis, hepatitis, AIDS and others, the 
report says. They also commit fewer crimes in trying to support their 
habit. The report also says that addicts on methadone tend to earn 
more than twice as much as those not being treated. Toward this end, 
methadone programs should be linked to job training, the report stated, 
since stable employment usually leads to more effective treatment. 
``What you get with methadone is a stabilizing of the brain rather 
than the destabilizing that you get with heroin,'' Leshner said. ``People 
can be restored to functionality because they are not experiencing 
these very dramatic highs and lows.'' City officials said they were 
trying to achieve stable employment in pushing those addicts being 
treated at the five city hospitals toward abstinence. New York City 
has the highest concentration of recovering heroin addicts in the 
country, with about 36,000 treatment slots. Of those, the city treats 
about 2,100, or 6 percent, in addition to about 350 people a day among 
the inmates on Rikers Island. Coles said that among addicts enrolled 
in private or public treatment programs in the city, 83 percent lived 
on either public assistance or Social Security. ``Contrary to the 
myths associated with methadone, it doesn't reintegrate addicts into 
society,'' Coles said. The city plans to invest $5 million in developing 
a job placement program for addicts who accept drug-free treatment 
as their ultimate goal. It will train the staff at its clinics to 
advocate abstinence, and by January it expects to accept bids from 
an outside company that will help place addicts in jobs. ``For many, 
many years, they have been giving methadone to these people with no 
incentive to do anything else,'' said Luis Marcos, president of the 
city's Health and Hospitals Corp. Officials said that since the program 
started in September, the number of addicts working has risen to 440 
from 350. Marcos said that since September, city hospitals had admitted 
into methadone programs only addicts who pledged to accept abstinence 
as their ultimate goal, and that in that time 20 addicts had moved 
off methadone. He added that he did not argue with the report's conclusions 
that methadone treatment programs can help reduce crime, diseases 
and other ills linked to heroin addiction. But he said more emphasis 
should be put on abstinence. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>