<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981208.0427 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A secret Pentagon report concludes that Hughes Space and Communications, 
without proper authorization, gave China technological insights that 
are crucial to the successful launchings of satellites and ballistic 
missiles. According to the report, completed on Monday, Hughes scientists 
helped Chinese engineers in 1995 to improve the sophisticated mathematical 
models necessary to predict the effects of wind, high-atmosphere buffeting 
and other natural forces on a rocket launching. These formulas are 
important to designing nuclear missiles and launching satellites that 
do not explode or break apart. They help technicians calculate the 
appropriate angle of launch, the shape of the nose cone of the rocket, 
the tolerable limits of weather and other factors. The Chinese, the 
Pentagon said, had been using an ``oversimplified'' mathematical analysis, 
resulting in a series of failed satellite launchings. Hughes pointed 
out that shortcoming to the Chinese in 1995, when its scientists helped 
investigate the failed launching of a Hughes commercial communication 
satellite atop a Chinese rocket. The report concluded that Hughes 
had provided a ``defense service'' to China that violated American 
standards against helping Beijing make better satellites and missiles 
and required a State Department review. The company's assistance to 
China ``raises national security concerns both with regard to violating 
those standards and to potentially contributing to China's missile 
capabilities,'' the report said. The company, and other American aerospace 
concerns, were eager to use Chinese rockets because they are cheaper 
than American or European competitors, but only if they could be made 
reliable. The Pentagon report said that contact between Hughes engineers 
and Chinese scientists allowed the Chinese to gain ``specific insight 
into specific launch vehicle design and operational problems and corrective 
actions.'' The report also says Hughes showed Chinese scientists flaws 
in the way they were attaching the cargo of rockets to the rockets 
themselves, including the strength of the rivets they used and the 
shape of the nose cone. In the case of the Chinese launchings, the 
cargo was satellites, but the technology is applicable as well to 
attaching a nuclear warhead to a missile. A spokeswoman for Hughes, 
which has denied any wrongdoing in the case, said that the company's 
actions were approved at the time by the Commerce Department, which 
she said was the ``appropriate licensing authority.'' The Pentagon 
report did not say whether China had used the information for military 
purposes, but it said the transfer did not likely alter the strategic 
military balance between China and the United States. ``What it taught 
them how to do, which they evidently didn't know how to do, is analysis 
on the stresses on a launch vehicle as it goes into the upper atmosphere,'' 
said one administration official who has read the report. The official 
added that what Hughes taught the Chinese ``could be directly applicable 
to military systems, although we have no information that it has been.'' 
An unclassified version of the Pentagon report, consisting of 11 pages 
and a two-page appendix, was made available by a government official 
who favors tighter controls on satellite technology. The Justice Department 
has been examining whether Hughes and Loral Space and Communications 
violated export laws when they helped Chinese rocket scientists understand 
the causes of another failed launching in 1996. That investigation 
has now been expanded to include whether Hughes violated export control 
laws in 1995. Hughes is a subsidiary of Hughes Electronics, which 
is owned by General Motors. The Pentagon report is the first indication 
that Hughes gave China valuable information involving the failed launching 
of 1995, and provides the most detailed account to date of what the 
Chinese might have gained from their contacts with the American aerospace 
companies. The Pentagon did not see the entire picture. Some relevant 
Hughes documents, unavailable for the Pentagon review, are being analyzed 
separately by intelligence officials as part of the criminal investigation, 
for which they were subpoenaed. Despite its limitations, the Pentagon 
report is likely to provide fresh ammunition to critics of President 
Clinton's 1996 decision to loosen controls over satellite exports 
to China, a decision for which Hughes officials campaigned heavily 
within the administration and which Congress reversed this fall. ``Our 
suspicions that technology can be transferred in these situations, 
that you can improve the reliability of Chinese rockets/missiles, 
were well founded,'' Sen. Thad Cochran, R-Miss., said Tuesday. He 
is chairman of a Senate committee that has examined the issue, and 
he requested the Pentagon report. Three years later, when the next 
rocket exploded for what the Pentagon said were identical reasons, 
the Commerce Department approved an accident review by Hughes without 
consulting the State Department. As a result, no Pentagon monitors 
attended the sessions with the Chinese. The Commerce Department has 
acknowledged that this was a mistake. In addition, in 1995, the CIA 
ignored warnings raised that year by one of its scientists, Ronald 
Pandolfi, that Hughes may have provided crucial ballistic missile 
technology to China. Pandolfi has now emerged as a key witness in 
the criminal investigation. A Hughes document obtained by investigators 
in connection with the 1995 review indicates that Hughes officials 
disliked the idea of government monitors, according to an administration 
official. In 1995 the chairman of Hughes, C. Michael Armstrong, led 
a lobbying effort to ease controls over satellite exports by shifting 
authority from the State Department, which requires monitors, to the 
less restrictive Commerce Department. Clinton named Armstrong to head 
his prestigious export council. At the council's first meeting, on 
Feb. 13, 1995, Clinton said ``I don't think we've done nearly enough'' 
on easing export controls, according to a White House e-mail. That 
same day Hughes provided its first ``failure presentation'' to Chinese 
officials. By July, the company completed its final report. A month 
later the Commerce Department gave its blessing to Hughes. But Pandolfi, 
the CIA analyst, didn't like what he saw when he visited Hughes' scientists 
in 1995. ``What they told him they were sharing and how far the company 
had been willing to go, he thought it was questionable from the standpoint 
of national security,'' said an associate of Pandolfi. But the agency 
killed Pandolfi's study and no one in Washington paid any more attention 
to the issue. The Hughes report, though, was carefully read in China. 
According to an administration official, the Chinese adopted the recommendations 
contained in the Hughes report. The issue of satellite exports to 
China became the subject of increased scrutiny last spring, after 
The New York Times reported on the Justice Department inquiry into 
the 1996 review by Loral and Hughes. Last July, the Senate subcommittee 
on proliferation, headed by Cochran, looked into the 1995 Hughes launching. 
William Reinsch, the undersecretary of commerce for export administration, 
told the panel that Hughes' release of its report to the Chinese was 
``appropriate and without risk to national security,'' but his department 
should have referred the matter to the State Department for prior 
review. Pentagon officials told the committee that they had just received 
the Hughes material from Commerce a few hours earlier so they could 
not yet assess the impact. Steven Dorfman, vice chairman of Hughes, 
assured the committee that ``no material technology was transmitted 
to the Chinese that would help them build missiles.'' Last summer, 
in the wake of congressional inquiries, Pandolfi told his superiors 
that he had relevant information, including detailed contemporaneous 
notes taken during his trip to Hughes in 1995. He was questioned by 
agents of the U.S. Customs Service and aides of the Senate Intelligence 
Committee. Investigators say they next wanted to question officials 
at Hughes about what Pandolfi had learned on his trip. But before 
those interviews took place someone at the CIA alerted Hughes _ a 
major supplier of spy satellites to the intelligence community _ to 
the investigators' next move. As a result, the interviews at Hughes 
never took place. But now the spy agency's heads-up is part of an 
investigation into whether the CIA obstructed the investigations of 
Hughes. Agency officials deny the CIA intended to obstruct any investigation. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>