<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981208.0138 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
They were stuffed into an old trunk in the Bermondsey antiques market 
in London, south of the Thames, when an Irish collector and historian 
named Sean Sexton came across them one morning in 1981. His eye, more 
practiced than most, told him immediately that he had stumbled upon 
a rare visual harvest _ a cornucopia of hundreds of ravishing photographs 
of fruits, flowers and mundane vegetables, magically transformed into 
art. Posed against neutral backgrounds, squashes and celery and potatoes 
sat for their portraits at the turn of the century, captured on glass 
plates by the camera of Charles Jones. His name or initials and the 
precise names of each variety were recorded on the backs of the gold-toned 
prints _ fine Dickensian names like Veitch's Autumn Giant cauliflower. 
But who was Jones? And when did he live? Sexton hadn't a clue, but 
he bought the lot for a pittance. Eventually, a small part of his 
trove was shown on British television, and Shirley Sadler, Charles 
Jones' granddaughter, saw the program and came forward with a few 
scant biographical details. Jones was a professional gardener, born 
in 1866 in the grimy Midlands borough of Wolverhampton. He worked 
most of his life for wealthy landowners, notably at Ote Hall, in Sussex, 
and died in 1959. None of his negatives appear to have survived; Mrs. 
Sadler recalls having seen as a child some of the plates in his garden, 
propped up like little tents to protect tender plants from the early-spring 
cold. Jones' prints are beginning to enter museum collections, and 
dealers in New York (the Pace Wildenstein MacGill Gallery) and London 
have sold some to private collectors. This fall, a selection of images 
_ sharp, spare, almost supernaturally detailed, reflecting long exposure 
times _ was on show at the M.H. de Young Memorial Museum here, and 
they will be appearing at other museums around the United States as 
soon as arrangements can be completed, according to Robert Flynn Johnson, 
the curator of the exhibition. One of Jones' fervent latter-day admirers 
is the restaurateur Alice Waters, whose unceasing search for pristine 
produce helped to define her Berkeley establishment, Chez Panisse, 
as a shrine of California cooking. In a book published to accompany 
the de Young show, ``Plant Kingdoms: The Photographs of Charles Jones'' 
(Smithmark, $24.98), she writes, ``Any cook with a passion for pure 
and fresh ingredients must be grateful that these photographs have 
been rescued from obscurity.'' Among the stars of the book and exhibition 
are a pair of pods full of peas as opalescently beautiful as any pearls, 
plump melons whose veins trace patterns as complex as spiders' webs, 
strawberries so voluptuous that you expect them to start dripping 
juice at any moment. There are also Grand Duke plums arranged so that 
they reminded me of the medals on a duke's tunic, currants shimmering 
alluringly in cunningly contrived light, seven runner beans drawn 
up at attention, turnips and beets and radishes trimmed and scrubbed 
to within inches of their young lives, and a humble Brown Globe onion 
invested with all the nobility of a Cezanne still life. In a few cases, 
like the onion, only one fruit or vegetable is shown. But often Jones 
arranged geometrical groups: a trio of leeks stout as oaks, pyramids 
of cabbages and cauliflowers, an octet of dark strangely forbidding 
tomatoes. Sometimes he arranged his homely subjects in bold diagonals 
to add drama, as in his portraits of clusters of long-stemmed turnips. 
Seemingly simple, even naive, the pictures were in fact staged with 
the instinctive guile of a modern merchandiser who knows whether to 
display a single striking object, a shelf-full or an entire cabinet-full. 
Johnson, the curator, was introduced to Sexton, and hence to the work 
of Charles Jones, by a dealer in another London antique market, the 
one on Portobello Road. In an interview, he theorized that Jones had 
made the photographs in the hope of selling them for use on seed packets 
and, rebuffed, had put them aside and gone back to work with rake 
and trowel. It is hard to believe that they were made at the turn 
of the century, two generations before the American Edward Weston 
and the Czech Josef Sudek, among others, began focusing their lenses 
on the striking shapes and patterns in the fruits and vegetables that 
we eat every day, usually without the slightest thought for where 
they came from or their natural beauty. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>