<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981208.0149 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It's the time of year in northern Scotland when gusts of wind send 
gold and russet leaves climbing the air, and bales of straw gone gray 
in the early falling dark stand sentinel over fields of barley stubble. 
One morning, Alexander George Gordon, the Earl of Haddo and laird 
of the Haddo Estate, and his manager, Mark Andrew, were in the staff 
quarters on the 9,000-acre family property, pulling on their distinctive 
navy and white estate tweeds. ``Someone once said we ended up looking 
like a herd of zebra,'' Andrew said. First came dark blue stockings 
with a bright yellow tail at the top called the garter, then the over-the-knee 
plus fours called breeks, finally a matching waistcoat, jacket and 
flat cap. Lachy, Lord Haddo's yellow Labrador, sashayed through the 
door while other Labs and springer spaniels yelped and swarmed outside. 
At a gruff order, they quieted down. ``This is what we wait all year 
for,'' Andrew said, stepping outside and splashing merrily through 
a puddle. Late autumn is the time when the brooding pace of country 
living picks up in Aberdeenshire, a place of wind-lashed expanses 
stretching to horizons dotted with ancient castles and crumbled towers. 
The start of the November-to-February pheasant-shooting season is 
cause for real excitement. The workers on the estate have spent months 
getting ready for the moment, and scores of well-dressed shooters 
have pursued their sport here from Austria, Belgium, France, Germany, 
Italy and the United States. Far away from here, there is a sense 
of anticipation, too. ``I look forward to the fall and get really 
excited with the start of the season in Scotland,'' Terrance Brennan, 
the chef of Picholine in New York, said over the telephone. For him 
and an increasing number of cooks and chefs in the United States, 
pheasant from Scotland is the best way to meet a game lover's fancy. 
Scottish pheasant spend more than half their lives completely wild, 
and that gives them flavor that flightless domestic birds confined 
in pens never acquire. The only domestic game allowed to be sold in 
the United States is farm raised. Kurt Gutenbrunner, the chef at Monkey 
Bar, said that only Scottish pheasant lets him recreate in New York 
the game dishes of his youth in an Austrian village on the Danube. 
``Also, there's no fat in wild game the way there is in farmed birds,'' 
Gutenbrunner said. Since the season is so early and the birds are 
still young, Gutenbrunner said, their meat is paler and milder than 
it will be in a few weeks. ``The longer it lives out in the woods, 
the gamier it gets,'' he said. ``Just a couple of weeks makes a big 
difference.'' And to real pheasant connoisseurs like Gutenbrunner, 
the gamier it is the better. ``Even if you taste the best that the 
U.S. has to offer, once you try the Scottish pheasant, there is no 
turning back,'' Brennan of Picholine said. ``For me, flavor is the 
most important thing, and there is no comparison between the gamy 
taste of Scottish pheasant and the kind that's been pen raised.'' 
He said that Scottish pheasant had flavors that were ``complex, complicated,'' 
the kinds that challenge a cook. This marriage of pheasants flying 
in Scotland and chefs working in America was brokered here by a serendipitous 
coming together of separate interests _ sportsman, estate owner, processor 
and importer. Like a lot of things in Scotland, it began with tradition. 
The custom has always been that a sportsman is entitled to keep a 
brace _ two birds _ that he has killed, and the rest belongs to the 
estate. A normal day's outing can produce up to 250 birds. The estate's 
birds used to be hung for a week to age and then passed out to workers 
on the grounds or sold to food merchants. With the disappearance of 
the corner butcher and the coming of supermarkets, the call for pheasant 
fell away. ``They weren't too keen on laying out birds with lead shot 
in them for supermarket customers,'' Andrew, Lord Haddo's manager, 
said. Spotting an opportunity, John Bain, the managing partner of 
Bain of Tarves Game and Venison Suppliers, created a fleet of refrigerated 
trucks and compiled a schedule of times and places of shoots, so that 
he could pick up freshly killed game and rush it the same day to his 
processing plants. Plucked, cleaned and vacuum packed, the pheasants 
are on their way to British supermarkets and American importers in 
two days, with a shelf life up to 10 days. Now the biggest employer 
in this rural area, Bain said he'd just as soon keep his success a 
secret. ``People think I'm handling 12 birds a week,'' he said, swinging 
his van around a hedgerowed corner. ``If they realize how many, they 
may want to come up here and compete.'' In fact, he is handling 10,000 
pheasant a week for the 12 weeks of the season ending in February. 
Twelve thousand of them end up in the United States through the importer 
D'Artagnan in Newark, N.J., which sells them to restaurant chefs and 
home cooks. With food safety such an issue in Britain and the United 
States, hygiene controls are strict at Bain's operations. Visitors 
have to take off watches or jewelry before donning surgical wraps 
and entering the premises. The birds are tracked by documents and 
virtually have group passports to make their final journey. Sandy 
Duncan, the procurement manager, rummaged through a newly arrived 
batch of birds to show how they're sorted. ``We look at the bum first 
to see that the color is good,'' he said. ``You've got to see where 
the shot went in and whether it caused much damage, also where the 
dog bit into the pheasant,'' something that happens when the dog retrieves 
it. He looks as well for the spot where the bird hit the ground. ``A 
little later in the season, when the ground is frozen, they're more 
damaged from their fall,'' he said. The winter also produces fatter 
birds. ``Imagine it's snowing outside and you're perched up on a branch,'' 
Duncan said. ``You'd tend to eat more, too.'' The birds are graded 
as A, oven ready; B, which are good for just their breasts, and ``no 
value,'' birds that have an unappealing greenish color. The rearing 
process begins when the season ends in February and the female birds 
are lured into cages by food and then put into fields with cocks. 
Once in place, pheasants stay put. ``Pheasants would walk everywhere 
instead of flying if they could,'' Andrew said. Eggs are laid in late 
March or April and, aided by incubation, hatch in May. In the early 
weeks, the chicks are fed pelletized food, but within six to eight 
weeks, their diet includes barley, wheat and maize from the estate. 
They are then transferred to 100-square-yard release pens in the woods 
with room to roam. By 12 weeks they are trying out their newly sprouted 
flight feathers. By October, some 9,000 grown pheasants are on the 
estate. There seem to be as many skittering across roads and darting 
around stone walls as hunkering down in wooded areas, copses or overgrown 
cottage ruins. ``Like any of us, they like warm places,'' Lord Haddo 
said. They take to the air only when roused, springing from the ground 
in bursts of energy that last only eight seconds before they have 
to glide to a landing. ``We'll have eight guns and four wives for 
lunch,'' Lord Haddo cheerfully told the women in the kitchen, who 
were cutting up chicken parts and smoked bacon for the noontime huntsman's 
pie. The ``guns,'' the invited shooters, were arriving in the driveway, 
every one in olive tweeds, a tattersall shirt, game-bird necktie and 
insulated wellies, the all-purpose Wellington boots, which have sheltered 
the feet of farmers and outdoors people in the British Isles for generations. 
A typical ``driven'' shooting goes to six sites during the day, with 
retreats from the chill wind to break into flasks of mulled wine. 
At each drive, or spot where birds are driven out, there are numbered 
stakes known as pegs, corresponding to the number the individual shooter 
has for that drive. Once they are in place, 20 men known as beaters 
come up gingerly behind the birds, waving flags and shaking rough-hewn 
wooden rattles. A first-time visitor asked Andrew if it was the tradition 
to use blue flags. ``No,'' he confided. ``It's just that fertilizer 
sacks come in that color.'' It is part of the beaters' skill not to 
scare all the birds up at once, and they scatter from cover and soar 
over the shooters in waves. Most make it to the other side of the 
clearing. Dogs tear through the brush after fallen birds and bring 
them back to one of the five pickers-up, who put them in their side 
bags. The cry ``Don't shoot'' goes up if the bird is an owl, a songbird, 
a hawk or some other protected species. ``Continental Europeans will 
shoot anything that moves,'' Lord Haddo said, taking his own shot 
at Britons' favorite targets. Andrew summoned a look of disgust. ``The 
French shoot larks,'' he said. A qualmish question about killing birds 
came up, and Lord Haddo turned mildly scornful. ``I would say the 
expression `birdbrain' applies perfectly to pheasants,'' he said. 
``I'm often amused when people talk about giving birds their rights. 
Well, if you gave pheasants rights, they'd all be in jail for murder 
and gang rape. They are ferocious to each other.'' The higher the 
flight, the greater the sporting challenge and the happier the estate 
owner. ``Exciting birds,'' Lord Haddo exclaimed as a clutch rose above 
the trees. ``It's my challenge to put as high a bird as possible out. 
Low birds should not be shot at. They should be allowed to fly another 
day.'' At one drive, Lord Haddo quietly told a newcomer whose aim 
kept dropping: ``Make sure there's a bit of sky. Otherwise, the beaters 
can get anxious.'' Once the beaters feel they've chased all the birds 
from one spot, they blow a whistle, and the group moves on to the 
next drive. On the Haddo estate, an old British railroad maintenance 
car attached to a John Deere tractor transports the keepers. The guns 
in their tweeds travel in cars. As Lord Haddo, 43, strides his grounds, 
the history of his own family, one of Britain's oldest, precedes him. 
Forty thousand of the original 65,000 acres had to be sold off in 
the 1920s to satisfy bad debts, but Lord Haddo is quick to defend 
the family honor. ``I stress that it wasn't things like gambling. 
It was bad business sense and too much benevolence.'' He pointed out 
a low red-brick building in a hollow and said that is where his great-grandmother 
raised exotic pheasants. Two hillsides bear monuments memorializing 
two ancestors _ one a young colonel who died in the Battle of Waterloo, 
the other the fourth Earl of Aberdeen, who was Britain's prime minister 
from 1852 to 1855. Back at Bain of Tarves, Duncan and his workers 
went through the messy business of handpicking and cleaning the day's 
pheasants. Hearing that his visitors had been on a shoot that morning, 
Duncan talked about how much people here love their blustery outdoors, 
and he asked excitedly if one of the pickers-up had been a woman with 
a black dog. His visitors nodded yes. ``That's my wife,'' he said. 
He looked longingly out the factory window at the swirling gray skies 
closing in on a newly harvested barley field and a forest of spruce, 
pine and larch. ``She's got a fine, bonny job,'' he said. WHERE TO 
ORDER Scottish pheasant is available at specialty stores in New York 
and by mail order. Here are some sources: Agata &AMP; Valentina, 1505 
First Ave. (79th Street), (212) 452-0690; $8.95 a pound for male pheasant 
and $9.95 for female pheasant; requires three days' notice for orders. 
All Food Emporium stores offer Scottish pheasant, at $18.99 a pound. 
They require a week's notice. Balducci's, 424 Avenue of the Americas 
(Ninth Street), (212) 673-2600; pheasant, $12.49 a pound; requires 
three days' notice for orders. Grace's Marketplace, 1237 Third Ave. 
(71st Street), (212) 737-0600; $8.99 a pound; requires two days' notice 
for orders. The Vinegar Factory, 431 E. 91st St., (212) 987-0885; 
$8.99 a pound; requires two days' notice for orders. Scottish pheasant 
can also be ordered by mail from D'Artagnan, (800) 327-8246 or www.dartagnan.com. 
Male pheasant are $16.95 each (about 2 pounds); female, $14.20 each 
(1.25 to 1.75 pounds). (RECIPES FOLLOW IN 3rd TAKE) WILD SCOTTISH 
PHEASANT IN A SALT CRUST AND FOIE GRAS SAUCE Adapted from Kurt Gutenbrunner, 
Monkey Bar Time: 1 hour 45 minutes 1 large piece fat back, at least 
6 inches by 4 inches by 1 inch thick 1{ cups salt, plus extra for 
seasoning 3 cups all-purpose flour 4 large eggs 2 male wild Scottish 
pheasants, breasts removed and skinned and carcass and legs reserved 
(see note) 2 tablespoons olive oil 2 carrots, cut into 1-inch dice 
1 leek, white and light green parts only, in 1-inch pieces 1 celeriac, 
cut into 1-inch dice 2 strips bacon, cut into 1-inch pieces 1 bay 
leaf 15 white peppercorns, lightly crushed Freshly ground white pepper 
24 juniper berries, lightly crushed \ cup fresh pine needles, rinsed 
and dried (optional) 2 tablespoons port wine 2 cups red wine 2 cups 
chicken stock 2 cups heavy cream 6 ounces fresh foie gras (optional). 
1. Freeze fat back until firm, then cut four very thin slices (postcard-size 
or larger). Set slices aside at room temperature, and reserve remaining 
fat back for another purpose. 2. In a large mixing bowl, combine 1{ 
cups of the salt with the flour. Add 2 eggs, and mix lightly. Gradually 
add just enough water _ { cup to 1 cup _ to make a cohesive dough. 
Work dough by hand until smooth. Cover, and refrigerate for at least 
1 hour. 3. Preheat oven to 350 degrees. Chop pheasant carcass and 
legs into medium pieces and set aside. In a large, heavy-bottomed 
pot or casserole over high heat, heat olive oil, and add carrots, 
leek, celeriac, bacon and bay leaf. Saute, stirring, for 1 minute. 
Add pheasant carcasses and legs, and crushed peppercorns. Continue 
to saute until pheasant pieces are lightly seared, about 10 minutes. 
Transfer pan to oven, and roast uncovered until the carcass bones 
are brown, 20 to 30 minutes. Remove from oven, cover and set aside 
at room temperature, or refrigerate for up to eight hours. 4. Season 
pheasant breasts with ground white pepper. Sprinkle both sides of 
the breasts with about half of the crushed juniper berries, and the 
pine needles. Wrap each breast completely in a slice of fat back. 
5. Divide dough into four balls. Roll out each ball to \ to 1/3 inch 
thick. Place a wrapped pheasant breast on one side of the dough, and 
fold the dough over to enclose it completely. Trim excess dough, and 
seal edges with a little water. In a small bowl, beat remaining 2 
eggs until blended. Brush outside of the dough packets with the egg 
wash. The dough packets may then be refrigerated for up to eight hours. 
6. Preheat oven to 350 degrees. Place dough packets on a lightly oiled 
baking sheet, and bake until an instant-read thermometer inserted 
through the dough into the meat reads 135 degrees, 13 to 15 minutes. 
Remove from oven, and allow packets to rest for 3 more minutes. 7. 
While breasts are baking, prepare foie gras sauce: Place the pot with 
the pheasant carcasses over medium heat, and add the port wine, red 
wine, chicken stock and cream. Simmer for 15 minutes. Add remaining 
crushed juniper berries, and simmer an additional 2 to 3 minutes. 
Strain sauce, discarding solids. Transfer sauce to a blender, and 
add the foie gras. Blend until smooth, about 3 minutes. If necessary, 
return to a clean pan to reheat just until hot. 8. To serve, slice 
around the sides of the dough packets, and remove the top portion 
intact. Remove pine needles and juniper berries, and slice each breast. 
Place sliced breast on each of four serving plates, and top each breast 
with the top of the dough packet. Serve with foie gras sauce and, 
if desired, spaetzle or dumplings. Yield: 4 servings. Note: Wild game 
frequently contains tiny pieces of shot, and it is not always possible 
to remove it before cooking. This will not harm the meat, but caution 
should be taken when eating. ROAST WILD SCOTTISH PHEASANT WITH SWISS 
CHARD, WILD MUSHROOMS AND SWEET POTATO-VANILLA PUREE Adapted from 
Terrence Brennan, Picholine Time: 1 hour 2 male wild Scottish pheasants 
(see note) 2 teaspoons juniper berries, finely ground Salt and freshly 
ground black pepper 2 medium bunches of fresh sage 5 tablespoons unsalted 
butter, at room temperature 1 tablespoon grapeseed oil } pound red 
Swiss chard 1 cup assorted wild mushrooms \ cup dry white wine } cup 
diced onion 1 ounce slab smoked bacon, sliced thinly into pieces { 
inch long 1 cup chicken broth Sweet Potato-Vanilla Puree (see recipe). 
1. Rinse pheasants and pat dry with paper towels. Rub { teaspoon of 
the ground juniper berries into the upper cavity and on the breast 
and sides of each pheasant. Season with salt and pepper to taste. 
Place one bunch of sage in the cavity of each bird, and truss the 
birds with kitchen string. Using 1{ tablespoons of the butter for 
each bird, rub the entire outside of each bird with butter. 2. Preheat 
oven to 350 degrees. Place a 12-inch ovenproof saute pan or roasting 
pan over medium-high heat. Add grapeseed oil. Add the birds and sear, 
turning, until lightly browned on all sides. Place the pan in the 
oven, with the birds breast side up. Cook until an instant-read thermometer 
inserted into the thickest part of the breast reads 135 degrees (for 
medium), about 15 minutes. Place the birds on a rack to rest, for 
10 to 12 minutes, and reserve the pan and drippings. 3. Remove stems 
from Swiss chard leaves, and cut stems into 1{-inch pieces; reserve 
leaves. In a small saute pan over medium-high heat, melt 1 tablespoon 
of the butter, and add mushrooms. Saute quickly, until mushrooms are 
lightly browned and begin to soften; set aside. 4. In a small nonreactive 
saucepan over high heat, bring the white wine to a boil, and reduce 
by three-quarters. Add it to the pan the birds were cooked in, and 
scrape the bottom of the pan with a spatula or wooden spoon to deglaze 
the pan. Add onions and bacon, and lower heat to medium. Stir until 
onions are transparent, 3 to 4 minutes. Add Swiss chard stems, and 
saute until barely tender, about 4 minutes. Add Swiss chard leaves 
and chicken broth. Reduce chicken broth by half. Add mushrooms, and 
cook an additional 2 minutes. Remove from heat, and whisk in the remaining 
tablespoon of butter until emulsified. Season with salt and pepper 
to taste. Cover and keep warm. 5. To serve, carve pheasants, removing 
the breast meat, legs and thighs. Debone legs and thighs. Divide mushrooms, 
Swiss chard and sauce among four dinner plates. Top with a breast, 
leg and thigh, and serve with Sweet Potato-Vanilla Puree. Yield: 4 
servings. Note: Wild game frequently contains tiny pieces of shot, 
and it is not always possible to remove it before cooking. This will 
not harm the meat, but caution should be taken when eating. SWEET 
POTATO-VANILLA PUREE Time: 1 hour 1} pounds sweet potatoes, scrubbed 
{ cup heavy cream 1 teaspoon grated orange zest, firmly packed 1 vanilla 
bean Sea salt and freshly ground black pepper. 1. Preheat oven to 
350 degrees. Place whole potatoes on a baking sheet. Bake, turning 
two or three times during cooking, until a fork can pierce them without 
any resistance, about 45 minutes. 2. Allow potatoes to cool enough 
to be handled. Split them in half lengthwise. Using a tablespoon, 
scoop the pulp into a food processor; be careful not to include any 
skin. 3. In a small saucepan, combine the heavy cream and orange zest. 
Split the vanilla bean lengthwise and scrape the pulp into the pan; 
reserve the pod for another use. Place the pan over high heat and 
bring to a boil. Immediately remove from the heat. (Optional: The 
cream may be allowed to stand for 20 minutes for the flavors to blend.) 
4. Add the cream mixture to the sweet potatoes, and puree for 30 seconds. 
Scrape down the sides and repeat until the mixture is very smooth, 
about 2 minutes. Season with salt and pepper to taste. If necessary, 
cover and then reheat in a preheated 300-degree oven, or transfer 
to a microwave-safe dish, and reheat in a microwave oven. Serve hot. 
Yield: 6 cups (4 to 6 servings). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>