<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981208.0300 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Clinton urged members of both parties Tuesday to be flexible 
as they seek a solution to Social Security's long-term financial woes, 
but he laid out no specific proposal for one of the most ideologically 
charged and politically sensitive issues facing the country. Opening 
a two-day conference on Social Security an hour before his legal team 
opened his impeachment defense on Capitol Hill, Clinton said the country 
needed to have an honest debate about the difficult choices involved 
in shoring up the retirement system. To reach an agreement, he said, 
political leaders also had to work to build bipartisan trust and consensus. 
``In the end,'' Clinton said, ``all of us in some sense will have 
to sacrifice our sense of the perfect to work together for the common 
good. I'm prepared to do whatever it takes to move us forward, but 
let's agree we have to march together.'' Rep. E. Clay Shaw Jr., R-Fla., 
said the president had suggested to him after his speech that he was 
willing to make a specific proposal soon to deal with Social Security's 
problems. But administration officials said Clinton had merely reiterated 
his willingness to consider any strategy to increase the chances of 
getting a deal. Clinton has so far avoided backing any specific plans 
for fear that by doing so he would draw so much fire from Republicans 
that no compromise would be possible. Republicans say he must go first 
if there is to be any chance of finding common ground. Clinton left 
the conference quickly after his speech Tuesday morning to attend 
the funeral in Tennessee of Albert Gore Sr., the vice president's 
father. And in the day-long session that followed, the several hundred 
policy analysts, academics and interest groups engaged in the same 
arguments that have divided them all year. Conservative groups called 
for Social Security to be revamped to include private investment accounts 
through which individuals would invest in stock and bond markets. 
Liberal groups said the country should not tinker in any major way 
with the collective system of social insurance that has worked so 
well for more than six decades. In the middle was a small group looking 
for a means of meeting the core principles of both sides while recognizing 
that any solution would involve some combination of tax increases 
and benefit cuts that would draw intense opposition from interest 
groups. Saying that individual investment plans created too much risk 
and that the current system provides too much in the way of benefits 
to middle and upper income people, C. Eugene Steurle, a senior fellow 
at the Urban Institute, said ``a compromise position must be found.'' 
Like conservatives, many liberals see the markets as part of the solution, 
but they favor having the government invest a portion of the surplus 
built up by Social Security in the financial markets. Republicans 
and some Democrats want to divert a portion of the 12.4 percent payroll 
tax that currently goes to paying guaranteed benefits into individual 
investment accounts owned by each worker. Clinton is open to the idea 
of individual accounts, but has not made a decision, administration 
officials said. The administration is also weighing a variety of ways 
to use the projected federal budget surpluses to help prepare Social 
Security for the retirement of the baby boom generation over the next 
few decades. Tuesday's session brought both parties together with 
administration officials to move what so far has been an academic 
debate into the first tentative efforts at negotiating a political 
deal. That effort will continue Wednesday, when 12 top administration 
officials meet with 48 members of Congress behind closed doors at 
the White House. Among the compromise proposals are several that would 
establish so-called ``add-on'' individual accounts. Under such a proposal, 
the current system would remain intact, financed by the 12.4 percent 
payroll tax. The new system would then add mandatory private accounts 
for each worker, financed by an additional levy on wages. Republicans 
do not like the add-on proposals because they view the additional 
levy as a tax increase, although the idea's supporters say it would 
not be a tax since workers would own the accounts into which the levies 
would be placed. Many Democrats do not like the idea because it creates 
individual accounts. But, packaged in the right way, supporters say, 
it could meet the core principles laid out by both parties _ maintaining 
the current guaranteed benefit program for Democrats, and moving toward 
an individually based, investment-driven approach for Republicans. 
``There is a middle ground that could accommodate the core concerns 
of both sides,'' said John Rother, the public policy director for 
the American Association of Retired Persons. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>