<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981208.0360 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As most of its neighbors suffer through their worst financial crises 
of modern times, China stands almost alone. It has held its currency 
steady, kept its economy primed and continued its long-running economic 
reforms. Now it will collect its reward. Barring last-minute changes, 
China will raise at least $500 million from foreign investors on Wednesday, 
becoming the first Asian country to issue an international bond since 
Russia devalued its currency and defaulted on its debt in August. 
Moreover, investors appear to be crowning China as Asia's best borrower 
outside Japan: It is set to pay a lower interest rate on its new debt 
than South Korea, Thailand or other neighbors would if they tried 
to raise money today. With a $140 billion hoard of foreign exchange, 
China does not need the fresh hard currency that this dollar-denominated 
bond, known as a Yankee bond, will bring. The offering, in fact, is 
a bit of muscle flexing by a country that wants everyone to heed Asia's 
new economic order. Some bankers and investors say China is raising 
fresh capital precisely because many of its neighbors cannot, at least 
without paying far more for the privilege. ``They are net lenders 
to the world, and they have low financing needs. So they really don't 
need the money,'' said Charles Van Vleet, a manager of the Putnam 
Global Fixed Income Fund who intends to buy some of the China bonds. 
``It's more like they are keeping in front of their potential needs, 
waving the flag.'' Some economists also see another message in the 
China bond, which lead underwriters Credit Suisse First Boston and 
Goldman Sachs &AMP; Co. are expected to officially announce Wednesday. 
China will join Argentina as the only developing country to raise 
big money from foreign investors since the Russia crisis began. And 
the two have something in common: Their currencies have not budged 
against the U.S. dollar. Like Argentina, China has fixed the exchange 
rate of its currency, the yuan, against the dollar, and promised not 
to change the rate for the foreseeable future. In contrast, Thailand, 
South Korea, Indonesia, the Philippines, Malaysia, Russia and many 
other developing countries have reduced the value of their currencies 
against the dollar by big margins _ the so-called Asian contagion. 
Countries that devalue their currencies get some benefits _ their 
exports are less expensive in dollar terms, for example. But many 
find it harder to pay back their foreign debt, because it takes more 
local currency to pay back the same amount of debt after devaluation. 
``It is clear from the Asian experience that devaluations destroy 
wealth and living standards, and they force countries out of global 
financial markets,'' said David Malpass, chief international economist 
for Bear Stearns. ``China took a different course, and they were able 
to retain their access to capital markets even in a tough year.'' 
Malpass sees a lesson for other developing countries, especially Brazil. 
China's success in launching an international bond ought to steel 
Brazil against critics who think it should weaken the value of the 
real against the dollar, he said. ``There will be an interesting test 
in 1999 for Brazil in my view. The controlled devaluation some academics 
are promoting would close it out of international financial markets. 
China should be a lesson,'' Malpass said. The China bond would also 
appear to relieve fears, at least in the near term, that Beijing will 
buckle to market pressure and allow the yuan to decline in value. 
To devalue shortly after selling bonds abroad would be a slap in the 
face to investors, akin to Russia's disastrous default and devaluation. 
Also, countries that have plans to reduce the value of their currency 
are ill advised to take on new debt before the devaluation. That debt 
would quickly become more expensive to pay in local currency terms. 
``They would not want to immediately incur a foreign-exchange loss 
on a big bond issue, so that should bring some relief to those who 
feared a devaluation in the short run,'' said Peter Askew, fund manager 
of the T. Rowe Price International bond fund. Investors said that 
a global road show to advertise the new China bond has been a relative 
success, despite continuing uncertainty about economic reforms in 
Brazil, Venezuela and other developing countries in recent days. Investors 
now expect that the new 10-year Yankee bond's interest rate, or its 
yield, will be pegged just below 300 basis points, or three percentage 
points, over similar U.S. Treasury bonds. Market sources said the 
spread could tighten a bit, to perhaps 280 basis points. Given buoyant 
market demand, China might decide overnight to increase the size of 
its offering to $1 billion. The offering was helped by a surprise 
announcement from a leading credit-rating agency, Moody's Investors 
Service, that reaffirmed China's sovereign rating at A3, which is 
considered a strong investment-grade rating for an emerging-market 
country. The agency also changed its outlook for China's rating from 
negative to stable. Moody's attributed its decision to China's commitment 
to protect its credit rating and to its strong exports. The offering 
and the high credit rating show that investors are making a sharp 
distinction between Chinese companies, even those owned by the state, 
and the national government. One prominent Chinese nonbank financial 
company, Guangdong International Trade and Investment Corp., recently 
defaulted on foreign debt payments. Other such companies have also 
missed debt payments lately, prompting many Western banks to freeze 
corporate lending there. ``We see it as a positive sign that China 
is beginning to shut down these pseudo-guaranteed banks and letting 
some of these state-owned companies fail,'' said Van Vleet of the 
Putnam fund. ``We do not see that as impacting them at the sovereign 
level.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>