<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981208.2000.1259 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
She came she saw, she lost. Pauline Hanson leaped onto Australia's 
front pages last fall when her One Nation Party tried to rally the 
public behind its anti immigration Australia First platform. But voters 
were having none of it. They elected only one parliamentarian from 
One Nation. And now, even she may not last. From Sydney, the BBC's 
David Grossman files this report. The crowd itself has cheered at 
the fact that Pauline Hanson appears to have lost her seat so certainly 
jubilant. There was not much to cheer about for Pauline Hanson's One 
Nation Party. In October's federal election, having made confident 
predictions of leading a dozen strong party in the new parliament, 
Mrs. Hanson could only watch as voters rejected first her and then 
160 of her fellow candidates. The one small consolation in a desperate 
night for the party is the fact that one candidate, Heather Hill, 
scraped home to take a senate seat in Queensland. But just when Miss 
Hill was planning to move to Cambra, where the new senate will meet 
for the first time next July, along came Chuck Hong. It is up to people 
like me to stand up and say no to someone that stick their middle 
finger out to the Australian people. A Sydney businessman, Mr. Hong 
was born in Malaysia. But has been an Australian for the past three 
decades. He is a strong critic of One Nation and its anitimmigration 
policies. Now, he is taking the party to the high court. He claims 
that Heather Hill held dual citizenship at the time of the election 
and so under article 44 of the Australian constitution was not eligible 
to stand. The rules of law that apply to you and to me and to all 
other Australians should apply equally to Miss Hill. That is the Australian 
way. Like many Britons, Heather Hill migrated to Australia as a child 
in 1971, when her family settled in Queensland. She had a career as 
a psychiatric nurse and a health center manager before moving into 
politics. A close friend of One Nation's leader, Pauline Hanson, Heather 
Hill, was in at the beginning of the party helping shape its populist 
right-wing agenda. The party claimed to stick up for ordinary Australians 
in the face of overbearing government, run away immigration, and global 
business interests. Now, Heather Hill sees those same forces behind 
the legal challenge to her senate seat. What is in my mind is absolute 
an outright just nastiness, by people who have money, it is malicious, 
it is fixacious, and is trying to destroy people who are trying to 
uphold a democracy. The Australian constitution says that any person 
seeking a seat must take adequate steps to insure they are not subjects 
of a foreign power. Alongside her Australian citizenship, Heather 
Hill, went into the election holding British citizenship. Though she 
says that she has since renounced this. It says in the constitution 
that you have to take reasonable steps, and I took all reasonable 
steps. And this is the issue that, no doubt, will be thrashed out 
in court. And according to constitutional experts, there is much to 
thrash out. Not least the fact that when the Australian constitution 
was framed in 1901, all Australians were British subjects. The distinct 
Australian citizenship did not exist until 1949. For some in Australian 
politics, there would be a delicious irony in Miss Hill losing her 
seat. One Nation told voters that immigration is robbing the country 
of its identity. Now it seems that he one NP elected on this ticket, 
was not herself, quite Australian enough. The BBC's David Grossman 
filing from Sidney, Australia. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>