<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981208.2000.0636 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Irish Republican Army has made a public appeal for help in finding 
some of its victims. Around 25 years ago, the group, which fought 
to rest Northern Ireland from British rule, murdered and secretly 
buried about 30 people. And now, it is apparently having trouble finding 
the bodies. Today, in a statement published in a Northern Ireland 
newspaper, the IRA said that is wanted people with information about 
the location of the graves to come forward. Suzanne Brien is the Belfast 
correspondent for the Irish Times. Suzanne, the strikes us here, perhaps 
without a sufficient amount of background, as a rather unusual statement 
to be making. What is the significance of it? Well, I think that this 
is a really a PR statement. The IRA is interested in improving its 
image. I do not take the statement seriously. The IRA have treated 
the families of these people, who the IRA abducted and killed, very, 
very badly. I broke one of the original stories back in 1994 and this 
was of two young men from west Belfast, John McKinney and Brian McClory, 
who disappeared in 1979 on their way to work and were never seen again. 
Their families believe that the IRA had abducted them and killed them. 
But when I approached the IRA and Sean Seeam, they denied that there 
was any involvement by the IRA in their abduction. And the IRA has 
masked these families about for fours and, and now it suddenly agreeing 
that it is responsible for their abduction and it is appealing to 
the public. When I think the IRA knows fine well where the bodies 
are and what has happened to these victims. It is better than nothing, 
but I do not think it means that the IRA has had a huge change of 
heart. I think the IRA is doing this now for political advantage. 
Well, if, as you say, the IRA actually does have the information as 
to the whereabouts of the bodies, and it is not offering it. Is it 
possible then, that people who would know where it is are getting 
some kind of signal from the IRA they had better not say it? Or are 
they actually free and is the IRA encouraging them to give out that 
information? I think, in some cases, probably. I do not know long 
it will take, but in some cases, bodies will be returned to families 
or the IRA will tell families for the bodies are. I think they have 
to do that But I think in other cases, the IRA will not want this 
information to come out. For example, we could have a scenario where, 
rather than just one or two people buried somewhere, there was a mass 
grave, and the IRA does not want this mass grave found or we could 
have weapons that were actually buried along beside bodies. So I think 
the IRA will pick and choose, in terms of the bodies that it wants 
to return to relatives, and the bodies which it does not want to. 
And in some cases, even though we know where the bodies are located, 
they might be impossible to retrieve them. For example, in the case 
that I was talking about of John McKinney and Brian McClory. They 
might have been buried on a building site and houses have now been 
built on that site. So the houses cannot be knocked down to find the 
bodies so that the mothers and fathers will never be able to have 
the bodies of their sons returned to them. Well, in the midst of this 
minor chord of symbols that are going on, we do have what you might 
call the major chord of the Nobel Prize. The peace prize being given 
out on Thursday to Protestant First Minister, David Trimboll, and 
Catholic Statesman, John Hulme. Is that in any way, going to give 
people more hope in the peace process do you think? Well, I think 
it reaffirms the commitment of the people receiving the prizes to 
the people that I think John Hulme is absolutely committed to the 
process. But I think that this further cements David Trimboll's commitment 
to making it work. Because, when somebody is applauded and hailed 
as an international statesman, he wants that to continue. But I must 
say in Northern Ireland, there is no great excitement about they Nobel 
peace prize awards. Most people here are very cynical. The peace process, 
at the moment is in a stalemate situation, and people would rather 
see that moving on. And I think are a bit suspicious that their political 
leaders are not here at home trying to work things out and get down 
to the nitty-gritty. But rather have children to fly abroad and accept 
these prizes. So I do not think there will be thousands of people 
waiting on the streets when David Trimboll and John Hulme return, 
and in all their Nobel glory. Suzanne, thank you very much for speaking 
with us. Thank you. Irish Times Correspondent, Suzanne Green, speaking 
to us from Belfast. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>