<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981208.2000.2716 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Back to our answer to today's geography stumper. We are headed to 
the world's northernmost capital city and also one of the newest. 
It became a capital just 80 years ago. Now 12 years ago, a diplomatic 
summit brought presidents Ronald Reagan and Mikael Gorbachov here. 
The answer is Rachiavik, Iceland. And, if you happen to visit here, 
whether or not you are a president. One of the must dos, is to sit 
down for a meal of puffin. That is right that is the black and white 
sea bird that can be found everywhere in Iceland and apparently also 
on some dishes. And quite frequently served up not only as an entree, 
but for dessert as well. Here to tell us about some popular puffin 
dishes is Valdemar Svenson, a cook with the A'Hanson Restaurant. Mr. 
Svenson, puffin for dessert? Yes. That original recipe with the puffin 
back in the old days when the people have to rely on birds and fish 
around Iceland, then they smoked it, and they can store the bird like 
that. Now, when you smoke a puffin, does that give it a particularly 
sweet flavor? No. Not sweet, it is like a smoked lamb. Well, tell 
me a little bit about the puffin. Starting from the outside and then 
working in. I mean it is a black and white bird. Is it, does it taste 
basically like chicken, as they often say? No. It is nothing like 
chicken, actually. The meat is pretty black and it soft as the chicken, 
but it has got a very distinctive flavor. So maybe more like a goose? 
Yes. Maybe more like goose. Are they grown on farms, or do people- 
No. They just living wild here. Yes. OK. Now one of the amazing things 
about the range of the puffin as a game bird is that it really can 
be served up as any number of courses including dessert, right? yes. 
Give me an idea of how you serve up something that tastes like lamb 
as dessert. Well, the first thing we do is we lightly toast it, and 
cut it down and it is pretty much raw inside. It is like medium rare. 
Then we have a sauce with it. It is Cumberland sauce. Cumberland sauce. 
That is a sweet jam, it is very nice. yes. But I think Iceland kids 
like it but I am not sure about Americans. Well, what would be a good 
way to prepare puffin, if you wanted to get people's sort of used 
to the idea of puffin and not go the wrong route right away. What 
would you? How would you serve puffin? I feel like it we have only 
on a menu we make a sauce out of the bones, after that, we added some 
puldwan, and the gingerbread jelly to it and small sugar and that 
gives it a wild flavor. How many puffin would you say you serve a 
night? Well, that depends, we can go up to 20, 30, or 40. And I notice 
for a fact, that the old-fashioned way, when it is smoked and eating 
this cold, that is the greatest, that is the greatest, the old-fashioned 
way. Well, thank you very much for filling us in a little bit on the 
puffin. I am going to consider it very seriously. ok. Thank you so 
much, Mr. Svenson. ok. Baldemar Svenson is a cook with the A'Hansen 
Restaurant in Racovik, the answer to today's geography quiz. Thanks 
again. Bye-bye. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>