<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981208.2000.2026 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Efforts to diffuse the developing crisis between the United States 
and North Korea moved ahead in two capitals today. In Washington, 
American and North Korean negotiators resumed talks over the U.S. 
demand for access to an underground site, which officials suspect 
is involved with developing nuclear weapons. And in Beijing, former 
defense secretary, William Perry, met with officials of the Chinese 
government, one of North Korea's few remaining friends. A Chinese 
spokesman said Beijing opposes any retreat from a 1994 deal under 
which Peon Yang, pledged to scrap its atomic weapons program. But, 
former U.S. Ambassador to South Korea, Donald Greg, says American 
policy toward North Korea is in disarray for several reasons. You 
have had a White House that has been distracted, so that there is 
not an awful lot of high level policy attention has been paid to the 
North Korean issue. And then a second part has been, I think, a leak 
out of U.S. military of some purported war fighting plans involving 
an invasion of North Korea is they were to attack the south and the 
North Koreans have to react to something like that. And they have 
beyond that, they are very dissatisfied with our performance under 
the agreed framework because when the agreement was set up in 1994, 
we said we would remove sanctions against North Korea, some of which 
go back to the Korean War, and we have not done that. And so, I am 
very glad that Bill Perry has been brought in to take a look at it. 
Indeed, he is in Beijing and one of the things that the Chinese are 
telling him is that in the case of North Korea, it is still a good 
idea to proceed very cautiously. Would you think that is good advice? 
Absolutely. I mean the time space factors are such in Korea that, 
even with a military establishment that is falling apart, they still 
have the ability through their masked artillery close to the DMZ to 
inflict tremendous damage on the city of Seoul. Help us understand 
one other part of this equation. And that is what internal pressures 
might exist in North Korea that might be forcing the government to 
behave as it is. You have a very volatile situation. Some people have 
said between an Army that is one of the most powerful around, and 
a population, which to a large extent is starving to death. Well, 
I think that is true and Kim Dae-Jung, the president of Korea, feels 
that there are two major power blocks in North Korea and the North 
Korean military. If you go back some years in history, I think, feel 
that they have a fairly good way of dealing with the outside world 
and that is do something awful, then sort of pull in your horns and 
we do not do anything in response. That goes back to the seizure of 
the American war ship, the Pueblo, in 1968 to blowing up half the 
Korean cabinet in Rangoon in 1983. Ax murders of two American officers 
in the DMZ; the blowing up of a Korean airliner in 1987 to try to 
derail the Olympics, all of these things were done by North Korea. 
And we never retaliated because we felt that to retaliate would start 
a second Korean War. So, the North Koreans, I think, can say to themselves, 
hey, we know how to deal the outside world. Because they do not dare 
to retaliate. And so that is a pattern that they have to be brought 
away from. What do we need to do to convince them that things have 
changed? Well, I think that there would be two things we could do. 
One, would be to raise sanctions. The second thing would be to perhaps 
have some American businessmen visit North Korea and say to them, 
look, we are interested in the region. North Korea is a missing piece 
of the mosaic. For example, Kim Dae-Jung, when he went to Beijing, 
talked to the Chinese about running a high speed rail train from Pousan 
through Seoul, Peon Yang, and up to Beijing. Here is Bechtel Company 
or Fleur Company that would like to build a rail bed to, that would 
accommodate a high speed train. That would take 50,000 workers. We 
would like to create 50,000 jobs so you could demobilize 50,000 of 
your troops. For that to happen, we would have to say to the North 
Koreans, we have to be sure that you are not going to fire missiles 
or build nuclear weapons or send submarines into the south. Ambassador 
Greg, thank you very much for talking with us. My pleasure. Donald 
Greg is former ambassador to South Korea from 1989 to 1993. And chairman 
of the Korea Society in New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>