<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981208.2000.2999 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In London today it was the pro Pinochet sides' turn. Supporters of 
Augusto Pinochet demonstrated in the British capital, urging the government 
to send the former Chilean dictator home. General Pinochet was arrested 
in London in October on a warrant from Spain. A judge there wants 
to try Pinochet on charges relating to the deaths of more than 3,000 
people during the 1970s and 1980s. Britain's home secretary is expected 
to decide this week on whether to proceed with the extradition. The 
controversy has riled up Chilean citizens for whom the Pinochet era 
is a fresh memory. Even those who weren't born when Pinochet rose 
to power in the 1973 coup, have strong feelings about the matter. 
Paul Kromer is a youth leader with a right-wing party, Rennovacion 
Nationalle, and Marcelo Heraldo, is a University of Chili sociology 
student whose parents fled the country after the coup. Robaldo says 
that what happened 25 years ago is a crucial part of every Chilean's 
life. I think no matter how young you are, I mean you could be a child 
and still feel affected by what happened in this country. I feel a 
lot of violence has been directed towards young people. I have spent 
the last 10 years in this country. And every time I have attended 
a rally in favor of the return to democracy or any other sort of rally, 
there is always a lot of violence from the police. And the general 
opinion of the people on the other political side is that we are basically 
trouble makers and that there is no need really to listen to what 
we have got to say. Yes. I am sorry but let me interrupt you here. 
Paul, how do you feel about the people who are protesting what Pinochet 
stood for, what he created, and who are in fact, saying that it hasn't 
completely gone away. Well I think the, most of the people that are, 
how to say, profinitive now, there are many people that are family 
of militaries and so, but I think the main young people actually, 
did not live when the military government was. And they are receiving 
history. I do not know the parents are right-wing and then they believe 
what they parents said and in so with a left inclined families, well, 
we will have a different history. I think we got to look to the future. 
We hope to have a new Chili to forget this violence and politics to 
forget the human right violations. Because we do not need that to 
discuss about politics. I think- Marcelo, let me interrupt you. Marcelo, 
Paul is saying basically that the only way that Chili can really have 
a democratic future is if it turns its back on whatever crimes might 
have happened in the past. That you have got to lay aside this question 
of whether there are human rights violations. Do you feel that that 
is a kind of future that Chili can have and that is what it should 
be building on? Absolutely not. I think we need to have a memory about 
what happened here. As people need memories in their own personal 
lives, I think, as a country, we need a, to remember what happened. 
And we need to know the truth about what happened to many people and 
without that, I think we cannot expect to have a normal life together 
as a country. Tony, I am, you misunderstood me, while I talk not clearly. 
I do not want to forget the human right violations. I want to forget 
the human right violations as a way to do politics in Chili. And we 
want not to forget what in Chili happened. And we do not want to repeat 
that, we want to have a new Chili. As I say it, in peace. Marcelo, 
do you think that the people your age who are pushing for more immediate, 
dramatic way of dealing with the human rights violations of the past. 
Are they content with the speed that the government itself has been 
showing in dealing with it in its own way. I think not. Most people 
I know, they do not really agree with seeing Pinochet back here because 
they feel that, here is where he has best odds at getting away with 
what he has been getting away with for the last 30 years. All right. 
Let me ask you both one final question. With all these emotions that 
are being stirred up now in Chilean society, do you both feel concerned 
about whether it is going to get out of hand or are you confident 
that this something that the Chileans and especially young people, 
like you, will be able to deal with? Marcelo. As a young person in 
Chili, I am committed to bringing to justice whoever has to answer 
for these crimes. And I feel it is perfectly legitimate for the Spanish 
courts to be prosecuting Pinochet. Paul? Well, I think the young people 
want to close this chapter of the history and Pinochet, if he has 
to be judged, should be judged here in Chili. The human rights violations 
occurred here, the Chilean justice works, and I think that can be 
done here in Chili, at home. Well, gentlemen, thank you both very 
much for taking the time to share your views with us. We appreciate 
it. Paul Kromer is the leader of the youth wing of Rennovacion Nationalle, 
a right-wing party and Marcelo Heraldo, a sociology student at the 
University of Chili, who spent time with his family in exile in London 
and in the U.S. Thank you both very much. Thank you very much Tony. 
Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>