<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981208.2000.2379 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Thousands of Brazilians are flocking to see Marcelo Rosi in action. 
Those who cannot see him in person are settling for his CD and watching 
him on television. Marcelo Rosi is not a rock star, he is not even 
a TV star. But he is a star. From Rio de Janeiro, The World's Paula 
Govi sent us this audio profile of Father Marcelo Rosi. Where Father 
Marcelo Rosi goes, he is trailed by hundreds of followers in search 
of spiritual relief from illness, misfortune, unemployment and even 
loneliness. This woman is overcome by emotion as she waits for Father 
Marcelo outside a TV studio in Rio. He has done so many good things 
for me. I listen to his prayers every day and he brought back my husband 
and my whole life has improved. I am a fervent Catholic now, because 
of him. When I see him, it is like I am looking at Jesus. Inside the 
studio, Father Marcelo is recording a program with Fagner Monti, one 
of Brazil's most popular talk show hosts. Monti says he has never 
seen a personality like Father Marcelo in his 30 years in television. 
Father Marcelo guarantees a big audience for any program he is on. 
With him, the ratings are sure to double or even triple. He is very 
charismatic and that is good because he is creating a school of young 
priests, just like him. Everyone in the studio dances and sings along 
with Father Marcelo. A tall, handsome, blue-eyed, 31 year-old priest, 
a former gym teacher, leads the audience to what he calls the Lord's 
aerobics. His unique way of preaching has turned him into a star. 
A title that he rejects. On every program, I seek to show that I am 
not a phenomenon or a star. All I want to be is the arrow that points 
to the Lord. In a country where the Catholic church is estimated to 
lose 300,000 followers each year, Father Marcelo manages to attract 
half a million faithful to his masses each month. He is part of the 
Catholic Charismatic Movement, which has similarities with evangelical 
churches. It is a very popular among other lessons, like Fernando 
Fireas, who recently attended one of his masses at a large warehouse 
in Salpowido. I was attracted to the Charismatic Movement because 
of the songs. Young people like the music and as St. Augustine said, 
he who sings, prays twice. God sent Father Marcelo so that we could 
praise the Lord and feel the power of his words. Father Marcelo not 
only joyfully sings and dances at the altar, but he also throws buckets 
of holy water to the crowds. His unconventional approach is seen as 
superficial by some sectors of the Catholic Church. Father Estaphan 
Betacur says that the hierarchy of the Church is keeping a close eye. 
The limits are suttle. The essence of his religious message could 
easily degenerate. That is why the bishops in both Salpalo and Rio 
de Janeiro are watching him very closely. To avoid it turning into 
a carnival. But while Father Marcelo's methods may be different, his 
preachings follow the conservative dark mouth, the Vatican. He condemns 
birth control, abortion, extramarital sex, and is in favor of celibacy 
for priests. His comments on homosexuality has sparked a lawsuit from 
a gay rights group. At a recent press conference, Father Marcelo gave 
this nervous explanation. I never said it was an illness. It is absurd. 
As a priest, if I said it was an illness, then it would not be a sin. 
If it were an illness, I would not even know how to accept it. Plus, 
I said, if it were proven to be an illness, and that is a big question. 
But Father Marcelo's comments are still discriminatory, according 
to Alias Lica of the Christian gay community. I am saddened, because 
he should be using all his charisma to fight injustice and discrimination. 
Some consider such criticism the price Father Marcelo must pay for 
his newfound fame. But a recent TV poll showed that the vast majority 
of Brazilians are still on his side. Meanwhile, his CD continues to 
top the charts with over 2 million copies sold in less than two months. 
Sales are expected to soar during Christmas season and Father Marcelo 
is even planning to record a new CD. All the revenue from his record 
sales is to be distributed to social causes. For The World, this is 
Paul Govi, in Rio de Janeiro. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>