<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981208.2000.0375 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
UN arms inspectors in Iraq moved into a higher gear today in their 
search for banned weapons programs. One day after their chief, Richard 
Butler, promised surprise inspections. Four groups of monitors headed 
for undisclosed locations to do their work and to test Baghdad's promise 
of renewed compliance. The flurry of activity comes a week before 
Butler is expected to report to the UN Security Council on whether 
Iraq has kept its promise to resume full cooperation. The BBC's Jeremy 
Cook is in Baghdad. Jeremy, what can you tell us about these new teams 
that have been arriving in Iraq. They are called specialist teams. 
What is their specialty? Well, these teams have been arriving over 
the last four or five days. Yesterday, more than 30 new inspectors 
arrived and their specialties, we are told are in the fields of chemical 
and biological warfare. There also seems to be at least in the arsenal 
of words a new term that is being introduced here and that is challenge 
inspections as opposed to whatever other kind of inspections they 
might have been doing before. Am I right in saying that this is a 
significant change? I think certainly in terms of the rhetoric, at 
least, it is a change. Richard Butler has made it very clear, I think, 
over the last couple of days that this is the crunch time for Saddam 
Hussein. And that Saddam Hussein's government must show that it means 
what it says and that there will be full and unfettered access to 
the ONSCOM teams. Now, I think that what Mr. Butler is saying, is 
that there will be nothing off-limits and these so-called challenge 
inspections, we can only assume, will be going to places perhaps where 
there have problems in the past with the teams being turned away. 
And also, I think it may be that we are looking at some new sites. 
Sites which nobody knew about before. Jeremy, in reporting, as you 
just did, that this could very well be the most significant, tense 
moment for these inspections, do not you get a bit of a sense of dejavu, 
or has this really reached a true flash point here now? Well, I think 
the difference is this. This is a sort of formal warning process at 
the moment. Because next week, perhaps as early Monday or Tuesday, 
Richard Butler, the chief weapons inspector, will write a full report 
and submit that report to the Secretary General of the United Nations. 
That report will detail whether or not the ONSOM teams here feel that 
they have had satisfactory cooperation from the Iraqi authorities. 
If not, then I think we are looking at a grave situation in this ongoing 
crisis. Because the Americans and the British indeed, but particularly 
the Americans, have stressed that if there is not that sort of level 
of cooperation, than the ways is well and truly open to the military 
options. So, I think that this document, which Richard Butler will 
put together over the coming days, is the key one. Because from the 
Iraqi's point-of-view, they want to be seen to be complying because 
they want desperately to have these sanctions lifted. Is there then, 
Jeremy, a potentially bright side to this should the report of Richard 
Butler be positive, would that mean that there might indeed be a lifting 
of international sanctions against Baghdad any time soon? Well, I 
do not think it is going to be that straightforward. I think that, 
if the report of satisfactory, than it may well be that the United 
Nations has another look at the sanctions issue. But remember this, 
the United States of course, has stressed all along that the sanctions 
will remain in place, as far as the U.S. is concerned, until Iraq 
is declared by ONSCOM to be free of weapons of mass destruction. Now 
that point, if we ever reach that point, may still be quite a long 
way off. And this is a cause of great concern and frustration to the 
Iraqis. Indeed, during the course of the day, the Deputy Prime Minister, 
Tariq Aziz, has been in Moscow and has said that. In a very challenging 
way, that unless the sanctions are dropped, the Iraqis will see no 
option other than to shut down the ONSCOM operation, the weapons inspection 
operation. That, of course, would mark a further decline in what is 
already a very serious situation. The BBC's Jeremy Cook speaking to 
us from Baghdad. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>