<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981208.2000.0907 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In advance of the Nobel Prize Ceremony, John Hulme and David Trimboll 
were honored last night with profile and courage awards from the John 
F. Kennedy Library. They are two of the nine key leaders to win the 
special award, the first time it was bestowed on non-Americans. They 
had not been together since negotiating the April 10 accord. Which 
aims to end 30 years of violence in Northern Ireland. Among the honorees 
and speakers was David Irvine of the Progressive Unionist Party. While 
I was about 14 years of age, what we now know as the troubles began 
in Northern Ireland. And we have never had a political crisis without 
having violence. Well, at the moment, back home we have a political 
crisis and it is almost luxurious to have a political crisis without 
violence. Just to have the experience of how societies, normal societies, 
make live. But we do have a difficulty and that difficulty, I think, 
is compounded almost by the monical williams remaining is that this 
is the first time that those people who did broker the Good Friday 
Agreement have been together. And perhaps that is part of our problem, 
that we still have a long way to go. Shortly after David Irvine of 
the Progressive Unionist Party spoke, another recipient addressed 
the crowd, the President of Chin Fane, Jerry Adams. Robert Kennedy 
once wrote, there are people in every land who want to stop history 
in its tracks. They fear the future, they mistrust the present, and 
they invoke the security of a computable past, which in fact, never 
existed. We certainly in Chin Fane, will not be deflected from the 
work which has to be done. But it is almost Christmas, from Easter 
to Christmas, so we do have a lot to do. Chin Fane's Jerry Adams. 
Monica McWilliams is co-founder of the Northern Ireland Women's Coalition. 
You know we have had a very painful 30 years in Northern Ireland. 
And indeed, a very painful summer, and as we stood at the gravesites, 
over those years and indeed this past summer. We reached out and recognized 
the humanity that each one of us had. And what we discovered, was 
our interdependence, one on another. We cannot go on doing this at 
the gravesites. We now have to do it in the politics of our new assembly. 
In one of your legislators close by in Connecticut, I saw a beautiful 
motto that said, after the clouds, the sun. The sun has come out for 
Northern Ireland. And I pledge to make sure that it shines on us in 
our new assembly. Monica McWilliams. And finally, the audience heard 
from Nobel Peace Prize winner, John Hulme. True democracy now in Ireland 
is about implementing that agreement and all its detail. Because that 
is what the people overwhelmingly voted for. And as we move now to 
the new century, let us leave our past, and it was a terrible past, 
and let us begin to work together in the new century. And let us also 
have the first century in our island history, in which we will not 
have killings of human being in our streets. And in which we will 
not have immigration of young people to other lands to earn a living. 
And as we work together to achieve that, I have no doubt that we will 
transform that little island. Nobel Peace Prize Lauria John Hulme, 
speaking last night in Boston at a ceremony honoring nine leaders 
who showed political bravery in the effort to bring peace to Northern 
Ireland. We also heard from Monica McWilliams of the Northern Ireland 
Women's Coalition. Jerry Adams, leader Chin Fane, and David Irvine 
of the Progressive Unionist Party. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>