<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981208.1600.0359 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
U.S. lawmakers in the House of Representatives' Judiciary Committee 
are hearing arguments from White House lawyers. Who are trying to 
convince members of the Committee that President Clinton should not 
be impeached. Which could eventually lead him to being removed from 
office. Mr. Clinton has been accused by Independent Counsel Kenneth 
Starr of lying under oath. Obstruction of justice and abuse of power. 
In trying to conceal his relationship with former White House intern, 
Monica Lewinsky. Joining us in the studio is VOA political analyst, 
Neil Levon. Thank you, Neil, for joining us. Good to be here. What 
is the latest? What are the scholars saying before the lawmakers? 
And have there been any surprises so far? Well, there have been no 
surprises. And most of these scholars are supporting the White House 
position. Who are appearing today. And generally, they've been talking 
along the lines of that whatever the President did. It's not certainly 
worthy of impeachment. Which means that an indictment in the House 
and a possible removal by the U.S. Senate. And there are lots of obstacles 
and questions that need to be answered. Procedural questions. Before 
such an act can take place. They're also saying since the current 
House term ends at the end of this year. And picks up again in January. 
That perhaps something incited by this Congress may not be binding 
on the next Congress. So there are lots of procedural things. Essences 
that whatever the President did does not warranty the very dramatic 
and radical move of impeachment. And that's generally what the scholars 
have been saying throughout this long hearing today. Can we expect 
similar arguments? What we heard before. People addressing the process 
and not the substance of the charges? Well, the process is very important 
here. Because this is a process that's only been used once before 
in our nation's history. And that was all the way back in the middle 
of the 19th century. And I think here, because one Congress ends and 
another begins. And presumably, this impeachment, if it does go through, 
would be carried out in one Congress. And then the trial in the Senate 
would be held in another. There are some questions that need to be 
asked. Of whether or not any new members need to be brought up to 
speed. Or on this. And who may be involved in this. Or just whether 
it's constitutional at all for one Congress to impeach a president. 
And another to stand in trial. Those are questions that have been 
addressed in the past. But perhaps need to be updated. How would you 
characterize this defense that's being carried out by the team appearing 
before the Committee? Is it strident? Is it gentlemanly? How would 
you characterize it? I would say it's not strident. These are scholars 
pointing out points of law. Several Committee members on the Republican 
side may object. Several Democratic members may support. But overall, 
this isn't some of the debate that we've seen so far in this Committee. 
Which usually draws some of the more strident members of Congress 
on both sides of the aisle. What about Wednesday? Well, Wednesday, 
tomorrow. A panel of five lawyers-- Wednesday, today's Tuesday right? 
Wednesday there'll be more lawyers for a change. Testifying on standards 
for prosecuting obstruction of justice and perjury. Which is what 
these articles of impeachment, if they are passed by this Committee, 
will center on. And many of these scholars will say, and these lawyers. 
That whatever it is, again this doesn't measure up to an impeachable 
offense. This falls short of the standards that we've used in impeachment 
in the past. So we're getting two days of presidential defense. And 
then the Committee will debate and then take an historic vote. And 
we could be heading, really, towards an impeachment of the President. 
It's not beyond the realm of possibility at all. Well, how likely 
do you think that might be? Well, most congressmen have been saying 
now that it appears the Judiciary Committee. Which is a majority Republican 
committee. Will approve one, two, three, four articles of impeachment. 
Exactly how many, and exactly what their nature is are not known yet. 
And it will likely be on a party line vote. And it will go to the 
full House. Where the chances for passage are 50/50. Which is much 
more than it was just even a week ago. Now, why is that? I was just 
going to ask you. There was a point in recent days when the opinion 
among the representatives appeared to shift from being opposed to 
impeachment. And now it looks, as you say, like it's about 50/50 now. 
Why is there -- why do we have that change? Well, the general consensus 
in Washington is that when the Committee submitted 81 questions to 
the White House for response. And many of these were yes or no questions. 
And this was almost seen as a way to have the Committee get out of 
the impeachment business. Get these answers and move on. The President 
and the Staff came up with answers that were very lawyerly. In fact, 
they sounded much like the President's August 17 speech. Which was 
roundly criticized. In which he never confessed to lying. But said 
about his affair with Monica Lewinsky, was said he had an "inappropriate 
relationship." It's these sort of answers that have even turned some 
moderate Republicans now. Edging towards voting for impeachment. Should 
it come to the full House. Neil Levon, thank you very much for joining 
us. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>