<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981208.1600.2501 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Racism and discrimination can take many forms. Sometimes subtle and 
even subconscious. And sometimes it becomes official government policy. 
As in South Africa, under apartheid. In the five years since South 
Africa ended apartheid, and held its first democratic elections. Its 
citizens are still struggling with racism. One emerging problem is 
a perception among many whites. Of the existence of so-called reverse 
racism. By blacks toward whites. We have more from VOA's Delia Robertson, 
in Johannesburg. Many white South Africans complain that since the 
1994 elections brought a black-dominated government to power. They 
are being disadvantaged. Or unfairly targeted because of the color 
of their skin. That perception is heightened when politicians exploit 
situations. Such as a recent complaint by white politicians. That 
voter registration requirements for next year's general election, 
identical for all race groups, would deprive many whites of the franchise. 
But, says researcher Louise Stark, real examples of so-called reverse, 
or black racism, are hard to find. If you ask directly, how do you 
experience racism in this society? People have great difficulty in 
actually expressing it. It's almost -- wow, is it real? And they have 
to think quite hard. To think of specific situations where they've 
actually experienced racial prejudice. Ms. Stark, and two other researchers 
at the Independent Center for Policy Studies in Johannesburg. Will 
next year begin a major study: Interrace Relations in South Africa. 
The first since all-race elections brought the African National Congress 
Dominated Government to power. Ms. Stark says it causes problems when 
senior government officials, such as South Africa's Deputy President 
Thabo Mbeki lump whites together when criticizing negative behavior. 
By an individual or small group. She says it is also problematic that 
leaders such as Mr. Mbeki fail to make it clear they include whites 
in their vision for South Africa. Whites do not feel that they have 
the right to call themselves African. And blacks don't even seem to 
realize that is not even be a problem for whites. So I don't think 
there's an acceptance yet. Of whites as a permanent African population. 
Ms. Stark says while white South Africans probably overstate experiences 
of so-called reverse racism. It would help if senior government officials 
made it clear that their contribution to society is as valuable as 
that from other race groups. Delia Robertson, reporting from VOA in 
Johannesburg. Racism: A Global Curse, was the subject of today's Dateline. 
I'm Pamela Taylor. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>