<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981208.0500.1335 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When most people think of the southern state of Florida, they think 
of Disney World, cruise ships, the Kennedy Space Center, orange and 
palm trees. But there's a fascinating older part of Florida that VOA 
travel reporter Ted Lanfair discovered in a visit to the Sunshine 
State. Like most Florida cities today, Tampa on the state's western 
Gulf coast is a bright and bustling place with beautiful beaches and 
trendy nightclubs, new sports stadiums and fancy bank buildings. It 
was not always so. In the 1880's Tampa was a sleepy fishing village 
that a railroad coming down from Orlando had just reached. City leaders 
saw rival towns on Florida's east coast beginning to boom as vacation 
resorts and they wanted something to put little Tampa on the map. 
At the same time, down on the southern tip of Florida, Key West was 
bustling as a new center of the cigar industry which had largely moved 
out of Cuba because of tensions that would eventually lead to the 
Spanish-American war. But those tensions among Spaniards, Cubans and 
Americans were starting to effect Key West just 140 kilometers from 
Cuba as well. Some cigar factories were burned. So the leaders in 
Tampa invited Key West's biggest cigar making, Don Vincente Martinez 
Ebor to relocate to Tampa. He and one other cigar maker did so, importing 
Cuban tobacco by ships through Tampa's deep water port. Those two 
little factories to start off with, the very first year in operation, 
handed rolled over one million cigars, the first year. The Cubans 
were masters. That's Rosanne Garcia, who's Sicilian grandmother and 
grandfather both made a living hand rolling cigars. She now owns a 
company that gives tours of Tampa. Before long, she says, Tampa's 
water front neighborhood that became known as Ebor City, had 250 cigar 
factories and a handy port and railroad to distribute the cigars. 
Workers of Cuban and Sicilian descent spilled from their little narrow 
shacks into the streets and bars. There were fiestas almost weekly. 
Thriving Ebor City was the undisputed cigar capital of the world. 
In the years when millions of men smoked cigars at work and at home, 
brands like Have a Tampa and Muriel became household names. TV commercials 
showed slinky women swooning at the sight of a man smoking a big fat 
cigar. But starting in the 1960's as cigar manufacturing became highly 
mechanized, the U.S. government began to heavily tax tobacco companies 
and factories were suddenly forbidden from importing fine leaf tobacco 
from Communist Cuba, many of Ebor City's little cigar makers closed 
their doors. Big companies bought out little ones and moved operations 
to central America. Ebor City became a blighted slum filled with abandoned 
factories. But lately, Ebor City has made a huge comeback. Streets 
and restaurants and nightclubs are full again. In fact on weekend 
nights in Ebor City, it's like carnival without the masks. Roseanne 
Garcia says it all began when artists discovered the neighborhood. 
They found in these old factories and these old buildings a lot of 
square footage for very little money. So they made these buildings 
their homes and their studios. So then this artist element started 
to bring more and more people here. There are a lot of new micro breweries 
and restaurants in the neighborhood. With all the Cubans and Spaniards 
and Sicilians in Tampa, Ebor City is reputed to have the highest per 
capita consumption of beer in America. And it's not hurt that cigars 
are fashionable in many circles in America again. Today, more than 
a dozen small factories are rolling tobacco leaves into cigars again 
in Ebor City. Despite government warnings about tobacco products, 
there are those who now find Ebor City the perfect place for good 
living as defined by a splendid meal, a great beer and a fine cigar. 
I'm Ted Lanfair. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>