<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981208.0500.2483 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
mr. Clinton won a victory Monday by avoiding an inquiry into his campaign 
fundraising activities when his attorney general refused to call for 
the appointment of another independent counsel. This decision came 
on the same day that a bipartisan commission of distinguished former 
public officials recommended that the independent counsel law be scrapped 
altogether. The law authorizes the appointment of special prosecutors 
to probe high government officials accused of wrongdoing. The commission 
released a report on the issue Monday and national correspondent Jim 
Malone was there. The group is called the National Commission on the 
Separation of Powers and includes some well respected figures from 
both major political parties such as former Republican Senator Howard 
Baker and the former attorney general in the Carter administration, 
Democrat Griffin Bell. The commission has been studying the effectiveness 
of the independent counsel law and other issues for the past 2 1/2 
years. Its recommendation is to let the independent counsel law expire 
next year, when Congress takes up the issue of whether or not to renew 
the statute for another five years. Former Senator Howard Baker is 
the commission's co-chairman. Nobody likes this statute, Republicans, 
Democrats, academics, lawyers. I suspect the independent counsel don't 
like this statute either. But and it's possible to amend it and change 
it in significant ways, but I really do believe and I think the commission 
shares the view that what we ought to do is let it expire and start 
over from scratch. The other commission co-chairman, former U.S. attorney 
general Griffin Bell says he believes the independent counsel law 
is fundamentally flawed because it treats high-ranking government 
officials accused of wrongdoing differently from ordinary Americans 
facing similar allegations. It singles out one target and makes that 
target public, whereas if the rest of the Americans, American people, 
investigations conducted under secrecy of a grand jury and if you 
never become a target, or you're never prosecuted, no one ever knows 
about it. The national commission which is sponsored by the University 
of Virginia recommends that a new law replace the independent counsel 
statute which would simply allow the attorney general to rescue him 
or herself from any criminal investigation involving either the president 
or vice president. Congress enacted the independent counsel law in 
1978 to establish procedures for the attorney general to seek the 
appointment of an independent investigator to probe high-ranking government 
officials accused of wrongdoing, including the president and vice 
president. Public support for the law grew during the period of the 
Watergate scandal in the mid-1970s, especially President Nixon's firing 
of Special Prosecutor Archibald Cox in 1973. But in recent years, 
both Republicans and Democrats have grown increasingly critical of 
the law. Republicans strongly criticize the Iran Contra probe led 
by independent counsel Lawrence Walsh during the Reagan Administration. 
Democrats have focused their complaints on Whitewater independent 
counsel Kenneth Starr and his probe of the White House sex and perjury 
scandal. Senator Baker says he believes there is enough bipartisan 
opposition to renewing the independent counsel law that it will be 
allowed to expire next year. Jim Malone, VOA News, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>