<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981208.1600.3208 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Singer Marcia Ball grew up in Denton, Louisiana. An area rich in all 
kinds of music. From blues and zydeco to Cajun and rockabilly. Ms. 
Ball was on her way to San Francisco in the early 1970's. When her 
car broke down in Austin, Texas. A city that had a growing musical 
scene of its own. And it's been her home base ever since. Caroline 
Weaver has a profile of Marcia Ball. I've never thought about moving. 
I mean, there are other places that you can go and maybe get a break. 
Or get a different kind of a break. But once I got here, I just felt 
like this was where I was set to be. Marcia Ball lives on an Austin 
side street. In a small house that's full of her husband's paintings. 
A tall, angular woman with enormous eyes and black hair that's graying. 
She's famous for her great live shows. And her records have the same 
energy. The title cut of her latest album, an old Tampa Red song called 
"Let Me Play With Your Poodle," features her both singing and playing 
piano. Marcia Ball didn't plan to become a singer. She studied English 
at Louisiana State University in Baton Rouge. But she also kept joining 
rock bands. Playing piano and guitar. Eventually, she discovered her 
singing voice was good for more than just back-up harmonies. In Austin, 
she played country music for a while. But by the early 1980's she 
had returned to her roots. Gulf coast rhythm and blues. That's really 
what I grew up with. It's the bottom line. And it's what moves me 
the most. To listen to listen to all kinds of music, and I appreciate 
it. And I love country music. I really love old country music and 
western swing a lot. And I love old classic jazz, too. You know, the 
pretty songs. But when it comes time to sing and dance, it's rhythm 
and blues. Ball's song "St. Gabriel" is a blues inspired by a true 
story with a feminist twist. About a woman in prison. There's a newspaper 
reporter friend of mine up in Kansas. Who had met this woman and written 
about her. She was in jail for killing her husband. And it was a case 
of self-defense. She had been brutalized for a long, long time. And 
had many scars to prove it. And finally, in self-defense in a cornered 
situation, she ended up killing him. But she went to jail. And she 
spent 10 years in jail. And probably would have spent more time if 
my friend hadn't found out about her. And started writing about her. 
And put her situation in front of people who could do something about 
it. And so she got out. And before she did, I actually got a chance 
to meet her. "St. Gabriel" is featured on a group record, "Texans: 
Live from Mountain Stage" released by Blue Plate Music in Nashville. 
Marcia Ball's latest album, "Let Me Play With Your Poodle" is released 
by Rounder. I'm Caroline Weaver. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>