<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981208.1600.3026 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Europe could overtake the United States in 1999. As the world's leader 
in economic growth. That's according to a study by the Conference 
Board. A U.S. business research organization. Linda Kashton reports. 
The Board predicts the U.S. economy will grow a healthy 3.5 percent 
next year. But a strong euro will help Europe achieve better inflation 
and financial market performance. While the U.S. recovery may be running 
out of steam. Conference Board Chief Economist, Gail Fozler says Europe 
is still in the early stages of expansion. With significant productivity 
gains likely. In addition, she says Europe is less vulnerable to the 
trade consequences of the Asian crisis than the United States is. 
Seventeen percent of U.S. exports go to Japan, she points out. But 
Japan accounts for only about two percent of European exports. Well, 
although they have a slightly smaller exposure to Asia. Generally, 
their exposure is really more in the vein of the countries that are 
doing better in Asia. Where the U.S. is more exposed to the countries 
that are weaker. And then of course, the U.S. is intensively exposed 
to Latin America. Where Europe's primary emerging market trading partner 
is with the East. And even though Russia has its problems, the rest 
of Eastern Europe and several of the former Soviet Republics are still 
growing quite nicely. As a consequence, Ms. Fozler says Europe's exports 
are still rising modestly. While U.S. export growth has virtually 
disappeared. However, Ms. Fozler says some economic questions about 
Europe's future prosperity remain. One is: Will Europe be able to 
attract more investment in the year ahead? To date, Gail Fozler says, 
Europe attracts only 10 percent as much foreign direct investment 
as the United States. Partly, she says because European labor rules 
are more stringent. Another question: Will Europe be able to turn 
into a service sector job creation machine? Like the United States. 
Services is essentially the growing sector all around the world. Even 
some of the emerging markets have relatively stable or shrinking manufacturing 
sectors. Because of course, the competition is in manufacturing. And 
growing service sectors. And as economies advance, the demand for 
services begins to take some dominance relative to the demand for 
goods. So allowing those sectors to grow and create jobs. Which essentially, 
offset the losses in manufacturing. Helps to keep the total economic 
dynamic going. Ms. Fozler says Europe has a way to go to catch up. 
Service sector jobs account for 73 percent of U.S. economic growth. 
But only 50 percent of Europe's. Linda Kashton, VOA News, Washington. 
And that's business news. In this hour of VOA News Now. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>