<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981208.1600.0834 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In Kenya, officials investigating allegations of public land being 
seized for private gain. Have named the country's attorney general 
as one of the beneficiaries. As VOA's Scott Stearns reports from Nairobi. 
Senior government officials deny any involvement in the land dispute. 
A Parliamentary investigation has named Attorney General Amis Wocko 
and Natural Resource Administrator Francis Letoto among the top officials 
who received land previously used for agricultural research. The plots 
in the western town of Kikale belonged to Kenya's Planned Health Service. 
And to the Agricultural Research Institute. Parliament's Public Investment 
Committee says it's considering calling top officials. To testify 
about how they got the land. Officials, who include provincial and 
district commissioners, a permanent secretary, and a former police 
chief. Attorney General Wocko says the plots in question do not belong 
to him as an individual. But to a company. He told reporters in Mombassa 
that the land is 80 hectares. Not the 100 claimed by public investment 
chairman, Wongeiki Kuyne. Attorney General Wocko says the issue is 
clearly under investigation. And the truth will come out once that 
investigation's complete. Land grabbing has become an increasingly 
emotional issue in Kenya. Local artisans clashed with police over 
land they say is being taken by wealthy merchants. Police say the 
artisans are squatting on the land illegally. Many Kenyans live and 
work on land they don't really own. Some families farming plots for 
generations. Without any formal claim. With British colonialists holding 
the best land, title deeds became a highly political issue at Kenya's 
independence. And it concerns that the new ruling party was rewarding 
supporters with free land. The government agreed on a willing seller, 
willing buyer policy. Leaving land distribution to market forces. 
The subsequent migration of Ethnic Kekulyu into largely Kolinjian 
areas of the Rift Valley has been the source of often violent confrontations. 
Then there's the land held in public trust. Land like the Agricultural 
Research Institute. Where there's been little science since its plots 
were allocated four years ago. In Nairobi's northern suburb, the Korura 
Forest is being cut. Much of it's already been cleared by developers. 
Who oppositions of Parliament say got their land illegally. Kenya's 
architectural association has instructed its members not to assist 
in any projects at Korura. A leading partner in the law firm that 
incorporated more than half of the companies that got the land. Has 
been forced to retire. Members of Greenbelt Movements from 25 countries 
left a conference in Nairobi over the weekend. And went to Korura 
to plant trees. There, they found police in riot gear. Who kept their 
distance as the planting went on. Earlier this year, demonstrators 
destroyed construction equipment in the forest. Where more than 500 
acres have already been allocated for private developments. Scott 
Stearns, VOA News, Nairobi. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>