<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981208.0500.0521 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The North Koreans are building underground missile launch sites, according 
to a new report from Japan's NHK Television. The network quotes U.S. 
intelligence sources who indicate the site should be completed within 
two years and that they would allow Pyung Yang to conceal preparations 
for future missile launches. North Korea caused a scare in Japan last 
August when it test fired its new Tipo Dong one missile over Japanese 
territory. The New York Times newspaper says U.S. officials are concerned 
that Pyung Yang is preparing another such test. This report emerges 
as a U.S. envoy, William Perry, makes a three nation tour through 
the region to reassess United States policy toward North Korea. He's 
visiting South Korea, Japan and China. The suggestion of underground 
missile launch sites should come as no surprise to U.S. officials 
however. James Kelley, the president of the research organization 
known as the Pacific Forum says North Korea has a reputation for building 
extensive underground facilities. Well, there's a long legacy of mining 
in North Korea and so they have been well known in military circles 
for many years for the breadth and extent of the underground facilities 
which I'm not aware of any westerners who've actually been inside 
of them. And obviously these help very much in concealment. For example, 
the very large number of forces that they North Koreans maintain just 
north of the demilitarized zone have extensive cave digging and concealment 
in which entire mile-long columns of troops and artillery are able 
to be concealed along with literally hundreds if not thousands of 
concealed in solid rock artillery positions. The tunnels under the 
demilitarized zone of which I think three or four have been found 
over the years but in which many more are believed to exist are themselves 
quite engineering marvels, 10 or 12 foot tunnels that extend for miles, 
2, 300 feet underneath the demilitarized zone. Connect these then 
to the suspicions which are currently the matter of negotiations about 
a suspected underground nuclear facility. Well, they clearly connect 
with North Korea's strategy of preservation amidst its inability to 
feed its own population and in doing so, North Korea has developed 
various threats against it's not clear what kind of invasions if they 
would expect. But which mobilizes population and keeps tensions and 
which they have had some success in the form of their earlier nuclear 
program of being rewarded for stopping the execution of that program. 
So there may be some hope that if they do this again we'll pay them 
again to stop it. That's why, in a recent piece I wrote in the International 
Herald Tribune I suggested that time was not on our side. But it's 
clearly a matter of considerable delicacy and former Secretary of 
Defense William Perry's visit to assess the feeling of our allies 
and Chinese I think is well aimed trip to adjust American policy to 
what maybe an increasingly difficult situation. It's clearly an inward 
looking regime, but it has a very difficult hand to play here now, 
because it is simply incapable of feeding itself. It is military effectiveness 
of its huge army seems to be diminishing and they may be choosing 
to go the path of weapons of mass destruction to signal to others 
that they somehow need to be preserved in their control of the country. 
James Kelley is the president of the Pacific Forum, a research organization 
located in Honolulu, Hawaii. U.S. and North Korean officials will 
discuss regional security issues today as they continue talks in Washington. 
U.S. negotiators are expected to press for access to this suspected 
underground nuclear facility that Washington says North Korea is trying 
to build. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>