<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981208.0500.0360 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
the possibility that renegade nations or terrorist groups will arm 
themselves with weapons of mass destruction is a serious threat to 
international stability and the post cold war world. And that is a 
major issue under consideration by NATO as it repositions itself and 
its new era. Secretary of State Madelaine Albright meets with other 
NATO foreign ministers in Brussels today to discuss these issues and 
VOA's Kyle King reports from the State Department. With just four 
months to go before NATO celebrates its 50th anniversary, officials 
are debating a new strategy to take the alliance into the 21st century. 
Secretary of State Albright says NATO's main mission will always remain 
the defense against aggression. But in an article in the Financial 
Times of London, she says NATO strategy must now take into account 
the fact that alliance territory and alliance interests can be affected 
by a range of risks from a variety of sources. State Department spokesman 
James Foley says Ms. Albright will use her talks in Brussels to urge 
her NATO colleagues to adopt a common understanding of the new threats, 
including the threat from the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and 
biological weapons. And on the questions of weapons of mass destruction, 
we're encouraging the alliance to work on a common understanding of 
the threat from weapons of mass destruction. We must improve overall 
alliance efforts, both to stem proliferation and to deter, prevent 
and protect against such attacks. The New York Times says the administration 
is planning to propose the creation of a new NATO center that will 
share intelligence information and produce a more unified assessment 
of threats from specific nations or individuals. Other proposals are 
said to call for greater collaboration on things like vaccines, research 
and equipment to help lessen the cost for individual nations. The 
last time NATO revised its political and military mission was in 1991, 
before the collapse of the Soviet Union. Now officials say, questions 
of strategic balance and numbers of tanks, planes and missiles are 
no longer as important as they once were. The emphasis has shifted 
to questions like terrorism and peacekeeping operations in places 
like Bosnia. During her two-day visit to Brussels, Ms. Albright will 
also be holding discussions with NATO Secretary General Havier Salana 
and meeting with a host of other officials on the sidelines of the 
talks. Kyle King, VOA news, the State Department. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>