<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981208.0500.2707 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
American cities are continuing their efforts to reduce water pollution 
and there is some evidence to report of success. In New York City 
for example, more and more water birds are showing up in coastal waterways. 
And VOA's Martin Bush reports. Many species of water birds once threatened 
with extinction are now thriving in New York City's waters, among 
them the snowy egret, the cormorant and the glossy ibis. The water 
bird population has increased because the city's waterways have gotten 
cleaner. The U.S. Clean Water Act of 1972 is responsible for most 
of the improvement. It requires improved sewage treatment and reduced 
pollution. Peter Matt is president of the New Yortk Audubon Society, 
a private, nonprofit organization dedicated to the conservation and 
study of birds. He says there were not many waterfowl in the area 
before 1972. The thing that was damaging or prevented those birds 
from being here was that there was no food available for them and 
there was no food available for them because the small fish that they 
ordinarily would eat couldn't live in some of the areas around the 
city because there was not enough oxygen in the water. Water birds 
nest and forage where people seldom go, deserted islands, wrecked, 
old barges, abandoned shipyards, tumbled down waterfront buildings. 
And most places where the water birds live have colorful names, Shooters' 
Island, the Kill U Thant Island. There's also the Meadowlands wetland, 
a vast area once a garbage dump which the state of New Jersey is gradually 
reclaiming. Don Smith, a naturalist working on the reclamation project, 
is also a bird lover. And here we can see right up ahead of us in 
this pond the water is literally wall to wall with green wing teal 
ducks and a few other species. Look at all those teal getting up. 
Look at that sight. If an oil tanker leaks its cargo, the result can 
be deadly for water birds nearby, especially in the Arthur Kill, a 
New York waterway where the tankers load and discharge their cargo. 
But notes the Audubon Society's Peter Matt, oil spills are not the 
problem they once were. I know for example if you went into the Arthur 
Kill today, you would find every tanker that's loading or unloading 
fuel surrounded by booms. So that if anything is spilled, it's contained 
inside those booms. Peter Matt says one major problem for waterfowl 
persists in metropolitan New York waters, pollution from human waste. 
All of the sewer plants in our communities are able to handle that 
waste so long as it doesn't rain. As soon as it rains, if it rains 
a lot, the plants can't handle the volume of water and the sewage 
spills over unprocessed into the estuaries. Cleaning that up is going 
to require immense political will, principally because it's going 
to be so expensive. As to the expanding presence of waterfowl in New 
York's waters, the New York Times calls it a testament to the incredible 
resilience of nature. Martin Bush, VOA News, New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>