<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981208.0500.0811 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It is universal time on VOA news now. Welcome aboard. President Clinton 
is accused of perjury and obstruction of justice in trying to conceal 
his affair with Monica Lewinsky, a former White House intern. The 
House Judiciary Committee is weighing these charges and today President 
Clinton's lawyers are expected to make their case against impeachment. 
But as VOA's Paula Wolfson reports, they probably will not change 
any minds in the panel. The presidential attorneys no their task is 
crucial. Most Judiciary Committee members have already made their 
views known for or against the president. And the panel's expected 
to approve formal charges against Mr. Clinton Friday or Saturday on 
a strict party line vote. The target for the president's lawyers will 
not be the 37 congressmen and women who sit on the committee, but 
rather the 398 other lawmakers in the House of Representatives. The 
full House will vote on the committee's recommendations next week 
and the outcome is expected to be very close, so close that fewer 
than 10 undecided Republicans could make all the difference. White 
House spokesman Joe Lockhart underscores the importance of the mission 
facing the president's lawyer. We are going to present over the next 
two days a very serious case for why the allegations as raised do 
not meet a constitutional standard for impeachment. The president's 
legal team plans to call 14 witnesses. Most are legal scholars and 
none are directly involved in the case. Committee Chairman Henry Hyde 
admits he's not overly impressed by the witness list. He says he wants 
to hear the White House rebut the charges of wrongdoing submitted 
to Congress by independent counsel Kenneth Starr. There are lots of 
questions and we'd like to hear some evidence on, but we'll hear from 
professors giving us their interpretation, perhaps unique, of the 
constitution. Mr. Hyde's committee has started work on articles of 
impeachment, legislation formally charging the president with impeachable 
offenses. But he says the drafting process will be put on hold until 
the president's lawyers complete their presentation. The Illinois 
Republican offers scant hope the panel will also offer the full House 
an alternative, a censure resolution criticizing the president in 
the strongest possible language for actions taken to cover up his 
affair with former White House intern Monica Lewinsky. Paul Wolfson, 
VOA News, Capitol Hill. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>