<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981208.1600.2300 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In a controversial decision in September, the British government announced 
it would require people arriving from Slovakia to have visas. British 
officials said the requirement is necessary. Because more than one 
thousand Slovaks have requested asylum in Britain this year alone. 
Following an influx of hundreds of Czech gypsies the year before. 
Britain's decision has been interpreted by Human Rights Group as an 
attempt to control the entry of gypsies, or Roma. A Roma human rights 
group based in Hungary says by requiring visas for Slovaks, the British 
government is sending a bad message to other countries in the European 
Union. Dimitria Petrova of the European Roma Center in Budapest, notes 
that EU countries have signed on to a treaty that permits border crossings 
without passports or other controls. If, let's just hypothetically 
imagine for some reason, Hungarian Roma or Polish Roma start to emigrate 
to any one shangyan country. The shangyan countries will, I think, 
reintroduce visas for the Hungarians and the Poles. No matter how 
democratic Hungary or Poland may be. Because of Europe's racism toward 
the Roma. Ms. Petrova says Britain's concern about gypsy immigrants 
began last year. When many Roma from the Czech Republic entered Britain 
on their way to Canada. A controversial television program shown in 
the Czech Republic depicted a better economic life in Canada. But 
Ms. Petrova says most Slovak Roma are not fleeing their country for 
economic reasons. The Roma will emigrate to England. The Roma who 
in fact, are better off economically. Who have better living conditions. 
And we are convinced that Roma escaped persecution. Ms. Petrova echoed 
the concerns of a recent report by the European Council. Which said 
Neo-fascist violence by skinheads against the Roma is on the increase 
in Slovakia and the Czech Republic. The skinheads movement is on the 
rise. There have been cases of killing by skinheads. There was this 
more dramatic case. When skinheads burned to death Mario Gural. A 
young Slovak Roma person. And there have been other cases which have 
resulted in death. Ms. Petrova says the policies of the opposition 
parties which ousted Nationalist Prime Minister Vladamir Metchyar. 
Are unlikely to be much different when it comes to the Roma. In its 
review of the status of gypsies in the neighboring Czech Republic, 
the Council of Europe says while there are some good policies at the 
Federal Level. They're not being implemented at the local level. Josephine 
Berstajit, who headed the Delegation, says the government must do 
more to incorporate the Roma into Czech life. Ms. Berstajit says to 
start with, the state should prosecute those who assault the Roma. 
A Roma member of the Council of Europe Delegation, Andre Mirga, is 
a Polish-born gypsy. Mr. Mirga says the reasons for the sudden desire 
among Roma to emigrate are obvious. Roma in Czech Republic do not 
feel secure. They do feel well-protected very long. And they are motivated, 
for example, to emigrate. Andre Mirga is currently a professor at 
Rutgers University in the United States. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>