<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981208.1600.2694 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Responding to angry demands from American farmers and cattle ranchers. 
The United States and Canada have agreed to lower barriers to cross 
border grain and livestock trade. And to ease other long-standing 
trade frictions. Rob Siveck reports. After weeks of tense discussions, 
U.S. and Canadian trade and agriculture officials have reached agreement 
on a series of measures. To open Canada's grain and livestock markets 
to more U.S. products. And head off future frictions over farm trade. 
U.S. Trade Representative Charlene Barshevsky told reporters in Washington. 
The first phase of the agreement covers a broad range of issues effecting 
the $15 billion a year farm trade between the United States and Canada. 
Today's first step will make exporting and shipping to Canada easier. 
Reduce paperwork and unnecessary regulation. And move us toward broader 
reforms. Specifically, the new trade agreement will address the complaints 
of many U.S. grain farmers. That Canada has been dumping low-priced 
subsidized wheat into the U.S. market. Thus hurting U.S. grain producers. 
The new agreement requires Canada to provide more detailed information 
about the price and quality of grain it ships to the United States. 
And U.S. Agriculture Secretary Dan Glickman says Canada has also agreed 
to lower its barriers to U.S. grain exports. For the first time, we'll 
allow U.S. wheat to move into designated elevators in Western Canada. 
It will also allow wheat, barley, and other grains to be transshipped 
through Canada to U.S. ports. An option that should provide more competitive 
transportation alternatives for our producers in the northern tier 
states. In addition, the agreement will harmonize cross-border veterinary 
rules. And open more Canadian markets to U.S. swine and cattle exports. 
A big win for American pork and beef producers. They have been protesting 
with the support of several northern state governors. That large numbers 
of Canadian livestock are sold into the United States for fattening. 
While U.S. livestock has been largely prohibited from Canadian feed 
lots. The new pact imposes no limits on Canadian livestock exports 
to the U.S. Canadian Agriculture Minister Lyle Van Clete, speaking 
to a farm conference in Washington. Said Canada is a staunch believer 
in free and fair trade. Mr. Van Clete insisted that while it is easy 
for financially-squeezed American farmers to blame their pain on Canadian 
trade practices. Canada is not the villain. Don't tell us that from 
yours. The bottom line is that market forces, not government treasuries 
have been more and more. The drivers determining production and trade 
patterns within all of North America. This has been Canada's aim. 
And we hope it's also the aim of the United States. According to Chuck 
Lambert, of the National Cattleman's Beef Association, most American 
farmers know that global market forces are to blame. For most of their 
financial woes. But Mr. Lambert faults Canada for ignoring, until 
now, American farmers' frustration with Canadian trade policies. A 
lot of these irritants that were in place that could be addressed. 
It is kind of a sad state of affairs. That the tensions had to come 
has high as they were. Before we could sit down and really get some 
policy movements on those types of issues. U.S. and Canadian officials 
have pledged to meet regularly and often. To discuss bilateral farm 
trade issues. They said such discussions will not only smooth U.S./Canadian 
commerce. But also avert the border protests and angry confrontations 
that spark the new agreement. In Washington, I'm Rob Siveck. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>