<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981208.1600.1354 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Well, the Christmas holiday shopping season has begun. And parents 
here in the United States are scrambling to buy the most popular toys 
before they're literally sold off the shelves. Once again, high technology 
toys top the list of popular toys among children. But before the age 
of computers, toy trains were frequently requested by boys, if not 
always, girls. Toy trains may not be as popular with children as they 
once were. But an entrepreneur in Columbia, Maryland has discovered 
that adults are buying them. As VOA's Susan Loag discovered when she 
visited MTH Electric Trains. Mike Wolf throws the control switch and 
a silver Amtrak passenger train pulls out of the station and begins 
to move along the track. Winding its way through a model landscape 
of farms and towns. Of houses, trees, shops, lampposts, cars, and 
people. The elaborate layout fills an entire room of the corporate 
headquarters of MTH Electric Trains. As the passenger train comes 
to a halt, Mr. Wolf pulls another switch. And sets a freight train 
pulled by a black steam engine in motion on a separate track. Now 
this looks like this town, the cars, the houses, the people. This 
looks like it's probably sometime in the 1950's. Why did you choose 
that period? That was the biggest era for toy trains. And that's what 
the people who are buying the stuff that they're reminiscing about. 
At 37, Mike Wolf is too young to remember the 1950's. But his average 
customer, at age 52, is not. I had a retail store at one point in 
the mid-80's. And we were Lionel's second-largest distributor. Customers 
would come in and they'd say: "I'd like to buy an old black steam 
engine like I had. It was about this big and it was really heavy." 
So you give them what Lionel currently makes. And they say: "No, no. 
This is not it. It's big and heavy." And you show them one of the 
old used trains from the 1950's. "Yes, that's it. That's what I want." 
And so I knew that there was a demand out there for that type of quality 
Lionel made back in the 50's. Lionel is the name most associated with 
model trains here in the United States. It has been in the business 
for nearly a century. But in the past five years, Mike Wolf has already 
produced a greater variety of model steam and diesel locomotives than 
Lionel has in its entire history. The MTH Electric Trains may recall 
the quality of the model trains of the 1950's. But they've been updated 
with new technology. Smoke billows from the engines. And sound emanates 
from speakers underneath the cab. Mike Wolf says a microprocessor 
stores sounds recorded from real trains. You get a scanner outside 
the real railroad yards. And scan the conversations. So these are 
actual real conversations that we took out. The founder and CEO of 
MTH has been playing with trains since he was a boy. And even then 
he found a way to make money with his favorite pastime. When I was 
12 years old, I rode my bike over to a neighborhood guy. Who was manufacturing 
trains in his basement. And it was $1.50 an hour. Which was a lot 
of money back then. By the time he was 19, Mike Wolf had his own mail-order 
business. And within three years, he was making his own trains. Working 
out of his parents' home. He had a five year contract to produce trains 
for Lionel. But in 1993 decided to set up his own company, MTH. Business 
has been good. MTH Electric Trains has captured 40 percent of the 
most popular collector's market in O gauge model trains. A model train 
collector spends an average of $2,000 to $4,000 a year on the hobby, 
according to Mr. Wolf. But chances are he was introduced to electric 
trains as a child. Often at Christmastime. It's an American tradition 
of a train around the tree. It starts that way. And I think it's a 
good experience that the whole family can enjoy. And some will become 
model railroaders. Or they'll remember that train around the tree. 
And want their children to have it. Or their grandchildren to have 
it. Mike Wolf is working to expand his market. By targeting those 
family customers. With a model line called Rail King. Which is less 
expensive than the serious collectors' O gauge models. And is sold 
in starter sets. Complete with everything the first-time buyer needs. 
In starter sets we don't make a whole lot of money on. In some cases, 
not any. But it is our business card to the consumer. And we feel 
that once they buy that, which they can buy over our website. We know 
they'll come back. Because the quality is what they remember in the 
50's. As every business owner knows, repeat customers are the hallmark 
of success. Mike Wolf plans to have many repeat customers in the years 
ahead. And even expects to surpass Lionel Trains. To become the number 
one manufacturer of electric toy trains. I'm Susan Loag. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>