<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981015.0557 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A wary NATO and world leaders kept up the pressure Thursday on President 
Slobodan Milosevic to withdraw more Serb forces from the Kosovo province 
before Saturday's deadline for threatened airstrikes. About halfway 
through the four-day grace period given Milosevic to show he's met 
international demands on ending turmoil in the secessionist province, 
NATO's chief said the Yugoslav leader was making progress toward compliance 
but still had a ways to go. That came amid new accusations by ethnic 
Albanian refugees of intimidation by Serb police. The alliance planned 
to send its secretary-general, Javier Solana, and two top commanders 
to Belgrade to sign an air surveillance deal for Kosovo and reinforce 
that he is not yet complying with the accord reached this week with 
U.S. envoy Richard Holbrooke. ``I would send a very clear message'' 
to Milosevic, Solana said Thursday in Brussels, Belgium. ``And that 
is that the solution to the problem is not signing papers but to comply 
with agreements that have been achieved.'' International officials 
also gathered Thursday in Paris and Vienna as part of the assessment 
process to make sure Milosevic is keeping his word. Hundreds of people 
have been killed and an estimated 300,000 displaced from their homes 
during Milosevic's crackdown on the Kosovo Liberation Army fighting 
for independence of the largely ethnic Albanian province. In Kosovo, 
the U.N. refugee agency delivered more aid to those displaced by the 
crackdown in the secessionist province in Serbia, the dominant Yugoslav 
republic. In the town of Kisna Reka, refugees living in a makeshift 
camp of 3,000 people in a nearby gully carted off 50-kilogram (110-pound) 
sacks of flour, bags of clothing, cooking oil and other supplies delivered 
by the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees. Asked how long they could 
stay in the woods, a man who gave his name only as Rexhep said: ``Until 
we die. We don't know how much we can take. We are afraid to go back.'' 
Efforts to restore more stability to Kosovo moved forward. Two top 
NATO commanders _ U.S. Gen. Wesley Clark and Germany's Klaus Naumann, 
chairman of the alliance's military committee _ were expected to fly 
to Belgrade with Solana later Thursday. The Balkans Contact Group 
of five leading Western nations plus Russia met for several hours 
in Paris. Later, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in 
Europe was set to approve the verification mission it will oversee 
in Kosovo. The move will authorize Polish Foreign Minister Bronislaw 
Geremek, the OSCE chairman, to sign an agreement on the mission with 
Yugoslav authorities in Belgrade on Friday. The verification mission 
was a key part of the deal Holbrooke struck Monday with Milosevic 
to end the seven-month crackdown on Kosovo Albanians. Western nations 
were discussing naming Jacques Klein, the American deputy to Bosnia's 
top international mediator Carlos Westendorp, as head of the 2,000-person 
mission _ to be composed largely of Europeans. Britain has pledged 
to contribute 200 people to the verification force, and both Russia 
and Germany are expected to make similar contributions. But it's expected 
to take weeks to organize the OSCE force. Efforts to save Kosovo's 
refugees from disaster have been stepped up since the agreement, which 
put off the threat of impending airstrikes against Yugoslavia. But 
many remain in hiding or refuse to return to their homes, fearing 
reprisals from Serb special police who have torched their villages 
and been accused of atrocities. At Kisna Reka, the refugees complained 
that Serbian security forces fired machine guns, mortars and other 
weapons throughout the night, apparently to intimidate them from planning 
a return to their villages. ``There's nobody there'' in the villages, 
said Fatmir Nuhaj, 27, his arms wrapped around his young son's shoulders. 
``It's only to keep us from our homes.'' They complained that unarmed 
monitors will do them no good. The Serbs, for their part, complain 
that the KLA rebels, who declared a cease-fire, are continuing attacks 
on police in the province. A Serb police source who declined to give 
his name said three policemen were wounded Wednesday and another one 
Thursday when they were ambushed on a major Kosovo road, some 30 kilometers 
(20 miles) west of the capital Pristina. Among the demands Milosevic 
must meet by Saturday, the one in which he appears to be the furthest 
from compliance is withdrawal of his forces to levels before the crackdown 
began on Feb. 28. A NATO official speaking on condition of anonymity 
said Wednesday that some Yugoslav units remained in Kosovo. He declined 
to say how many but said they far exceed the level required by NATO. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>