<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981015.0152 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A wary NATO and world leaders are keeping up the pressure on President 
Slobodan Milosevic, saying he needs to withdraw many more Serb forces 
from Kosovo before Saturday's deadline. About halfway through the 
four-day grace period given Milosevic to show he's met international 
demands on ending Kosovo turmoil, NATO officials said he had a long 
way to go. And despite noting signs of progress, a U.S. spokesman 
called compliance efforts ``a mixed bag.'' ``NATO authorities will 
have to make a judgment at the end of the week, whether there is substantial 
and serious compliance on the part of President Milosevic,'' State 
Department spokesman James Rubin said in Washington on Wednesday. 
In case there isn't, the alliance is continuing with preparations 
for air raids against the Serbs. NATO warplanes are being moved to 
bases in Italy, just across the Adriatic Sea from Yugoslavia. International 
officials gathered in Paris and Vienna on Thursday as part of the 
assessment process and push for peace in Kosovo. The Balkans Contact 
Group of five leading Western nations plus Russia was to meet in Paris. 
Later Thursday, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe 
was set to approve the verification mission it will oversee in Kosovo. 
The move will authorize Polish Foreign Minister Bronislaw Geremek, 
the OSCE chairman, to sign an agreement on the mission with Yugoslav 
authorities in Belgrade on Friday. The verification mission was a 
key part of the deal struck Monday by U.S. envoy Richard Holbrooke 
with Milosevic to end his seven-month crackdown on Kosovo. Western 
nations are discussing naming Jacques Klein, the American deputy to 
Bosnia's top international mediator Carlos Westendorp, as head of 
the 2,000-person mission _ to be composed largely of Europeans. British 
Foreign Minister Robin Cook said Wednesday that Britain will contribute 
200 people to the verification force, and both Russia and Germany 
are expected to make similar contributions. Efforts to save Kosovo's 
refugees from disaster have been stepped up in the aftermath of the 
agreement, which put off the threat of impending airstrikes against 
Yugoslavia. The U.N. refugee agency resumed aid convoys to refugees 
Wednesday, two days after suspending them for fear of Serb retaliation 
if NATO attacked. Rubin said European and American monitors _ the 
advance team for the verification force _ found evidence of refugees 
returning. But many refugees remained in hiding, fearing reprisals 
from Serb special police who have torched their villages and been 
accused of atrocities against civilians _ not just rebel fighters 
fighting for Kosovo's independence. ``He's lying!'' said Hajdin Mehmeti, 
a 70-year-old refugee in the forested hamlet of Baks, referring to 
the Yugoslav president's pledges. ``Until the NATO planes fly here, 
Milosevic will say whatever people want to hear.'' Hundreds of people 
have been killed and an estimated 300,000 displaced from their homes 
by Milosevic's crackdown against ethnic Albanian separatists in the 
southern Serbian province. Many are crammed into houses with relatives 
and other refugees; tens of thousands of others remain camped and 
are vulnerable to worsening weather in hilly Kosovo. Among the demands 
Milosevic must meet by Saturday, the one in which he appears to be 
the furthest from compliance is withdrawal of his forces to levels 
before the crackdown began on Feb. 28. A NATO official speaking on 
condition of anonymity said Wednesday in Brussels that some Yugoslav 
units remained in Kosovo. He declined to say how many but said they 
far exceed the level required by NATO. A week ago, Washington said 
Milosevic had withdrawn only 40 percent of the troops he sent into 
Kosovo and only 1,000 of 10,000 special police. International officials 
acknowledge they won't have a full picture of the situation until 
the monitoring mission begins. It's expected to take days or weeks 
to assemble the force from the OSCE's 54 member nations. The monitors 
will be unarmed, and officials in Washington said Wednesday the NATO 
allies are planning to protect them by deploying an offshore backup 
force in the Adriatic Sea, capable of carrying out rescue missions. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>