<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981015.0340 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
China and Taiwan moved closer Thursday to resuming formal negotiations 
broken off three years ago, as their top envoys agreed to have their 
aides explore re-establishing routine talks. In a further sign of 
the improving atmosphere, Taiwan's Koo Chen-fu invited his Chinese 
counterpart, Wang Daohan, to visit Taiwan, and Wang agreed to visit 
at a mutually convenient time, Koo's spokesman said. The agreement 
on having aides to Koo and Wang consider a resumption of routine talks 
was reached in the convivial atmosphere of a meeting over Chinese-style 
tea at a swank Shanghai hotel. The two officials met for the first 
time in five years Wednesday, holding an hour-long discussion that 
mixed pleasantries with the divisive positions that have kept the 
two sides from resuming the formal negotiations Beijing scrubbed three 
years ago. The informal setting of Thursday's meeting _ Koo and his 
wife joined Wang and his wife at a round tea table with their aides 
sitting at similar tables nearby _ belied the importance of the talks. 
Just the fact that the two elder statesmen were meeting face-to-face 
appeared to be enough to propel relations between the divided governments 
forward. Political heirs to the antagonists in the Chinese civil war, 
China and Taiwan split after Mao Tse-tung's Communists forced Chiang 
Kai-shek's Nationalists off the mainland in 1949. Koo, an 81-year-old 
business tycoon and Nationalist Party elder, and Wang, an 84-year-old 
Communist Party stalwart and mentor to Chinese President Jiang Zemin, 
held their first and until Wednesday only meeting in Singapore in 
1993. China suspended the lower-level dialogue Wang and Koo started 
after Taiwan President Lee Teng-hui traveled to the United States 
in 1995, a move Beijing interpreted as a signal he was reneging on 
eventual reunification. Chinese test-missile launches and war games 
near Taiwan strained relations to their most tense since the height 
of the Cold War. A resumption of talks would suit both sides. The 
Nationalists hope to win business support through improved ties with 
China _ a key destination for Taiwan investment. Chinese President 
Jiang, likewise, faces pressure from the powerful Chinese military 
and communist old guard to get Taiwan to agree to reunification. Until 
now, talks have been held up by China's insistence that negotiations 
deal directly with thorny political issues, including reunification, 
while Taipei wants to have the talks pick up where they left off, 
settling practical issues like fishing disputes. On Thursday, Koo 
renewed his effort to address practical issues, such as business concerns, 
that his government wants to deal with first. During a luncheon with 
Taiwanese business executives _ who have committed dlrs 35 billion 
in investment in China over the past decade _ Koo said he was aware 
of their urgent concerns about the safety of their investments and 
their personal security. He said both sides had agreed to discuss 
such problems. ``I hope that we can at an early point hold consultations 
to establish a normal order for economic and trade relations between 
the two sides. That will allow each of you to feel secure and at ease 
in investing in the mainland,'' Koo said. Koo pressed his practical 
agenda at Wednesday's meeting with Wang and during sightseeing Thursday 
morning. After touring Shanghai's Pudong district _ a swath of farmland 
transformed over the past decade into a collection of factories and 
office towers _ Koo toured the fledgling stock exchange. ``Open and 
fair business dealings require stricter laws and more transparent 
regulation,'' Koo told reporters as floor traders looked on. Later 
Thursday, Wang and Koo were to dine and attend a traditional Beijing 
opera together. In an indication of the hopes China is placing on 
the visit, Koo will meet Chinese President Jiang and Vice Premier 
Qian Qichen over the weekend in Beijing. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>