<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981015.1600.0567 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
An arraignment for the man accused of shooting two police officers 
at the U.S. capitol building in July has been postponed. The attorney 
for Russell Weston says he's considering an insanity defense. A psychiatrist 
will evaluate Weston to determine if he understands the charges against 
him and is competent to stand trial. Weston is said to have schizophrenia. 
So do Ted kacyzinski and John hinkley. But they are not representative 
of the people with the disorder. Rhonda Rowland reports. Charlie chastain 
says most people are surprised when they find out he has schizophrenia. 
He developed the tell-tale signs of the brain disease when he was 
15. The chastains were told to expect the worst. He would probably 
have to be in a locked facility the major part of his life. And we 
would be visiting on holidays. So the family should be prepared to 
adjust to that. But that's not how life turned out for Charlie. He 
attributes much of his success to what he found four years after his 
first break with reality -- the right medication. I really think if 
I went off my medicine I'd probably end up in a psychiatric hospital. 
That fear motivates him to continue his treatment. Unfortunately, 
among people with schizophrenia, Charlie is the exception, not the 
rule. When you see a homeless person, there's a good chance he or 
she has schizophrenia. Medication could help a lot of these people. 
So it makes you wonder, "why aren't there more charlies?" Dr. E. Fuller 
torrey is a leader in schizophrenia research. He says the biggest 
reason people don't get help is they don't realize they're sick. Doctors 
say a good example are those like Russell Weston, who's accused of 
shooting people on Capitol Hill in July. So when you say to someone 
like Mr. Weston, "you need your medication," he'll say, "why should 
I take medication? There's nothing wrong with me." Charlie sees the 
well-publicized events like the Capitol Hill shooting as a serious 
setback for people like him. It's a little frustrating, 'cause there's 
a lot of stigma there. You know, they can see, "oh, he killed the 
president. And well, of course he has schizophrenia." I think it's 
a misrepresentation. We hear about the schizophrenics who've committed 
violent acts. Every day, we see the homeless mentally ill on our streets. 
They're also in our prisons. But many of them, if given the proper 
treatment, might be able to live more normal lives, like Charlie. 
Rhonda Rowland, CNN, Atlanta. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>