<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981015.1600.1516 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It may be the best advertising Hollywood could hope for. Anything 
that turns you into a walking billboard for a movie, TV show or musician 
is fair game. Gloria Hillard reports. It was a taping of the fox sitcom 
"holding the baby." And members of the studio audience were holding 
T-shirts, baseball caps and other promotional stuff. Some people even 
Sang for a T-shirt. Raindrops keep Fallin' on my head Yes, when it 
comes to promotion, it's not just billboards, promos and trailers 
anymore. Hello, there, girly bug. Shoe, fly. Don't bother me. "A bug's 
life" -- Just think about how many times you might see a "Titanic" 
hat over the course of a summer in comparison to that one television 
spot. We create a low-cost way for the studios, for the record companies, 
to promote their product. Secret identity is just one of the companies 
that creates promotional products given away in conjunction with contests, 
film premieres or even sent to members of the media. And there were 
a few items around the office. Here's one of my favorites from the 
film "George of the jungle," a zippered coconut. I don't know. I guess 
you could put your stuff in there or something. This is the "Armageddon" 
clock. You see a few of those around here, which I guess works for 
deadlines when you come to think of it. You got it, "Godzilla." This 
one's a little tougher, though -- the "waterworld" mouse pad. In developing 
promotional campaigns for studios and record companies, it usually 
begins -- Let's take "Titanic." We would be shown the script, of course. 
We would see trailers. The number one item for "Titanic" was the Titanic 
treasure box which held inside an original replica ticket for to board 
the boat. For the film "men in black," it was, of course, hats, sunglasses 
and glow-in-the-dark watches. For the heavy metal group metallica 
-- Ashtrays, glasses, and, you know, the steel look. And everything 
is thematic for metallica. For country artist Shania Twain, it's pastel 
T-shirts, candles and address books. For the hit TV show "Ally McBeal," 
the promotional campaign supports a female, gen-X gap demographic 
with flannel pajamas, a cap and cappuccino cup. For the volcano film 
"Dante's peak," which takes place in the northwest, it was backpacks, 
thermos and a camping skillet. Now, the film "volcano" takes place 
in Los Angeles, and no one would use a camp skillet, even in a disaster, 
so it was candles, key chains and our break room toaster, which Burns 
toast, so the theme continues. A lot of times, these products are 
very useful. Well, except for that coconut with the zipper. Gloria 
Hillard, CNN Entertainment News, Los Angeles. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>