<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981015.2100.0396 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We are joined tonight in Washington by the man you just saw in Fred 
Francis' setup piece. David stempler, frequent critic of the federal 
aviation administration and an airline expert we call upon in this 
broadcast often, and David, so the common complaint is they don't 
act in a preventive way, they don't act soon enough and when they 
do, this is just a recommendation. Why not a firm plan and tell the 
airlines what to do? Well, it's like a Chinese fire drill. They're 
very confused as to what to do. It's because they're reacting to crises 
and not being proactive. They had information about this problem intensively 
about two years ago when the Chinese administration basically says 
there's a real fire hazard with this insulation, and the F.A.A. just 
sloughed it off but because of the Swissair accident where there were 
fatalities which is about the only thing that gets the F.A.A. to act 
they finally had to act. Are there any other areas you can name off 
the top of your head that have come up in the post crash investigations 
of other prominent flights that have been in the news over the past 
several years where it deserves at minimum a recommendation and at 
most an order to the airlines to get a specific problem fixed? Well, 
the clearest example, Brian, was the one with the A.T.R. 72 up in 
rose lawn, Indiana. For years they knew about icing problems with 
that airplane and with other turboprops and they ignored it and it 
wasn't until the accident that caused the grounding, as you recall, 
at least the stopping of flying in icy conditions of those airplanes 
and they finally had to make let -- retro fits on those airplanes 
and others. They act after an accident. Where do we stand after the 
T.W.A. flight 800 accident, the temperature, the fuel tanks, hot summer 
tanks, the air conditioning cells, have they all been grounded, all 
been checked and back up in the air? Well, we're still grinding away 
at the solutions to the problem. We still have no long-term solutions 
coming out of the F.A.A. or advisory groups working on it but one 
thing that did happen with that after the T.W.A. accident we would 
have thought they would have looked at every wire in, around, or near 
a fuel tank and it was only about six months after that that we had 
the problem with the 737 wires going to the fuel tank that they never 
checked. It was only because some astute continental mechanics found 
it. So again, reaction, reaction, reaction and no pro action. Last 
question. If you're an airline, what is your -- what is forcing you 
to fix the insulation? You got aircraft you know need fixing. What 
is going to force you to bring them in and get it done? As you know, 
they go through some heavy checks, what are called D checks where 
the airplanes get stripped down to the melts and this is a perfect 
time to make this changeover but the F.A.A. really won't have the 
standards established for six months. They're recommending changes 
be made now and the change -- the standards may be different after 
six months, so the airlines are really caught in a confusing situation. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>