<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981015.2100.1033 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We are joined tonight by one of the journalistic voices of Chicago, 
author of several books, Mr. Bob Greene, ladies and gentlemen, and 
Bob, going back to the Joe Johns piece just before the break, I suppose 
no flipness intend that the television viewers and voters in Chicago 
and Illinois would have been a bit more shocked to see a U.S. senator 
come on the air and apologize if they hadn't just seen the same thing 
we national level. Yeah there, is sort of a culture of apology going 
on and it's also -- there was a pretty good book -- a very good book 
a couple of years ago called "moving ourselves to death" which made 
the point that in the American culture we have to be entertained all 
the time. Not necessarily made to laugh, but it takes a little bit 
more to Jack up the level of public interest. So now if a candidate 
comes on -- an incumbent candidate comes on and apologizes, it makes 
it more interesting. It makes it more engaging to watch, and I don't 
think there's any real sense of shock that the senator apologized. 
It's all of a sudden it's got people talking about the campaign. I 
don't know if it will work. It's certainly not going to hurt her. 
Now, how is the Clinton story in general playing in the state of Illinois, 
which is in kind of an interesting bellwether position in this country 
and movements from the west to the east and from the east to the west, 
trends often hit Illinois just at the right time. Well, I travel all 
across the country writing the column and I think it's the same here 
as it is anywhere else which is that you can't escape it and I think 
in a lot of ways for those of us who report the news and certainly 
those of us who also read the papers and watch the broadcasts, it's 
a little unfortunate. I've spent much of the last year up in rural 
Wisconsin covering a case about a little 11-year-old boy who walked 
Bare foot on a freezing night and alone to the local police station 
to ask for help because his 7-year-old sister had been kept repeatedly 
in a dog cage overnight. It's one of the most compelling stories of 
bravery and trust in the system I've ever seen, and yet you probably 
don't know about it, because it hasn't been covered. It's not national 
news, because for the last year just about everything else has been 
pushed out of the news. I will go back to my hotel room at night up 
in Wisconsin and turn on the television set, and if it's not wall-to-wall 
Clinton -- I remember one night I came back when this child poured 
his heart out on the witness stand and there was a life feed from 
California and there's Latrell Sprewell talking about how upset he 
was that he was thrown off the basketball team for allege choking 
his coach and there were hundreds of reporters there. We just seem 
to have a tendency now to have hundreds, sometimes thousands of media 
latch on to one story and you wonder about all the stories that aren't 
getting told. You wonder about all the voices out there that we'll 
never hear because of this. Devil's advocate, though. Two points, 
the story in Wisconsin often the kind we get letters about saying, 
you know, if it happens to little kids, if it's especially sad or 
depressing, you folks lead with it at 11:00, and number two, what 
if the Clinton story just happens to result in the drawing up of one 
or two articles of impeachment, the potential resignation or otherwise 
removal of office for the president? Where do you strike the balance? 
There's no question it's an important story and I'd say you'd almost 
have to put that aside and then ask yourself -- let's assume it's 
every Pitt bit as important and historic as we think it is. It's not 
that it's not a huge story. You still have to wonder when this year 
-- or maybe it will turn into two years -- is over, whether some day 
we will look at ourselves and wonder what didn't we get? What stories, 
for the best possible reasons perhaps because of a huge story, what 
stories did we miss? And I do think, Brian, that they're not getting 
told and there are big stories and small all over the country that 
are being pushed out of the way because we tend to have this need 
to make the whole front page symbolically one story these days. The 
whole broadcast one story. We do a vy good job covering it. What we 
sometimes don't do is catch up with the other things. Now let's talk 
about what was the year of the woman and what feels like so long ago, 
1992, and what's going to happen, and let's begin with Illinois. What 
does your gut tell you if you were a betting man? Is this woman, the 
first black American woman elected to the U.S. Senate, going to survive 
and hold that seat? She has had a rough go and if you would, tell 
the folks just what kind of problems she's had, especially in foreign 
affairs. Well, it's looking kind of doubtful for her. She's behind 
in the polls. She has an opponent, Mr. Fitzgerald, who until this 
week, at least the rap on him has been that he's been avoiding going 
out in the media and only doing this via television. She's run into 
all kinds of problems with the voters -- foreign trips, stuff that 
I -- I think in a sense, Brian, it sort of washes over people, because 
one of the -- part of the fallout from what's going on in Washington 
is -- is as soon as you hear a charge against a -- a candidate, a 
foreign incumbent especially, you start, you being the public, the 
readers, the viewers of the broadcasts, started asking themselves, 
all right, where does this come from, who is selling this story, what 
-- who is -- who is putting this into the dialogue? And I think there's 
a great deal of cynicism -- not, you know, not starting with the events 
of this year. Going back for many years, that until the very final 
days of the campaign people sort of tried not to think about it. It's, 
you know -- they'll watch the world series and then they'll think 
about it. Having said that, you know, I think she's probably got big 
problems to overcome here. Can she -- Bob Greene from -- I'm sorry, 
Bob. I was going to -- Can she overcome them, perhaps. It looks pretty 
bad. On that, I have to take us to a break. Bob Greene from Chicago, 
and by way of the "Chicago tribune," appreciate it. Good to see you 
again. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>