<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981015.2100.1955 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
An issue that first came up in January has resurfaced concerning Kenneth 
Starr and whether or not his past contact with Paula Jones' lawyers 
originally posed a conflict with his role as independent prosecutor. 
If it happened before he was independent prosecutor. To bring us up 
to date on where the Paula Jones case and a possible settlement could 
stand, NBC's Ron blome who is with us tonight from Little Rock tonight. 
N.P.R. kind of took a bite out of this story yesterday. The allegation 
is that Kenneth Starr, before he was independent counsel had had contact 
with the Jones case. The Jones lawyers. Do you want to take it from 
there? Well, it had been known since 1994 that Starr had had some 
contact with the Jones case. He was an advisor informally on constitutional 
issues. What was not known was the extent of those contacts the yesterday 
National Public Radio reported there were a half dozen phone calls 
between Kenneth Starr and gill Davis, then a lawyer for Paula Jones 
on the constitutional issue could a sitting president be sued. The 
extent of that is now brought up in the context of should Kenneth 
Starr have informed the justice department, Janet Reno and the three-judge 
panel before he entered the Monica Lewinsky phase of the Jones case 
-- hey, I may have had this conflict of interest. Now the justice 
department is investigating a number of conflict issues regarding 
Mr. Starr, and you can add that one to the list. All of this, of course, 
taking place against the backdrop of the settlement talks in which 
they're trying to settle the Jones case before it gets to the appeal 
hearing next week. And what is the latest on the appeal? We even heard 
money amounts and yet no one giving an oncamera yes or no, no one 
giving an oncamera confirmation of where they are. Well, the clock 
is running on settlement -- in the settlement talks. The New York 
developer who has pledged $1 million to Paula Jones if she will drop 
the case has said there's a deadline now. A deadline of tomorrow and 
he's added some caveats. She said Paula Jones should get some of the 
money. In fact through his attorney late today he said Jones should 
get most of his money and the lawyers should not have a claim on it. 
What is emerging now is an interesting squabble between lawyers on 
the Jones various camps and teams over who gets what part of the money 
should a settlement be reached. She had the first legal team that 
dropped out in the fall of 1997 when Jones wouldn't accept a settlement. 
She has the second team from llas, and now we understand that Susan 
were Carpenter McMillan's husband is now her financial lawyer and 
he is handling some of those negotiations. On the sidelines Bob Bennett 
who has a $700,000 settlement offer from the president, but apparently 
most of the settlement talks are now between the lawyers and we know 
that Paula Jones probably could use some money now. Her husband has 
been out of work since the summer. And it gos on and we'll be talking 
-- goes on and we'll be talking with you about the next development 
in the Paula Jones case. Ron, thanks. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>