<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981015.0206 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Over the last decade, exhibitors at the International Fine Art and 
Antique Dealers Show have seen it all. They remember the flush days 
of the late 1980s when collectors elbowed one another to be the first 
through the heavy carved oak doors of the Seventh Regiment Armory 
in Manhattan, dropping several million dollars on a chic little table 
or a pair of unusual chairs. But they also remember the bleak years 
of the early '90s when the crowds came but almost nobody spent. Just 
how this year's show, which opens Friday and runs through Thursday, 
will be affected by the worldwide financial crisis is yet to be seen. 
As usual, the offerings are broad and the booths glamorous. A walk 
around the show provides a look at everything from a $3 million Cezanne 
still life to a $100 delft tile and a $40 18th-century silver mustard 
spoon. Dealers hope the art market will continue to rise as it did 
in 1987 after Black Monday. ``I haven't seen a client yet who says 
he's feeling too broke to buy,'' said Edward Munves, owner of James 
Robinson, a Park Avenue gallery specializing in antique jewelry and 
silver. ``People consider buying silver or jewelry simply moving money 
from one kind of asset to another. It didn't stop me from bringing 
good pieces because people today would rather not buy than have lesser 
quality.'' Some dealers take a less sanguine view of the market. Khalil 
Rizk of Chinese Porcelain Co. in Manhattan is prepared to see a few 
less sales this season. ``Volume will be down, but things that are 
compelling and essential to a collector won't be passed up,'' he said. 
``There's such a shortage of great objects that connoisseurs won't 
be able to resist them.'' The walls of Rizk's booth are covered with 
black felt to show off 70 watercolors of Chinese birds, which were 
made around 1810 for an English nobleman. They are priced at $3,800 
each, and Rizk said he hoped collectors would buy them in interesting 
groups rather than one or two at a time. These are his purely decorative 
offerings. The stars of his booth are an 18th-century Chinese painting 
of a reclining horse, which has a $125,000 price tag, and a seventh-century 
Vietnamese gold Buddha, which stands 22 inches high and which Rizk 
says is one of the largest gold pieces of that period known. It costs 
$550,000. It's not unusual to find booths like Chinese Porcelain Co.'s 
that feature both affordable items and very expensive ones. Mark Brady, 
a painting and drawing dealer from Manhattan, said he brought reasonably 
priced decorative objects as well as serious, museum-quality works. 
Over the last several years, Brady said, he has had a significant 
rise in sales to American museums. But given the uncertainty of the 
market, he said he believed careful pricing was crucial. ``People 
just don't feel like spending excessive amounts of money like they 
did a year ago,'' Brady said. ``They want to find works of art that 
are attractively priced.'' One such work is a haunting painting titled 
``The Emperor Napoleon's Horse, Tauris,'' which was in the collection 
of the National History Museum in Paris. Priced at $38,000, it is 
signed and dated B. Noriac/1908 and depicts the skeleton of a horse 
being fed by his trainer, who also happens to be a skeleton. This 
year's fair seems to offer a wider range of paintings than it has 
in recent years. Waring Hopkins, a Paris dealer, has a whimsical and 
colorful Calder from 1974, ``The Card Players,'' which costs $50,000 
and comes from a private collection in Paris. Also arresting is a 
Nabis-period Bonnard, ``The Stork,'' an oil-on-cloth painting with 
a brilliant red background, which costs $960,000. Hopkins just flew 
in from France after participating in the Biennale des Antiquaires, 
Paris' big antiques event, which ended last month. ``The biennale 
wasn't as lively as the Fine Art Fair here in May,'' he said. ``But 
we made many sales, so I can't complain.'' One of the four new dealers 
this year, De Jonckheere, also showed at the biennale and is no stranger 
to New York fairs. The Paris gallery, which specializes in 16th- and 
17th-century Flemish and Dutch paintings, has a booth filled with 
paintings by masters like Teniers, Bruegel and Cranach. One outstanding 
Bruegel, ``The Return of the Country Fair'' (1620), depicts a lively 
village scene. It is priced at $2 million and came from a private 
collection in Belgium. The three other new dealers tried to decorate 
their booths with flair, and all succeeded. Frederick Schultz, an 
antiquities dealer from Manhattan, paneled his booth in a blond wood 
with modular displays that feature all kinds of objects, from a fifth-century 
B.C. bronze horn with a wonderful patina that costs $475,000 to an 
Iberian column idol dating from 200 B.C. for $165,000. ``I'd like 
to think that I present antiquities in an intriguing way to people 
who never thought about them before,'' he said. One booth away from 
Schultz is Galerie Blondeel Deroyan, another new dealer. The cool 
gray space features simple, sleek clear plastic display cases that 
show off a wide variety of objects, including antiquities, tapestries, 
furniture and artworks. Unforgettable are the booth's three important 
tapestries. The most striking is a large French embroidered one dating 
from 1600 that shows scenes of the Old Testament around the border 
and the New Testament in the middle, with the four Evangelists. It 
is from a private collection in northern France and costs $360,000. 
On a simple pedestal in the center of the booth is an impeccably carved 
figure of an Egyptian dignitary from the period of the Ramses kings, 
1315 to 1090 B.C., for $525,000. Galerie Blondeel Deroyan is based 
in Paris. So is another new dealer, Maroun Salloum. But Salloum specializes 
in 19th- and early-20th-century furniture and artworks. ``My taste 
isn't very French,'' Salloum said. The walls of his small booth are 
paneled to resemble an Arts and Crafts room. In the booth, a pair 
of early cabinets by Adolf Loos, the Austrian architect and designer, 
face each other; they are priced at $110,000 for both. Other pairs 
here include 1860 plaster figures and evocative silver scones by Jacques-Emile 
Ruhlmann, a leading Parisian decorator and designer of the 1920s. 
If one trend is evident at the fair this season, it is a proliferation 
of 1920s and '30s furniture and decorative objects. Vallois, another 
French dealer, is back for its second year, with a large booth whose 
walls are covered in parchment-colored undulating paneling. Nearly 
all the objects _ dining tables, chairs, vanities _ are by Ruhlmann. 
And an old-timer at the show, Ciancimino from London, used to epitomize 
English country-house taste until recent years when its booth and 
Pimlico Road shop have consistently carried Art Deco objects. This 
year a pair of ebony screens by Jean-Michel Frank flank the booth's 
back wall. ``We feel most of our American decorators are going toward 
that look,'' Jean-Claude Ciancimino said. They're also going for Russian 
furniture. Some of the best can be found at the booth of another London 
dealer, Antoine Cheneviere, who is showing a pair of Russian commodes 
by Heinrich Gambs, a major cabinetmaker of his time. Dated 1810, the 
pieces are of mahogany and ebony with gilt bronze leopardlike faces 
for drawer pulls and gilt claw feet. The dealer says he has not priced 
them yet. When asked for his predictions about the fair, given the 
state of the economy, Cheneviere said: ``Some people may decide to 
buy because it's another sort of investment. But at this point, it's 
anyone's guess.'' Here is information about the International Fine 
Art and Antique Dealers Show, which runs through Thursday, and other 
antiques shows and art fairs in Manhattan this weekend: 10TH INTERNATIONAL 
FINE ART AND ANTIQUE DEALERS SHOW, Seventh Regiment Armory, Park Avenue 
and 67th Street. Hours: 11 a.m. to 8 p.m. daily except Sunday and 
Thursday, 11 a.m. to 7 p.m. Admission: $15. Information: (212) 642-8572. 
FIFTH AVENUE ART AND ANTIQUES SHOW, 2 E. 79th St. Through Monday. 
Hours: Noon to 8 p.m., except Monday, noon to 6 p.m. Admission: $8. 
Information: (212) 249-4865. NEW YORK PHOTOGRAPHY FAIR, Puck Building, 
Houston and Lafayette Streets, East Village. Hours: Friday, noon to 
8 p.m.; Saturday and Sunday, noon to 7 p.m. Admission: $12. Information: 
(212) 777-5218. PARK AVENUE ANTIQUES SHOW, Wallace Hall, Park Avenue 
at 84th Street. Hours: Friday and Saturday, 11 a.m. to 8 p.m.; Sunday, 
11 a.m to 6 p.m. Admission: $10. A free shuttle bus to the International 
Fine Art and Antique Dealers Show at the Seventh Regiment Armory will 
run during show hours. Information: (212) 288-3588. NEW YORK ARTS 
OF PACIFIC ASIA SHOW, 26th Street Armory, at Lexington Avenue. Benefit 
preview Friday night, 6 to 9 p.m. Tickets: $125, to benefit the China 
Institute. Hours: Saturday, 11 a.m. to 7 p.m.; Sunday, 11 a.m. to 
6 p.m.; Monday, 11 a.m. to 5 p.m. Admission: $12. Information: (212) 
683-2434. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>