<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981015.0187 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
No man is an island, nor woman either. Manhattan, however, certainly 
is, and on occasion it's refreshing to look at it from the surrounding 
waters. In the years I've lived in New York, I've perused this glittering 
borough from the Staten Island ferry, the ferries to Liberty and Ellis 
Islands and, of course, the standard of sightseeing voyages _ the 
three-hour trip around the isle on the Circle Line. This excursion, 
which really encourages a clock watcher to unwind, is especially challenging 
when one is caring for a small child and time is measured in pure 
emotion, according to the duration of the child's irritability and 
happiness, rather than increments on a clock. Since the days I heaved 
a toddler and stroller up the Circle Line gangplank, the company has 
inaugurated a new Manhattan voyage from the South Street Seaport: 
a brisk tour, one hour flat. On a recent weekday afternoon, I decided 
to try it, this time alone. The weather was rather wet, and although 
the vessel could accommodate several hundred passengers, only about 
35 were sailing. Most headed directly indoors on the main deck. There 
were several knots of teen-agers, a few families with kids, three 
or four young couples and a sprinkling of solitaries. One couple chose 
to stay on the outer deck, in the rain. I had wanted to stand in their 
spot, at the point of the bow, to scan the horizon with full compass. 
But it was evident they had sought privacy, so I moved to an indoor 
perch and settled down to listen to the tour guide, positioned somewhere 
on the upper deck out of sight. He had a good voice, a trained baritone: 
hearty, optimistic and as clear in diction as a television announcer's. 
If you were there, the voyage would have gone something like this. 
As we pull away from the pier, you notice a red-and-black four-master, 
called the ``Peking.'' The guide explains it was built in Hamburg, 
in 1912, as a lighthouse ship and is the last of its kind. Oh, you 
want a hot dog. Well, you can't have one yet. The attendant in the 
snack area has to boil them, and that will take 10 minutes. Here, 
have a swig of bottled water. There's no more hydrating experience 
than drinking water on the water, unless it's drinking water on the 
water while standing in the rain. You can't do that because the young 
couple might get embarrassed. Pretend you're standing in the rain. 
See how much fun you're having; that's what imaginations are for. 
Look, there's the tree-lined esplanade of Brooklyn Heights and, below, 
what used to be the bustling port of Brooklyn. No, I don't know why 
there's no buttermilk in the Buttermilk Channel, unless it's the same 
reason there's no butter in buttermilk. Here we are at John Roebling's 
Brooklyn Bridge, 1883. Now, the Manhattan Bridge, 1909. Why are they 
called suspension bridges? Because of the cable. Say, did you know 
the East River isn't really a river but a salt-water estuary in which 
the direction of flow, to or from Long Island Sound, is determined 
by the tide? That's pure New York! Buttermilk Channel without buttermilk, 
egg creams without eggs or cream, an East River that isn't a river. 
At least Trinity Church is a real church, although in this fog it's 
kind of hard to see. Let's imagine we see it, right next to the disappearing 
glass tower of I.M. Pei. Wow, here's Battery Park, where Lafayette 
landed and Sam Morse set up the first telegraph. Battery Park City? 
I think that's fronting the other river, the one that's a real river. 
There goes a two-masted schooner. She takes passengers around the 
harbor, but the tour guide can't remember her name. Wait, he thinks 
it may be the Mae West. No, it's the Letty Howard. Of course he knew 
that all the time. What he doesn't know is the fate of Governors Island. 
Will they install casinos there? Right across from the Statue of Liberty? 
He doesn't think so. Hey, check out Castles Clinton and William: walls 
14 feet thick, rooftop cannon never fired in battle, and just as well, 
because they're pointing the wrong way. And there are the towers of 
the World Trade Center. Have you ever been on the elevator to the 
top? Fifty-seven seconds. Almost like being shot out of a cannon. 
Bon voyage. Incidentally, Jenny Lind made her United States debut 
at Castle Clinton. Jenny Lind: there was a songbird who could carry 
a tune. Oh, we've swung around. There's Battery Park City. The modest 
octagonal structure is the new Holocaust museum. What are those festive 
blue-and-yellow tents right next to it? The Cirque du Soleil. You 
know, in this era of memoirs, there's a story people should read. 
It was published in the 1940s by a Holocaust survivor named Dr. Olga 
Lengyel. Her suffering is beyond comprehension. Anyway, during one 
particularly life-denying New Year's at Auschwitz, she tried to imagine 
what people in a world untouched by disaster would be doing. Somewhere, 
she thought, they were drinking champagne. Olga Lengyel was intensively 
educated and had very high style. The best I could probably imagine 
might have been tourists on a boat trip, regarding this building next 
to those tents. By the way, we're now in the Hudson River, navigable 
all the way to the Adirondacks. The river has its source way upstate, 
in Lake Tear of the Clouds. If you look east toward the World Financial 
Center, you'll see Henry Hudson Park _ especially beautiful at night, 
the tour guide says. To the south, you can glimpse a ferry en route 
to Staten Island. He recommends that ride at night, too. In fact, 
he seems to recommend night rides in general. Hmm. It must get cold 
listening to all this history under the constellations. I guess you 
provide your own deck blanket, or improvise. Look, it has stopped 
raining. There's the old Jersey Central terminal. And Ellis Island. 
You'll never see anything built like them anymore. And here's the 
star of the show: the Statue of Liberty. She stands 305 feet over 
the harbor, a sculpture fashioned entirely of hammered copper, oxidized 
to a green patina. The Statue of Liberty: the one thing in New York 
that isn't famous enough. Priceless. Once it had a price tag, though. 
To help raise money for the pedestal alone, Emma Lazarus wrote a sonnet 
in the statue's voice. Pretty good. Imagine, one little poem so highly 
valued that it helped bring in enough cash to put Liberty, herself, 
on her feet. That's what history says, anyway. Great, we're back. 
Before we leave, let's say good-bye to the guide and thank him. His 
name is Stephen Moran, and he turns out to be a writer. Wouldn't you 
know? Go ahead, ask him a question. Does he know how to steer a boat? 
What a crazy question. He doesn't know port from starboard; what he 
does know is how to ad lib his way from the Ninth Circle of Hell. 
He thinks of New York as a university course in civilization, in all 
its dimensions. Now, why is that other man running around the ship 
and yelling? He's advertising a ride called ``The Beast,'' which takes 
place in a speedboat painted to look scary, with fearsome teeth on 
the bow. He says he'll offer history, all right: exactly 30 seconds 
worth. After traveling more than 50 miles an hour for 45 minutes, 
that's about all the history the passengers will be able to absorb. 
He says that he's the captain and that his name is Mad Dog. Can we 
take the trip? Sure. As soon as we join the circus and get shot out 
of a cannon. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>