<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981015.0179 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Bertie Wooster, the dimwitted swell of P.G. Wodehouse's ``Jeeves'' 
novels, didn't get many things right. But he did show unusual wisdom 
in his perception that a certain kind of woman was dangerous. It wasn't 
so much hard-hearted vamps that gave Bertie the shivers as what he 
called ``soupy'' girls, with an overdeveloped sense of whimsy: the 
type, as he described one of them, to say that ``rabbits were gnomes 
in attendance on the Fairy Queen and that the stars were God's daisy 
chain.'' Were Bertie to meet the female constituents in the wayward 
wedding party of Beth Henley's new play, ``Impossible Marriage,'' 
which opened Thursday night in a Roundabout Theater Company production 
starring the Oscar-winning actress Holly Hunter, he would probably 
book the next train to Siberia. Their names are Pandora, Floral and 
Kandall, and their behavior confirms the fanciful choices of their 
christeners. Pandora, who is soon to be married, plans to accessorize 
her bridal gown with a pair of blue wings. Floral, her heavily pregnant 
older sister, relieves pre-ceremony tensions by rolling down a hill. 
And Kandall, their mother, the sensible one, is deeply distressed 
when a visitor kicks over some toadstools in her garden because, she 
wails, he has ``destroyed all the fairies' houses.'' A fanciful disposition 
is nothing new to the characters of Beth Henley, who emerged as a 
startlingly original theater voice in the early 1980s with such plays 
as the Pulitzer-prize winning ``Crimes of the Heart'' and who here 
makes a long overdue return to the New York stage. But even the crimson-haired, 
baton-twirling heroine of Ms. Henley's 1984 comedy ``The Miss Firecracker 
Contest,'' which memorably starred Ms. Hunter, might find the women 
of ``Impossible Marriage'' a bit much. Ms. Henley appears to be deliberately 
pushing the envelope of eccentricities that is her stock in trade. 
In creating characters who are as baroquely mannered as anyone out 
of Oscar Wilde, she is also pointing out the limitations of those 
who live by the pose. As Floral (Ms. Hunter) notes, in a jarringly 
clear departure from her usual ornate utterances, ``Everyone isn't 
always what they seem.'' A ravening fear and loneliness surge beneath 
the willful preciousness of ``Impossible Marriage.'' But unlike ``Crimes'' 
and ``Firecracker,'' this comedy never breaks through its exterior 
to reveal a fractured human heart. There are signposts aplenty, pointing 
to the conflict between rarefied posture and primitive passion, but 
they remain stuck on the surface. And while an estimable cast, which 
includes the wonderful Lois Smith as Kandall, has been assembled, 
the actors are hard pressed to connect with their characters in any 
way that they or their audience can believe. As a consequence the 
play, stiffly directed by Stephen Wadsworth, never acquires any organic 
flow. The whole evening often feels like Pandora (Gretchen Cleevely), 
twirling in the moonlight on the eve of her wedding, while calling 
out: ``Come look at me everyone. I'm all alone out here.'' The work 
is a sustained, flashy cry for attention, but it doesn't quite know 
how to behave once it gets it. ``Impossible Marriage'' is Ms. Henley's 
contemporary answer to ``A Midsummer Night's Dream.'' It is set in 
the lush, pastel-flowered garden (Thomas Lynch's picturesque setting 
suggests Martha Stewart on Prozac) of the Georgia country home of 
Kandall Kingsley, a wealthy Savannah widow. Like Shakespeare's Athenian 
forest, it is a place where the course of true love will assert itself 
in disruptive and unexpected ways and couples will be scrambled like 
the partners in a square dance. Love, the play suggests, is always 
impossible, and all you can do is let it take you where it will. The 
people who act out this theory are all of poetic temperament, throwing 
metaphors among themselves like balloons at a children's party. (Excuse 
the simile: Ms. Henley's style is perilously contagious.) In addition 
to the Kingsley women, there is Edvard Lunt (Christopher McCann), 
a famous novelist who has left his wife and eight children for the 
childlike Pandora, and his hopelessly self-conscious son, Sidney (Daniel 
London), who is determined to stop the wedding. Also on hand are Floral's 
husband, Jonsey Whitman (Jon Tenney), an aimless rich boy who defines 
himself entirely by his mannequin-like handsomeness, and the elderly 
Rev. Jonathan Larence (Alan Mandell), who has just returned from missionary 
work in Nigeria and who tends to wince, for reasons that quickly become 
apparent, whenever people talk about how good he is. ``Sincerity,'' 
he says ominously, ``is difficult to discern.'' Before ``Impossible 
Marriage'' ends, a gun is fired, a wedding cake is ravaged and assorted 
secrets, whose nature can be discerned early on, are dragged into 
the open. There are a couple of jolting carnal images, in which unlikely 
couples make brief physical contact, but mostly the evening is an 
occasion for lots and lots of fancy talk. Ms. Henley is a virtuosic 
wordsmith, and she knows how to bend a figure of speech in all sorts 
of unexpected ways. Consider, for example, Edvard's paean to his bride-to-be: 
``a brand-new penny that has not been dropped down tollbooths, handed 
to beggars, thrown into wishing wells, flipped for bets or used in 
bad magic tricks.'' Such lines are usually pitched not to another 
character but directly to the audience, as the epigrams are in high-school 
productions of Wilde and Sheridan. The intention, one gathers, is 
to accent the posturing nature of Ms. Henley's self-dramatizing lovers. 
But the actors seem uncomfortable with, and even distanced from, their 
dialogue, and the result is a doubly affected rendering of affectations. 
Ms. Hunter, heaven knows, is a splendid actress, as anyone who saw 
her in ``Broadcast News'' or ``The Piano'' can attest, and her association 
with Ms. Henley has been long and fruitful. Unfortunately, she is 
ill served here. Her strength has always been in an intense emotional 
sincerity. Artificiality does not come naturally to her. Ms. Smith 
provides the evening's greatest depth of feeling. ``She can do so 
much with the tone of her voice,'' says Floral of her mother. And 
Ms. Smith's Kandall does indeed work wonders with inflections and 
pauses. The performance is also disjointed, however, unusually so 
for this actress, and marked with a tendency to mug. The only actor 
to come up with a fully integrated performance is Tenney, whose Jonsey 
seems both touchingly resigned to and saddened by his inability to 
get beyond the fact of his good looks. It is telling that the most 
convincing character in the comedy is also its most superficial. There 
is another, uncredited performer in ``Impossible Marriage.'' That's 
the brown and white dog who runs across the back of the stage in a 
gleeful blur in the show's opening and closing moments. The dog's 
appearance is never explained, but its seeming spontaneity registers 
in resonant contrast to the noncanine actors, hinting at a natural 
world, a realm of instinct beyond all those enameled manners. ``Marriage'' 
is clearly charted to take its characters into the world. Somehow 
they never arrive there. PRODUCTION NOTES: `IMPOSSIBLE MARRIAGE' By 
Beth Henley; directed by Stephen Wadsworth; sets by Thomas Lynch; 
costumes by Martin Pakledinaz; lighting by Peter Kaczorowski; sound 
by Dan Wojnar; hair and wigs by Paul Huntley; dialect coach, Kate 
Wilson; production stage manager, Jay Adler. Presented by the Roundabout 
Theater Company, Todd Haimes, artistic director; Ellen Richard, general 
manager. At Criterion Center, Laura Pels Theater, 1530 Broadway, at 
45th Street, Manhattan. With: Holly Hunter (Floral Whitman), Daniel 
London (Sidney Lunt), Lois Smith (Kandall Kingsley), Jon Tenney (Jonsey 
Whitman), Gretchen Cleevely (Pandora Kingsley), Alan Mandell (the 
Rev. Jonathan Larence) and Christopher McCann (Edvard Lunt). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>