<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981015.2000.1513 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Federal Reserve this afternoon cut short term interest rates by 
a quarter of a point today, citing growing caution by lenders and 
unsettled conditions in financial markets. Stock prices soared on 
Wall Street after the announcement. The Dow Jones Industrials closed 
up 331 points at 8299. The NASDAQ gained 70 points to close at 1611. 
To explain the cut in interest rates and the climb in stocks is Liz 
George at The World's Business desk in New York. Liz, I gather there 
were two interest rate cuts today. What were they and why is the Fed 
saying it did it? Absolutely. Two interest rates cuts today. The first 
one was on the Federal Funds. The second one was on discount rates 
and this is actually an extraordinary move by the Federal Reserve 
Bank, to actually cut interest rates on both of those. Not only is 
it just weeks away from its normal rate setting committee anyway which 
meets on November the 17th, but also to cut the discount rate. That 
hasn't been cut since January '96, so it is an extraordinary move. 
Now, the reason it's been cited by the Federal Reserve Bank is unsettled 
conditions in financial markets, so it's obviously extremely concerned 
by the global crisis, both the impact that that is having here -- 
And that's very plain language for the Fed as well, isn't it? So, 
they must mean it. It's very straight forward language by the Feds 
and they're not pulling any punches in announcing this. I mean, you 
know, that's what they have said it is. One of the interesting things 
is that this discount rate cut, that's as a result of this flight 
from any sort of risk by investors. Investors have been running away 
from anything that's got any kind of risk to safe havens, things like 
Treasury bonds and one of the reasons that economists believe that 
this discount rate has been changed so extraordinarily is that it's 
wanting to bring more cash into the market. The Federal Reserve wants 
to bring more cash into the market and obviously enable banks to borrow 
much more easily and that's effectively what that discount rate cut 
does. What about the immediate or relatively quick effects this might 
have for home finances, for the average American or for the average 
investor anywhere in the world? Well absolutely. I mean, economists 
are saying today on Wall Street that they love it. I mean, this is 
going to be fantastic. It's going to be a real boost to the economy 
immediately, not only for investors but obviously because the interest 
rates affects, you know, people's borrowings and people's savings 
as well. So, you know, it's going to have an enormous impact immediately 
and it's going to be great. On the long term, we'll just have to wait 
and see whether that can be sustained or not and whether -- you know, 
how bad this impact of the global crisis is and whether even they'll 
have to come down further. Of course, you say the long term and that's 
a very strange and hard to understand term nowadays. The Feds are 
going to be meeting officially, as you say, on the 17th of November. 
Is there a likelihood that they could at that point consider yet another 
lowering of the interest rate? Well I guess that's partly one of the 
reasons that they've actually done it now and literally just four 
weeks away from that meeting. You know, it is an unprecedented move 
that they come out and they do that when they're so close to another 
meeting. But it would be, you know, gazing into the future which I 
don't particularly want to do here. But it wouldn't be unheard of 
that they might cut again at that time. Maybe that's why they cut 
now, sort of give themselves a bit of breathing space that they can 
see exactly what impact happens now, how bad this global crisis is 
going to be and what sort of impact it's having on domestic demand, 
to give themselves a chance of cutting again. Just one last quick 
question for you. Back on September the 29th, when the Fed did cut 
the short term rate, but not by very much, there was a lot of criticism 
at home and abroad of its decision and saying it wasn't enough to 
give the world economy a boost. Will this do that, do you think? There's 
been an awful lot of criticisms about how much people have been cutting 
interest rates by and it is this balance -- if you cut interest rates, 
obviously that gives the economy a little bit of a boost. And the 
sort of the best thing that they can do is get that balance between 
boosting the economy too much and pushing us into inflation and keep 
it growing nice and steadily. Now -- Liz, I'm sorry. We have to cut 
you right there but we got a pretty clear picture. Thank you very 
much. Liz George, The World's Business desk in New York. Thank a lot. 
Thank you, Tony. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>