<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981015.2000.0375 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This week's talk at Wye River offered the chance for the parties to 
break the law jam and finally take the next essential steps for peace 
in the Middle East. We must remember as we come together again that 
in the end, peace is more than a process. It is, in the end, a destination. 
The immediate destination for President Clinton after he welcomed 
the Israeli and Palestinian leaders to the White House was the Wye 
Plantation in rural Maryland. There, the three men will try to break 
a 19 month stalemate in the peace process. Their short term goal, 
a land for security agreement. Their long term goal, a permanent peace 
deal. Coming up, we'll speak with a former U.S. ambassador to Israel 
about the prospects for an agreement and for peace, but first we have 
two reports about the political pressures on the Middle East rivals. 
From Jerusalem, here's The World's Richard Myron. As Benjamin Netanyahu 
prepared to leave Jerusalem for the summit, he got a noisy send off. 
Hundreds of right wing demonstrators gathered outside the Prime Minister's 
residence to warn him against making an agreement with Yasser Arafat. 
Their banners declared, if there's a pullback, there won't be a government. 
These people represent the Jewish settlers of the West Bank and they're 
worried. I wish and I pray that will not succeed with his plan to 
establish independent Arab Palestinian states together with Arafat. 
Benny Aloine is a member of the Israel Parliament and a leader in 
the settler movement. He says he and his political allies will bring 
down the government if Netanyahu signs an agreement committing Israel 
to withdraw from more of the West Bank. It looks like he's turning 
his back to his for achievements, that he calls it achievements. He's 
going to commit suicide on behalf of the nation and to establish an 
independent Arab Palestinian state. We don't really understand what 
is this kind of achievement. It's nonsense. During his victorious 
election campaign two and a half years ago, Benjamin Netanyahu promised 
a secure peace. Netanyahu said that despite objecting to the Oslo 
peace accords, he'd honor them but that he would extract a better 
deal for Israel. Most members of Netanyahu's party have followed this 
line but many, like member of Parliament Ruby Riven believe that the 
real test of this policy is whether Netanyahu can win sufficient security 
assurances from the Palestinian authority. Okay, we understand that 
there is no other way. We should fulfill our obligations but that 
couldn't be without the Palestinians fulfilling their obligations 
because until now, it was only a give and give and take and take game. 
Now it should become a give and take and he has to understand and 
they have to understand that there is no way that he could remain 
as Prime Minister if he would do something that would bring the Palestinian 
to believe that they are on the way to get everything that they demand. 
While members of Netanyahu's party may be threatening to bring him 
down if he's too ready to sign with the Palestinians, the opposition 
labor party which began the peace process is offering the Prime Minister 
its support. Yelsi Balin is a labor member of Parliament and was one 
of the architects of the Oslo accords. Even though I know logically 
he is still sure that Oslo was a big mistake, in practice he's the 
one who is implementing now the process or I would like him to implement 
it, but in his own way. But if he does it, I think that he deserves 
our support in the Parliament and the fact that we will not topple 
him with the extreme right if he comes back from Washington with an 
agreement. Israel is bitterly divided on the question of the peace 
process, but most Israelis seem to accept, either through necessity 
or ideology, that there's no realistic option to this proposed withdraw. 
This sentiment strengthens the Prime Minister in negotiations by giving 
him a popular mandate, but also pressures him not to come back from 
the summit empty handed. For The World this is Richard Myron reporting 
from Jerusalem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>