<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981015.2000.1259 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Every year, millions of dollars flow from Mexican immigrants in the 
United States to their families back home and the amount is increasing. 
These so called remittances are a significant portion of the family 
income in some Mexican towns and villages. Now, one state government 
has come up with a plan to channel some of the money from up north 
into jobs south of the border. The World's Franklin Theodus takes 
us to the state of Guanahato. A brand new clothing factory in the 
town of El Tigre, Guanahato, turns out hundreds of t-shirts a day. 
The factor employs some 50 workers. Many of them are young and they've 
never had a job. Twenty-one year old Sonya Guiardo has been working 
here since January, earning $6 a day. It's hard at first but it gets 
easier. I've stayed because I like to work and make money. Besides, 
it's near my home. A job like Guiardo's is rare here. El Tigre is 
a small agricultural community. Jobs in the field are few and most 
people here prefer to leave town and head to the U.S. to find better 
work. Those who do often send money back to their families. But now, 
thanks to a state program, immigrants living in the U.S. can send 
money a different way. They can invest it in job creating businesses 
back home. That's how this clothing factory came to be. Immigrant 
investors put in $50,000. The state matched their funds. The state's 
program is run by Jose Hernandez, a long time business executive. 
Part of his job is to connect Mexicans in the U.S. with business people 
here. The government does not manage the money that comes in. The 
people who run the factories manage it themselves. It is their property. 
So this is a very transparent operation. So far the state has helped 
ten start up projects like the one in El Tigre. The program is the 
brainchild of Guanahato Governor Vicen DeFox. Hello. How are you brothers, 
countrymen? Are you there in the United States? Here in Guanahato, 
we continue working. We are working to generate opportunities for 
your family members here. Critics say the immigrant investment program 
is merely a platform to promote Fox as a candidate for the Conservative 
National Action Party in Mexico's next presidential elections. Luis 
Miguel Reonda is a political analyst at the University of Guanahato. 
He declared that unemployment does not exist in Guanahato, but there 
seemed to be many examples that show the opposite -- people at stoplights 
trying to get money. We have one of the highest rates of illiteracy 
in the country. So when the next census comes out in the year 2000, 
it'll be too late to measure the success or failures of his government. 
Despite such criticism, Guanahato's program is being considered by 
other states as an innovative way to create desperately needed jobs 
in Mexico. Back at the sewing factory in El Tigre, they're busy trying 
to finish a job for a client in San Diego. Ramira Ramirez made the 
trip from California to check on the quality of some Halloween costumes 
her company ordered. I have to tell them exactly what they have to 
do and, you know, little details and if they do do it right or what 
they have to be corrected or, you know, find a way they can do it 
faster, 'cause I see worse. I mean, I see companies like totally disastrous. 
But no, this is very organized people, very clean and it looks pretty 
good and I know they can -- they capable to do because they have a 
lot of machines and they got very capable people too. Workers and 
management at the factory know that the quality of their product will 
help determine whether Guanahato's experiment in job creation is successful. 
If it is, many here believe it would offer would be immigrants a new 
reason to stay. For The World, this is Frank Theodus in Mexico City. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>