<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981015.2000.3162 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Time now for the answer to today's geography quiz. Remember, we were 
looking for a Middle Eastern kingdom that's the home if Islam's holiest 
cities, Mecca and Medena, a land where Muslim pilgrims flock each 
year but where few non-Muslims have been allowed to travel. Well, 
here with the answer is Christopher Grime who works for a British 
tour operator, Bayles Worldwide. Grime is coordinating the first ever 
Western tour of -- Chris? We're heading to Saudi Arabia. The kingdom 
of Saudi Arabia and the answer to today's geography quiz. Chris, tell 
me, how did Bayles Worldwide manage to swing a tour to Saudi Arabia? 
Well we were very fortunate. We've actually been operating tours to 
the Middle East for over 50 years now and because we've been going 
there for such a long time, they were looking for a number of operators 
as possible, people to start the tours, who were experienced in this 
area and would be sensitive to the needs of tourism in the region. 
And tell me what some of them are. What are the restrictions that 
they would place on tours? Well, I mean, there's restrictions related 
to -- particularly more restrictions on women than for men. I mean, 
for example, women are not allowed to travel if they are unaccompanied 
by their husband or brother or father, if they are under 40 years 
of age. I mean, as I said to them at the time, "You do realize that 
excludes Madonna and Hillary Clinton?" And they said yes, gladly. 
I guess they wouldn't be classified as two 40 year olds that they 
would think would be easy to let go in a country but there you are. 
Well presumably, people don't go on vacations someplace just to make 
trouble so, in a sense, the group, it selects itself, and you have 
people who want to appreciate something different. But, what kinds 
of people have you been hearing from so far? Well literally, you know, 
all sorts, from all sorts of walks of life from people who are interested 
from an academic point of view to the people who are interested because 
they just know that they've never had the opportunity to go somewhere 
like this and it really is a fantastic country. There's so much there 
that most of us -- I mean, including me. Before I was fortunate enough 
to go there, I really didn't have any idea of some of the things that 
were there. Well, tell me about that. What were the surprises for 
you, Mr. Grime? Well, I think you just said to a lot of people, name 
a few things about Saudi Arabia. I mean, the things that would come 
up would be possibly Mecca, definitely sand and probably oil. But, 
there's a lot more to it than that. I mean, the hospitality that we 
were shown was embarrassing. To give you an example, we pulled up 
in a village just to have a look because it looked interesting and 
they'd never seen any Western people in their lives. This old chap 
came out and they were very curious to start with and a little apprehensive 
because they didn't know who on earth we were. And then they were 
insisting that we should stay and they were going to slaughter a goat 
so that we could have a traditional meal with them. And when we said 
we're really sorry but we've got to go and see some other government 
officials somewhere and he was insisting that we should take the goat 
with us. And this is a village where they have absolutely nothing. 
So, I mean, it's an amazing experience. It really is. Christopher 
Grime, tour coordinator for Bayles Worldwide, speaking to us about 
their upcoming tour to Saudi Arabia. Thanks, Chris. No problem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>