<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981015.2000.0905 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Arafat and Netanyahu face domestic pressures, but at this weekend's 
summit, they'll face American pressure to set aside regional politics. 
By May of next year, the two Middle East leaders must agree on how 
to implement the Oslo accords, including the hand over of an additional 
13 percent of the West Bank to the Palestinians. Though that hand 
over may be settled in the next few days, former U.S. Ambassador to 
Israel, Edward Djerejian says a larger question hangs over the summit. 
There most likely will be an agreement on this 13 percent, but the 
real issue then arises, will the United States president and the administration, 
will Netanyahu and his government and will Arafat then engage in sustained 
negotiations that will be able to come to some sort of closure by 
May 4th, 1999? It would seem that there might be two factors that 
might actually make this get together different from all other get 
togethers and that would be, one, if there is really the potential 
of such a significant crisis, if it doesn't happen, that they really 
finally have to take action; or, if there's something in President 
Clinton's determination to make a significant agreement happen because 
of the pressures perhaps that he's under politically. Do you think 
that either of those things might actually make for a difference or 
that perhaps there is yet another factor that could change things? 
Well, I think you're right in terms that it's a complex situation. 
Events in the world, and we're talking about the Middle East, proceed 
at their own pace. And they are not a concomitant of domestic U.S. 
politics. So there's the reality on the ground of the Middle East, 
a frustrated peace process that has been stalled as many months, nothing 
happening on the Israeli, Syrian or Lebanese fronts since February 
of 1996. The U.S. Administration at the presidential level getting 
engaged where I have stated often that presidential involvement, direct 
involvement, is critical to make progress in the Arab/Israeli peace 
process. The president has finally gotten engaged in this. And therefore, 
whether or not he's being motivated by internal politics or the realities 
of the issues in the peace process itself, I quite frankly think it's 
both. The important thing is that he use the power of his office to 
hammer out the second redeployment and then the critical test of leadership 
will be his sustained engagement in the final status talks. That's 
where presidential influence, in my eyes, will be critical. What do 
you think is the very least that has to come out of this in order 
for you to say, and for most people watching to say, it's some kind 
of a success? Well, I think if there is an agreement on the 13 percent 
redeployment, that a package is agreed upon in terms of reciprocal 
Palestinian requirements on fighting terrorism, arresting terrorists 
and getting into a much more efficacious security cooperation with 
Israel, I think we could categorize the Wye Plantation talks as having 
been a successful step forward, albeit tardy, but a successful step 
forward for addressing the final status issues. And that in itself, 
I believe, would be an accomplishment, but one must not make that 
much of it. Let's just be realistic, that there are very, very tough 
issues facing all the parties, even if this is accomplished. Edward 
Djerejian was the U.S. Ambassador to Israel from 1993 to '94 and he's 
director of the Baker Institute for Public Policy at Rice University. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>