<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981015.0600.0589 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Clinton, later today opens a summit between Israeli Prime 
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and Palestinian Leader Yasser Arafat the 
talks are aimed at completing a long delayed interim agreement so 
that negotiations on a final peace settlement can begin. VOA's Deborah 
Tate reports from the White House. Officials here hope that the talks 
will result in an agreement on a further Israeli troop withdrawal 
from the West Bank in return for Palestinian security guarantees. 
That will allow the parties to begin negotiations on the so-called 
final status issues including Palestinian statehood and control of 
Jerusalem. Mr. Clinton is expected to spend a good part of the day 
with the Israeli and Palestinian leaders Thursday beginning with a 
welcoming ceremony at the White House, and then meeting with them 
at the Wye River conference center in Eastern Maryland where the talks 
will take place. Secretary of State Madeleine Albright and Special 
Envoy Dennis Ross will also be on hand. The talks are expected to 
continue through Sunday and Mr. Clinton has cleared his schedule this 
weekend to be available to the parties, if needed. White House spokesman 
Joe Lockhart says the United States will do what it can to move the 
peace process forward, but says it will not try to impose a peace. 
The President has always said, that it is our hope, uh, to bring the 
parties together, narrow the differences, move to an interim, uh, 
settlement, uh, so that they can move to the difficult issues in the 
final status talks. Uh, but the important point is that we can't get 
there, we can't reach that point unless both parties come in the spirit 
of wanting, uh, uh, to make an agreement. So ultimately it will be 
up to the parties. Administration Officials are concerned about the 
prospects of a breakdown in the peace process if the current deadlock 
continues. Mr. Arafat has said he would unilaterally declare a Palestinian 
state if a final settlement is not negotiated by May 4th of next year, 
the deadline specified under the terms of the Oslo Peace Accords. 
Mr. Netanyahu has said that if Mr. Arafat makes good on that pledge 
Israel would retaliate with unspecified unilateral steps a phrase 
Palestinians mean to military action to reclaim self-rule areas. State 
Department Spokesman James Rubin sounded a note of urgency about concluding 
the interim agreement and moving on with final status talks. We are 
facing the prospect of, uh, the interim period envisaged by the Oslo 
Agreement ending, uh, and the, uh, in May where different parties 
are making different threats of what they're going to do, clearly 
there are grave dangers ahead if the peace process is not put back 
on track. On the eve of the summit, Mr. Clinton called Jordan's King 
Hussein, who is undergoing cancer treatment in the US state of Minnesota 
to discuss expectations for the summit and get a readout of Mr. Netanyahu 
meeting with Jordanian Crown Prince Hassan in Amman earlier in the 
day. Mr. Clinton also spoke with British Prime Minister Tony Blair 
who briefed the President on his talks with Mr. Arafat in London. 
Deborah Tate VOA News, at the White House. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>