<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981015.1700.2155 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The World Bank hosted a seminar here in Washington last week on the 
role of the news media in fighting corruption and keeping governments 
honest. Participants concluded the Asian economic crisis might not 
have happened had a more critical media exposed the so-called Crony 
Capitalism now widely blamed for the economic mess. The media and 
corruption is the subject of today's Dateline. Here is Pamela Taylor. 
In his address to the annual meeting of the International Monetary 
Fund and the World Bank, bank president, James Wilsenson* said that 
free flow of information is essential for economic progress. Mr. Wilsenson 
said it is the responsibility of a free press to scrutinize their 
government's economic policies and to expose corruption and cronyism. 
Tim Carrington* of the World Bank's economics journalism training 
program says the Bank was in the business of training journalists 
from developing countries well before the Asian crisis. He says they 
noticed a link between corruption and media repression. For a long 
time, people have understood that independent media is very beneficial 
to the creation of democracy and that it is crucial in political development 
towards democracy. But the World Bank is a financial institution, 
not a political institution, so again why the World Bank? I think 
what people have come to realize in the past few years is that a functioning 
media is also very important to the creation of a working economy. 
A market-oriented economy in which the flow of information is absolutely 
crucial to a variety of economic actors making informed choices. The 
Asian crisis highlighted the fact that, when governments are largely 
unaccountable and there is little independent analysis of the quality 
of economic policy, economic management, that you have got a situation 
that is more ripe for abuse, for cronyism, for a variety of distortions 
that contributed to the crises in east Asia. What about what is happening 
in Russia right now? Do you see a connection between the economic 
collapse and the fact that the media seems to be coming more repressed? 
The media in Russia is a troubling aspect of the distorted version 
of capitalism that he Russians have experienced in the last few years. 
It is interesting as an American, we would-I would tend to think of 
independent media as being a question of whether or not the state 
owned a particular news organ. In Russia, many of the news organizations 
are not owned to controlled by the state, but they are owned and controlled 
by particular financial industrial groups and that makes them no more 
independent than if they were owned by the state. For instance, they 
will be quick to run stories about he corruption or alleged corruption 
of officials in government, but they are not going to run a lot of 
stories about corruption or the appearance of it within the oppositions. 
And, in your seminars, do you try and explain the connection between 
credibility and the role of an independent media by explaining that 
if you do not be even-handed in ferreting out and exposing corruption 
on all parts, it makes the one case that you do uncover look perhaps 
suspect. Right, right, one of the newspapers that was represented 
in the seminar that we held in Washington just prior to the annual 
meetings, was Les Pos Polita*, a Warsaw-based paper that is a terrific 
example of a newspaper that came into being with the new economy in 
Poland. And they made the strategic decision that they would do better 
as a business if they ran credible reliable news on economic and legal 
change in Poland. And so they were not associated with any particular 
political faction or business interest, but they were simply attempting 
to cover the transition as credibly as they could and what that translated 
to was a broad readership of a solid advertising base, and very significant 
commercial success. Is that a problem that you face around the world. 
I imagine in Asia, in former East Bloc, in Africa, that there is a 
lack of understanding between the word independent and being truly 
objective in the Western way. Right, there is. There is the media 
that springs up when things are liberalized somewhat is often times 
in the first instance, going to be opposition media. So, then no, 
they are not truly independent, but I think that the first step is 
simply to allow a diversity of voices to be heard and then out of 
that, I think in one country after another, you start to see some 
truly objective credible organizations beginning to realize some success. 
And I think one of the things is that business interests can help 
drive that. If you are only writing a version of the truth that appeals 
to a particular political faction, you are unnecessarily limiting 
your readership or your listenership. The seminar which Tim Carrrington 
organized for the World Bank included participants from the Berlin-based 
corruption-fighting group Transparency International and the George 
Solace* -financed Media Development Loan Fund of Prague. Many participants 
agree with the World Bank that a more crusading news media could have 
softened the Asian economic crisis, but the head of the Paris-based 
World Association of Newspapers, Timothy Balding said press freedom 
has its limits. He pointed to Nigeria where he said the late military 
ruler, General Sammy Abatcha* simply ignored allegations of corruption 
which surfaced from time to time in Luegos* press. But at another 
media symposium in Belgium, journalist Cabral Blamier* of Guano said 
this does not mean the Nigerian press should stop its efforts to expose 
corruption. Nigeria shall be a better country even though there is 
corruption. And if we do not highlight corruption, we make it possible 
for routines for countries to slip further into to underdevelopment. 
Cabral Blamier is the president of the West Africa Journalists Association. 
He outlined some of the barriers to uncovering corruption faced by 
journalists in West Africa. Things like restricting access to official 
information and punishment for possessing stolen documents. In our 
South Africa, there is no law binding a government or a public official 
to this information. And there are many funny cases like the case 
in Sinigal* where a newspaper was fined $1 million for libel and in 
this case, they had evidence from customs, the background that helped 
them in their case, but under the laws of Sinigal* they couldn't submit 
that evidence as an element of defense because it was not obtained 
officially. Mr. Cabral says African journalists can face severe retaliation 
for publicizing corruption. Some disappear he says and others are 
beaten or thrown in jail. There was a communciton* where three journalists 
were sentenced to imprisonment for almost two years for sedition. 
And what is the offense? The admiral pointed out Lokal Sokakeem had 
lost * because of the pressures of the head of state. That his pressures 
was a part of man for the king. Brownan journalist, Cabral Blamier, 
says what Africa needs is to develop a culture of democracy including 
a free press and an end to official secrets acts, laws on sedition, 
and punitive libel laws. The media and corruption was the subject 
of today's Dateline. I am Pamela Taylor. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>