<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981015.1700.0676 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In this country the American Red Cross has launched an emergency appeal 
for $50 million in donation to aid victims of Hurricane George. The 
storm devastated the U.S. Gulf Coast from Florida to Louisiana. Speaking 
with reporters by telephone, Elizabeth Dole, President of the American 
Red Cross, says Hurricane George is the costliest disaster the Red 
Cross has ever faced. If you imagine a path of destruction from New 
York to Omaha, 40 miles wide, shattering the lives of hundreds of 
thousands of people, you will have the picture that describes just 
how wide-spread this is. And, of course, while no one can predict 
when or where the next disaster will strike, we know there are going 
to be more. Disasters can happen at any time, any place, to any one, 
so we count on individuals to help us. We are dependent on charitable 
contributions and, of course, America is counting on the Red Cross 
right now to help with this disaster. So we need the help now and 
I would like to ask people to call 1-800-HELPNOW and then for Spanish-speaking 
individuals 1-800-257-7575 or on the Internet www.redcross.org. These 
are the easiest ways to give to this disaster to help people with 
dire human need. This is really a huge disaster in terms of being 
the most far reaching in terms of disaster relief in Red Cross history. 
The broadest and also the most expensive. Why is this disaster more 
costly than others? Naturally, there are hurricanes every year. What 
is special about this one? Right. The 187,000 dwellings have been 
impacted. And 70 percent of those have either been destroyed or severely 
damaged. If you compare that to hurricane Andrew, for example, I believe 
it was 137,000 dwellings, so you can see that it fast and a lot of 
this is in Puerto Rico, in the interior in the mountains. When our 
people finish their disaster assessment and these numbers have been 
corroborated. I believe that FIMA is actually using those numbers 
now and it was just so much more far-reaching than many people realized. 
The press, the media actually left Puerto Rico in the days immediately 
following the disaster and you know all of this in the interior became 
obvious after the media, the press, had gone. So it is much, much 
more disastrous than was originally understood by the press, I believe. 
I couldn't recall if you had said whether the damage assessment had 
yet been completed and to follow. How are you making certain that 
the aid reaches those in need? Especially in remote areas. Right. 
This is the preliminary damage assessment. Those numbers are being 
used on Capital Hill right now by FIMA and it is corroborated. The 
way we get the supplies to individuals. Seventy-five percent of our 
emergency response vehicles are being used right now on hurricane 
George and that is a 180 vehicles and they go out to the remote areas 
and they provide all of these like comfort kits that handed out almost 
15,000 comfort kits that have various supplies. They distributed almost 
8,000 cleanup kits already. And that count continues. We have 12,300 
Red Cross workers who have been involved in this effort around the 
clock providing the food the comfort, the counseling, the tools needed 
to rebuild their lives. Then we have provided over all about 1,800,000 
meals to people about 1,133,000 in Puerto Rico and mental health counseling 
at this point, there have been about 13,484 mental health contacts 
just to date and there will probably be many more. So you can see 
what a big operation it is and certainly getting to those people in 
the interior, our emergency response vehicles are vital. Elizabeth 
Dole, the President of the American Red Cross speaking from Westchester 
County, New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>