<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981015.0600.2432 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Officials from 30 nations gathered in Miami for the opening of the 
Caribbean Regional Drug Control Conference. The event is hosted by 
the US Drug Policy Director Barry McCaffrey who says a united well 
coordinated multi-national approach is critical to stop drug traffickers. 
VOA's Michael Bowman has this report from Miami. Mr. McCaffrey, commonly 
known as the US Drug Czar says he hopes for an open and honest exchange 
with officials from thorough-out the Caribbean and Central America, 
plus Columbia, Venezuela and Mexico. We will be sharing ideas with 
senior drug policy officials on both interdiction and judicial police 
cooperation, as well as demand reduction. Addressing local anti-drug 
activists in Miami Wednesday, Mr. McCaffrey noted that drug abuse 
is spreading in countries like Haiti and Jamaica. Last week I was 
in Haiti and Jamaica, their children are also threatened by drug abuse. 
Their workplaces, their democratic institutions. The US Drug Policy 
Director says Haiti is particularly vulnerable to the corrosive effects 
of narcotic-corruption on institutions such as it's police force. 
He said Haitian law enforcement has been put to the test recently 
and some drug routes have shifted away from Puerto Rico and toward 
the island of Hispanola. Which Haiti shares with the Dominican Republic. 
Mr. McCaffrey went on to urge hemispheric nations to abandon the idea 
that the drug problem is merely one of US demand and Latin American 
supply. This is no longer a US drug demand problem, with a supply 
coming out of Peru, Bolivia and Columbia. The drug abuse problem is 
Rio is worse than Miami. And I say that not to transfer the problem, 
but just to remind all of us these terrible international criminal 
organizations have to be confronted in some notion of partnership. 
But convincing all Caribbean nations about this may not be an easy 
task. Dwight Strawn is a staff reporter for the Bahamian daily newspaper 
"The Tribune," Mr. Strawn says people in the Bahamas see their country 
as a trans-shipment point left largely unscathed by the drug trade. 
Most of the people would believe this is the pass through point, it's 
coming from the South and it's passing through the country, and going 
to the States. Mr. Strawn adds that drug control issues and larger 
regional economic matters go hand in hand. He notes many Caribbean 
nations have lost export oriented jobs to Mexico since the creation 
of the North American Free Trade Zone, NAFTA. The journalist says 
people in the Bahamas and other Caribbean nations want the United 
States to help address pressing trade and economic matters affecting 
their region. The argument is that healthy economies will likely be 
less susceptible to narco-corruption, and the financial lure of drug 
trafficking in general. Michael Bowman VOA News Miami. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>