<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981015.0600.1356 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the coming days the US Tobacco Industry is expected to settle a 
number of state lawsuits. State government sued the cigarette manufacturers 
to try to recoup the money they spent on healthcare for illnesses 
related to tobacco use. But a large chunk of the multi-billion dollar 
pay-out will be going to attorneys who took on the industry when few 
people expected the lawsuits to succeed. Now some officials are complaining 
money that should be going to anti-tobacco efforts will end up in 
the pockets of lawyers, including Ron Motley of South Carolina. Bob 
Kerr of NBC Television's "Today Show" reports Mr. Motley's upcoming 
windfall follows five years of effort, putting together anti-tobacco 
lawsuits for 28 of Americas 50 states. Already fabulously wealthy 
from an earlier crusade against the asbestos industry, this 54 year 
old super lawyer is about to collect fees, of a billion dollars or 
more. At a recent ceremony in Washington, Motley's colleagues said 
he earned it. The American Trial Lawyers Association named Motley 
Lawyer of the Year. He took on not the difficult fight, but he took 
on American Tobacco, which is literally bigger than life. Still when 
critics learned that Motley and other lawyers stood to gain 500 million 
dollars in Mississippi, just over 2 billion in Texas, and almost 3 
billion in Florida, they were outraged. Colorado Congressman Scott 
McInnis. Rep. SCOTT MCINNIS, COLORADO: They are due just compensation, 
but not a windfall at the expense of the American People. Especially 
money that would otherwise be diverted to fighting the use of tobacco. 
The states have decided to subject existing fee contracts to arbitration. 
Motley and other lawyers will go along and tear up lucrative contingency 
fee contracts, signed years ago with individual States. But Motley 
wonders where the critics were then. No body thought we had a chance 
to win, when we brought these lawsuits. If they wanted to set an hourly 
rate, win, lose or draw, when we started these cases that would have 
been perfectly fine with us. But they didn't do that, they waited 
until we brought the cigarette companies to their knees. No matter 
what, there are members of Congress, who say these lawyers don't deserve 
more than a $125 or $250 an hour, instead of several thousand dollars 
an hour. That would be like two years after, someone goes out and 
buys with his own ingenuity and with his own money, he drills for 
oil someplace, where it wasn't expected to be found. Came back with 
a great gusher, and Congress saying Oh gee, that guy took all the 
risk, he did all the work, we love the oil, but now we think he is 
making too much money. Motley's law firm has been described as a huge 
well oiled tobacco-fighting machine, the ground work started 5 years 
ago. Now at least 30 attorneys and about 100 support staff are focused 
on the battle against cigarette makers. Over the years Motley estimates 
his firm's cost in time and resources at about 25 million dollars. 
In court he challenges a jury. This national health disaster called 
the cigarette epidemic can be stopped. It can be stopped right here, 
right now, forever. His 84 year old father is there to watch, but 
it was his mothers' death from Emphysema that fueled Motley's passion. 
When she was in the hospital, uh, she would actually have one of her 
sisters disengage the oxygen she was on, 24 hour oxygen, disengage 
the oxygen so should could smoke, that's how addicted she was to cigarettes. 
Over the years, Motley was on the road more than he was at home, so 
the big pay day that's coming comes at a price. All the time that 
he was away, as his kids now out on their own, were growing up. Nothing's 
worth missing my children grow up. How do you deal with it? How do 
you? Well, you try to repair those relationships as best you can. 
My children and I are very close now. I think he's finally realizing 
that workings great, but he, you know, he needs to have some balance 
in his professional and personal life. His daughter describes Motley, 
as driven, and now even as other states agree to settle their tobacco 
lawsuits, Motley is working with Massachusetts Attorney General on 
a tobacco trail set to start next year. You have to have the best 
lawyers, you could get. We think we got them here, we got Ron, we 
got the others, these folks have done a tremendous job around the 
country. It's a gamble, but one Motley is about to cash in. For Today 
Bob Kerr, NBC, News Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>