<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981015.1700.2696 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
American farmers are very busy these days rushing to gather in what 
looks to be the second biggest maze harvest and the largest soybean 
crop in U.S. history. Combines on many farms are running from the 
break of day well into the night as farmers race against time, the 
whether, and their own fatigue to finish the fieldwork. Farming is 
a very dangerous occupation any time of year, but the feverish pace 
can take a tragic toll. Each year during the fall harvest, an estimated 
300 American farmers are killed, many more are seriously injured. 
Tom Bogardine* has the story from Columbus, Ohio. It is early afternoon 
on the farm of Don and Marcy Williams, a 2,000-acre spread northwest 
of Columbus at the extreme eastern edge of the corn and soybean belt. 
Don Williams is transferring soybeans from a combine to a grain cart 
before he moves it to another field. Williams, like other farmers, 
if involved in a version of beat the clock. As he rushes to get crops, 
valued at hundreds of thousands of dollars off the field and into 
grain bins and elevators. Thirty to forty harvests in a lifetime. 
And that is basically your living for your life. So that is probably 
the biggest pressure that is on all farmers that are grain farming 
specialists. Then after that, you know, the losses start mounting 
up fast and with the margins that are here today, we do not have much 
to loose. As Williams transfers grain, his wife Marcy approaches on 
foot along a field side gravel road. She keeps in constant contact 
with her husband and son during harvest days through two-way radios. 
Her vigilance stems from what she calls a freak accident that nearly 
took her husband's life. In 1973, my husband was picking corn with 
a mounted corn picker. The trotter or the husking rolls on it needed 
roughed-up a little bit and he was using a torch on that to do that. 
The trotter caught on fire, the tractor battery exploded underneath 
the gas tank, which just doused him with gasoline, and he was a human 
torch until we could grab him and put him down and roll him. He was 
in the hospital for three months, skin grafts. That night he wasn't 
given more than a 50/50 chance to live. So we are very fortunate that 
we have him with minimal scarring and 99 percent use of his arms that 
were burnt so bad. National Safety counsel officials say Williams' 
story is all too familiar. The counsel notes agriculture is the second 
most dangerous occupation behind mining. Even though farmers know 
safe practices, many cut corners during harvest. Leroy Billman of 
the Ohio Farm Bureau Federation can't harvest crops any more because 
he lost his right arm in a hay bailer. I got off of that piece of 
equipment and had some loose clothing on and was looking to see what 
was wrong with the equipment and became entangled in the hay bailer. 
Billman, along with agricultural safety extension chief, Dee Jeffson, 
travel the state through the summer and fall reinforcing safety warnings. 
Both know of the economic pressure that is brought to bear on farmers 
but Jeffson says the consequences of ignoring safety warnings on combines, 
tractors, or augers is often personal and permanent. Because it is 
harvest season, a lot of that equipment is fierce. You know, it is 
designed to tear things apart. It is designed to rip open that corn 
shuck and it doesn't matter whether it is your hand or a corn shuck, 
it is going to take it. Back on the Williams' farm, equipment stands 
ready to take another 20-ton load of beans to a local elevator. The 
timely 1998 harvest will help keep the small operation solvent. Marcy 
Williams listens to the two-way radio as part of her vigil to keep 
the family safe. I am Tom Bogerdine, in Columbus. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>