<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981205.0581 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Kneeling on a slope in Jesus' hometown, volunteers from an American 
church gently fitted rock on limestone rock and filled in cracks with 
a mortar of mud. The result of a day's labor was a ragged knee-high 
wall lining an agricultural terrace _ a common sight in the Middle 
East, where farmers since biblical times have had to plant on rocky 
hills. But this wall was special. It marked the start of a dlrs 64 
million project, largely financed by American donations, to build 
a replica of a biblical-era village and farm in the heart of Nazareth, 
where tradition says Christ spent much of his life. In time for the 
millennium, visitors will be able to stroll along donkey paths into 
an ancient village of one-room stone houses and courtyards, and mingle 
with actors playing 1st century housewives and farmers. Or they can 
follow a ``parable walk,'' accompanied by storytellers in period costume 
who will relay news of Jesus as a contemporary. For the devout, there 
will be a holy communion, a foot washing or a reading from the Bible. 
Project organizers say they want to bring Jesus and his teachings 
to life in historical context, something a standard tour of the Holy 
Land often fails to deliver. ``You can see only so many archaeological 
sites before you don't know anymore what you are seeing and are not 
moved by it,'' said Joel Kauffmann, program director of Nazareth Village, 
a not-for-profit association of professionals and business people 
whose honorary chairman is former U.S. President Jimmy Carter. In 
modern Nazareth _ a noisy, congested city of 60,000 whose main attraction 
is the 1950s Church of the Annunciation _ that connection to the biblical 
past is especially difficult to make. Jackhammers are tearing up the 
city center as dlrs 80 million is being spent on widening streets 
and building 1,000 hotel rooms in preparation for an expected 4 million 
tourists in 2000. But the work is behind schedule and ambitious plans 
for a large stadium, a civic auditorium and an additional 1,500 hotel 
rooms have been dropped. A new snag arose after November municipal 
elections. In the mainly Arab town that is 70 percent Muslim and 30 
percent Christian, the Islamic movement for the first time won a majority 
on the city council. The Christian mayor, Ramez Jeraisi, was barely 
re-elected. Topping the Islamists' agenda is the construction of a 
mosque right next to the Church of the Annunciation, on a spot where 
city planners had hoped to build a Venetian-style plaza for tourists. 
The dispute is in court and the plaza is on hold. The election outcome 
worries some Nazarenes, who fear a new emphasis on religious alignment 
is emerging in a town that has long prided itself on tolerance. Mindful 
of the tensions, the planners of Nazareth Village decided to get the 
community involved from the start. ``We're not high-powered Westerners 
coming in and creating a theme park, a place whose sole purpose is 
to make money,'' said Michael Hostetler, the executive director of 
Nazareth Village and an employee of the Mennonite Board of Missions 
in Elkhart, Indiana. On a recent Saturday, 360 local volunteers launched 
the project by clearing thorny bushes covering the 12-acre (5-hectare) 
plot that is part of the grounds of a hospital run by the Edinburgh 
Medical Missionary Society of Scotland. Muslim girls wearing traditional 
headscarves worked alongside Christian teen-agers in jeans and T-shirts 
and a dozen volunteers from the United Methodist Church in Gulf Breeze, 
Florida. Local grocers donated food for a picnic lunch. By the end 
of the day, the brush was cleared, laying bare the terraces of a 1st 
century farm. Later will come orchards of olive, fig and plum trees. 
An earlier archaeological dig yielded a quarry, watch tower bases, 
stone irrigation channels and a wine press _ a level area cut from 
limestone for squeezing grapes and a vat below for collecting juice. 
Frieda Brothers, a 67-year-old retired nurse dusty from hauling underbrush, 
said the work helped strengthen her faith. ``It was a joy to get something 
started that the rest of the world will see someday and know this 
is where Jesus walked and lived,'' she said. It is believed that biblical 
Nazareth, where Jesus spent much of his life, consisted of only about 
35 homes spread over six acres (about 2.5 hectares). By 2000, Hostetler 
hopes to have the first six or seven homes built and open the site 
to visitors. The work will then become part of the attraction, with 
builders in biblical dress transporting materials _ all strictly 1st 
century _ on donkeyback. A ``parable walk'' will weave through the 
village and the farm and use existing sites to illustrate New Testament 
stories. For example, visitors might pause at a terrace and hear the 
parable of the farmer who saw some of his seeds go to waste because 
they fell on rocky ground. The story might make little sense to visitors 
used to vast stretches of fertile land in other parts of the world, 
Hostetler said. ``But when you come here, you see the narrow terraces, 
and it's not a stretch of the imagination that some of the seeds would 
naturally fall on rocks,'' he said. In the later stages, there will 
be a multimedia exhibit detailing Jesus' life. At night, visitors 
might don period dress themselves and participate in a village celebration. 
A biblical Disneyland? ``I don't think we should deny the entertainment 
aspect of this,'' Kauffmann said. ``But this will not be garish, this 
will not be pumped up.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>