<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981205.0339 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The ruling Nationalist Party was leading in the Taipei mayoral race 
Saturday, early results showed in a contest highlighting Taiwan's 
precarious relations with mainland China. The Nationalists also kept 
control of the Taiwanese Legislature in Saturday's elections. With 
results still coming in, Nationalists already had 97 of the 176 seats 
chosen directly by voters, compared with 40 for the opposition Democratic 
Progressive Party and 18 for smaller parties. Attention focused on 
the campaign by Ma Ying-jeou, the Nationalist candidate, to unseat 
the capital's incumbent mayor, Chen Shui-bian _ the top figure in 
the DPP, which calls for formal independence from China. With more 
than 80 percent of Taipei's votes counted, Ma had 51 percent of the 
votes, compared to 46 percent for Chen. A candidate from the tiny 
New Party, Wang Chien-shien, trailed far behind. Chen has not conceded, 
but Ma supporters had been celebrating for hours, setting off fireworks 
and cheering as they watched their candidate's lead grow as the numbers 
rolled in. Ma, a former justice minister, has a squeaky clean image 
and youthful good looks and charm that earned him the nickname ``Sonny 
Boy Ma.'' Ma's party backs eventual reunification with the mainland, 
though he did not emphasize this during the race. Chen avoided mentioning 
independence in the campaign, although his camp raised divisive questions 
about the loyalty of Ma, who was born to parents from the mainland 
and moved to Taiwan when he was just 1. While the campaigners had 
talked mainly about tackling the urban problems of Taipei, the underlying 
theme was that the winning party would go into presidential elections 
16 months later from a position of strength _ and differing ideas 
on how to deal with Beijing. President Lee Teng-hui plans to retire 
in early 2000. The Nationalists banked on citizens being scared by 
the DPP's platform calling for a declaration of independence from 
China _ seen as a potential catalyst for a military attack by the 
mainland. Beijing is closely watching the outcome. The Chinese government 
claims pro-Western Taiwan as a part of China, although the two separated 
politically in a 1949 civil war. Most Taiwanese want to maintain a 
separate identity from China and postpone the question of whether 
to pursue reunification or permanent independence. The economic slump 
that has started to hit Taiwan may have put voters in a conservative 
mood that brought them back to the ruling party, which had previously 
been hurt by widespread concerns about corruption. ``Despite people's 
complaints against the Nationalists, they feel they need the party 
at the time of financial turmoil,'' said Lee Hsi-kun, a professor 
of political science at National Taiwan University. ``As long as the 
Chinese threats remain, we can't expect voters to entrust the DPP 
to rule the island.'' Turnout appeared heavy among the island's nearly 
15 million eligible voters, with officials estimating 80 percent had 
cast ballots in Taipei. Police had guarded more than 10,000 polling 
stations _ with huge barbed wire barriers on hand in some spots _ 
but they avoided any repeats of violence that had marred past elections. 
After the voters chose 176 national legislators, another 49 seats 
were to be assigned to parties based on how many votes they got. The 
Nationalists appeared to have substantially improved their popular 
support across the island. With most of the legislative votes in, 
they had won almost 52 percent, compared to 46 percent in the race 
three years ago. Many of the gains represented former Nationalist 
voters returning from the New Party, which broke away from the Nationalists 
to take a stronger stand for unification. The New Party's popular 
support plunged to 7 percent from 13 percent, while the DPP's support 
held at 32 percent, compared with 33 percent before. Voters also were 
choosing a mayor for the southern city of Kaohsiung _ where the DPP's 
Frank Hsieh was leading _ and city councils in Taipei and Kaohsiung. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>