<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981205.0755 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Palestinians threw stones and Israeli troops responded with rubber 
bullets and tear gas in scattered clashes that injured 25 Palestinians 
and three Israeli soldiers Saturday. The clashes came as Palestinians 
launched a campaign of protests to call for the release of so-called 
security prisoners, an escalating dispute that has threatened to derail 
the new Mideast peace accord. Seven protesters were arrested. In addition 
to the street protests, 2,500 Palestinian prisoners began a hunger 
strike Saturday to press for their early release. Under the Wye River 
peace agreement, Israel agreed to free 750 Palestinian prisoners by 
the end of January. In a first stage last month, it freed 250 prisoners, 
most common criminals. Instead, the Palestinians are demanding the 
release of hundreds of prisoners jailed for anti-Israel activity. 
The prisoner issue is highly emotional because almost everyone in 
the West Bank and Gaza Strip has had a relative arrested at some point 
during the 30-year Israeli occupation. Saturday's protesters dispersed 
after hours of clashes on the outskirts of Bethlehem, Ramallah, Nablus 
and the Israeli settlement of Ariel. Israeli paramilitary police also 
fired tear gas to disperse dozens of stone throwers in traditionally 
Arab east Jerusalem. Five Israeli buses were stoned, and two bus drivers 
were slightly injured from broken glass, the police said. Meanwhile, 
a week before U.S. President Bill Clinton is to arrive for a three-day 
visit, supporters of a radical Palestinian faction burned U.S. flags 
in the West Bank town of Hebron to protest the Wye River land-for-security 
agreement. About 1,000 Palestinians took part in the demonstration 
sponsored by the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine. The 
West Bank village of Beta was put under a curfew by the Israeli army 
Saturday night after Molotov cocktails were thrown at a military vehicle 
passing through the town, said Col. Fahed Deyab, who heads the Palestinian 
side of a joint security post in the area. In Ramallah, the Palestinians' 
top negotiator on prisoners expressed regret over a statement by the 
Clinton administration. Friday in Washington, the U.S. State Department 
said the Israelis have ``done what they said they would do ... concerning 
prisoner releases.'' ``We are sorry for what the American administration 
has said, that Israel has fulfilled its obligations,'' Kadoura Faris, 
who is representing Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat's government 
in talks with the Israelis on the issue, told 500 protesters. Israeli 
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has said he would not free members 
of the Islamic militant group Hamas or those involved in attacks that 
led to the death or injury of Israelis. Palestinian officials contend 
there is a pool of hundreds of security prisoners eligible for release 
even under those terms. Israel has said it would hold up implementing 
provisions of the accord, including a troop withdrawal from 5 percent 
of the West Bank scheduled for later this month, until Arafat accepted 
Israel's criteria for releasing prisoners. The Clinton administration 
has insisted the troop pullback proceed despite the disagreement. 
In Stockholm, Arafat struck a conciliatory note on the explosive issue 
of Palestinian statehood. Arafat, who has said he will declare statehood 
unilaterally on May 4, said, ``There can be no just solution without 
the agreement of the existence of two states ... coexisting by mutual 
agreement and acceptance.'' Netanyahu's spokesman David Bar-Illan 
said Arafat's remarks did not constitute a retraction of his intentions 
to go forward with a unilateral declaration of statehood in May. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>