<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981205.0378 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The ruling Nationalist Party scored a major win Saturday as its candidate 
Ma Ying-jeou declared victory over the top opposition politician in 
the Taipei mayor's race, a critical contest that highlighted Taiwan's 
precarious relations with China. ``It's not my personal victory, but 
a victory for all of Taipei's citizens,'' Ma told cheering supporters. 
Ma said his win would help heal old ethnic wounds between the native 
Taiwanese majority and those who emigrated from China after a 1949 
civil war. The Nationalists also kept control of the Taiwanese Legislature 
in Saturday's elections. With results still coming in, Nationalists 
had 97 of the 176 seats chosen directly by voters, compared with 40 
for the opposition Democratic Progressive Party and 18 for smaller 
parties. Attention focused on Ma's campaign to unseat the capital's 
incumbent mayor, Chen Shui-bian, the top figure in the DPP, which 
calls for formal independence from China. With more than 80 percent 
of Taipei's votes counted, Ma held a commanding lead at 51 percent, 
compared to 46 percent for Chen. A candidate from the tiny New Party, 
Wang Chien-shien, trailed far behind. Ma, a former justice minister, 
has a squeaky clean image and youthful good looks and charm that earned 
him the nickname ``Sonny Boy Ma.'' Chen did not immediately concede, 
although many of his supporters were weeping. Ma's fans had been celebrating 
for hours, setting off fireworks, cheering and waving flags as they 
watched their candidate's lead become insurmountable. Ma's party backs 
eventual reunification with the mainland, though he did not emphasize 
this during the race. Chen avoided mentioning independence in the 
campaign, although his camp raised divisive questions about the loyalty 
of Ma, who was born to parents from the mainland and moved to Taiwan 
when he was just 1. While the campaigners had talked mainly about 
tackling the urban problems of Taipei, the underlying theme was that 
the winning party would go into presidential elections 16 months later 
from a position of strength _ and differing ideas on how to deal with 
Beijing. President Lee Teng-hui plans to retire in early 2000. The 
economic slump that has started to hit Taiwan may have put voters 
in a conservative mood that brought them back to the ruling party, 
which had previously been hurt by widespread concerns about corruption. 
``Despite people's complaints against the Nationalists, they feel 
they need the party at the time of financial turmoil,'' said Lee Hsi-kun, 
a professor of political science at National Taiwan University. ``As 
long as the Chinese threats remain, we can't expect voters to entrust 
the DPP to rule the island,'' Lee said. The Nationalists had banked 
on citizens being scared by the DPP's platform calling for a declaration 
of independence from China _ seen as a potential catalyst for a military 
attack by the mainland. Beijing is closely watching the outcome. The 
Chinese government claims pro-Western Taiwan as a part of China. Most 
Taiwanese want to maintain a separate identity from China and postpone 
the question of whether to pursue reunification or permanent independence. 
Turnout appeared heavy among the island's nearly 15 million eligible 
voters, with officials estimating 80 percent had cast ballots in Taipei. 
Police had guarded more than 10,000 polling stations _ with huge barbed 
wire barriers on hand in some spots _ but they avoided any repeats 
of violence that had marred past elections. After the voters chose 
176 national legislators, another 49 seats were to be assigned to 
parties based on how many votes they got. The Nationalists appeared 
to have substantially improved their popular support across the island. 
With most of the legislative votes in, they had won almost 52 percent, 
compared to 46 percent three years ago. Many of the gains represented 
former Nationalist voters returning from the New Party, which broke 
away from the Nationalists to take a stronger stand for unification. 
The New Party's popular support plunged to 7 percent from 13 percent, 
while the DPP's support held at 32 percent, compared with 33 percent 
before. Voters also chose a mayor for the southern city of Kaohsiung 
_ where the DPP's Frank Hsieh declared victory _ and city councils 
in Taipei and Kaohsiung. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>