<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981205.0591 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Snaking through silent streets, Nigerians took a step away from military 
rule towards democracy Saturday in local government elections seen 
as a pivotal test for Africa's most populous nation. In stark contrast 
to the usual frenzied commerce and paralyzing traffic jams of Nigerian 
cities, shops were closed and the government ordered all cars, trucks 
and even motorcycles off city streets and country highways to prevent 
political protests and traffic jams. Children played soccer in the 
streets while adults shuffled past on their way to the polls. Nigeria, 
a country filled with ethnic tension, crime and corruption, came to 
a temporary and joyous halt. Although borders were closed and about 
100,000 riot police patrolled the major cities and rural villages 
amid fears of elections violence, the mood was buoyant. At one police 
station in Lagos, officers released prisoners awaiting trial so they 
could vote. It was unclear if the move had been approved by senior 
authorities or if the prisoners would be sought to return behind bars. 
``Even detainees are entitled to vote,'' said a police sergeant on 
duty who asked to remain anonymous. ``I will also go vote when I leave 
duty.'' Voters began churning through polling stations, where officials 
took peoples' names and gave out special identity cards. The actual 
casting of ballots did not begin until shortly before noon. Vote counting 
began in some municipalities soon afterwards. Elections organizers 
said the turnout was high. More than 50 million people are registered 
to vote for some 8,800 municipal government posts. Nine parties have 
registered and three have fielded candidates nationwide. It is the 
first vote since Gen. Abdulsalami Abubakar outlined his plan earlier 
this year to give power to civilians in May after presidential elections 
on February 15. Abubakar took power after the unexpected death of 
Gen. Sani Abacha in June. ``From what we have seen so far, the turnout 
is commendable,'' Abubakar said after voting in the capital, Abuja. 
``The government has done its part and it is now up to Nigerians and 
the politicians to play their own.'' Saturday's poll is a test run. 
The national electoral commission is inexperienced and the political 
parties have vague platforms and are relatively unknown. Abubakar 
has promised that the military will not intervene in the transition. 
Nigeria, a country of more than 100 million people which has failed 
to tackle grinding poverty despite fabulous oil wealth that has made 
it the world's 6th largest producer, has a history of armed coups 
and military meddling in politics. The country has been ruled by civilians 
for only 10 years since independence in 1960. Abubakar has warned 
that parties which campaign on divisive ethnic lines will be barred 
from the presidential poll. Simmering ethnic tensions prompted authorities 
to cancel polling in a number of towns and villages in oil-rich southwestern 
Nigeria. After official campaigns began last week, colorful ads promising 
jobs and ethnic representation quickly filled radio and television 
airwaves and crowds of people have followed cars blaring election 
promises on loudspeakers. Any party that fails to pick up at least 
5 percent of the vote in 24 of Nigeria's 36 states will be eliminated 
from the ballot for the presidential poll. Although it was too early 
to say whether the elections would be judged free and fair by foreign 
observers, only scattered logistical problems were reported by officials 
early Saturday _ a few people's names were missing from voters' lists 
in Abuja and Lagos and polling began late in some stations. Later 
in the day, officials said youths stole election material and disrupted 
voting in some communities in the western state of Osun. Pickup 20th 
graf pvs. `The first results ...' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>