<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981205.0354 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
St. Petersburg was at the forefront of this country's democracy movement 
a decade ago, but as it heads into city elections Sunday, its politics 
are now considered as dirty and deadly as anywhere in Russia. Last 
month's killing of Galina Starovoitova, the country's most prominent 
female politician, drew international condemnation and focused attention 
on St. Petersburg, a city that has failed to meet its high expectations 
in the post-Soviet era. The run-up to the election has been marred 
by several contract killings of politicians and leading businessmen, 
beatings and drive-by shootings against candidates and frequent reports 
of dirty tricks by campaigners. ``Five years ago we could hardly imagine 
that elections to the St. Petersburg Legislative Assembly would include 
threats, blackmail and assault,'' the head of Russia's Federal Security 
Service, Vladimir Putin, said in an interview with the newspaper Peterburgsky 
Chas Pik. Boris Nemtsov, the former first deputy premier, recently 
visited the city and called it ``the crime capital of Russia.'' In 
this atmosphere, 587 candidates are competing for 50 seats in the 
city assembly. Unlike many cities in Russia, where the city legislature 
has little power, this body could be quite influential. A new city 
charter, introduced this year after a bitter battle, calls for the 
legislature to be a full-time body with extensive powers. Gov. Alexander 
Yakovlev _ the city's mayor despite his title _ strongly opposed the 
new charter, which curtails his clout. Yakovlev is not on the ballot 
and has not been actively campaigning for individual candidates. But 
critics say the powerful Yakovlev has contributed to the mean-spirited 
atmosphere surrounding the election. Prominent liberal politicians 
opposed to Yakovlev have found that people who share the same name 
were mysteriously proposed as candidates. This has been done in an 
attempt to confuse voters and take away votes from liberals. For example, 
when voters go to the polls, there will be two ``Sergei Belyayevs'' 
on the ballot. Voters may be hard-pressed to determine which one is 
the well-known liberal and which one is the anonymous decoy candidate. 
In addition, anti-Semitic leaflets have been handed out asking citizens 
not to vote for Jewish candidates, and one candidate's posters were 
defaced with slurs against Jews. There have also been multiple reports 
of attempts to bribe voters. Pensioners have reportedly been taken 
on ``free excursions'' _ bus rides with presents and free vodka _ 
which end at a polling station where the retirees are told that the 
trip was sponsored by a certain candidate whom they were asked to 
vote for. St. Petersburg's 3.7 million voters seem fed up with the 
city's crime and corruption, and its poor economic performance, but 
it's not clear that they will turn out in large numbers. St. Petersburg, 
which is Russia's second-largest city after Moscow, had seemed a likely 
candidate for prosperity in the post-Soviet era. It's been a liberal, 
Westward-leaning city ever since the Russian Czar Peter the Great 
built it from scratch at the beginning of the 18th century and dubbed 
it the country's ``window on the West.'' St. Petersburg produced many 
of the country's democratic reformers and free-market economists in 
the late 1980s and early 1990s, but the city has languished since 
then. The murder of Starovoitova seemed to symbolize much of what's 
gone wrong. No one has been arrested for the Nov. 20 killing of Starovoitova, 
who was a member of the national legislature and was not on Sunday's 
ballot. But her movement, Northern Capital, was based in St. Petersburg 
and is expected to make a solid showing. She was an outspoken critic 
of political corruption, and the Russian media has speculated that 
she was killed by political opponents. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>