<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981205.0392 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A week before the scheduled start of President Clinton's visit, Palestinian 
stone-throwers battled Israeli troops in scattered clashes that left 
25 Palestinians injured. Seven protesters were arrested. The clashes 
came as Palestinians launched a campaign of protests to call for the 
release of so-called security prisoners _ those held for anti-Israeli 
activity. The escalating dispute has threatened to derail the new 
Mideast peace accord. On the outskirts of the West Bank towns of Bethlehem, 
Ramallah and Nablus, scores of Palestinian youths threw rocks at Israeli 
troops, who responded with rubber bullets and tear gas. The fighting 
went on for several hours before protesters dispersed. Israeli paramilitary 
police also fired tear gas to disperse dozens of stone-throwers in 
traditionally Arab east Jerusalem. Police said seven Palestinians, 
mostly minors, were arrested. In addition to the street protests, 
about 2,500 Palestinian prisoners began a hunger strike Saturday to 
press for their early release. In the Ramallah clash, two protesters 
and two Palestinian police were hit by rubber bullets, and three demonstrators 
suffered tear-gas inhalation. Five protesters in Bethlehem were shot 
with rubber bullets. Outside the northern town of Nablus, three protesters 
were hit by rubber bullets and another 10 were sickened by tear gas 
as they marched toward a Jewish settlement. Meanwhile, supporters 
of a radical Palestinian faction burned U.S. flags in the West Bank 
town of Hebron to protest the Wye River land-for-security agreement. 
Clinton's visit is meant to help keep up momentum on implementing 
the accord. About 1,000 Palestinians took part in the demonstration 
sponsored by the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine. During 
it, some two dozen masked marchers burned American and Israeli flags 
and waved banners vowing to ``continue the struggle.'' In Ramallah, 
the Palestinians' top negotiator on prisoners expressed regret over 
a statement by the Clinton administration siding with Israel in the 
prisoner dispute. On Friday in Washington, the State Department said 
the Israelis have ``done what they said they would do...concerning 
prisoner releases.'' ``We are sorry for what the American administration 
has said, that Israel has fulfilled its obligations,'' Kadoura Faris, 
who is representing Yasser Arafat's government in talks with the Israelis 
on the issue, told about 500 protesters at a rally in Ramallah. Under 
the peace agreement, Israel agreed to free 750 Palestinian prisoners 
by the end of January. In a first stage last month it freed 250 prisoners, 
but most were common criminals such as car thieves. The Palestinians 
are demanding the release instead of hundreds of so-called security 
prisoners, who were jailed for anti-Israel activity. Israeli Prime 
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has said he would not free those involved 
in attacks that led to death or injury of Israelis, or members of 
the Islamic militant group Hamas. Palestinian officials contend there 
is a pool of hundreds of security prisoners eligible for release even 
under those terms. Israel has said it would hold up implementing provisions 
of the accord _ including a troop withdrawal from 5 percent of the 
West Bank scheduled later this month _ until Arafat accepted Israel's 
criteria for releasing prisoners. Washington has insisted the troop 
pullback proceed despite the disagreement. The prisoner issue is highly 
emotional, because it touches nearly all Palestinian families. Almost 
everyone in the West Bank and Gaza Strip has had a relative _ a father, 
a brother, a son, an uncle, a cousin _ arrested at some point during 
the 30-year Israeli occupation. At Saturday's rally in Ramallah, families 
demanded that the Palestinian Authority make the release of security 
prisoners a top priority. ``The Israelis ... did not release the ones 
who deserved to be released,'' said Bahia Jabara, 44, who has husband 
and brother in Israeli jail. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>