<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981205.0169 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Palestinians on Saturday launched a protest campaign to demand the 
freeing of hundreds of prisoners held for anti-Israeli activity, a 
dispute that has threatened to derail the new peace accord. Meanwhile, 
a week before President Clinton is to arrive for a three-day visit, 
supporters of a radical Palestinian faction burned U.S. flags Saturday 
in the West Bank town of Hebron to protest the Wye River land-for-security 
agreement. About 1,000 Palestinians took part in the demonstration 
sponsored by the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine. During 
it, some two dozen masked marchers burned American and Israeli flags 
and waved banners vowing to ``continue the struggle.'' In the West 
Bank town of Ramallah, the Palestinians' top negotiator on prisoners 
expressed regret over a statement by the Clinton administration a 
day earlier siding with Israel in the escalating dispute. On Friday 
in Washington, the State Department said the Israelis have ``done 
what they said they would do...concerning prisoner releases.'' ``We 
are sorry for what the American administration has said, that Israel 
has fulfilled its obligations,'' said Kadoura Faris, who is representing 
Yasser Arafat's government in talks with the Israelis on the issue. 
Without resolution of the issue, he told a rally of about 500 prisoner 
relatives and their supporters, ``there can be no peace.'' Also Saturday, 
about 2,500 Palestinian prisoners began a hunger strike to press for 
their early release. Under the peace agreement, Israel agreed to free 
750 Palestinian prisoners by the end of January. In a first stage 
last month it freed 250 prisoners, but most were common criminals. 
The Palestinians are demanding the release instead of hundreds of 
so-called security prisoners, who were jailed for anti-Israel activity. 
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has said he would not free 
those involved in attacks that led to death or injury of Israelis, 
or members of the Islamic militant group Hamas. Palestinian officials 
contend there is a pool of hundreds of security prisoners eligible 
for release even under those terms. Israel has said it would hold 
up implementing provisions of the accord _ including a troop withdrawal 
from 5 percent of the West Bank scheduled later this month _ until 
Arafat accepted Israel's criteria for releasing prisoners. The Clinton 
administration has insisted the troop pullback proceed despite the 
disagreement. The prisoner issue is a highly emotional one, because 
it touches nearly all Palestinian families. Almost everyone in the 
West Bank and Gaza Strip has had a relative _ a father, a brother, 
a son, an uncle, a cousin _ arrested at some point during the 30-year 
Israeli occupation. At Saturday's rally in Ramallah, families demanded 
that the Palestinian Authority make the release of security prisoners 
a top priority. ``The Israelis ... did not release the ones who deserved 
to be released,'' said Bahia Jabara, 44, who has husband and brother 
in Israeli jail. In another development, the first commercial Palestinian 
Airlines flight from the newly inaugurated Gaza airport took off Saturday 
morning. But in a sour note, the flight to Amman, the capital of neighboring 
Jordan, was delayed for more than three hours by an argument between 
Palestinians and the Israelis over airport security. Meanwhile, a 
fresh dispute loomed over a meeting that is to take place during Clinton's 
visit to reaffirm pledges that the Palestinians no longer seek Israel's 
destruction. At the Dec. 14 meeting, participants _ members of the 
Palestine National Council, the Palestinians' parliament-in-exile, 
and various Palestinian groups _ are to ``reaffirm'' a letter to Clinton 
in which Arafat declares clauses of the PLO founding charter calling 
for Israel's destruction null and void. The Palestinians say the Wye 
agreement does not call for an actual vote, only an acceptance by 
acclamation. However, Israel maintains the PNC is required to vote 
by a show of hands. David Bar-Illan, a senior adviser to Israeli Prime 
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, suggested Friday the handover of land 
scheduled to take place after the meeting would not occur unless there 
was an actual vote. ``It has been made clear that Israel will not 
withdraw troops if the Palestinians do not adhere to their commitments 
under the Wye agreement,'' Bar-Illan said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>