<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981205.0548 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A week before the scheduled start of U.S. President Bill Clinton's 
visit, Palestinian stone-throwers battled Israeli troops Saturday 
in scattered clashes that left 25 Palestinians and three Israeli soldiers 
injured. Seven protesters were arrested. On the outskirts of Bethlehem, 
Ramallah and Nablus, and the Israeli settlement of Ariel, scores of 
Palestinian youths threw rocks at Israeli troops, who responded with 
rubber bullets and tear gas. The fighting went on for several hours 
before protesters dispersed. Israeli paramilitary police also fired 
tear gas to disperse dozens of stone-throwers in traditionally Arab 
east Jerusalem. The clashes came as Palestinians launched a campaign 
of protests to call for the release of so-called security prisoners 
_ an escalating dispute that has threatened to derail the new Mideast 
peace accord. In addition to the street protests, about 2,500 Palestinian 
prisoners began a hunger strike Saturday to press for their early 
release. In the Ramallah clash, two protesters and two Palestinian 
police were hit by rubber bullets, and three demonstrators suffered 
tear-gas inhalation. Five protesters in Bethlehem were shot with rubber 
bullets. An army officer and two soldiers were injured very lightly 
in the Ramallah and Bethlehem clashes, the army said. Outside the 
northern town of Nablus, three protesters were hit by rubber bullets 
and another 10 were sickened by tear gas as they marched toward a 
Jewish settlement. Dozens of Palestinians also protested outside of 
the West Bank settlement of Ariel and tried to set fire to an electricity 
pole. Others threw stones towards homes on the settlement and Israeli 
forces on the site. Israeli soldiers fired rubber bullets and tear 
gas onto the crowd but there were no injuries, the army said. Meanwhile, 
a week before President Clinton is to arrive for a three-day visit, 
supporters of a radical Palestinian faction burned U.S. flags in the 
West Bank town of Hebron to protest the Wye River land-for-security 
agreement. About 1,000 Palestinians took part in the demonstration 
sponsored by the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine. During 
it, some two dozen masked marchers burned American and Israeli flags 
and waved banners vowing to ``continue the struggle.'' In Ramallah, 
the Palestinians' top negotiator on prisoners expressed regret over 
a statement by the Clinton administration siding with Israel in the 
prisoner dispute. On Friday in Washington, the State Department said 
the Israelis have ``done what they said they would do...concerning 
prisoner releases.'' ``We are sorry for what the American administration 
has said, that Israel has fulfilled its obligations,'' Kadoura Faris, 
who is representing Yasser Arafat's government in talks with the Israelis 
on the issue, told about 500 protesters at a rally in Ramallah. Under 
the peace agreement, Israel agreed to free 750 Palestinian prisoners 
by the end of January. In a first stage last month it freed 250 prisoners, 
but most were common criminals such as car thieves. The Palestinians 
are demanding the release instead of hundreds of so-called security 
prisoners, who were jailed for anti-Israel activity. Israeli Prime 
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has said he would not free those involved 
in attacks that led to death or injury of Israelis, or members of 
the Islamic militant group Hamas. Palestinian officials contend there 
is a pool of hundreds of security prisoners eligible for release even 
under those terms. Israel has said it would hold up implementing provisions 
of the accord _ including a troop withdrawal from 5 percent of the 
West Bank scheduled later this month _ until Arafat accepted Israel's 
criteria for releasing prisoners. The Clinton administration has insisted 
the troop pullback proceed despite the disagreement. The prisoner 
issue is highly emotional, because it touches nearly all Palestinian 
families. Almost everyone in the West Bank and Gaza Strip has had 
a relative _ a father, a brother, a son, an uncle, a cousin _ arrested 
at some point during the 30-year Israeli occupation. At Saturday's 
rally in Ramallah, families demanded that the Palestinian Authority 
make the release of security prisoners a top priority. ``The Israelis 
... did not release the ones who deserved to be released,'' said Bahia 
Jabara, 44, who has husband and brother in Israeli jail. In another 
development, the first commercial Palestinian Airlines flight from 
the newly inaugurated Gaza airport took off Saturday morning. But 
in a sour note, the flight to Amman, the capital of neighboring Jordan, 
was delayed for more than three hours by an argument between Palestinians 
and the Israelis over airport security. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>