<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981205.1300.1494 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Oprah Winfrey is one of the most powerful people in the entertainment 
industry. But even her clout couldn't prevent her latest film from 
dying at the box office. Michael Okwu has more. She turned her viewers 
into readers, and turned books into best sellers, like magic a La 
Oprah. I love for people to underestimate me. But when Oprah turned 
Toni Morrison's novel "beloved" into a Movie, the real trick would 
be beating the odds. To this point, the few films that have focused 
on the issue of slavery have not performed well at the box office. 
That concerned "beloved's" director early on. Sometimes it worries 
me if people think that -- that this is a movie about slavery or it's 
a movie that's gonna challenge you on the level of how you feel about 
slavery, that they're gonna resist seeing it. And perhaps they did. 
After six weeks in theaters, Oprah's $55 million "beloved" has barely 
earned $25 million. People don't tend to look at Oprah as just a black, 
you know, talk show host, you know? She cuts across all genres. So, 
I think it was broadly marketed. Still, even Oprah couldn't sell audiences 
on a slave story. These movies many times are not really in sync with 
the appetite of african-American consumers. And so, in that sense, 
it's not surprising that these movies don't work. Hollywood keeps 
giving us "uncle Tom's cabin" when what African-American consumers 
want is "spartacus." We're finally bringing this story to the world. 
It's an incredible night for me tonight. Debbie Allen and Steven Spielberg 
launched their slave ship epic "Amistad" at a splashy Washington, 
D.C. premiere last December. President Clinton saw it, but most regular 
folks didn't. Spielberg, who filled theaters with his Holocaust drama 
"Schindler's list," couldn't do the same with slave history. "Schindler's 
list" was all about teaching tolerance. And there's a whole other 
aspect of this story which is about tolerance. Some say the movie 
theater is no place to teach. On television, where you have the miniseries 
form which allows a long time to develop and deal with a story that's 
complicated, perhaps the material is better served by that form. Ms. 
flora. "mama flora's family," an adaptation of alex haley's post-slavery 
family chronicle, scored CBS some of its highest ratings of the November 
sweeps period. PBS debuted its new five-part documentary "Africans 
in America" in October and counts it among its most successful fall 
projects. Meanwhile, on the big screen, analysts agree, the bleak 
history of slavery has a bleak future. Michael Okwu, "CNN Entertainment 
News," New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>