<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981205.0130.1472 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Young people in Israel are embracing a new kind of music they say 
gives them "an escape from reality." Jerrold Kessel reports. a new 
musical wave is rolling over Israel. All around the land, on the shores 
of the country's metropolis, Israelis are entranced by a craze known 
as "trance music." It's not only to escape the heat that they're taking 
to nature to dance trance. The thing of trance. It gets into your 
ears. It's very up-tempo. It makes you want to move. I just let my 
body dance. I try not to think. Forget about elaborate bands and multifaceted 
music troupes. This intrinsically electronic-age music is born of 
synthesizers and computers. The cyberdj is king. People are looking 
for ways to release the tension that's in the air continuously. a 
captivating energy cuts across generations. And it's an Arena of the 
international music scene, where Israel is at the forefront. Trance's 
growing popularity has triggered a bitter argument among politicians 
about what it means. It is a reaction of what is happening here in 
Israel, of tough life, of a Demanding life, of a very aggressive society 
which these people don't like to share. They're looking for something 
different and are creating for themselves -- a world for themselves, 
their own island where they can have joy and fun. It's against the 
Judaism because you educate the youths today to go in this way of 
trance, of transsexual, homosexual -- everything against Judaism. 
As I told you, to dance is Judaism, to be happy is wonderful. But 
not in this way like, I don't want to say, animal. If it is animal 
attraction, there are times it's an attractive sight. And at least 
some in the religious community don't heed the advice of their politicians, 
preferring to join in the ecstatic release. We are all the same people. 
The easygoing each to their own philosophy is maintained. Even as 
the religious men take center stage, women dancers, in deference to 
their sensibilities, adopt a live and let dance approach, staying 
voluntarily on the fringe. It's been a long, hard night's delight, 
lasting into the bright new morning. This music, it's the music of 
the '90s. It comes into our hearts and then we can dance. It's beautiful. 
I hope it will become more and more popular. a place where, once, 
in a previous puritan age, the Beatles were banned may still keep 
dogs and paddle tennis off-bounds. But it's unlikely that the opponents 
will be able so long as the enthusiasts keep it's music of the '90s. 
I hope it becomes more popular. Before the Beatles were banned. It's 
unlikely that Israel will be unable to stop transmaking its marks 
as long as enthusiasts keep asking for it and it's there way of cooling 
off. Jerrold Kessel, Tel Aviv. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>