<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981205.0130.0097 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Two politicians who have their eyes on the oval office are gearing 
up for the 2000 presidential election. Friday, advisers for republican 
senator John Ashcroft of Missouri told CNN he will announce his candidacy 
on January 5th. Ashcroft has asked his advisers to begin establishing 
a fund-raising committee. He went from the pro basketball court to 
the Senate floor. Now, Bill Bradley may be aiming for the oval office. 
He's formed an exploratory committee to consider the possibility of 
running for president in 2000. Bruce Morton reports. I'm at the top 
of my game. He didn't run in 1988 or '92, he wrote, because he wasn't 
sure he was ready and he worried about his family's privacy. Even 
this week, he had doubts. In other words, does my ability match the 
moment? That is the first and most important decision. And the second 
one is, do my wife and family and I want to jump off a 50-story building? 
Now he's jumped or at least announced a committee to explore jumping 
and raise money. He's always been an issues man, and he talked issues 
at his announcement -- children, for one. You can't have millions 
of kids in this country living in poverty and turn away from that. 
You can't have over 40 million people without any health insurance 
in this country and ignore it. He is an unusual man. Basketball star 
at Princeton and the U.S. Olympic team that year, which won the gold. 
Rhodes scholar at Oxford, basketball star on the New York Knicks, 
NBA champions in 1970 and '73 -- teams famous for, of all things, 
teamwork. And then, a three-term senator from New Jersey -- thoughtful, 
unglamorous, not afraid to disagree with fellow democrat Clinton on, 
for instance, the president's welfare Bill. And then he left, saying 
politics was broken. Neither political party speaks to people where 
they live their lives. And both have moved away from my own concept 
of service and my own idea of what America can be. Since then, he's 
been talking to people about issues -- race and the economy and moral 
values. He's been talking, among other places, in New Hampshire. I 
like New Hampshire in the fall. It's great. Like many democrats, he 
is on record about the president's behavior, though he has not called 
on him to resign. My own reaction to this situation, generally, is 
I think it's disgusting. So he's running, exploring. Vice President 
Gore, the front-runner in every poll, says that's fine. Has the old 
shooter a shot? I think he is a smart and serious candidate. And my 
guess is, outside of Al Gore, this will be the first person who will 
get to double digits. And that, to me, seems like the first hurdle 
for any presidential candidate. Maybe it all comes down to something 
he said as he was leaving the Senate. The only thing you can do is 
go out there and work as hard as you can every day. Think as clearly 
as you can. Speak as much from your heart as you can. And the future 
either evolves or it doesn't. As a basketball player, he could sometimes 
shoot and score not looking at the basket. Bradley told author John 
McPhee that came from knowing the court so well, from having a sense 
of where you are. He's behind, of course. But just maybe he still 
has that sense. Bruce Morton, CNN, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>