<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981205.1300.0058 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
U.N. secretary-general Kofi Annan is in Tripoli, appealing for the 
Libyan government to hand over the suspects in the 1988 bombing of 
Pan Am Flight 103. Annan hopes to meet with Libyan leader Muammar 
Gadhafi, but Libya's official news agency says Gadhafi is out of town. 
Tim lister looks back on the Pan Am bombing and the diplomatic wrangling 
that has followed. pan am 103. Ten years ago this month, those that 
flight designation -- Frankfurt to london to New York -- and they 
became an event. Packed with travelers heading home for the holidays, 
Pan Am 103 plunged into the Scottish town of Lockerbie. And that name, 
too, was connected to tragedy. A joint anglo-American investigation 
into the crash quickly found that a Bomb was responsible. A sophisticated 
bomb disguised to look like a radio cassette player exploded in the 
cargo hold, bringing the aircraft down. But who put it there? A three-year 
investigation by British and American officials pointed strongly to 
Libyan involvement. Investigators believe two Libyan agents stationed 
in Malta prepared the bomb and put it on a plane to Frankfurt, where 
it was loaded onto Pan Am 103. The motive -- revenge for the American 
air strike on Tripoli two years earlier. In November 1991, U.S. and 
British officials demanded the surrender of the libyan suspects. Libya 
refused, offering first to try them at home, and then to allow them 
to stand trial before by the Arab league. The security council refused 
and imposed sanctions, including a worldwide ban on air travel and 
arms sales to Libya. In December 1993, the security council tightened 
its sanctions, freezing libyan assets and banning the sale of oil 
industry related equipment. Then this August, Washington and London 
dramatically changed policy, calling Libya's hand. We have decided 
to go forward with a trial of the two suspects before a Scottish court 
with Scottish judges applying Scottish law. We thank the netherlandses 
government for indicating its willingness to host this proceeding. 
From there, events moved quickly. Libya appeared to agree to the conditions, 
and the security council promised to lift sanctions if a trial got 
under way at the Hague. But just when the case seemed all but resolved, 
Libya raised new concerns. Tripoli ruled out the prospect of the two 
suspects serving their sentences in the United States or Britain if 
convicted. Now, Kofi Annan's hopes to resolve those last barriers 
to a trial, bringing an end to a seven-year battle. And perhaps, for 
the families of the victims, putting the words "Pan Am 103" behind 
them. Tim lister, CNN, reporting. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>