<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981205.1830.0962 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In "focus" this evening -- the legal liability questions being raised 
in a Second-degree murder case, where the victim's faith is an issue. 
NBC's Dan Lothian has our report. 32-year-old Keith cook is on trial 
for murder, but believes he's not responsible for the death prosecutors 
say he caused while driving drunk. The law is very clear on this. 
If a suspect sets in motion a series of events which ultimately results 
in someone's death, he's responsible for that death, even though there 
may be other contributing factors. Like an injured person refusing 
medical treatment because of religious convictions. The accident happened 
in March, along this road in Azusa, California, 25 miles east of Los 
Angeles. 55-year-old jadine Russell, a mother of five, was returning 
home from a Movie with her daughter. Keith cook, already on probation 
for driving under the influence, was returning home from a party. 
Russell had pulled over in this area after getting into a minor traffic 
accident, and was standing along the side of the road with her daughter 
and two police officers. That's when authorities say cook, behind 
the wheel of his pickup, slammed into Russell's disabled car, sending 
that vehicle plowing into the group. Russell, a devout jehovah's witness, 
was the most seriously injured. Because of her faith, she refused 
blood transfusions. Ten times she said, "I won't take blood, I won't 
take blood, I won't take blood." She acknowledged that she knew she 
may well die. Death was her choice, not the choice of Mr. cook. The 
defense thinks the charge of second-degree murder is unfair, even 
though authorities say cook's blood alcohol level the night of the 
crash was more than twice the legal limit. James Russell, who had 
to bury his wife the day before their 35th wedding anniversary, says 
she's being victimized again. They're accusing jadine of being guilty 
because he hit her. And that's -- how is that just? It's not fair. 
In the coming weeks, there will be medical testimony about russell's 
chances of survival. But the verdict will likely come down to who 
the jury feels is most at fault. It's not an impossible defense. It's 
just a very difficult defense. What's difficult about it is that they're 
blaming the victim. On the other hand, some people might wonder, why 
did the victim make that choice? The case should go to the jury later 
this month. Dan Lothian, NBC news, Los Angeles. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>