<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981205.1830.0444 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
To Washington now, where the house Judiciary committee has responded 
to the White House demand that the president's attorneys get additional 
time to defend him at the impeachment hearings. NBC's John Palmer 
is at the White House tonight. As President Clinton attended a friend's 
funeral in Arkansas today, his lawyers in Washington were busy negotiating 
with republicans on the Judiciary committee for more time to present 
Mr. Clinton's defense against impeachment charges. And late this afternoon, 
the White House got some of what it wanted -- a Statement from chairman 
Henry Hyde that he would "make a sincere effort to accommodate this 
last-minute request." Sources say the committee will give the president's 
lawyers less than the four days they want, but more than one day for 
final arguments next week. Some republicans on the committee accused 
Mr. Clinton's lawyers of trying to stall for time. They realize that 
the president is in danger of being impeached on the floor. They don't 
have the votes they thought they had, and therefore, they're scrambling 
around for some way to delay and to avoid the vote on the floor. The 
president's attorneys had asked the committee to set aside three or 
four days next week to hear testimony from White House witnesses instead 
of the one day allotted earlier for final defense arguments. The letter 
to the committee stated -- the White House wants the witnesses to 
testify about -- the constitutional standards for impeachment. The 
standards for prosecution, for perjury, obstruction of justice, abuse 
of power, prosecutorial misconduct and the impact of Tainted evidence. 
White House officials noted that last month, Hyde had promised the 
president's lawyers all the time they needed. The president's counsel 
will have unlimited time to present his witnesses at the end of our 
hearings when they're ready to do so. The president's supporters are 
insisting house members be given a Change to vote on censure, not 
just impeachment. There will be a black Mark in American history for 
any member of the house that prevents people the right to vote on 
censure. The White House believes the president's chance of avoiding 
impeachment by the full House of Representatives rests with 15 or 
so moderate republicans. And next week's defense arguments will be 
aimed at convincing them that censure is a better choice than impeachment. 
John Palmer, NBC news, at the White House. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>