<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981205.0106 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The United States and 32 other countries concluded four days of arms 
control meetings here with a public commitment to exercise ``maximum 
restraint'' before selling weapons to regions of conflict. Behind 
closed doors, the delegates to the so-called Wassenaar regime, an 
arms control organization that came into being after the Cold War, 
made clear that the areas they were most concerned about were Central 
Africa, where a half dozen countries are fighting in Congo, and the 
Horn of Africa, where Ethiopia and Eritrea are on the brink of full-scale 
war. For at least two Wassenaar countries, the pledge of restraint 
seems somewhat hollow. This week, Russia will begin shipping the first 
contingent of $150 million worth of combat aircraft, helicopters and 
other military equipment to Ethiopia. And Bulgaria said last week 
that it had recently issued licenses for the sale of tanks to Ethiopia 
and Uganda. ``That's not consistent with any commitment to maximum 
vigilance,'' bristled a Western diplomat about the Russian sale, which 
was not known publicly until a few hours after the Wassenaar meeting 
closed here Thursday. Neither sale violates the Wassenaar regime, 
or any other arms control treaties, which encourages advocates of 
greater curbs on the conventional weapons trade to campaign for new 
treaties that would keep weapons out of regional trouble spots. But 
Washington's efforts to put a few more teeth into Wassenaar have been 
thwarted by countries such as Russia and France, U.S. and European 
diplomats say. The Bulgarian tank sales were first reported 10 days 
ago by a Bulgarian newspaper, Trud, which said that 140 tanks had 
been sold to Ethiopia. The newspaper reported that another deal, for 
80 tanks, was pending, and these were going to Ethiopia and Uganda. 
Bulgaria acquired the T-55 tanks cheaply from Moscow during the Cold 
War. In response to written questions, Bulgaria's Ministry for Trade 
confirmed on Thursday that licenses had been issued for tank sales 
to these countries, but it declined to discuss the details. Uganda 
is not in the market for used tanks, U.S. officials in Africa say, 
but it had been giving support to the rebels in Congo, and has been 
the provider of weapons to rebels in southern Sudan, who have surprised 
observers with the remarkable number of tanks they have managed to 
come up with in recent months. In recent years, Bulgaria, which has 
seen its Soviet-era defense industries plunged into economic misery, 
has become a prime arms bazaar, supplying rebel groups, from the Tamil 
Tigers in Sri Lanka to rebels in Congo. The Ethiopian deal earned 
the Bulgarian government $4.4 million in profit, Trud reported. An 
obviously pleased senior defense official told Trud that it was the 
best commercial year for the ministry since it sold tanks to Yemen 
in 1994. During the Wassenaar meetings here, Bulgarian diplomats were 
chagrined that their defense officials were gloating so openly about 
the deal, other diplomats who attended the meetings said. U.S. and 
European diplomats say that the current Bulgarian government is deeply 
concerned about the country's negative image as a result of disclosures, 
largely in the international press, of its arms trading, and that 
the Foreign Ministry in particular would like to clean up the practices. 
But it is not clear how much sway the advocates of change will have 
over the defense industry. The United States has largely ignored Bulgaria's 
arms dealings, but U.S. officials say that is about to change, and 
that the U.S. ambassador in Bulgaria, Avis Bohlen, intends to put 
it on the agenda in her meetings with Bulgarian officials. To date, 
the Clinton administration, while unhappy about the tank sales to 
Ethiopia, has not said anything publicly or made any official protests 
to the Bulgarian government, said an official in Washington, who believes 
that this is what needs to be done. Like others, this official would 
discuss Bulgaria's arms sales only on condition he not be identified. 
In order to curb the flow of weapons to troubled regions, the Clinton 
administration has been trying to strengthen Wassenaar. During the 
meetings this week, for example, U.S. diplomats pushed to name the 
countries to which arms should not be sold, such as Ethiopia and Eritrea. 
A majority of the Wassenaar members supported the United States, but 
the organization operates by consensus and there were objections. 
There are 33 members of the Wassenaar regime, which is named for the 
Dutch city where agreement was first reached in 1995 to exchange information 
on sales, if only after the fact. The organization has been largely 
ineffective at stopping any transfers of conventional weapons. ``It's 
hard to see what value Wassenaar is,'' said Lora Lumpe, an arms trade 
analyst who is currently on leave from the Federation of American 
Scientists to work on arms control issues at the Peace Research Institute 
of Oslo. Wassenaar meetings, like the one here last week, are behind 
closed doors, and it does not release the data it compiles on sales. 
``Because the information is not made public, it is hard to evaluate 
what it has done,'' said Ms. Lumpe. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>