<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981205.0167 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It lasted too long to be called a spurt and since it spanned two halves, 
it probably could not be classified as a run, even an extended one. 
The only category to put it in is dominance _ pure and total. Outscoring 
its hosts by 28 points over a 15-minute period, St. John's ripped 
Boston College, 74-55, Saturday at the Conte Forum. Though it was 
the Big East opener for both clubs, it eventually took on the feel 
of one of those one-sided routs that St. John's had been having against 
its smaller, metropolitan-area rivals. The 25th-ranked Red Storm, 
which improved to 6-2, took command with just under eight minutes 
left in the first half. Until then, the Storm played as if it hadn't 
had enough sleep the night before. Beaten on the backboards, outhustled 
on the perimeter and unable to score from practically everywhere, 
St. John's found itself trailing by 24-15 with 7 minutes 56 seconds 
to go in the first half. The deficit was shocking since Boston College 
(2-4) entered as a huge underdog. With no seniors, only three juniors 
and little height, the Eagles already had lost to supposedly lower-level 
teams such as Harvard and Fairfield. So when Boston College hit three 
3-pointers en route to its 9-point lead, the crowd of 4,438 went from 
being pessimistic to hopeful. But not for long. As if to say ``enough 
is enough,'' St. John's scored 17 of the final 19 points of the half 
to go ahead, 32-26. The run was outstanding, as the Red Storm, after 
making only four of its first 15 field goal attempts, hit 10 of its 
next 16. The spurt began with defense, as the re-energized Red Storm 
forced 11 turnovers and held the Eagles without a field goal over 
the final eight minutes of the half. Converting in transition, St. 
John's scored nine of its 10 baskets on layups and dunks, including 
a wicked reverse slam by Lavor Postell after driving the baseline. 
``You have to give them a lot of credit for creating turnovers and 
making them lead to scores,'' Boston College coach Al Skinner said. 
``Once we turned the ball over, they were very aggressive in taking 
the ball to the basket.'' What was still a close game at the start 
of the second half became lopsided in a hurry. A thunderous dunk and 
layup by Tyrone Grant, a 3-pointer by Ron Artest, a 3-pointer and 
three-point play by Postell, and layups by Erick Barkley and Reggie 
Jessie _ all while holding Boston College to two baskets _ powered 
St. John's to a 49-30 lead with 12:54 remaining. By that time, the 
end was no longer in doubt, and Red Storm coach Mike Jarvis was relaxed. 
``On the road, you get scared and that's what I kept reminding the 
kids,'' Jarvis admitted. ``I said forget about their record, forget 
about being in the top 25. We're at their place and they're not going 
to quit.'' As usual, St. John's had balanced scoring, with Grant leading 
the way with 15 points, Barkley following with 14, Artest scoring 
11 and Postell and Jessie adding 10 apiece. The only bad news of the 
day for St. John's was that senior center Albert Richardson was elbowed 
in the right cheek midway through the first half and had to be taken 
to nearby Newton Wellesley Hospital, where he received stitches. After 
the game, Jarvis said Richardson was fine and expected to return to 
action soon. The victory made for a nice homecoming for Jarvis, who 
was born and raised in Cambridge and experienced some of his greatest 
professional triumphs in the area. In 1978, 10 years after graduating 
from Northeastern University, he landed his first job as a head coach 
at Cambridge Ridge and Latin High School, his alma mater. With a young 
7-footer named Patrick Ewing leading his club, Jarvis won 77 of 78 
games his first three years, earning Massachusetts' coach of the year 
award each season. He moved into the college ranks in 1985 and, in 
five seasons, became the first coach to win 100 games at Boston University. 
``It's always special to come back home and that's with capital letters,'' 
said Jarvis, who spent Saturday night watching local high school games. 
``How often does anybody get the opportunity to go back in front of 
your mother, your wife, your family and friends, in your own back 
yard.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>