<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981205.0130 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Explorers are still arriving along the northeast coast of Florida. 
Ponce de Leon was looking for the Fountain of Youth when he reached 
what is now St. Augustine in 1513. He didn't discover it _ but maybe 
Nobuko Koop has come as close as anyone will. A newly retired financial 
analyst with the Federal Aviation Administration in Washington, Ms. 
Koop has moved into a one-story ranch house that was built for her 
on land she bought a year ago in Grand Haven, a new community in Palm 
Coast, 30 miles south of St. Augustine. ``I sold my house in June 
and the next day I headed south,'' Ms. Koop said. ``I've been playing 
golf five days a week ever since. If I had to describe my life in 
one sentence, I would say I am on a perpetual vacation, with the convenience 
and comfort of my own home.'' Another of Ms. Koop's discoveries was 
that these indulgences cost less than they do in comparable communities 
in southwest or southeast Florida. It is a point that was made by 
several other recent arrivals, golfers and otherwise, encountered 
on the 65-mile stretch of the northeast coast from Ponte Vedra Beach 
in the Jacksonville area to Daytona Beach to the south. It was echoed 
by newcomers even in the very different environment of historic St. 
Augustine. Ms. Koop wound up spending about $200,000 for a three-bedroom 
ranch with a lake at the rear and views of the 13th and 16th fairways 
of a new golf course. She said she had taken almost all the upgrades 
offered by a Palm Coast builder, Arthur Rutenberg. The house has 1,760 
square feet of space and was offered at a base price of $160,000. 
North of central St. Augustine, Donald and Jacqueline Bosley, retired 
schoolteachers and avid golfers from Smith Mountain Lake, Va., near 
Roanoke, bought a lot for $90,000 on a lake at the new World Golf 
Village, the first project at the 6,000-acre Saint Johns master-planned 
community in St. Johns County. They are planning to build a house 
in the $300,000 to $350,000 range. The land is midway between downtown 
St. Augustine and Jacksonville. The Bosleys said they spent four years 
looking at golf communities in southeast and southwest Florida. ``We 
probably would have had to spend 20 or 25 percent more to buy in other 
places we looked,'' among them Venice and the Fort Myers areas, both 
in southwestern Florida, Mrs. Bosley said. All is not golf, however, 
in northeast Florida. In the 15-mile oceanfront stretch running south 
from Matanzas Inlet to Flagler Beach along Route A1A _ halfway between 
St. Augustine and Daytona Beach _ the appeal is the ocean. Condominium 
prices are about 40 to 50 percent below those in oceanfront communities 
in South Florida, said Robert Follansbee, who runs Wolcott Realty 
in Flagler Beach. They range from $75,000 to $145,000, he said. Population 
density is thin in comparison with South Florida, and much of the 
development that has occurred aims at a moderate-income market. Lower 
land prices in a region of relatively lesser market demand account 
for the lower price structure. Charles Clark, a real estate consultant 
based in Ponte Vedra Beach, estimated that lower land prices have 
made it possible for buyers to pay 20 percent to 40 percent less for 
new homes in vacation communities in the area than they would pay 
in the more developed vacation- and retirement-oriented centers of 
southeast or southwest Florida. In and near Jacksonville there is 
a substantial burst in primary housing, both rentals and sales, in 
a wide range of prices, a result of economic growth. One builder there 
is Mercedes Homes, based in Melbourne. Cora Johnston, president of 
the company's Jacksonville division, estimated that 5,600 new homes 
a year were being built in the Jacksonville metropolitan area and 
that probably 70 percent of the buyers were buying in Florida for 
the first time, an indication of the region's economic growth. ``As 
few as 3 percent of our buyers are second-home purchasers,'' Ms. Johnston 
said. The Mercedes houses sell for $180,000 to $280,000, and are generally 
priced a notch lower than other new housing in the immediate area. 
For example, the company's houses sell in that range at Oceans Edge 
in Ponte Vedra. Nearby, the average price in recent sales is $611,000 
at the high-end Marsh Landing golf-course community. But it is the 
new master-planned communities of Saint Johns _ with its World Golf 
Village as the first major phase of development _ and Grand Haven 
in Palm Coast that show the region in its strengthened role as a destination 
and ultimate resettlement location for vacationers and retirees. A 
golf course designed by Sam Snead and Gene Sarazen has been completed 
only within the last year at World Golf Village. The Golf Hall of 
Fame opened there in May. A hotel and a midrise time-share resort 
hotel have been completed, and now new home construction is moving 
forward apace. There have been 100 house sales so far in first-phase 
developments by both national and local builders, with homes selling 
for $180,000 to about $600,000, said Rob Kearney, the marketing vice 
president. The first occupants arrived in June. The Grand Haven site 
in Palm Coast was sold by ITT Community Development Corp. to Lowe 
Enterprises, of Brentwood, Calif., two years ago. ITT started developing 
Palm Coast in the '70s on portions of over 100,000 acres of timberland 
that it owned in Flagler County. The development area was ultimately 
scaled down to 42,000 acres, and much of it is still undeveloped although 
many lots have been sold for future construction. But over 33,000 
people live there already, many year-round, in such neighborhoods 
as Indian Trails, Pine Lakes, Sea Colony and Palm Harbor. It was ITT 
that developed Palm Coast's first master-planned community, the high-end 
Hammock Dunes, between the Intracoastal Waterway and the ocean. Lot 
sales began in 1990, and there are already 376 completed homes _ single-families 
and condominium units. Its unsold single-family home sites _ currently 
154 _ are among the few assets that ITT still retains at Palm Coast, 
and they are expected to be sold in the near future to another development 
group. There is nevertheless a sales office on site for developable 
lots and completed condominium homes. The condominiums start at $315,000 
and the building lots sell from the mid-$130,000s to $750,000. The 
nearby Grand Haven is on 998 acres on the inland side of the Intracoastal. 
It will reach a much broader middle-income market than Hammock Dunes. 
The master developer, Grand Haven Palm Coast Inc., a Lowe affiliate, 
is building the streets and other common facilities, and last May 
it completed an 18-hole golf course designed by Jack Nicklaus. Home 
building is proceeding apace. Lowe itself is developing three single-family-home 
neighborhoods, with five local home builders authorized to do custom 
residential construction. Two national builders _ Centex Homes, based 
in Dallas, and Pulte Home Corp., of Bloomfield Hills, Mich. _ are 
building in three other residential neighborhoods. Prices for lots 
range from the mid-$30,000s to the low $200,000s, the higher prices 
being for lots along the Intracoastal. Home construction began 18 
months ago, and so far 175 houses are completed or under construction. 
There is a golf club, in which membership is optional at a cost of 
$150 a month, and a village center with health and fitness facilities. 
Through Centex or Pulte, home-and-lot packages are available from 
the high $130,000s to the low $200,000s. One of Pulte's buyers was 
Dennis Brydges, an executive with the United Nations Food and Agricultural 
Organization in Washington, and his wife, Evelyn. They closed in October 
on a $165,000 patio home on a lake, in walking distance of the golf 
course. ``In Naples we couldn't have gotten something like this for 
under $250,000,'' Brydges said. If past trends hold true we would 
expect that 30 to 35 percent of our buyers will be avid golfers,'' 
said Bill Haussmann, vice president for sales. ``The rest will be 
occasional golfers or they will be attracted to other amenities.'' 
Most buyers are retirees with incomes in the range of $75,000 to $125,000 
a year, he said. Another new golf-oriented project in the area is 
in Daytona Beach. Indigo Development Inc., a subsidiary of Consolidated 
Tomoka Land Company, a publicly held company based in Daytona Beach, 
is developing the LPGA International golf community in cooperation 
with the Ladies Professional Golf Association and the city. Two 18-hole 
golf courses have been completed, one of them only last October, and 
in the first phase of residential development 57 houses are completed 
or under construction. The entrance to the site is near a new LPGA 
Boulevard Interchange on Interstate 95. Local builders are producing 
single-family houses, close to a completed course designed by Reese 
Jones, at prices ranging from $125,000 to $750,000. A 3,000-square-foot 
home on a third of an acre on the golf course, with four bedrooms 
and a pool and a two-car garage, would sell for about $330,000, said 
Indigo president William McMunn. Nowhere does golf enthusiasm ride 
higher than it does at World Golf Village. Buyers are paying a premium 
for condominium units that offer a direct view of the World Golf Hall 
of Fame itself. Ecogroup Ltd., based in Tampa, is developing 200 condominium 
units selling for $250,000 to about $500,000 in buildings of one, 
two and three stories. They use as a facade element a fieldstone from 
Tennessee and Alabama that is frequently used in home construction 
in mid-Atlantic states. The style contrasts markedly with the Spanish 
or Mediterranean stucco-and-tile-roof look found in southern Florida. 
The names of golf heroes of the past are embedded in the cobblestones 
of a circular walkway, about a mile long, that connects the major 
elements at the center of the development: 80,000 square feet of new 
shops under construction, the completed 300-room World Golf Village 
Resort Hotel, and the 180-foot tower of the hall of fame itself. The 
PGA Tour, the professional organization of tournament players and 
the organization that runs tournaments in the United States, has had 
its headquarters in Ponte Vedra Beach since 1980. It had long wanted 
to have a Hall of Fame, Kearney said, in collaboration with other 
national and international golf organizations. It ultimately joined 
forces with Davidson Development Inc., the master developer of the 
6,000-acre Saint Johns site, to develop the World Golf Hall of Fame 
as the centerpiece of the project. The location is off Interstate 
95 at International Golf Parkway, near an interchange that the developer 
built in 1994. A second golf course _ the first collaboration between 
Arnold Palmer and Jack Nicklaus _ is scheduled for completion in spring 
2000. Beyond that the master plan calls for still another golf course. 
There are three single-family-home neighborhoods, all in construction, 
each of which will have a community facility, parks, pools and tennis 
courts. Five local builders and one national builder _ Panitz Homes, 
a subsidiary of Beazer Homes, of Atlanta _ are authorized to produce 
houses in the development. So far 20 are completed and 50 are under 
construction. Buyers can purchase lots and bring in their own builders, 
or build at a future date. About a third of current buyers are planning 
to build at a future time, Kearney said. Lot prices range from $55,000 
to $100,000. Buyers who are building now are paying from $180,000 
to $600,000 for lot and house. Like Davidson himself and other executives 
of his company, Kearney was active in the development of Arvida Corp.'s 
Sawgrass master-planned community in Ponte Vedra from 1981 to the 
early '90s. About 12,000 people live in Sawgrass, which is only 25 
miles from Jacksonville and over the years has become as much a bedroom 
community for Jacksonville as an active-leisure retirement community. 
``There's a perfect analogy,'' said Kearney. ``I think that Saint 
Johns will eventually evolve into a bedroom community of both Jacksonville 
and St. Augustine.'' Even in the fully developed downtown of St. Augustine, 
there is new construction aimed at the inter-regional market. An Orlando-based 
hotel owner and developer, Richard Kessler, is restoring an 1888 Spanish 
Moorish hotel, the Casa Monica, into what he says will be a four-star 
hotel with 137 rooms and an Old World ambiance, something St. Augustine 
has lacked in the modern era despite its wide popularity as a tourist 
resort. It is a $16 million development project, Kessler said. The 
Casa Monica was one of three grand downtown hotels once owned by Henry 
Morrison Flagler, the one-time business associate of John D. Rockefeller 
Sr. who wanted to establish St. Augustine as the American Riviera. 
He bought the Casa Monica in 1889, a year after it was built, and 
later developed two other hotels nearby. One is now the home of Flagler 
College and the other is the City Hall and the Lightner Museum. The 
Casa Monica closed in the 1930s and became the St. Johns County Courthouse. 
Kessler, whose Grand Theme Hotels chain has projects in Orlando and 
Savannah, Ga., bought it last year and began construction three months 
ago, with Howard Davis of St. Augustine as the architect. It will 
reopen next September. ``The county wanted to reconstruct it as a 
hotel and they put it out to bid in 1994 when the hotel market was 
struggling,'' Kessler said. The designated builder was not able to 
close, and the project long seemed in doubt. ``But they stuck to their 
guns,'' Kessler said. Uncharacteristic as it is of the region as a 
whole, St. Augustine offers some of the most interesting old houses 
and one of the few places where restoration has become a major business. 
``There's not much turnover and there's a waiting list for houses,'' 
said Patricia Merritt, a broker who set up shop in St. Augustine in 
1992 after she and her husband moved from Palm Beach County. ``I was 
a broker there for 20 years, and when I saw the opportunity here I 
decided to open an office.'' There are about 75 sales of turn-of-the-century 
houses a year in downtown St. Augustine, Ms. Merritt said. Prices 
are as low as $120,000, but many houses need substantial upgrading. 
John Valdes, a contractor who specializes in custom restorations, 
said that many were Mediterranean Revival houses that he has renovated 
as bed-and-breakfasts. But some become primary housing. Jim Jaffre, 
an international fast-food consultant, bought a house on Marine Street 
just outside the city's historic district for $375,000 in 1997 and 
had it restored and enlarged by Valdes at a cost of $250,000. ``This 
town is unlike any other part of Florida,'' Jaffre said. ``Everything 
else looks like it was built after 1950, whereas this town is older 
and more quaint.'' In a section called the Abbot Tract, old houses 
on heavily shaded streets sell for $110,000 to $450,000, Ms. Merritt 
said, and new buyers will often invest $20,000 to $125,000 to upgrade 
them. There is also ongoing home development on a strip of land called 
Camachee Island, bordering on its 300-slip yacht harbor, and on Anastasia 
Island, reached by the Bridge of Lions from the historic district. 
There the Thompson family has been developing a waterfront community 
called Pelican Reef, fronting on the Matanzas River, on land it has 
owned since 1936. It took 13 years to complete the permitting process 
for the 132 home sites, said Paul Thompson. Approval came in 1992. 
Since then 33 lots have been sold and 22 houses have been built, mainly 
as primary homes for local residents. The typical cost of a lot with 
a new house is currently about $350,000 to $400,000, Thompson said. 
For Anthony and Frances La Duca, inland roads are as much an attraction 
of the region as golf courses, the ocean or a historic city. La Duca 
is a motorcycle enthusiast who owns a restaurant called the Camino 
del Mar in Deerfield Beach. The couple live in Boca Raton. A year 
ago they bought a beach house for $178,000 in Flagler Beach. Daytona 
Beach and its celebrated Speedway are nearby, and Bike Week, which 
drew half a million motorcyclists to the city last March, also brought 
15 or 20 visitors to stay with the La Ducas at their beach house. 
But on normal occasions there is more solitude. ``When we're up there 
we like to drive our bike on the back roads around the countryside,'' 
La Duca said. ``It's so nice and quiet. It's beautiful.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>