<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981205.0085 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Through its storied history, the Pullman rail car factory has stood 
for much. Once a revolutionary company town, with housing, churches 
and schools for its workers, it stood for an innovative industrial 
model. After a crippling strike in 1894, it stood for the struggle 
of the working man. It stood for civil rights when long negotiations 
with the Pullman Porters, workers who served the nation's elite on 
the luxurious sleepers and had included many ex-slaves, finally resulted 
in a contract in 1935. But after a spectacular fire destroyed its 
old clock tower and several adjacent buildings Tuesday, hopes of turning 
it into a transportation museum were stood on end. The blaze, which 
engulfed the former administration building and gutted adjacent manufacturing 
structures, finally ran out of fury after an all-night battle by more 
than 150 firefighters. The fire left residents of the neighborhood, 
many of whom were fourth- or fifth-generation descendants of original 
Pullman workers, in tears at the sight of history going up in flames. 
``We're devastated,'' said Robert Fioretti, president of the Historic 
Pullman Foundation, whose father once worked in the factory. ``There 
are a lot of people in this country who have connections to the Pullman 
Works complex.'' Police determined the fire to be arson and arrested 
a 45-year-old man Wednesday. Sgt. Maurice Sullivan, a detective with 
the police bomb and arson unit, said that the man, Anthony Buzinskas, 
confessed to setting the blaze at the direction of voices he heard 
in his head. Buzinskas was found near the fire Tuesday, and the police 
said he told them what he had done. At a court appearance Thursday, 
Buzinskas was ordered to undergo a psychiatric test, and his brother, 
Norman Busch, said Buzinskas had a history of mental illness. Along 
with memories of the past, the fire also damaged hopes for the future. 
The factory site, dormant since the last rail car was turned out in 
1982, was purchased by the state in 1991 and was being considered 
as a site for a new transportation museum. Fioretti, whose organization's 
missions are education and the preservation of the neighborhood, said 
plans for the museum would go forward. ``Right now it looks like most 
of the buildings can be restored,'' he said. ``Hopefully, from these 
ashes our dreams can still come true.'' Now a middle-class residential 
neighborhood on Chicago's far south side, the Pullman site, built 
in 1880 and anchored by the factory and the upscale Hotel Florence 
_ named for Pullman's daughter and not damaged by the fire _ was a 
600-acre planned community, the grand vision of the company's founder, 
George M. Pullman. With the hopes of creating an environment pleasant 
for his workers and efficient for his business, the town of Pullman 
was designed to be self-sufficient. Workers lived in Pullman-owned 
housing, shopped in a Pullman-owned market and went to work everyday 
building the illustrious Pullman rail cars. The housing, with intricate 
architecture and indoor plumbing, not standard at the time, was arranged 
around the factory. Larger houses for the executives were the closest 
to the factory, and the buildings regressed outward to housing for 
the foremen, skilled workers and unskilled workers. It was the rent 
for such housing that led to the great strike of 1894, a time of recession 
in the country. In an effort to save money, Pullman cut wages for 
his workers, but refused to lower rent. Workers walked off the job 
and federal troops were eventually ordered to intervene, but not before 
13 people had died in the strike and the organized labor movement 
was born. In 1889, the Illinois Supreme Court ordered the company 
to sell all non-industrial property and the land was absorbed by the 
city. Fioretti said 70 percent of the country's sleeper cars were 
once made here, establishing Chicago as a hub for rail travel. The 
company closed in 1969, and Amtrak bought the site, where it made 
and repaired rail cars until 1982. Engineers must still determine 
the structural stability of what remains standing after the fire, 
and rule whether demolition is necessary. But for the residents of 
Pullman, who have overcome efforts to raze the buildings, and succeeded 
in registering the site as a historic landmark, the fire can be overcome. 
``When I walked out of my house and saw 30-foot flames rising out 
of the clock tower I was simply in shock,'' said Frank Beberdick, 
the archivist for the Historic Pullman Foundation. ``But the residents 
here are resilient, and if it's possible to bring people together 
and start the restoration process, we're going to do it.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>