<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981205.0210 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Rolando Alphonso, the tenor saxophonist for the Skatalites and a major 
figure in Jamaican music, died Nov. 20 at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center 
in Los Angeles. He was 67 and lived in New York. The cause was a brain 
hemorrhage, said his daughter Michelle Alphonso. A blood vessel burst 
while he was playing a solo with the Skatalites at the Key Club in 
Hollywood the night before. Since the 1950s, Alphonso's saxophone 
has been one of the most dependably ebullient sounds in Jamaican music. 
He worked as a studio musician during the evolution of Jamaican music 
from American-style rhythm-and-blues to the insistent backbeat of 
ska to the steadfast lope of rocksteady and reggae. He backed Jimmy 
Cliff, the Wailers, the Maytals and most of the other leading Jamaican 
performers of the 1960s, and he toured the world with the Skatalites, 
a group that could transform anything from movie themes to jazz tunes 
into buoyant ska. Since ska appeared in Jamaica in the early 1960s, 
it has had frequent revivals, including the recent one that placed 
bands like No Doubt and the Mighty Mighty Bosstones on the pop charts. 
At the All Boys Catholic School in Kingston, Jamaica, Alphonso played 
drums and then trumpet in the band. His mother gave him his first 
saxophone when he was 15. After playing in hotel bands, he became 
a studio musician and appeared on his first recording in 1954. He 
worked for two of the most influential producers in Jamaica, Duke 
Reid and Coxsone Dodd. The Duke Reid Band of session musicians included 
Alphonso and most of the future Skatalites, while Dodd worked with 
Alphonso as an arranger and a core member of the Blues Blasters, who 
prolifically recorded American-style rhythm-and-blues shuffles from 
1958 to 1961. Jamaica gained independence from Britain in 1962, and 
as it did, Jamaican musicians were creating a distinctively Jamaican 
version of rhythm-and-blues, drawing on New Orleans rhythm-and-blues 
and styles from around the Caribbean. The ska beat clearly emerged 
around 1960 on songs by Derrick Morgan and the producer Prince Buster, 
and Dodd and Reid were quick to adapt to the style. Alphonso performed 
at Dodd's sessions that yielded the first hits for the Wailers in 
1963. In 1964, the Skatalites officially became a group, led by Don 
Drummond on trombone. The band also included Alphonso and Tommy McCook 
on tenor saxophones, Lester Sterling on alto saxophone, Johnny Moore 
on trumpet, Lloyd Knibbs on drums, Lloyd Brevett on bass, Jackie Mittoo 
on piano and Jerome Hinds on guitar. They brought a jazz background 
to dance tunes, adding harmonic surprises to their propulsive music. 
The Skatalites, often with arrangements by Alphonso, recorded instrumentals, 
songs with vocalists and sessions for half a dozen producers. The 
original Skatalites lasted barely 14 months. In 1965, Drummond was 
convicted of murdering his girlfriend and was committed to a mental 
hospital; he died in 1969. Although the Skatalites played their farewell 
concert in August 1965, the band left an indelible mark on Jamaican 
music. After the group disbanded, Alphonso led the Soul Vendors. He 
also worked with the Soul Brothers, made albums under his name and 
worked as a studio musician. In 1971, he suffered a stroke, and during 
his recovery he was told by doctors that he had only five years to 
live. But he continued to work in Jamaica's studios before moving 
to the United States in the 1980s. When the British ska revival at 
the end of 1970s rekindled interest in ska, the Skatalites regrouped, 
first for a 1983 performance at the annual Sunsplash festival in Jamaica 
and, since the mid-1980s, as a working band based in New York. Two 
albums by the band, ``Hip Bop Ska'' (Shanachie) and ``Greetings from 
Skamania'' (Shanachie) were nominated for Grammy Awards in the 1990s. 
In addition to his daughter who lives in New York City, Alphonso is 
survived by his wife, Hermine; his children, Dennis, of Ontario; Rolando 
Jr., of Los Angeles; Pauline, of Seattle, and Barrinton and Noel, 
of New York; 33 grandchildren; and three great-grandchildren. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>