<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981205.0155 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan, gambling that he could persuade 
Col. Moammar Gadhafi to turn over two suspects wanted in the bombing 
of a Pan Am jet in 1988, spent hours Saturday meeting lower-level 
Libyan officials with no assurance he could see the Libyan leader. 
By nightfall, Libyan officials said Annan had delayed by five hours 
his departure from the Mediterranean port of Sirte, where Gadhafi 
usually receives his few important foreign visitors. The delay left 
open the possibility of a later meeting, after Gadhafi initially rebuffed 
Annan and was reported by the official Libyan news agency, Jana, to 
be ``in a camp in the desert.'' Annan, whom aides describe as a born 
conciliator, flew to Sirte at some political risk, saying he wanted 
to try to break the decade-long deadlock in the Lockerbie case by 
persuading Gadhafi to send the two suspects to the Netherlands for 
a trial by Scottish judges. This was a compromise proposed in August 
by the American and British governments after the Libyans balked at 
a trial in either country. Instead, when Annan arrived at Sirte, he 
was left talking with Libya's foreign minister, Omar al-Montasser, 
and Libya's permanent representative at the United Nations, Abu Zeid 
Omar Dorda. Annan, who detoured from a trip between Tunisia and a 
meeting of Persian Gulf leaders in Abu Dhabi to go to Libya despite 
the skepticism of diplomats and U.N. officials in New York, could 
have met either lower-level Libyan official at the secretary-general's 
U.N. office. His trip to Libya was premised on the chance of meeting 
Gadhafi, although there was no assurance in advance that the Libyan 
leader would show up. Pan Am 103 was blown up over the town of Lockerbie 
in Scotland on Dec. 21, 1988, killing 270 people, including 11 on 
the ground. An investigation by British and American law enforcement 
and intelligence agencies concluded that two Libyan agents had planted 
an explosive on the plane disguised as a radio-cassette player. The 
Libyans are also accused of plotting the explosion that destroyed 
a French jetliner over Niger in 1989, killing 171 people. That case 
is also unresolved. Gadhafi is eager to see the end of sanctions, 
imposed on Libya in 1992 and toughened in 1993. These sanctions have 
barred international air travel to and from Libya as well as the sale 
of arms and spare parts for aviation and the oil industry on which 
the Libyan economy depends. Libyan assets have been frozen abroad 
and diplomatic representation has been limited. Annan had to apply 
to the Security Council's Libyan sanctions committee on Thursday for 
permission to fly to Libya from the Tunisian resort island of Djerba. 
An American diplomat who has been working on the Libya issue in the 
Security Council said Thursday that the Clinton administration saw 
Annan's trip as a way to ``advance the hand-over of the suspects,'' 
and nothing more. ``We would expect his travel to Libya to achieve 
that end,'' said the diplomat, Nancy Soderberg. Several diplomats 
said that Annan had gone to Libya with no room for negotiation. ``The 
United States and Britain have gone the extra mile,'' Ms. Soderberg 
said. ``Libya has been given every opportunity to comply with the 
Security Council resolutions. It's been almost 10 years since the 
Pan Am 103 tragedy and the families of the victims have waited long 
enough.'' Before Annan's trip, which he planned in close consultation 
with British and American officials, Libya had been sending mixed 
signals about its intentions, as Gadhafi tried to set conditions on 
the release of suspects to protect his intelligence network and his 
political position, Arab diplomats said. One of the suspects belongs 
to a clan in Libya that is, at best, lukewarm in its support of the 
government. According to Jana, Gadhafi, who has ruled Libya since 
a 1969 coup, did not have the power to turn over the two men, Abdel 
Basset al-Megrahi and Lamin Khalifah Fhimah. The agency said that 
the Libyan people, through 500 ``popular committees,'' would have 
to decide the fate of the two, who were indicted by Britain and the 
United States in 1991. The move seemed to imply that Gadhafi wanted 
political cover. On Saturday, Libyan state radio reported that the 
General People's Congress, Libya's top legislative and executive body, 
had been summoned for Tuesday. The body usually endorses major policy 
decisions. Publicly, the Libyan government had been saying that it 
objected to the prospect that the suspects, if convicted, would have 
to serve jail sentences in Scotland. British officials last week said 
they had assured the Libyans that they could send diplomats to Scotland 
to monitor the prison conditions and that all Islamic strictures would 
be followed. The two suspects are now under loose government supervision 
in Libya. They are unable to travel abroad because their passports 
have been confiscated. Western diplomats said here last week that 
Libya was also concerned that the United States would not agree to 
a lifting of sanctions if the two men were sent to the Netherlands 
for trial, but would instead move the finish line to other issues. 
These diplomats seemed to confirm Libyan suspicions by saying that 
the sanctions would be suspended when the suspects were in custody, 
but that a final lifting of the embargo would not take place until 
Libya had met other goals, like ending support for terrorism. American 
allegations that Libya has been behind attacks on Americans led to 
bombing raids on Libya in 1986. Some Arab diplomats say the attack 
on Pan Am 103, if Libyans were responsible, was more than likely retaliation 
for the American bombing. British and American officials say there 
is no hidden agenda, and that Security Council resolutions demand 
general cooperation from Libya before sanctions can be permanently 
rescinded. Libya has seen its sanctions erode slightly over the last 
year, after the Organization of African Unity decided to ignore the 
flight ban for its heads of government. The Arab League, to Libya's 
annoyance, has refused to take the same decision. Arab League nations 
have pressed Libya to turn over the suspects. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>