<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981205.0182 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In another strange, competitive contest of the kind that has marked 
the series in the past decade, Army scored 15 points in the fourth 
quarter Saturday to defeat Navy, 34-30, in the 99th Army-Navy game. 
A 70-yard touchdown run by fullback Ty Amey midway through the fourth 
quarter gave Army a 31-30 lead and proved to be the winning score 
for the Cadets. The game was marred by an incident immediately after 
Amey's run, when a railing in the east end zone at Veterans Stadium 
gave way and nine spectators were injured as they fell out of the 
stands. The game was delayed for more than half an hour while ambulances 
were brought onto the field. The nature of the injuries was not immediately 
known, though there was a television report that the most serious 
was a broken leg. Both teams ended their seasons with 3-8 records. 
Navy played exuberantly in a first quarter that was filled with action. 
Johnny Goff, Army's senior quarterback and second-best ground gainer, 
fumbled on the Cadets' first and second offensive series, turnovers 
that set up the Midshipmen for a 35-yard field goal by Tim Shubzda 
and a 23-yard touchdown drive. On the first fumble, Goff was hit hard 
by the freshman defensive end Bwerani Nettles from Los Angeles. Nettles 
recovered the second fumble, which led to fullback Irv Dingle's 17-yard 
touchdown run and a 10-0 Army lead. The next time Army's offense had 
the ball there was a new quarterback, the sophomore Joe Gerena, with 
Goff now a cheerleader on the sideline. Gerena had started two games 
and done well after Goff injured an ankle in September, but had seen 
little action in the last half of the season. Ed Warinner, the Army 
offensive coordinator who calls the plays, decided to attack the Navy 
flanks with quarterback option plays and they worked. Army moved down 
to the Navy 25 and from there Gerena ran inside, ducked two tacklers 
and sped for a 25-yard touchdown. On Army's next series Gerena startled 
Navy by ripping off a 69-yard run down the sideline for a second touchdown. 
When the extra-point attempt failed, the Cadets led by 13-10. The 
lead did not endure for long. In the second quarter the Navy quarterback, 
Brian Broadwater, hit wide receiver Ryan Read for touchdown passes 
of 49 and 69 yards, the latter an Army-Navy game record. The first 
time Read ran a stop-and-go pattern against cornerback Andrew Burke, 
who also stopped but did not go again. Broadwater's pass was perfect. 
So was the next one into Ryan's hands, as he sped by Burke once more. 
Those big plays put the Midshipmen ahead, 24-13, but Army took back 
six points before halftime on another long play. Craig Stucker, the 
fullback, hit into the line on a common dive play. He found resistance 
but kept going 70 yards for a touchdown, just making it to the end 
zone ahead of two Navy tacklers. A 2-point conversion failed, and 
Navy remained ahead by 24-19. The Sailors increased the lead to 30-19 
in the third quarter following a 74-yard drive that ended with a nine-yard 
run by another senior fullback, Matt Harden. This time Navy's 2-point 
attempt failed. Army was not through. The Cadets staggered through 
a 98-yard drive that concluded with a surprise play, a 36-yard touchdown 
pass to halfback John Johnson thrown by Army's best running back, 
Bobby Williams, in the first minute of the fourth quarter. In four 
seasons of play Williams had never attempted a pass. The Cadets then 
trailed by 30-25. Navy lost a touchdown when Harden fumbled in the 
end zone when hit by Will Henderson, and Army's Jason Walker recovered 
for a touchdown. The Cadets then took the lead on Amey's 70-yard run, 
another simple dive play. After another 2-point conversion failed 
_ between them, the teams failed on four in a row _ the score was 
31-30, Army. The Cadets added a 27-yard field goal by Eric Olsen with 
47 seconds left in the game. Between them the two teams came in having 
won only five of 20 games this season. But such is the luster of this 
contest that all 66,590 seats at Veterans Stadium were sold out by 
late September, before big losses to Air Force, Army by 35-7 and Navy 
by 49-7, had dimmed the season's sheen. Army's record was 2-8, the 
two victories coming against Cincinnati and Houston, two opponents 
in Conference USA, the Cadets' new affiliation. Navy, one of the few 
remaining independent Division I-A teams, beat Kent, Colgate and Boston 
College. Regardless of records, the game remains a grand spectacle, 
with the Cadet Corps from West Point and the Brigade of Midshipmen 
from Annapolis, each 4,000 strong, providing peripheral splendor, 
notably when marching into the stadium well before the kickoff. These 
ceremonies have been going on for decades, mostly in Philadelphia, 
where the game has mostly been played since 1899. There have been 
21 games at other sites, such as Giants Stadium at East Rutherford, 
N.J. Going into Saturday's game, Army was ahead in the series, 47-44-7. 
After 98 games the differential between the teams was only 93 points, 
in the Cadets' favor. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>