<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981205.0053 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Abortion rights advocates have slowly and quietly been winning victories 
in state courts to make abortions more widely available. Bypassing 
what they see as an increasingly conservative federal judiciary, groups 
that favor the right to abortion have been focusing on state constitutions 
that often contain greater privacy rights than the U.S. Constitution 
or that have equal rights amendments. They have racked up victories 
even as federal courts have limited the right to abortion established 
by the Supreme Court in Roe vs. Wade in 1973. In the most recent decision, 
the New Mexico Supreme Court unanimously ruled 10 days ago that the 
state's Equal Rights Amendment required the state to use Medicaid 
money to pay for abortions that are deemed medically necessary for 
poor women. Lawsuits have also been filed seeking Medicaid financing 
of abortions in Alaska, Florida, Tennessee and Texas. And Catherine 
Weiss, director of the American Civil Liberties Union's Reproductive 
Freedom Project, which brought the New Mexico case, said abortion 
rights advocates were exploring the possibility of filing suits in 
two additional states, which she declined to identify. ``We have started 
looking more at the state constitutions because the issues have been 
foreclosed by the decisions in the federal courts,'' said Louise Melling, 
associate director of the Reproductive Freedom Project. New Mexico 
represents the latest in a line of victories for abortion rights advocates 
in state courts on the issue of public financing for abortion. Advocates 
have also been successful in striking down so-called parental notification 
laws. In the last two years, measures requiring that at least one 
parent be notified when a girl under 18 is seeking an abortion have 
been thrown out by courts in Montana, California and Alaska. The decision 
last month in New Mexico made it the 16th state to pay for medically 
necessary abortions using state Medicaid money. Federal Medicaid money 
is not involved. ``These have been really significant decisions,'' 
said Janet Benshoof, president of the Center for Reproductive Law 
and Policy. ``Poor women have been just constantly squeezed in the 
whole issue of access to abortion.'' Of those states now paying for 
abortions for poor women under the Medicaid program, 12 are doing 
so as a result of legal challenges brought by abortion rights advocates 
who cite provisions in state constitutions to back their case. Four 
states _ New York, Hawaii, Maryland and Washington _ voluntarily pay 
for abortions under Medicaid. Abortion rights advocates have lost 
legal challenges to compel North Carolina and Pennsylvania to pay 
for abortions for poor women. Anti-abortion groups are making their 
own gains, winning bans in 28 states since 1995 of what they call 
partial-birth abortion, enabling them to gain some political momentum. 
But federal and state courts have blocked most of the bans, so they 
have prevented few abortions. In contrast, the victories for the abortion 
rights movement have come without huge political battles, but have 
resulted in government-paid abortions for 200,000 women a year, about 
14 percent of the total number of abortions performed annually, according 
to a 1994 study by the Alan Guttmacher Institute, the most comprehensive 
one to date. Lawyers for abortion rights organizations say they have 
chosen their states carefully, looking not only for states whose constitutions 
have broader privacy rights than the federal Constitution or that 
have an Equal Rights Amendment, but also for a state supreme court 
that has been willing to act independently of Supreme Court doctrine. 
The idea is to compile a series of victories in a number of states 
that can then be used as precedents to convince the high courts in 
other states. ``The best legal argument to make is `Look how many 
we've won and how few we've lost,''' said Ms. Weiss of the civil liberties 
union. ``So you certainly don't want to start racking up losses.'' 
In New Mexico the Supreme Court ruled that the state's Human Services 
Department had discriminated against women by denying money for abortions 
to poor women while paying for any medically necessary procedure for 
poor men. ``Under the department's regulations, there is no comparable 
restriction on medically necessary services relating to physical characteristics 
or conditions that are unique to men,'' Justice Pamela Minzner wrote. 
``Indeed, we can find no provision in the department's regulations 
that disfavor any comparable, medically necessary procedure unique 
to the male anatomy.'' Opponents of abortion denounced the New Mexico 
ruling, saying it was a sign of what could happen if a federal Equal 
Rights Amendment for women should be enacted. ``These five judges 
apparently see no moral distinction between removing an unborn child 
and removing an enlarged prostate gland,'' said Douglas Johnson, legislative 
director of the National Right to Life Committee. ``Once they've adopted 
that premise, it's hard to see how any limitations on abortion can 
survive, including abortions in the last stages of pregnancy.'' Abortion 
opponents note that they have prevailed in several state court cases. 
For example, a ruling in Ohio upheld a state law requiring a waiting 
period for women seeking abortions, and mandating that doctors tell 
women seeking to end a pregnancy about adoption agencies and show 
them pictures of a fetus at various stages of development. ``I don't 
see it as a trend,'' James Bopp, general counsel for the National 
Right to Life Committee, said of the state court decisions. ``It's 
been an effort that has sprung up in individual states periodically 
over the last 20 years.'' Medicaid, the medical insurance program 
for low-income people, is financed jointly by the federal government 
and states. In 1976 Congress passed the Hyde Amendment, named after 
Rep. Henry Hyde, that barred federal Medicaid payments for abortions 
unless the life of the mother was threatened, or the pregnancy resulted 
from rape or incest. In 1980, the Supreme Court, in Harris vs. McRae, 
upheld the constitutionality of the Hyde Amendment, prompting abortion 
rights advocates to file several lawsuits in state courts to compel 
states to use their own money to pay for abortions for poor women. 
They won six of those. A second wave of lawsuits in state courts was 
spawned by the Supreme Court's 1992 ruling in Planned Parenthood vs. 
Casey, which gave states more latitude to restrict abortions. That 
case persuaded a number of abortion rights advocates to take their 
chances in state courts. Since then, abortion rights groups have won 
six more lawsuits regarding Medicaid. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>