<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981205.0044 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
To the surprise of almost no one, the New York Stock Exchange has 
agreed to stay in New York. Whether its well-heeled officials really, 
truly, turn-blue-and-die meant their many threats to move to New Jersey 
will probably never be known. After years of negotiations, the exchange 
finally muscled city and state officials into coming up with $900 
million in cash and tax breaks for a new trading complex in lower 
Manhattan. The exchange's board still has to vote, but by Friday, 
it was virtually a done deal. But buckets of money aside, there are 
certain intangibles that add up to a strong case that they were never 
really serious about leaving. There are, after all, some things that 
you just can't put a price on. Start with the name problem. The New 
Jersey Stock Exchange. The Jersey City Stock Exchange. Actually, officials 
had anticipated that problem long ago and secured the right to call 
themselves the New York Stock Exchange wherever they might land. Still, 
there would be the inevitable jokes. ``People use the phrase Wall 
Street around the world,'' said H. Claude Shostal, president of the 
Regional Plan Association. ``It's a brand name and a marketing image. 
It's Coca-Cola; it's Scotch tape. The New York Stock Exchange would 
jeopardize its enormous psychological and marketing value if it moved 
very far away from Wall Street.'' Some companies will move part of 
their operations to less expensive space in New Jersey or elsewhere, 
Shostal said. For an institution like the New York Stock Exchange, 
however, there is an incalculable value in being in New York, where 
the financial industry is concentrated. In the 1980s, Shostal made 
his living luring New York companies to Jersey City for Cushman Realty. 
He jumped through hoops putting together a deal to build a broadcasting 
headquarters for NBC in Jersey City, only to see NBC snap up a $100 
million tax break to stay at Rockefeller Center. ``We knew Tom Brokaw 
was not going anywhere,'' he said. ``The people in the bright red 
suspenders and the silk ties are not going to go to Jersey City.'' 
After all, New Jersey is off the beaten limo track. Could the masters 
of the universe have handled the logistics? The trip from, say, Greenwich 
would border on indignity. The train to Grand Central, then the subway 
to Times Square, then a transfer to a subway to Penn Station, a walk 
through the tunnels to get the Path train for the trip under the Hudson 
River to Jersey City. Then a taxi or who knows what to the new quarters. 
And could they really leave behind the headquarters of Morgan Stanley, 
Goldman Sachs, Merrill Lynch and Salomon Smith Barney, or the restaurants, 
or the recognition of having made it in New York? Shostal did get 
Merrill Lynch to move several thousand back office workers to Jersey 
City. But, he said, the tax breaks and subsidies on either side of 
the river are merely icing on the cake. ``The vast majority of tenants 
locate where they need to for business reasons,'' Shostal said. ``The 
bidding war between the states is really a milking of the public sector, 
rather than a determining factor in where they want to go.'' There 
is no question that the New York Stock Exchange, which pays about 
$51 million a year in a variety of taxes, is cramped at its 100-year-old 
home on Wall Street. On an average day, 680 million shares are traded 
on the market, up from 160 million 10 years ago. Exchange chairman 
Richard Grasso, who lives on Long Island, always maintained that he 
wanted to remain in New York. Yet, new construction is always a difficult 
proposition in Manhattan. In playing the relocation card, the Stock 
Exchange was no different than Mercedes-Benz, Nebraska Beef, Intel 
Corp. or any company that has pitted one state against another, from 
Alabama to Maine and California. Corporate relocation has had as much 
to do with the chairman's comfort as with economics. In a study of 
38 companies that left Manhattan in the 1970s, urban planner William 
Whyte found that 31 moved to within 8 miles of the chairman's home. 
Sometimes, the flight to the suburbs ends in a crash landing. Whyte 
found that 17 of the 38 departed companies were later bought out or 
raided, or merged with a dominant partner. A majority posted lower-than-average 
profits, while a comparable group of three dozen major companies that 
remained behind saw their stock valuation jump an average of 277 percent. 
But this is an old movie. In 1990, New Jersey offered to build New 
York's five commodity exchanges a $100 million complex at the Harborside 
Financial Center before New York offered a more generous deal. Five 
years later, the Cotton Exchange signed a letter of intent to move 
to New Jersey, but New York countered with a higher bounty and the 
traders stayed put. Even the developers in New Jersey who talked to 
the the New York Stock Exchange privately acknowledged long ago that 
they had little chance of luring away the Stock Exchange. Mitchell 
Moss, director of the Taub Urban Research Center at New York University, 
said the New York Stock Exchange needs to be in Manhattan to retain 
its crown as the world's largest equity market, especially with Frank 
Zarb's Nasdaq moving to New York and merging with the American Stock 
Exchange. ``New Jersey may be a better place to live but it's not 
a better place to work,'' said Moss. ``There is more of a chance of 
schmoozing and acquiring random information in an hour in the hallways, 
on the streets, at lunch or on the concourse at Grand Central Terminal 
in New York than there is by spending a week in a parking lot in New 
Jersey.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>