<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981205.0039 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Frustrated and embittered by their failure to stop abortions _ and 
by a federal law protecting clinics _ fringes of the anti-abortion 
movement are linking up with a new ally: the right-wing militia movement. 
Driven by religious zeal and radicalized by events, these splinters 
have adopted a violent, insurrectionary style that has been associated 
with seven murders in the last six years. In much the way gun control 
legislation mobilized the right-wing militias' anti-government politics 
and the Vietnam War shaped the leftist Weather Underground, these 
groups have formed a shadowy ``Army of God,'' which is not so much 
an organization as a shared set of ideas and enemies. In recent years 
this ``army'' has claimed responsibility for scores of bombings and 
other attacks on abortion clinics. ``Militia types have shown more 
and more interest in the abortion issue, while the anti-abortionists 
are becoming more and more militant and allying themselves with the 
militia movement,'' said Dallas Blanchard, chairman of the University 
of West Florida's sociology department, who has written on the subject. 
The overlapping of abortion with the anti-government agenda, say law 
enforcement officials and researchers, is most clearly seen in the 
case of Eric Rudolph, who is accused by the FBI of bombings at the 
1996 Olympics, a gay bar and an abortion clinic near Atlanta, and 
the bombing this year of a Birmingham abortion clinic in which an 
off-duty policeman acting as a guard was killed. Rudolph disappeared 
into the North Carolina woods. ``Eric Rudolph personifies the convergence 
of these issues,'' said Frederick Clarkson, author of a study for 
the Southern Poverty Law Center on the ties between the anti-abortion 
fringe and the militias. The Olympics, he said, represented ideas 
of internationalism and racial integration _ the so-called New World 
Order _ which are anathema to the extreme right, particularly to the 
white supremacist, anti-Semitic Christian Identity movement. Strikingly, 
the same conclusion is voiced on a fiercely anti-abortion Internet 
Web site maintained by the Rev. David Trosch, a Catholic priest in 
Mobile, Ala., who was one of the signers of a ``justifiable homicide'' 
declaration in 1993 after the first murder of an abortion provider, 
Dr. David Gunn. Listing the four bombings, Trosch's Web site declared: 
``The common link _ all of the bombings were against people highly 
offensive to God.'' In 1995, white supremacists calling themselves 
the Phineas Priests robbed a bank and bombed a newspaper office and 
an abortion clinic in Spokane, Wash. Larry Pratt, the head of Gun 
Owners of America, who was a co-chairman of Pat Buchanan's 1996 presidential 
campaign until his ties to militias and racist groups became known, 
helped raise nearly $150,000 to pay the court fines and other debts 
of Operation Rescue, the militant anti-abortion group. When the authorities 
arrested the Arizona Patriots, another militia band, they found plans 
to blow up hydroelectric dams, synagogues _ and abortion clinics. 
Of course, the vast majority of abortion opponents, many of whom still 
conduct regular protests outside clinics, do not advocate or condone 
murder. It is a small band of protesters, many of whom hardened their 
beliefs in prison during the 1988 Operation Rescue activities in Atlanta, 
who claim biblical justification for killing abortion providers. The 
Operation Rescue protests of the late 1980s and early 1990s represented 
a high-water mark for the radical anti-abortion movement. Hundreds 
of demonstrators were arrested for weeks on end as they tried to block 
clinic entrances in New York, Atlanta, Wichita and other cities. But 
in 1994, Congress passed the Freedom of Access to Clinic Entrances 
law, which made it a crime to obstruct clinics and provided tough 
penalties if anyone was hurt during demonstrations. Statistics kept 
by the National Abortion Federation, a pro-abortion group, show that 
the clinic blockades dropped off sharply with the passage of the law 
to only 2 with 16 arrests this year from a high of 201 with 12,358 
arrests in 1989. But since 1993, there have been seven murders of 
doctors and other clinic workers _ something previously unheard of 
_ along with 14 attempted murders and many incidents involving bombing, 
arson and vandalism. In the latest, the sniper slaying of Dr. Barnett 
Slepian near Buffalo, N.Y., in October, the FBI is seeking to question 
James Kopp, a longtime itinerant protester with a Catholic group called 
the Lambs of Christ. He is yet to be found. Neal Horsley, who maintains 
an anti-abortion Web site with a logo of dripping blood and a list 
of doctors who perform abortions _ their names are crossed out if 
they are killed _ blames the federal law as ``the step that made it 
inevitable to see a crescendo of violence. ``The federal government 
made up its mind to block any nonviolent attempt to stop abortion,'' 
Horsley said in an interview. ``The federal government literally drove 
men mad, moved them to execute abortionists. When a federal monolithic 
government begins to crush the rights of a minority, if the issues 
truly matter, fighting men rise up and do the things fighting men 
do. In the life and death struggle to stop this unjustified slaughter, 
Christian men are looking down the barrel of a rifle.'' Vicki Saporta, 
executive director of the National Abortion Federation, a pro-abortion 
group, said: ``There has truly been an evolution of violence. They 
started with peaceful demonstrations, and then as the protesters became 
frustrated, to invasions and then blockades, and then some became 
so frustrated they decided the only way to stop abortions was to murder 
providers.'' There are now Internet links between the Web site of 
the neo-Nazi Aryan Nation and Horsley's Web site. And the anti-abortion 
movement has its own underground literature of apocalyptic revolutionary 
novels, similar to the ``Turner Diaries,'' which inspired Oklahoma 
City bomber Timothy McVeigh. In one titled ``Rescue Platoon,'' protesters 
rise up against the government. In effect, the anti-abortion movement 
has created its own version of the milieu in which the far right operates, 
where leaders _ mostly male _ set forth an ideology and scattered 
individuals or small groups act on their own to carry it out. A former 
Ku Klux Klan leader and prominent rightist, Louis Beame, has called 
this strategy ``leaderless resistance.'' ``There clearly must be some 
underground network,'' said Blanchard. ``It couldn't happen without 
a community of support. They split into smaller and smaller groups, 
and as the groups got smaller, they got more violent. They tend to 
limit their own group _ becoming encapsulated, it's called _ and this 
does reinforce the tendency to violence.'' Clarkson and Chip Berlet, 
another researcher, said claims of biblical justification for the 
killings come from three fringe theological traditions: Christian 
reconstruction, which grew out of conservative Protestant splinter 
groups, particularly Presbyterianism, and seeks to establish a theocratic 
government; apocalyptic Catholicism, and the racist, anti-Semitic 
Christian Identity sects that view abortion as a threat to the propagation 
of the white race. An undercurrent running through much of the violence 
is the mysterious Army of God. The deadly Birmingham bombing attributed 
to Rudolph was claimed in notes signed by the Army of God. Its underground 
manual gives detailed instructions for attacking abortion clinics, 
including how to manufacture homemade explosives and cut off doctor's 
hands or thumbs; it also contains an effusive tribute to protesters 
using their jail-house nicknames, including Kopp, who is called ``Atomic 
Dog.'' ``Who or what is the Army of God?'' Clarkson wrote in his study. 
``That question has plagued investigators for years. Whether it is 
a concept _ a handy moniker for whoever takes up the cause _ or a 
permanent underground group is not yet clear.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>