<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981205.0065 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In a modest office building across the street from the Deja Vu nude 
showgirls lounge, 15 workers, most of them elderly, spend their days 
in a long, narrow room lined with cubicles, computers and telephones. 
The door to the room has a sign that reads ``Telephone Operations.'' 
Inside, the workers poll voters on coming races, survey the nation 
on issues and make get-out-the-vote calls for candidates. ``I'm going 
to read you the names of some people in our community,'' a worker 
repeatedly recited from a script in the days before last month's election. 
``After each, please let me know if your impression of them is favorable 
or unfavorable.'' The telephone room does not belong to a political 
party, a candidate or a consulting firm. It belongs to Stephen Wynn, 
the chief executive of Mirage Resorts, the driving force behind the 
new $1.9 billion Bellagio casino hotel here, the man most responsible 
for reshaping the way the nation perceives casinos. ``We're in the 
political business now,'' Wynn declared in 1994 after several efforts 
to expand his company ran afoul of elected officials in Connecticut, 
Detroit and Vancouver. And so in Wynn fashion, he has used campaign 
contributions, lobbyists and his corporation's own expertise and manpower 
to assemble one of the most powerful political machines in the nation. 
As he goes about building casino resorts in New Jersey and Mississippi 
and enlarging his Las Vegas empire with the extravagant Bellagio, 
political muscle is a vital element in his ambitious plan to transform 
his industry. ``Steve Wynn's control over politicians is all-encompassing,'' 
said Steve Miller, a former Las Vegas City Council member who has 
frequently been at odds with Wynn. ``It's overwhelming. Either you 
work for him or he tries to get you out of office.'' Considered by 
many Nevadans to be the most powerful man in the state, Wynn gets 
roadways rerouted, public transportation projects scuttled and public 
land deeded over to his company. But he wields his influence not only 
to expand his company beyond Las Vegas, where it owns four casinos 
plus a half interest in a fifth, but also to advance the public's 
acceptance of casinos as he builds palaces so lush that they become 
must-see stops on America's road map. ``There is a change taking place,'' 
Wynn said in a recent interview, whispering intimately for effect. 
His new casinos will be ``more elegant, more lovely, more complete 
and fetching than anything done before.'' ``And it has nothing to 
do with gambling,'' he said. In the past, of course, when a state 
rejected a Mirage casino but he was urged to build a hotel and entertainment 
complex anyway, Wynn refused. The gambling, he conceded, will ``certainly 
help us pay for it all.'' To help realize his ambitions, Wynn has 
made Mirage one of the largest contributors among casino companies 
to federal candidates and the Democratic and Republican Parties, even 
though competitors like Harrah's and Hilton own more casinos in more 
states. In the two years leading into the last election, Mirage gave 
$464,596, at that level, and it says it contributed $650,000 more 
to local and state candidates. In Mississippi, where its $650 million 
Beau Rivage in Biloxi will employ 4,000 workers, Mirage is already 
one of the largest contributors to local races. In Biloxi's mayoral 
race in 1997, campaign finance records show that Mirage was the largest 
single contributor to the successful re-election campaign of Mayor 
A.J. Holloway. In addition to his deep pockets, Wynn uses his opulent 
properties to woo politicians. A 1995 fund-raiser at Shadow Creek, 
Mirage's ultra-exclusive Las Vegas golf resort where caviar is served 
on the fairway, raised $500,000 for the presidential campaign of Bob 
Dole. The casino operator hedged his bets, attending a $25,000-a-plate 
fund-raiser for President Clinton and contributing to the Democratic 
National Committee. What sets Wynn apart is his polling operation, 
which enables him to influence elections and gain the favor of politicians 
who decide everything from new roads that lead to Mirage casinos to 
taxes paid by the entire industry. Under the guidance of Punam Mathur, 
Mirage's director of government and community relations, polls are 
taken on everything from local school board races to gambling initiatives 
in states where the company might want to do business. The telephone 
operation also conducts marketing and corporate surveys. In southern 
Mississippi, for example, where the labor force is very tight, Mirage 
conducted telephone surveys of residents to learn what job benefits 
would make its casino attractive to potential employees. The company 
shares its polling data with preferred candidates. ``It's nice to 
be able to call a candidate and say, `Whatever you're doing, keep 
it up,' or `You better start working because your opponent is beating 
you,''' Ms. Mathur said. Wynn also conducts voter registration drives 
for his 26,000 employees and their families in Nevada, where Mirage 
has its corporate headquarters. He and his staff personally meet with 
as many as 350 candidates in an election year before deciding whom 
Mirage will support. Then, before Election Day, he issues his employees 
a voter guide with stars next to the names of candidates who have 
received his ``seal of approval.'' The Mirage telephone operation 
pays dividends in many ways. For example, when Yvonne Atkinson Gates, 
chairwoman of the Clark County Board of Supervisors in Nevada, wants 
to hold a community meeting, she calls the Mirage telephone room to 
have it place calls to residents. ``They record a telephone message 
with my voice on it and do the dialing for me,'' said Ms. Gates, who, 
as head of the county board that must approve casino development along 
the Las Vegas strip, is a vital link to Wynn's continued success. 
To the envy of many other casino owners, Wynn has gotten what he wants 
from the county board, as well as from other local entities. To expand 
his Golden Nugget casino, he persuaded city officials to deed him 
a downtown street. In developing the Bellagio, he struck a deal with 
the county board of supervisors that enabled Mirage to build a nine-acre 
lake with 1,100 fountains in front of the hotel, despite a local ordinance 
barring new artificial lakes in the desert city. ``We went to the 
county fathers with a business proposition that would be hard for 
them to refuse,'' Wynn recalled with amusement. He offered to trade 
water rights attached to his property in exchange for an ordinance 
allowing his lake. The ordinance, however, allowed new lakes in terms 
so specific that only the Bellagio could benefit from it. ``It was 
referred to as the Mirage ordinance,'' Wynn said, laughing. ``For 
obvious reasons, it can't be duplicated.'' And, he noted, ``It passed 
without opposition.'' Along the Mississippi Gulf Coast, with its strange 
brew of magnolia trees, antebellum mansions and high-wattage casino 
lights, Wynn's Beau Rivage is quickly becoming a force in local politics. 
``These Beau Rivage people, they want to control everything,'' said 
one Biloxi city official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity. 
One of Mirage's first moves in Biloxi was to hire the same law firm 
that represents the city on casino matters. Not only has Mirage built 
one of the most expensive and dramatic buildings the region has ever 
seen, but by contributing campaign money and lobbying local politicians, 
the company has been able to include unique features that distinguish 
its casino from the dozen others here. For example, Mirage officials 
vigorously lobbied the state Legislature to enact a law allowing restaurants 
to feature micro-breweries. As a result, the Beau Rivage will have 
Mississippi's first micro-brewery. To get clear and free title to 
the huge waterfront parcel needed to build the casino hotel, Wynn 
spent $1.9 million to buy 4,225 acres of coastal wildlife habitat 
throughout Mississippi and swapped it for a critical 6.8 acres that 
were owned by the state. One powerful Mississippi resident whom Wynn 
has made a special effort to court is Republican Sen. Trent Lott. 
The Mirage contributed $10,000 this year to Lott's political action 
committee, according to an analysis of political contributions, and 
last year Lott, the majority leader, flew to Las Vegas on Wynn's corporate 
jet to attend fund-raising events sponsored by the gambling industry. 
In Washington, where until a few years ago the industry had only a 
scattered presence, Wynn was instrumental in forming the American 
Gaming Association, which pays $800,000 a year to Frank Fahrenkopf 
Jr., a former Republican National Committee chairman, to lead the 
industry's lobbying efforts. ``I think Steve is doing what he does 
best,'' said John Smith, author of ``Running Scared,'' an unauthorized 
biography against which Wynn has a defamation lawsuit pending. ``He 
has been most effective at making the gambling industry a legitimate 
industry that does things like lobbying and contributing to candidates.'' 
Weeks before Wynn graduated from the University of Pennsylvania in 
1963, his father, a gambler and Maryland bingo parlor operator, died 
of heart disease at age 46, leaving the family with huge debts from 
his gambling losses. Stepping in to take over the bingo parlor, the 
young Wynn was on his way to helping build the country's fledgling 
casino industry. He soon moved to Las Vegas, invested in the mob-tainted 
Frontier casino, ran a liquor distributing company and entered into 
a real estate investment involving Howard Hughes that netted Wynn 
more than half a million dollars in less than a year. Charming Wall 
Street as he now does politicians, Wynn first took control of the 
Golden Nugget in Las Vegas, and then with the aid of Michael Milken, 
the junk bond financier, he built the Golden Nugget in Atlantic City 
in 1980 for $140 million. He hated New Jersey's heavy regulation of 
casinos, though, and sold the casino in 1987 for $440 million, vowing 
never to return to the state. As Wynn refined his ability to negotiate 
with politicians, he reversed that position. After the industry successfully 
lobbied New Jersey officials to relax casino regulations, Wynn then 
persuaded them to provide $220 million in public money _ in addition 
to $110 million of Mirage's _ for a roadway and tunnel that will lead 
to Le Jardin, a $1 billion casino development planned by Mirage. Last 
month, the state broke ground on the roadway. New Jersey law prohibits 
casinos from contributing to local politicians. So in 1996, while 
Wynn was trying to win acceptance of the roadway and tunnel, which 
was causing an uproar among other casino operators as well as among 
residents who would be displaced by the project, he pumped $31,000 
into the state's U.S. Senate race, according to an analysis of the 
company's contributions. He gave $17,000 to the eventual winner, Robert 
Torricelli, a Democrat, and $14,000 to his Republican opponent, Richard 
Zimmer. Meanwhile, he dined at the governor's mansion with Christie 
Whitman, and directed his largess at community leaders in Atlantic 
City. To build support, he flew a group of public housing officials 
and tenant association leaders to Las Vegas for a tour of Mirage properties, 
all accommodations paid. Not only did Wynn persuade local officials 
to build the roadway and tunnel, but the city also gave him the 170-acre 
site for his project, in the marina district north of the boardwalk, 
and the New Jersey Legislature passed a bill to repay him up to 75 
percent of the money he spends to clean up the site, part of which 
had been a landfill. ``The guy is very smart,'' said Alan Marcus, 
a spokesman for Donald Trump's casinos, which adamantly opposed Wynn's 
Atlantic City plans. ``He's so smart he took their pants off. He got 
everything he wanted.'' To be sure, Wynn has not pulled it all off 
alone. He is widely credited for surrounding himself with talented 
people, and his reputation for treating his employees well is legendary. 
He once surprised his 400 managers and executives in Atlantic City 
with new cars. Last year, Fortune magazine named Mirage as one of 
America's ``most admired'' companies, second only to Coca-Cola. Yet 
those who have worked closely with Wynn know there is a mercurial 
side. His temper, people who know him say, can erupt as fiercely as 
the volcano in front of his flagship casino, the Mirage. During one 
telephone call, Miller, the former Las Vegas City Council member, 
recalled, Wynn was ``breathing hard and calling me names.'' During 
his negotiations with New Jersey officials, Wynn once called Whitman 
and complained that he was unhappy with the terms she had announced 
for the roadway and casino project. Angered by her refusal to change 
the terms, Wynn delivered a biting last shot over the governor's speaker 
phone, says one of the people who were listening. ``This is Steve 
Wynn,'' he said. ``I don't accept this deal. Good night, ladies and 
gentleman.'' And he hung up. Under Wynn, Mirage has grown into a $1.5 
billion-a-year company, its stock rising an average of 28 percent 
a year since he took over the company 25 years ago. Wynn controls 
more than 15 percent of the stock, and his wife and brother also own 
substantial shares. Wynn and his wife, Elaine, first married in 1963, 
had two children, then divorced, then married each other again. Wynn, 
56, pals around with celebrities like Michael Jordan, Kenny Rogers 
and Quincy Jones. And he is often treated with more reverence than 
any casino operator could expect. Last month's groundbreaking for 
the Atlantic City roadway was attended by more than 500 people. As 
guests crowded inside a huge tent and waited for Wynn to arrive, one 
man quipped, ``There's going to be a mad rush when God arrives.'' 
Afterward, an elderly couple dressed in matching Elvis jackets clamored 
for Wynn's autograph. One day during Bellagio's opening festivities 
in October, as he finished lunch and headed off through the resort, 
Wynn bumped his shin on a low stone wall. His expression was pained, 
but he instantly recovered, only to take two more steps and stumble 
over the base of a metal pole. The Mirage employee accompanying Wynn 
did not appear to be accustomed to the subtleties of leading the boss 
without being obvious: Despite a degenerative eye disease, he is determined 
to appear in public as if his vision is fine. Undeterred, Wynn cautiously 
walked past the Bellagio's $300 million art gallery, where masterpieces 
by van Gogh, Renoir and Monet hang on the walls, and through the hotel's 
conservatory, with its 50-foot ceiling and explosion of flowers. On 
through the lobby he went, with all heads spinning in his direction. 
As he gingerly walked onto the casino floor, he was met by a close 
friend, the singer Paul Anka. Throwing his arm around the shoulder 
of the diminutive Anka for guidance, Wynn moved quickly now, through 
the rows of blackjack tables, past the four-star restaurants with 
their world-renowned chefs, beyond the high-roller slot area where 
gamblers such as Julius Erving, the retired basketball star, were 
playing slot machines at $100 a spin, and toward the $95 million theater 
that is home to a new original Cirque du Soleil production. This was 
just the atmosphere that the Mirage chairman had envisioned for all 
of his new properties, and as customers stared and marveled at him, 
he beamed with the confidence befitting the unofficial king of this 
gambling kingdom. ``Smell this place,'' he said, pursing his lips 
and squinting his eyes with sheer delight. ``Feeeeeel this place.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>