<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981205.0032 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the span of three days, 35 free agents signed contracts worth $225 
million, and there went the winter meetings. This was in December 
1992, in Louisville, Ky., and the free-agent frenzy sent officials 
home reeling. Never again, they said, vowing not to provide agents 
with that kind of opportunity in subsequent Decembers. It was like 
shooting fish in a barrel, the officials decided, the general managers 
being the overmatched swimmers. The agents, however, have not suffered 
in the absence of the winter meat market. In just one recent week 
this off season, five free agents signed contracts worth $330 million. 
Inflation and escalation contributed to the cascade of dollars, but 
clubs proved they did not have to be a captive audience to spend lavishly. 
Perhaps most interesting about the signings of Mo Vaughn, Bernie Williams, 
Randy Johnson, Albert Belle and Rafael Palmeiro was that the agents 
did not wait for this week's return of the winter meetings to stir 
up another feeding frenzy. Yes, the meetings are back, six years later, 
officials having decided that enough time has passed to make it safe 
to go into the water again. The one thing the sport could always count 
on was that the meetings would generate a week's worth of talk about 
baseball. Teams would make trades that would command huge amounts 
of newspaper space and television time, and even if they did not complete 
player swaps, speculation about possible trades would serve the same 
purpose. Without the meetings, general managers became accustomed 
to making deals before December, and this year, players like Bobby 
Bonilla, Charles Johnson, Todd Hundley, Ron Gant, Bret Boone and Denny 
Neagle have already been traded. Roger Clemens will join that group 
if the Toronto Blue Jays meet their own timetable. That is not to 
say that general managers will not find trades to make at these meetings, 
which will begin Friday in Nashville and run through the following 
Tuesday. When they gather in one place, general managers spend most 
of their time talking with each other _ in pairs, of course, as they 
feel each other out to determine whether they have a match for a trade. 
But there is always far more talk and speculation than business conducted. 
Some clubs may not have any business to conduct at the revival meetings. 
Assuming Clemens is traded before Nashville, the Yankees figure to 
be observers. They have already had a solid off season because they 
have kept their World Series championship team together while their 
chief competitors have stumbled and bumbled their way out of contention. 
If the Mets sign Rickey Henderson in the next few days to be their 
leadoff hitter and left fielder, they will join the Yankees on the 
sideline except for perhaps some money-saving moves, like the Willie 
Blair trade Friday. The Mets have had a good off season because they 
retained the players they wanted to keep (Mike Piazza, Al Leiter, 
Dennis Cook) and they have added two run producers (they hope) in 
Robin Ventura and Bobby Bonilla, and a hard-throwing relief pitcher, 
Armando Benitez, who someday could grow into John Franco's closing 
role. The Arizona Diamondbacks have had a good and expensive off season, 
adding six free agents, including Randy Johnson, Todd Stottlemyre 
and Steve Finley (to be announced), but committing about $119 million 
in doing it. If the dollars don't translate to vast improvement, the 
expansion team will be viewed as the epitome of excess. Some teams 
have had a dreadful six weeks since the World Series. The San Diego 
Padres, who played in the World Series, have lost third baseman Ken 
Caminiti and center fielder Finley and are on their way to losing 
Kevin Brown, their No. 1 pitcher. The Chicago White Sox have lost 
Belle and Ventura, who drove in 28 percent of their runs last season. 
For awful off seasons, though, who can top the Yankees' rivals? The 
Baltimore Orioles have signed Belle, B.J. Surhoff and Delino DeShields, 
but they failed to sign three free agents they wanted, Ventura, Brian 
Jordan and their own Palmeiro. Roberto Alomar and Eric Davis also 
departed as free agents. The Orioles, though, at least had various 
plans. The Boston Red Sox incredibly let Vaughn walk away without 
having a reasonable alternative plan in mind. They tried to sign Williams 
as Vaughn's replacement in their lineup, but they had to know he would 
be a long shot at best, and they had no clue where to go once Williams 
took the Yankees' $87.5 million instead of theirs. The Orioles and 
the Red Sox have been reduced possibly to going head to head for Will 
Clark to fill their hole at first base, but the diminished Clark will 
not replace Palmeiro's 43 home runs and 121 runs batted in or Vaughn's 
40 and 115. Although anything is possible, it is highly unlikely that 
either team can trade itself out of its plight at the meetings, but 
the Orioles and the Red Sox will try because they don't want to concede 
the division to the Yankees this early. The Orioles may even be tempted 
to overpay for Kevin Brown, the best free agent still on the market. 
For six years and more than $80 million, the dominant pitcher could 
be theirs. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>