<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981205.0025 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Once upon a time, a frontier woman heard a frightful commotion right 
outside the log cabin. Seeing her loutish husband and a vicious bear 
locked in mortal combat, she paused for a moment and then blurted: 
``Go husband! Go bear!'' That's how I feel these days watching a few 
epic struggles in our own crude little wilderness called sports. I 
see people grappling with thumbs on each other's windpipes, and I 
don't know where my sympathies lie. More accurately, I don't have 
any sympathies at all. Take the impasse between George Steinbrenner 
and Charles Dolan. George was negotiating to sell control of the Yankees 
to the man from Cablevision. But George could not restrain himself, 
and he opened his big yap and roared that he would be the boss of 
all bosses for the foreseeable future, maybe even at Madison Square 
Garden, and I'm kind of glad he did. I admit, I got a giggle out of 
imagining George calling a practice of the Knicks (when the league 
resumes next October) and snapping, ``Look, No. 33, you're leaving 
your feet on every head fake! Learn some defense or I'm shipping you 
to Europe!'' George's bluster got blown up in the headlines and trumpeted 
across the airwaves, and Dolan, who likes to do his thing in private, 
became alarmed about whether he could control this raving egomaniac, 
which of course he couldn't. So the deal is in limbo. Great. I don't 
really want to see Cablevision engulf the Yankees because that would 
just about complete the Dolan stranglehold on New York teams, which 
means my rates would keep rising, and meaningful games would disappear 
into the brave new world of pay television, which I am not going to 
acknowledge in my lifetime. Hey, Chuckie baby, did you hear what George 
said about you? He said you were an uptight rustic who had spent too 
much time out in Long Island and would get lost in the Big City without 
your helicopter and your limousine, so who are you to put the clamps 
on a big-timer like him? Hey, George, did you hear what Dolan said 
about you? He said you are a control freak whose word cannot be believed. 
Oh, yes, he also said your turtlenecks are going to land you on Blackwell's 
Worst-Dressed List. Go husband! Go bear! Now let us turn our attention 
to the spectacle of David Stern and Billy Hunter rolling in the gutter. 
These lunkheads could not figure out how to divide a few billion dollars, 
so they are now a week or two from Zero Hour. Has anybody noticed 
the lovely weather since these boobs started throttling their own 
golden goose? Sure, we might miss the dunkathons on a few nasty nights 
in January and February, but if we can only encourage Stern and Hunter 
to keep flailing away at each other, we've got every chance for a 
healthy and fulfilling springtime. Hey, David, did you hear what Billy 
said about you? He said you're trying to squeeze blood from a turnip. 
He said it was you and your megalomaniac owners who raised the players' 
salaries in the first place. Billy also said you paste on the beard 
every morning before going to work. Hey, Billy, did you hear what 
David said about you? He said your business suit is going to get stretched 
out of shape from the strings attached to David Falk's fingers. Go 
husband! Go bear! That said, there are a few other feuds I'd like 
to instigate. Hey, Ralph Wilson, did you hear what Paul Tagliabue 
said about you? He said you're a crotchety old anarchist, and besides 
that, you never won a Super Bowl, nyah-nyah-nyah. Hey, Paul Tagliabue, 
did you hear what Ralph Wilson said about you and the grim lumbering 
juggernaut of the National Football League? Just read the papers. 
That got it about right. Hey, Governor Rowland of Connecticut, did 
you hear what Bobby Kraft said about you? He's laughing behind your 
back, saying you remind him of those Sun Belt politicians who think 
getting a major sports franchise like the Patriots will make them 
important. He hopes you've got a safe house in some other state once 
the people figure out what you've given away. Hey, Bobby Kraft, did 
you hear what Governor Rowland said about you? He said you're going 
to become such a pariah in Boston that people will hoot at you when 
you walk down the street. He said you're going to regret your impulsive 
move, but he's laughing behind your back that he's got you tied up 
tighter than a sheaf of tobacco leaves drying in a shed. It's our 
new winter sport. Go husband! Go bear! 
</TEXT>
</DOC>