<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981205.0070 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With North Korea refusing to allow inspection of a huge underground 
construction site that could be used to hide a nuclear reactor, Clinton 
administration officials acknowledge that a 4-year-old agreement meant 
to freeze North Korea's nuclear weapons program could collapse within 
weeks. The 1994 agreement, which the administration has hailed as 
among its proudest foreign policy achievements, was supposed to end 
the threat that North Korea would build a nuclear arsenal. But the 
discovery of the vast underground installation and North Korea's continued 
development of ballistic missiles have led many administration officials 
to wonder whether the agreement will have to be scrapped. Under the 
so-called Agreed Framework, the North Koreans were promised billions 
of dollars in energy assistance, including two new nuclear reactors, 
the waste from which would be far harder to turn into warheads. In 
return, North Korea agreed to shut down its nuclear weapons program. 
The North Koreans, frustrated by delays in the construction of the 
two new nuclear plants and by economic sanctions that have worsened 
a famine there, have described the administration's threat to break 
the agreement as virtually a declaration of war. Even by the usual 
standards of its overheated language, recent statements on the issue 
by the North Korean government have been fierce. ``The U.S. imperialists 
are driving the situation to the brink of war,'' the official spokesman 
for the North Korean army said last week. Senior Clinton administration 
officials say that the North Koreans will be told in negotiations 
this month that the agreement will unravel unless North Korea allows 
a team of dozens of U.S. inspectors complete access to the underground 
installation that is being built 25 miles from the North Korean nuclear 
complex at Yongbyon. Aerial photographs show thousands of North Korean 
laborers working at the site. The North Koreans insist that the project 
is intended for civilian use. But a senior State Department official, 
speaking on the condition of anonymity, said last week that U.S. intelligence 
information offers ``very convincing'' evidence that the mountainside 
facility will be used by North Korea to recreate its nuclear program. 
U.S. officials say they are also alarmed by intelligence evidence 
suggesting that North Korea is making preparations to test-fire a 
medium-range ballistic missile over Japan; a similar launch last August 
caused a near-panic in Japan. ``The North Koreans are playing with 
fire,'' said Robert Gallucci, the former State Department official 
who negotiated the 1994 agreement and who is now dean of the School 
of Foreign Service at Georgetown University. ``The North Koreans are 
quite consciously engaging in brinksmanship. They are putting the 
framework at risk.'' Donald Gregg, U.S. ambassador to South Korea 
during the Bush administration and now president of the Korea Society 
in New York, said that U.S. policy toward North Korea was in ``disarray'' 
and that there was little time left to salvage the 1994 agreement. 
Gregg said that the North Koreans may be justified in their frustration 
with the United States, especially over the continuation of U.S. economic 
sanctions that were imposed on the North during the Korean War. ``The 
Agreed Framework said we would lift sanctions as soon as feasible, 
and we haven't,'' he said. ``We have not lived up to all that we said 
we would do.'' ``And if we don't get our act together in the next 
three or four months, Congress is going to take apart the Agreed Framework 
and that will remove any inhibition the North Koreans have from going 
full bore to develop a nuclear capability,'' he said. ``I think the 
problem is that there's really no constituency in Washington for a 
sustained serious policy toward North Korea.'' The administration 
announced in October that former Defense Secretary William Perry would 
oversee a complete review of U.S. policy on North Korea. Perry, who 
left the Clinton administration to return to private business in California, 
is scheduled to travel this week to South Korea, Japan and China. 
Administration officials acknowledge that the appointment was in part 
an effort to placate Republican leaders on Capitol Hill, where Perry 
is widely respected. Senior Republican lawmakers have threatened to 
cut off the tens of millions of dollars required to carry out the 
1994 agreement, citing provocative acts by the secretive communist 
government in North Korea, including the construction of the underground 
site and the missile launch last August. They have refused to consider 
lifting sanctions. ``I don't think there is any reason to trust them,'' 
said Sen. Craig Thomas, R-Wyo., chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations 
Subcommittee on East Asian and Pacific Affairs. ``You have a government 
that is more like a cult, and that is obviously going downhill economically.'' 
He said that without a promise by North Korea to allow unfettered 
inspection of the underground site, ``I frankly think we ought to 
discontinue our agreement with them.'' In drafting the mammoth government 
spending bill in October, the Republicans reluctantly agreed to provide 
$35 million requested by the administration to pay for deliveries 
of heavy fuel oil to North Korea, as required under the 1994 accord. 
But they placed tough conditions on disbursement of the money. Under 
the bill, most of the money cannot be paid out unless the administration 
certifies in writing that it has obtained a satisfactory explanation 
about the purpose of the underground site, that North Korea has shut 
down its nuclear weapons program and that it has stopped selling ballistic 
missile technology to nations that support terrorist organizations, 
such as Iran. Administration officials say that it will be nearly 
impossible to meet those conditions and that President Clinton will 
probably have to invoke national security in paying for the fuel oil 
_ a move permitted under the legislation but one that would further 
erode support in Congress for the 1994 agreement. The administration 
has warned that if Congress cuts off the money, a move that the North 
Koreans have suggested would undermine the agreement, the North Koreans 
could recreate their nuclear weapons program almost immediately. In 
recent congressional testimony, Defense Secretary William Cohen said, 
``If they can point to that as a breach of the Agreed Framework, in 
a matter of weeks they can be back in the business of producing plutonium.'' 
The North Koreans have pursued an aggressive program for the development 
of ballistic missile technology, which is marketed to Iran, Pakistan 
and other countries and which has proved to be an important source 
of income for North Korea. The United States has had little luck pressuring 
North Korea to abandon the missile program, and administration officials 
say they are alarmed by recent intelligence information showing that 
North Korea is building new launch platforms for medium-range missiles. 
While denying Japanese news reports that the United States has intelligence 
information suggesting that the North Koreans are only days away from 
another missile launch, administration officials took the opportunity 
to warn that another missile test could mean the end of the 1994 agreement. 
``The United States views the North Korean missile program as a serious 
threat to the region,'' said James Rubin, the State Department spokesman. 
``Any further missile tests would have serious consequences.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>