<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981205.0101 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Dawn was still a half-hour away when I reached the tripod stand on 
which I was to perch for the next three hours, waiting for a deer 
to wander past. I dawdled a few minutes before making the ascent to 
the top of the 16-foot stand, where there was a short board for me 
to straddle and sit on. Once ensconced, there was no coming back down 
until my vigil was done. In this region of Minnesota, only a few miles 
south of the Manitoba border, most deer hunting is done from stands. 
Our stands _ there were eight in our party on the opening day of the 
deer season, which ran from Nov. 7-15 _ were scattered along nearly 
a mile of brush, small trees and canary grass that forms the western 
edge of croplands owned by the Roseau farmer Manfred Holm. Farther 
to the west was a long, narrow stand of conifers, mostly larches and 
spruce. The drill was to occupy our aeries before the deer, which 
go into the fields at night to feed, began to work their way back 
into the thickets and woods to bed down for the day. On other opening 
days in Minnesota, below-zero cold had been usual. This time around 
the weather was almost balmy, with temperatures in the low 20s, gentle 
breezes and a dust of snow on the frozen earth. Just when I was able 
to start making out objects on the ground beneath in the gathering 
light, guns coughed a few times miles south of me. Silence reigned 
after that, save for the mournful wail of a distant freight train. 
On previous Minnesota hunts at that hour I had listened to fusillades 
both near and far. To one accustomed to the sound of an occasional 
shot bouncing off mountainsides in Maine or New Hampshire during deer 
season, such salvos are astonishing. The portion of Minnesota in which 
we hunt is flat and open, and multiple shots over long distances at 
running deer are commonplace. I had not been with those who had built 
my stand the previous day, and I soon realized that it wasn't for 
someone who shoots left-handed. There was a clearing that stretched 
for 500 yards or more to my left, far out into one of Manfred's fields, 
but there was no way I could twist around and fire in that direction 
with any degree of competence. My only hope was that a deer would 
approach from a different direction. But I needn't have worried. All 
I saw was a chickadee and two magpies. On that day and others, some 
members of our party were dive-bombed in their stands by great gray 
owls. At 9:15, I descended and walked back to our vehicles, where 
I was joined by Gordon Haugen, Manfred's son-in-law, and my brother 
Danny. Neither had seen deer. As we were chatting, a single close-at-hand 
shot sounded. ``That sounded like a .243,'' I said, adding that it 
must have been fired by Glenn Holm, Manfred's son, the only one of 
us carrying a rifle of that caliber. The others agreed, and we were 
correct _ Glenn had bagged a four-point buck. He was the only member 
of our group to see a deer that morning, although Daniel Tilton, the 
son of David Tilton, our deer camp host, had heard one moving through 
thick brush near his stand. Back at the elder Tilton's house-trailer 
deer camp, which is on a strip of land he owns along the Roseau River, 
we learned that David, Whit Manter and Matthew Haugen, Gordon's son, 
had seen no deer. In the three days before the season opened we had 
refurbished old stands, built two new ones and erected one prefabricated 
metal stand, the first such structure we had ever used _ towing it 
into position on a flat-bed trailer hauled by an all-terrain vehicle. 
That first afternoon we made two deer drives that produced nothing, 
and the same was true of our second day in our stands, although Daniel 
Tilton did pass up a chance to shoot a fawn and had a brief glimpse 
of a large deer. I went to a different stand the second morning, even 
though I had doubts about climbing it and had momentarily considered 
asking Glenn Holm if I could join him in his stand, a penthouse of 
its genre, a small walled and roofed building with sliding windows 
and a gas heater built 15 feet above the ground on posts. My new stand 
had been formed by erecting a platform between three poplars, and 
the steps leading up to the platform leaned back toward the climber 
at about 15 degrees. It proved negotiable and once in place I was 
delighted. I could see and shoot in four directions. Nothing came 
by that morning or the following one, however. Whit shot a seven-point 
buck the second evening, and on the third evening, while hunkering 
down in the puckerbrush with Manfred beside one of his cultivated 
fields in which succulent green shoots of winter rye were emerging, 
I shot a four-pointer. We ate high on the hog each day. The menu included 
baked striped bass and oyster stew, roast turkey and fried deer liver 
and bacon, and throughout our stay there was a flood of pies, biscuits 
and pastries from the kitchens of our Minnesota members. On our fourth 
and last full day of hunting, a major snowstorm driven by gale-force 
winds swept through North Dakota and northern Minnesota. All save 
Whit elected to sleep in that morning. Whit came back to report that 
he had spotted the tracks of a doe and a fawn made in the new snow 
directly beneath my unoccupied stand, and I regretted being a slugabed. 
Our party had a number of unused tags, both buck and doe, and Minnesota 
law permits any member of such a group to keep hunting until all the 
tags are used. In our short morning hunt the day after the storm, 
Whit shot a small doe from the new metal stand. The New Englanders 
_ the Tiltons, Whit, Danny and I _ cut up two of the group's four 
deer in Manfred's shop and packaged them in insulated boxes for the 
trip home. That chore done, we were free to relax and swap yarns with 
one another and with the guests that arrived at camp. One such visitor 
was Larry Pladson, a Roseau musician and music teacher, whose renditions, 
guitar and voice, of ``Danny Boy'' and the ``Kerry Dancers'' filled 
my heart with tears, an emotion no doubt enhanced by a sturdy belt 
of Irish whiskey. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>