<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981205.0116 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In a modest televised ceremony, several hundred Khmer Rouge guerrillas 
surrendered to the Phnom Penh government Saturday in what was presented 
as a final end to the armed communist movement that tore Cambodia 
apart for decades. But the last three top leaders at large _ targets 
of a possible international tribunal for crimes against humanity _ 
did not participate in the surrender. They are known to have moved 
back and forth across the border with Thailand for years, and their 
whereabouts are unknown. It was not clear how many fighters were involved 
Saturday. The Cambodian general who accepted their surrender, Meas 
Sophea, said about 500 fighters would be integrated into the government 
army. Another official put the figure at under 1,000. It did not appear 
that these last rag-tag fighters would receive the special deal offered 
to earlier, more powerful defecting groups, which have been allowed 
to keep their territory, political structure and military forces. 
The surrender on Saturday would also allow the return of some 20,000 
civilians who had been under Khmer Rouge control along the northern 
border. Most of them are now refugees in Thailand. ``We held negotiations 
at Preah Vihear temple yesterday,'' Meas Sophea said, referring to 
a location on the Thai border. ``They agreed to defect and join the 
government. It's the end of the Khmer Rouge.'' In fact, the Khmer 
Rouge has been ending in stages since mid-1996, when much of its Western 
command joined the government, followed by other groups of defectors. 
Splits in the top leadership in early 1997 further weakened the movement. 
Its founder, Pol Pot, was tried by his comrades and sentenced to a 
life term of house arrest in the northern jungles. He died last April. 
It was then only a matter of time before the surrender of the last 
holdouts in a brutal 30-year-old revolutionary movement that caused 
the deaths of more than 1 million people when it ruled Cambodia from 
1975 to 1979. Analysts of the Khmer Rouge said it was possible that 
some guerrillas remained at large, essentially as roving bandits, 
and that some retainers may have stayed with the three top leaders. 
The three are Ta Mok, the Khmer Rouge military leader; Khieu Samphan, 
its political chief, and Nuon Chea, a top ideologue. ``We can't find 
them on Cambodian territory,'' Meas Sophea said. ``They must be somewhere 
along the border.'' He has previously said the leaders had crossed 
into Thailand. Last month, a three-member team of international lawyers 
visited Cambodia to assess evidence against Khmer Rouge leaders for 
a possible trial. They are to present their findings to the United 
Nations in January. Any trial would probably target only a small number 
of top figures, perhaps 15 or 20. Political and diplomatic barriers 
to a trial must yet be crossed, and there is also the problem of capturing 
the suspects. Apart from the three leaders who remained at large Saturday, 
other leading figures are living in defector zones where it may be 
impossible to seize them. These potentially include Ieng Sary, a close 
aide and brother-in-law of Pol Pot, who led the first defections and 
who is now based in the defector zone of Pailin, though he spends 
much of his time in Thailand. Saturday's surrender was led by Khem 
Nuon, chief of staff for the three fugitive leaders. ``We ask for 
permission from the royal government of Cambodia to rejoin society 
and the Royal Cambodian Armed Forces,'' Khem Nuon said during the 
videotaped ceremony. Like the defectors who have preceded him _ and 
the participants at Pol Pot's show trial a year ago _ he publicly 
denounced the men he had served for years. ``We have stopped believing 
the deception of leaders Nuon Chea, Ta Mok and Khieu Samphan, who 
are criminals,'' he said. ``From now on we will follow the government's 
platform and respect the orders of the government armed forces.'' 
That may be somewhat easier to do than in the past. At the end of 
last month, Cambodia finally formed a new government that for the 
moment at least is speaking with one voice, under the leadership of 
Prime Minister Hun Sen. The former government was an acrimonious coalition 
under Hun Sen and his rival, Prince Norodom Ranariddh, that competed 
for the support of Khmer Rouge defectors. This competition was one 
factor in a coup in July 1997 in which Hun Sen ousted Ranariddh. For 
months afterward, some royalist soldiers held out against Hun Sen's 
troops in a northern stronghold where they formed a tactical alliance 
with Khmer Rouge holdouts. The surrender and reintegration of these 
royalist soldiers was also announced last week. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>