<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981205.0045 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
They sell bread on the streets in Russia, from the windows of little 
roadside kiosks identified by signs proclaiming a single beloved word: 
bread. White bread, black bread, delicious Georgian bread laced with 
cheese, braided loaves and loaves baked in the shape of big brown 
domes, and much more. The average Russian's consumption of baked goods 
rose 5 percent from 1990 to 1995. In 1996 he ate 143 pounds of bread 
_ 6.4 ounces every day, 365 days a year. Russians even have a saying: 
``Bread is the beginning of everything.'' So why have they begun lately 
to eat less bread? The answer says a lot about the state of Russia 
and its people. What it says most is ``chaos.'' And not just bread, 
either: The entire Russian diet is lurching through a perestroika 
that mirrors the bust-and-boom, future-versus-past nature of the nation's 
economy and mentality. Like the country itself, Russian cuisine is 
a messy scene. Russia today is a society caught somewhere between 
tiny torts exquisitely topped with kiwi and a predominant national 
dessert, the deep-fried apple. It is a place where subway vendors 
hawk cases of Pringles to a population whose principal source of protein 
is real potatoes, lifted fresh from the ground. Russia wavers today 
between Tyson chicken, the pricey pinnacle of frozen fowl displayed 
in better markets, and the plate of hot sausage of indeterminate origin 
that was free when Leonid Brezhnev was in charge. At the moment, sausage, 
boiled potato and fried apple are in the ascendancy. Nationalism may 
be part of it; Russians are bridling at Western influence over their 
culture and sovereignty. But to the experts, the overwhelming factor 
is money. Russia and Russians are broke, and prices are rising. The 
ruble lost two-thirds of its value in a single week in August. Bread 
costs more _ 10 percent of the average Russian's food bill, compared 
to 4 percent just a few years ago. It is enough to make some Russians 
long for Brezhnev's steady socialist hand on the tiller, at least 
until they remember the iron grip that came with it. ``The difference 
between today and the '80s,'' said Alexander Baturin, deputy director 
of the Institute of Nutrition at the Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, 
``is that then the shelves were empty, but people who could buy a 
bit of fish were satisfied. It was enough. Today you can find almost 
everything in every store. The question is whether people can afford 
it.'' A relative few can. In prosperous Moscow, two Western-style 
supermarkets stocking both Russian and European brands opened last 
month alone. Given enough money, you can now buy Haagen-Dazs and Tony's 
frozen pizza in Moscow. In a few places, one can even find a real 
luxury _ fresh milk, from Finnish cows. But Muscovites are less than 
10 percent of Russians. The rest of the country briefly flirted with 
lowfat milk and skinned chicken breasts and ugli fruit, now found 
even in parts of Siberia. But it sleeps with traditional Russian cuisine, 
the comfort food that saw it through Brezhnev and Gorbachev and, now, 
the lean years of Boris Yeltsin. This means fatty fried meats, fried 
potatoes, fried apples, pancakes, cabbage soup topped with mayonnaise, 
fermented cabbage, butter and dense black bread. And tea. Without 
milk, but perhaps with a little jam. Preferably bought in bazaar-style 
markets, from stalls crawling with live crawdads and dripping with 
cattle blood and groaning with produce, none of it freshness-dated 
or shrink-wrapped by clerks with plastic gloves. To a lot of Western 
palates, this tastes, well, heavy and greasy. Heavy and greasy is 
the norm in a climate better suited to reindeer than humans. Sometimes 
greasy is good: glorious onion-and-hamburger-filled pancakes, or blinis, 
that surely were lifted from White Castle recipe banks; tasty vinaigrette 
salads of cabbage and carrots and oil; a good borscht. The key word 
here is sometimes. The downside of Russian cuisine is that it is not 
especially healthy; three daily helpings of sausage is bad for the 
heart. Three daily helpings of potatoes and bread can lead to obesity, 
and half of all Russian adults are overweight. Nor does freedom from 
Communist shackles seem to have helped much. Post-Communist Russia 
has been flooded with Western meats and groceries _ up to half of 
all food sales _ yet a recent study by one expert concluded that the 
vitamin content of Russian diets has not appreciably improved. Virtually 
every Russian suffers from vitamin deficiency. Among Russian children, 
half of whom do not regularly drink milk, the shortage of B vitamins, 
which promote bone growth, is catastrophic, Baturin says. ``Our way 
of life is a violation of the norms from the very beginning,'' said 
Yuna Popova, an administrator at the government's premier center for 
treating food-related disorders. This is not to say that Russians 
ate better when the Kremlin played mama, ordering its subjects to 
eat what was put in front of them or go hungry. But turning the Russian 
diet over to the market has been a mixed bag. There is, for instance, 
the free, hot lunch. Under Soviet rule, virtually every factory and 
office worker got one, either free or nearly so, as part of the state's 
cradle-to-grave package of social benefits. In modern Russia, there 
is no such thing as a free lunch _ and many people simply do not eat 
as a result. Most Russians eat twice a day _ morning and late evening, 
Ms. Popova said. Skipping a meal could be seen as a good thing. A 
few years ago, the average Russian packed away 3,000 calories a day 
by some measures, a quarter more than is recommended. And the calorie 
intake has dropped during the 1990s. But the dropped calories came 
largely from costlier foods that are important to a healthy diet. 
Baturin's institute periodically asks thousands of Russians about 
their eating habits, and some conclusions are disturbing. Fruit consumption 
dropped one-third between 1990 and 1995; meat, one-quarter; vegetables, 
a fifth. Fish consumption was halved. On one hand, less meat means 
less fat _ and some Russian doctors point to that to explain a slow 
decline in heart ailments that began in 1994. But it also has immediately 
led to an increase in iron deficiencies among women; a third of pregnant 
women lack enough iron. The decline in fruit consumption now means 
that 20 percent of Russians are critically low in vitamin C _ so low 
they risk getting rickets. Cost is one factor, Baturin said, but another 
is inertia. Most fruits and vegetables have never grown well in Russia; 
cabbage is the primary source of vitamin C. People eat what they know. 
Just as western Russians eschew one southern appetizer _ donkey-meat 
jerky traditionally cured by several weeks beneath the saddle of a 
sweaty horse (it tastes like a Slim Jim) _ others are repelled by 
sweet peppers. Or artichokes. Or pears. But not everyone. Baturin 
tells of coming across a report of Russian family that loved pears, 
despite living in a remote Siberian town where pears were uncommon. 
Delighted by their healthy eating habits, he decided to find out what 
led them to add fruit to their diet. The answer was simple and telling. 
The husband was jobless; the wife worked but had not been paid in 
months. To survive, they unloaded fruit trucks _ and were paid part 
of their salary in castoff pears. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>