<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981205.0173 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial for Sunday, Dec. 6: Americans 
are understandably ambivalent about the foreign entanglements of U.S. 
business. Overseas operations can produce profits and support some 
jobs at home, but they can also help sustain abusive dictatorships 
and labor practices. In recent years companies like Nike and Unocal 
have embarrassed themselves with questionable overseas partnerships, 
but the problem extends far back in U.S. industrial history. The issue 
was highlighted last week in a Washington Post story on General Motors 
and Ford operations in Nazi Germany. The Post reported that after 
the Nazi occupation of Czechoslovakia in 1939, the chairman of GM, 
Alfred P. Sloan, told a shareholder that the internal politics of 
Nazi Germany ``should not be considered the business of the management 
of General Motors.'' The company plant in Germany was highly profitable. 
``We have no right to shut down the plant,'' Sloan wrote. General 
Motors and Ford deny that they helped the Nazis or significantly benefited 
from forced labor. The Post article said American Ford and GM executives 
accepted medals from Hitler. A GM executive met with Hitler and participated 
in converting the German GM plant to military production in 1939 and 
1940. The German Ford and GM plants were the largest producers of 
trucks for the German army, according to U.S. Army reports. A 1945 
Army report says U.S. Ford helped Hitler acquire crucial strategic 
materials. Ford has found documents showing it profited slightly from 
its German plant during years when the plant used forced labor. Ford 
and GM should give a thorough account of their actions in Germany, 
and pay appropriate compensation. But they were not the only U.S. 
businesses to profit during the Third Reich. The world has no contemporary 
equivalent of Hitler. But for the past decade, U.S. companies have 
cozied up to the junta in Myanmar, Afghanistan's Taliban, Central 
Asia's dictators, African kleptocrats and Colombia's military. U.S. 
corporations argue that they can be a positive force in repressive 
countries. This can be true. They often pay better than local companies, 
and bad publicity has spurred some corporations to sponsor health 
clinics and other good works. But these benefits are outweighed by 
the political support companies lend to bad regimes. Few ever criticize 
their hosts' policies. Governments take their presence as a U.S. endorsement. 
It is unrealistic to expect that corporations will refrain from trade 
or investment with bad governments. But they should hold themselves 
to some guidelines. Their own practices should not be abusive, even 
if local laws allow it. This means giving workers wages they can live 
on and good working conditions. They also should not collaborate with 
government repression. Apparel manufacturers in China and elsewhere 
have fired workers trying to organize unions. Unocal, which is a partner 
with Myanmar's government in a gas pipeline project, is being sued 
in U.S. courts for alleged use of forced labor and forced expulsion 
of villagers. Last week, Unocal did end its efforts to work with the 
Taliban on a pipeline through Afghanistan, primarily because oil prices 
are low. The entanglements of oil, gas, mining and other natural resource 
companies with dictatorships are complex, as the businesses sometimes 
find themselves keeping repressive governments afloat. The activities 
of Shell, a British-Dutch company, in Nigeria brought in nearly half 
the nation's hard currency. Companies should use their tremendous 
power responsibly. Shell's image is still tainted by its failure to 
speak out strongly to prevent Nigeria's 1995 execution of nine environmental 
activists. Some regimes are so heinous that simply to continue making 
profits under them is reprehensible. Nazi Germany was surely one. 
Corporate officials are not only businessmen, they are citizens of 
the world. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>