<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981205.0063 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Slowly but surely, college campuses that for decades were dominated 
by males are becoming the place where the boys are not. In a trend 
that is reshaping everything from recruiting to social life, women 
increasingly outnumber men at colleges and universities. Even if the 
imbalance never becomes extreme, it raises concerns about the consequences 
of fewer men getting advanced education, and the sense that the liberal 
arts education may become a women's domain. ``I don't know why there 
are more women here, but I know that in high school I always felt 
women did better and cared more about doing well,'' said Catherine 
Gang, a sophomore at New York University, where there are nearly six 
women for every four men, a ratio shared by, among others, Fordham 
University, the University of California at Santa Cruz, the University 
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and Beloit College. Nationally, the 
population of students enrolled in higher education tipped toward 
women more than a decade ago, and the skew is growing, year by year. 
Although census figures show that there are slightly more college-age 
men than women, according to U.S. Department of Education statistics, 
there were 8.4 million women and only 6.7 million men enrolled in 
college in 1996, the last year for which statistics are available. 
The number of men enrolled in college has declined each year from 
1991 to 1995 but rose in 1996, while the number of women has risen 
steadily. And by 2007, the department projects, that gender gap will 
be larger, with 9.2 million women and only 6.9 million men. Women 
outnumber men in every category of higher education: public, private, 
religiously affiliated, four-year, two-year. And among part-time students, 
older students and African-Americans, the skew is much larger. ``Men 
are just not as interested in higher education as women,'' said Alan 
McIvor, vice president of enrollment services at Beloit in Wisconsin, 
who two years ago began urging the Associated Colleges of the Midwest, 
a group of 14 liberal arts colleges, to study the issue. ``They have 
these nonacademic interests: the butcher, baker, the candlestick maker. 
But at a residential liberal arts college, where kids learn as much 
from each other as from their professors, I think we should be concerned 
about the mix of students, about gender balance, about attracting 
more young men who are as strong as our women applicants.'' There 
is no clear consensus on what men are doing instead of college, and 
why they are less committed to higher education. But education experts 
say it is probably a confluence of factors, from girls' greater success 
in high school to a strong economy that may give boys a sense that 
they can make their way without higher education, whether in computer 
work or the military. And at a time when the country's high school 
graduation rate is lagging behind the rates in other industrialized 
nations, boys are more likely to drop out than girls. ``You start 
with who does well in high school, and girls are ahead there, which 
some people say is because they tolerate boredom better,'' said Patricia 
Albjerg Graham, president of the Spencer Foundation of Chicago, which 
specializes in educational research, and past dean of the Harvard 
School of Education. ``Then there are racial and ethnic differences; 
black girls persist in school more than black boys. Those differences 
account for part of what's going on, but I think the larger difference 
is that men feel it easier to get a job that can support them. This 
tilt to women has a great deal to do with what people of modest means 
do or don't do educationally, and whether they see higher education 
as necessary to their future.'' Given the widening income gap between 
high school graduates and those with advanced degrees, though, many 
education experts worry that men's failure to pursue higher education 
will seriously limit their life choices. ``We need to be concerned 
that higher education is losing poor and minority men, that more African-American 
men are going to prison than to college,'' said Arthur Levine, the 
president of Columbia University's Teachers College. ``It's also worth 
thinking about what it means if our broadest education, the liberal 
arts, is increasingly being reserved for one sex.'' For college admissions 
officials, the under-representation of men poses a challenge. Most 
say they are aware of the gender imbalance, but not overly concerned 
_ yet. But there seems to be a consensus that somewhere beyond a 60-40 
split, there comes a moment when a school ceases to be a comfortable 
place for both sexes. ``We do have some concern about the skew going 
too far,'' said Jerry Lucido, director of admissions at the University 
of North Carolina. ``How far is too far? I guess that would be if 
students here thought it was a problem. We certainly don't want the 
reputation that Chapel Hill is not a place for men, because that's 
not true.'' The threshold at which colleges start to worry has shifted 
in the last few years, said Levine, a former liberal arts college 
president. ``It used to be that you worried at 55 percent women, but 
the new wisdom is that anything up to 60 percent is OK,'' he said. 
``Probably nobody will admit it, but I know that lots of places try 
to get some gender balance by having easier admissions standards for 
boys than for girls. Recently, at a school where I was giving a speech, 
I asked `How far down the list are you going for boys?' and the answer 
was `All the way.' The problem is that if you take men who are not 
of the same caliber as the women, the highest-performing women leave, 
because the men aren't as interesting.'' Admissions policies are not 
the only ways to address the issue, though. Many schools are repackaging 
themselves to attract more male interest. ``We've had researchers, 
in-house and independent, help us shape the messages we use in our 
letters to the individual candidates we contact through the College 
Board,'' said John Buckley, the dean of admissions at Fordham University. 
``For women, the messages we're stressing are small classes, personal 
attention and access to professors. For men, we're talking about internships 
and intercollegiate sports.'' When Buckley arrived at Fordham 15 years 
ago, the student body was split evenly between men and women, but 
a skew became noticeable about five years ago, and now incoming freshman 
classes, he said, run about 59 percent women, 41 percent men. Baylor 
University in Waco, Texas., which like Fordham is religiously affiliated, 
has also taken steps to entice male applicants. ``We're a liberal 
arts school with a large education school and we know we're heavy 
toward women, so we've fought it a little, by adding some majors that 
we thought would appeal to guys, and an engineering school,'' said 
Stan Madden, vice president of university relations. ``We're having 
our recruiting literature redesigned, and we've been thinking about 
what's a feminine look, and what's a masculine look. We had a picture 
of a library with a lot of stained glass, and people said that was 
kind of a feminine cover. Now we're using a picture of the quadrangle.'' 
While the colleges that were formerly for men only have had no trouble 
finding large numbers of female students, many former women's colleges 
are still struggling to attract enough qualified men to reach the 
40-60 threshold. ``We talk about it a lot, that we're at 33 percent 
and until we reach the 40 percent threshold, we haven't completely 
made the transition,'' said Gail Berson, the dean of admissions at 
Wheaton College, in Massachusetts. ``You need to have that critical 
mass.'' And some, like Vassar and Sarah Lawrence, admit a higher percentage 
of male applicants than female ones. ``We have no preset criteria 
for men or women, and we review them one at a time, but we do take 
slightly more men,'' said David Borus, director of admissions at Vassar, 
which accepts not quite 40 percent of the women who apply, and slightly 
more than half the men. ``Because we want to try and have some gender 
balance, I think there is a bit of a mindset that may be a bit more 
generous to the men.'' At most engineering and technical schools, 
including the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Carnegie Mellon, 
men are still the majority. Harvard, Yale and Princeton still have 
a male edge, as do the University of Chicago and Johns Hopkins University. 
But at most liberal arts schools, women are the majority. ``There 
may be a bias against the liberal arts, a feeling that real men don't 
speak French, that in the 20th century these are women's topics and 
men do economics and engineering,'' said Catharine Stimpson, a feminist 
scholar who is dean of the Graduate School of Arts and Science at 
NYU. At NYU, Matthew Santirocco, the dean of the College of Arts and 
Science, said he was untroubled by the gender ratio. ``It's a very 
diverse, very inclusive environment,'' Santirocco said. ``I'd only 
be troubled if it got to the point where it was a majoritarian environment, 
where the minority was afraid to raise their hands.'' While the feeling 
may be absent at NYU, Ms. Stimpson said, some schools develop a sense 
of unease as women become the majority. ``At some places, I've seen 
trustees worry about the skew,'' she said. ``Male trustees get worried 
if the gender balance goes to 48 to 52, and the female trustees say, 
`Are you crazy, were you worried when it was 48 to 52 the other way?' 
I think it's about money and prestige and an old atavistic fear of 
tipping. Some people still believe that if you're a women's institution, 
you're a lesser institution.'' Students at NYU express mixed feelings 
about the gender imbalance, with many male students saying they thrive 
on it. ``I knew there were more girls than boys when I applied,'' 
said Hugh Curnutt, a junior, ``and I thought it was a positive thing, 
because if there's more girls, the dating possibilities go up. I feel 
more comfortable in classes where there aren't so many guys. It's 
less competitive and intimidating. Guys always want to take you on. 
They're really quick to say, `He's all wrong.' Girls might disagree 
but they'll say something like, ``He might be right, but I think ...' 
In my communications class I think there's 29 girls and 2 guys. I 
love it.'' The women tend to be less enthusiastic. ``There aren't 
many guys to date, and the ones there are have their pick of so many 
women that they have a tendency to become players,'' said Ms. Gang, 
a drama student. ``I've fallen in love with more gay guys than anyone 
should. And in scene classes, we have to do a whole lot of two-women 
scenes. But it's not so bad, because we're in New York City, and you 
can always find a way to meet people off campus.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>