<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981205.0086 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
They say they are not bluffing, that the season could be terminated 
in the next few weeks. But as players and owners stare down each other 
at the bargaining table, how likely is it that National Basketball 
Association's 82-game schedule will be permanently wiped away? ``The 
first time the players hear someone say the season is gone will be 
the day we decide to do it,'' said David Stern, the league commissioner. 
``I will not prematurely cancel the season. That's not fair to anyone.'' 
The league's hesitancy to issue a deadline for an agreement to be 
reached in the five-month-old lockout suggests there is room and time 
for compromise. The union's executive director, Billy Hunter, struck 
an optimistic tone Friday, saying he was confident a settlement could 
be reached. But with not one key economic issue resolved and no further 
bargaining sessions planned after a session that lasted more than 
10 hours Thursday, the prospects are looking grimmer by the day. Few 
believed that the stalemate would go this long. Yet instead of the 
Knicks making their first trip to the Meadowlands arena last Thursday 
or Stephon Marbury, Kevin Garnett and the Minnesota Timberwolves making 
their annual visit to Madison Square Garden on Saturday, the most 
calamitous labor dispute in league history continues. By Saturday, 
teams had lost only 18 to 20 dates from their 82-game schedules. But 
because nearly a month is needed after an agreement is reached to 
resume the season, the two sides are toying with playing fewer than 
50 games. Observers of the National Hockey League lockout view Stern's 
tactics along the same lines as those employed by NHL commissioner 
Gary Bettman during the 1994-95 lockout. A settlement was not reached 
until Jan. 13 after more than a month of no bargaining. The shortened 
season resumed two weeks later. But unlike the NBA, the NHL did not 
have more than 200 free agents waiting to be signed by teams. That 
dilemma and the need for at least a three-week training camp dims 
the possibility of a rushed settlement in mid-January. Friday, Hunter 
deemed Jan. 1 as the cutoff date for reaching an agreement, a date 
that would put the start of the season on or about Super Bowl Sunday. 
Though NBC lost its Christmas Day doubleheader, the network does not 
begin regional weekly coverage until Jan. 16. If a deal was signed 
near the first of the year, NBC would lose three weekends of telecasts. 
Meanwhile, the players are beginning to talk candidly about losing 
an entire season. ``I'm hoping for something to happen,'' said the 
Minnesota forward Tom Gugliotta. ``But I also know that in the back 
of my mind losing the season is a distinct possibility. We hope it 
won't happen, but we know the reality is at this point, and we can't 
rule it out. It's something that could happen. If it does, it would 
be difficult for everyone. But we know we tried.'' Added Michael Curry, 
a member of the union's negotiating committee, ``I've thought of the 
worst-case scenario. So the worst-case scenario would be to cancel 
the season. All you can do is to give 110 percent to make sure that 
doesn't happen. Mentally, you have to be prepared for the worst-case 
scenario.'' For Patrick Ewing, the union president, that means forfeiting 
$18.5 million, the highest salary in the NBA this season. Ewing loses 
$243,924 per game, a figure that already brings his estimated loss 
to more than $4 million. Karl Malone, the All-Star forward of the 
Utah Jazz, will lose his biggest payday ever, $6 million. ``I think 
other players should prepare themselves to say the season is over,'' 
Malone said. ``I think we should get with our people and go out and 
start playing games on our own. We should be playing and putting money 
away for those less fortunate. I'll lend my name to games, whatever 
it takes.'' The agents Arn Tellem and David Falk have finally put 
the finishing touches on their All-Star exhibition game, to be played 
Dec. 19 in Atlantic City, N.J. They scheduled a press conference for 
Monday for the game, which features members of all four Dream Teams 
_ the 1992 and 1996 Olympic teams and the 1994 and 1998 World Championship 
teams. It was unclear whether Michael Jordan would play or coach, 
but he is expected to be in attendance. The proceeds will go to players 
on the low end of the league's salary scale. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>