<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981205.0158 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The two reformers were rivals from the very beginning. And for nearly 
three years, they waged war over the direction of New York City's 
dysfunctional child welfare agency. Nicholas Scoppetta, who seized 
the reins of the troubled agency when it was reorganized as the Administration 
for Children's Services in 1996, was determined to fix it from within. 
And Marcia Robinson Lowry, the veteran New York City litigator, was 
equally determined to topple him with a class-action lawsuit that 
sought a court takeover of the system that all too often failed the 
children it was supposed to protect. ``What's changed?'' Ms. Lowry 
liked to say, when asked about Scoppetta's efforts. ``Nothing's changed.'' 
But last week, as Ms. Lowry formally announced the settlement of her 
lawsuit in U.S. District Court in Manhattan, it was clear that much 
had changed. The two adversaries had finally found what had long eluded 
them: the shared belief that Scoppetta had actually begun to push 
his agency down the long road to reform. Ms. Lowry, who heads a national 
advocacy group called Children's Rights and who has sued 10 child 
welfare agencies over the last 25 years, withdrew her call for a court 
takeover, agreeing that the city should be guided for two years by 
a panel of experts who would offer advice, not mandates. Scoppetta 
agreed that he could use the extra help. And in the end, Ms. Lowry 
decided that the man she had battled so vigorously actually offered 
the best hope for salvaging the system. Her turnabout reflects a growing 
consensus among child welfare experts across the nation that litigation 
alone rarely forces troubled agencies to change. Three years after 
Ms. Lowry won a court takeover in the District of Columbia, and five 
years after she won a series of court-imposed mandates in Missouri, 
those agencies were still struggling to serve the abused and neglected 
children in their care. New York City, on the other hand, had begun 
the slow process of reform after the beating death of Elisa Izquierdo, 
6, who was killed by her mother while under the agency's watch in 
1995. There are still staggering challenges confronting the agency, 
which with 40,000 foster children is second only to Los Angeles in 
the size of its system. But Ms. Lowry concluded that it would be better 
to help Scoppetta than to try to dethrone him. So the two sides negotiated 
an innovative pact that includes the creation of the expert panel 
and allows Ms. Lowry to seek a court takeover if the city fails to 
act in good faith, with the experts serving as her witnesses. In a 
separate accord, the state has agreed to conduct nine audits of the 
agency and assign 41 workers to monitor city compliance with state 
laws. For Scoppetta, the deal last week meant an end to the court 
battles that had consumed his most talented deputies and the assurance 
that he would not endure the negative publicity that would result 
from a trial highlighting his agency's failings. For Ms. Lowry, it 
meant gaining unprecedented independent scrutiny of the agency and 
a sharper legal case against the city if it should renege on its commitment. 
The panel of experts, who will testify for Ms. Lowry if the city acts 
in bad faith, will have complete access to city officials and their 
records. Backing away from the use of court-imposed mandates was a 
gamble, but a worthy one, because while the agency remains deeply 
troubled, Scoppetta has tried harder to fix it than anyone else in 
recent memory. Over the last three years, with the support of Mayor 
Rudolph Giuliani, Scoppetta has reduced caseloads, toughened eligibility 
standards for new employees, increased the number of adoptions and 
raised salaries for caseworkers who have long been overworked and 
underpaid. There is still much to be done, of course. City officials 
have yet to prove that their efforts have actually improved abuse 
investigations. Thousands of children still languish for years in 
foster care. Parents wait months for drug treatment programs. Adolescents 
sleep in city offices while officials scramble to find them beds. 
And even the city predicts that the coming state audits will uncover 
deficiencies. In July, Giuliani sharply rebuked agency officials for 
sending two foster children home, where they were repeatedly sexually 
assaulted by their biological parents and relatives. Ms. Lowry and 
city officials do not underestimate the challenges ahead. But with 
the combination of expert advice and tough monitoring, Ms. Lowry now 
believes the team can push the agency forward. And in a gesture of 
faith, she agreed to a two-year ban on any class-action lawsuits on 
behalf of children now in foster care. ``This administration has paid 
more attention to this agency than any in recent memory,'' said Ms. 
Lowry, whose group sued the city in 1995 in partnership with another 
group, Lawyers for Children. ``Scoppetta's level of visibility and 
political access combined with the know-how of these experts is a 
potentially winning combination for the children.'' Ms. Lowry also 
agreed to dissolve court-ordered mandates imposed by another foster 
care settlement, the Wilder Settlement, which was intended to insure 
that foster children went to proper homes. City officials had never 
come close to meeting the dictates of that agreement, which was made 
in 1986, and Ms. Lowry insisted they comply with those obligations 
under the good-faith test established in the new accord. And the city, 
which has long sought an end to the Wilder litigation, agreed. Such 
a meeting of minds was almost unthinkable just five months ago. Ms. 
Lowry, after all, had built a reputation as a relentless litigator. 
For 25 years, the class-action lawsuit has been her sword and the 
court-imposed settlement the justice she renders on behalf of the 
nation's abused and neglected children. Scoppetta, a former federal 
prosecutor and deputy mayor who led the federal investigations of 
police corruption in the 1970s, was equally determined not to submit 
his agency to court-imposed oversight. And increasingly, some critics 
say, he seemed reluctant to acknowledge the depths of its troubles. 
So for years, the two sides sparred testily in court and in the media. 
And even now, after having negotiated the compromise, some bitterness 
remains. The old adversaries did not appear together publicly to announce 
their agreement last week. They did not shake hands and they still 
spoke of each other with suspicion. But by signing their names to 
the settlement, they were, in effect, standing on common ground. ``That 
someone like Marcia would give up litigation, which is her stock in 
trade, and that someone like Scoppetta would acknowledge that these 
outside experts could really be beneficial, says a lot for both sides,'' 
said Monica Drinane, who heads the Juvenile Rights Division of the 
Legal Aid Society, which represents foster children in court. ``It's 
really hopeful because what it signals is that people are not focused 
on personally winning or losing,'' she said, ``but on what is best 
for the children in the system.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>