<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981205.0233 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
James P. Hoffa won election Saturday to the presidency of the teamsters' 
union, the job that his powerful father held for more than a decade, 
after the main opponent conceded defeat. With the concession, from 
Tom Leedham, Hoffa, a labor lawyer from Detroit, will take the helm 
of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, one of the nation's 
largest unions. The victory returns the Hoffa name to the head of 
a union that federal officials had long called the most corrupt, particularly 
when Hoffa's father, James R. Hoffa, led the organization from 1957 
to 1971. According to Michael Cherkasky, the federal election monitor, 
Hoffa had 100,899 votes, or 54 percent, of those counted here in Alexandria 
early Saturday evening, while Leedham, head of the union's warehouse 
division, had 74,700 or 40 percent. A third candidate, John Metz, 
a St. Louis teamsters' leader, had 9,225 votes, or 6 percent. In conceding 
defeat, Leedham said: ``The returns have made it clear that our campaign 
for rank-and-file power ran out of time. Hoffa Jr. campaigned for 
four years, spent $6 million and had a famous name, but in six short 
months we came from nowhere to build a grass-roots campaign for rank-and-file 
power.'' Hoffa's lead is expected to expand because Sunday will be 
dedicated to counting votes from the Midwest, which is Hoffa's home 
turf and was his father's stronghold. About 420,000 votes were cast; 
counting is expected to be finished on Sunday or Monday. Hoffa won 
the race in his second attempt, having lost narrowly in 1996 to Ron 
Carey, the incumbent. That result was overturned and a new election 
ordered when a federal monitor found that three Carey aides had misappropriated 
more than $700,000 from the teamsters' treasury to help the Carey 
campaign. Carey was later expelled from the union and Leedham replaced 
him as a candidate. This year, the Hoffa camp spent almost a $1 million, 
while the Leedham campaign spent about one-fourth that amount. Hoffa 
narrowly won the South, with 14,282 votes to 13,197 Leedham and 1,062 
for Metz. Hoffa ran more strongly in the East, after having lost it 
by 21,000 votes to Carey in 1996. This year, Hoffa received 65,196 
in the East, Leedham received 43,611 and Metz, 7,192. Ballots from 
the West were being counted Saturday and ballots from Canada are to 
be counted late Sunday or Monday. Hoffa, a graduate of the University 
of Michigan Law School, ran on a platform promising to reunite the 
badly splintered union and to give more power back to state and local 
teamster organizations. Leedham styled himself as an anticorruption 
reformer in the fashion of Carey when he first won the union's leadership 
in 1991, and Leedham promised to involve the rank and file far more 
in negotiations and other union activities. Hoffa flew to Washington 
from Detroit Saturday, and his campaign aides said he was not planning 
to speak publicly until Sunday or Monday. At a news conference Saturday, 
Tom Pazzi, Hoffa's campaign manager, said, ``I would characterize 
our attitude as a continuation of what it's been, which is a quiet 
non-hysterical confidence. We are looking forward to not merely winning, 
but to running the union in an effective way and making some progress. 
That prospect is a sobering one.'' Jody Rodriguez, a ballot observer 
who works at a Yellow Freight trucking terminal in Columbus, Ohio, 
offered this assessment: ``We feel like Jimmy's the messiah of the 
labor movement. He's for the working-class people, and he's the guy 
who's going to rebuild this union. There's nothing wrong with having 
an educated attorney heading the union instead of truck drivers because 
that will help us even the playing field with companies.'' It will 
not be easy to restore the teamsters to their power of old, largely 
because the union's membership has slipped to 1.4 million from 2.3 
million in the 1970s and the overall power of the labor movement has 
declined. But Hoffa's supporters say they hope that he is the man 
who will lead the resurgence of labor and attract hundreds of thousands 
more workers to the teamsters banner. ``I think he'll do the same 
thing his father did, build up this union,'' said Danny Moussette, 
a teamsters' official from Chicago who began driving trucks in 1960. 
``With the solid people Jimmy has around him, he'll be able to build 
this union back up to 2 million.'' The Hoffa camp and the Leedham 
camp demonized each other. The Leedham forces called Hoffa a corrupt 
tool of the teamster old guard, which provided him with much of his 
campaign support. The Hoffa supporters called Leedham a corrupt Carey 
lieutenant because he was part of the 1996 Carey slate and Carey had 
named him head of the warehouse division. ``I think we've done well 
enough that we've shown the reform movement will stay alive,'' said 
David Eckstein, a Leedham slate member who was director of field services 
under Carey. The estimated number of votes cast this year, 420,000, 
was down from 480,000 in the 1996 election. Teamster officials attributed 
the decline to two factors: cynicism arising from the Carey scandal 
and the fact that the current campaign did not have the same heat 
and fury as the battle between Hoffa and Carey. The teamsters have 
long been considered one of the nation's most powerful unions not 
just because of its size but also because its members handle goods 
that affect every nook and cranny of the economy. Its members include 
long-haul truck drivers, police officers, warehouse workers, food-processing 
workers, garbage collectors, flight attendants, even the actors who 
play Mickey Mouse and Donald Duck at Disney World. Federal officials 
have played a role overseeing the union since 1989 when the teamsters 
signed a consent decree allowing government oversight to settle a 
lawsuit charging that the union had made a ``devil's pact'' with organized 
crime. James R. Hoffa became the nation's most famous union leader 
not only because he greatly expanded the teamsters size and clout 
but also because he won the first nationwide master freight contract 
and helped double the wages of many teamsters. But Hoffa was also 
widely known for his ties to the underworld. He was convicted of mail 
fraud and jury tampering, and law-enforcement officials say he helped 
arrange for the teamsters' pension and welfare funds to lend tens 
of millions of dollars to organized-crime figures. Hoffa disappeared 
in 1975, in what was widely viewed as a mob killing. He was last seen 
in a restaurant in suburban Detroit. His son has denied any ties to 
organized crime and has repeatedly insisted that as far as he knows, 
his father was framed by the government and did not have dealings 
with crime figures. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>