<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981205.0103 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Five months after the death of Nigeria's longtime military dictator 
raised the prospect of greater political openness here, Nigerians 
cast ballots Saturday for local government officers across the country. 
The voting, viewed as an early test of the new government's seriousness 
about reform, appears to have been generally peaceful and the turnout 
high, according to government officials and Western diplomats. In 
Lagos, with 8 million people the biggest city, the normally traffic-choked 
streets were eerily deserted. Drivers obeyed a curfew, and teen-age 
boys transformed streets into soccer fields. Residents lined up before 
8 a.m. at polling places across the city. Many expressed hope that 
their votes would lead to what the president, Gen. Abdulsalami Abubakar, 
has promised will be a transition to a democratic government in May. 
``I believe the elections will be free and fair,'' said Solomon Ikujuni, 
60, at a polling place in the Epetedo neighborhood. ``We will get 
a clean government. We don't want a military government anymore. We've 
been suffering for so long.'' In Abuja, the capital, Abubakar, in 
civilian clothes, visited six polling places and said the high turnout 
underscored strong support for a transition to civilian rule. ``There 
are bound to be some mistakes or problems,'' he said, ``and we have 
tried our best to put everything in place. It is now left to Nigerians 
to make it work.'' The optimism, echoed in Lagos, came in sharp contrast 
to the anger in July after the death of Moshood K.O. Abiola, the wealthy 
businessman whose apparent victory in a presidential election in 1993 
was annulled by the military. The optimism was especially noteworthy 
in Epetedo, which had given Abiola such strong backing that he chose 
it as the site of a ceremony to swear in himself in a futile bid to 
claim the presidency. Abiola _ a member of the Yoruba, the ethnic 
group that dominates Lagos and the rest of the southwest _ died in 
government detention, and his death set off sometimes fatal riots 
in Lagos. It also further deepened the resentment in the Christian 
and animist South toward the predominantly Muslim North, whose military 
rulers have controlled Nigeria for all but 10 years since independence 
from Britain in 1960. After Abiola's death, Abubakar announced that 
Nigeria would hold elections, starting with local races this month 
and culminating in presidential elections on Feb. 27. He is not running 
for president. Several groups from outside Nigeria monitored the elections 
and are expected to release fuller details this week. Voting appeared 
to have been orderly in Lagos and elsewhere, although the Independent 
National Electoral Commission postponed balloting in parts of the 
Niger Delta, where ethnic Ijaw threatened to disrupt voting to protest 
the oil-rich region's lack of roads, electricity and running water. 
Local human rights organizations also monitored the voting. ``So far, 
so good,'' said Lanre Ope, a member of the Alliance for Democracy. 
As an monitor, Ope was allowed to drive to several wards in Lagos. 
``If you bring in an unknown face in this neighborhood, we'll know 
right away.'' Registered voters were required to have their cards 
stamped early in the morning by election officials at polling places, 
each handling about 500 names. To prevent fraud _ as many as one-third 
of the 60 million voting cards disappeared this fall _ voters entered 
polling places around 11:30 a.m. and were not permitted to leave until 
all had cast ballots. Visits to several wards disclosed some problems. 
At one station in the Bishop Aggey neighborhood in central Lagos, 
electoral officials arrived an hour late and were still accrediting 
voters at 12:30 p.m. At a station in Ajegunle, voters complained that 
there were no ballots for council seats, only for the post of chairman. 
``The voters are cooperating,'' said Justina Uzoh, an election officer 
presiding over a station in Ajegunle. ``They came out en masse, although 
many could not be accredited because they came late.'' Turnout seemed 
to vary widely from ward to ward; nationwide figures were not available 
Saturday. Votes were supposed to be counted immediately at each station. 
But election officials do not expect to have results of broader voting 
patterns until Sunday or Monday. Of the nine parties that presented 
candidates, only those who win 5 percent of the votes in at least 
24 of the 36 states will be allowed to take part in the statewide 
and presidential elections. Three parties _ the All People's Party, 
the People's Democratic Party and the Alliance for Democracy _ are 
considered the best financed and include most of Nigeria's political 
heavyweights. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>