<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981205.0221 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The U.N. secretary-general, Kofi Annan, gambled on an unusual trip 
to Libya Saturday but apparently failed to persuade Col. Moammar Gadhafi 
to turn over two suspects wanted in the bombing of a Pan Am jet over 
Lockerbie, Scotland, in 1988. After keeping Annan waiting nearly all 
day at the Libyan coastal town of Sirte, Gadhafi later met briefly 
with the secretary-general, who said afterward that the talks at an 
undisclosed location were ``fruitful and positive,'' but indicated 
that obstacles remained in the path to a trial in the Netherlands. 
``Libya has confirmed its seriousness and readiness to find a solution 
to the Lockerbie problem,'' Annan said at a news conference in Tripoli, 
the Libyan capital. ``Libya has also agreed to a trial in a third 
country and believes that it ought to be possible to find answers 
to all other outstanding issues related to this matter.'' But a trial 
in a third country, specifically the Netherlands, was not the outstanding 
issue Annan went to Libya to discuss. That compromise had been agreed 
to with the United States and Britain in August after the Libyans 
balked at a trial in either country. The problems that have arisen 
since come from Libyan demands that the two suspects, if convicted, 
not be imprisoned in Scotland. Libya also wants more assurances that 
U.N. sanctions, imposed for its failure to hand over the two suspects, 
will indeed be lifted when it turns the men over. Annan, whom aides 
describe as a born conciliator, flew to Sirte at some political risk, 
saying he wanted to try to break the decade-long deadlock in the case 
by getting Gadhafi's agreement to stop delaying the transfer of the 
two suspects to the Netherlands for a trial by Scottish judges. When 
Annan arrived at Sirte, he was left talking with Libya's foreign minister, 
Omar al-Montasser, and Libya's representative to the United Nations, 
Abu Zeid Omar Dorda, as well as the visiting president of Burkina 
Faso, Blaise Compaore. Annan detoured from a trip between Tunisia 
and a meeting of Persian Gulf leaders in Abu Dhabi to go to Libya, 
despite the skepticism of diplomats and U.N. officials, and he could 
have met either lower-level Libyan official at his office in New York. 
His trip to Libya was premised on talks with Gadhafi, although there 
was no assurance in advance that the Libyan leader would show up. 
This is the third time in his first two years as secretary-general 
that Annan has taken political risks to try to reach a compromise 
with a dictatorial leader. He agreed two years ago to reconstitute 
an investigation team looking into allegations of massacres in Congo 
when the new president, Laurent Kabila, whose troops were accused 
of the killings, refused to work with the group set up by the U.N. 
Human Rights Commission. In February of this year, he went to Baghdad 
to persuade President Saddam Hussein to resume cooperation with arms 
inspectors. In both cases his agreements were not honored. There were 
no details immediately available on his talks with Gadhafi, whom he 
appears to have met in a lavish desert tent, which a television crew 
was permitted to film. Expectations for the meeting were never very 
high, but the United Nations had a plane on standby in Italy in case 
the two suspects were released. It is still possible that this could 
happen, since Libya's Parliament has been summoned into a rare session 
on Tuesday. Pan Am Flight 103 was blown up over the town of Lockerbie 
on Dec. 21, 1988, killing 270 people, including 11 on the ground. 
An investigation by British and American law enforcement and intelligence 
agencies concluded that two Libyan agents had planted an explosive 
disguised as a radio-cassette player planted on the plane. The Libyans 
are also accused of plotting the explosion that destroyed a French 
jetliner over Niger in 1989, killing 171 people. That case is also 
unresolved. Gadhafi is eager to see the end of sanctions, imposed 
on Libya in 1992 and toughened in 1993. These sanctions have barred 
international air travel to and from Libya as well as the sale of 
arms and spare parts for aviation and for the oil industry on which 
the Libyan economy depends. Libyan assets have been frozen abroad 
and diplomatic representation has been limited. Annan had to apply 
to the Security Council's Libyan sanctions committee on Thursday for 
permission to fly to Libya from the Tunisian resort island of Djerba. 
In Washington, a spokesman for the National Security Council, David 
C. Leavy, said: ``We are disappointed that Libya is still not in compliance. 
... this has been going on for far too long.'' An American diplomat 
who has been working on the Libya issue in the Security Council said 
Thursday that the Clinton administration saw Annan's trip as a way 
to ``advance the handover of the suspects,'' and nothing more. ``We 
would expect his travel to Libya to achieve that end,'' said Nancy 
Soderberg, the acting deputy representative at the United Nations. 
Several diplomats said that Annan had gone to Libya with no room for 
negotiation. ``The United States and Britain have gone the extra mile,'' 
Ms. Soderberg said. Before Annan's trip, which he planned in close 
consultation with British and American officials, Libya had been sending 
mixed signals about its intentions, as Colonel Qaddafi tried to set 
conditions on the release of suspects to protect his intelligence 
network and his political position, Arab diplomats said. One of the 
suspects belongs to a clan in Libya that is, at best, lukewarm in 
its support of the government. According to Jana, the Libyan news 
agency, Gadhafi, who has ruled Libya since a 1969 coup, did not have 
the power to turn over the two men, Abdel Basset al-Megrahi and Lamin 
Khalifah Fhimah. The agency said the Libyan people, through 500 ``popular 
committees,'' would have to decide the fate of the two, who were indicted 
by Britain and the United States in 1991. The move seemed to imply 
that Gadhafi wanted political cover. Calling a Tuesday meeting of 
the General People's Congress, Libya's top legislative and executive 
body, could provide that. The body usually endorses major policy decisions. 
Publicly, the Libyan government had been saying for some time that 
it objected to the prospect that the suspects, if convicted, would 
have to serve jail sentences in Scotland. British officials said this 
week that they had assured the Libyans that they could send diplomats 
to Scotland to monitor the prison conditions and that all Islamic 
strictures would be followed. The two suspects are now under loose 
government supervision in Libya, still being paid by the national 
airline, Libyan Arab Airways, but unable to travel abroad since their 
passports were confiscated. Western diplomats said here this week 
that Libya was also concerned that the United States will not agree 
to a lifting of sanctions if the two men are sent to the Netherlands 
for trial, but will instead move the finish line to other issues. 
These diplomats seemed to confirm Libyan suspicions by saying that 
the sanctions would be suspended when the suspects were in custody, 
but that a final lifting of the embargo would not take place until 
Libya had met other goals, like ending support for terrorism. American 
allegations that Libya has been behind attacks on Americans led to 
bombing raids on Libya in 1986. Some Arab diplomats say the attack 
on Pan Am 103, if Libyans were responsible, was probably retaliation 
for the American bombing. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>