<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981205.0037 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Theodore Roosevelt plotted the beginning of the end of John D. Rockefeller's 
oil empire at a secret meeting at the White House on a summer night 
in 1906. Surrounded by his attorney general and other key cabinet 
members, he mapped out the antitrust suit against Standard Oil that 
prompted steel baron Henry Clay Frick to complain on behalf of his 
fellow oligarchs, ``We bought the son of a bitch, and then he didn't 
stay bought.'' It took five years for Roosevelt's case to be won in 
the Supreme Court, breaking up Standard Oil into 34 companies. And 
for the better part of the next 70 years, Washington's economic agenda 
was dominated by the high-stakes politics of curbing the power of 
big enterprises: The regulatory zeal of the New Deal, the oil cartel 
cases of the 1950s and '60s, the failed _ and now foolish-looking 
_ 13-year pursuit of IBM, the breakup of the Bell System. But something 
has changed in Washington in the past decade or so, something that 
has taken the issue that Woodrow Wilson called ``these vast aggregations 
of capital'' off the country's political agenda, even as it lives 
on in courtroom arguments about the legality of Microsoft's strategies 
to dominate the electronic ether. Last week, when two of the biggest 
remaining parts of the old Rockefeller empire, Exxon and Mobil, were 
recombined in the world's largest merger, Washington yawned. House 
Minority Leader Dick Gephardt, the pro-union, pro-consumer voice of 
the Democratic Party's left wing, spent the day complaining loudly 
_ about the Clinton impeachment inquiry, and he has yet to say anything 
about the deal, according to his office. In fact, scarcely a politician 
of any stripe headed for the cameras to question whether the $75 billion 
deal was good for the country, for workers or for consumers. The same 
silence greeted the deal that created Citigroup, which was the largest 
financial services company for a few minutes until Deutsche Bank bought 
Bankers Trust Corp., earlier this month, and Cargill Inc.'s move to 
snap up Continental Grain, one of the few huge concerns that farmers 
could turn to if they didn't like the prices Cargill was offering 
for their harvest. President Clinton, only steps away from the room 
where Roosevelt held forth 92 years ago, was hardly pounding the podium. 
``My position on mergers,'' he said, ``has always been that if they 
increase the competitiveness of the company and bring lower prices 
and higher quality services to the consumers of our country, then 
they are good; and if they don't, they aren't.'' Clinton's fence-sitting 
reflects the odd politics of an era of prosperity tinged with uncertainty. 
A few years ago downsizing was a brewing political issue; though layoffs 
continue _ last week the Asian economic crisis claimed another 28,000 
workers at Boeing _ job growth has been so strong that that the issue 
has been defused. Less than a decade ago, when Japanese corporations 
snapped up New York's Rockefeller Center and two Hollywood studios, 
many in Congress were in an uproar over the sale of American icons 
to foreigners. But these days, with the Dow bobbing at record levels 
and analysts declaring the triumph of American-style capitalism, neither 
the Deutsche Bank acquisition or Daimler-Benz's purchase of Chrysler 
Corp. last spring has yielded a similar furor. Many theories have 
been offered to explain this new passivity about the evils of Big 
Everything: the pace of technological change, or the realities of 
borderless competition in a year of global tumult, or the confusing 
business currents that at once celebrate the global reach of U.S.-based 
multinationals and the entrepreneurial spirit of small businesses. 
And perhaps it's just temporary _ if prices start going up again at 
the pump, or if the U.S. economy falters, there could be a renewed 
clamor to reign in corporations viewed as too big, too powerful or 
too heartless. But whatever the reason, noted Sen. Paul Wellstone, 
D-Minn., who is among the few in Congress still exercised about the 
concentration of corporate power, ``Once upon a time this was a burning 
issue, and now it's not even on the table.'' The government's current 
antitrust case against Microsoft seems at first blush be the notable 
exception: It's hard to turn on the television these days without 
hearing about the company's supposed scheme to dominate the Internet 
browser market, or its secret strategies to flatten competitors. (Imagine 
the muck Ida Tarbell could have raked with access to e-mail.) But 
among politicians, the case is rarely mentioned. No one ran for office 
on a platform of Gates-bashing the way Roosevelt once called Rockefeller's 
crowd ``the biggest criminals in the country.'' At a rare high-profile 
hearing this year on the long-term effect of mergers, Federal Reserve 
Chairman Alan Greenspan argued that the government was inept at determining 
in advance those mergers that would create competitive problems and 
would be wiser to wait and see. ``I would feel very uncomfortable 
if we inhibited various different types of mergers or acquisitions 
on the basis of some presumed projection as to how markets would evolve, 
how technology would evolve,'' he said, ``because history is strewn 
with people making projections that have turned out to be grossly 
inaccurate.'' Greenspan's view was challenged at the hearing, chiefly 
by Joel Klein, the assistant attorney general in charge of antitrust, 
and Robert Pitofsky, the chairman of the Federal Trade Commission, 
which will review the Exxon-Mobil merger and presumably force the 
company to divest some assets. Pitofsky noted that undoing the damage 
after employees of an acquired company have been fired, after its 
plants have been closed and after top management has moved on, ``is 
enormously expensive.'' But the fact remains that few lawmakers dare 
to venture deep into this territory, even though it sustained generations 
of their predecessors. ``The biggest reason is the mix of money and 
politics,'' says Wellstone, who is intensely focused on the issue 
as he decides whether to run for his party's presidential nomination. 
``For both parties, these are the heavy hitters, the monied interests 
who have a huge impact on the tenure of people in Congress. Not too 
many people want to challenge them.'' Of course, that was also true 
in Roosevelt's day, even if Frick and other monopolists came to regret 
their support of the president. But Wellstone notes a second reason: 
the quiet arrival in Washington of ``a set of shared assumptions about 
what is necessary these days for survival in a global economy.'' The 
first is that while bigger is not always better, it may be the only 
way to extend one's reach abroad. ``The ability to be a global player 
and to be competitive anywhere in the world has become more important 
as all the traditional walls of regulation, state ownership and time 
barriers have come down,'' said Daniel Yergin, chairman of Cambridge 
Energy Research Associates. The second assumption is that technology 
moves faster than antitrust cases. When the government began its push 
against IBM in the late 1960s, the microprocessor had just been invented. 
By the time the case was abandoned, the microprocessor was revolutionizing 
the computer industry, and IBM was missing the boat. It caught up, 
but market dominance was no longer an issue. And the breakup of the 
Bell System, while leading to lower long-distance rates and helping 
to promote technological advances, has also driven millions of consumers 
up the wall. For many, the only thing more annoying than trying to 
figure out how to get a phone fixed is answering dinner time calls 
from solicitors trying to sign up customers for a new phone service 
nobody has ever heard of. In the end, today's trust-busters are no 
longer politicians but technocrats and regulators who, over the next 
few months, will be reviewing neighborhood-by-neighborhood what to 
do about streets that have both a Mobil and an Exxon station. Almost 
no one is talking about blocking the merger itself, a merger that 
a decade ago Exxon would not have dared to think possible. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>