<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981205.0111 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial for Sunday, Dec. 6: The decision 
on whether to impeach or censure President Clinton is too important 
to be left to a ferocious partisan like Rep. Tom DeLay, R-Texas, the 
Republican whip. But that is what the next speaker, Bob Livingston, 
and his becalmed GOP leadership team are doing. If they continue to 
tolerate DeLay's bullying, they will be allowing a single willful 
legislator to frustrate the public's desire to settle the Monica Lewinsky 
scandal by censuring President Clinton sternly for his lies and failures 
of leadership. DeLay and the Republican hard-liners on impeachment 
know that both the public and a majority of House members favor a 
condemnation of Clinton instead of impeachment, unless new evidence 
emerges. But DeLay calculates that if he can prevent a censure vote, 
the House may vote to impeach rather than let Clinton go unpunished. 
But it is an insult to duty for any congressional leader to ram through 
an impeachment vote by using parliamentary trickery of the kind more 
suitable to votes on highway bills. DeLay is taking advantage of the 
fact that many Republicans of moderate views were infuriated by the 
president's hair-splitting answers to the Judiciary Committee's list 
of 81 questions. Even so, Rep. Peter King, R-N.Y., is continuing to 
campaign for censure as the best way to punish Clinton and let Congress 
move on to other problems. He maintains that perhaps 20 Republicans 
prefer such a route, and if they stick together to oppose impeachment, 
it will likely fail. While DeLay is saying GOP members are free to 
vote their consciences, he is working behind the scenes to make Republicans 
follow him, not King. The White House knows that if a vote were put 
off until next year, the president would be in a stronger position, 
and that may be why it is asking for more time now to present its 
defense. But Democrats who have called all year for a swift procedure 
are in no position now to call for postponement. King has had the 
good sense to offer a censure measure that would require an admission 
by Clinton. He is thereby keeping alive chances of a negotiated settlement 
that would be stern enough in its condemnation of Clinton to attract 
support from both parties. But King cannot carry the fight alone. 
He needs help from senior Republicans, including Livingston, who have 
enough spine to stand up to Tom DeLay. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>