<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981205.0177 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
All Allan Boesak says he is guilty of is ``struggle bookkeeping.'' 
But in Courtroom 19 in the new wing of Cape Town's High Court, a judge 
is going to decide whether ``struggle bookkeeping'' was really fraud 
and theft, crimes serious enough to send one of the liberation struggle's 
heroes to jail. Since August, the court has heard from a string of 
witnesses that Boesak used welfare projects to raise cash for a life 
of luxury, flashy cars and overseas holidays. And for a while, it 
seemed the prosecution might breeze to victory. But last month, one 
of the prosecution's principle witnesses, Boesak's bookkeeper, crumpled 
under cross-examination and admitted that he had implicated Boesak 
only to cover up his own thieving. With tears in his eyes, the bookkeeper, 
Freddie Steenkamp, who is already serving a six-year sentence for 
theft, asked for Boesak's forgiveness. Just how big a blow to the 
prosecution this was remains to be seen. Prosecutors are scrambling 
to line up other last-minute witnesses, including the singer Paul 
Simon, who contributed more than $100,000 to Boesak's Foundation for 
Peace and Justice. But the case has gripped this country both because 
it has offered a window into Boesak's indulgent living and because 
President Nelson Mandela has several times swooped in to help him, 
in ways some critics find deeply objectionable. When Boesak returned 
from a year in California to face charges last year, Mandela sent 
his justice minister to greet him at the airport, and in recent weeks 
Mandela has openly raised funds for his defense and derided the quality 
of the prosecution's case, triggering outrage in legal circles. He 
later apologized for those remarks. In his heyday, Boesak was a clergyman 
in the forefront of the anti-apartheid movement, defying the authorities 
and landing more than once in solitary confinement. He was a founder 
of the United Democratic Front, the political group aligned with the 
outlawed African National Congress and a man with a certain gift for 
rallying a crowd. But in the years that followed, prosecutors say, 
Boesak began using the funds that poured in from foreign donors to 
support his Foundation for Peace and Justice for his own needs _ sports 
cars, an expensive home and, after his divorce, the debts of his new, 
young wife. At one point, auditors testified, more money was spent 
on first-class travel for Boesak and his family than for any other 
project the foundation was involved in. The accusations of misappropriation 
of funds surfaced in 1994, when lawyers for DanChurch Aid, a Danish 
charity, said money they had sent to help victims of apartheid had 
been used to pay for Boesak's house. But it took more than two years 
before formal charges were made. Boesak faces 32 counts of fraud and 
theft involving nearly $1.5 million dollars, $195,000 of which he 
is accused of taking for himself. Much of the money had been donated 
by Scandinavian charities, but some was donated by Simon after his 
Graceland tour of South Africa and some from the charitable arm of 
Coca-Cola. The prosecution says Boesak deliberately raised money from 
Coca-Cola saying it was for a poverty project, when he had every intention 
of using the money to invest in a hotel. The case was delayed for 
more than a year as Boesak battled to have the country's Legal Aid 
system pay for his legal bills. Eventually, an anonymous donor coughed 
up more than $150,000 for his defense. When Boesak ran out of funds 
last month, he appealed directly to Mandela, who then publicly solicited 
more money for him. Within 24 hours another anonymous donor gave another 
$150,000. Some witnesses have been former board members of Boesak's 
foundation who described being kept in the dark about almost all the 
foundation's financial transactions. Some had even resigned because 
of the lack of accounting procedures. But some witnesses have clearly 
been reluctant to speak against a man they admire. During Thursday's 
testimony, the prosecutor battled with an auditor who had trouble 
remembering much of anything, including which years he audited the 
foundation's books. Finally, the prosecutor made him read the notes 
from the margins of his work sheets. ``A good system of internal checks 
does not exist,'' the notes said. Boesak says he feels abandoned by 
almost everyone, but Mandela. At times, he says, he has regretted 
``ever leading one single march.'' He says the charges are not about 
fraud or theft but about politics and people getting revenge for the 
success he had. He says that administering the accounts of the foundation 
was not his work and that he paid little attention to it. ``My job 
was to work for the downfall of apartheid,'' Boesak said, brushing 
aside the notion that perhaps he should have been more aware. ``I 
should like to think that that was a job not badly done.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>