<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981205.0133 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
From his desk on the top floor of the Founders Building, Douglas Wendel 
can look out over the expanse of high-rise hotels that makes up Myrtle 
Beach. He sees a $2-billion-a-year resort community that his concern, 
Burroughs &AMP; Chapin Co., has shaped as no other entity has. At 
one time, Burroughs &AMP; Chapin owned the entire oceanfront. The 
city's very name was selected by the company founder's widow, Addie 
Burroughs, to honor the wild wax myrtles that lined the dunes. For 
generations, the company was looked upon as the grandfatherly overlord 
that provided land for churches and schools, developed the first seaside 
hotel and brought new life to the region. In recent years, however, 
the downtown has become increasingly ticky-tacky. But now, some of 
the city's 25,000 residents worry that grandfather has bought new 
dentures and is biting away at the very fabric of the community with 
regard only for profits. The company found itself in the center of 
last year's mayoral election as Mark McBride, a political newcomer 
who promised to stand up to the company, was carried into office by 
a mere 42 votes over Robert Grissom, the 12-year incumbent who since 
died at the age of 76. The company has aggressively stepped up its 
development effort since Wendel was named chairman and chief executive 
five years ago. He was the first outsider to head the company, still 
held and directed by descendants of the founders, F.G. Burroughs and 
Simeon Chapin. Wendel developed Broadway at the Beach, a 350-acre 
complex of theaters, shops and restaurants a few miles from the oceanfront. 
The company expected completion in 10 years, but it took just three. 
The complex features Planet Hollywood and Hard Rock Cafe, the first 
trendy national chains to open restaurants here. Now on the drawing 
board is the 2,000-acre Grande Dunes resort stretching from the largest 
oceanfront tract remaining to a point several miles inland west of 
the Intracoastal Waterway and, about four miles west of the resort, 
a 1.3 million-square-foot shopping mall, which when completed will 
be the state's largest. ``Change is difficult for anybody and most 
react in a negative manner,'' said Wendel. ``If we were a greedy company 
one option would have been to take all of our 30,000 acres and parcel 
it up and sell it, take our assets and move someplace else. But we 
want to make Myrtle Beach as good a resort as it can be.'' Now, Myrtle 
Beach stands at a crossroads. The mayor and local developers want 
more projects like Broadway at the Beach to attract a more upscale 
clientele rather than a further accretion body-piercing pagodas and 
T-shirt shops like those that now line Ocean Boulevard, the main downtown 
and oceanfront thoroughfare. The downtown area's primary tourist attraction, 
the Pavilion, an amusement park owned by Burroughs &AMP; Chapin, looks 
more and more dated every year as the company has pursued its other 
projects. Stores sell vulgar T-shirts and items that could be used 
for illegal drugs. McBride, 34, said the city had taken a major step 
toward bringing a family atmosphere back to the downtown with the 
council's vote in mid-November to set up a commission to oversee a 
$50 million redevelopment. The plan calls for the city to build a 
pier, on which Burroughs &AMP; Chapin would build a new version of 
their Pavilion amusement park. ``If we were not the magnanimous, loving, 
caring company we are, we would abandon it (the Pavilion),'' said 
Wendel. If the Pavilion were closed, he added, it would just lead 
to further downtown deterioration. Nevertheless, the Pavilion/downtown 
project is not high on the company's list. Two residential and resort 
projects, Grande Dunes and South Beach, take precedence, said Wendel. 
The Grande Dunes, which will include a 400-room hotel, will rise on 
a one-mile stretch of oceanfront, the last large tract of undeveloped 
land within the city limits. It will include two golf courses, oceanfront 
condominiums with prices beginning at $450,000, golf villas and three 
marinas on the Intracoastal Waterway. In addition, the resort will 
include an equestrian center, a golf school, detached homes and a 
downtown-like shopping district. ``The success of projects like that 
will change the mix here,'' said Mayor McBride. ``Resorts like that 
are more family oriented. You don't see video poker on every corner 
in Hilton Head.'' Nearby residents protested the Grande Dunes project 
in a hearing before the City Council, which approved the plan in October. 
Some 435 acres of the 2,000-acre project _ the prime oceanfront land 
_ is within the city limits. The protesters were residents of the 
Dunes Club subdivision, which was built by Burroughs &AMP; Chapin. 
``It's just too close to us,'' said Dwight Hudson, who lives at the 
Dunes Club. Another resident, Robert Hawkins, said, ``Their attitude 
seems to be, `Trust us.' Are you kidding me?'' South Beach, the second 
of the company's new projects, will be geared for the more traditional 
budget-minded Myrtle Beach visitor. Already built as part of the complex 
is the Crown Reef Hotel and some miniature golf courses. A meeting 
and convention center is planned, as well as amusement activities. 
But as Burroughs &AMP; Chapin and other developers bring in large-scale 
resorts, the mom-and-pop operations that have been the mainstay of 
Myrtle Beach are being squeezed out. Just a few weeks ago, a wrecking 
ball and bulldozer took down one of the oldest such establishments, 
Harts Villa. The 31 units will be replaced with a 76-unit high-rise. 
``Overall, the majority of the people here are not against development 
or redevelopment,'' said McBride. ``What people are against,'' he 
said, ``is rules.'' Residents complain that Burroughs &AMP; Chapin 
donated the land for the Route 17 Bypass to accommodate their future 
Broadway at the Beach and NASCAR speedparks projects, pointing to 
traffic tie-ups even on a November weekday. The company that eventually 
grew into Burroughs &AMP; Chapin began in 1857. F.G. Burroughs grew 
rich from turpentine and retailing in Conway, S.C., 15 miles to the 
west of what is now Myrtle Beach. As his company grew so did his landholdings, 
eventually some 60,000 acres beside the beach. He died before it his 
property became a resort, but his sons entered into a partnership 
with a New York stockbroker, Simeon Chapin, to launch Myrtle Beach 
Farms, the company that brought vacationers to the place that was 
then called New Town. Benevolence has been the company's motto through 
the years and continues today, company officials said. The land on 
which the city's minor league ballpark is being built was donated 
by the company, as was part of the land on which the Myrtle Beach 
Convention Center stands. Myrtle Beach enjoys access to the ocean, 
unequaled along the South Carolina coast, because of Burroughs &AMP; 
Chapin. The street ends were donated to the city, with parking provided 
about every other block along the miles of oceanfront. The company 
also donated an oceanfront park and the 320 acres for Myrtle Beach 
State Park. McBride said his relationship has been good with the company 
since he ran his campaign to harness it. He says company and city 
officials worked diligently to hammer out a compromise on the Grande 
Dunes project that reduced the total number of units from 25,000 to 
17,000 and the height of the hotel from 180 feet to 80. But, he cautions, 
``change comes slowly.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>