<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981205.0222 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The big question coming into Saturday's game between top-ranked Connecticut 
and eighth-ranked Michigan State was whether this would be a day of 
rebirth for Mateen Cleaves, last year's Big Ten Player of the Year, 
or Khalid El-Amin, last season's pre-eminent freshman in the Big East. 
Both point guards had abysmal outings in last week's Great Eight Basketball 
Classic in Chicago and vowed to improve their games in Saturday's 
matchup before a capacity crowd of 10,027 at Gampel Pavilion. It was 
El-Amin who made good on his potential. Connecting on seven of 10 
shots from the field, including four of seven from 3-point range, 
and dishing off six assists, he led all scorers with 20 points as 
Connecticut won its fifth consecutive game, defeating Michigan State, 
82-68. El-Amin improved over his performance against Washington last 
Tuesday, when he committed five turnovers and had no assists in his 
team's victory. Cleaves, on the other hand, endured another dismal 
performance. He managed only two of 15 field goal attempts, including 
one of seven 3-pointers, to finish with 6 points. That performance 
followed Cleaves' three-of-17 game against second-ranked Duke on Wednesday 
in the Chicago tournament, and left him 10 of 49 (20.4 percent) in 
his last four games. Cleaves, a junior guard, trailed only Richard 
Hamilton of Connecticut in the voting for The Associated Press' preseason 
team. Cleaves' subpar outing Saturday was largely attributable to 
a superb defensive job by Ricky Moore, a senior guard who is UConn's 
best defensive player. ``Ricky Moore did a great job on Mateen,'' 
Michigan State Coach Tom Isso said. ``He got very frustrated in the 
second half because of Moore's defensive play.'' Jim Calhoun, the 
Connecticut coach, agreed that Moore's defense was a key to his team's 
victory. ``I don't know why people don't see that Ricky is one of 
the best defensive players,'' said Calhoun, whose team shot 63.6 percent 
in the second half while leading by as many as 17 points. ``He did 
a great job on Mateen.'' After scoring the first basket of the game 
on a layup by Kevin Freeman, Connecticut went cold, missing five straight 
shots while Michigan State could not miss. Connecting on their first 
five shots, four from inside, the Spartans ran off 11 consecutive 
points to take an 11-2 lead. But then it was the Huskies' turn to 
surge, going on a 12-2 run to grab a 14-13 lead on El-Amin's first 
3-point goal. Then it was a seesaw affair, with nine lead changes 
and three ties in the first half. Connecticut scored 8 of the last 
10 points in the half, 5 of them by El-Amin, as the Huskies took a 
38-24 lead at the intermission. They never looked back. REBOUNDS Even 
though Saturday's game was a home game for Connecticut, the Huskies 
spent Friday night on the road. For the last several years the UConn 
squad has spent the nights before home games at a hotel in Farmington, 
30 miles away, before returning to the Storrs campus the following 
morning. Coach Jim Calhoun said the routine was intended to keep the 
players together and away from distractions on campus. Calhoun, after 
watching film with the team at the hotel, drives home while the team 
stays behind with an assistant coach and, usually, an academic counselor. 
... Four of the five Michigan State starters are from Michigan, and 
three _ Mateen Cleaves, Antonio Smith and Charlie Bell _ are from 
Flint, where Cleaves and Bell were high school teammates. ... Connecticut's 
next game is against Massachusetts on Wednesday night in Amherst, 
Mass., followed by its Big East opener against Pittsburgh Dec. 12. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>