<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981205.0188 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Winter does not officially begin until later this month, but the winter 
sports season officially began in September, when the aerialists opened 
their World Cup freestyle season in Australia. Winter athletes are 
not yet tennis players, or golfers, or soccer players, for whom one 
season blends seamlessly into the next without much time for reflection 
or recovery. But the winter campaigns are getting longer, and it will 
be intriguing to see what happens as the Southern Hemisphere continues 
to develop. Skiers now train in South America and New Zealand during 
the off season. Will there eventually be World Cup Alpine races in 
Chile in June? World Cup moguls in Australia's Snowy Mountains in 
July? World Cup snowboarding in South Africa's Drakensberg range in 
August? For now, the winter circuit remains a European and North American 
affair, with an occasional long-haul flight to Japan. The 1998-99 
season began in earnest the last few weeks, without some of its best 
known performers. Alberto Tomba, Picabo Street and Katja Seizinger 
are not involved in the proceedings. Tomba announced his retirement 
in early October, shortly before the Alpine skiers opened their season 
on the glacier in Soelden, Austria. The now-traditional glacier event, 
which comes nearly a month before the next World Cup Alpine race, 
exists largely to remind consumers that it is time to book their ski 
vacations. Tomba helped inspire plenty of lowlanders to head for the 
mountains, and not just in his native Italy, during his remarkable, 
rollicking career. But after winning three Olympic gold medals and 
two world championships and then fading in the last two seasons, he 
will now have time to devote to his acting and his wine cellar, and 
to addressing serious charges of tax evasion that have been brought 
against him in Italy. Tomba's charisma will be extremely difficult 
to replace, but the Austrian Hermann Maier is potentially a more dominant 
skier, if not personality, than Tomba was at his peak. Unlike Tomba, 
who specialized in the two technical events, Maier, known as the Herminator, 
is a three-event skier: capable of winning any super-G, downhill or 
giant slalom he enters. The Austrians have emphasized cross-discipline 
skiing in their development program of late, and Maier won the overall 
World Cup title with ease last season, his first full season on the 
circuit. He also won two gold medals at the Winter Olympics in Nagano, 
Japan, picking himself up out of the snow after one of the most spectacular 
falls in the history of the downhill and finishing first in the super-G 
and giant slalom. His success did not go unchallenged. In the off 
season, the Italian team doctor, Herbert Schonhuber, and the Swiss 
team leader, Teo Nadig, both publicly insinuated that Maier had used 
performance-enhancing drugs in the last three years to help him add 
more than 20 pounds to his once-slight frame. Maier denied those accusations, 
attributing them to frustration on the part of his rivals. He said 
he had been tested four times in 1998 and that his new muscles came 
from lugging the bricks he laid for a living before he found his place 
on the Austrian team. After defending himself, Maier strapped on his 
skis and resumed attacking: winning the opening giant slalom at Soelden 
by 1.6 seconds. The United States will play host to this year's world 
Alpine championships in Vail, Colo., in February, but the Americans 
are in no position to impress the home crowds. Tommy Moe, whose only 
career downhill victory came at the 1994 Olympics in Lillehammer, 
Norway, has retired, along with A J Kitt and Kyle Rasmussen, his longtime 
teammates. A much larger blow to American skiing came at the World 
Cup finals last March, when Street broke her left femur and tore ligaments 
in her right knee in a crash. Street, one of the most personable of 
athletes, had already spent most of 1997 rehabilitating after another 
knee injury and had gotten healthy just in time to win the Olympic 
super-G gold medal in Nagano. Street will not compete this season, 
but at age 27 she has no plans to retire, and as if to prove it, she 
is featured in a television commercial in which she escapes from a 
hospital bed in her wheelchair, rolling down stairs and out the swinging 
doors of the emergency room in tuck position. Street's longtime rival, 
Katja Seizinger of Germany, the premier women's skier of the 1990s, 
is not nearly as comfortable in front of the camera, although she 
is every bit as audacious on skis. But she, too, is in rehabilitation 
after suffering the first serious injury of her career (torn knee 
ligaments) during training in the off season. Seizinger won two gold 
medals and a bronze in Nagano and the overall World Cup title last 
season. In her absence, her teammates, Hilde Gerg and Martina Ertl, 
Austria's Alexandra Meissnitzer and Sweden's Pernilla Wiberg are among 
the favorites to replace her. Austrians have dominated the Alpine 
events in the early weeks. When Christiane Mitterwallner won the super-G 
in Mammoth Mountain, Calif., on Friday, it gave the Austrian women 
four victories in eight races so far; the weekend before in Lake Louise, 
Alberta, Meissnitzer won the super-G and Renate Goetschl won two downhills. 
The Austrian men have been equally impressive, with Maier leading 
a 1-2-3 giant-slalom sweep in Soelden and Stefan Eberharter leading 
a sweep of the top five places in the super-G in Aspen, Colo., last 
weekend. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>