<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981224.0762 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
He was delayed for a few hours by a manhunt for a prison escapee suspected 
in the killings of two Israelis, but Yasser Arafat's helicopter landed 
in Bethlehem on Christmas Eve in time to make it for celebrations. 
The festive mood despite the dragnet in the town of Jesus' birth was 
not out of place: occasional intrusions of the profane did not keep 
many Christians around the world from the sacred business of celebration. 
Boy Scout bagpipe bands marched through Bethlehem throughout the day, 
and crowds of wellwishers _ along with mounted Palestinian police 
_ greeted the Latin patriarch, Michel Sabbah. As soon as darkness 
fell, the snap and sparkle of firecrackers filled Manger Square _ 
despite published pleas by Mayor Hanna J. Nasser, who told The Associated 
Press he considers such displays inappropriate at Christmas. Bethlehem 
was handed over from Israeli to Palestinian rule three years ago just 
before Christmas, and the fireworks were a celebration of independence. 
Crowds were down this year because of security fears in the wake of 
recent anti-Israel violence and protests against the U.S. and British 
bombardment of Iraq. It didn't bother Heather Taylor, 25, a teacher 
from Winnsboro, Texas. ``This is where it all started,'' she said. 
``I'm here to be near to the place of the person I love, the Savior 
I love.'' Nasser got his wish for decorum later in the evening, with 
Midnight Mass in the Church of St. Katherine, next to the fourth-century 
Church of the Nativity, built on the traditional birthplace of Jesus. 
Sabbah fanned incense over the altar, and led a service that included 
prayers in Arabic, English and Latin. He delivered a sharply political 
mass, alluding to Israel as the ``oppressor'' and praying for the 
release of Palestinian prisoners in Israeli jails. Sabbah also prayed 
for the ``people of Iraq,'' days after a U.S.-British bombardment 
of that country. For the overflow, a three-meter (yard) square television 
screen was set up, tuned into Palestinian television, which broadcast 
the mass live. The choir of the Salem Baptist Church of Chicago led 
a foot-stomping pre-Mass performance. Chorister Jamell Meeks said 
things had changed since 1992, the last time the choir performed, 
during the ``intefadeh,'' the Palestinian uprising. ``All that scary 
stuff isn't going on,'' she said. A fireworks display from the roof 
overlooking the square an hour before the Midnight Mass brought cheers 
from the crowd below. Singers in the Bethlehem Bible College choir 
raised their arms to try to shield their eyes from the smoke, blowing 
off the roof down into their faces. As Palestinians grow more confident 
in their sovereignty, the nationalist tone of previous Christmases 
has been played down: instead of the two-story high portrait Arafat 
of earlier years, smaller depictions of the Palestinian leader hung 
from streamers over Manger Square. Arafat is a Muslim, but his participation 
in Christmas events in Bethlehem signals his support for the Christian 
Palestinian minority. A manhunt for Jamil Jadala, a Bethlehem native 
accused of involvement in the killings of two Israelis in October, 
was still underway when Arafat arrived in Bethlehem early Thursday 
evening. Arafat is under pressure from Israel to contain anti-Israel 
violence. Jadala's escape from a Nablus jail earlier this week has 
embarrassed him, and when Bethlehem police received a tip he had returned 
to the area of his hometown, they went on immediate alert and surrounded 
his house. Arafat was due at 4:30 p.m., but arrived 45 minutes late 
_ a delay Israel army radio, citing Palestinian security sources, 
attributed to security rearrangements because of the manhunt. Tensions 
intruded into Christmas celebrations elsewhere in the world. In Jakarta, 
Indonesia's Christian leaders, shaken by recent attacks by Muslim 
mobs on Christian churches, appealed for racial and religious harmony. 
The world's fourth most populous nation has endured sporadic riots 
in recent months as social and religious tensions rise amid the worst 
economic crisis in three decades. Istanbul's largest Roman Catholic 
Church called off Christmas Eve midnight Mass, citing security concerns 
due to strong anti-Italian sentiment over Italy's harboring of a Kurdish 
rebel. In the Persian Gulf, some 72 planes, including 46 fighter jets, 
were chained down Thursday as a giant U.S. aircraft carrier dropped 
anchor to prepare for Christmas celebrations. The USS Carl Vinson, 
which leads an eight-ship battle group, took charge from the USS Enterprise, 
which sailed out of the Gulf Wednesday. Several warplanes that took 
off from the Enterprise had been engaged in four days of air strikes 
on Iraq. But the partial stand-down did not alter the state of alertness 
on the 97,000-ton carrier where most of its 5,000 crews worked the 
normal 12 hours. In the Kuwaiti desert, some 1,000 U.S. Marines in 
the region to meet any Iraqi threat in the region tried to make the 
best of Christmas Eve in the desert. The United States and Britain 
launched air attacks against Iraq in the early hours of Dec. 17 after 
the United Nations withdrew its weapons inspectors saying that Iraq 
was blocking their work. Cpl. Robert Katz of New Rochelle, New York, 
said Christmas was about being with the people dearest to your heart, 
and ``we're all friends and family here.'' On the others side of the 
border, President Saddam Hussein said that the recent U.S. and British 
airstrikes on Iraq violated the teachings of Jesus and called on all 
believers to ``face up to these criminals.'' Some 5 percent of Iraq's 
22 million people are Christians and Saddam issues a Christmas address 
each year. ``We hope that this year we will have a Christmas of peace,'' 
said Matti Shaba Matoka, the Syrian Catholic archbishop of Baghdad. 
The bleak Christmas did not stop Faris Boutros Mehdi from shopping 
for presents to put beneath his small, bare, plastic Christmas tree. 
A bottle of perfume for his girlfriend costs about 25,000 dinars (dlrs 
14), about half of his monthly salary. The effects of eight years 
of U.N. sanctions have limited celebrations in Iraq; in hundreds of 
towns across Central America, natural disaster wiped out the holiday 
entirely. ``What Christmas?'' asked Gregorio Sanchez, a 42-year-old 
farmer and evangelical preacher who lives with a wife and five children 
in a dirt-floor shelter of black plastic shelter in Posoltega, Nicaragua, 
alongside hundreds of other refugees. Two months ago, the rains of 
Hurricane Mitch were followed by mud, burying their lands, their houses, 
their friends, and often their families. Elsewhere, others could celebrate 
a reemergence of Christmas. In Havana, Cubans crowded markets to buy 
pork roasts and other traditional foods for a Christmas made especially 
festive by the recent reinstatement of Dec. 25 as a permanent holiday. 
In Asmara, Eritrea, a Christmas tree decked with glowing lights dominated 
a traffic island on Asmara's main thoroughfare. Another adorned the 
central post office where electronic Christmas jingles play throughout 
the day. A western version of Christmas is making inroads in this 
half-Muslim, half Orthodox Christian capital of 400,000 in the Horn 
of Africa. Those driving the observance of western-style Christmas 
on Dec. 25 are minority Roman Catholics and Protestants _ and the 
many Eritreans who have returned from years of exile in western nations, 
after Africa's newest nation became independent from Ethiopia in 1993. 
Most Eritrean Christians are Orthodox, and celebrate Christmas on 
Jan. 7. ``I lived in Piscataway, New Jersey, for 11 years, so I'm 
used to celebrating on the 25th,'' said Luz Yosief, an Eritrean who 
now works for the U.N. Development Program. At the Vatican, Pope John 
Paul II celebrated this Christmas with his mind on the next one, looking 
ahead eagerly to the opening of the jubilee year that will launch 
Christianity's third millennium. John Paul was delivering his Christmas 
Eve Mass homily from St. Peter's Basilica. From there, on Dec. 24, 
1999, the pope will open 2000 celebrations with the traditional jubilee-year 
opening of the basilica's usually closed main doors. ``My thoughts 
already turn to Christmas next year, when, God willing, I shall inaugurate 
the great jubilee with the opening of the holy door,'' John Paul said 
in an advance text of his Christmas Eve homily. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>