<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981224.0312 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With a flourish of bagpipes and drums, the white-robed Latin patriarch 
of Jerusalem entered Bethlehem on Thursday to usher in Christmas Eve 
festivities in the town of Jesus' birth. Patriarch Michel Sabbah, 
the top Roman Catholic clergyman in the region, was to preside later 
at midnight Mass at the 4th-century Church of the Nativity, built 
over the cavelike grotto that tradition holds is Christ's birthplace. 
Although the Palestinians gained self-rule in Bethlehem three years 
ago, Israel still controls surrounding villages and roads leading 
in and out of the city. The patriarch's motorcade from nearby Jerusalem, 
trailed by Christian pilgrims, cleared an Israeli military checkpoint, 
where an Israeli delegation offered holiday greetings. Palestinian 
police on horseback and Palestinian boy scouts then escorted the procession 
into town. Festivities in Bethlehem this year were somewhat subdued 
by a drop-off in tourism and big pre-millennium renovation projects 
that have turned the Palestinian town into an open-air construction 
site. Although the majority of Bethlehem's residents are Muslims, 
the municipality decks out the streets with Christmas lights and puts 
up Christmas trees, one of which was decorated last week by U.S. President 
Bill Clinton and his family. Banners in English and Arabic read ``Merry 
Christmas!'' Christmas in Bethlehem is also something of a state occasion; 
plastic Palestinian flags flutter in streets and squares, and Palestinian 
leader Yasser Arafat and other dignitaries were to formally welcome 
the patriarch. Religious rites reflect a diversity of cultures and 
variety of Christian sects. In Bethlehem, Christmas-eve services could 
be found in English, French, Arabic and Aramaic, the ancient language 
of Jesus. In Bethlehem's Manger Square, Christmas eve draws large 
crowds of Palestinian locals _ Christians and non-Christians alike 
_ as well as foreign tourists. The scene resembles an open-air party, 
with pop tunes blasting on loudspeakers and vendors loudly hawking 
sweets and steaming ears of corn on the cob. At midnight, the Mass 
is shown on large television screens for what is always an overflow 
crowd outside in the square. On the outskirts of Bethlehem, quieter 
observances are staged at Shepherd's Field, near the place where the 
Bible says herders first learned of the birth of Jesus. Many Palestinians 
hope that by next Christmas, they will be marking the holiday in their 
own independent state. Arafat has said he has the right to declare 
statehood in May even if terms have not yet been negotiated with Israel. 
Israel has indicated it would respond harshly to any such declaration, 
perhaps by annexing parts of the West Bank. Israel has demanded that 
Arafat renounce any intention to make a unilateral claim of statehood, 
which the Palestinians have refused to do. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>