<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981224.0145 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Relations with the Palestinians are crumbling and an agreement not 
to harm civilians along the Lebanese border is collapsing _ just as 
Israel goes to elections over how to shape its security into the next 
century. Reflecting widespread security concerns, a bevy of retired 
generals are among the candidates for prime minister. And each seems 
to have different ideas about bringing peace to the country. On Wednesday, 
Lebanese guerrillas showered towns on Israel's northern border with 
Katyusha rockets, retaliation for an Israeli air raid a day earlier 
that killed a woman and six of her seven children. Israel vowed further 
retaliation. In the Gaza Strip, meanwhile, Palestinian authorities 
released the spiritual leader of Hamas, two months after placing him 
under house arrest when a member of the militant Islamic movement 
attempted to blow up a schoolbus full of Israeli children. Israel 
accused its Palestinian partners and Lebanese enemies of violating 
agreements. Government spokesman Moshe Fogel said the Palestinians 
showed bad faith by releasing Sheik Ahmed Yassin. Yasser Arafat's 
government has ``conducted a high-profile policy of ostensibly taking 
actions against Hamas ... but in reality, quietly acquiescing to Hamas 
activities,'' he said. Palestinian leaders are frustrated with a slowdown 
in Israel's fulfillment of the peace accords reached in Wye River, 
Maryland, in October, and have said they will not meet any new Israeli 
demands. Israel has frozen a number of its Wye commitments, including 
a small pullback from the West Bank, accusing the Palestinians of 
failing to contain anti-Israel violence. Yassin, frail and confined 
to a wheelchair, said his release showed that his movement _ which 
calls for the destruction of Israel _ had triumphed over Wye. `Today, 
after the sound of Wye has become inaudible, it is inevitable that 
other voices will be heard,'' Yassin told reporters after followers 
greeted him with kisses. In the north, Israel accused the Hezbollah 
guerrilla movement of breaking a two-year-old agreement to avoid attacks 
on civilians. The Lebanese guerrillas countered that Israel had broken 
the agreement with the deadly air raid on Tuesday. In Baalbek, Lebanon, 
hundreds of mourners gathered Wednesday for the funeral of Nada Othman 
and her children, aged 2 to 13. ``Murderers must pay the price of 
their crimes,'' Hezbollah said. Israeli chief-of-staff Lt. Gen. Shaul 
Mofaz expressed his regrets and said the attack on the family home 
was the result of pilot error. The target had been a Hezbollah radio 
transmitter. He said Hezbollah's retaliatory rocket attack was inexcusable. 
``We reserve the right to decide when and where we will respond,'' 
Mofaz said. The rockets struck early Wednesday just as Israeli schoolchildren 
were emerging from bomb shelters, where families had spent the night 
in anticipation of an attack. Sixteen people suffered light to moderate 
injuries. The Katyusha attacks and Yassin's release came two days 
after Israel's parliament voted to hold elections more than a year 
ahead of schedule. The early elections, expected by April, were prompted 
by widespread opposition to Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu. Hard-liners 
in his governing coalition are angry with his Wye concessions to Palestinians, 
while the dovish opposition says Netanyahu is scuttling the agreement 
with his demands of the Palestinians. On Wednesday, Lebanon became 
an election issue as well. Dovish legislators revived their claim 
that Israel's occupation in southern Lebanon _ meant to protect northern 
villages _ is counterproductive. ``Staying there is a trap and, unfortunately, 
a death trap,'' said Labor legislator Yossi Beilin. ``Leaving there 
gives us a chance.'' No less than three potential candidates toured 
northern border towns Wednesday in their capacities as ministers in 
the outgoing government _ but looking a lot more like campaigners. 
``We can't let this pass quietly,'' Netanyahu told residents of Kiryat 
Shemona. ``We will react.'' Also touring were Defense Minister Yitzhak 
Mordechai, who is likely to challenge Netanyahu within their Likud 
Party, and Agriculture Minister Rafael Eitan, who is likely to run 
for prime minister as head of a small rightist party. Mordechai and 
Eitan are former generals _ as are Netanyahu's two likeliest challengers 
from the left: Labor Party leader Ehud Barak and Amnon Lipkin-Shahak, 
a former military chief who formally retired from the army on Thursday 
and announced his intention to enter politics. Shahak is, 29th graf 
pvs. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>