<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981224.0802 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Yasser Arafat's helicopter landed in Bethlehem on Christmas Eve _ 
delayed by a manhunt for a Palestinian fugitive but still in time 
for celebrations in the town of Jesus' birth. Troubles intruded on 
holiday celebrations elsewhere in the world, too, with refugees of 
Hurricane Mitch finding Christmas spirit hard to come by and Christians 
in Indonesia shaken by attacks on churches. Still, the sacred business 
of celebration took precedence for many Christians. At the Vatican, 
Pope John Paul II celebrated this Christmas with his mind on the next 
one, looking ahead eagerly to the opening of the jubilee year that 
will launch Christianity's third millennium. John Paul delivered his 
Christmas Eve Mass homily from St. Peter's Basilica. From there, on 
Dec. 24, 1999, the pope will open 2000 celebrations with the traditional 
jubilee-year opening of the basilica's usually closed main doors. 
``My thoughts already turn to Christmas next year, when, God willing, 
I shall inaugurate the great jubilee with the opening of the holy 
door,'' John Paul said in an advance text of his speech. Even the 
dragnet in the town of Jesus' birth could not dampen festivities. 
Boy Scout bagpipe bands marched throughout the day, and crowds of 
well-wishers _ along with mounted Palestinian police _ greeted the 
Latin patriarch, Michel Sabbah. As soon as darkness fell, the snap 
and sparkle of firecrackers filled Manger Square _ despite pleas by 
Mayor Hanna J. Nasser, who says such displays are inappropriate at 
Christmas. Bethlehem was handed from Israeli to Palestinian rule just 
before Christmas 1995, and the fireworks were a celebration of independence. 
Heather Taylor, a 25-year-old teacher from Winnsboro, Texas, said 
she didn't mind the intrusion: ``I'm here to be near to the place 
of the person I love, the Savior I love.'' Decorum came later in the 
evening with Midnight Mass in the Church of St. Katherine, next to 
the fourth-century Church of the Nativity that was built on the traditional 
birthplace of Jesus. A 10-foot by 10-foot (3 meter by 3 meter) television 
screen was set up for the overflow. Sabbah fanned incense over the 
altar, and led a service that included prayers in Arabic, English 
and Latin. He delivered a sharply political mass, alluding to Israel 
as the ``oppressor'' and praying for the release of Palestinian prisoners 
in Israeli jails. Sabbah also prayed for the ``people of Iraq,'' days 
after a U.S.-British bombardment of that country. The nationalist 
tone of previous Christmases in a Bethlehem under Palestinian authority 
has been played down: Instead of the 2-story-high portrait Arafat 
of earlier years, smaller depictions of the Palestinian leader were 
hanging from streamers over Manger Square. A manhunt for Jamil Jadala, 
a Bethlehem native accused of involvement in the October killings 
of two Israelis, was still under way when Arafat arrived in Bethlehem 
early Thursday evening. Arafat is under pressure from Israel to contain 
political violence, and Jadala's escape from a Nablus jail earlier 
this week has embarrassed him. Istanbul's largest Roman Catholic Church 
called off Christmas Eve midnight Mass, citing security concerns due 
to strong anti-Italian sentiment over Italy's harboring of a Kurdish 
rebel. In the Gulf, some 72 planes, including 46 fighter jets, were 
chained down Thursday as a giant U.S. aircraft carrier dropped anchor 
to prepare for Christmas celebrations. Tensions intruded into Christmas 
celebrations elsewhere in the world, but festivities were not lost: 
_In Jakarta, Indonesia's Christian leaders appealed for racial and 
religious harmony following recent attacks by Muslim mobs on Christian 
churches. Rising social and religious tension has rocked a nation 
struggling through its worst economic crisis in three decades. _In 
the Kuwaiti desert, 1,000 U.S. Marines in the region to meet any Iraqi 
threat, tried to make the best of Christmas Eve in the desert. Cpl. 
Robert Katz of New Rochelle, New York, said Christmas was about being 
with the people dearest to your heart, and ``we're all friends and 
family here.'' _On the others side of the Kuwait-Iraq border, President 
Saddam Hussein delivered a Christmas message, saying recent U.S. and 
British airstrikes on Iraq violated the teachings of Jesus. He called 
on all believers to ``face up to these criminals.'' _In some Central 
American towns, Hurricane Mitch wiped out the holiday entirely. ``What 
Christmas?'' asked Gregorio Sanchez, who lives with his wife and five 
children in a dirt-floor shelter of plastic in Posoltega, Nicaragua, 
alongside hundreds of other refugees. _In Havana, however, Cubans 
crowded markets to buy pork roasts and other traditional foods for 
a Christmas made especially festive by the recent reinstatement of 
Dec. 25 as a permanent holiday. _In Japan, it was business as usual 
for most people. Christmas is a secular, largely commercial event 
and not a national holiday in Japan, where about 1 percent of the 
country's 125 million people are Christians. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>