<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981224.1830.0075 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening on this Christmas eve 1998. One that's been marked by 
weather-related travel nightmares for millions trying to make it home 
for the holiday, as well as all the last-minute shoppers cramming 
the malls. It is much more serene tonight. And already Christmas in 
Rome, where Pope John Paul II is celebrating midnight mass. But here 
at home, it has been rough going for holiday travelers all over the 
country. Two big storms have brought snow and freezing rain from Texas 
to the mid-atlantic coast and to the pacific northwest. There are 
major airport delays from Dallas to Memphis. And weather may also 
be a factor in a terrible accident in New Jersey. We begin tonight 
with NBC's Kelly O'Donnell. a New York tour bus heading for a gambling 
holiday in Atlantic City swerved, skidded and slammed through a guardrail 
in New Jersey about 20 miles south of Manhattan. Of the 22 passengers 
on board, at least eight dead. All the rest injured. Some trapped 
for several hours in mangled wreckage. Rescue workers held sheets 
to shield victims from onlookers. The cause of the crash unknown but 
a fresh, two-inch snowfall and icy conditions could be to blame. We 
have one witness who observed the bus through her rearview mirror. 
She said it began to swerve, then it disappeared. Across the country 
harsh weather leads to frightening but less serious mishaps. Heavy, 
wet snow in Spokane slows traffic to a crawl. Providence, Rhode Island 
-- five inches of snow a Delta flight slips off the runway early this 
morning, a jolt and quick exit for 132 passengers. At many airports, 
delays up to several hours. Traveling pets won't be home for Christmas. 
Some airlines refuse to fly animals, unable to guarantee pets won't 
freeze while waiting to be loaded outside. Those going by road stuck, 
too. At the Greyhound station in Dallas, overflow crowds and aggravating 
delays. Frustrating Christmas eve. The bite of subfreezing cold much 
more than a holiday hassle at farms in California's central valley. 
A year of work wiped out. Huge citrus crop losses more than a $500 
million. It's tough to get this type of blow right before Christmas. 
It kind of takes the edge off everything. My family has canceled its 
normal Christmas eve ceremony. Gary caviglia hasn't slept in five 
nights, trying to salvage his family's 120 acres of orange trees. 
You get kind of a slushy mixture. California supplies 80% of the country's 
fresh oranges, so wherever you live, expect to pay more. Prices are 
predicted to double. So for many around the nation tonight, dreams 
of a white Christmas more maddening than memorable. Kelly O'Donnell, 
NBC news, Los Angeles. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>