<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981224.1830.0968 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
NBC news "in depth" tonight -- one of this country's highest profile 
unsolved mysteries, the murder of Jonbenet Ramsey, killed two years 
ago saturday inside her family's house in Boulder, Colorado. And despite 
two years of police work, a grand jury investigation and intense media 
scrutiny, no one has been arrested. why? Our "in depth" report tonight 
from NBC's Dan abrams. Christmastime in the Rockies, the ornaments, 
the trees, the mountains. But these days also Mark an anniversary 
many in Boulder would rather forget. Two years ago, on the day after 
Christmas, 6-year-old Jonbenet Ramsey's beaten and strangled body 
was found in her family's basement. And now as the murder mystery 
enters its third year with no arrests, many are asking, why is it 
taking so long to find the killer? Prosecutor Bob grant is assisting 
the investigation. We have a dead girl here. If there was sufficient 
direct evidence to bring this case to the bar of justice, it would 
have been done by now. It's been slow going from the start. In September, 
20 months after Jonbenet's death, a Boulder grand jury finally began 
hearing evidence, meeting, at most, twice a week. And now, a five-week 
Christmas break. Boulder is a very laid back community. They don't 
rush. What is happening in the grand jury is secret, but criminal 
defense attorney Larry posner says it is clear who is the focus. The 
prosecutors are saying, "here is our case against the ramseys. Do 
you buy it or do you not?" And even the police and prosecutors have 
been divided about the case against the ramseys. This past year, one 
Boulder police detective resigned, saying the prosecutors were too 
soft on Jonbenet's parents, while a district attorney's investigator 
resigned, claiming they were unfairly targeted. So what physical evidence 
potentially links the ramseys to the crime? Police still believe a 
ransom note found in the home could be critical. Patsy Ramsey has 
not been excluded as the author of that note. Other evidence -- fibers 
from duct tape found on Jonbenet's mouth could have come from clothing 
worn by Patsy Ramsey. On the other hand, there is some evidence investigators 
haven't matched to anyone in the house, including DNA particles found 
under Jonbenet's fingernails, DNA possibly from more than one source 
found in her underwear and a palm and shoe print found in the basement. 
That evidence could support the ramseys, who say an intruder was responsible. 
In some circumstantial cases, there is evidence that can point in 
many different directions. And there is a complex picture that can 
be interpreted differently by different people. Whatever the interpretation, 
everyone here hopes by next christmas, there will be no more mystery 
to Jonbenet's murder. Dan abrams, NBC news, Boulder. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>