<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981224.0278 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When Fernando Sarabia Blanco travels around Europe these days, he 
totes home, besides souvenirs and memories of tasty meals and good 
hotels, piles of useless change. For when European banks exchange 
one currency for another, they rarely accept coins, only notes. ``I've 
got boxes of coins from every European country,'' he said. ``It's 
very annoying.'' Sarabia Blanco, 52, an executive at Europa Metalli, 
a metals trading group, says he is not the sort of person who will 
``run after every novelty.'' Yet, come January, when 11 European countries 
_ Italy, Germany, France, Belgium, the Netherlands, Luxembourg, Austria, 
Spain, Portugal, Ireland and Finland _ have a single common currency, 
Sarabia Blanco says he will be in the front ranks of those who will 
use the euro. True, euro coins and notes will not be available until 
2002, so European pockets will continue to jingle with German marks 
(a euro is worth nearly 2 marks), French francs (6.6 a euro) and Italian 
lire (1,945 a euro). But Sarabia Blanco's bank account will be denominated 
in euros, and the Diners Club and Visa cards he carries will be payable 
in euros. His phone bill from Telecom Italia, the national carrier, 
is already denominated in both lire and euros, and monthly statements 
from Banco Ambrosiano Veneto, where he has his account, are likewise. 
Indeed, many Europeans are eager to use the euro _ now worth $1.17 
_ and expect to see benefits in cost and efficiency in travel and 
personal finance as a result. By one estimate, about 35 million Europeans 
use several currencies on a daily basis, and more than a quarter of 
the 372 million people in the 15-nation European Union travel each 
year, for business or pleasure, to another European country. ``These 
constituencies,'' said David Hopkins, manager of the euro program 
at General Motors Corp.'s European unit, ``will readily embrace the 
euro as a form of payment.'' According to a Louis Harris poll in six 
euro countries in November, 58 percent of Europeans expect the single 
currency to have a positive effect on their daily lives. The survey, 
of 2,535 people in Germany, France, Italy, Belgium, Spain and Portugal, 
found that 52 percent thought they were sufficiently well informed 
about the changes that faced them. Purchases in euros will be possible 
from the start. Auto-rental companies, like Avis and Hertz, will accept 
euros as well as national currencies come January, and automakers, 
like General Motors, will list prices in both forms. And when Europeans 
travel, if they watch their costs, they will pay as much of their 
way as possible without using cash. Banks that change euros for local 
currencies will continue to charge a fee to do so, so to save, experts 
say that Europeans like Sarabia Blanco will desert cash in favor of 
credit cards. ``Now, taxis in Brussels take credit cards, and highway 
tolls are paid that way in Spain,'' Sarabia Blanco said. ``Until now, 
the more you paid cash, the more the banks earned.'' Of course, not 
all Europeans are in step with business executives like Sarabia Blanco. 
Among the elderly, and in the rural population, those who rely primarily 
on cash and do not use banks much will be slow to feel the euro's 
impact. Fulvio Loffredo, 31, a textbook publisher from Naples, is 
skeptical. He intends to list prices in euros, he said, but he added: 
``I think we're a bit ahead of our times. In reality, I don't believe 
people will be buying schoolbooks in euros for a while.'' Fabio Vanzi, 
head of private banking at Banco Ambrosiano Veneto, says he expects 
customers to divide into two categories: ``those who've already accepted 
the euro for its advantages and don't resist, and those who are anchored 
in the old system.'' Just how fast Europeans begin using euros depends 
in part on how soon their employers begin doing so. Europa Metalli, 
where Sarabia Blanco works, will move quickly to embrace the euro, 
unifying for example its copper-purchasing business throughout Europe; 
he expects to be paid his salary in euros sometime next year. Enrico 
Carone, however, has no idea when his employer, the Italian government, 
will do so. While Sarabia Blanco's salary is deposited directly into 
his bank account, making a euro transfer simple, Carone, 56, an adviser 
to the foreign affairs committee of the Italian Parliament, is handed 
a monthly paycheck. The government in Rome, like governments elsewhere 
in Europe, says it will not be prepared to operate in euros until 
2002. Still, Carone was an early enthusiast of a single currency. 
In 1995, he worked as a civil servant at European Union headquarters 
in Brussels, tendering contracts from companies in East European countries, 
like Poland, that were denominated in European Currency Units. Since 
it was created in 1979 as a basket or weighted combination of 12 European 
currencies, the ECU has spawned a commercial paper market, as well 
as personal checks, credit cards and even bank accounts and bank loans 
in ECUs. In countries with high inflation and volatile currencies, 
like Italy, banks often counseled customers to use European Currency 
Units, and Carone did so, opening an ECU account where he worked, 
at a Brussels branch of Paribas, the French financial services group. 
But Italians who had taken out loans in ECUs were badly burned in 
1992, when the lira collapsed, losing 30 percent of its value against 
other other basket currencies, because they had to repay their debts 
in lire. Some renegotiated mortgages; others sold their homes to pay 
back their debts. By 1996, the lire-ECU exchange rate had stabilized, 
ECU borrowing rates were a fraction of those for lire, and Carone 
said friends were financing homes and other large purchases with European 
Currency Units. The single currency, in his view, has already brought 
benefits, not so much from the euro itself as from the financial environment 
its introduction is creating. The fiscal austerity needed to qualify 
countries for the euro pushed down interest rates, making borrowing 
easier; currency-exchanging fees will be avoidable. To purchase a 
home for his son, Carone is negotiating a bank mortgage. In 1984, 
when Sarabia Blanco bought a house, Italian mortgage rates were 13 
percent; now, Carone will pay about a third of that. When European 
central banks cut their lending rates early this month, the mortgage 
rate dropped a further half-point, Carone said. Moreover, the need 
to get government accounts in order for the euro forced many countries, 
including Italy, to sell nationalized industries, and newly privatized 
phone companies, airlines and utilities, no longer coddled by public 
ownership, have cut costs and reduced prices to hang onto customers. 
Where he banks, Carone may convert his lira account for use with both 
lire and euros, or open a new account in euros alone. Carone thinks 
that the euro will push people to use noncash forms of payment. About 
80 percent of European commerce is now handled that way, according 
to experts, and many payments are made by bank-to-bank transfers. 
And while many Americans still pay monthly gas, electric and credit 
card bills by check, Europeans have long used automatic bank transfers, 
and such noncash payment activity will likely increase. If there are 
benefits to be reaped from use of the euro, however, there is also 
a price to pay, Carone said. For one thing, merchants, by rounding 
off prices when converting from local currencies to euros, will be 
tempted to charge more for their goods, he said. But most Europeans 
are not yet familiar with price listings in euros. In countries like 
Italy and Belgium the adjustment will be greatest, since their money 
has long done without decimals. But the euro, like the dollar, will 
be divided into 100 cents, and a Roman who subscribes to a daily paper, 
and pays his bill in euros, will find himself paying, instead of 1,500 
lire per paper, about 80 euro cents, a mere 8/10 of a euro. Consumers 
may well be confused. Still, Sarabia Blanco says that the euro's smaller, 
more manageable numbers can only allow greater clarity in the long 
run. In Italy, where the dollar now trades around 1,667 lire, government 
budgets run into the trillions of lire _ numbers that few can meaningfully 
digest. ``They're mastodonic,'' he said. Sarabia Blanco says his next 
step is to have a look at his investment portfolio with a view to 
widening the spread of his investments across Europe. In January, 
securities markets in the 11 participating countries will denominate 
stocks and bonds in euros, enabling him to compare at a glance securities 
prices throughout Europe. And indeed throughout Italy, long lines 
formed in recent weeks in banks and at postal savings windows as Italians 
reshuffled their portfolios. That was because Italian government bonds 
now traded in minimum lots of five million lire, or $3,000, must be 
realigned into new lots of 1,000 euros, or $1,170. Investors may either 
hold onto the remaining amounts until maturity, sell securities or 
make additional purchases to round off the amounts. Gianfranco Altafin, 
branch manager at Banco Ambrosiano Veneto, said it was a time for 
bankers to be close to their customers. ``It's a period of great attention 
to customer service,'' he said. Since June, his employees have been 
taking courses to assist customers with the euro starting Monday morning, 
Jan. 4, when the new currency will in practical terms be introduced. 
``No one's allowed to take off,'' he said, ``on the second and third 
of January.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>