<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981224.0171 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The people who walked in darkness have seen a great light. _Isaiah 
9:2 NEW YORK _ After hearing this scriptural reading on a recent Sunday 
morning, the people of Marble Collegiate Church on Fifth Avenue watched 
and applauded as a dark veil dropped to the floor, revealing glacier-blue 
skies and crimson tongues of fire in a shimmering new 22-foot-high 
stained-glass window. ``Like painting in the air with colored light,'' 
the donor of the window, Robert Ryneveld, told the congregation. And 
the theme of luminousness suffused the service, from the introit (``Arise, 
Shine'') to the closing hymn (``I Want to Walk as a Child of the Light''). 
It is not every day that a stained-glass window is installed in a 
house of worship in New York. At Marble Collegiate, it is barely every 
century. The last one, by Louis Comfort Tiffany, was dedicated in 
1901. But there is much newly brilliant glass to admire around the 
city. Restoration projects have reclaimed dozens of darkened and damaged 
windows by masters like Tiffany, at Congregation Shearith Israel on 
the Upper West Side; John La Farge, at Judson Memorial Church in Greenwich 
Village, and William Jay Bolton, at the Church of St. Ann and the 
Holy Trinity in Brooklyn Heights. St. Bartholomew's Episcopal Church 
on Park Avenue is restoring eight windows made in northern France 
in the late 16th century, long before there was a St. Bartholomew's 
(or an Episcopal Church, for that matter). Two of the windows, which 
were given to the church in 1953 and placed in the auditorium, are 
on display in the Gallery at the American Bible Society, Broadway 
and 61st Street, as part of the exhibition ``Glory in Glass: Stained 
Glass in the United States,'' which runs until Feb. 16. And what better 
time to appreciate stained-glass windows than in winter? They are 
a tonic for December's monochrome, with luscious palettes that wash 
dark corners in glowing strokes of light, their hues blending like 
a medley of wildflower fragrance. At noon, the cavernous Gothic nave 
of St. Ann and the Holy Trinity on Montague Street begins to sparkle. 
Rays from the clerestory windows stipple the fruits and vines of the 
column capitals with purples, greens and golds. In a clearing at the 
west end of this flamboyant architectural forest is a Mediterranean-blue 
sky visible in the tracery web atop the 40-foot-high chancel window, 
back after a four-year restoration. Across the East River, as the 
sun hits the east side of the Judson Church on Washington Square South, 
certain colors in La Farge's profusion of opalescent glass seem to 
leap to the foreground, like French horns slicing through the sound 
of a symphony orchestra. At one moment, it is the gold on the edge 
of the Scriptures held by St. Anthony. At another, it is the scarlet 
in the legs of St. George, whose limbs are rendered as intricately 
as in an anatomical diagram. A counterpoint to the dazzle is the grape-and-violet 
robe of St. Peter, so lush in the layering of purples that it looks 
as if it had been cut from velour rather than glass. Judson's windows, 
installed from 1892 to 1915, are together in place for the first time 
in a decade. Weakened and buckling, they had been removed one by one 
and stored. The church simply did not have the $1 million needed to 
restore them. But in 1994 Judson was bequeathed $300,000 on the death 
of its administrator, Arlene Carmen. The senior minister, the Rev. 
Peter Laarman, proposed using the money as a down payment toward restoration. 
``We owe it to the city and our successors to bring those windows 
back,'' he said. ``They're too good to have in the basement in crates.'' 
Support came from the Henry Luce, Vincent Astor and Paul and Klara 
Porzelt foundations. The New York Landmarks Conservancy gave $7,500 
as part of its Sacred Sites Program, which has made 44 grants totaling 
$154,125 to stained-glass projects around the state. ``There are lots 
of things that need fixing in churches,'' said Peg Breen, the conservancy 
president, ``but stained glass really resonates with people.'' It 
is that resonance that appealed to Laarman. ``I never cast this project 
as prettifying,'' he said. ``I cast it in terms of the human spirit. 
I think the expansive spirit of the creators of this space can touch 
people in lots of contexts apart from worship.'' Saturday, for instance, 
La Farge's Renaissance-style saints will gaze down on a Kwanzaa celebration 
by gay and lesbian African-Americans. Judson was intended from its 
origin as a place with a social mission. But it is also a glorious 
place, designed by Stanford White and ornamented by La Farge, who 
thought of opalescent windows as a ``form of translucent mosaic.'' 
La Farge produced 15-foot-high windows resembling arched niches, with 
individual saints framed by pilasters. In a smaller round window is 
an ``Angel in Adoration,'' said to have been modeled on La Farge's 
mistress, Mary Whitney Lawrence. The last windows to be restored returned 
in October from the Cummings Studio in North Adams, Mass. The vice 
president of the studio, Julie L. Sloan, said relinquishing the La 
Farge glass was like sending a child to college. ``As proud as you 
are, there's a parting that's very sad,'' she said. ``They were wonderful 
windows to work with, and we'll miss them.'' After laboring eight 
years on the Bolton windows in Brooklyn, David Fraser, director of 
operations and senior stained-glass conservator at the St. Ann Center 
for Restoration and the Arts, says he feels that same sense of kinship. 
``He used a palette of glass colors as you would in oil painting,'' 
Fraser said. ``But glass is very brittle, and you're applying materials 
to it to control the light. It makes oil painting and watercolors 
seem like a snap. Bolton was fearless. He must have been a very spiritual 
person.'' Fraser also found a human side to Bolton at the summit of 
the chancel window, beyond detection by the unaided eye. ``When we 
got to the top, there was an unbelievably voluptuous nude female figure 
of an angel playing a harp,'' he said. ``It was one of the most intimate 
moments I had with Bolton.'' William Bolton and his brother, John, 
were hired in 1844 to produce all 60 windows for the Church of the 
Holy Trinity, as it was then called, designed by Minard Lafever. The 
extraordinary ensemble was the first major stained-glass commission 
in the United States, said Virginia Chieffo Raguin, director of the 
Census of Stained Glass Windows in America. ``The Baptism of Christ,'' 
now being restored, exemplifies Bolton's work: a composition that 
breaks across the frames of the windows, with powerful figures, an 
exquisite rendering of detail and the unorthodox use of opaque areas 
to highlight adjacent colors. It took the Boltons four years to make 
and install the windows. To date, it has taken 18 years to restore 
them. ``We really feel as if we have a mission,'' said Susan Feldman, 
the executive director of the St. Ann Center. The center has struggled 
to finance the $3.5 million project; indeed, it still must raise $1 
million to complete the north windows. It even faced an attempted 
eviction in 1995 by the rector. Church leaders worried that the project 
was placing esthetics above the salvation of souls. That can be a 
tough call: spending thousands of dollars on windows and other architectural 
features when religious and social programs also beg for scarce resources. 
But the Rev. John A. Kamas, pastor of St. Jean Baptiste, a Roman Catholic 
church on Lexington Avenue, said he had no trouble raising $500,000 
from parishioners to restore windows made by the Lorin studio of Chartres, 
France, between 1914 and 1919. The work was done by Sunlites Stained 
Glass of Rockaway Park, Queens. Congregation Shearith Israel on Central 
Park West, also known as the Spanish and Portuguese Synagogue, raised 
more than $300,000 to restore its Tiffany windows, which had buckled 
so badly in the century since installation that pieces of glass were 
popping out. ``Bricks and mortar are not separate from the mission 
of the congregation,'' said Rabbi Marc D. Angel. ``When you come into 
the synagogue, you realize you're in the presence of God. You feel 
the span of the centuries.'' The east windows, above the ark, are 
buttery yellow under the morning sun after restoration by the Clerkin 
Higgins Stained Glass studio in Williamsburg, Brooklyn. ``It was as 
if somebody had turned the lights back on,'' said Michael Katz, the 
chairman of the building and grounds committee. Some members even 
complained good-naturedly that the sanctuary was so bright they needed 
sunglasses, said Dr. Alan M. Singer, the executive director of the 
synagogue. It was not darkness that bothered Ryneveld, a member of 
the Marble Church on Fifth Avenue. Rather, as he stared at the south 
wall during services, he thought it would be nice if the diamond-patterned 
window over the minister's shoulder were pictorial. The window was 
made by the 141-year-old Lamb Studios of Briarcliff Manor, N.Y., with 
pieces of German and Polish glass that were painted by Roy Coomber 
of Bristol, England, and shipped to the United States for assembly. 
Scenes include the Crucifixion and the Pentecost, in which ``tongues 
as of fire'' rest upon the heads of the disciples. At the base of 
this group is a distinctly modern-looking trio of children: one black, 
one Asian, one white. ``This was an opportunity to reflect on what 
we're about as a church,'' said Dr. Edwin G. Mulder, retired general 
secretary of the Reformed Church in America and director of the capital 
campaign at Marble. ``Each panel says something about who we are. 
The Pentecost one says we are a diverse community in the congregation 
itself, every color and race, young people, old people.'' The stained-glass 
windows mentioned in the article _ only a sampling of those that have 
been recently installed or restored in New York City _ can be seen 
at these times: CHURCH OF ST. ANN AND THE HOLY TRINITY (Episcopal), 
Montague and Clinton streets, Brooklyn Heights. The church is open 
from noon to 2 p.m., Tuesdays and Thursdays. Tours of the church and 
stained-glass workshop can be arranged by calling (718) 834-8794, 
extension 16. CHURCH OF ST. JEAN BAPTISTE (Roman Catholic), Lexington 
Avenue and East 76th Street. The church is open from 7 a.m. to 6:30 
p.m., seven days a week. CONGREGATION SHEARITH ISRAEL, Central Park 
West and West 70th Street. A visit can be arranged by calling the 
synagogue office, (212) 873-0300. JUDSON MEMORIAL CHURCH (American 
Baptist and United Church of Christ), Washington Square South and 
Thompson Street, Greenwich Village. Beginning in January, the church 
will be open from noon to 4 p.m. on Wednesdays; at other times by 
appointment: (212) 477-0351. MARBLE COLLEGIATE CHURCH (Reformed Church 
in America), Fifth Avenue and 29th Street. The church is open from 
8 a.m. to 5 p.m. on weekdays. Visitors should come to 3 W. 29th St. 
and will be escorted. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>