<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981224.0285 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
If Europe worked in line with economic theory, Wolfgang Marschall 
would probably be scared to death about the euro. But he isn't, and 
his reasons illuminate much about the way Europe works in practice. 
Marschall is general manager of Auto Friesen, a sprawling car dealership 
in this small town just a few miles from the French border. The lot 
looks like any other _ colorful flags to attract attention, signs 
promoting the latest specials and hundreds of new cars on display. 
But unlike ordinary dealers, Marschall makes his profit by euro-arbitrage. 
Instead of ordering Volkswagen Passats from German factories, he buys 
them from other car dealers in Spain, Italy or Denmark. Then he imports 
them back into Germany, where he still manages to undercut standard 
dealers' prices. Earlier in December, Auto Friesen was offering a 
fully loaded Passat for 36,590 Deutsche marks _ or $22,175 _ about 
13 percent less than the price quoted by authorized dealers in Frankfurt. 
Audi's luxurious A6 Avant was on sale for 69,900 marks, or $42,363, 
about 5 percent less than the standard price. It isn't just German 
cars. Marschall also trades in Fiats, Chryslers, Hondas and most other 
brands sold in Europe. ``My best deal right now is on Jeep Grand Cherokees,'' 
he said, strolling through his lot on a snowy afternoon. ``I bought 
them in the Canary Islands, which has been having a very special offer 
on them. They're about DM 20,000 below the standard price.'' Impossible? 
Not at all. Because incomes in Spain are only about 75 percent of 
the European average, most car makers offer much lower base prices 
to Spanish dealers than those in Germany or France, forgoing profits 
to maintain market share. Marschall and other gray-market resellers 
readily exploit the price differences because there are no tariff 
barriers on cars shipped within the European Union. In Germany, gray-market 
dealers sell 300,000 cars a year; conventional dealers sell more than 
4 million. Promoters of the euro argue that the new currency will 
create ``transparency'' in prices, forcing companies to harmonize 
their prices across national borders. If so, that would take away 
the resellers' arbitrage play. But Marschall betrays little worry 
about losing his niche. ``People have known about these price differences 
for years already,'' he said. ``If the car companies equalized prices, 
we would be hurt. But I don't think they will do that, because we're 
really too small a problem for them. If they dropped their prices 
in Germany, they might take our sales. But they would lose much more 
money on all the other cars they sell.'' In fact, car company executives 
say price differences on their products across Europe have narrowed 
considerably in recent years. Nonetheless, they have remained easy 
targets for gray marketeers. Few consumers travel from France to Spain 
for cheaper perfume, but many are willing to make the trip if it means 
saving several thousand dollars on a car. ``The car industry is the 
most heavily criticized industry on this question, but it is one of 
the best behaved,'' said Wolfgang Schneider, vice president of public 
and government affairs at Ford of Europe, in Cologne. ``If you look 
at price differences within the euro zone, they are within a band 
of 10 to 15 percent, net of tax differences. That's much less than 
in most other consumer products.'' That is not always the case; a 
Ford Mondeo at Auto Friesen is about 30 percent cheaper than the standard 
dealer's price in Frankfurt. But there is evidence to support Schneider's 
view, notably in the case of Volkswagen. In recent years, VW had been 
notorious for charging far less in other European countries than in 
Germany, while systematically blocking dealers in other countries 
from selling to German re-importers. The European Commission fined 
the company more than $100 million last year for the latter practice. 
Today, Volkswagens are easier to get and the price variations are 
modest. Most VW's available at Auto Friesen are priced only slightly 
less than at authorized dealers. Still, some disparities are likely 
to remain for quite some time, because they are based on tax differences 
among European countries. In Denmark, which has an extremely high 
luxury tax on car sales, many car manufacturers lower their base prices 
to stay in the market. Re-sellers like Marschall take advantage, because 
they don't have to pay the luxury tax if they are shipping the cars 
directly to Germany. Indeed, not counting tax differences, automobile 
executives say, European car prices don't vary much more than those 
between different regions of the United States. Moreover, car executives 
acknowledge, prices will remain lower in the European Union's less-affluent 
countries until incomes catch up to their wealthier neighbors' _ assuring 
Marschall and his peers a thriving business, euro or not. ``Until 
Spanish standards of living are equal to those in the rest of Europe,'' 
said Schneider of Ford, ``there will be price differences.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>