<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981224.0263 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The bulldozers have reopened the highway below her house in the village 
of Balin, clearing away tons of earth that slid down the mountain 
during a hurricane in November, plowing under houses, gardens, animals 
and 17 human beings. The growling machines have smoothed over the 
ugly gash in the earth and molded a new dirt road. Trucks rumble through 
Leila Marina Morales' life again, linking the country's interior to 
the sea, as they always did before. But now there is a hole in the 
universe where her family once was. ``For me it seems as if everything 
is a dream, as if my family has gone on a trip and will return,'' 
Ms. Marina Morales, 27, a housewife, said peering up at the sheered 
mountain that swallowed her mother and three sisters on Nov. 2. ``But 
at the same time I must accept that they died.'' Two months after 
the vast storm called Mitch mauled this hilly and poor country in 
late October, Hondurans like Ms. Marina Morales are still trying to 
come to terms with the disaster and their losses, both personal and 
financial. Hurricane Mitch was the region's worst natural disaster 
this century. It left several thousand dead and hundreds of thousands 
homeless, while crippling the economies of Honduras and Nicaragua. 
By some estimates, the storm caused at least $5.4 billion in damage 
to infrastructure and crops, international lending institutions say. 
Both Nicaragua and Honduras were devastated by the storm, though Honduras 
bore the brunt, with nearly every part of the country affected, whereas 
damage in Nicaragua was concentrated in pockets. Fearing a flood of 
immigrants or a new round of instability in Central America, the United 
States has pumped about $170 million dollars in disaster relief into 
Honduras in the last seven weeks and has canceled about $40 million 
of Honduras' enormous debt. Nicaragua has received similar levels 
of aid. Tons of food and medicine have been shipped in and ferried 
to remote villages, mostly by U.S. military helicopters and cargo 
planes. More than 800 U.S. military engineers have helped open roads 
and build fords across rivers where dozens of bridges were washed 
away. President Clinton has even announced he will delay deporting 
illegal Honduran immigrants from the United States. Yet Honduras _ 
one of this hemisphere's poorest countries before the storm _ still 
barely functions and will need months more of aid. Though some roads 
are passable, the country's tattered infrastructure can now be washed 
away by one hard rainfall, U.S. military officers here say, and it 
will take billions of dollars to repair the bridges and roads. Thousands 
of people are still trying to dig out from under mud that buried riverside 
towns of hard-hit regions. Thousands of others are camping in makeshift 
tents or living in temporary shelters, relying on handouts from the 
United Nations and the Catholic Church. Many towns still have no potable 
water and their sewerage systems have been destroyed. ``We still need 
to do more,'' the U.S. housing secretary, Andrew Cuomo, said on a 
visit here this month to announce an aid package. ``You had a country 
that was just struggling to get to their feet and this was a serious 
setback.'' Even worse than the destruction of houses has been the 
loss of jobs. Uncounted thousands of farmers, factory workers and 
plantation hands have either been laid off or have lost their crops, 
poultry and livestock. Most say they have no way to make a living. 
With the economic outlook dismal at best, many younger Hondurans here 
who can obtain visas are already migrating to the United States in 
search of work. Other young people have decided to take the illegal 
route through Mexico. ``I have at least five friends who have gone 
to Mexico and are waiting there trying to get over the border into 
the United States,'' said Kevin Sarrios, 21, a cabdriver in San Pedro 
Sula. Though Sarrios has decided to stay in Honduras despite the lack 
of jobs and tourists, his wife left just after the storm's wrath for 
a six-month stint as a domestic servant in Colorado, leaving him with 
their year-old baby. Other Hondurans have fewer options. On the main 
highway outside the once-thriving town of La Lima, a banana-growing 
center in the Sula Valley in the north, hundreds of banana plantation 
workers and farmers are living in a squalid row of tents and shacks. 
On a recent rainy afternoon, children with no shirts clutched themselves 
against the chill air. Many were suffering from respiratory illnesses 
and diarrhea. Shivering in a light rain, Catarino Cortez Gomez, 35, 
reached into a pocket with his calloused hands and carefully pulled 
a notice from his former employer, Turnbull Agroindustria Asociada, 
a banana grower, to show to a visitor. Tracing the words with his 
index finger, Cortez explained that he has been laid off for at least 
four months because the storm destroyed the banana plantations. His 
two young sons huddled next to his legs. ``One has to live by the 
grace of God,'' he said, ``because we don't have anything.'' Like 
most of the refugees in this sad row on the highway, Cortez saw his 
small house sink into the mud when the floods came during the hurricane. 
The zinc roof was washed away. All his belongings were destroyed. 
He waded to higher ground with his sons on his back. He says he has 
no savings and no way to make money if the banana companies do not 
hire again. His family is living in a tent, eating beans and flour 
distributed by a Catholic charity. ``We lost everything in that house,'' 
he said. Inside the town of La Lima, city workers with backhoes and 
bulldozers were working away at the tons of mud left behind in the 
streets by the floods. Nearly everyone in this town of 75,000 wore 
heavy rubber boots to wade through the thick ugly muck still covering 
all the streets. Here and there, homeowners struggled with shovels 
to clear mud out of their houses. ``Two months after the hurricane 
and we are still trying to get the mud out,'' said Carlos Ramos, a 
64-year-old contractor, leaning on a shovel in foul-smelling muck. 
``What's bothering us the most is all the sewage that's flowing into 
the streets.'' German Henriquez, the municipal official in charge 
of public works, took a break from the cleanup efforts to tick off 
the town's woes. The floods washed away more than 175 houses, damaged 
400 others and killed at least 12 people. The waters destroyed four 
major bridges, damaged most of the roads and wrecked 80 percent of 
the sewers. Raw sewage now runs out into mud-filled streets in many 
neighborhoods. Though La Lima has received about $367,000 from the 
central government to clean up, officials here estimate it will take 
about $44 million to repair the town's infrastructure. At the same 
time, La Lima's major employers _ a subsidiary of the Chiquita Brands 
International and several smaller plantation owners _ have announced 
severe layoffs, and it will be at least a year before they rehire. 
About 700 families, many of them connected to the banana industry, 
are living in tents. ``We are destroyed financially,'' Henriquez said. 
La Lima is not alone. Several other similar-sized Honduran towns _ 
like Pespire and Choluteca _ are in the same condition. Other small 
cities on the northern coast were cut off. To reach La Ceiba, for 
instance, trucks and buses must still ford a wide fast-moving river 
and pedestrians are forced to cross on a narrow cable bridge. Dozens 
of smaller communities are also struggling to recover from vast flood 
damage with even fewer resources. One of the worst-hit villages was 
La Guacamaya, a hamlet about 20 miles west of San Pedro Sula, in the 
shadow of the mountains that mark the Sula Valley's eastern boundary. 
During the storm, a landslide in the mountains blocked the small river 
that runs through La Guacamaya and created a lake. On Thursday, Oct. 
29, the waters broke through the temporary dam and crashed down the 
mountain, flooding the town. About 82 of the town's 400 houses were 
buried to their rooftops in mud and the main bridge linking the village 
to the nearest large town, El Progreso, was washed away. Local officials 
managed to evacuate the town before the water rose too high, and no 
one was killed. This month, a team of U.S. Navy engineers from Gulfport, 
Miss., cleared away much of the mud along the village's main street 
and built fords around the destroyed bridge. But the people in La 
Guacamaya say it will be a long time before their village recovers. 
To begin with, most of the men in the town work in a nearby sugar 
plantation. The owners, having lost much of their crop, have halved 
the workers' salaries, from $30 per week to less than $15. Dozens 
of families are camped next to the wreckage of their homes. Griselda 
Flores and her husband, Jose Pinto, managed to escape the floods just 
before their three-room house was buried in mud and water. Pinto woke 
the family and carried his two youngest children on his back to higher 
ground. For the last month, the Pinto family has been living in an 
improvised shack next to what remains of their home, which now resembles 
the ruins of an archeological site. Their seven acres of land were 
stripped of corn and beans. Pinto has been laid off by the sugar plantation. 
The family is surviving on handouts from the World Food Program and 
a few clothes donated by other charities. ``We have been living without 
shoes, clothes, nothing,'' Ms. Flores said. ``Without work it's not 
possible to recoup what we have lost, but someday perhaps, we can, 
little by little.'' In a sense, the Pinto family is lucky. Houses 
can be rebuilt. For the family members of at least 3,000 people known 
to have died here and more than 2,000 reported missing, there is no 
hope of recovering the past. In Balin, the village about 50 miles 
south of San Pedro Sula where 17 people were buried in a mudslide 
on Nov. 2, many family members of the victims and their neighbors 
are talking about moving. Some say they are nervous the landslides 
may happen again. Others simply cannot bear the memory of the terrible 
night when they woke to a sound like the world ending and the screams 
of survivors half-buried in mud and rock. ``I would leave here if 
I could, but we have no place to go,'' Ms. Marina Morales said as 
her 2-year-old daughter climbed into her lap. ``We are all sad. We 
are trying to recuperate, but it's something very hard. Four members 
of my family are gone.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>