<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981224.0192 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Early on a Sunday morning almost a decade ago, I picked my way warily 
through the ruined streets of East New York, Brooklyn, bound for the 
church that would change my life. I did not know then, of course, 
how St. Paul Community Baptist Church would transform me. I knew only 
that I intended to write a book on the congregation and its pastor, 
the Rev. Johnny Ray Youngblood. I understood that I was entering this 
black Christian church as a double outsider, a white Jew. I was carrying 
a notebook, not a Bible. But what confounded St. Paul's worshipers 
most of all was that I was not observant even in my own faith. A Hasid, 
a Buddhist, a Zoroastrian _ all would have made more sense to these 
Brooklyn Baptists than I, the secular humanist. On a Sunday morning 
earlier this month, 10 hours before Hanukkah and 12 days before Christmas, 
I drove back to St. Paul. Beside me sat my rabbi, Gerald Zelizer of 
Temple Neve Shalom of Metuchen, N.J. In taking him to St. Paul, I 
was reconciling the two parts of my spiritual life. And as a practicing 
Jew, I was returning to this Christian sanctuary that had become for 
me, paradoxically, consecrated ground. The night sky was just lightening 
when Rabbi Zelizer and I pulled off the Belt Parkway and up Pennsylvania 
Avenue. The 8 a.m. service was nearly an hour away. I had planned 
to arrive early. I wanted Rabbi Zelizer to see the same East New York 
I had seen those years ago, the place where the police wore T-shirts 
emblazoned ``The Killing Fields.'' A trash fire burned under a trestle 
of the elevated line. Wild dogs prowled the rubble of the same vacant 
lots that had been there in 1989. Outside the 24-hour smokeshops shuffled 
men with wildly tufted hair and oil-smeared coats. I remembered the 
time I had inadvertently stared at one too long and he mimed shooting 
me. Then Rabbi Zelizer and I caught sight of the first gaggle of worshippers 
padding down New Lots Avenue: the little girl with braids, the father 
with shaven head and a broad-shouldered topcoat, the mother in heels 
and a wide-brimmed church hat. From my first visit to East New York 
until now, this same tableau had never failed to stir me. Every step 
that family took toward St. Paul seemed an act of will and faith. 
Improbably as ever, a traffic jam formed outside St. Paul even as 
most of New York was still snoring. The church itself had the tan 
bricks and smoked windows of a branch library. It had been built in 
the mid-1960s as a synagogue by Jews who never imagined the suddenness 
with which block busting and panic selling and street crime would 
drive them away. Some of the older members of the St. Paul congregation 
still recall playing in bingo games in the synagogue, all proceeds 
going to the building fund. ``Welcome,'' came the greetings as Rabbi 
Zelizer and I joined the line on the church sidewalk. ``Welcome back.'' 
Like anyone attending a reunion, I looked for the familiar faces, 
so many of them, like mine, grayer and more deeply lined for the passage 
of time. There they were: Melvin Heyward and Rose Stokes, Leroy Howard 
and Nell Jones. Bill Scott, a new member of the church when I first 
visited, now served on the board of elders. In place of his once close-cropped 
hair hung dreadlocks. Once inside the church, Rabbi Zelizer and I 
squeezed past tables covered with the envelopes that hundreds of members 
use for tithing: contributing to the church, by the example set in 
the Book of Numbers, one-tenth of their earnings. On the billboard 
of the main lobby hung posters for St. Paul's annual production of 
Langston Hughes' ``Black Nativity.'' And beyond a set of double doors 
sprawled the 1,200-seat sanctuary, overarched by the skylights and 
cedar beams for which I remembered the worshipers raising money. Meanwhile, 
Rabbi Zelizer and I were hurried by ushers into the minister's study. 
Youngblood was stripping off a kente-cloth vestment, soaked through 
as he had preached during the 6 a.m. service. The men knew each other 
by reputation through me, and both had also been friends of Rabbi 
Marshall Meyer of Congregation B'nai Jeshurun in Manhattan. ``I'm 
Sam's second rabbi,'' Rabbi Zelizer said, extending his hand to Youngblood. 
``Second?'' the minister asked. ``You're the first,'' Rabbi Zelizer 
explained. Then Youngblood, smiling, regarded me, back after 10 months' 
absence to this home of sorts. ``We have a saying around here,'' he 
joked deadpan, ``that when you talk about the Devil, you bring him 
around.'' I wasn't quite the Devil when I first arrived at St. Paul. 
I was just the product of my past with all its antipathy toward religion. 
My mother had grown up with observant, immigrant parents but had broken 
with them over her youthful love affair with an Italian Roman Catholic. 
My father, the child of anarchists, grew up among Jews so fiercely 
secular they held dances on Yom Kippur. As for me, my childhood experimentation 
with Judaism had ended when, two weeks before my bar mitzvah, the 
rabbi announced he would not perform the ceremony because the reception 
lunch was not sufficiently kosher. A different rabbi ultimately presided 
at the service, but my parents' critique of religion had been confirmed. 
Yet something more than a purely journalistic curiosity had brought 
me to St. Paul in 1989. I wondered what it meant to believe; I wondered 
how it might change your life. And I thought that maybe the answers 
would appear more visibly in an alien environment, that I might learn 
more about myself by looking out the window than in the mirror. When 
my wife miscarried early in my time at St. Paul, a group of church 
elders asked me to pray with them, and even in my ambivalence I dropped 
to my knees. When a group of recovered drug addicts testified to God's 
grace during one worship service, I nearly wept at the memory of a 
friend who had died of an overdose. It was as if, all through the 
three years I spent reporting and writing my book about St. Paul, 
half of my brain was thinking and half was feeling. ``God's not going 
to be done with you,'' Youngblood told me more than once, ``till you're 
a rabbi.'' I remain a long way shy of the clergy. But St. Paul showed 
me what the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. meant by the phrase ``beloved 
community'': a church that not only lifted spirits but also built 
housing, started schools, underwrote small businesses. It set a standard, 
in other words, for whatever synagogue I might attend. And it proved 
to me that feeling unworthy, far from disqualifying one for faith, 
was perhaps the prerequisite for having any. Shortly after finishing 
my book on St. Paul in late 1991, I moved to New Jersey and found 
Rabbi Zelizer's temple up the street. I proceeded to break my atheist 
father's heart by joining. But even he, when I took him to St. Paul 
one time, had to admit, ``I love that church.'' On this latest pilgrimage, 
I experienced the familiar with the revelatory power of newness, seeing 
St. Paul through Rabbi Zelizer's eyes. Not a pew was empty; the last 
arrivals stood three deep along the rear wall. When the congregation 
swayed with the power of praise-songs, of ``This Is the Place'' and 
``The Blood That Jesus Shed for Me,'' Rabbi Zelizer whispered to me, 
referring to Jewish prayer, ``It's the same as davening, the undulation.'' 
When a dance troupe of the church's teen-agers performed on the altar, 
Rabbi Zelizer leaned to me again and said, ``The exaltation, you can 
transfer that exaltation from the secular into the religious.'' As 
I would explain later to the rabbi, he was not viewing just any conventional 
black church. Youngblood had years earlier nicknamed St. Paul ``Church 
Unusual''; he even had the slogan stenciled on the church's vans. 
Nothing was more unusual on this morning than his decision to leave 
the pulpit and sit beside Rabbi Zelizer as the church's children and 
young adults paid tribute to a man named Rochester Blanks. ``Uncle 
Rocky,'' read the embroidery on the maroon cardigan that Blanks always 
wore during my time at St. Paul. ``Father Rocky'' might have been 
more accurate, for, as the church's financial director and then its 
facilities manager, he served most importantly as surrogate parent 
to scores of young people. Like so many of them, he had grown up fatherless 
himself. All though the testimonial to Blanks, who was retiring to 
North Carolina, Youngblood provided a running commentary to Rabbi 
Zelizer. That girl dancing has a drug-addicted mother. That boy just 
quit a gang. That young mother had a baby out of wedlock; there were 
folks who wanted her kicked out of church. ``This is sacred work,'' 
I overhead the rabbi tell the minister. Himself awed by the testimonial 
to Blanks, Youngblood decided not even to deliver a sermon. He returned 
to the pulpit only briefly toward the end of the service to speak 
of a passage from the Gospel of John. It tells of the Apostles in 
a moment of doubt, asking Jesus to show them God, as if their leader's 
miracles had not offered proof enough. ``How often do we fail to see 
the God in each other?'' Youngblood asked, mindful of Rochester Blanks 
and so many other obscure heroes in his flock. ``Stop looking up for 
God. Start looking down. Start looking around. And there's a better 
chance you'll see God.'' When the service heaved its last prayer, 
more than three hours after it had begun, Rabbi Zelizer and I headed 
back to the car and New Jersey. As I steered, he talked about resurrection. 
What he had seen was resurrection, he said, the kind of literal, physical 
resurrection that the sages of the Talmud said the Messiah would bring. 
There was no Messiah, needless to say, in East New York, least of 
all for two Jews. Neither of us could believe in Jesus as anything 
more than human. ``But there's a way,'' Rabbi Zelizer said of St. 
Paul's service, ``you can take the spirituality without the theology.'' 
And I realized right then that my rabbi had expressed just how Youngblood's 
church had blessed me. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>