<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981224.0256 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A brutal, four-day freeze has destroyed more than a third of California's 
annual citrus crop, inflicting upwards of a half-billion dollars in 
damage and raising the prospect of tripled orange prices in supermarkets 
by next week. Throughout the Golden State, cold, dry air from the 
Gulf of Alaska sent temperatures below freezing beginning Monday, 
with readings in the high teens and low 20s in the agriculturally 
rich Central Valley early Thursday _ the worst cold spell since a 
10-day freeze in 1990. Farmers frantically ran wind and irrigation 
machines overnight, but officials pronounced the lemon crop a near-total 
loss in the valley, and said perhaps half of the state's orange crop 
was lost as well. ``This should be a time of joy, but it's been a 
bitter disappointment,'' Bob Krauter, a spokesman for the California 
Farm Bureau in Sacramento, the state's largest agricultural organization, 
said of the Christmas-week freeze. ``We've had more than our share 
of challenges from Mother Nature this year, with El Nino early on 
bringing excessive moisture and cold weather that delayed planting 
and increased pest infestation and disease problems.'' Indeed, agricultural 
officials said, the late planting meant that more of the state's navel 
orange crop remained on trees than usual this week and thus susceptible 
to freezing. California grows about 80 percent of the nation's oranges 
eaten as fruit, and 90 percent of the lemons, and wholesalers said 
the retail prices of oranges could triple in the next few days. Lemon 
prices are likely to rise as well. (Prices of frozen orange juice 
will probably not be greatly affected, because most juice oranges 
are produced in Florida.) In some California markets, wholesalers 
reported that the price of navel oranges had gone from 35 cents a 
pound Tuesday to 90 cents a pound Wednesday. The citrus industry accounts 
for well over $1 billion of the state's $27 billion agricultural output. 
But from the Central Coast to the inland desert Imperial Valley, the 
cold also threatened crops from avocados to strawberries and celery. 
The freeze hit especially hard in the towns up and down the San Joaquin 
Valley, which took years to recover from the last big freeze and where 
some counties already have unemployment rates of upwards of 15 percent, 
three times the national average. Officials were preparing to seek 
state and federal disaster aid next week. ``In a nutshell, it was 
way too cold for way too long,'' said Gary Kunkel, assistant agriculture 
commissioner in Tulare County, which has 100,000 acres of orange groves 
_ about half the state's production _ and estimated today that 85 
percent of the citrus crop remaining on trees was already lost, about 
$370 million of its $500 million annual total. ``We've had some places 
below 25 degrees for 13 or 14 hours at a time,'' Kunkel added, noting 
that warmer weather predicted for this weekend was coming too late 
to do much good. ``Imagine watching somebody just tear up your annual 
paycheck right in front of your eyes.'' When oranges suffer a hard 
freeze, the juice sacs inside crystallize and burst through the membranes. 
When the flesh thaws, the juice seeps out and evaporates through the 
skin, leaving the insides dry and inedible. Because of El Nino-related 
planting delays and poor pollination caused by excess moisture the 
California citrus crop was already expected to be about 20 percent 
below last year's, said Keith Collins, chief economist for the U.S. 
Department of Agriculture in Washington. ``We were already on track 
to have a much reduced crop,'' he said. The freeze capped a year of 
weather-related calamities around the nation that produced mixed results 
for the nation's agriculture industry. The moist El Nino conditions 
led to record yields on winter wheat in Texas and the Plains states 
and record summer heat and drought caused declines in cotton, cattle 
and other crops and commodities from California to Texas, New Mexico 
and Louisiana. In Florida, continued warm weather and drought has 
resulted in sharply lower citrus crop forecasts. The Florida Department 
of Citrus estimates this year's harvest will produce 190 million boxes 
of oranges, down from last year's record harvest of 244 million boxes. 
Last summer, fires and drought in central Florida caused an estimated 
$150 million in damage to crops and destroyed $400 million worth of 
timber. ``What's particularly curious, even stunning, about this year, 
is that for all the weather turmoil we still wound up with many near-record 
crop yields,'' in corn and soybeans in states like Illinois, Indiana 
and Iowa, Collins said. But the high yields also produced low prices 
for many crops, and together with the weather-related damage in selected 
areas, led to passage of the biggest agricultural relief measure in 
the nation's history, $5.7 billion, Collins said. ``There are air 
pockets of financial stress all across the country.'' Darwin Smith, 
an orange-grower in Orland, Calif., about 100 miles north of Sacramento, 
knows that stress first-hand. He expects to lose his entire 75-acre 
crop this year, more than 100,000 cartons, which would have brought 
him $50,000. He and other farmers who formed a packing plant will 
have to lay off about 40 workers. ``I think at this point right now, 
the chances of anything being harvestable are just about nil,'' Smith 
said. ``We'll know better when we go in next week and start cutting 
fruit, but at this point, if there was anything salvageable, I'd be 
shocked.'' This is the second time Smith has lost his entire crop 
to a freeze in his 13 years of farming, and the federal crop insurance 
he buys will cover only about half his expected loss. His family will 
have to rely on income from his wife's job and a part-time job he 
works in the summers, but he dismissed any suggestion of leaving farming. 
``You've got to realize that growing oranges is always going to be 
a risk,'' he said. In Lindsay, Calif., the LoBue Bros. packing plant, 
Tulare County's largest employer, laid off 450 of its 500 employees 
Wednesday, and company officials said it could be two weeks before 
they know whether they will need their usual crew of pickers and packers 
for navel and Valencia oranges. ``Four hundred and fifty people are 
not going to show up on Monday, they're not going to get paid, they're 
not coming to work,'' said Joe LoBue, the company's marketing director. 
``And we don't know when they will come back. If in fact these people 
don't go back to work for a long period of time, it starts to affect 
the whole economy of the county here. In 1990, you had a lot of people 
that showed up at food banks, a lot of people who ended up on welfare, 
a lot of people who couldn't get jobs.'' Robert Ward, a citrus farmer 
in Exeter, Calif., about halfway between Los Angeles and San Francisco 
in the San Joaquin Valley, was up at 4 a.m. today, checking water 
pumps and wind machines designed to raise the temperature on his 250 
acres. Despite the efforts, Ward, a fifth-generation farmer, said 
the damage was severe. ``It's the only way of life I know,'' he said. 
``I'm 60 years old and it's too late to start over. I don't know what 
else I'd do. I've done it pretty much all my life. ``We'll make it,'' 
he added. ``It's going to get tight around here. We're not going to 
upgrade any new equipment. We're just going to get by as best we can, 
and see what happens next season.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>