<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981224.0268 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Since it is Christmas, a day on which nobody reads a newspaper anyhow, 
and since this is the last of these columns titled ``Observer'' which 
have been appearing in The Times since 1962, I shall take the otherwise 
inexcusable liberty of talking about me and newspapers. I love them. 
I have loved them since childhood when my Uncle Allen regularly brought 
home Hearst's New York Journal-American with its wonderful comics, 
Burris Jenkins cartoons and tales of rich playboys, murderous playgirls 
and their love nests. At that age I hadn't a guess about what a love 
nest might be, and didn't care, and since something about ``love nest'' 
sounded curiously illegal, I never asked an adult for edification. 
On Sundays Uncle Allen always brought The New York Times and read 
himself to sleep with it. Such a dismal mass of gray paper was of 
absolutely no interest to me. It was Katzenjammer Kids and Maggie 
and Jiggs of the King Features syndicate with whom I wanted to spend 
Sunday. At my friend Harry's house I discovered the New York tabloids. 
Lots of great pictures. Dick Tracy! Plenty of stories about condemned 
killers being executed, with emphasis on what they had eaten for their 
last meal, before walking _ the last mile! The tabloids left me enthralled 
by the lastness of things. Inevitably, I was admitted to practice 
the trade, and I marveled at the places newspapers could take me. 
They took me to suburbs on sunny Saturday afternoons to witness the 
mortal results of family quarrels in households that kept pistols. 
They took me to hospital emergency rooms to listen to people die and 
to ogle nurses. They took me to the places inhabited by the frequently 
unemployed and there taught me the smell of poverty. In winter there 
was also the smell of deadly kerosene stoves used for heating, though 
their tendency to set bedrooms on fire sent the morgue a predictable 
stream of customers every season. The memory of those smells has been 
a valuable piece of equipment during my career as a columnist. Columnists' 
tendency to spend their time with life's winners and to lead lives 
of isolation from the less dazzling American realities makes it too 
easy for us sometimes to solve the nation's problems in 700 words. 
Newspapers have taken me into the company of the great as well as 
the greatly celebrated. On these expeditions I have sat in the Elysee 
Palace and gazed on the grandeur that was Charles de Gaulle speaking 
as from Olympus. I have watched Nikita Khrushchev, fresh from terrifying 
Jack Kennedy inside a Vienna Embassy, emerge to clown with the press. 
I have been apologized to by Richard Nixon. I have seen Adlai Stevenson, 
would-be president of the United States, shake hands with a department-store 
dummy in Florida. I have been summoned on a Saturday morning to the 
Capitol of the United States to meet with Lyndon Johnson, clad in 
pajamas and urgently needing my advice on how to break a civil-rights 
filibuster. I have often been played for a fool like this by other 
interesting men and, on occasion, equally interesting women. Pope 
John XXIII included me in an audience he granted the press group en 
route to Turkey, Iran and points east with President Eisenhower. The 
pope's feet barely reached the floor and seemed to dance as he spoke. 
Newspapers took me to Westminster Abbey in a rental white tie and 
topper to see Queen Elizabeth crowned and to Versailles in another 
rental white-tie-and-tails rig to share a theater evening with the 
de Gaulles and the John F. Kennedys. Thanks to newspapers, I have 
made a four-hour visit to Afghanistan, have seen the Taj Mahal by 
moonlight, breakfasted at dawn on lamb and couscous while sitting 
by the marble pool of a Moorish palace in Morocco and once picked 
up a persistent family of fleas in the Balkans. In Iran I have ridden 
in a press bus over several miles of Oriental carpets with which the 
shah had ordered the street covered between airport and town to honor 
the visiting Eisenhower, a man who, during a White House news conference 
which I attended in shirtsleeves, once identified me as ``that man 
that's got the shirt on.'' I could go on and on, and probably will 
somewhere sometime, but the time for this enterprise is up. Thanks 
for listening for the past three million words. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>