<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981224.0243 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It has been a general's maxim at least since the time of the Romans: 
Let him who desires peace prepare for war. President Clinton's legal 
lieutenants say they are planning an aggressive defense in the Senate 
against the impeachment charges lodged against Clinton even as he 
sues for peace in the form of a speedy and bipartisan resolution of 
censure. But this strategy presents problems for the White House. 
A combative stance toward the two articles of impeachment voted by 
the House last Saturday could be read by conservative Senate Republicans 
as a sign that Clinton still refuses to acknowledge wrongdoing. The 
White House says it has identified about 20 Senate Republicans it 
sees as eager for a trial that would conclusively establish Clinton's 
guilt and justify his removal from office. Although White House officials 
profess confidence that they will prevail in a trial, it could bring 
into the open some very ugly and damaging testimony that could further 
tarnish the president's reputation. Neither can the White House appear 
too fervent in its desire for censure. Any punishment the president 
so avidly seeks, these critics will contend, cannot possibly be a 
sufficient rebuke for his misconduct and for the past 11 months of 
national trauma. And it is not hard to imagine the president finding 
himself in the same position he was in as the House impeachment vote 
neared. Moderate House Republicans had said they might vote against 
impeachment only if the president would confess to lying under oath, 
something he would not do then, and, his lawyers insist, will not 
do now. The White House must also contend with the Senate's jealously 
guarded prerogatives and the fact that its 100 members will serve 
as the silent jury for any trial of the president, should it come 
to that. Sen. Robert Byrd, D-W.Va., has already warned the White House 
against tampering with the Senate jury, by injecting itself into decisions 
about trial procedures or the wording of any resolution of censure. 
The White House faces an additional problem: there is no single Senate 
strategy to answer; there may be several separate strategies, each 
requiring a different response. Further, Rep. Henry Hyde, R-Ill., 
chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, who will lead the prosecution 
team in the Senate, has given no sign of how he intends to present 
his case. So where is the way out for Clinton? Gregory Craig, who 
leads the White House impeachment defense team, put it this way: ``What 
we want to do is show confidence in our ability to meet these allegations. 
We think there are strong legal and factual defenses against these 
articles.'' But it is not inconsistent, Craig said, to prepare to 
mount an aggressive legal challenge to the impeachment accusations 
while seeking a plea bargain on lesser charges. It is what any good 
defense lawyer would do, he added. Craig said the president had suffered 
during the House debate from the conventional wisdom that he was not 
contesting the facts of the accusations against him. Craig repeated 
the White House contention that even if most of the accusations were 
true _ which he is not conceding _ they would not warrant impeachment 
and removal from office. There are some in the White House and among 
Democratic partisans who contend that Clinton should stop pleading 
for censure and fight the charges in a trial, although this is not 
Craig's current position, nor the president's. These supporters of 
the president maintain that the impeachment articles will not withstand 
the scrutiny of a trial and that the resulting acquittal will clear 
Clinton's name for all time. ``Why agree to a censure?'' said Rep. 
Robert C. Scott, D-Va., a member of the House Judiciary Committee 
who voted against all four impeachment articles. ``That's admitting 
guilt, and maybe he's not guilty. It's also something the Republicans 
cannot prove.'' But on the other side are Republicans who contend 
that a trial may bring to light evidence that can ultimately lead 
67 senators, the necessary two-thirds majority, to vote to convict 
Clinton and thus remove him from office. The White House is prepared 
to use a Senate trial to assail the credibility of Monica Lewinsky 
and others, whose testimony forms the case against the president. 
One member of the legal team for Clinton said the president's lawyers 
would not flinch from challenging Ms. Lewinsky's truthfulness on matters 
where her grand jury testimony conflicts with the president's. For 
example, at the heart of the first impeachment article, accusing the 
president of perjury before a federal grand jury on Aug. 17, is the 
charge that the president lied when he denied directly touching Ms. 
Lewinsky's breasts and genitals. Clinton testified that he had no 
such contact. The president's lawyers are prepared to portray these 
statements as her word against his with no independent corroboration. 
They are also ready to call as witnesses friends of Ms. Lewinsky who 
will testify that she frequently exaggerated the details of her trysts 
with the president to make it appear that they had a reciprocal sexual 
relationship. ``Winning'' an impeachment trial, in other words, would 
have its costs, both for the nation and for the president. And it 
is far from certain that acquittal would give Clinton the historical 
exoneration that his loyalists seek on his behalf. He remains only 
the second president to be impeached. ``Vindication?'' one White House 
adviser mused. ``It's a little late for that now.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>