<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981224.0337 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Roger Clemens may still be traded, or maybe he won't be, but his agreement 
with the Toronto Blue Jays has put Major League Baseball in the embarrassing 
position of taking disciplinary action against its No. 2 official, 
Paul Beeston. A baseball lawyer said Thursday that officials had already 
decided that Beeston, the president and chief operating officer of 
Major League Baseball and the former Blue Jays president, will be 
fined. An official declined to confirm or deny that decision, saying 
it was the province of Commissioner Bud Selig to announce such matters, 
but he suggested that Toronto and other clubs would be fined for violating 
established procedures in the Clemens matter. Beeston and the Blue 
Jays would be fined for entering into an agreement when they signed 
Clemens two years ago that they kept secret by not submitting it to 
the American League as part of the contract. The Blue Jays could also 
be fined for giving other teams permission this month to speak to 
the pitcher and his agents. ``We did not follow the letter of the 
law,'' Gord Ash, the Blue Jays' general manager, said Thursday. Ash 
declined, however, to acknowledge the existence of the written, unsubmitted 
agreement with Clemens. Initially, it was believed that Beeston had 
given Clemens only an oral commitment that the team would trade him 
if he felt the Blue Jays were not going to be contenders. But since 
Clemens asked a few weeks ago to be traded, the existence of a written 
agreement has become known. Two officials said Thursday that the agreement 
covers five points. One gives Clemens the right to request a trade; 
another gives him the right to approve the team to which he would 
be traded. A third gives him the right to request a trade to the Houston 
Astros after any season during the four-year contract. The reason 
for that right, the officials said, was not spelled out, but both 
said it involved the pitcher's agents, Randy and Alan Hendricks. The 
officials said Clemens wanted to be able to request a trade to the 
Astros in the event the Hendricks brothers, who live in Houston, bought 
the team. Randy Hendricks, Clemens' chief representative, did not 
return a telephone call seeking comment. Clemens said at a news conference 
in Houston on Tuesday that he was withdrawing his request to be traded 
and that he was prepared to remain with the Blue Jays. However, Ash 
said he was prepared to resume talks with interested clubs, though 
probably not until the new year. ``We got far enough down the road 
with a few clubs that we owe it to ourselves to go back and talk,'' 
he said by telephone from his home in Toronto. ``There were players 
on the table who could improve the Blue Jays dramatically. But I'm 
not driven to do anything that doesn't work for us.'' Ash said he 
was not part of the original agreement with Clemens, but, he added, 
``My position has been to follow the spirit of the agreement, which 
was if Roger asked out, we'd move him.'' Beeston, who traveled to 
Clemens' home in the Houston area in December 1996 and persuaded him 
to choose the Blue Jays over the Yankees and the Cleveland Indians, 
declined to comment on any aspect of the Clemens case. He became baseball's 
No. 2 official during the pitcher's first season in Toronto. The commissioner's 
office sent a memo to all clubs last week reminding them of two policies 
dealing with the signing and trading of players: no unreported side 
deals are permitted and thus are unenforceable, and clubs cannot talk 
to another team's signed player without permission of the commissioner's 
office. Permission, the memo reminded clubs, is given only if the 
player's team reaches agreement with another team on a trade for the 
player. Then, if the acquiring club desires, it can get 72 hours to 
speak to the player and his agent about a new contract or contract 
extension. Randy Hendricks, with the Blue Jays' permission, has spoken 
with several teams even though the Blue Jays have not made a deal 
with any of them. Some teams could be fined, a baseball official said, 
because they continued talking to Hendricks even after they were told 
to stop. He declined to identify the teams. The Astros have been perhaps 
the most aggressive in trying to acquire Clemens but have balked at 
the high price, both in players they would have to give the Blue Jays 
and in money they would have to commit in a new contract to Clemens 
to secure his approval for a trade. The Texas Rangers and the Indians 
also have been interested. The Yankees have spoken with the Blue Jays 
but have been reluctant to pay the price for Clemens. The Mets also 
talked to the Blue Jays but declared themselves out of the running. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>