<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981224.0282 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Andrew Windsor is already nostalgic. ``It will be a real shame,'' 
said Windsor, head of retail operations at Thomas Cook, the British 
travel services company, to see venerable European currencies like 
the French franc, the Spanish peseta and the Italian lira just disappear. 
Travelers, he said, ``see using foreign notes and coins as an exciting 
and integral part of their holidays.'' The romance is lost on Geoffrey 
H. Lipman, president of the World Travel and Tourism Council. Emptying 
his wallet during a recent phone conversation, he listed the bank 
notes he found. ``Pounds sterling, Belgian francs, American dollars,'' 
Lipman groaned. ``And before I cleaned it this week, I had German 
marks, too.'' Nostalgic or not, come Jan. 1, travelers to Europe will 
encounter 11 nations undertaking a historic shift _ the replacement 
of their currencies by the euro. The extent of the changes won't be 
immediately obvious. In most places in the euro zone, prices will 
still be posted in the old local currencies. Travelers who need cash 
will still have to change dollars for marks, francs, lire or other 
familiar bills. Euro coins and bills will not appear until 2002. But 
beginning on Friday, the local currencies _ whatever image of monarchs, 
heroes or landmarks they bear _ will all be denominations of the euro, 
in much the same way as nickels and dimes are denominations of the 
dollar. Travelers changing money will, in fact, be trading dollars 
for euros, but pocketing them in the form of marks, francs or the 
like. If travelers want to deal in euros right away, they can _ by 
avoiding cash. Thomas Cook (presumably cursing the change all the 
while) will join American Express in issuing new euro-denominated 
traveler's checks. Credit cards and debit cards will also allow payment 
in euros, though it will depend on whether the store, hotel or airline 
is prepared to accept them. If so, you can request it, and if you 
have a dollar-denominated card, your monthly statement will show the 
transaction in the euro amount, then translate it into dollars. Visitors 
should do business in euros whenever possible, experts say, because 
it will encourage retailers to post prices in euros, making costs 
easier to compare throughout Europe. In some cases, it may also create 
competitive pressures that can drive down prices. ``Our advice to 
travelers,'' said Sally Brown, a spokeswoman for American Express, 
``is to take note of these price differences from country to country.'' 
Over time, the use of a common currency across a wide swath of Europe 
should produce significant benefits for visitors _ though not without 
certain risks. In a paper presented this month at a meeting in Washington, 
the National Business Travel Association, a group of American corporate 
travel managers, said the euro would ultimately eliminate many expenses 
of changing money, which it estimated at $13 to $14 a transaction. 
The common currency will also enable travelers to easily spot price 
differences for travel services. The danger? The euro will also shine 
a floodlight on corporate expense accounts. Without the cloud of receipts 
in a dozen strange currencies, the boss back home will more easily 
spot profligacy, the report warned. ``The new ease of comparable pricing 
could place an added burden on the business traveler, who will be 
held more responsible by his company in identifying savings that cannot 
be controlled by the corporate travel manager, like business meals,'' 
the report said. These possible effects are not lost on corporate 
travel managers. In an American Express survey, 58 percent of European 
business travelers said that, once the euro arrived, they would broaden 
their search for less expensive travel services across Europe. In 
the poll, conducted earlier this year among 200 business travelers, 
70 percent said they thought travel companies like airlines and car 
rental agencies would be forced to cut prices as a result of the euro. 
Of course, corporate travel departments that insist on doing business 
in euros will have to invest to update their computer software, and 
they may need to renegotiate contracts for bulk services with airlines 
and hotel chains. But if overall prices start falling because of the 
euro's introduction, travel companies, facing lower profits, may be 
less willing to negotiate discounts for corporate customers. Indeed, 
the travel industry, fearing that prices will drop, has been in no 
hurry to embrace the euro, according to Reinhard Schulte-Braucks, 
a European Union official who helps companies prepare for the new 
currency. ``They don't want the competition,'' he said. Still, business 
and leisure travelers alike will find a continent in transition in 
the new year, noted Hasan Alemdar, euro program manager for Visa International 
in London. In some places, like Germany, there will likely be separate 
cash registers for marks and euros; in France and Spain, stores will 
probably accept payment in the local currency or in euros at the same 
point of sale. In a third group of countries, including Belgium and 
Italy, many stores may not be ready to trade in euros, so they will 
require payment in the old local currency and merely give the customer, 
by way of information, the euro amount on a separate receipt. Experts 
advise travelers to count their change carefully _ and not to count 
on any windfalls. ``It's like switching from Celsius to Fahrenheit,'' 
Schulte-Braucks said. ``It doesn't get warmer or colder; you don't 
get richer or poorer.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>