<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981224.0143 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When ``The Beatles Anthology'' was released in 1996, it was the expressed 
hope of the former band members that this 10-hour video production 
would be the Beatles biography to end all Beatles biographies. Not 
surprisingly, it instead became more grist for a mill that still pours 
forth everything from scholarly analysis to diary-style listings of 
the events in the saga. The Beatles' insistence that only they could 
say what really happened, however, has given rise to a style of biography 
in which authors try to fade into the woodwork. David Pritchard and 
Alan Lysaght take that approach in ``The Beatles: An Oral History,'' 
a book that draws on material they began collecting in the late 1970s 
for a 24-hour radio series, ``The Beatles: The Days in Their Lives,'' 
and interviews they have conducted since the show was broadcast. Apart 
from an occasional scene-setting sentence or two, the book is a sequence 
of quotations from the Beatles and some 100 people who were participants 
in their career or close observers of it. It follows this year's similarly 
laid out ``Many Years From Now,'' a collaboration between Bob Miles 
and Paul McCartney, in which transcripts of interviews with McCartney 
are interrupted only by brief descriptions of the events he is about 
to discuss. The book version of ``The Beatles Anthology,'' due next 
year, is to be transcripts of interviews that the Beatles and a few 
close associates gave during the making of the ``Anthology,'' with 
John Lennon represented by excerpts from the expansive autobiographical 
interviews he gave throughout his life. There is much to be said for 
getting these memories on record, but one needn't be a practicing 
historian to recognize that dispensing with the authorial voice is 
not an entirely satisfactory approach in biography. It puts the reader 
at the mercy of the subject's memory lapses, self-editing and misapprehensions, 
to say nothing of self-serving interpretations. The ``Anthology,'' 
valuable as it is, embodies all these flaws. To their credit, Pritchard 
and Lysaght don't leave the story in the Beatles' mouths, although 
they are quoted plentifully. Friends, journalists and disk jockeys 
who traveled with them all weigh in, as do recording engineers and 
session musicians, artists who designed their record jackets and members 
of the inner circle at Apple, the company the Beatles set up to run 
their affairs. By casting such a wide net, the authors offer perspectives 
beyond those usually cited in Beatles' biographies. Some of these 
perspectives are trivial, but the best of them _ for example, the 
recollections of friends from Liverpool _ give a palpable sense of 
the atmosphere at the band's early performances. There are also some 
dangling mysteries, including several contradictory versions of how, 
when and where Brian Epstein discovered the group that he would manage 
to stardom. And Dick Rowe, the producer at Decca who rejected the 
Beatles after they auditioned for the label in January 1962, explains 
his decision and is discussed sympathetically by several colleagues, 
including some in the Beatles' circle. Geoff Emerick and Glyn Johns, 
recording engineers at the Abbey Road Studios, provide fresh details 
about the recording of the ``Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band,'' 
``Let It Be'' and ``Abbey Road'' albums, and Johns' dissection of 
the ``Let It Be'' film and recording project is fascinating. He describes 
the first edit of the film as being full of humor, and blames Allen 
Klein (who had just become the Beatles' manager) for having it transformed 
into the portrait of fractiousness and apathy that was eventually 
released. The section on the band's breakup gives the sense of an 
adventure gone suddenly awry. There are some illuminating characterizations 
of the band members, including one by Victor Spinetti, a British actor 
who appeared in several of their movies. While filming ``Help!'' in 
Austria in 1965, Spinetti, bedridden with the flu, was visited separately 
by each of the Beatles. McCartney asked if the flu was contagious 
and left quickly when Spinetti said yes. George Harrison came in to 
plump his pillows. Ringo Starr sat at the foot of his bed pretending 
to read a fairy tale aloud from a room-service menu, and Lennon walked 
in, affected a German accent to tell Spinetti that he would be experimented 
on and left. Inevitably, the book often reads like a radio script: 
one speaker follows another, expanding on the story and offering a 
different viewpoint. Errors that might pass in an interview-based 
radio series, though, are less acceptable between hard covers; authors 
are expected to keep the facts straight, even when interviewees do 
not. Given the depth of detail in ``The Beatles: Recording Sessions,'' 
Mark Lewisohn's invaluable book a decade ago, there is no excuse for 
such errors as quoting both George Martin, the group's producer, and 
Norman Smith, an engineer, saying that they recorded 12 of the 14 
songs on their debut ``Please Please Me'' album in a single day. They 
recorded 10; four songs were released on singles before the marathon 
session. Smith adds that the Beatles recorded their instruments first 
and added vocals later (not true at that point), and that the 1965 
``Rubber Soul'' album was recorded on eight-track equipment, which 
was not available at Abbey Road until the ``White Album'' sessions 
in 1968. If the authors did not want to tamper with the quotations, 
they might have included clarifying footnotes. A list of sources and 
dates for the interviews would have been helpful as well, since they 
were not all conducted by Pritchard and Lysaght: some date from the 
1960s, and there are excerpts from news conferences. Better care should 
also have been taken with names. In one amusing instance, when an 
interviewee refers to Simon Postuma and Marijke Koger (partners in 
the design team that ran the Beatles' Apple boutique) using only their 
first names, the transcript yields ``Simon Mariaka.'' Even the interviewees 
are not safe: William Pobjoy, headmaster at young Lennon's school, 
is listed as Popjoy. This book tells the story with a reasonable balance 
of diplomacy and candor, and its most enlightening quotations nearly 
make up for the lack of a guiding, interpretive viewpoint. But a biography 
built on unprocessed interviews has to be edited more carefully than 
this. PUBLICATION NOTES: `THE BEATLES: An Oral History' By David Pritchard 
and Alan Lysaght Illustrated. 332 pages. Hyperion. $23.95. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>