<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981224.0316 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A white and silver bus carrying 23 people from Brooklyn to Atlantic 
City for a day of casino gambling spun around on the Garden State 
Parkway in New Jersey on Thursday, slashed through a guard rail and 
plunged down an embankment, rolling over several times. Eight were 
killed and 15 were injured, many critically. The cause of the accident 
was not immediately determined. No other vehicle was involved, and 
an overnight snow had been plowed from the parkway, which was snowbanked 
but dry. Witnesses, however, said speeding and snow patches may have 
been factors, and officials said the driver had a record that included 
tickets for speeding and other infractions, an accident and suspensions 
that required retraining. Witnesses told of an apparently speeding 
tour bus suddenly spinning around and flipping on its side at 10:35 
a.m., of victims hurtling surrealistically through shattered windows 
as it tumbled down a 100-foot slope and halted on its side, a wreck 
with moaning passengers trapped in its mangled interior. ``I was the 
first one on the scene,'' said Lamar Jenkins, 32, a bus driver who 
saw the accident from behind, pulled over and leaped out, stunned 
at the carnage sprawled over the snowy parkway median near the Cheesequake 
Rest Area in Sayreville, 25 miles south of midtown Manhattan. ``People 
were lying on the ground,'' he said of the victims, men and women 
in their 50s, 60s and 70s. ``People were crying for help. People were 
bleeding. I saw a woman with her leg off. That snow on the ground, 
it was red. The snow was red! It was like a war. There were bodies 
everywhere, some not moving at all.'' It was bitterly cold, with temperatures 
in the 20s, and an icy wind scythed over a bleak landscape strewn 
with victims, boxes, bags and other possessions. Jenkins saw the driver 
of the overturned bus, Valentin Viner, 52, whom he had known for three 
years. ``He looked in my face and there was nothing I could do for 
him,'' Jenkins said. ``He got up and walked around. He had a serious 
cut over his left eye and he was just walking like he was in a daze.'' 
Soon, a crowd of passing motorists had stopped. Workers from the rest-area 
service station ran up. Calls for help went out. Blankets were brought 
to cover the bodies. Then, amid a wail of sirens, rescue vehicles 
began swarming to the scene: state and local police officers, firefighters, 
medics, rescue teams. Some were rescued a half-hour after the accident, 
while others were trapped for up to an hour. To reach some of the 
victims, rescue workers had to dig underneath the bus and raise it 
slightly with cables and winches. They also cut through the bottom 
of the bus, shearing off a portion toward the rear. It was 2:30 p.m., 
four hours after the crash, when the last passengers, all of them 
dead, were removed from the wreckage. Shut off by the tangle of rescue 
vehicles, all southbound traffic on the parkway _ three express lanes 
and three local lanes _ was halted for hours. A trickle of cars was 
allowed to pass in the local lanes then, but the express lanes were 
closed until late afternoon on one of the busiest days of the year. 
At midafternoon, as the last of the dead were taken away and efforts 
turned to the less urgent business of removing the shattered bus, 
Lt. Daniel Cosgrover, a spokesman for the New Jersey State Police, 
said eight people had been killed and all of the other 15 on board 
had been injured, six critically. The injured were taken to University 
Hospital in Newark, Memorial Medical Center in South Amboy, Robert 
Wood Johnson University Hospital in New Brunswick and Raritan Bay 
Medical Center in Perth Amboy. They were 47 to 78 years old, residents 
of Brooklyn mostly, and were suffering from various head and internal 
injuries, broken bones, severe lacerations and hypothermia. Viner, 
the driver, a Russian immigrant, was in stable condition at Memorial 
Medical Center, and was to be interviewed Thursday night by the State 
Police. No charges were filed against him Thursday. The National Transportation 
Safety Board in Washington dispatched a team of investigators, who 
arrived in the late afternoon. A spokesman said the team was sent 
because of the large number of deaths and because the agency was conducting 
a special study of bus accidents. The bus that crashed, officials 
said, is owned by Bruins Transportation, of 300 Liberty Ave., Brooklyn, 
and was operated by SGS Travelscope, 1620 East 16th St., Brooklyn, 
which organizes tours to Atlantic City and other destinations. The 
New York State Department of Transportation said it inspected 13 Bruins 
buses between January and September and passed all but two, which 
were taken out of service, repaired, reinspected and put back in service. 
A department spokeswoman, Maureen McCarthy, called it an average inspection 
record. But the driver, Viner, who trained as a mechanic in Russia 
and came to the United States five or six years ago, had a spotty 
record, according to the New York State Department of Motor Vehicles. 
Joseph Picchi, a spokesman, said Viner obtained a license to drive 
buses in November 1994, and had an accident that involved property 
damage only in Queens in 1996. His license was suspended in 1995 for 
failure to pay a ticket. After his reinstatement, he was convicted 
of speeding in 1997, of failure to stop for a school bus later that 
year and of speeding last March. Having accumulated more than nine 
points for these infractions, his license was suspended in March. 
It was reinstated in June after he took a retraining course, Picchi 
said. An acquaintance said Viner, who is married and has two children, 
made runs several times a week to Atlantic City. His passengers, who 
paid $22 for the round trip, bought tickets in pharmacies, grocery 
stores and other outlets in Brooklyn, and from travel agents. Viner 
on Thursday began his run shortly before 9 a.m. and made 10 stops 
in Brooklyn to pick up 22 passengers, all bound for the Atlantic City 
Hilton Casino Resort, which was to give a gambler's-lure rebate of 
$18 to each passenger. The police said the accident occurred near 
Exit 124 on a stretch of the parkway that is split into three express 
and three local lanes, divided by a wide, gullylike median. The right 
local lane was still unplowed, officials said, and the bus was in 
the left lane, beside a guard rail and a snow bank. The speed limit 
there changes from 55 to 65. Viner's speed was unclear, but Jenkins, 
the bus driver who was following, said he thought his friend's bus 
skidded on a patch of snow while speeding. ``The only thing that I 
think he did wrong was speed,'' he said. ``Speed always plays a part 
in weather like this. I have a governor that keeps me at 65 miles 
an hour. I was trying to catch him, but I couldn't. I just backed 
down and thought, I'm not going to catch him. He was going faster 
than 65.'' Investigators said the bus, for unknown reasons, spun around, 
shot through a guardrail and plunged down the embankment, striking 
a sewer cap on the grass berm as it went down. It rolled over three 
or four times, its windows shattered and as many as 10 people were 
hurled out before it came to rest on its side, a few feet from the 
express lanes and a busy underpass. ``There were people alive inside 
the bus,'' said Craig Conley, 27, who ran over from the service station. 
``It was kind of surreal. You feel helpless.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>