<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981224.0250 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
U.S. consumers took a late-autumn pause last month from their recent 
relatively heavy levels of spending as incomes surged and personal 
savings grew for the first time in four months. Jobless claims also 
fell last week to their lowest level in more than a year. Together 
with the recent performance of the stock market, which approaches 
the end of the year at near-record levels, those signs point to continued 
economic expansion, economists said. Financial markets reacted positively 
to the news, with the Dow Jones industrial average rising 15.96 points, 
to 9,217.99, in an abbreviated trading session. Volume on the New 
York Stock Exchange measured a mere 247 million shares, the lowest 
this year. Broader market benchmarks were mixed, with the Standard 
&AMP; Poor's 500-stock index and the Nasdaq composite index falling 
slightly and the Russell 2000 index, a measure of smaller company 
stocks, inching up. Convinced that the Federal Reserve might be satisfied 
with the economy's progress after three cuts in interest rates this 
year, bond traders sent prices lower. The yield on the 30-year Treasury 
bond, which moves in the opposite direction of its price, rose to 
5.21 percent. The Commerce Department reported Thursday that personal 
income grew by five-tenths of 1 percent in November, while spending 
grew by one-tenth of a percent. That makes November the first month 
since July in which income growth surpassed spending growth. The December 
holiday season is likely to have brought more spending by consumers, 
however, and perhaps a return to the negative rate of personal savings, 
which showed up this fall for the first time since the Great Depression. 
``I would say that the overall trend is still toward spending and 
not toward savings, as it has been since the middle of 1997,'' said 
Kenneth Safian, the president of Safian Investment Research of White 
Plains. Consumer spending is the main fuel of the domestic economy, 
but sharp increases in outlays can worry Wall Street that consumers 
will have to stop and let their incomes catch up with their bills. 
Safian said, however, that the current environment did not carry such 
ominous overtones. ``The trend to increased spending is not as severe 
as it was at other stock market peaks,'' he said. Similarly, too much 
saving by individuals is seen by some economists as a precursor to 
recession. The Commerce Department said the savings rate, measured 
as a percentage of disposable personal income, measured one-tenth 
of a percent in November, compared with a negative two-tenths of a 
percent in October. The slower growth in spending last month could 
be traced to two factors, financial analysts said. Purchases of new 
cars, which jumped in September and October after the settlement of 
a strike during the summer by General Motors workers, returned to 
more normal levels last month. And a spate of mild autumn weather 
held back spending on electricity and natural gas. The Commerce Department 
also revised its estimate of personal expenditures for October; it 
now thinks that spending grew by seven-tenths of a percent rather 
than five-tenths of a percent as previously estimated. Jobless claims 
also moved contrary to expectations, falling by 13,000 last week, 
to 287,000 claims. Economists had been expecting claims to rise by 
about 12,000, according to Bloomberg News. Last week's level of jobless 
claims was the lowest since late July 1997. The strength of the labor 
market probably also contributed to the growth in income, but the 
gains were spread unevenly across industries, the Commerce Department 
reported. Wages and salaries were nearly flat, when compared with 
those of the previous month, in manufacturing and distribution companies. 
But service companies reported that they paid about 1 percent more 
in wages last month than in October. Meanwhile, the income of farm 
owners rose by more than 10 percent last month despite continued declines 
in commodity prices as subsidy payments by government programs grew. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>