<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981224.0340 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Without lawyers, players or a public announcement, Commissioner David 
Stern and the union director, Billy Hunter, held a secret meeting 
Wednesday night in an attempt to salvage the National Basketball Association 
season. The meeting, held in the Los Angeles office of Leonard Armato, 
the agent for Shaquille O'Neal and Hakeem Olajuwon, was the first 
between Stern and Hunter since Dec. 12, when negotiations broke off 
after 30 minutes. It came as a surprise since Stern and Hunter were 
on vacation and had not revealed that they would meet. But while the 
circumstances surrounding the meeting seem to suggest progress, there 
was apparently no movement toward ending what threatens to be the 
most costly labor dispute in the history of professional sports. ``Absolutely 
no progress was made,'' said Brian McIntyre, the league spokesman. 
``The meeting lasted a few hours and nothing happened. They might 
meet again this weekend.'' Fox Sports reported that the two sides 
had met again Thursday, but the league denied it. ``There was not 
another negotiating session,'' said Jeffrey Mishkin, the NBA's chief 
legal officer. ``That didn't happen.'' With Stern and Hunter refusing 
to budge from their positions, the sides rehashed the issues that 
have stifled talks for weeks. Just hours before the meeting, Stern 
begrudgingly set a deadline of Jan. 7 for a settlement to be reached. 
If the sides cannot come to an accord by then, Stern will propose 
that the league's 29 owners cancel the season at a special board of 
governors meeting that day. Despite the urgings of the union, Stern 
had refused to issue a deadline. Hunter and numerous players had been 
calling for a drop-dead date for weeks in order to create a sense 
of urgency that would perhaps force the sides to accelerate the negotiations. 
At the very least, Wednesday's session could be seen as a step in 
that direction, as both Stern and Hunter inconvenienced themselves 
to meet. Stern flew in from Aspen, Colo., where he had been vacationing 
since last weekend, and Hunter traveled from Oakland, Calif. What 
role Armato played in getting the two together is unknown, but he 
has served as a mediator between Stern and Hunter in the past, flying 
to New York a few weeks ago to help the sides convene for a meeting 
that produced little progress. Armato declined to comment on Wednesday's 
talks. One of the largest stumbling blocks in negotiations remains 
the league's insistence on obtaining cost certainty. The owners have 
proposed that players with seven to nine years of experience be limited 
to earnings of 30 percent of the salary cap. The figure would increase 
to 35 percent for players with at least 10 years in the league. The 
union, which has agreed in principle to maximum salaries for players 
with less than seven years of experience, will not accept the league's 
proposed limitations on the older veterans. Meanwhile, the league 
will not agree to the minimum salary demands of the union. For instance, 
the players want rookies to earn at least $375,000 a year, but the 
league is offering $250,000. The sides also differ on how to divide 
the NBA's more than $2 billion of revenue. The owners want to limit 
the player salaries to 53.5 percent of the basketball-related income, 
while the players want 57 percent. While no date for another meeting 
has been set, McIntyre and Mishkin said the sides may meet over the 
weekend. ``It's being discussed but nothing has been scheduled yet,'' 
Mishkin said. Whether the next meeting will be in Manhattan and include 
both sides' full negotiating committees, or be the fourth tete-a-tete 
between Stern and Hunter, is not known. But Jerry Colangelo, the Phoenix 
Suns owner and a member of the league's labor relations committee, 
said he saw no point in going to New York unless the sides have determined 
that progress would be made. ``We've been to New York so many times 
it's ridiculous,'' Colangelo said from his home in Arizona. ``We're 
prepared to come back if there's truly, truly something to talk about, 
but I'm not interested in any more rhetoric.'' Unlike many players, 
who refuse to believe that the season may be canceled, Colangelo has 
become skeptical. His opinion is the opposite of the 16 star players 
who competed in last weekend's ``Game on Showtime'' in Atlantic City, 
and gave assurances that play would begin soon. ``I've always been 
optimistic about what eventually might take place but I've been wrong 
more times than not during this whole process,'' Colangelo said. ``Right 
now, I'm very pessimistic. The bottom line is that we're getting down 
to the wee hours and my disappointment is big time.'' If Colangelo's 
fears are realized, the NBA would earn the distressing distinction 
of becoming the only major professional sports league to lose an entire 
season to labor strife. Even major league baseball, which has had 
eight stoppages since 1972 and lost the 1994 World Series to a players' 
strike, has never had an entire season wiped out. Attempting to avoid 
such a disaster, the NBA mailed its latest proposal to the players 
last week. Since then, Karl Malone and Kevin Willis have challenged 
the union's direction, saying that Stern's latest offer is a good 
one. Thursday, Norman Blass, the agent who represents Mookie Blaylock, 
Keith Askins and Derrick McKey, became another discontented voice, 
telling the Associated Press that the players should hold a closed 
vote on the league's latest proposal. Willis suggested a secret vote 
Tuesday. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>