<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981224.0180 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When the Union Congregational Church building in Worcester, Mass., 
a rather loose interpretation of Notre Dame in Paris, was vacated 
and sold to a developer in the mid-1980s, its stained glass windows 
were removed and stowed. Chief among them was the ``Angel of Praise,'' 
designed in 1896 by Henry Landon Parkhurst of New York, a wonderfully 
crafted, opalescent Victorian vision in pinks, mauves and turquoises 
of a full-length female angel in flowing robes. After a decade of 
oblivion, the window, seven feet tall, now graces the new Pakachoag 
Church building in Auburn, Mass., where a sensitive installation has 
eased its transition to a simpler interior in New England meeting-house 
style. Its recycling in a more modern setting is one example of a 
growing interest in the preservation of American stained glass from 
earlier times. (The renewed appreciation of this essentially public 
art brought about, in 1979, the formation of a nonprofit group, the 
Census of Stained Glass Windows in America, to record architectural 
stained glass in the United States. A recent survey made by its Philadelphia 
branch came up with 3,654 examples in that city alone.) According 
to Virginia C. Raguin, a professor of art history at the College of 
the Holy Cross in Worcester, the interest has at least in part to 
do with the post-modern revival of appreciation for narrative and 
descriptive art. ``We prize this art much more now than in the time 
when we were looking at, say, Rothko, as the criterion of artistic 
expression,'' said Dr. Raguin. ``Now we have the ability to read a 
window, in terms not just of its image, but its color, form, its placement 
within a building, the kinetic element of changing light, its relationship 
to poetry, novels, stories and texts.'' Dr. Raguin is the curator 
of ``Glory in Glass: Stained Glass in the United States,'' a shimmering 
_ and enlightening _ show at the Gallery of the American Bible Society 
that explores the development of stained glass in American churches. 
Drawing from seven houses of worship around the country, including 
St. Bartholomew's in Manhattan, as well as the Neustadt Museum of 
Tiffany Art, a collection in part housed in Queens and Hartford, Conn., 
the show contains 14 ``living'' (not replica) windows, panels and 
roundels, including the ``Angel of Praise,'' removed from its setting 
for restoration. Although only a small sampling, it suggests that, 
even if not quite up to Chartres or St.-Denis, the glass in American 
churches is not to be taken lightly. The show is buttressed by loans 
of earlier European work from art museums, sketches, cartoons, design 
books _ many from the Bible Society's own extensive collection _ and 
pictorial inspirations for subject matter. A glazier's table shows 
a 19th-century window in the process of restoration. And there is 
a display of pieces in various stages of glazing along with a collection 
of tools and paints used in the craft. Stained glass, used pictorially 
in European cathedrals since the 10th century , was regarded as a 
symbolic manifestation of divine light, and at the same time a highly 
effective tool for teaching Biblical history and church dogma to illiterate 
congregations. In the 12th and 13th centuries, the golden age of the 
craft, windows were made to look like transparent paintings, and the 
art was in fact one of the most important forms of monumental painting. 
Nineteenth-century Romanticism and the Gothic revival brought about 
a renewed interest in stained glass as well as other medieval arts. 
The interest was nurtured in England by the Arts and Crafts movement 
under William Morris, and in this country by two brilliantly innovative 
designers, John La Farge and Louis Comfort Tiffany. Alas, there are 
no works by Tiffany or La Farge in the show (although they may be 
seen in churches around Manhattan). But there is a radiant, full-length 
``Angel with Lilies'' (1900) by Frederick Wilson (1858-1932), an Englishman 
who served for more than 30 years as chief designer of the Tiffany 
Studios. Wilson, known for his figural work, specialized in the upscale 
``Tiffany angel,'' looking rather like a Balanchine ballet dancer 
and described in the show's catalog as having ``an elegant pre-Raphaelite 
body, long slender nose, broad forehead, high cheekbones and invariably 
reddish tonality of hair.'' Wilson's ``Angel with Lilies,'' designed 
for an unknown building, also reveals, with its tightly pleated bodice 
and rippling robe, the artful handling of glass that is characteristic 
of the Tiffany Studios. This particular angel, lent by the Neustadt 
Museum, is thought to be from a three-part window ensemble. It is 
shown in the hope that someone may be able to shed more light on its 
origins. A more compassionate-looking celestial being is the Botticelli-like 
figure in a circular medallion that appeared above a double lancet 
window showing Jesus washing the feet of the Apostles. Designed by 
the famous Hardman Studios in Birmingham, England, for the monumental 
Gothic building of St. Peter's Church, in Lowell, Mass., the windows 
were saved when the 1892 church was demolished in 1966. In this medallion 
the kindly looking androgynous angel, with bright yellow hair, is 
dressed in white with a lavender robe and surrounded by stylized foliage. 
One of the most beguiling angels appears in an intensely color-charged 
image, a seraph's face that glows white in a dazzlement of vividly 
jewel-toned feathers. It was part of a choir loft window designed 
by the Munich firm of Franz Meyer around 1900, for what is now the 
Sacred Heart Cultural Center of Augusta, Ga. A fine example of the 
Romanesque Revival style, the center started out in 1898 as the Sacred 
Heart Church. But over the decades the congregation dwindled, and 
in 1971 the church closed. For 16 years the building languished, prey 
to pigeon and human nesters. Then a local philanthropist led a drive 
to renovate it, and in 1987 it was reopened as a nonprofit center 
for cultural events. Not all the windows are of holy figures. The 
earliest display, from the Central Baptist Church of Southbridge, 
Mass., built in 1866, goes back to the very beginning of American 
stained glass. Its windows, possibly designed by Samuel West of Boston, 
are among the rare intact examples in America of a technique known 
as quarry glazing, in which small sections of glass are assembled 
into a stylized lattice pattern. It was popular in English 14th- and 
15th-century country churches and in medieval and Renaissance secular 
buildings. Many early American Protestant congregations used this 
decorative scheme because they were short on money and technical resources, 
and they didn't like the idea of figurative art in churches. The upper 
half of the sanctuary window displayed here is stenciled in a grisaille 
pattern composed of diagonals, each bearing a circle surrounded by 
eight highly stylized three-leaf figures _ dull, but neat and serviceable. 
The show's most secular exhibit _ although from a church _ is the 
knockout Goddard Memorial Window of the First Parish of Brookline, 
a 280-year-old Unitarian church in Brookline, Mass. Dedicated in 1912, 
the window was designed by the Boston painter George H. Hallowell 
(1871-1926) and executed by Otto Heinigke (1850-1913) of New York. 
Although the church has many important sacred windows, this one honors 
the Revolutionary war hero John Goddard, a Brookline farmer who in 
1776 built overnight, with the aid of a horse-and-wagon corps he organized, 
a fort that helped to drive the British from Boston. But rather than 
depicting his deed, the twin-lancet window gives equal space to full-length 
figures of farmer Goddard and his wife, Hannah, pillars of New England 
rectitude, as role models for 20th-century parishioners. It's too 
bad there's so little here in the way of contemporary work. There 
are a couple of cartoons and sketches for windows done in 1995 by 
Susan van Heukelom for the Cathedral of All Souls in Asheville, N.C., 
but their style is traditional. One might brood on the fact that the 
United States has no artists like Matisse, Chagall or Rouault doing 
star turns in stained glass. Still, the show _ handsomely installed 
in the newly expanded galleries of the Bible Society _ is not intended 
to be comprehensive, and it has a lot worth seeing. ``Glory in Glass: 
Stained Glass in the United States'' is at the Gallery at the American 
Bible Society, 1865 Broadway at 61st Street, through Feb. 16 (closed 
this Friday through Sunday). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>