<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981224.0269 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A week ago, my wife and I took a hard fall on a slippery pavement 
in New York. Shook us up, but no harm done _ maybe some good. Afterward, 
we recalled promises I made after I began writing about persecuted 
religious minorities abroad. I had promised myself I would keep writing 
about all persecuted minorities but never gloss over what Western 
governments like to forget _ that now most people arrested, tortured 
or slaughtered for their religion are Christians. I did continue. 
But I also had promised that no column on persecution would be my 
last. How foolish, I said. How could I know, when I wrote a column 
telling off Saddam Hussein or somebody, whether the next day a harder 
crack on a pavement or a car flying around a corner, or a grossly 
undeserved heart attack or other injustice would make that column 
my last. On this Christmas Day I am making sure my promise outsmarts 
any other endgame at least once more: ``Millions of American Christians 
pray in their churches each week, oblivious to the fact that Christians 
in many parts of the world suffer brutal torture, arrest, imprisonment 
and even death . . . for no other reason than that they are Christians. 
. . . They have been persecuted and martyred before an unknowing, 
indifferent world and a largely silent Christian community. ``Eleven 
countries where Christians are currently enduring religious persecution 
are China, the Sudan, Pakistan, North Korea, Saudi Arabia, Vietnam, 
Egypt, Nigeria, Cuba, Laos and Uzbekistan. They evidence a worldwide 
trend of anti-Christian persecution based on two political ideologies 
_ Communism and militant Islam.'' I quoted that in my first column 
on religious persecution, in 1997 _ from ``In the Lion's Den,'' by 
Nina Shea, a human rights army in herself, now director of the Center 
for Religious Freedom of Freedom House. Unknowing, indifferent _ only 
a few months ago at a dinner, one of America's richest and pleasantest 
men and the headmaster of a noted private school, a minister, both 
said they knew nothing about the persecution of their fellow Christians. 
Governments know. They are silent for 30 billion pieces of trade silver. 
In 1994 Bill Clinton, breaking his pre-election promises, sold to 
China the American commitment to human rights for Chinese and Tibetans. 
What he got in return was the permission to continue business with 
China, a kindness that costs America $50 billion annually in export-import 
loss, strengthens China with American missile technique and escorts 
Beijing into U.S. politics. And it frees China from administration 
action or denunciation for the arrests of more Christians who refuse 
to worship in government-regulated churches, and more long prison 
sentences to Chinese who believed the Communists might allow another 
political party. For the price America paid, read ``Year of the Rat'' 
by Edward Timperlake and William C. Triplett II (Regnery) and learn 
as much as your stomach can bear. Tibet got something in return for 
the Clintonian assurances of Chinese reasonableness. It got a Chinese 
stonewall to the Dalai Lama's eagerness for talks, and more repression. 
But millions of American Christians backed by many Jews and Buddhists 
rebelled against the persecution. In China, in the Sudan, where Christians 
are slaughtered by government armies _ everywhere. Working in churches, 
organizations and Congress, in November they defeated administration 
opposition to legislation that creates a commission to monitor persecution 
worldwide, and to suggest penalties to the president. The weakness 
is that he can waive the penalties. The strength is that a year-round 
spotlight can be kept on persecution. Tuesday the Republicans named 
four strong-minded fighters for religious freedom: former Sen. Bill 
Armstrong, former Assistant Secretaries of State John Bolton and Elliott 
Abrams, and Nina Shea. Democrats and the White House have yet to be 
heard from about their combined five appointments. Americans who won 
the bill should make sure the spotlight does not go out through weak 
administration appointments, unprotested waivers, press inattention. 
Stay organized, on the phone to Congress. And so that there will be 
another day to fight for religious and political rights, don't fall 
on slippery streets. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>