<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981224.0255 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Thirty-six years after he joined the army, Gen. Amnon Lipkin-Shahak 
turned in his uniform on Thursday and plunged into civilian life in 
a peculiar role, dubbed by the news media ``the great white hope'' 
of Israeli politics. Standing before a battery of cameras outside 
a military discharge center near Tel Aviv, Shahak, 54, did not announce 
his candidacy for prime minister. He voiced no political opinion beyond 
a call for ``togetherness.'' But even if he tiptoed, Shahak, a silent 
shadow over the electoral aspirations of both Prime Minister Benjamin 
Netanyahu and the opposition Labor Party leader, Ehud Barak, had finally 
stepped into the fray. ``This is in general a time to hold hands with 
everyone possible and to surrender everything that has to do with 
the ego,'' Shahak said. But then he added, his blue eyes flashing 
a photogenic steeliness, ``There will be a new way, and this new way 
is my way.'' One political cartoon published Thursday portrayed Shahak, 
a former paratrooper who radiates what many here see as decency, parachuting 
into a sea of sharks. He is expected to present himself as a centrist 
candidate in elections to be held in the spring, after Parliament's 
vote on Monday to dissolve Netanyahu's already disintegrated government. 
The Israeli public does not know much about Shahak's political opinions, 
which may be one reason he leads most polls; one on Thursday showed 
him trouncing Netanyahu, 48 percent to 33 percent, with 18 percent 
undecided. (The same poll shows Netanyahu, with the same 33 percent, 
losing to Barak's 45 percent.) Shahak is from the old school of Israeli 
politics. A sabra, or native-born Israeli, he comes from an Ashkenazi 
family that reaches back five generations in the region. A career 
military man, he was groomed by the late Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin 
and retired as army chief of staff. A lifelong member of the elite, 
he belonged to a small circle of influential leaders that carried 
the sobriquet ``the Jacuzzi gang,'' for their weekend meetings at 
luxury hotels. In an interview in the New York Times office here this 
fall, Shahak portrayed himself as a political moderate who supports 
the Israeli-Palestinian peace effort, a view he said reflected a deep-seated 
majority sentiment among Israelis. ``I believe without question that 
the peace process must move on, even though it won't be easy, not 
with the Palestinians, and not, eventually, with the Syrians,'' he 
said. ``But even with the rest of the Arab world, compromise will 
come. It has to come.'' Saying he remained deeply disturbed by the 
assassination three years ago of Rabin, his mentor, Shahak also expressed 
distaste for the crude and turbulent political discourse that has 
dominated Israeli politics. ``Obviously we need to make peace inside 
as well,'' he said. Shahak professed to be constrained by army rules 
from stating his views too explicitly. But he is notoriously frugal 
with words, and seemed uneasy making political pronouncements anyway. 
Some Israelis have criticized the public for falling in love with 
Shahak's body language. ``He appears to have good judgment and to 
be serious,'' wrote Yitzhak Deutsch in Hatzofe, the National Religious 
Party paper. ``He is experienced. But this man has not stood before 
the public. He has not presented his identity card.'' Not knowing 
whether Shahak is a hawk or a dove, a social liberal or conservative, 
Israelis have pounced on the idea of a political center (however vague), 
in large part out of frustration with the two major parties. Likud 
is riven by in-fighting, struggling to redefine itself now that its 
overriding mission, defending the land of Israel against territorial 
compromise, has been abandoned in pragmatic support of the peace effort. 
Labor, acknowledging that it has too long been considered a party 
of the elite, is fighting to recreate itself. And the center is seen 
as a refuge for defectors from both left and right. As such, the center 
is crowded. Dan Meridor, a Likud member and former finance minister 
under Netanyahu, announced his candidacy for prime minister earlier 
this week at the head of an undeclared centrist party. But he and 
Shahak are likely to join forces, and Shahak has said he would yield 
to Meridor if the polls showed him to be running stronger against 
Netanyahu. For Netanyahu, it has been a week to be stomped by former 
allies and opponents alike. Jerusalem's mayor, Ehud Olmert, joined 
the list of those considering challenging him for the leadership of 
Likud, and Olmert, who met Thursday with the disaffected defense minister, 
Yitzhak Mordechai, is probably the strongest contender inside the 
Likud. Mordechai has also met with Shahak to consider joining forces 
with him. So nervous are Shahak's opponents that they have factored 
him into their negotiations to set an election date, which is now 
expected to be some time between late March and late April. They calculate 
that a later date is preferable, figuring that Shahak's popularity 
will decline once he advances his political views, in part because 
he is not a commanding speaker. Shahak was born in Tel Aviv, where 
his father owned a movie theater, and is married to a journalist, 
Tali, the first woman to serve in Israel as a military correspondent. 
They have five children, ages 5 to 25. After attending military boarding 
school in Haifa, he joined the army at 18, enlisting at the same military 
center where he was discharged Thursday. He steadily worked his way 
up the ranks, serving as a paratroop commander in the 1967 and 1973 
Arab-Israeli wars, and earning two Medals of Valor. He served as deputy 
chief of staff to Barak, the Labor leader, and some former military 
associates believe the two would still work best as a team. But Shahak, 
who succeeded Barak in 1995, reportedly believes that Labor cannot 
win an election. A critical assessment in the newspaper Haaretz says 
Shahak was an undistinguished chief of staff who did not initiate 
any major changes in the army's military doctrine or organization. 
Rabin brought Shahak into the peace talks as lead negotiator of the 
details in the 1995 interim agreement with the Palestinians. But under 
Netanyahu, who did not believe the military should be involved in 
political negotiations, Shahak was frozen out. Relations between Shahak 
and Netanyahu were formal at best. ``There was no friendship,'' Shahak 
said. ``He never invited me to his house, and he is definitely not 
in my circle.'' After he resigned Thursday morning, Shahak drove to 
President Ezer Weizmann's home in Jerusalem. Weizmann can grant him 
a dispensation that allows him to enter politics before the usual 
100-day, postmilitary waiting period expires. Leaving Weizmann's house, 
Shahak crossed the street to hold his first public political meeting, 
in a raggedy protesters' tent where he listened as the mothers of 
soldiers killed in Lebanon, who are rarely heeded here, vented their 
anger. He said little more than that the policy on Israel's engagement 
in southern Lebanon had to change sometime soon. But he was not quick 
to leave. He gave the women their due, and when he left, the mothers, 
with their sons' photographs pinned to their sweaters, held their 
hand-lettered signs a little higher. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>