<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981224.0194 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Looking back at 1998 should instill a little humility in Washington 
journalists and global investors. They are two breeds with little 
in common, other than a fondness for confidently predicting how events 
will unfold _ and then explaining confidently how life interfered 
with an otherwise perfect scenario. When President Clinton's indiscretions 
were revealed, many a talking head predicted that he would be gone 
in months. When the Paula Jones civil suit was dismissed, journalists 
said impeachment was inconceivable. Autumn airwaves were full of forecasts 
that the Democrats would lose 10 to 20 seats in Congress. They gained 
five, and impeachment was dead again. Until it wasn't. The masters 
of the world economy didn't do much better in 1998. The International 
Monetary Fund thought its program to save Indonesia would be carried 
out because President Suharto understood his own interests and had 
an iron grip on his country. Wrong twice. Then the IMF's managing 
director, Michel Camdessus, told the world to pay no attention to 
investors fleeing Russia: ``Contrary to what markets and commentators 
are imagining, this is not a crisis. This is not a major development.'' 
But those miscalculations pale beside the ones investors made. America, 
they figured, had too much invested in Boris Yeltsin to permit default 
and economic chaos in Russia. When both arrived there, world markets 
fell into an abyss that looked bottomless by October. Then the experts 
said the Asian contagion had finally arrived in America and killed 
the boom; three interest-rate cuts later, the Dow is back around 9,000. 
Historians will no doubt spend decades dissecting the lessons of roller-coaster 
1998. Here are a few to get them started. (italics)The markets prefer 
paralysis in Washington _ until someone needs a bailout.(end italics) 
One explanation for Wall Street's so-what view of impeachment comes 
from the libertarian song book: A distracted Congress won't have time 
to raise the minimum wage or otherwise monkey with the economy. ``It's 
the kind of thing you hear when markets are good,'' said Allen Sinai, 
chief global strategist for Primark Decision Economics, a consulting 
firm in Boston. ``People on the Street convince themselves that the 
government can only mess things up. When things go bad, then it's 
a different tune.'' The tune certainly was different when Long-Term 
Capital Management was on the verge of collapse and the Federal Reserve 
instigated a private-sector bailout. White House and Treasury phones 
were abuzz with the suggestions by everyone from George Soros to the 
partners at Goldman, Sachs about what the president should say and 
when he should say it. ``I think the turning point was the president's 
speech at the Council on Foreign Relations,'' Treasury Secretary Robert 
E. Rubin said in an interview last week, referring to Clinton's call 
in September _ scripted by Rubin and the Fed chairman, Alan Greenspan 
_ for policies to promote growth rather than contain inflation. Interest 
rates fell around the world as a result. The lesson is that at crucial 
moments, government policy does matter _ and government paralysis 
matters even more. Just ask the Japanese. (italics)It's bad news when 
big economies stumble, but it can be worse when little ones do.(end 
italics) Even Rubin, a staunch defender of the country's response 
to the Asian crisis, concedes that his staff saw little chance of 
Thailand's 1997 meltdown leading to global economic trouble. It was 
a reasonable guess, since larger economies had tanked, as Mexico's 
did in 1995, without causing tsunamis. But it was wrong, and it won't 
be the last bad guess. The world tracks (and professes to understand) 
every ripple in the American and Japanese economies but has little 
insight into developing countries. Thailand, Indonesia and Russia 
are all examples of what happens when, as one Clinton administration 
official puts it, ``you put countries with 19th-century financial 
institutions into a 21st-century world economy.'' So the surprises 
may not be over. A month after Brazil received a $41.5 billion bailout, 
investors are not exactly rushing back in. The IMF predicted last 
week that Russia's economy would shrink by 8.5 percent next year, 
topping anyone's list of social explosions waiting to happen. And 
if China, which has bravely held off the worst effects of the Asian 
crisis, starts to falter, all bets are off. (italics)Crony capitalism 
sank the Asians, but in Greenwich, it has its advantages.(end italics) 
Washington and the IMF miss no opportunity to tell Asians why they 
shouldn't bail out failing institutions to spare the well-connected. 
So who could blame Japan for gloating when Long-Term Capital Management 
was rescued? ``This looks a lot like our program,'' observed Kiichi 
Miyazawa, Japan's finance minister, with a twinkle in his eye. (italics)The 
markets have discounted the possibility of a long impeachment trial 
in the Senate, because everyone knows what's coming: a censure deal.(end 
italics) Yeah. It's a sure bet. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>