<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981224.0227 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A decade ago, Iman Mohammed was a new schoolteacher who earned the 
equivalent of $400 a month and spent a fair amount of it keeping herself 
smartly dressed and pretty in the hope of attracting the best possible 
husband. Today Ms. Mohammed still teaches fifth-graders, but inflation 
has reduced the value of her monthly salary to just $2. She lives 
at home with her widowed mother and five brothers and sisters, and 
has all but given up hope of starting a family of her own. ``My two 
brothers support the family, but they have no money to get married,'' 
she said during a break between classes on Thursday. ``Other young 
men are in the same situation. I am ready to marry anyone who asks, 
but who can do it in these conditions?'' Depressed, unable to contribute 
substantially to her family and facing the prospect of living her 
life without a husband, Ms. Mohammed, 36, is typical of her generation 
of Iraqi women. Although eight years of economic sanctions on Iraq 
have devastated the entire society, women have suffered most acutely. 
``The sanctions have changed many things for women,'' Ms. Mohammed 
said. ``There is no work, so men do not get married. Women can barely 
afford food or medicine, and the idea of having anything nice is just 
a dream. When I was young, I was middle class and happy. Now my adulthood 
is being denied to me. ``Boys and men can adjust more easily to this 
situation. They can go everywhere they like. They can have jobs, even 
if they are bad ones. We are much more limited. We can't even go out 
for a picnic. It causes us great psychological problems.'' Millions 
of Iraqi women like Ms. Mohammed work in public jobs, and nearly all 
earn about what she earns. They avoid starvation largely because of 
monthly food rations supplied by the United Nations and paid for with 
money the government is allowed to earn by selling oil. The sanctions, 
imposed by the United Nations in an effort to persuade President Saddam 
Hussein to curb his weapons program and ease his harsh regime, forbid 
almost all foreign trade and have reduced the Iraqi economy to ruins. 
Women like Ms. Mohammed do not work mainly for income, like people 
in the rest of the world. Without jobs they would have no alternative 
but to sit at home, so they work to occupy their minds and maintain 
contact with the outside world. There are no reliable statistics about 
marriage rates here, but anecdotal evidence suggests that they have 
plummeted. One Iraqi newspaper recently estimated that 70 percent 
of Iraqis between the ages of 18 and 40 are unmarried. In interviews 
this week, women of all social classes said they knew of almost no 
young people who have married in the last eight years or are preparing 
to marry. It is a phenomenon that could have widespread social effects. 
``In this country, marriage takes a woman out of her home and gives 
her independence,'' said a 24-year-old graduate student who asked 
to be identified only by her first name, Nebras. ``Single women must 
follow very strict rules. It is impossible to have a boyfriend. Living 
alone is out of the question. The only way to have a real life and 
become a real person is to marry. Nowadays we can't do that, because 
sanctions have made it impossible for men to earn enough to support 
a family. It is a very difficult situation for us.'' Nebras is highly 
intelligent and vivacious and comes from a well-to-do background. 
Women with fewer assets face different and perhaps even more daunting 
challenges. Before the sanctions were imposed eight years ago, after 
Iraq invaded Kuwait, Widad Abdul-Latif was busy from morning to night 
caring for her two sons and seven daughters. Her husband earned a 
good living as a tailor, and her sons ran a grocery store. Soon after 
the sanctions took effect, her husband's business collapsed along 
with that of virtually every other tailor in the country, since people 
found themselves without money for new clothes. Later the grocery 
store failed for similar reasons. Ms. Abdul-Latif, now 58, began putting 
in 11-hour days selling falafel sandwiches on a street corner. ``It 
is shameful for women to do work like this, but I have no choice,'' 
she said. ``My sons do construction work when they can find it, but 
without the few pennies I bring home, we could not survive. My daughters 
stay at home all day. They will never marry, not as long as the embargo 
continues. Men cannot afford to marry. As for women, what can we say? 
Nothing. We can only keep silent.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>