<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981224.0320 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Twice in the last week, buildings designed to save lives in the event 
of a fire turned instead into deathtraps, when human error foiled 
the fireproofing systems that were meant to isolate and contain deadly 
flames, smoke, heat and gases. The two incidents, which claimed the 
lives of three firefighters at a burning Brooklyn apartment building 
last Friday and four residents in a Manhattan high-rise fire on Wednesday, 
have focused renewed attention on New York City's fire code and its 
approach to fire safety in high-rise residential buildings. Fire safety 
experts said that in the case of high-rise apartment buildings, the 
city relies heavily on fire-resistant construction, intended to contain 
a fire until firefighters arrive, while the rest of the state and 
most of the country have moved to require sprinkler systems in tall 
residential buildings. A system of structural fire barriers like New 
York City's can _ and, in most cases, does _ work, the experts said. 
But it is vulnerable. For the system to function as intended, the 
room or apartment where a fire has broken out must be closed off. 
A human mistake as simple as leaving a door ajar, as occurred in the 
two most recent fatal fires, can cause the safety system to break 
down. ``New York is really the only major city in the country that 
has this philosophy,'' said Jonathan Barnett, associate professor 
of fire protection engineering at the Worcester Polytechnic Institute 
Center for Fire Safety Studies in Worcester, Mass. City officials 
say that their fire code has proven its worth because, over all, fire 
deaths are declining. But, as underlined by the two most recent fatal 
fires, many of the fire-safety innovations introduced in the city 
during the last 20 years _ self-closing doors to seal off stairwells 
and apartments, fire-rated doors and walls to contain fires, fire-rated 
concrete block construction _ can be undone by human error. In the 
Brooklyn fire on Dec. 18, an elderly woman left the door open behind 
her as she fled a fire in her 10th-floor apartment, turning the hallway 
into a wind tunnel for a fireball that engulfed three firefighters. 
City officials are investigating why the supposedly self-closing steel 
door did not shut on its own and why a sprinkler system in the building's 
hallway had been turned off. That system was not required by the city 
code, but had been installed by the federal agency that managed the 
residence. At the fire in Manhattan, Fire Department officials said 
residents propped open a self-closing door to the apartment where 
the blaze started on Wednesday morning. Fire and smoke escaped into 
the hallway and were sucked into a stairwell when firefighters opened 
the door. Four people on the stairs were killed. The two fires appear 
to have given new political impetus to stalled efforts to require 
sprinkler systems in tall residential apartment buildings. Mayor Rudolph 
Giuliani has suggested in recent days that he will push for legislation 
to require all new apartment towers to have sprinkler systems. At 
the same time, the City Council's Housing and Buildings Committee 
has scheduled a hearing on potential sprinkler legislation in the 
coming weeks, said Rica Rinzler, the committee's spokeswoman. Sprinklers 
are now required in apartment towers only when the building has a 
compactor chute, which is difficult to seal off and can be difficult 
for firefighters to reach if a fire breaks out in the chute itself. 
Sprinkler systems are already required for some types of buildings: 
new high-rise residential hotels and office buildings taller than 
75 feet, nightclubs, department stores, some factories and warehouses, 
nursing homes and single-room-occupancy hotels. Fire Commissioner 
Thomas Von Essen said his department would support new and tougher 
legislation to require sprinklers in residential high-rises. But he 
said any new laws should strike a balance between fire-safety imperatives 
and the cost of the new systems. ``The public has to realize that 
buildings are much safer,'' Von Essen said. ``We have fewer fire fatalities 
than we have ever had. There were 145 fire fatalities last year. That 
was the lowest in 37 years. ``This year, there have been 101 fire 
fatalities,'' he continued. ``Things are better than they ever were. 
Could conditions be safer? There are always ways to improve.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>