<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981224.0344 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Another year of sports television and business is nearly over, so 
it's time to revisit my musty notes to see if anything intelligible 
shakes out. BEST STORIES: 1. Beanie Babies take over baseball. 2. 
National Football League TV rights sell for $18 billion. 3. Rupert 
Murdoch buys Dodgers, and Yankees are nearly bought by Cablevision. 
4. Cleveland Browns sell for $530 million. 5. Islanders vacate Nassau 
Coliseum fearing scoreboard would fall. 6. Fox and ESPN scramble to 
carry Mark McGwire-Sammy Sosa home run race; ESPN shows McGwire's 
61st, Fox his 62nd. ``WHEN GOLFERS ATTACK!'': No, it's not a new Fox 
prime-time show, but Arnold Palmer and Jack Nicklaus testifying, coldly, 
on tape against Casey Martin's right to use a golf cart because of 
his right leg, which is badly atrophied because of a lifelong circulatory 
disease. INDELIBLE IMAGES: 1. McGwire embracing Roger Maris' family 
after his 62nd home run. 2. Knicks Coach Jeff Van Gundy hanging onto 
Alonzo Mourning's leg during wild playoff fracas, looking like a scarecrow 
in a tornado. 3. Michael Jordan hitting National Basketball Association 
finals-winning shot. 4. Teeth falling from Warner Wolf's mouth during 
Channel 2 sportscast. 5. David Wells wearing a leisure suit on ``Late 
Show with David Letterman'' after pitching his perfect game. THE RICH 
ARE DIFFERENT: Ted Turner jumps from his seat during an interview 
to check his Time Warner stock holdings: ``Ha! I made $150 million 
today!'' IS THERE NO SHAME? Upper Deck slices a vintage Babe Ruth 
bat into 200 pieces for insertion into trading card backs. Good news: 
company says the bat wasn't used for a significant home run. That's 
like shredding a speech written by Winston Churchill because it wasn't 
the one that coined the term ``Iron Curtain.'' BEST AD FOR THERAPY: 
Keith Olbermann quits 14-month-old news gig on MSNBC, credits his 
therapist for making him realize he loved sports all along (he just 
hated his old employer, ESPN). So, he takes a million-dollar deal 
to become the undisputed anchor star of Fox Sports News. Somewhere, 
Jung has scored a biscuit in a basket. WAITING FOR REPRISALS: No longer 
National Football League TV partners, irked NBC and Turner plan a 
new spring-summer pro football league that is expected to begin next 
year. NBC, TNT and TBS would carry the games, but there is no league 
title (Revenge League?), cities (Hell, Michigan, is a start) or nicknames 
(Visigoths? Vandals? Ditkas?). EXPERIENCE _ QUITE A CONCEPT: While 
players and coaches continue to move directly from the field to broadcast 
booths and studios with uncertain results, ESPN's Solomon Wilcots 
and Fox Sports Net's Jackie Slater worked for several years honing 
their craft. Not surprisingly, they show polish, poise and personality. 
REQUIEM FOR A TOY: Fox retires its glowing puck for NHL games. FREE 
FRANK GIFFORD! ABC replaces the Giffer with Boomer Esiason in the 
``Monday Night Football'' booth, then sends Frank to play nominal 
role inside a sound-proof booth in new pre-game show from the ESPN 
Sports Zone sports bar in Baltimore. Maybe next season, ABC should 
let Frank be co-host of the show with Art Donovan, the loquacious 
and opinionated former Baltimore Colt. Then put Chris Berman in the 
booth. NETWORK DINING: If ESPN can start the Sport Zone chain, and 
Fox can begin a line of airport sports bars, will NBC launch the Olympic 
Plausibly Live Restaurant, where meals are served on tape-delay in 
time for the 2000 Summer Olympics in Sydney? BAD MOVE-GOOD MOVE: NBC 
hires Isiah Thomas as its No. 1 NBA analyst (bad move), then hires 
Doug Collins (good move) in midseason to join him, then shifts him 
to the studio show (potentially good move) if there's an NBA season. 
TIMING IS EVERYTHING: With the lockout in force, the NBA opens posh 
NBA Store on Fifth Avenue. When greed is the word about players and 
owners, why not sell $8,000 Waterford vases etched with the figure 
of Larry Bird driving to the basket or $30,000 replica Bulls championship 
rings? So far, the store hasn't begun selling the $250 Patrick Ewing 
cell phone, which stays glued to your ear during gritty labor talks. 
RETRO REPLAY? The failed bid to revive instant replay for the NFL 
playoffs did not include a retroactive attempt to reverse a bad yard-line 
spot on a third down run by the Giants' Gifford during the 1958 championship 
game won by the Colts, 23-17. MYSTERY FOR 1999: After the Jan. 4 Fiesta 
Bowl, ABC's Keith Jackson will retire as the network laureate of college 
football. Who will succeed him? ABC won't say. But if you heard ESPN's 
Ron Franklin announce the UCLA-Miami game last month, you'd choose 
him: he has style, he calls a solid game and he sounds like Al Michaels. 
PROFILE IN COURAGE: Ralph Kiner showed real heart by continuing to 
call Mets games for Channel 9 and Fox Sports New York despite suffering 
from Bell's Palsy. His voice was slow and distorted, but he was still 
the same amusing and insightful Ralphie Boy. He improved dramatically 
by season's end. Here's to a full recovery in 1999. And here's to 
a wonderful holiday season, filled with watching entirely too much 
TV. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>