<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981224.0330 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial on Friday, Dec. 25: Just as 
the move to censure President Clinton is gaining momentum in the Senate, 
the House Republicans' chief hatchet man has arrogantly tried to block 
its progress. Tom DeLay, the majority whip, is inviting senators who 
oppose a lengthy trial over removing Clinton from office to view some 
mysterious evidence against the president that has not been made public 
or disclosed to the White House but is available only to House members. 
This claim of secret evidence is an insult to due process and an improper 
intervention into Senate deliberations. The Senate's obligation is 
to weigh evidence in the open and stick to the official case brought 
by the managers of the impeachment case. Reports of exactly what the 
evidence is against Clinton are muddy. Some is said to relate to Kathleen 
Willey's charge that the president groped her and to an accusation 
that Clinton forced himself on a woman 20 years ago, when he was attorney 
general of Arkansas. Before the impeachment vote in the House, some 
wavering Republicans were invited to look at the material, just in 
case anyone thought the charges brought by Kenneth Starr and Republican 
investigators on the House Judiciary Committee were not enough to 
support impeachment. The White House was right to object then and 
even more right now. Neither Starr nor any other investigator saw 
fit to include these allegations in their charges that the president 
committed perjury and obstructed justice. DeLay's notion that evidence 
can be brought to bear on senators' decisions even though it is kept 
secret from the public is repugnant to any standards of justice and 
to the need for open procedures in a democracy. The House Judiciary 
Committee debated the evidence for some time and laid out its findings 
for all to see. It had ample opportunity to bring out any material 
it saw fit. Now that the House has approved two articles of impeachment, 
it is the Senate's turn to respond. It is simply inappropriate for 
a House leader to reach across to the Senate and try to put his thumbs 
on the scale with hidden material the House had every chance to bring 
out in a responsible form but chose not to. The sorry leadership vacuum 
in the House is making it possible for DeLay to make mischief. Now 
that Speaker Newt Gingrich and the one-time speaker-to-be Robert Livingston 
have gone home to nurse their own self-inflicted wounds, House Republicans 
have settled on Dennis Hastert as the next speaker. If Hastert does 
not call DeLay off quickly, he will end up a front man rather than 
a powerful speaker. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>