<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981224.0224 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Klaus Gossens built his career by thinking more like a European than 
a German. As head of European trade management at Braun AG, he has 
nurtured one of Europe's best-known brand names for such household 
gadgets as coffee makers, spice grinders and electric shavers. So, 
as most of Europe takes a huge step toward unity by introducing its 
new single currency, the euro, why is Gossens worried? His problem 
is prices. A Braun Flex Integral shaver sells for about $90 in Spain, 
$103 in the Netherlands, $118 in Germany and $124 in France. There 
are similar variations for countless other products: Chanel perfume, 
Volkswagen sedans, Levi's jeans, even Bayer aspirin. And French or 
German consumers are not the only ones who pay more. Europe's biggest 
retailers themselves often pay their suppliers different prices in 
different countries. ``Until now, buyers tolerated those differences,'' 
Gossens said in a recent interview at Braun headquarters in Kronberg, 
north of Frankfurt. ``But they aren't tolerating them anymore. We 
are entering a situation where everything is very transparent. If 
I am a buyer and I don't get satisfactory answers about prices, I'll 
go off to another company.'' That may sound like Economics 101, but 
until recently Europeans have been fighting it. Though the European 
Union abolished most trade barriers among member countries years ago, 
European retail markets remain stubbornly balkanized. Now, as 11 countries 
prepare to start using the euro as their common currency on Friday, 
the crazy-quilt system has become a battleground. By eliminating the 
fig leaf of different currencies, the euro should theoretically make 
it much easier to compare prices and to pounce on discrepancies. It 
is also likely to give a new boost to cross-border transactions within 
Europe, because it will eliminate exchange-rate fluctuations and the 
cost of hedging against them. Though the new bills and coins will 
not begin circulating until 2002, the euro is already quite real. 
The participating countries _ Germany, France, Italy, Belgium, the 
Netherlands, Luxembourg, Austria, Spain, Portugal, Ireland and Finland 
_ will permanently lock their exchange rates to the euro on New Year's 
Eve and surrender their control over monetary policy to the new European 
Central Bank. Indeed, some stores have begun posting prices in euros 
and plan to start accepting euros on credit card purchases as early 
as Jan. 4. Banks are required to let their customers keep their accounts 
in either euros or the local currency, and all interbank transfers 
will be cleared in euros. Big industrial companies like DaimlerChrysler 
and Siemens are converting their own books and prodding their suppliers 
to deal in euros as quickly as possible. All this is accelerating 
a revolution in prices that began when the European Union essentially 
abolished trade barriers among member countries earlier in this decade. 
Big retailers like Carrefour Group in France and Metro AG of Germany 
are beefing up their computer systems to catch suppliers' pricing 
discrepancies. Car companies, already struggling with overcapacity 
and brutal competition, are grudgingly bringing prices into closer 
alignment from country to country. Computer manufacturers, generating 
more sales through the borderless Internet, are doing the same. Still, 
those who expect Adam Smith's invisible hand to eliminate the incongruity 
_ and to do so swiftly _ are likely to be disappointed. European prices 
are rooted in big social and institutional differences that companies 
have learned to respect. Buying power, for example, is much weaker 
in Spain and Portugal, where personal incomes are about 25 percent 
lower than the European average. Aspirin is more expensive in Germany 
in part because laws aimed at protecting small pharmacies prohibit 
supermarkets from selling it. Groceries are expensive in Paris; the 
city has prohibited high-volume ``hypermarkets'' within its boundaries. 
Sales taxes and luxury taxes also vary, despite years of efforts by 
European leaders to harmonize them. With so many variables, there 
are no simple patterns in the price differences. A recent survey by 
Test-Achats, a consumer research association in Brussels, found that 
Italy had the lowest prices for Swatch watches but among the highest 
for Lacoste polo shirts. ``I think the euro will bring lower prices 
over all, but that the price differences will be more or less the 
ones we have right now,'' said Stephane Douchy, a market analyst at 
Test-Achats. With the euro, ``there will be greater price transparency,'' 
added Harald Muenzberg, a retail industry expert at Gemini Consulting 
in Bad Homburg, Germany. Still, he said, it will remain ``relatively 
difficult to figure out prices.'' ``There are many different prices 
for many different products,'' he added. ``There are discounts, advertising 
allowances, rebates. All of that leads to different pricing.'' For 
people like Gossens of Braun, which is owned by Gillette Corp., it 
also adds up to big struggles ahead. ``Our customers are coming to 
us and saying, `We want to pay the lowest prices possible,' '' he 
said. ``But what is that? Is pricing what you have in your price list? 
Is it the price after you deduct bonuses and conditions? What are 
you really comparing across countries?'' De Meaux is looking forward 
to the euro era, in which he expects retailers to grab more influence 
over pricing from the hands of their suppliers. ``The market dynamics 
have existed for several years already,'' he said in a recent interview 
in Paris. ``But this will make more pressure on suppliers; that is 
obvious. It's not going to happen overnight on Jan. 1. It will take 
a few years. But it will be a big change.'' Like Wal-Mart, Carrefour 
sells everything from fresh fish to personal computers, relying on 
huge volume to eke profits from small margins. With total sales this 
year of about $32 billion, it competes ferociously on price and puts 
constant pressure on suppliers. It is not alone. Metro AG of Germany 
is now the world's second-biggest retailer, behind only Wal-Mart, 
operating everything from warehouse and department stores to cash-and-carry 
grocery outlets. Inditex SA of Spain owns clothing stores in much 
of Europe as well as Latin America and Asia. Yet Europe's incongruities 
are sufficiently confounding _ and so deeply seated _ that even these 
giant retailers can hardly expect to call all the shots. For one thing, 
European consumers have widely varying tastes, which means that identical 
goods are not sold everywhere and that comparison-pricing across borders 
can be tricky. Italians like big, ``family-sized'' bottles of shampoo, 
for instance, while French families prefer smaller bottles tailored 
to individuals. Nestle has scores of variations on the formula for 
Nescafe, to take account of regional coffee-drinking preferences from 
Italy to Scandinavia. National regulations add to the complexity. 
French retailing, for example, is unique in Europe, because stores 
are prohibited from charging more for products than they show on their 
own invoices. Instead, retailers earn their profits by negotiating 
with suppliers to obtain rebates and other payments for promotional 
services. The money works out about the same, but the practice makes 
international comparisons far more complicated. Different countries 
also have very different retailing systems, some more efficient than 
others. High-volume hypermarkets have a strong presence in France 
and Spain, but Germany has a high proportion of smaller specialty 
stores. On top of all this are logistical rigidities that are the 
modern tracings of hundreds or thousands of years of national divisions 
on the Continent. ``Carrefour can't just say, `Well, I'll buy all 
my Coke from Spain because it's cheaper,''' de Meaux said. ``If you 
need to supply 130 stores in France, you can't change all your suppliers 
every time someone offers a lower price.'' Price comparisons can even 
be difficult on the Internet, where national borders can be jumped 
with a few clicks of the mouse. Consider the experience of Dell Computer, 
which now sells about $2 million worth of personal computer equipment 
a day in western Europe over the World Wide Web. ``We were in a chicken-and-egg 
situation,'' said Jan Gesmar-Larsen, president of Dell's subsidiary 
for Europe, the Mideast and Africa. ``We have been using the Web to 
push all our sales. But as you go on the Net, it's very easy to call 
up pages country by country. It's very easy for a skilled customer 
to make comparisons between pricing.'' Larsen said Dell could not 
hope to charge different national prices when it began marketing over 
the Web in 1996. But even though prices were equalized, consumers 
were nudged in different directions by means of separate home pages 
for almost every country, in its own language. As a result, comparing 
prices is anything but simple. Customers who log onto the German page 
find that the baseline home computer is a modest machine that costs 
about 2,895 marks, or $1,754. The prices and complexity go up from 
there. Those who log onto the Spanish page are led to an entirely 
different series of computers. This list starts with a model that 
sells at 347,000 pesetas, or $2,443, and from there the prices and 
complexity go down _ ultimately below the cheapest German packages. 
Those differences are a reflection of very different markets. German 
consumers remain among the wealthiest in Europe, yet they are used 
to price wars on computers and are anxious about the economy's slow 
growth. Spanish consumers are much poorer, on average, but economic 
growth is booming and businesses are spending heavily on equipment 
of all types. Dell says that its pricing policies are reasonable and 
that the euro will be good for business. ``We think what it will do 
is encourage more visibility on prices, and that will encourage people 
to go to our Web site,'' said James Reed, the company's director of 
European programs. ``We look on this as an opportunity and not a risk.'' 
The advent of the new currency is forcing merchants and their suppliers 
to battle over some of the hoariest traditions of pricing. As in the 
United States, European stores try to make products look cheaper by 
posting prices just below a round number _ for example, selling shoes 
in Germany for 99.99 marks instead of 100. But in euros, that price 
would be more like 51.51. And that raises the question of whether 
to round the euro price up (to 51.99) or down (to 50.99). Collectively, 
such choices will add up to billions of euros that will be borne either 
by consumers or someone else along the supply chain. Political leaders 
have already begun warning stores not to make consumers pay by rounding 
such prices up, and most experts don't think consumers would accept 
the increases, anyhow. But suppliers and retailers do not want to 
absorb price declines, and neither is ceding much ground. ``Retailers 
already have enough clout to make their views prevail,'' said Gossens 
of Braun, echoing a widespread fear among consumer-goods companies. 
``It will be tough.'' Particularly so, because the euro arrives at 
a time when European prices are already under downward pressure. Across 
the Continent, inflation is below 2 percent a year; it has nearly 
evaporated in Germany, where prices rose just seven-tenths of a percent 
over the last year. Thanks to fallout from financial crises in Asia 
and Russia, many European exports are actually declining in price. 
Though Germany's economy grew about 3 percent in 1998, the Association 
of German Retailers estimates that retail sales declined slightly 
in real terms, according to its spokesman, Hubertus Pellengahr. ``It's 
just not possible to raise prices in this environment,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>