<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981224.0258 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A sustained assault by Serbian forces on this area in northern Kosovo 
province ripped apart a tenuous two-month cease-fire Thursday, as 
more than 40 armored vehicles and tanks fought through the day with 
separatist guerrillas. Leaders of the international monitoring mission 
intended to help build confidence and spur talks between the government 
and the rebels questioned whether it was becoming pointless _ and 
too dangerous _ to stay. Thursday's attack, which diplomats said was 
the worst violation since the cease-fire went into effect, came after 
11 days of combat and assassinations in which, international monitors 
say, the two sides have shown that they do not intend to solve their 
differences peacefully. ``Both sides have gone looking for trouble 
and they have found it,'' said William Walker, the U.S. diplomat in 
charge of the monitoring mission. ``If the two sides are unwilling 
to live up to their agreements, 2,000, 3,000 or 4,000 unarmed verifiers 
cannot frustrate their attempts to go after each other,'' he said. 
The monitors were allowed into Yugoslavia under the threat of NATO 
air strikes in October. At that time the Belgrade government also 
agreed to withdraw many of its forces from Kosovo and to stop its 
attacks on the rebels. The ethnic Albanian rebels of the Kosovo Liberation 
Army agreed to a cease-fire and to enter good-faith negotiations. 
The monitoring mission is part of the Organization for Security and 
Cooperation in Europe. There are about 600 observers in Kosovo now, 
and the plan is to have about 2,000 in place by the end of January. 
But with Kosovo seemingly racing toward all-out war again, a British 
major general, John Drewienkiewicz, who is deputy head of the monitoring 
mission, wondered Thursday night if Europe and America would continue 
to contribute observers. ``Why should we put the lives of our young 
men in danger to help people who have not kept their solemn agreements?'' 
asked Drewienkiewicz. ``The states contributing forces will not see 
them caught in a meat grinder. They will pull out instead.'' As if 
to highlight the danger, foreign officials say an observer parked 
in front of a military barracks Thursday was told by the police that 
soldiers would shoot him if he stayed more than two minutes longer. 
The government said the assault Thursday was part of the investigation 
into the assassination of a state security official in Podujevo on 
Monday, a claim dismissed by diplomats. ``You don't need 40 armored 
vehicles, including tanks, for a murder case,'' a diplomat said. On 
Thursday night, fighting continued sporadically in the area around 
Podujevo, with small-arms fire and what appeared to be occasional 
mortar rounds. A senior Western diplomat said fighting would probably 
pick up again on Friday because it seemed as if government forces 
had been prevented from taking their principal objective, the village 
of Gornja Lapastica. ``They are not going to back off,'' he predicted. 
``I think they will come back and pound the KLA again. If that happens, 
all of Kosovo could go up in flames.'' International monitors said 
the rebels had used anti-tank weapons to inflict a surprising amount 
of damage on the government's armored vehicles. While the rebels had 
anti-tank weapons during combat over the summer, they had not used 
them effectively and usually fled from government attacks. Rebel commanders 
and international observers say that in recent months rebel forces 
have received new weapons and more rebels are trained in using them. 
In Thursday's fighting, monitors said, rebel forces often stood their 
ground and forced government troops to retreat. Diplomats point to 
the rebels' recruitment drive and their rearming as indications they 
are not interested in serious negotiations. At nightfall, a long column 
of government troop transports, armored vehicles and tanks was moving 
back to its base south of Podujevo. Some of the armored vehicles showed 
heavy battle damage. ``This is going to make the Albanians feel pretty 
cocky,'' a senior Western diplomat said. ``They're going to want to 
keep on going.'' Ethnic Albanian civilians said the attack began about 
8:30 on Thursday morning with what sounded like mortar or artillery 
fire directed at the village of Gornja Lapastica. Villagers said they 
fled when they saw the tanks coming. They, and perhaps 300,000 other 
ethnic Albanians, fled government forces over the summer when the 
police and soldiers tried to rout the guerrillas but ended up terrorizing 
and radicalizing most of the people in Kosovo. In houses near the 
village Thursday, villagers sat and stared with wide, terrified eyes. 
``This is like the summer when we spent the whole time trying to escape,'' 
said Zade Hoxha, 80. Sabid Kopalla, who was working in his carpet 
store in Podujevo when the fighting started, said: ``They put snipers 
on all the tall buildings in town. Then they began firing everywhere, 
but I think they were shooting to make people afraid and go inside, 
not to hurt them.'' A construction worker, Lytfi Salihu, said the 
only conceivable response from the rebels was to step up attacks on 
government forces. ``They are ones who attack us, and our people must 
protect us,'' he said. A Serbian police officer was shot to death 
and three others were wounded in attacks Tuesday. Last week started 
out with the murder of six Serb youths in a coffee shop and a government 
ambush that killed 36 rebels trying to smuggle in weapons from Albania. 
Saturday a Serbian government official was murdered. The government 
is faced with a particular problem in this area. Not only are Serb 
civilians threatening to form vigilante groups to protect themselves, 
but the town is on the main road to the rest of Serbia. During the 
cease-fire, rebels had taken up positions close to the center of the 
town and along the road, thus threatening the government's ability 
to control the road, or even resupply its forces in Kosovo. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>