<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981224.0187 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
One morning in October, Steven M. Golden set upon his competitors 
like a brawling barnyard dog. Golden is chief executive of Coolsavings, 
one of seven companies vying to dominate a burgeoning field that barely 
existed two years ago _ the electronic distribution of coupon-style 
discounts to consumers. On Oct. 19, Coolsavings, which is based in 
Chicago, announced the first of six lawsuits against all its rivals, 
accusing them of infringing a patent it was granted in June. ``We're 
taking a position of strength and following the advice of attorneys 
about how we protect our position as an industry leader,'' Golden 
said in an interview. Coolsavings' patent-and-sue strategy is aggressive 
but far from unique. Companies in fiercely competitive technology 
industries from communications and software to drugs and biotechnology 
are giving the 12-gauge lawsuit a prominent place in the corporate 
gun cabinet. The volume of civil lawsuits in federal courts is rising 
again after a slump in the late 1980s and early 1990s. And a recent 
federal court of appeals decision that broadens the already wide definition 
of a patentable process has opened the door for more contentious patents, 
and thus more litigation. Patent lawyers say strategic suing makes 
sense in lucrative new drug and technology markets. ``It can definitely 
be a good idea if it slows competitors and gets you a one- to two-year 
head start,'' said James G. Gilliland, an intellectual-property lawyer 
in San Francisco who has many technology clients. ``That can make 
all the difference in the world because, my goodness, there is a lot 
of money to be made'' when a new idea first reaches the marketplace, 
he said. The combination of more patents and more companies built 
around patented technology has driven up the number of lawsuits, said 
Eugene R. Quinn Jr., a lawyer and consultant who teaches at the Franklin 
Pierce Law Center in Concord, N.H. In a review of federal court records, 
Quinn found that the number of new patent-related lawsuits grew to 
more than 2,100 in 1997, from 1,500 in 1992. Strategic suing is not 
for the thin of wallet. The richer the prize, the bloodier the warfare 
and the greater the likelihood that the case will be tried rather 
than settled. The median cost to each party in a patent trial is $1.2 
million, according to the American Intellectual Property Association; 
complex trials can run to $6 million or more. Zealous patent litigators 
are tutoring entrepreneurs in the art of legal combat. Although most 
lawsuits are settled before trial, suing or threatening to sue is 
viewed as a mandatory sign of resolve. ``Regrettably, the only way 
to look credible in this game is to play hardball,'' Quinn said. ``The 
name of the game is to take no prisoners.'' Patent disputes are still 
sometimes resolved without lawsuits being filed, Gilliland said, but 
``far less so than in the past.'' At Coolsavings, the patented process 
involves the ability to aim discount certificates at the most promising 
customers, a system the company introduced ahead of competitors in 
March 1997, Golden said. The goal of the lawsuits is to fend off the 
irksome prospect of imitators' copying its methods while undercutting 
its prices. ``It isn't right,'' he said. ``We had a lot of development 
costs, a lot of hurdles to figure out our business formula.'' But 
Coolsavings is not on a crusade. If his competitors will come to the 
negotiating table, Golden said, he would consider ``any solution that 
makes economic sense.'' The targets of Coolsavings say the suits are 
groundless. ``Nuisance patent suits are part of the background noise'' 
in technology-based businesses, said Bill Purcell, chief executive 
of Planet U, one of the defendants. ``What happens is, when people 
get a patent, they often get patent testosterone and think their patent 
covers a lot of area it doesn't.'' He said his company prefers to 
``win in the marketplace, not the courtroom.'' Patent duels can pay 
off big in the drug industry, where huge brand-name drug makers like 
Glaxo Wellcome and Eli Lilly are accustomed to throwing their legal 
weight around. A much smaller, generic drug maker, Barr Laboratories, 
has profited richly by identifying shaky patents on brand-name drugs 
and then either suing the patent holder or provoking a suit, hoping 
to open the way for Barr to market a generic version. A trial is set 
to begin in federal court in Indianapolis next month in Lilly's suit 
against Barr over the validity of Lilly's Prozac patent. Barr's chief 
executive, Bruce L. Downey, said Barr would realize an additional 
$100 million in revenue if it wins. Downey is a lawyer, and he and 
Barr's senior vice president for strategic business development, Paul 
M. Bisaro, once worked together at a law firm. Going to court thus 
comes naturally for the company, and the hunt for breakable patents 
is a permanent part of its business model. ``A component of our business 
is to set about looking for them,'' Downey said. ``We make no apologies 
for that.'' Barr expects to spend $6 million to $8 million each time 
it goes to trial, so Downey said he wanted to be sure the chances 
of winning were at least 50 percent before joining battle. To date, 
Barr is two for three in big patent cases. It sued and won a settlement 
from Zeneca Group in 1987 over tamoxifen, a breast cancer drug; under 
the settlement, Barr became a distributor of the drug. Barr provoked 
a suit from Glaxo Wellcome in 1991 by filing for government approval 
to sell a generic version of AZT, which is used to combat AIDS; Glaxo 
won, and Barr must wait until the patent expires in 2005. Barr did 
better when a similar filing in 1995 over the antibiotic ziprofloxacin 
drew a suit from Bayer AG; Bayer agreed last year to pay Barr up to 
$30 million a year until the patent expires in 2003 and to allow Barr 
to distribute the antibiotic for the final six months of the patent's 
term. The proceeds of its patent battles help pay for Barr research 
aimed at creating patentable new drugs of its own. Smaller companies 
sometimes contend that bigger competitors who win broad patents leave 
them no choice but to sue. Nestor Inc., which makes software to detect 
credit card fraud, is suing a younger and much larger company, HNC 
Software, in federal district court in Providence, R.I., contending 
predatory and monopolistic practices over a broad patent recently 
won by HNC. With 23 of the 25 top issuers of bank credit cards buying 
HNC's system, Nestor felt so shut out that it had little option but 
to seek relief in court, said the company's chief executive, David 
Fox. Patricia Campbell, HNC's marketing director, denied that HNC 
had a monopoly and said the patent office had already settled the 
question of whether HNC's anti-fraud neural network system was patentable. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>