<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981224.0249 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A split of France's far-right National Front party appears likely 
after the party's founder, Jean-Marie Le Pen, had his former deputy 
and six other party leaders expelled from its executive body this 
week. Bruno Megret, Le Pen's deputy until the two clashed publicly 
this month over strategy for next June's European Parliament elections, 
was formally expelled from the National Front's political bureau on 
Wednesday along with six of his lieutenants. Le Pen had summoned the 
seven to party headquarters in suburban St.-Cloud to explain themselves. 
They refused to go. Megret used to describe the Front as a sort of 
political family for French voters alienated by corruption, immigration 
from former French colonies, European integration and high unemployment, 
all of which the party promises to end if it wins power. One of the 
six supporters expelled with Megret this week lives with Le Pen's 
eldest daughter, Marie-Caroline. She is trying to organize a reconciliation 
between the factions. But another expelled Megret supporter, Jean-Yves 
Le Gallou, said Thursday that it seemed likely that two separate National 
Front slates of candidates would run in the European Parliament elections. 
``I don't think that would be a catastrophe, because it would allow 
the voters to choose and it would be a sort of primary election for 
the right nationally between Jean-Marie Le Pen and Bruno Megret,'' 
Le Gallou said. Elections for the European Parliament, unlike those 
for France's national legislature, use a system of proportional representation 
that gives parties in each country a share of seats that corresponds 
to their share of the vote. Le Pen said before the split burst into 
the open that he hoped that the party would end up next year with 
20 or 21 members of the European Parliament, which sits in Brussels 
and Strasbourg. The National Front won 11 in the last elections, in 
1994. It took about 15 percent of the vote last year in elections 
to France's legislature, but it has no seats there. Megret's supporters 
say they have collected more than 14,000 signatures on a petition 
for a special party congress Jan. 23-24 in Marignane, a southern French 
town where one of the expelled party leaders is Mayor. Megret's wife, 
Catherine, is Mayor of Vitrolles, one of the three others where the 
National Front controls a majority in the municipal council. ``The 
only legitimate National Front will be the one that emerges from the 
congress,'' said Serge Martinez, who also was expelled from the political 
bureau Wednesday. Le Pen's chief lieutenant, Bruno Gollnisch, retorted 
that anyone who attended such a congress would be expelled. With Le 
Pen fighting a criminal assault conviction for attacking a Socialist 
campaigner against his daughter during last year's elections, Megret 
had suggested that he himself should take his place at the head of 
the National Front ticket for the European Parliament. Le Pen wanted 
his wife to run if he could not, but he can unless the country's Supreme 
Court turns down his appeal before next June and disqualifies him. 
But a ruling that soon, he said, would be unprecedented. So as things 
now look, Megret and Le Pen will run at the top of two separate slates, 
both calling themselves ``National Front.'' Megret has made clear 
he believes that Le Pen, with his reputation and his reckless, sometimes 
anti-Semitic remarks, is a liability keeping the National Front from 
exploiting common ground with other conservative parties and sharing 
power nationwide. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>