<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981224.0176 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
What a wonderful world it would be if every American family had older 
relatives as wise, kind, generous and stern (when necessary) as Rosa 
Lynn (Mary Alice) and Earl (Al Freeman Jr.), the heroes of Maya Angelou's 
unabashedly inspirational film ``Down In the Delta.'' Together this 
sister and brother gently and methodically heal the wounded spirit 
of a Chicago inner-city household on the verge of disintegration, 
and in the process save their proud family line from possible extinction. 
The movie, which often threatens to disappear into a tub of soapsuds, 
is elevated immeasurably by the calm, stately performances of Mary 
Alice and Freeman. These two fine actors lend their roles a gravity, 
balance and underlying sense of sorrow that convince you such noble 
souls really do exist in the world, even if they're few and far between. 
If the term ``family values'' has a taint of right-wing intolerance 
nowadays, the movie reminds you of what those values, shorn of political 
ideology, really mean in terms of caring, self-sacrifice and the nurturing 
of tradition through the honoring of one's ancestors. ``Down in the 
Delta,'' which Ms. Angelou directed (it is the poet's debut behind 
the camera) from a screenplay by Myron Goble, doesn't pretend that 
love and devotion alone can do the job. When it becomes apparent to 
Rosa Lynn that her daughter Loretta (Alfre Woodward), her grandson 
Thomas (Mpho Koaho) and autistic granddaughter Tracy (Kulani Hassen) 
are in imminent danger of succumbing to the drug-and-gun infested 
street culture of Chicago, she takes drastic action. Telephoning her 
brother in Mississippi, she announces that she is sending her daughter 
and grandchildren south for the summer to stay with him. To pay for 
the journey, Rosa Lynn pawns a priceless heirloom, a sterling silver 
candelabrum, named Nathan, that has been in the family for generations. 
As ``Nathan's'' story comes out in bits and pieces, it becomes larger-than-life 
myth (illustrated with flashbacks to slavery times) exemplifying the 
family's continuity in the face of adversity. That story gives ``Down 
in the Delta'' a resonance that transcends mushy family drama and 
lends it the aura of a folk tale. Family legends that connect us to 
our past, the movie suggests, are necessary for the care and feeding 
of our souls. If ``Down in the Delta'' portrays some moments of family 
strife, they are very muted in a film that is really a idyllic celebration 
of a return to one's roots. Even in its relatively gritty early scenes 
in Chicago, in which Loretta, rejected for a cashier's job because 
she hasn't learned arithmetic, goes directly from her job interview 
to a liquor store and from there to a crack house, the edges are softened. 
Almost as soon as Loretta and her children have settled comfortably 
in Earl's sprawling house in rural Mississippi, her hard shell begins 
to melt. The film lavishes equal amounts of love on the bucolic Mississippi 
landscape and on the kind, careworn faces of Earl and his wife Annie 
(Esther Rolle), who is suffering from Alzheimer's disease. Freeman's 
Earl is a man of infinite patience and tenderness, and the scenes 
of him gently, painstakingly helping his wife around the house and 
comforting her when she's afraid are among the rare moments to be 
found in a contemporary movie in which you see older people caring 
for one another. Earl devotes the same care to Loretta, whom he hires 
as a waitress in the local restaurant he owns, an establishment called 
Just Chicken. Also popping up on the homestead is the couple's strapping 
grownup son Will (Wesley Snipes), a successful Atlanta lawyer who 
gives his cousin some useful lessons in self-esteem. ``Down in the 
Delta'' may be an impossible dream, a cinematic Hallmark card of familial 
togetherness, but the vision it offers is still a dream worth dreaming. 
PRODUCTION NOTES: ``DOWN IN THE DELTA'' Directed by Maya Angelou; 
written by Myron Goble; director of photography, William Wages; edited 
by Nancy Richardson; production designer, Lindsey Hermer-Bell; produced 
by Reuben Cannon, Victor McGauley, Rick Rosenberg and Bob Christiansen; 
released by Miramax Films. Running time: 110 minutes. This film is 
rated PG-13. WITH: Alfre Woodard (Loretta), Al Freeman Jr. (Earl), 
Wesley Snipes (Will), Mary Alice (Rosa Lynn), Esther Rolle (Annie) 
and Loretta Devine (Zenia), Mpho Koaho (Thomas) and Kulani Hassen 
(Tracy). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>