<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981224.0177 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Game of the Week Saturday, 12:35 p.m. VIKINGS (14-1) at OILERS (8-7) 
Key Stats: Vikings _ 530 (Points scored; leads league) Oilers _ 47.5 
(Craig Hentrich's punting average) Commentary: The Oilers are out 
of the playoffs, so they are playing for the ``p'' word _ pride. Minnesota 
has homefield advantage throughout the playoffs and is also playing 
for a ``p'' word _ points. Before the Vikings sail into the post-season, 
they would like to make NFL history. Just 12 more points and the Vikings 
will break the team scoring record of 541 set by the 1983 Washington 
Redskins. In this age of parity, that is a remarkable achievement. 
Something else to look for: Quarterback Randall Cunningham leads the 
league in passer rating (107.3) and could break the mark of 112.8 
set by San Francisco's Steve Young in 1994. Vikings, 35-24 Saturday, 
4 p.m. CHIEFS (6-9) at RAIDERS (8-7) Key Stats: Chiefs _ 15.5 (Leslie 
O'Neal's sacks vs. Raiders) Raiders _ 4 (Charles Woodson's interceptions) 
Commentary: The Chiefs have had a terrible year, and now comes the 
inevitable talk of what changes will be made. The pressure of a failed 
season bubbled to the surface when wide receiver Andre Rison blew 
up at a reporter this week. The Raiders were never expected to make 
the playoffs this year, so they will be more relaxed. One more thing: 
Woodson was supposed to play on offense this week, but coach Jon Gruden 
nixed the idea after Woodson said, basically, that it was about time. 
So for now, Woodson remains a working stiff on defense and probably 
gets another interception. Quarterback Wade Wilson, 40 years old, 
fills in fine for Oakland. Raiders, 24-17 Sunday, 1 p.m. Games BILLS 
(9-6) at SAINTS (6-9) Key Stats: Bills _ Plus 8 (Turnover ratio) Saints 
_ 4-1 (Record when leading at half) Commentary: The Jets developed 
the blueprint for stopping Bills quarterback Doug Flutie: Flood the 
field with defensive backs and blitz him so that he stays pinned in 
the pocket. No doubt that Saints defensive coordinator Zaven Yaralian, 
who has done an outstanding job this year, will try some form of that. 
But over all, New Orleans does not have the talent the Jets do. The 
Bills want to win badly because they have an outside chance at a home 
playoff game. Flutie passes for 300 yards and throws for three touchdowns. 
Bills, 32-20 PANTHERS (3-12) at COLTS (3-12) Key Stats: Panthers _ 
4 (Linebacker Jeff Brady's interceptions) Colts _ 17 (Sacks given 
up) Commentary: Carolina is in a state of complete disarray. The head 
coach, Dom Capers, will probably be fired. The linebackers coach, 
Kevin Steele, sore from being roughed up by Kevin ``WWF'' Greene, 
will leave the team to coach in college. And Greene himself is contemplating 
retirement. About the only good news for the Panthers is that quarterback 
Steve Beuerlein leads the league with a 63.4 completion percentage. 
Meanwhile, Colts quarterback Peyton Manning continues to light up 
the league. He has an NFL rookie-record 25 touchdown passes and tied 
a club record this season with four 300-yard passing games. Colts, 
21-14 LIONS (5-10) at RAVENS (5-10) Key Stats: Lions _ 1,450 (Barry 
Sanders' rushing yards) Ravens _ 3rd straight vs. NFC Commentary: 
This was a disappointing season for Baltimore, and coach Ted Marchibroda 
will probably be fired because of it and moved to the front office 
if he desires. But the Ravens will end their season with a victory 
because the Lions remain the game's biggest underachievers. Ravens 
quarterback Jim Harbaugh has thrown for 1,746 yards against Detroit, 
his highest total against any team. Ravens, 28-10 PACKERS (10-5) at 
BEARS (4-11) Key Stats: Packers _ 9 (Straight victories vs. Bears) 
Bears _ 1-10 (Dave Wannstedt vs. Packers) Commentary: The Packers 
have a playoff berth, but are motivated because if they win and San 
Francisco loses, the Packers would have a home playoff game. The only 
danger for Green Bay is that Bears running back James Allen will most 
likely start, and last week against a decent Baltimore defense he 
rushed for 163 yards, highest total by a Chicago running back since 
Walter Payton ran for 176 in 1986. Packers, 30-19 DOLPHINS (10-5) 
at FALCONS (13-2) Key Stats: Dolphins _ 299 (Regular-season victories) 
Falcons _ 13 (Victories this season, club record) Commentary: It will 
be interesting to watch Atlanta this week, and not just because coach 
Dan Reeves, who recently had heart surgery, won't be on the sideline. 
How will the Falcons play this game? Will they keep their starters 
in the entire game if it's close, or will they play it safe and sit 
most of them? Imagine the outcry if the brittle quarterback Chris 
Chandler was injured in a meaningless game. That's why the Falcons 
will probably get an early lead, then take out their starters in the 
third quarter. Miami allows only 15.1 points a game, but they are 
no match for a fast artificial-turf team like Atlanta. Falcons, 25-9 
PATRIOTS (9-6) at JETS (11-4) Key Stats: Patriots _ 3-3 (Scott Zolak's 
career record) Jets _ 59-25 (Bill Parcells' record at Giants Stadium) 
Commentary: Beating the 49ers last week without Drew Bledsoe was one 
of the best coaching jobs this season. But asking New England's Pete 
Carroll to duplicate that feat against Parcells, who in some ways 
knows the Patriots better than Carroll does, is almost impossible. 
The Jets are peaking, typical of Parcells teams in December. He owns 
a career 34-19 regular-season record in December, and with veterans 
on his side like Keith Byars, who will play with an injured arm, and 
David Meggett, signed last week, his December success won't change. 
Patriots quarterback Drew Bledsoe sits again with an injury; Scott 
Zolak gets the start. Jets, 31-28 BUCCANEERS (7-8) at BENGALS (3-12) 
Key Stats: Buccaneers _ 294 (Rushing yards last two games) Bengals 
_ 8 of last 11 (Victories in December games) Commentary: Tampa Bay 
blew its best chance for post-season play with an inexcusable loss 
to Washington last week. Now their playoff fate is out of their hands. 
They can finish 8-8, and after the way their season began, that would 
be a moral victory of sorts. It will be a close game. Cincinnati has 
a terrible defense and inconsistent offense, but one thing they do 
not do is turn the ball over. The Bengals, with 19 turnovers, are 
tied with Denver and Tennessee for fewest in the conference. Tampa 
Bay, 12-7 GIANTS (7-8) at EAGLES (3-12) Key Stats: Giants _ 3 (Consecutive 
victories) Eagles _ 14.8 (Points per game) Commentary: The Giants 
can clinch a playoff berth with a victory, and losses by Arizona and 
Tampa Bay. A long shot, sure, but strange things have happened before. 
The Eagles will play hard, in part because of inspiration from wide 
receiver Irving Fryar, who is retiring after the game. But a player 
on the Giants will be inspired as well _ defensive end Michael Strahan. 
He leads the team with 14 sacks and needs just half a sack for a career 
high. Watch out, quarterback Koy Detmer. Giants, 21-3 RAMS (4-11) 
at 49ERS (11-4) Key Stats: Rams _ 60 (Amp Lee's receptions) 49ers 
_ 16 (Consecutive home victories) Commentary: One of the most incredible 
streaks in the NFL: the 49ers have not lost in 15 home games under 
coach Steve Mariucci. But the 49ers could be vulnerable. Steve Young 
will probably play, but his knee is no doubt still very sore from 
a bruising hit he took last week against New England. And the 49ers' 
secondary is still banged up _ there isn't a part of safety Tim McDonald's 
body that isn't hurting. 49ers, 38-28 CHARGERS (5-10) at CARDINALS 
(8-7) Key Stats: Chargers _ 5 (Terrell Fletcher's touchdown runs, 
last 6 games) Cardinals _ 3 (Adrian Murrell's consecutive 1,000-yard 
seasons) Commentary: So now come reports that Ryan Leaf, who has had 
one of the worst seasons, on and off the field, of any rookie quarterback 
this decade, has been showing up late to meetings and sleeping through 
some of them. Players are beginning to doubt if he will ever be a 
leader. That may be why coach June Jones decided to start Craig Whelihan 
instead of Leaf, though Leaf will get significant playing time. Arizona 
is fighting for its life because a victory gets it into the playoffs. 
Who do you think will win this one _ a hungry Jake Plummer, who just 
signed a new contract that included a league-record $15 million signing 
bonus? Or a sleepy-headed Leaf? Cardinals, 40-21 SEAHAWKS (8-7) at 
BRONCOS (13-2) Key Stats: Seahawks _ 4-1 (Jon Kitna's record as starter) 
Broncos _ 2 (Consecutive losses) Commentary: What's wrong with the 
Broncos? That's the question Denver is being asked again and again, 
almost as much as it was asked about going undefeated. What's wrong 
is that Mike Shanahan teams don't do well in December _ the Broncos 
lost two straight last year at this time, and under Shanahan the last 
four years they are 6-8 in December. Denver lost its last two games 
on the road. At Mile High Stadium this week, the losing will end. 
Denver has scored at least 30 points in 12 of its last 14 games at 
home. The Broncos are also 29-2 at home under Shanahan. Nothing like 
home cooking to erase a losing streak. Broncos, 38-14 REDSKINS (6-9) 
at COWBOYS (9-6) Key Stats: Redskins _ 4 (Consecutive victories) Cowboys 
_ 7-0 (Record vs. NFC East) Commentary: The Redskins are one of the 
most curious teams in the league. They have won six of their last 
eight games and five of their last six. At one point, coach Norv Turner 
was fighting for his job; now he has the team fighting for him. Since 
the Cowboys have nothing to fight for in this game _ they are already 
in the playoffs _ they lose by a touchdown. Redskins, 16-9 Monday 
8 p.m. STEELERS (7-8) at JAGUARS (10-5) Key Stats: Steelers _ 1,046 
(Jerome Bettis' rushing yards) Jaguars _ 20 of last 23 (Home victories) 
Commentary: Jacksonville's crushing 50-10 loss to Minnesota came on 
the same day the Jaguars won the AFC Central, a longtime goal. The 
starter at quarterback against Pittsburgh is uncertain, but it definitely 
won't be Mark Brunell, out with an ailing knee. There is even some 
doubt _ albeit small _ about Brunell's return for the first round 
of the playoffs. The way Pittsburgh's offense is playing right now, 
the Jaguars don't need Brunell. The key to this normally intense series 
is that the home team has won each of the seven meetings. Jaguars, 
21-14 
</TEXT>
</DOC>