<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981224.0229 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Christmas has come and gone, and only a handful of days remain in 
what has been for many a truly unusual _ and often painful _ year. 
Hal W. Reynolds, chief investment officer of Wilshire Asset Management, 
which runs about $10 billion from its headquarters in Santa Monica, 
Calif., reflected last week about what sort of a year it was, and 
offered some thoughts about 1999. Q. Developments in financial markets 
in the United States and around the world have generated a lot of 
surprises this year. But has 1998 really been that atypical? A. I 
don't know if I would call it unusual. We tend to get equity corrections 
every three to four years. The situation in emerging markets, which 
began in the fall of 1997, is not an unusual event, because we have 
seen boom-and-bust cycles there before. Q. Large-capitalization stocks 
have outperformed small caps for five years in a row now. And the 
performance of the average equity fund has badly lagged behind the 
Standard &AMP; Poor's 500-stock index, which is up well over 20 percent 
this year. What does that say? A. It does not say investors would 
do better buying individual stocks than mutual funds. The return-to-risk 
ratio of individual stocks is far inferior to a well-diversified portfolio. 
And the Standard &AMP; Poor's index is not the market. Moreover, about 
half the stocks that are in it have returned less than a money market 
fund this year. Q. Long-Term Capital, the hedge fund that almost failed 
this fall, provided a jolt to the financial system. What should we 
take away from that experience? A. The lessons to be learned from 
Long-Term Capital are much more relevant to institutional investors 
than individuals. Institutions went into hedge funds because they 
were very concerned about high valuations in the equity market and 
wanted diversification. But a highly leveraged hedge fund carries 
similar or higher levels of risk than staying in equities. The near-collapse 
of Long Term Capital stands as a reminder to require transparency, 
and to have a good risk-monitoring system in place. Buying into the 
best and the brightest, which is how Long-Term was seen, isn't good 
enough. Q. Markets have been quite volatile this year. Should we expect 
more of the same? A. The first eight years of this decade were a period 
when equity risk was the lowest it has been in the post-World War 
II era, with volatility running at about 12 percent. In 1998, it was 
closer to 20 percent. We think it will be close to that next year. 
Q. Why is that? A. The characteristics of the stock market are different 
than they used to be. We are getting more return in the form of capital 
appreciation and less in the form of dividends. That makes stocks 
a riskier asset. The dividend yield in 1990 was as high as 4 percent. 
Today it is 1.4 percent. That is a pretty dramatic change. Q. Why 
will stocks be a risky investment in 1999? A. There is a real chance 
we won't get strong earnings growth next year. If that happens, we 
will probably get lower earnings multiples on stocks. So we think 
it is a good time for investors to look at sectors of the market where 
the risk is less and returns are higher. One area we like is real 
estate investment trusts, which have had a bad year. But the fundamentals 
are strong, and many REIT stocks are trading with dividend yields 
of 6 percent to 6.5 percent. So you get a nice current return and 
an opportunity for capital appreciation. Q. Emerging markets are a 
risky asset class that many investors seem to have deserted permanently. 
Is that a wise move? A. No, I don't think it is. Higher-risk investments 
like emerging markets require higher returns but over longer time 
periods, not necessarily 5 to 10 years. In these markets, strong economies 
may not generate higher stock prices unless there is higher earnings 
growth. That requires better corporate governance and a greater alignment 
of interest between shareholders and managers of the business. Those 
qualities are getting better in emerging markets. They continue to 
be very risky, but stock valuations are much better than three years 
ago. So the picture is improving. Q. You like bonds as an asset class. 
Isn't it hard to get investors excited about something that yields 
only 5 or 6 percent? A. The public isn't that interested in bonds. 
But we need to look at these yields relative to inflation, which over 
the last 12 months is running at under 2 percent. With the global 
economy slowing down, it is unlikely that inflation is going to pick 
up. As a result, real interest rates are going to remain very attractive. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>