<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981224.0222 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Simply living through 1998 proved quite a learning experience for 
many investors. People who had previously been acquainted only with 
a bull market in stocks finally looked a bear market in the eye. And 
those who never paid much attention to the bond market learned in 
late summer that when its mysterious wheels grind to a halt, a full-blown 
credit crisis can result. Investors also discovered why Alan Greenspan 
is a lot more important to the markets than Bill Clinton. And they 
found out why big, risky investment pools are called hedge funds _ 
because they often get clipped. What better time than the end of a 
momentous market year to reflect on its players, both major and minor, 
and to bask in its priceless moments with the awarding of the first 
Augustus Melmotte Memorial Prizes? The awards, for this year's financial 
flubs and feats, are named for a larger-than-life character in ``The 
Way We Live Now,'' Anthony Trollope's novel. A sort of ``Bonfire of 
the Vanities'' circa 1875, the book details the chicanery of Melmotte, 
a financial plunger of mysterious background who buys his way into 
the upper levels of London society, entertaining royalty and gaining 
a seat in parliament. His fall from grace comes when a railroad company, 
for which he helped raise money, is found to be nonexistent. PARTY 
ANIMAL OF THE YEAR AWARD To Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal 
Reserve and everybody's favorite master of the punch bowl. Who knew 
that the man who cautioned investors about irrational exuberance in 
the stock market in 1996 would work so hard 3,000 Dow points later 
to keep the party going? Greenspan's three successive interest-rate 
cuts last fall and explosive increases in the money supply meant that 
investors partied hearty late in 1998. AMIABLE DUNCE AWARD To William 
Gates, chairman of the Microsoft Corp. Before his taped depositions 
in the Justice Department's antitrust suit against Microsoft, most 
people assumed that the world's richest man had to be a genius. After 
all, amassing $51 billion in personal wealth usually takes brains. 
But in his testimony Gates displayed an impressive ignorance about 
such business basics as market share, and he could not explain what 
he meant when he wrote an e-mail to top aides saying, ``Winning Internet 
browser market share is a very, very important goal for us.'' And 
how smart is it to underestimate the determination of the federal 
government in full pursuit? According to a witness in the trial, Gates 
predicted back in 1995 that ``this antitrust thing will blow over.'' 
KNEADING OUT THE KINKS AWARD To Walter Forbes, former chairman of 
the Cendant Corp. Forbes was chief of CUC International, a membership 
services company that merged with the franchiser HFS to create Cendant 
in 1997. After the merger, auditors found that CUC's numbers had been 
massaged to create profits that, on second look, were losses instead. 
Cendant has since restated three years of results. In 1997, for example, 
the company turned in a $217 million loss, not the $55.5 million profit 
it had initially reported. Forbes left with a $35 million severance 
package, saying he had ``absolutely no knowledge'' of the accounting 
problems. WHAT WAS HE THINKING AWARD To Alan Greenberg, chairman of 
the Bear Stearns Companies. In September, Greenberg, who is known 
as Ace, sent a $10,000 check to the Police Athletic League, a charity 
whose chairman is Robert M. Morgenthau, the district attorney of Manhattan. 
A simple case of generosity? Maybe. But Morgenthau's office also happens 
to be deep in an investigation of the possible role of the Bear Stearns 
Clearing Corp. as clearing firm for the defunct brokerage A.R. Baron, 
described by prosecutors as a criminal enterprise that stole $75 million 
from investors. The check was returned. ROUND WHEEL AWARD To Albert 
Dunlap, pushed from his post as chairman of the Sunbeam Corp. in June. 
Dunlap, known for axing thousands of jobs to keep his company's stock 
price high, learned that what goes around sometimes comes around. 
Under Dunlap, author of ``Mean Business: How I Save Bad Companies 
and Make Good Companies Great,'' the company was found to have overstated 
Sunbeam's earnings in 1997 by 65 percent, largely by selling barbecue 
grills to retailers in December and agreeing to defer billing on the 
goods until the following summer. While almost nobody felt sorry for 
Dunlap, Sunbeam shareholders were to be pitied indeed. The company's 
stock, which traded as high as $53 in March, was still skulking around 
at $5.5625 six months after Dunlap left. DEPENDS HOW YOU DEFINE ``ONE 
TIME'' AWARD To the management of Kellogg Inc., the cereal giant in 
Battle Creek, Mich. For the fourth time in four years, the company 
took a ``one-time'' restructuring charge to earnings in 1998 for ``streamlining 
operations.'' The charges this year came to $22 million. The total 
charged to earnings over the four years of one-time charges: $764 
million, equivalent to one-quarter of Kellogg's net income during 
the period. TIMING IS EVERYTHING AWARD To the top executives of the 
Cendant Corp. In October, after Cendant stock had lost two-thirds 
of its value, falling to a low of $7.50, executives cut the exercise 
price on 26.3 million stock options to $9.81. Previously, the options 
had prices between $12.26 and $20. The stock has since recovered, 
giving the executives an enormous windfall but leaving public shareholders 
wondering: Where are our repriced shares? CHIEF EXECUTIVE AS OSTRICH 
AWARD To Jill Barad, chairman of Mattel Inc. In a Dec. 14 conference 
call to analysts, she told of a shocking 30 percent decline in earnings 
per share at the company and a 12 percent drop in sales of Barbie 
merchandise. After a great Thanksgiving, Ms. Barad explained, retail 
reorders ``came to a screeching halt.'' Never mind that throughout 
the year, press reports had noted weaknesses in the Barbie business 
that Ms. Barad had steadfastly denied. The stock fell 27 percent on 
her wake-up call. PREDICTIONS ARE DANGEROUS AWARD To the management 
of Starwood Hotels and Resorts. On Nov. 11, 1997, with Starwood shares 
trading at $55.25, the company ran a full-page newspaper ad listing 
the 12-month projections from 10 Wall Street analysts for Starwood's 
stock price. Ever optimistic, the analysts reckoned that Starwood 
shares would trade between $75 and $83. Twelve months later, the stock 
was just over $27, a victim of investor fears over the performance 
of real estate investment trusts in a slowing economy. Oh, well. Who 
will remember? LET THEM EAT CAKE AWARD To Charles Wang, chairman of 
Computer Associates. Last May, he received 12.15 million free shares 
of stock in the company _ worth $670 million _ after the shares rose 
to $53.33 and stayed there for 60 trading days. The grant was a reward 
for three years of Wang's labor. Unfortunately for Computer Associates' 
other shareholders, two months after the chairman bagged his prize, 
the company announced a $675 million charge to earnings to cover the 
stock award to Wang, among other things. It also warned that revenues 
and profits would probably slow for several quarters, thanks to slack 
demand from Asia. The shares slid almost 31 percent in response to 
the news. UNDUE DILIGENCE AWARD To Goldman, Sachs. The investment 
bank reaped millions in underwriting fees on two Russian bond deals 
peddled to customers last June and July. Not long after the ink on 
the $7.65 billion in bonds was dry, Russia's banking system collapsed, 
making the bonds worthless. The firm earned $56 million on the July 
deal alone. BACK-OF-THE-ENVELOPE RESEARCH AWARD To Henry Blodget, 
Internet stock analyst at Oppenheimer &AMP; Co. On Dec. 16, Blodget 
raised his year-end 1999 price target for Amazon.com from $150 a share 
to $400. That would give the Internet darling a market capitalization 
of $21 billion _ one-third the value of all books sold in the world 
at retail last year. Blodget told Bloomberg News that he raised his 
price target because Amazon.com had blown through the one he had set 
earlier. The day Blodget made his optimism public to the investing 
masses, Amazon shares jumped 17 percent, to $289. A week later, the 
stock was at $325. Could a $500 price target be far behind? IT'S NOT 
ROCKET SCIENCE AWARD To number crunchers at the United States Treasury. 
Earlier this month, the Treasury revealed that miscalculations meant 
it had paid Social Security and other trust funds $1.4 billion in 
extra interest since 1980. And Uncle Sam is afraid to privatize Social 
Security, so average Americans can control their own retirement accounts? 
YEAR'S BEST TRADE AWARD To the risk management committee of Switzerland's 
UBS A.G., the world's second-largest bank. UBS wanted so desperately 
to invest in the Long-Term Capital Management hedge fund that it made 
personal loans to the fund's partners and bought an $800 million stake 
in Long-Term Capital as part of a complex derivative transaction. 
When the teetering hedge fund had to be rescued by a consortium of 
Wall Street banks and brokerage firms in September, UBS wound up writing 
off its investment, losing $700 million in the process. The bank's 
chairman, Mathis Cabiallavetta, and three other top executives resigned 
over the disaster. A SOW'S EAR IS A SOW'S EAR AWARD To executives 
of the Zapata Corp., a fish oil and meat-casing company in Houston. 
Hoping to breathe a little life into the company's stock, Zapata management 
announced plans in July to become ``one of the largest Internet companies 
in the world.'' How? By buying or investing in enough World Wide Web 
sites so that it could compete with established search engines like 
Yahoo and Excite. Investors snapped up Zapata shares on the news, 
pushing the formerly comatose stock from around $10 to almost $23. 
Alas, the Internet plans fizzled, the company returned to fish oil 
and the stock fell back to earth _ until the company announced last 
week that its Internet onslaught was back on track. PATIENCE IS ITS 
OWN REWARD AWARD To individual investors. Those who hung tight through 
the summer's market meltdown _ while professional money managers panicked 
_ proved that every once in a while, amateurs can beat the pros at 
their own game. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>