<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981224.0236 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Just in case anyone here missed the point, the state-run news media 
have given rare publicity to the severe sentences dealt to three prominent 
leaders of an alternative political party. Most Chinese had never 
heard of the imprisoned men _ Xu Wenli, Qin Yongmin and Wang Youcai 
_ and for months the local news media had totally ignored their efforts 
to form a China Democracy Party. But after the sentences this week 
the press, sending a clear message to any would-be dissidents, reported 
that the three criminals who had threatened national security by promoting 
an illegal party had been given sentences of 11 to 13 years. After 
a draining week of shock and despair those who worked openly to promote 
the party, by some estimates 200, are pondering the next steps for 
the movement and for themselves. At least one other organizer was 
sent to a labor camp. Most remain free, if under surveillance. To 
a large degree the intimidation has worked. In Wuhan, where about 
30 people had established an important branch of the party, activities 
have been suspended, said Chen Zhonghe, a party leader who spoke by 
telephone. ``There were many people here who sympathized with our 
goals and might eventually have joined our party,'' Chen, 50, said. 
``But now, after these trials, it's impossible. Most people wouldn't 
dare to get involved.'' Certainly the authorities have made it clear 
that they intend to shut down the party, which had become the focal 
point of the democracy movement. Still, experience suggests that advocates 
will soon find new ways to challenge the system. As recently as January 
1997, after long prison sentences had been given to two prominent 
dissidents, Wei Jingsheng and Wang Dan, the U.S. State Department 
declared in a report that no active dissidents remained in the country. 
For most of last year it seemed that way. But toward the end of the 
year, as Wei was sent to exile and Chinese-American relations warmed, 
advocates sensed a slight easing of controls. People like Xu, 55, 
and Qin, 44, both of whom had already served long prison terms, began 
faxing statements to colleagues and the foreign press. This year, 
about the time that President Clinton visited China in June, Wang 
Youcai founded the party. Almost overnight hundreds of people appeared 
who seemed willing to risk everything for the cause. Even this week, 
as their senior colleagues were heading for prison, some party members 
spoke bravely about carrying on, even though they spoke on telephone 
lines that were almost certainly monitored. In Beijing on Wednesday 
a leading organizer, Gao Hongming, said: ``The China Democracy Party 
will continue working for a free democratic China. And it will do 
so in a way that is public, rational and nonviolent.'' Gao, 48, recently 
spent two years in labor camps for distributing leaflets critical 
of the 1989 military crackdown on demonstrators in Tiananmen Square. 
The trials this week, he acknowledged, had ``greatly slowed the development 
of a truly national party.'' But, he added, ``because of the achievements 
of the last six months the mechanisms for its establishment are in 
place.'' For now, Gao said, advocates should work quietly to spread 
democratic ideas at the local level. ``The government will feel it 
can keep an eye on us,'' Gao said. ``I don't think they'll throw us 
all in jail.'' The crackdown has had the opposite of the intended 
effects on at least one person, Jia Wei, 36, a former high school 
teacher in the northeastern city of Changchun. Jia said he had believed 
in democracy since he was a teen-ager. But he never became involved 
in organizing, preferring to use essays and lectures and the occasional 
public letter to leaders, although he had recently been intrigued 
enough by the democracy party to meet Xu here. ``This terrible repression 
has been a massive shock to my spirit,'' he said of the sentences 
this week. ``Now I feel the work of Xu Wenli has to be continued for 
the good of society. ``Direct political activities may be necessary. 
And now I have to contemplate the possibility of spending time in 
prison.'' One big unknown for the movement is to what extent younger 
people may become involved. Notably, virtually all those who joined 
the Democracy Party were veterans of the Democracy Wall movement of 
the late 1970s or the 1989 demonstrations. Certainly many students 
and other young people are skeptical about the Communist Party. But 
few have shown a willingness to risk their futures. That could change 
in the event of prolonged economic hardship or other social traumas. 
That fact helps explain why President Jiang Zemin in a speech on Wednesday, 
his second hard-line speech on social stability in a week, warned 
against ``infiltration by both domestic and foreign hostile forces.'' 
``Any factors that could jeopardize our stability,'' Jiang said, ``must 
be annihilated in the early stages.'' The government is especially 
sensitive about dissident activities, because of growing unemployment 
and frequent protests by unpaid workers. The Communist Party's great 
nightmare is a joining of democracy and labor movements against it. 
In another pointed reminder the official People's Daily carried new 
court instructions on Wednesday on how the revised criminal code would 
apply in prosecutions of illegal publications. Knowingly publishing 
or disseminating materials that incite splitting of the country or 
overthrow of the socialist system, the instructions said, would be 
tried as serious crimes, including subversion of state power. On Sunday 
a man who tried to organize a pressure group for laid-off workers 
is to be tried in Henan province for endangering national security, 
according to the Information Center of Human Rights and Democratic 
Movement in Hong Kong. The coming year is seen as a touchy one, too, 
because of the 10th anniversary of the crushed Tiananmen Square demonstrations, 
as well as the 50th anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic. 
But the security apparatus needed no special reasons to quash the 
China Democracy Party. Any threat to the supremacy of the Communist 
Party is, by definition, a threat to national security. That gave 
officials a neat way to explain why the recent trials did not violate 
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which China 
has signed but not ratified. All three defendants were convicted of 
subversion. China, of course, abides by the covenant stipulations 
on freedom of belief, speech, assembly and association, said a long 
commentary issued on Tuesday by the official New China News Agency. 
But because the three convicted democracy advocates imperiled the 
state, the commentary continued, ``it is logical that the Chinese 
judiciary bring such criminals before the law in order to protect 
the human rights of the Chinese people.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>