<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981224.0301 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Emilio Fermin Mignone, who became a leading campaigner for human rights 
in Argentina after his daughter was among the thousands who disappeared 
in the military regime's ``Dirty War'' two decades ago, died of cancer 
on Monday in Buenos Aires, Argentina. He was 76. As founder and director 
of the Center for Legal and Social Studies, Mignone was regarded as 
Argentina's best-known campaigner for human rights, particularly from 
1976 to 1983, when the country was under military rule. His organization, 
one of several rights groups, specialized in documenting kidnappings, 
murders and torture by the military and trying to file legal actions 
to establish accountability. Mignone had a distinguished career before 
the military took power in 1976. A lawyer, he had worked for the Justice 
Ministry in the '50s and spent the early '60s in Washington as an 
official of the Organization of American States, specializing in educational 
policy. He returned to Argentina, where he was founding rector of 
a new university in Lujan. By 1976 he had retired and was writing 
textbooks about civic education. In that year, on a May morning at 
5 o'clock, a group of armed men entered the family's house and arrested 
Mignone's daughter Monica, 24, the third of his five children. A close 
friend, Juan Mendez, now director of the Inter-American Institute 
of Human Rights in San Jose, Costa Rica, said Mignone painfully recalled 
how he had told his daughter to go with the men, who showed army identification, 
saying he would seek her release in court. At the time the scale of 
disappearances was not widely known, and Mignone, a devout Roman Catholic 
and a Peronist, had faith in due process. He never saw his daughter 
again. She had been active in a volunteer group of Catholics who were 
working among the slum dwellers of Buenos Aires. Mignone and his wife, 
Angelica, spent weeks approaching courts and ministries and met high 
military officials. Despite writs of habeas corpus, they learned nothing 
of the young woman's whereabouts or fate. They contacted church officials, 
and again they felt spurned. Years later Mignone wrote ``Dictatorship 
and Church,'' in which he criticized the inaction of the church in 
Argentina in that period. He became a leader of the Permanent Assembly 
for Human Rights, an umbrella organization formed shortly before the 
military seized power. Realizing that a more narrowly focused organization 
was needed to gather documentation and offer legal help, he founded 
the Center for Legal and Social Studies. Government opponents were 
pursuing varied strategies. Mrs. Mignone became a founder of the Mothers 
of the Plaza de Mayo, a group of parents of ``the disappeared'' who 
held vigils near the Presidential Palace while holding up posters 
with the names of their missing children. Other groups sought to generate 
protest by uniting religious communities. Mignone's center compiled 
records on the missing and the tortured that were essential when, 
after the restoration of democratic civilian rule, a commission established 
that 11,000 people had disappeared and been killed and that at least 
an additional 10,000 had been kidnapped and detained for long periods. 
The center also located mass graves where the remains of some of the 
disappeared were found. Even when the military was in power, Mignone's 
center filed suits to determine accountability. In a complex class 
action known as the Perez de Smith cases, Mignone on four occasions 
persuaded the Supreme Court that the government that had appointed 
them needed to acknowledge the fact of the disappearances and to account 
for specific circumstances raised by the suits. Among those was having 
clandestine military units' ordering, by radio, police patrols to 
withdraw from regions, ceding ``free areas'' to the military. Mendez 
said another of Mignone's contributions was forging links with foreign 
governments and human rights organizations. ``He traveled a great 
deal and he kept the question of Argentina's military rule before 
the international community,'' said Mendez, who was born in Argentina. 
``Whenever foreign figures came, they would visit him.'' On Feb. 28, 
1981, two weeks after Mignone had returned from Geneva, where he had 
testified about the disappearances to the U.N. Human Rights Commission, 
he and five other directors of the center were arrested, and the offices 
were raided. An international outcry followed, and all six were released 
in a week. With the restoration of elected civilian government, the 
Center for Legal and Social Studies remained functioning to monitor 
and report on civil rights and abuse of power. Mignone returned to 
his interest in civic education and prepared a three-year high school 
curriculum that linked themes like the history of military governments, 
the democratic way of life and the breakdown of institutional order. 
On occasion he spoke out in protest, as he did in January, when he 
joined demonstrators who opposed government plans to raze the Navy 
Mechanics School, where many of the disappeared had been killed. He 
appealed to President Carlos Saul Menem, who in the name of reconciliation 
wanted the complex destroyed. ``You can't call for national unity, 
a sort of pacification, in a place where at least 4,000 Argentines 
have been murdered and tortured by the Navy,'' Mignon said. By that 
time he had learned that the people who had taken away his daughter 
were from a Navy unit, but he did not mention it. In addition to his 
wife, surviving are two daughters, Isabel del Carril of Washington 
and Mercedes, of Buenos Aires; and two sons, Fernando, of Rome, and 
Javier, of Edmonton, Alberta. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>