<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981224.0280 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Pierre Beaudoin won't deny it: These days, he often finds himself 
staring out his office window, scanning the skies for snow clouds. 
That may not come as a surprise. He is, after all, president of the 
recreational products division of Bombardier Inc., whose Ski Doo snowmobiles 
have been in a sales slump for two years. But other executives at 
the company's headquarters here are not nearly as sensitive to the 
vagaries of the weather. For Bombardier has come a long way from its 
beginnings in 1942 as a Canadian manufacturer of snowgoing equipment 
which expanded into snowmobiles in the early 1960s. The company has 
grown into a global transportation giant whose revenues are increasing 
at a rate of 20 percent a year. It builds and sells subway cars, trains, 
airplanes and other motorized vehicles to clients that range from 
the New York City subway system to Shandong province in China. Snowmobiles 
are now just a small part of the company's $6.1 billion annual business. 
Quietly, but aggressively, Bombardier (pronounced bohn-BAR-dee-ay) 
has built itself up. The company has succeeded in part by trying to 
be like a local company when it enters new markets and regions, usually 
by taking over a government-owned business or entering into a partnership 
with the local government. Yet Bombardier is still very much a Canadian 
institution with close ties to the government in Ottawa, which has 
helped the company more than once. Cozying up to government officials, 
of course, is not uncommon in aerospace and mass transportation, businesses 
in which the customers are often government agencies and the capital 
outlays are enormous. And Ottawa officials know that Bombardier, like 
many other successful Canadian businesses, needs to look beyond its 
limited domestic market and focus on exports. Roughly 88 percent of 
the company's revenue comes from abroad. Still, Bombardier's close 
relationship with the Canadian government has at times drawn fire 
from competitors, who complain that Ottawa unfairly props up the company. 
``It's a deliberate and determined policy by the government of Canada 
to support the aerospace industry by whatever means available,'' said 
Valdemar Leao, director of the economic department in the Foreign 
Ministry of Brazil, the home of Embraer, Bombardier's chief rival 
in the regional-jet market. ``And if you talk about aerospace in Canada, 
you have to talk about Bombardier.'' In response, Bombardier acknowledges 
that it has received assistance from the Canadian government, but 
it says that such help consisted of repayable loans, not subsidies, 
available to other manufacturers and not specially set aside for Bombardier. 
Still, for a company that has not sought to draw much attention to 
itself, such criticism has often thrown a spotlight on Bombardier 
both at home and in the many foreign countries where it does business. 
Consider the following cases: _ One of the company's first major contracts 
in the United States _ a 1982 deal to build 825 cars for the New York 
City subway system _ caused an uproar because the Canadian government 
had provided $563 million of low-interest loans to finance the bid. 
The U.S. Commerce Department ruled that Canada had illegally subsidized 
the sale and was prepared to fine the Metropolitan Transportation 
Authority of New York $91.2 million _ the estimated amount of the 
illegal subsidy. The fine was withdrawn when the MTA agreed not to 
buy foreign-made subway cars again for three years. _ When Bombardier 
bought the de Havilland division of Boeing Co. in 1992, the province 
of Ontario helped by acquiring 49 percent of de Havilland's equity. 
Last year, Ontario agreed to sell its share to Bombardier for $34 
million, but government opposition leaders and Bombardier's rivals 
complained about the sweetheart terms of the deal _ the purchase price 
was payable over 15 years at an interest rate of 7 percent. _ In a 
complaint now before the World Trade Organization, Brazil accuses 
Canada of providing Bombardier with millions of dollars in loans that 
are actually prohibited export subsidies. That complaint followed 
one Canada filed on behalf of Bombardier, accusing Brazil of providing 
subsidies that let Embraer use export financing to discount the price 
of its jets by $2.5 million each, stealing business from Bombardier. 
_ When Bombardier's bid to build 252 subway cars for a new line in 
Mexico City was rejected last year, Canada's ambassador to Mexico, 
Marc Perron, undiplomatically accused the municipal government of 
chicanery. He later resigned. Prime Minister Jean Chretien stepped 
in and wrote to the Mexican president, Ernesto Zedillo, asking him 
to investigate Bombardier's rejection. The competing bid was also 
eventually rejected. A new competition is to be held, but no selection 
will be made until 2000. Laurent Beaudoin, Bombardier's 60-year-old 
chairman, _ and father of the 36-year-old Pierre _ does enjoy a close 
relationship with Chretien, who is also from Quebec. And over all, 
Yves Allaire, Bombardier's vice president for strategic planning, 
described Bombardier's relations with the Canadian government as ``good 
to moderate.'' But are they good enough to ask for favors? ``Well, 
no, not favors in the sense of anything that is not part of standard 
programs,'' Allaire said. ``The only favor, quote unquote, we asked 
is that they go to the WTO to fight off Brazil, and it took us two 
years to get Canada to go. So that could be considered a favor, but 
if it's a favor, it took a long time coming.'' In its submission to 
the WTO on Bombardier's behalf, the Canadian government stated that 
``none of the impugned programs, activities or transactions is a prohibited 
export subsidy.'' Controversy may be difficult to avoid for a company 
that has a reputation for being a gutsy organization willing to take 
big risks. It has enjoyed particular success in aerospace, a business 
that Bombardier timidly entered in 1986 with the purchase of Canadair, 
a wobbly aviation company, from the Canadian government. Now, Bombardier 
is the third-largest civilian aerospace company in the world behind 
Boeing and the European consortium Airbus Industrie. This year, Bombardier 
has received a total of 166 orders for its small regional jetliners 
_ an aircraft niche it practically invented. (On Monday, Bombardier 
won an additional $580 million order for 25 70-seat jets from Horizon 
Air, a unit of Alaska Air Group.) It builds Learjets, luxury private 
jets, and even a workhorse water bomber used by forest-fighting services 
in several countries. Bombardier is also one of the world's largest 
rail and subway contractors. Anyone who regularly rides the New York 
City subway has sat in a car assembled by Bombardier at its plant 
in Plattsburgh, N.Y., and the company is at work on another 680 subway 
cars worth more than $900 million. Bombardier will also run and maintain 
the new light-rail link planned for Kennedy International Airport, 
the 150-mile-an-hour trains that will run on Amtrak's Northeast corridor 
and as many as 500 intercity railcars for China's Ministry of Railways. 
Earlier this month, it signed a $1.8 billion contract to build locomotives 
and train coaches for the Virgin Rail Group in Britain. While snowmobiles 
and Sea-Doo jet skis have been reduced to just a small part of Bombardier, 
until recently they accounted for approximately a third of the company's 
profit. In the latest monthly report, though, recreational vehicles 
showed no profit at all. But there was a flood of orders in the aerospace 
and rail divisions. For the third quarter, the company, which has 
47,000 employees, earned $81 million. ``Bombardier is almost like 
a portfolio,'' said Ronald Schwarz, executive director of equity research 
at CIBC Wood Gundy, an investment bank in Toronto. ``At any given 
time, one segment may not be performing as it should, but it will 
be offset by a better than expected performance by another segment 
of the portfolio.'' Laurent Beaudoin (pronounced bo-DWAN) has said 
that a key to Bombardier's success is the slow pace of its diversification, 
and its willingness to walk away from opportunities that are not as 
promising as they first appeared. For instance, the company dropped 
its original bids for Canadair, Learjet and de Havilland, and agreed 
to complete the deals only when its first offers, or close to them, 
were accepted. Bombardier has also shown an ability to take initiative 
in the face of dashed opportunities. When energy prices soared in 
1973 after the Arab oil embargo, snowmobile sales fell by half. As 
one response, Bombardier made a bid to build cars for the new Montreal 
subway, and it won, thus entering the mass-transit business. And when 
snowmobile dealers had trouble getting financing from banks, Bombardier 
started its own capital and financing group. Bombardier often buys 
the advanced technology it wants, usually at bargain rates. For example, 
Bombardier's 1986 purchase of the financially troubled Canadair gave 
it access to the technology behind the small Challenger corporate 
jet. Soon after, the company invested an amount equivalent to half 
its market capitalization on the design of a 50-seat regional jet 
that just about everyone else thought the industry did not need. Questions 
about the design of the jet's wing and how it is affected by ice have 
been raised recently by an official of the U.S. Transportation Safety 
Board. Bombardier officials say that the wing design has been proved 
safe in 18 years of service. The company is now developing a new, 
larger regional jet. In a cavernous building near Dorval airport outside 
Montreal, crews of workers crawl over the enormous wing assembly of 
the new Canadair 700, a 70-seat regional jet. The aircraft was designed 
at a total cost of $431 million, including a government development 
loan of $63 million. And Bombardier is already working on plans for 
a 90-seat jet that would bring it closer to direct competition with 
the smallest Boeing and Airbus airliners. In addition to help from 
Canada, Bombardier has received a hand from the Mexican government. 
The company bought the decrepit Concarril locomotive works in central 
Mexico from the government almost seven years ago, with the expectation 
that the government would ensure that Bombardier had enough contracts 
to keep the plant busy. Early on, the company won a contract to renovate 
cars for the Mexico City subway, and to build some new ones. It is 
also assembling 275 locomotives under subcontract to General Motors 
Corp. The locomotives are typical of the way Bombardier works in an 
increasingly integrated North American market. Their electrical systems 
are made in Ontario. Their powerful motors come from LaGrange, Ill. 
All the parts for GM's locomotive division are assembled by Mexican 
workers employed by Bombardier, and some are sold to Burlington Northern 
and Santa Fe Railway, which uses the locomotives to haul mile-long 
coal trains through the American West. But Bombardier's sprawling 
plant is still working at only 60 percent of capacity in part because 
the company did not get the contract for the new Mexico City subway 
line. Robert E. Brown, the president of the aerospace unit who will 
replace Beaudoin as Bombardier's president and chief executive as 
of Feb. 1, said complaints that the company succeeded only because 
it rubbed elbows with government officials were off base. ``We're 
not afraid of competition,'' Brown said, ``but it should be on a fair 
basis.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>