<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981224.0338 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The echo of Exodus House past resounds in the present. Where men healing 
from heroin addiction once pored over the Bible and learned to read 
and write, children now slog their way through ``Animal Farm'' and 
long division. Where the booming voice of a Methodist minister once 
exhorted men to kick their heroin habits, his sons now urge their 
pupils to study and read and sit up straight and not be late. Where 
the sons once shot baskets with addicts on a backyard court, they 
now do the same with 60 schoolchildren, most of them poor, some from 
homes broken by the newer ills of the streets, AIDS and crack cocaine. 
The sons, Ivan and Hans Hageman, grew up in Exodus House, a residential 
drug treatment center in East Harlem once run by their parents, the 
Rev. Lynn Hageman, who died in October, and his wife, Leola. Although 
the family was not wealthy, Ivan and Hans were able to attend prep 
school and college with the help of academic scholarships. Now, after 
Ivy League educations and careers in privileged pockets of the law 
and education, they have returned and given the ``family business'' 
a new life. Five years ago, their parents ailing, the sons took over 
Exodus House, turning it into a private middle school called the East 
Harlem School at Exodus House. In a converted tenement at 309 East 
103rd St., the Hagemans have blended their unorthodox childhoods, 
Ivy League educations and street credentials to create a school that 
is increasingly drawing notice from educators for its success in placing 
poor minority children in respected public and private high schools. 
``Ivan and Hans have done a really phenomenal job in designing and 
organizing a program for inner-city youth that gets them focused and 
excited and enthusiastic about learning,'' said Dan Levine, admissions 
director at the Chapel Hill-Chauncy Hall School in Waltham, Mass., 
a private school that has accepted four Exodus House students since 
the school opened in 1993. That design and organization derive from 
their unusual upbringing. As children, they walked in natty prep school 
uniforms past addicts on the streets outside their Harlem house. They 
played football with John F. Kennedy Jr. at the prestigious Collegiate 
School in Manhattan, then came home and played basketball with men 
only dimly aware of who he was. They attended the finest universities 
_ Princeton, Harvard, Columbia _ but were always aware that others 
from their neighborhood lacked basic opportunities. ``It was anger-provoking,'' 
Ivan Hageman, 39, recalled earlier this month when discussing his 
passage through such disparate worlds, ``because you saw the inequality.'' 
The East Harlem School, he says, is about erasing that inequality, 
about giving disadvantaged children the rigorous academic preparation 
that will carry them to success. The impetus behind the school's founding 
mirrors that of a growing number of such efforts nationwide, as entrepreneurial, 
maverick educators, underwritten by foundations or private donors, 
set up small urban schools that provide poor children with an alternative 
to failing public schools. Like other independent alternative academies, 
the East Harlem School has small classes, none larger than 15 students, 
and an unconventional approach, starting with a year-round schedule 
and with a school day that runs from 7:45 a.m. to 5:30 p.m. Just as 
Exodus House addicts lived under strict rules, so do the East Harlem 
students, all to keep the focus on learning, the Hagemans say. To 
the chagrin of some students, dating is prohibited. Lateness brings 
a 45-minute after-school period of total silence. Parents are asked 
to sign their children's homework and forbid them to watch TV on school 
days. The students wear uniforms and are scolded if they slouch at 
their desks or interrupt one another. All but five of the students 
come from families who qualify for public assistance. Some have lost 
parents to drugs, disease or prison. Even some of the staff members 
are rebounding from the pain of the streets. Luis Isaac Roman is a 
high school dropout who was in and out of jail on drug charges for 
several years. Now, Roman, 23, spends mornings as a maintenance worker 
for the school, and afternoons as its gym teacher. The students describe 
the school as a haven from the fistfights and neglect they encountered 
at their former schools, even though the three hours of homework per 
night and strict rules take some getting used to. ``They expect a 
lot from you here,'' said Jason Rodriguez, 13, an eighth-grader. ``They 
really emphasize being successful here and going on to great colleges.'' 
The formula appears to be working. In the previous school year, eighth-graders 
scored well above the national norm on the Stanford-9 achievement 
test, a standard examination given in public schools, and all but 
one graduate was accepted at a competitive boarding school or an alternative 
public high school in New York City. Lynn and Leola Hageman opened 
Exodus House in 1963 and moved their two sons and daughter, Erika, 
into the building in 1967. In 1984, with government financing for 
drug treatment programs drying up, Mrs. Hageman turned Exodus House 
into an after-school tutoring center. In 1993, Hans Hageman decided 
that Exodus House could do more than supplement the spotty education 
many children in the neighborhood were getting. He said he thought 
he could reach children in their difficult adolescent years _ fifth 
through eighth grades _ when many go astray. ``I saw sweet kids who 
wanted to talk things out but at the same time I was seeing the poor 
state of education they were receiving,'' Hageman, 40, recalled of 
the students he had tutored as part of his mother's program. He approached 
his brother, who had also struggled to reconcile the privileged education 
he had enjoyed with the feeling that he did not deserve so much more 
than others from his neighborhood. Ivan was reluctant. More than Hans, 
he wanted some distance from home to spread his wings. Besides, he 
wondered, where would they get the money? The Robin Hood Foundation, 
a charity run by Wall Street business executives, provided a seed 
grant of $50,000 to start the school, in large part at the request 
of Kennedy, who is on the organization's board of directors. Last 
month, the foundation gave the school an additional $25,000 grant. 
The school opened in the fall of 1993 with the two brothers as teachers 
and 13 students _ bright but underachieving children who passed aptitude 
and creativity exams designed by Ivan Hageman. The school has grown 
to include 60 students, four full-time teachers and a handful of volunteers. 
Hans is now the executive director and Ivan the principal. The school 
survives on donations to cover its $500,000 annual operating expenses. 
Tuition is $1,100 a year, and parents pay what they can afford based 
on a sliding scale, a system intended to give them a sense of ownership 
of the school, Hans Hageman said. The brothers do not keep a waiting 
list but say they turn away a handful of interested students each 
year. From her apartment in the East Harlem School building, Mrs. 
Hageman beamed at the thought of what her family had accomplished. 
``We always wanted to be role models,'' she said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>