<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981224.0009 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Rangers' defensive woes of the previous two games disappeared 
on Wednesday night after three days of hard practices and a number 
of lineup changes. But there was no solution for a lethargic offensive 
effort in a game that they let slip away. The Rangers rarely threatened 
until the final minutes in falling quietly to the Carolina Hurricanes 
by 1-0 at Madison Square Garden. It was the Rangers' fifth loss in 
their last six games, but perhaps the most painful. This game was 
one the Rangers had pointed to as essential. They start a four-game 
road trip after the two-day Christmas break. But the improved effort 
was not enough to make the difference. ``It's totally the wrong way 
you want to go into any kind of holidays, in this kind of mood,'' 
Ulf Samuelsson said. ``We've been pumping ourselves up so much for 
this game. It meant so much, and it sort of knocks the wind out of 
you. It's hard.'' The holiday might represent the Rangers' best chance 
to put this behind them. Coach John Muckler had put the team through 
long skates after two consecutive embarrassing performances last week. 
``I think you don't have a choice,'' goalie Mike Richter said. ``You 
have to put it behind you and go on. We didn't dwell on the last two, 
and they were worse efforts.'' The Rangers surrendered 13 goals in 
their previous two games, a 6-3 loss at New Jersey and a 7-4 defeat 
at Toronto. Richter, who had been playing sensationally before this 
recent struggle, was in the net on Wednesday night for his 12th straight 
game, and from the start this one was far different from the previous 
two. Richter made four spectacular saves in the opening period, almost 
singlehandedly squashing Carolina opportunities. In the second period, 
he continued to excel, and the Rangers held an 18-16 advantage in 
shots through the first 40 minutes. But in the third period, it took 
just 38 seconds for the shutout to be lost. Carolina right wing Ray 
Sheppard settled the puck along the boards outside the right circle 
and, with a clear look at the net, drilled a shot over Richter's right 
shoulder into the top of the net on the near side. ``You want to win, 
but it's not just a snap of the fingers that's going to pull you out 
of a slump,'' Muckler said. ``There's a lot of things that go through 
everybody's mind on your way to getting out. The only way you're going 
to get out of a slump is hard work.'' A scoreless tie through two 
periods may have been the last thing either side expected after the 
Rangers' recent troubles. And the Hurricanes had problems of their 
own. They took the ice with a shortage of defensive help, playing 
without Steve Chiasson (back spasms), Sean Hill (bruised ankle), Nolan 
Pratt (back spasms), and Dave Karpa (knee surgery on Dec.2). Curtis 
Leschyshyn played despite a bruised sternum. But the Carolina defense 
was hardly tested, and in the second period, when the Hurricanes went 
on a power play, they played with five forwards on the ice. The Rangers, 
who had converted 8 of their last 16 power-play opportunities entering 
on Wednesday night, had two chances in the first period but could 
not take advantage. When Carolina's Marek Malik was whistled for interference 
at 9 minutes 29 seconds of the first period, the Hurricanes nearly 
scored. First, Paul Ranheim made a run up the right side after the 
puck skipped past Brian Leetch as he attempted to settle it with his 
glove just outside the Hurricanes' zone, but Richter was able to stop 
the shot. Then Keith Primeau skated past Petr Nedved for an open shot 
at Richter from directly in front of the net. But Richter again make 
the stop. Just 47 seconds after the Hurricanes defended that power 
play, Carolina's Kent Manderville was sent off for boarding the Rangers' 
Marc Savard. This time the Rangers had their chances, with Mathieu 
Schneider blasting a shot from just inside the blue line that goalie 
Arturs Irbe caught with his glove. Then, with six seconds left in 
the man advantage, Niklas Sundstrom deflected a Nedved slap shot in 
front, but Irbe again smothered the puck. ``Our power play has been 
a good reason that our offense has scored goals'' Leetch said. ``At 
some point, you need to get some five-on-five conversions and tonight 
we got neither. It's a game that we really had to win, wanted to win.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>