<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981224.0170 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In ``A Civil Action,'' the self-interested lawyer played by John Travolta 
gets a speeding ticket that changes his life. As Jan Schlichtmann, 
on whose bruising experiences the best-selling book by Jonathan Harr 
was based, Travolta gets stopped while racing his Porsche back to 
Boston from Woburn, Mass. He has just disappointed a group of decent, 
aggrieved Woburn citizens whose children were casualties of a poisoned 
river. A case like that isn't worth a thing to ambulance-chasing Jan. 
But he spies some sudsy water while his car is stopped. Intrigued, 
he even muddies his expensive shoes tracking the water to its source. 
When he finally finds the tannery that has been dumping evil-looking 
chemicals, Schlichtmann's face lights up: not from solving the mystery, 
but from discovering that the factory is linked to the deep-pocketed 
corporations Beatrice Foods and W.R. Grace &AMP; Co. Anyone who can 
spell J-O-H-N G-R-I-S-H-A-M can imagine the ripe dramatic possibilities 
here. Maybe Schlichtmann will uncover a billion-dollar conspiracy 
centering on the factory and dig to the bottom of it, with a beautiful 
female colleague at his side. Or maybe he will just change his ways, 
lose the suits, become a passionate environmentalist and champion 
Woburn's citizenry until the good fight is won. What makes this gripping, 
expertly acted film by Steven Zaillian so enveloping is its avoidance 
of anything that easy. The story presents both Schlichtmann and the 
civil court system as stubbornly complicated. And it tells a finely 
nuanced tale of right, wrong and the gray area in between. Anyone 
who remembers Zaillian's previous film, ``Searching For Bobby Fischer,'' 
or his screenplay for ``Schindler's List'' will recognize the keen, 
watchful intelligence he brings to this story. Just as Harr did on 
the page, the filmmaker presents Schlichtmann as an abrasive yet affecting 
character and treats everything else in the story in equally lifelike 
terms. Schlichtmann's glaring mistakes become as compelling as his 
smart moves, to the point where ``A Civil Action'' rings more true 
than most films about the law. Zaillian has also faced the problem 
of the real story's very non-Hollywood outcome and made it slightly 
more palatable on screen, without minimizing the toll the prolonged 
Woburn case took on its participants. ``A Civil Action'' is ultimately 
less about winning or losing than about the difficulty of playing 
a game in which settlement-hungry lawyers gamble against tremendous 
odds and risk losing their bearings in the process. William H. Macy, 
who plays the bean-counting member of Schlichtmann's small firm so 
enjoyably here, even complains about financial trouble to Kathleen 
Quinlan, as a somber mother whose child fell victim to Woburn's pollution. 
``How can you even begin to compare what you've lost to what WE'VE 
lost?'' she snaps in reply. ``A Civil Action'' is very much an actor's 
film, with Travolta at his best in the central role. The star captures 
this showboating lawyer with that special zeal he brings to less-than-angelic 
figures. (To watch Schlichtmann get upset about water spilled on his 
conference table is to know a lot about the man.) Yet his reluctant, 
unanticipated decency is made very real, too. Travolta and ``A Civil 
Action'' are good enough to see beyond the particulars of one case 
and treat Schlichtmann as emblematic, a man badly in need of a wake-up 
call. The performance is strong enough to carry the audience along 
with Schlichtmann's transformation, every step of the way. Also outstandingly 
deft here is Robert Duvall as Jerome Facher, a daunting corporate 
lawyer who cultivates his oddball mannerisms to Machiavellian effect. 
Zaillian's screenwriting, economical and revealing, is sharp enough 
to announce Facher's tactics just by watching him shred a young man 
who interrupts him. Beyond being a fine showcase for Duvall's wiles, 
the film also elicits shrewd, first-rate performances from John Lithgow 
as a judge who takes a quick dislike to Schlichtmann, James Gandolfini 
as a conscience-stricken witness in the case and the director Sydney 
Pollack in another of his mischievous acting turns. Tony Shalhoub 
and Zeljko Ivanek join Macy as partners dragged along by the Schlichtmann 
coattails even when those coattails seem to be headed over a cliff. 
``A Civil Action'' is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). It 
includes profanity and implicit scenes of death. PRODUCTION NOTES: 
`A CIVIL ACTION' Directed by Steven Zaillian; written by Zaillian, 
based on the book by Jonathan Harr; director of photography, Conrad 
L. Hall; edited by Wayne Wahrman; music by Danny Elfman; production 
designer, David Gropman; produced by Scott Rudin, Robert Redford and 
Rachel Pfeffer; released by Touchstone Pictures. Running time: 113 
minutes. WITH: John Travolta (Jan Schlichtmann), Robert Duvall (Jerome 
Facher), Tony Shalhoub (Kevin Conway), William H. Macy (James Gordon), 
Zeljko Ivanek (Bill Crowley), Bruce Norris (William Cheeseman), Kathleen 
Quinlan (Anne Anderson), Peter Jacobson (Neil Jacobs), Mary Mara (Kathy 
Boyer), James Gandolfini (Al Love), Stephen Fry (Pinder ) and Dan 
Hedaya (John Riley). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>