<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981224.0332 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Air Force pilot who flew his attack jet into a Colorado mountainside 
last year was in mental turmoil over ``unrequited love'' for a former 
girlfriend and over his mother's Christian pacifist faith, a ``psychological 
autopsy'' by the Air Force has concluded. Air Force officials concluded 
last year, basically for lack of a better explanation, that the 32-year-old 
pilot, Capt. Craig Button, committed suicide when, on April 2, 1997, 
he broke formation from his unit instead of proceeding on a training 
run and then flew from southern Arizona to the Colorado Rockies. But 
the psychological report, which was released earlier this month because 
of legally enforceable requests made by The Tucson Citizen under the 
Freedom of Information Act, was an attempt to explain why. It was 
based on interviews with about 200 people. The report also dealt with 
another mystery of the flight: what happened to the four 500-pound 
bombs that were on board the plane but never found. Loud explosions 
in northern Arizona and near the Colorado mountain towns of Telluride 
and Aspen that were heard by 58 witnesses cited in the report indicate 
that Button may have dumped the bombs. The pilot's parents, Richard 
and Joan Button of Massapequa, N.Y., angrily reject the conclusion 
that he committed suicide. ``They pulled that out of a hat: that he 
must have done it himself, which I think is a lie,'' said Richard 
Button, a retired Air Force lieutenant colonel, in a telephone interview. 
Button, who served in the Air Force during World War II, the Korean 
War and the Vietnam War, noted that his son's plane broke from formation 
just after it had been refueled in the air. ``There must have been 
some kind of air contamination,'' Button said. ``We think he was disoriented, 
that he wasn't able to control his airplane for a period of time. 
We think that caused the accident.'' At the crash site, just below 
the summit of a 13,365-foot-high granite peak in the Holy Cross Wilderness, 
investigators did not recover enough human remains to determine whether 
Button had suffered from carbon monoxide poisoning. But they did determine 
that he was not using drugs or alcohol before the crash. Searchers 
were able to retrieve about two thirds of the $9 million war plane 
and much of its ammunition. The bombs, sometimes called ``tankbusters,'' 
were never found. After a second search four months ago, the U.S. 
Forest Service reopened the area to hikers, posting warning signs 
showing what the missing bombs looks like. In ruling out an accident 
caused by loss of consciousness, the Air Force investigators noted 
that Button's A-10 Thunderbolt climbed from its altitude of 6,000 
feet during the flight exercise, and threaded its way through 14,000 
foot high peaks. An avid skier, Button had skied in the Colorado Rockies, 
had been reprimanded by the Air Force for often going out of his way 
to fly over the Rockies and had talked about one day leaving the Air 
Force to fly commercial jets out of Denver. On his final flight, Craig 
Button, a New York City native, roared over New York Lake at 300 miles 
an hour, missed Craig Mountain by two miles and crashed into Gold 
Dust Peak. The Air Force report, based on interviews with friends, 
fellow fliers and relatives, sketches a picture of a ``perfectionist'' 
who was inwardly torn by his relationships with his mother and a former 
girlfriend. Before releasing the report, the Air Force Office of Special 
Investigations blacked out almost all the names of people interviewed. 
Two points were not a part of the report. After Button's plane disappeared, 
but before its wreckage was found several days later, rumors circulated 
widely that he was connected to right-wing paramilitary groups and 
had taken the jet and its payload for use by those organizations. 
After the wreckage was found, rumors had it that Button was gay and 
that torment over military policy on homosexuality had led him to 
take his life. But the report as released did not mention anything 
about those rumors. Button, raised as an only child of elderly parents, 
broke as a teen-ager with the faith of his parents, who are Jehovah's 
Witnesses. ``My mother is a Jehovah's Witness, raised me to think 
that joining the military is wrong,'' Craig Button, wrote as a 23-year-old 
Air Force cadet to a commander. A classmate from the Reserve Officer 
Training Corps told an Air Force investigator that Craig's ``mother 
would not allow him to wear his ROTC uniform in the house.'' The pilot's 
half-sister, Susane Button, told an Air Force investigator that his 
mother wanted him ``to leave the military for the airlines.'' Lt. 
Brian Gross, a pilot who shared an apartment with Button at Davis-Monthan 
Air Force Base, near Tucson, Ariz., said that in the month before 
the disappearance, Button's ``mother became increasingly vocal in 
her negative feelings towards her son's job and role in the military.'' 
But in the weeks before the crash, Button seemed to some people to 
be disillusioned with his life in the military. A former landlord 
in Texas recalled to an investigator that in two telephone conversations 
prior to his death, the pilot seemed ``out of character,'' saying 
that he was ``learning to kill people.'' Mrs. Button has declined 
to be interviewed by reporters about her son's death. But she talked 
with Air Force investigators on April 17, 1997, while her son was 
still missing. ``She advised there were no arguments with her son 
over religion during their visit in Tucson,'' the Air Force interviewer 
wrote, referring to a weeklong visit by the parents to their son, 
a visit which apparently ended amicably one week before his last flight. 
In a telephone interview Wednesday, his father said Button had gotten 
along well with his mother during the visit and had talked enthusiastically 
about a coming transfer to Germany. ``There were no arguments between 
the two,'' said Button's father. ``There were no flareups, no extreme 
arguments relating to any faith.'' The Watch Tower Bible and Tract 
Society, a Jehovah's Witness group which arranged the telephone interview 
with Button, also provided a statement on their faith and military 
service: ``Jehovah's Witnesses choose to abide by the principle outlined 
in the Bible to `beat their swords into ploughshares.' However, they 
do not interfere with or oppose individuals who choose to serve in 
the military.'' Another source of turmoil for the young pilot was 
a ``lost love'' for a former classmate who had turned down his vague 
proposal of marriage three years earlier. By 1996, the captain told 
his friends, he had gotten over this Air Force flight instructor. 
But around Christmas 1996, the woman, who was coming out of another 
relationship, called him. Later, the captain told a friend that he 
had thrown away her Christmas card unread, proof, he said, that he 
had gotten over the relationship. On Tuesday, April 1, 1997, Button 
broke a three-month silence and called the woman. She was in a work 
meeting but took down his new telephone number and said she would 
call him back. Just the day before, Button bought a videocassette 
recorder and a videotape of ``Bridges of Madison County,'' one of 
his favorite movies. That evening, while the phone never rang, he 
watched the movie, about a doomed love affair. Four days after the 
crash, the woman, unaware of it, tried to call him. ``It was a dramatic 
example of a man who seems to have everything going for him in his 
life, yet cannot have the woman he loves passionately,'' the Air Force 
report concludes. Referring to the male lead in the movie, it added, 
``Did Craig Button see himself in this Clint Eastwood role?'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>