<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981224.2000.0377 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
On this Christmas Eve, there is no peace in Kosovo, the mostly ethnic 
Albanian province of Serbia. Serb tanks and troops struck today at 
Kosovo Liberation Army guerrillas, dealing a blow to U.S.-led efforts 
to stop the fighting. The Serbs cracked down on the secession-minded 
KLA in February, and by the time a U.S.-brokered cease-fire took effect 
in October, about 1,500 people had died. The Organization for Security 
and Cooperation in Europe is putting a 2,000 person Kosovo verification 
mission, or KVM, into the province to observe the cease-fire. But 
KVM spokesman Jorgen Grunnet says today's attack has put the cease-fire 
at risk. There has been a major operation by the Yugoslav forces, 
both the army and police, during the day, and they reported that they're 
going to break off the operation mid afternoon. But it seems that 
that didn't happen and that they're still, according to unconfirmed 
reports, fighting in the area north of Podujevo, northwest of and 
in Podujevo. But this is unconfirmed and, of course, the KVM patrols 
in the area are trying to verify this. There are also unconfirmed 
reports that tanks and other armored vehicles have been destroyed 
by KLA. But this is all unconfirmed. Mm-hmm, mm-hmm. Do you know about 
the scale of what's been happening today in terms of how many troops 
are involved, how much machine gun fire? Our patrols observed a considerable 
number of armor. I know that in one column, there was at least six 
tanks and 20, you know, armored vehicles, like personnel carriers. 
If this proves to be true, is it considered a major acceleration in 
the conflict there and a major breaking of the cease-fire? Yes, of 
course, that would be a break of the cease-fire and a quite serious 
breach. Mm-hmm. And in what way could this attack be seen as being 
provoked? After all, there were cases in the past week or so... The 
reason the Yugoslavian forces gave for this operation today was the 
term they used was a limited search of suspects in the murder case 
of a policeman who was killed in Podujevo last Monday. And so, they're 
saying this is in retaliation for that? They don't use the word "retaliation." 
They were looking for suspects in that murder case. The Kosovo Liberation 
Army guerrillas are reported to have issued an ultimatum to the Serbs 
to get out of certain areas. Can you confirm that? I know they've 
issued a statement like that, yes. Do you think it's genuine? Yes, 
I don't think there's any doubt of that. Is there anything that the 
monitors who are spread throughout the area can do to try and prevent 
even more outbreaks of violence? Well, the Kosovo verification mission 
patrols are unarmed and are here as civilian -- are civilian and are 
here only to verify what happens. And if you're unarmed, you don't 
step out in front of a tank or in front of a machine gun. Mm-hmm. 
As you mentioned, the members of the verification commission are unarmed 
and spread throughout the area. Are you afraid that they might be 
in danger at this point? Well, there's been an instance of a threat, 
you know, by a policeman today against an American patrol. A policeman 
who tried to get this patrol away from army units and so on. But nothing 
happened, and we've received assurances from the liaison officer of 
the Yugoslavian army here that they still guarantee the safety of 
the KVM people. How would you say the scale of this violence that 
has been happening the past week and much of which has happened today, 
how would it compare with the previous violence? There's no doubt 
that there's been an increasing number of incidents over the last 
couple of weeks. And of course, that is very detrimental to the whole 
effort of the KVM and achieving peaceful conditions, which is the 
prerequisite for achieving a solution to the conflict. Jorgen Grunnet 
is acting spokesman for the Kosovo Verification Mission, speaking 
to us from Pristina. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>