<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981224.2000.1187 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There's no accounting for nostalgia. In Russia, there is currently 
a movement to bring back a statue honoring the founder of the Soviet 
secret police. And some of Russia's most powerful parliamentarians 
are supporting the move. From Moscow, the BBC's Rob Parsons has the 
story. It was a night when history was made. On Moscow's Lyubyanka 
Square, home to the KGB, the crowd of ordinary Russians was doing 
something which, until then, had been unthinkable. Inch by inch, they 
were lifting the statue of Iron Felix Dzerzhinsky, founder of the 
Soviet secret police, from his pedestal. The year was 1991, and within 
months, the Soviet Union has ceased to exist. Seven years on the space 
here on Lyubyanka Square, where Iron Felix once stood remains empty. 
Across the road in the old KGB office, the successors to the Soviet 
secret police are still smarting from the humiliation. But there's 
a hint of vengeance in the cold winter air. In Russia's Communist-dominated 
parliament, moves are afoot to restore Dzerzhinsky to his pedestal. 
In a debate in the lower house, the Duma, a left-wing coalition led 
by Nikolai Kharitonov of the Agrarian Party, finds overwhelming support 
for the statue's return. Leafing through telegrams from old KGB operatives, 
he tells me he's got the public on his side. Dzerzhinsky is simply 
a symbol in the fight against crime, because today Russia needs dictatorship. 
Dictatorship of the law. Mr. Kharitonov brushes over what sort of 
dictatorship of the law Dzerzhinsky brought to Russia. The stark truth 
is that it was dictatorship by mass terror. Hundreds of thousands 
of innocent people perished at the hands of the Cheka, a precursor 
to the KGB created by Iron Felix. Unbowed by time or fate, Zoya Marchinka 
has not and cannot forget. The piano is one of the few luxuries in 
an otherwise spartan flat. She lost her father to the Cheka, her husband 
and brother to Stalin's camps and was herself imprisoned three times. 
For me, Dzerzhinsky is a symbol of evil. He always has been. I'm terrified 
that if they put his statue back up, they will be returned to the 
terror of the past. In a garden near the square, nationalist and Communist 
demonstrators try to break up a meeting called to oppose parliament's 
plans. The extremists are beginning to feel the establishment is on 
their side. Mr. Kharitonov's call for the return of Dzerzhinsky's 
statue is matched by a demand by the speaker of the Duma for the revival 
of hard labor camps. Political analyst Andre Piankovsky senses a chill 
wind blowing through Russian politics. Until recently, the Communist 
claim that they have changed and that they are not responsible for 
the brutality of former Communist regimes in this country. But now, 
they deliberately send a message to the people that they took a responsibility 
for all the action of such persons as Lenin, Stalin or Dzerzhinsky. 
Most impatient of them succumb to intoxicating smell of approaching 
power. Iron Felix still stares balefully across the scruffy Moscow 
park where he was abandoned in 1991. But behind that granite mask, 
there may be a smirk. His supporters are gathering strength. The shadows 
are closing in again on Russia. The BBC's Rob Parsons reporting from 
Moscow. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>