<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981224.2000.2008 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It's not shaping up to be a very merry Christmas in the little town 
of Bethlehem. Tensions in the Middle East have put a damper on the 
seasonal spirit and scared away foreigners and their badly needed 
dollars. But as The World's Richard Myron reports, there is deeper 
trouble on the minds of Christians on the West Bank -- the realization 
that many of their fellow believers are leaving the Holy Land. The 
congregation at St. Catherine's Church in Bethlehem chants "The Lord's 
Prayer." St. Catherine's is just yards from the place where, according 
to the Bible, Jesus was born. It's Sunday Mass, traditional time for 
Christian worship, yet there are some empty seats to be found in the 
pews. And each year, there are more and more spaces as the congregation 
shrinks in size. Nadema Fore has come to the church with his wife 
and four children. He was born and brought up in Jerusalem. But now 
lives in Palestinian-controlled Bethlehem. Life, he says, is difficult 
here for Christians. We are a minority living in a Muslim state. My 
children are asked always, "Why are you Christians? Why don't you 
become Muslim" You know, this sort of thing. So we don't feel very 
comfortable. That's why most Christian people are leaving the country. 
The departure of Christians from Bethlehem is reflected throughout 
the Holy Land. Today, there are 200,000 native-born Christians -- 
65,000 in the West Bank and Gaza and the remainder in Israel. They 
make up less than 2 percent of the total population. Sixty years ago, 
one in three were Christian. Bethlehem's mayor, Hana Nasser, refutes 
the claim that religious intolerance is driving Christians away. Bethlehem 
is considered a model of coexistence. Christians and Muslims here, 
they are cooperating together, and they are living in harmony. We 
don't have any serious problems so far, and all these rumors, believe 
me, they are not right. They are baseless. But he does admit the poor 
state of the economy in the West Bank has hit the traditionally middle-class 
Christian community harder than others. I am very worried about the 
economic situation, and I hope it will be better. But God forbid, 
if the economic situation will continue as it is now, I'm afraid that 
we have another emigration out of the city of Bethlehem. In Jerusalem's 
Church of the Holy Sepulchre, tourists weighed down with cameras outnumber 
the local congregates as they watch Franciscan monks praying next 
to the spot where Jesus is said to have been crucified. Video cameras 
record the waving of the incense and the voices of the choir. Some 
believe that if the situation continues, Christians may become just 
a museum relic rather than a living, thriving community. I fear for 
Christian presence in the birthplace of our faith. Bishop Breyer is 
the senior Anglican clergyman at St. George's Church in Jerusalem. 
I fear for Christian presence in Bethlehem and in Jerusalem, in Nazareth, 
in Galilee. More people seem to leave seeking fortune, whether it 
is for work or for study or got fed up with what is all happening 
around or being caught in between the conflicting parties. Or as a 
result of being neglected or ignored by their sisters and brothers 
in Christ. The church must wake up. But some aren't so worried about 
the future of the community. Christians have traditionally been a 
minority among the populations of the Middle East. Harry Hagopien, 
the executive director of the Jerusalem office of the Middle East 
Council of Churches, believes spiritual strength and not the size 
of the community is the important thing. If we take the early Christianity, 
there was Jesus and 12 apostles. And the Christians have always been 
a small community. It has never been numbers which are daunting. The 
Christian faith and the Christian presence and the Christian witness 
rely as much on the quality of their contribution to the society rather 
than on the quantity. At a checkpoint on the road leading out of Bethlehem, 
Israeli soldiers scan the documents of Palestinians trying to cross 
into Israel. Tensions are high at the moment. Palestinian Christians 
are finding themselves increasingly caught in the middle between the 
rising waves of Jewish and Islamic extremism. Many, like Nadema Fore 
see few options but to leave. Most of the families that I know of 
have left. I have a sister in Canada, another sister in the United 
States. It's sad for me to leave because it's my homeland here. But 
what can I do otherwise? I have to follow all my friends and all my 
family. The congregation at St. Catherine's Church in Bethlehem sing 
hymns for the coming Christmas. Each year, the numbers are fewer, 
and many say all they can do is pray for the future of the Christians 
of the Holy Land. For The World, this is Richard Myron in Bethlehem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>