<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981224.2000.2364 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Despite his woes of late, Augusto Pinochet is planning a pleasant 
Christmas. Twenty-three of the former Chilean dictator's children 
and grandchildren have traveled to his temporary residence near London 
to spend the holiday with him. General Pinochet has been detained 
since October, when he was arrested on a Spanish warrant on charges 
of torture and murder. His legal battle has divided Chileans between 
those who want him extradited and those who want him free to return 
to Chile. Non-Chileans find it very confusing, given Pinochet's iron-fisted 
rule. But as The World's Alejandra Martines reports from Santiago, 
outsiders don't understand just how conservative Chilean society is. 
Chile is the only country in Latin America where there is no divorce 
law. But this doesn't stop couples from marrying several times. They 
simply get an annulment, the practice so common that it has come to 
be known as "divorce the Chilean way." Teresa Valdez is a sociologist 
at Latin American faculty of social sciences in Santiago. She explains 
the law requires couples to get married in the district where they 
live. So when they want the marriage annulled, they simply tell the 
magistrates they were living elsewhere. They go with two or three 
people that testify that they got married in the wrong place. That 
means that it was -- it has to be annulled. So it was never a marriage, 
and it has very bad consequences since there is not regulation for 
what happens with the children and what happens when the woman stays 
alone, well, how can she provide alone for the children? That's our 
Chilean divorce. Many divorce bills have been introduced in congress. 
But they either end up at the bottom of the pile or rejected. One 
of the most vocal opponents of a divorce law is Senator Sergio Diaz. 
Senator Diaz says a divorce law would promote more family break-ups. 
If you know that your marriage forever, you take care and you study 
and think very deeply before you get married. So I think that a divorce 
law promote weak marriage. And divorce is not the only issue where 
conservative and less conservative views seem to be at loggerheads 
in Chile. Through TV broadcasts like this one, which shows a teenager 
and his mother talking about AIDS, the government has been trying 
to inform Chileans on prevention measures. There are about 6,000 registered 
cases here of people who either have AIDS or are HIV positive. Tim 
Frasca, an American, is the director of the AIDS Prevention Council 
in Santiago, the first nongovernmental organization devoted to AIDS 
prevention in Chile. He credits the government for trying to tackle 
the problem but says many obstacles remain. The government has produced 
spots for television about AIDS. They do at the end say here are the 
different ways to prevent it -- abstinence; single partner which, 
of course, is a very dubious proposition; and condom use. Well, of 
course, every year, like clockwork, the Catholic television station 
and another right-wing television station refuses to play them. So 
among the three main channels, only the government-owned television 
plays these spots. And this is the main problem. Encouraging people 
to use preservativos, or condoms. The conservative stations say these 
messages are basically saying to young people it doesn't matter with 
whom you sleep, just use a condom. Dr. Raquel Child is the director 
of the government AIDS program. She says despite the difficulties, 
the government has a duty to inform. We know that we need to have 
a widen information on AIDS prevention measures and that there must 
be freedom of information. Many sociologists have tried to explain 
why Chile seems to be so conservative. The Catholic Church certainly 
has a strong influence here. But that is also the case in many other 
Latin American countries where public debate on condoms or divorce 
don't generate such a big controversy. Tim Frasca of the AIDS Prevention 
Council says conservatism is not a feature of Chilean society as a 
whole, but of a small group. If we go to a meeting of people, average 
people, average Chileans and say we want to discuss AIDS, and that 
includes this and this and this, and they say, "Tell us everything. 
We want to hear the whole nine." You know, "We want all the information. 
We want to hear about condoms." But then, the power, the institutions 
come along and say no. And that's because Chile's not a very democratic 
country. The imperfections of democracy in Chile have become one of 
the favorite topics among politicians since the arrest in London of 
former military leader, General Augusto Pinochet. The constitution 
passed during Pinochet's government left in place many controversial 
institutions, such as non-elected senators -- former high military 
and civilians officials that automatically become members of the senate. 
Some critics say that's why, even though right-wing parties only account 
for one-third of the popular vote, conservative views dominate the 
senate. That claim is rejected by Senator Sergio Diaz, who says the 
issues are openly debated in congress. But he agrees with those who 
describe Chile as deeply conservative. Yes, I think so, and thank 
God. It's a conservative society in matter of principles. But not 
to be closed to discuss. We discuss every problem very openly. The 
parliamentary tradition in Chile is quite open. Everyone can promote, 
present a project, defend, vote and so on. Parliamentary traditions 
aside, many Chileans are resorting to other forums to debate social 
issues and even politics. Los Tres is one of Chile's most popular 
rock bands. They are well-known among young people for speaking their 
mind, even when it comes to the most controversial issues, as their 
lead singer Alva Enriques explains. People like our music and like 
this band because we are -- we're trying to be honest, and we try 
to do things the way I think things should be done like, you know? 
They banned our video because there was a little angel, you know, 
coming, a stupid thing. So we decided not to go, never to the shows, 
and we never did. This song, "La Primera Vez," "The First Time," is 
perhaps the best example of the group's direct style. In it, Enriques 
speaks of the first time he ever wished ill of anybody, a reference 
to General Pinochet. The lyrics refer to somebody who is tempted by 
power, commits visas and then has to face justice. What is amazing 
in a society deeply divided on the Pinochet case is that Los Tres 
is a magnet for young people on both sides of the argument. Alva Enriques 
again. Many people who like Pinochet maybe likes Los Tres, too. And 
they know that we don't like Pinochet. But everybody is trying to 
open their minds, you know, a little bit more. The debate over General 
Pinochet's arrest has deeply polarized Chile. But many observers, 
like sociologist Teresa Valdez, say debate on controversial issues 
can only benefit Chilean society. The dictatorship was traumatic, 
it was really traumatic. And the people were afraid, a lot of fear 
of conflict. Anything that produces confrontation will be denied. 
And so, since we finally -- we are discussing what's going on or what 
happened with human rights, I think that we will be able to discuss 
many other aspects, too. A final decision on General Pinochet's fate 
is still months or even years away. And the arguments in Chile are 
likely to intensify during next year's presidential campaign. Perhaps 
it will be a chance for Chileans not only to look at their recent 
past, but also to cast a critical eye on their society. For The World, 
this is Alejandra Martines in Santiago. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>