<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981224.2000.2903 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
If scientists from the European Union get their way, Europeans will 
have to change the way they think about and make foie gras, and here's 
why. The delicacy is made from the livers of ducks and geese which 
have had large amounts of grain crammed down their gullets through 
a tube twice a day. The EU study concludes that this force feeding 
is detrimental to the welfare of the birds. Scientists are urging 
drastic changes in the rearing and feeding of the animals. That strikes 
Alec Sayak, a former chef at LeCirque in New York, as an over-reaction. 
The Frenchman has fond memories of foie gras. During the season between 
November and Christmas, my mother went to the market. And at that 
time, the foie gras are the best. So she bought maybe three, four 
kilo of foie gras -- that's near, of course, to 10 pound. She mixes 
that with pork, and I was a little kid, you know, in the kitchen, 
and she told me, "OK, now go to the butcher and buy me two small truffle." 
So I go there, you know, I was 8 years old. And she put this in a 
jar, and we have that when we go to picnic. And that was very, very 
good. Hmm, I can imagine. But I never asked myself, you know, maybe 
those geese are suffering. I mean, don't we kill a lot of animals, 
you know, to sustain ourselves? I don't know. They make me laugh a 
little bit, this kind of thing, you know? I think for some people, 
though, they might wonder if haute cuisine is compatible with, for 
instance, animal welfare. That's right. Well, what do you think? I 
think you don't need to have a foie gras to have a good Christmas, 
first, you know? But I look about caviar. I know you want to talk 
about foie gras. But look at caviar. What do we do about caviar? We 
open the sturgeon when it's alive, and we take the eggs inside. So 
do we have to condemn all the people that take care of the sturgeon? 
Yeah, but if these scientists who are appealing to the European Union 
get their way, then I wonder if you kind of shudder at the idea of 
foie gras or many other kinds of delicacies having to change their 
production methods. I mean, when you hear about complaints and concerns 
about -- from animal welfare activists, does it bother you as a chef? 
Do you understand them? Do you regret them? I think, you know, I understand 
very well the sensibility of certain people. But I think, you know, 
the business of food, food business is that you can think whatever 
you want in your life, you know, and be the most pure person in the 
world. But when your stomach is asking you for food, you eat whatever 
you can. That comes from the century and century and century, and 
people, they have to eat. Mr. Sayak, I wonder what's going to be on 
your Christmas table this Christmas. This Christmas, we're going to 
have a just a touch of foie gras. We're going to have caviar, roast 
beef. We're going to have a potato endive. And a lot of other goodies 
like this, a lot of fruit. Plumcake, Christmas log, and a lot of champagne 
and a lot of wine. It's sounds delicious. I imagine there are going 
to be no animal welfare activists at your dinner table. Oh, my God. 
I mean, it's bad if I say OK, I'm going to have only vegetable, you 
know? But some do, we should say. Alec Sayak, the executive dean of 
culinary studies at the French Culinary Institute. Thank you very 
much and Bon Noel. OK, Bon Noel. Merci. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>