<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981224.2000.0632 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The fighting in Kosovo is but one example of the violence that's pervaded 
the former Yugoslavia. For the past several years, groups of intellectuals 
have met to swim against the tide of the region's savage history. 
Writers, researchers and thinkers gathered this month in Belgrade 
to discuss ways to replace Balkan hatred with if not love, at least 
tolerance. The World's Nenad Shebek attended this year's conference 
and filed this report. Try calling Belgrade from Sarajevo this holiday 
season, and you'll be lucky to get through. Phone services have only 
recently been fully restored. For the many families that find themselves 
divided among the successor states of the former Yugoslavia, the busy 
signal is only one of the legacies of the modern Balkan wars. Surface 
mail is also erratic. Visas are extremely hard to obtain. Commerce 
is almost nonexistent, and cooperation between the new states is still 
the exception and not the rule. Belgrade academic Ivan Trolovic says 
that's no surprise at all. Today, throughout the region, we have in 
power what are known as ethnocracies. They have no interest in any 
regional cooperation because a crucial part of their policy and method 
of ruling is vilifying the neighbor and turning him into an enemy. 
It's the strategy of these nationalistic leaders who manage to stay 
in power by generating a paranoid fear of the others in the region. 
The war wouldn't be possible without making neighbors enemies here. 
Belgrade sociologist Sherana Papic. I think it was the precondition 
of the war in ex-Yugoslavia to make the neighbor the enemy, to make 
Croats, you know, impossible to live with or Muslims to be impossible 
to live with because of there's a whole manipulation and instrumentalization 
of the differences. The hatred will spread through the population 
at large through the state-run media, says Papic. It happened ahead 
of the break-up of the former Yugoslavia and, she says, it's happening 
again now because of the violence between ethnic Albanians and Serbs 
in the province of Kosovo. If they'd watch, you know, the production 
of the dominant discourse on TV and radio, which is very much controlled. 
That you know, Albanians are genetically different from us and that 
they're biologically primitive because they have more than, you know, 
two children, and people start to think that they're really something 
else. I see it as a very serious form of racism. Another problem is 
that those who do bear a good will towards the other nations have 
almost no means of learning about each other. Skelzin Malichi is an 
ethnic Albanian intellectual from Kosovo. There is no proper communication 
between us. There is darkness on the information field. Most of the 
people in Serbia just follow the state-run news media and their propaganda. 
Any other opinions are so hard to find, not because they don't exist 
but because they have so few ways to find a way to reach the rest 
of the population. And the participants of the conference have no 
problems communicating or agreeing with each other. But then, the 
participants of good will conferences never have. The problem is how 
to get this message of good will across to others. Gislaine Glason 
d'Champ organized the conference. The program relies on the fact that 
we are working with multipliers of opinion -- professors at the university, 
young people studying in human sciences, political sciences and law 
who will either be teachers or lawyers or juries and -- or journalists 
and so on. Our aim is not to touch a lot of people, but to work with 
the right people at the right place at the right moment. D'Champ's 
organization runs summer and winter camps for people from the Balkan 
countries, trying to spread the message of tolerance and understanding. 
Even if this message doesn't reach everyone, Skelzin Malichi from 
Kosovo agrees that it's important to keep trying. It's like an oasis 
in the desert. They are few and far between, but they are very important. 
What we're hoping for is that the oasis will defeat the desert ultimately. 
Even though it might appear to be a futile exercise, we have to hope. 
Malichi says that the era of extreme chauvinism and hatred is close 
to being over and that economic ties will slowly develop new links. 
Many analysts here believe, for example, that isolating Serbia through 
economic sanctions is the wrong way to deal with it. Opening it up 
to the world, they argue, might be much more deadly for the regime. 
For The World, this is Nenad Shebek in Belgrade. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>