<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981224.0500.1966 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Chinese government has signaled that its crackdown on political 
dissent will carry over into the new year. Officials from Jangs Onen 
on down warned against rising social instability. Despite these warnings, 
scores of dissidents plan to stage a relay-style hunger strike to 
protest the long prison sentence handed out to three activists this 
week. From Beijing, Roger Wilkinson reports. A Hong Kong based human 
rights monitoring group says two dissidents in Northeastern Nuyalninbg 
province kicked off a hunger strike Thursday. To protest the jailing 
of dissidents Chu Win Lee, Wan Yo Si, and Chin Yong Nyn. The three 
men were sentenced to 13, 11, and 12 years respectively for trying 
to set up an opposition party to challenge communist rule. The Information 
Center for Human Rights and Democratic Movement in China says more 
than 200 other dissidents will join the strike, with two picking up 
as an earlier two and each 24 hour period. The campaign is slated 
to end in April. The word has come down from on high that the Communist 
Party will not any opposition to its monopoly on power. President 
Jung Zu Minh in his second hard-lined speech in less than a week, 
told law enforcement officials Wednesday that they must show no mercy 
in crushing threats to the communist system. Mr. Jung's uncompromising 
language appears to signal a change in China's to mute foreign criticism 
of its human rights situation. Beijing has made much to do of its 
signing of international human rights covenants and its efforts to 
improve its legal system. Chinese foreign ministry spokesman, Ju Bon 
Zow, speaking through an interpreter, says the dissidents were convicted 
for attempting to undermine safe security and that their trials are 
in no way a sign of repression. The judicial trials of Chu Win Lee, 
by the judicialty parliament of China, does not contradict with our 
protection of human rights. This taxes its unconformity with international 
covenants of civil and political rights. In his speech, President 
Jung warned that growing unemployment, rising crime, and dwindling 
rural incomes threaten to destabilize China. Mr. Jung says China needs 
stability if it is to continue modernizing. If attempts of one to 
seek divestment, they think they can is stability so if that is important 
to the stability of a country, and will continue to make effort in 
promoting and protecting human rights. Western diplomats in Beijing 
say one reason China is nervous about stability is that 1999 marks 
both the 10th anniversary of the massacre of democracy demonstrators 
near Beijing's Tianamen Square and the 50th anniversary of the communist 
state. Roger Wilkinson, VOA News Beijing. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>