<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981224.0500.1381 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A $2 million house for sale is noteworthy, but this one is made of 
gingerbread. And the fact it is being sold at the famed New York jewelry 
company, Harry Winston & Co., might be a clue that this is not your 
ordinary Christmas time confection. Indeed, this special gingerbread 
house is made by the distinguished pasty chef, Jacque Tores, comes 
with a 106 carat diamond necklace draped around the door of the miniature 
house. Although most people can only dream of owning such a lavish 
gingerbread house, many Americans are preparing much simpler ways 
to celebrate the holiday season through culinary traditions. Steve 
Umber has more. While many families of the United States choose to 
celebrate Christmas dinner at home with Turkey and trimmings, some 
opt for a special restaurant experience. The highly acclaimed Inn 
at Little Washington in a rural Virginia town of just 150 people, 
is celebrating its 20th Christmas. The Inn's chef and co-owner, Patrick 
O'Connel, says for him, Christmas is a time to celebrate old American 
traditions. And avoid artificial and commercial aspects of the season. 
Everybody calls to find out what day the Christmas decorations will 
be up. When you are using all live and real things, you do not put 
them up before Thanksgiving, as the shopping malls do. So usually, 
the first week of December until New Year's Day, we have beautiful 
decorations throughout the whole town area. Mr. O'Connel says his 
holiday menu reflects the traditional foods served during rural Virginia 
winters, venison, rabbit, and apples. People have great appetites 
at that time of year. We have hardy robust dishes. A goose is usually 
on the menu with sauerkraut or something rustic like that. Plump puddings 
and all sorts of elegantly presented dishes. Back in the Washington 
suburbs at the city's best-known cooking school, Academy de Cuisine, 
inspector Bonnie Moore helps students make gingerbread houses. She 
says making the dark brown houses became a common Christmas time activity 
in the 18th Century and was further popularized by such children's 
fables as Hansel and Gretel, which featured gingerbread Victorian 
houses. Ginger as a spice was always quite a treat and very expensive 
and very rare. It became particularly popular in Germany and, as I 
understand it, ginger was not as expensive in Germany. There was a 
port that made it more accessible. And that is where the whole concept 
of gingerbread houses was really popularized. Ms. Moore adds that 
applying icing to the intricately decorated gingerbread houses at 
the cooking school provides practical as well as nostalgic benefits. 
The gingerbread house contains an awful lot of techniques that we 
want the students to practice on. And the gingerbread house has a 
nice tradition and just the smell of it as it is being assembled reminds 
everybody of the holidays and gets everybody in good cheer. Ms. Moore's 
colleague at Academy de Cuisine, director Francios de Anul, helps 
students create the Brista Noel, the French Christmas dessert is a 
fantasy version of the wood logs in a fireplace. A spongy gin raas 
cake is rolled and filled, as Mr. De Anul explains. Sort of a complete 
meal, it has got the cake, it has got the filling usual amount of 
food to preserve. It has got the butter cream, it has got the meringue, 
it has got the little decoration. It is something which is very amusing 
for the kids and something that is always Santa Clause. All little 
candy canes, all the holly leaves with the to the berries, which advocates 
Christmas. Sometimes the surface of the Brista Noel, is a textured 
chocolate to resemble a real log surface and sprinkled with green 
pistachio nuts to look like moss. Not surprisingly, the ingredients 
of the French Yule log are high in fat. So Francios de Anul says some 
chefs have reluctantly made some changes. The French are very conservative 
in that respect that they do not change, but now what they do. Instead 
of doing it with the cake and the butter cream, which butter cream 
is very rich, they use ice cream. They make a Brista Noel made out 
of different flavored ice cream, and also covered with an ice cream 
and of course, they keep it frozen. Furthering the holiday spirit 
of giving, many of the Brista Noel and gingerbread house creations 
made at Academy de Cuisine are donated to children's charities in 
Washington. I am Steve Umber. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>