<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981224.0500.0562 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A split has developed in UN Security Council. Over how to deal with 
Iraq in the wake of last week's U.S. led air strikes. Russia for one, 
has condemned the use of force. In fact, it wants the Security Council 
to issue a statement expressing regret about the attacks. Moscow also 
wants the council to give UN Secretary General Kofi Annan a bigger 
role in dealing with Iraq. Russia's strong stand on this issue in 
the Security Council comes as the Dumas Russia's Lower House in the 
legislature begins debate today on a long delayed 1999 budget. Moscow 
correspondent, Peter Heimline, discussed both these issues with NewsNow. 
First explaining Russia's interest in defending Iraq before the Security 
Council. Russia has a long relationship and previously the Soviet 
Union had a long and very profitable relationship with Iraq. Right 
now, of course, Iraq owes Russia billions of dollars, which it cannot 
pay because the sanctions prohibit Iraq from generating any income. 
So, Russia has economic as well as political interest in being sympathetic 
to Iraq. In addition, the Prime Minister, Yevgeny Primakov, of course, 
has a long relationship with Saddam Hussein dating back to Mr. Primakov's 
tour in the Middle East. And he is an Arabic expert. Along the budget 
issue, Peter, things are pretty tight right now. The budget faces 
an uphill battle in both chambers because there are problems. What 
are some of those problems? Finance Minister, Michael Zaduroff, is 
currently presenting the budget before the Duma and it is a very tight 
budget but, of course, it does have a number of structural difficulties. 
Western observers say it is completely unrealistic, even though prime 
minister Primakov and his government say it is as tight as can be 
and he is under serious criticism in the Duma for it being maybe too 
tight. The budget calls for expenditures of about $30 billion but 
revenues of only about $23 billion. And even that, Western observers 
say, is dependent upon IMF money and dependent on some other assumptions 
such as the Soviet-era debt being rescheduled and it does not appear 
at this point that is going to happen. So the budget is under attack 
from both sides and Prime Minister Primakov has threatened to resign 
unless the Duma approves the budget. But it remains to be seen what 
the Duma's action is going to be. There is some word today that they 
may postpone consideration. Now, Peter like all good politicians, 
in Moscow as in Russia, there have been promises of budget cuts where 
would these come from. Is this going to be in the form of tax relief 
or? Well, budget cuts are a very difficult question here. Because 
what it means is less money for social programs, in many cases. And 
already the health infrastructure is collapsing. The other education, 
is suffering. And they are saying, at the same time, they want to 
keep up the military budget but, of course, many of these figures 
are based on nothing more than wishes. And so it is hard to say where 
cuts would be because the cuts are not real. In any case because, 
in the past, we have said we are spending so much money for such and 
such a program, but in fact, the money allocated for that comes out 
to be a small fraction of what was budgeted. If the prime minister 
does resign, carries through on that threat, who is on deck? That 
is a very difficult question, Ray. Unfortunately, Mr. Yeltsin, President 
Yeltsin, has used up a lot of his options. Primakov, Mr. Primakov 
was a compromise candidate in September and it is a no, it is a thankless 
job and it would be hard to imagine who might be next. I do not think 
you would see a communist come to power, but who would like the job? 
Moscow corespondent, Peter Heimline, spoke with News Now, Paul Westfeiling 
and Ray Kubiel. Passage of a tight budget is important for Russia 
now because of pressure being applied by international lenders. In 
July, the IMF paid out the first installment of a multibillion-dollar 
rescue package for Russia. The lender has since withheld further monetary 
assistance until Moscow proves its commitment to reforms. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>