<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981224.0500.2268 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Police in Seoul have detained 28 people and charged another 38 in 
connection with Wednesday's raid on the office complex belonging to 
one of South Korea's largest Buddhist organizations. Police evicted 
a group of Buddhist monks from the building in downtown Seoul. The 
building stands empty with no one allowed to go inside now. As reporter 
John Markin tells us, this dispute appears to be over which factions 
controls the vast wealth of the organization. I have spoken to some 
seasoned Buddhism watchers in Korea who stress that while most monks, 
especially with other orders, will make quite dignified minitative 
lives in the mountains. There are some who I guess who live what you 
would call tainted lifestyles for monks. The Churgar order is the 
biggest order in South Korea. It is probably the wealthiest as well 
and it has got a history of power struggles. Probably due to the fact 
that it does control quite a bit of wealth. Now, you have the obvious 
point to make here is that monks are not even supposed to touch money. 
In Asia they are supposed to completely shun money, but obviously, 
these monks do not. Money seems to be quite important to the Churgar 
order. Most of their wealth comes from extensive land holdings throughout 
Korea and many of these are temples. I spoke to one Buddhist watcher 
who said that the order gets a cut of the fees that people pay when 
they go to visit national parks because a lot of the old historic 
temples are located within national parks. And when you couple this 
with the fact that there are many Buddhists in Korea who make rather 
large donations on occasions like Buddhists birthday, for example, 
to the order, well you have quite a thriving business really. What 
happens to the building now? These rival monks that were kicked out 
by police. Some of them have been charged, others have been detained, 
but who goes back into the building and when is that likely to happen? 
Or is the building likely to remain vacant? Well the building, just 
to give you an idea of what the setup is. The complex is in downtown 
Seoul, it is a very historic temple complex and basically what you 
have is the big gate, it leads to the administration building which 
is a mondoscript ferment five story office block. Next to that, is 
a large and very beautiful temple. So they were not actually in the 
temple. They were in this administration building. It is empty at 
the moment. I would imagine they are cleaning it up. At least that 
is the information I can get from, that is what the television is 
showing right now. Because there is quite a bit of debris strewed 
around the place. It will stand, I guess, until the dominant faction 
of monks, the monks who were not occupying the temple are allowed 
to move back into the temple grounds. There was a court order on December 
11, which basically told the rebel monks to end their occupation of 
the temple grounds. They refused and that is why the police raided 
yesterday. Now, there is another court decision pending and I would 
imagine that depending on which way that goes, the monks who win the 
legal battle will be allowed legally to move back into the building. 
Has there been any reaction from any of the other orders of monks, 
the ones who may be less visible. The ones who may lead a more pious 
lifestyle in Korea to all of this? No, there has not. The Buddhism 
has been troubled in recent months in Korea. There have been vandalism. 
There has been vandalism done on some of the older Buddhist temples, 
some of which belong to the Churgar order, but a lot of this is being 
done by fundamentalist Christians, strangely enough. But you find 
that the Churgar order is definitely the most, has the highest profile 
in South Korea, amongst the Buddhist sects, the others tend to be 
very low profile. Very active in the community, but they do not chose 
to take such a public profile. They certainly do not get involved 
in power struggles as visibly as the Churgar order does. Reporter 
John Martin spoke with News Now's Paul Westfieling from Seoul, South 
Korea. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>