<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981224.1600.0743 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Millions of Christians are gathering for Christmas Eve services tonight. 
It is a time for both celebration and prayer. Many will be praying 
for, among other things, peace on earth. A traditional prayer this 
time of year. One that has not yet been answered. So, why do people 
pray, even when it seems their prayers will not be answered? Rabbi, 
Irwin Cassof, is co-author of the book, Powerful Prayers, Conversions 
on Faith, Hope, and the Human Spirit. He and Larry King of CNN television 
interviewed over 100 provocative, high profile Americans. Everyone 
from President Carter to Muhammad Ali, to Kirk Douglas. Rabbi Cassof 
told VOA's Mimi Levitch nearly everyone prays, even atheists and agnostics. 
Something that I found universally was that people are hard wise for 
spirituality. It is the human condition. We are built this way. And 
religious affiliation would have nothing to do with what people are 
praying for? Nothing. We, interviewed-I spoke to Muslim, Christian, 
Buddhist, Behai, Atheist, ...and there, it is a part of our condition 
and it has been like this since time in memorial. You have interviewed 
a number of major celebrities, as you say. Are people praying for 
themselves, for the betterment of society, for their fellow citizens, 
is there a common thread? It was funny, we seemed to get a lot athletes, 
Muhammad Ali, Bruce Jenner, the Olympic decathlon gold medal winner, 
Scott Hamilton, the gold medal figure skater. And all the athletes 
told us that they prayed that God would give them the ability to perform 
as best as they could. Are they disappointed if their prayers are 
not immediately answered? That is a difficult one. Sure, you know, 
President Carter, when we spoke to him said that he felt that all 
prayers are answered. Sometimes it is a yes, sometimes it is a no. 
And sometimes it is you have got to be kidding. So, it is an issue 
that, sure it is hard for everyone. One of the things that I try to 
explain to Larry, you know the way we work for powerful prayers is 
we do these interviews and the come back and we say Rabbi. What is 
going on? You know, how do you explain Allen Dirshwitz making a bargain 
with God. Or Suzanne Somers making a bargain with God. And sometimes 
it works and sometimes it does not. Is that prayer is an opportunity 
for you to sit back and reflect on yourself, first and foremost, and 
say why do you even want what you are asking for? Why is that important? 
If you do not get it? Then you have to say well, why is not God giving 
that to me? It is too easy to understand prayer. You just have to 
look at the relationship between you and your children. If your child 
asks you for candy, you are going to give it to him, right? But if 
he asks you for a box of chocolate and he has not even had his breakfast 
yet, are you going to give it to him? No. Right? Now in his mind, 
are you are good parent, a good father, or are you a nasty, no good 
for nothing, who really does not love him? Most kids would say you 
do not love me and if you loved me you would give me that box of chocolates. 
It is no different with God. He is our father in heaven, he loves 
us. If we do not get what we want, we can get angry at him. Right? 
And rebel, just like the child or we can step back and say, maybe 
that is not for my. Maybe that is not the best thing for me. What 
is he trying to tell me? What is the message? There must be a reason 
for it. That is Rabbi Irwin Cassof, co-author of Powerful Prayers, 
Conversations on Faith, Hope, and the Human Spirit. He spoke with 
Mimi Levitch. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>