<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981224.1600.2701 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For many Americans the holiday season would not be complete without 
bringing home a freshly cut Christmas tree. Decorated with lights 
and ornaments, the festive evergreens have long been the centerpiece 
of Christmas gift giving. As Rob Siveck reports, the tradition supports 
not only a billion dollar a year Christmas tree industry, but also 
a special kind of family fun. Many of the 35 million Americans who 
buy a real Christmas tree each year hope to find a little tradition 
along with that perfect tree. Rather than buy their trees precut at 
a store, they visit one of the 15,000 Christmas tree farms located 
all across the U.S. to chose and cut their own. In the Eastern state 
of Maryland, a lot them come to Butler's Orchard. A family run farm 
in the countryside a half-hour north of Washington D.C. Surrounded 
by neat rows of man sized Conifers, local residents Ed Green, his 
wife, Debra, and their two young children, Rachel and Joseph, have 
found their tree, a two-meter tall Douglas Fir. With borrowed saw 
in hand, Ed Green explains why they have come here for the past three 
Christmases. It is an opportunity for us to be together as a family. 
yes. It is a tradition that we have each year at Christmas, which 
everybody looks forward to. yes. And we also get a very fresh tree. 
Looks like you are doing all the work, though. That is OK. The family 
helps me decide on the tree that we are going to be cutting. Oh, so 
those were the choosers. You are the choosers? And Rachel, what do 
you think makes the perfect tree? What do you look for in a tree? 
Big and fat. Big and fat. Yes. And would you say this is a pretty 
close to perfect tree? Yes. It is about perfect tree. yes. Getting 
close. Let us see what it does now. All right. Whoa, timber. OK. Here 
we are. We got a tree. Our slogan is start a family of tradition and 
I think for a lot of people, it is a tradition. that is Todd Butler, 
co-owner of Butler's Orchard. You know, they bring the whole family, 
not just Dad going to the corner lot, grabbing a tree and bringing 
it home. Todd Butler says his 200 hectare fruit and vegetable farm, 
grows only about 10 hectares of Christmas trees. A small fraction 
of the family business. But he says it takes at least a decade of 
hard work to grow a crop of trees with the right shape and size. The 
biggest challenge is putting a very tiny seedling in the ground and 
trying to keep the weeds and the disease, not so much disease, but 
mostly the weeds are the big thing in a year like this. Of course 
the drought, trying to get enough water on those small seedlings. 
And then as they get bigger, you have got shearing and you have got 
again continual mowing to keep the weeds and the grass down in the 
aisles. And it takes some time, it is not just stick them out there 
and you know wait a few years and then they are ready to cut. Todd 
Butler concedes that on the small scale they practice it, and with 
retail prices averaging $40 for a two-meter tree, Christmas tree farming 
really is not profitable. But Mr. Butler says there are other incentives. 
Well, I think right now, I think it is a good part of it may be spirit. 
The spirit of the holidays. And the knowledge that each year the farm's 
small crop of Christmas trees yields a bounty of joy for the families 
who come to harvest that perfect tree. In Germantown, Maryland, I 
am Rob Siveck. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>