<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981224.0500.3186 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
During the holiday season, music fans enjoy adding the latest albums 
to their collection. It could be rock, classical, country, jazz, all 
musicians seem to meet the challenge each year by reinterpreting the 
timeless classics of the seasons or coming up with some new song ideas 
entirely. VOA's Bernie Bernard samples some of the latest recordings 
for the 1998 Christmas season. Chip Davis and his millions selling 
group Mannheim Steamroller has presented us with several holiday albums 
since 1984. Using layers of synthesizers and other instruments, Mannheim 
blends rock, classical, and some Renaissance touches that appeal to 
listeners of all ages and musical tastes. This year's release, the 
Christmas Angel. Is a story set to music. Narrated by Chip Davis and 
singer Olivia Newton John. The NBC television network recently broadcast 
a special program highlighting the Christmas Angel as interpreted 
by some of the world's championship figure skaters. Mannheim Steamroller 
will be on their holiday concert tour of the United States through 
the end of this year. Also in 1998, pop singer, Cindy Lauper, released 
her first holiday album, Merry Christmas, Have a Nice Life. Known 
for her hits, Girls Just Want to Have Fun, Time after Time, and others, 
Cindy includes both holiday classics and some fun tunes that fans 
would expect. The album explores a whole range of emotions, warmth, 
humor, passion, melancholy, remembrances of the past, hopes for the 
future, and a Congoline? Cindy's Merry Christmas, Have a Nice Life 
includes traditional offerings such as Silent Night and Three Ships, 
as well as her own compositions Christmas Conga, Mini and Santa and 
others. For the recording, she invited the Chatterton Elementary School 
Choir from Long Island, New York to join her on a few songs. From 
Cindy Lauper, here is a bit of Home on Christmas Day. Cindy Lauper 
will be making several television appearances this holiday season 
where she will be performing tunes from Merry Christmas, Have a Nice 
Life. Some of the world's finest guitarists from several fields of 
music have joined on the album Merry X-mas, Volume II, the sequel 
to last year's popular collection. The 1998 version features surprisingly 
poignant interpretations of traditional songs and carols from rockers 
such as Ted Nugent and Zach Wilde. Blues rock veteran, Robin Trower, 
base player Stu Hehm, Toto's Steve Lucather, and Jazz fusion player, 
Al Demeiola, among others. According to producer Steve Vie, each artist 
was given the freedom to chose and arrange the tunes according to 
their particular styles. From Merry X-mas' Volume II, here is Neil 
Shawn of the classic rock band, Journey, and his version of O Come, 
O Come Emanuel. Wishing you a happy and musical holiday season, I 
am Bernie Bernard. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>