<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981224.0500.2684 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
During the holidays, this time of year, some people may have visions 
of sugar plums dancing in their heads. I do not know what that means, 
but in Alaska, American's northernmost state, many are instead having 
visions of snow. They would love to have some because there is so 
little of it. Even with the recent snowfall, the so-called La Nina 
weather system, predicted to bring lots of the white stuff to the 
far north has instead fallen far short. Reporting from Alaska, here 
is Doug Schneider. Earlier this fall, skiers, snow machiners, and 
dog mushers throughout Alaska leapt for joy upon hearing predictions 
for lots of snow this winter. The snow, along with cold temperatures, 
were to have come courtesy of La Nina. The cold weather system that 
typically follows an El Nino. But as Thanksgiving came and went, and 
as Christmas looms close, many people are wondering, where is the 
snow? As of mid-December, nary 12 inches of the white stuff blanketed 
the Fairbanks area. And while Anchorage has more snow, the amounts 
are far less than normal. The lack of white stuff has people like 
Fairbanks, snow machiner, Juan Gula adding snow to his Christmas with 
list. Most snow machiners or snow mobilers here in the Fairbanks in 
the interior are mostly are very disappointed. We have been waiting 
for a good snow fall for the past three years almost, and this year 
has been the worst so far. So, yes, it has been quite frustrating. 
But there is nothing you can do about it. Just wait for mother nature 
to help us out. That may be a while. In a normal year, much of Alaska 
should have at least two feet of snow by now says Rick Toman, the 
lead forecaster with the National Weather Service in Fairbanks. But 
this isn't a normal winter. It is a La Nina winter. And by rights 
there should be even more snow on the ground. Still, Rick Toman is 
sticking with his forecast, at least for now. Snowfall is over most 
of the anterior substantially below normal and certainly below the 
normal for a La Nina winter. But I guess it is not unusual to have 
light snowfall early in the winter in a La Nina winter. It averages 
less than the normal. So all in all, it is not necessarily going any 
different than we might have expected. The reason for the lower than 
expected snowfall has much to do with the engine that drives Alaska's 
weather. The so-called Alution Low. This massive low pressure system 
in the North Pacific Ocean should have moved eastward by now. Bringing 
with it, winter storms. But this year, for reasons scientists do not 
fully understand, the normally powerful system has not moved from 
its spot in the Bering Sea. Essentially, it is stuck with the low 
stranded, it has had a secondary effect on blocking the northerly 
flow of upper air called the jet stream. That is another reason that 
the precipitation Fairbanks area has been so low. We, that jet stream 
has remained far to the south and because of the persistence of that 
Alution Low, has never been able to come up into interior Alaska. 
And that, of course, in the central interior is how we get our heaviest 
snowfalls is when the jet stream can come up from the Southwest over 
the open waters of the Bering Sea and then over the interior. And 
that just has not happened. So has La Nina been a La Dud? Forecaster, 
Rick Toman, does not think so. He says those who love snow ought to 
be careful about what they wish for. Because those wishes just might 
come true. For VOA, I am Doug Schneider with Arctic Science Journeys, 
in Fairbanks, Alaska. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>