<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981224.0500.0359 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Iraqi ban on UN flights into its air space has resulted in the 
cancellation of a scheduled flight of military observers headed to 
Baghdad. The ban follows U.S. and British raids on targets allegedly 
linked to Iraq's weapons programs. Scott Ridder is the former UN arms 
inspector who resigned in protest earlier this year. He says the UN 
Security Council did not give the UN special commission enough support 
to do its job in Iraq. Mr. Ridder told VOA's Susan Clark, how likely 
it is that ONSCOM inspectors will return to Iraq, now that U.S. air 
strikes are over. Well, I think it is desirable that ONSCOM inspectors 
go back into Iraq and I think the reasons are quite obvious to everybody 
who now looks at the situation, after the dust has settled. We have, 
you know, military, our own damage assessments to our briefers. Talking 
about the effect of munitions on the facilities. We have no clue what 
was inside the facility, what level of damage was achieved, where 
Iraq has moved these, moved capabilities to, and what is going on 
in Iraq? The inspection process is not perfect. And indeed, if the 
objective was 100 percent disarmament, we were not able to achieve 
that. But we were able to achieve a certain amount of deterrent. And 
until we come up with a solution, the final solution for the Iraqi 
problem, I think it is critical that we have inspectors in Iraq doing 
their job. Whether or not inspectors will go back is another question. 
I personally believe that the current team that has been built up. 
A very experienced team, a professional team that has been around 
for seven years, unfortunately, will not be allowed to go back into 
Iraq as it is currently organized. The linkage between the work of 
the inspectors and the unilateral bombing undertaken by the United 
States and Great Britain without Security Council backing or authorization. 
Has taken the special commission down and there is no way the Iraqis 
or the Security Council can view this special commission as being 
independent and objective. Two things that are critical for it to 
carry out its job. If ONSCOM goes back in, it will, unfortunately, 
be with a most probably with a new executive chairman and be restructured 
along lines that are more traditional regarding a United Nations organization. 
It will also be I would assume with people with less experience than 
the team that just left. What sort of difference would that make? 
Well, it is a tremendous difference. One reason why we can pass judgment 
on Iraq in a definitive manner, is that ONSCOM is staffed with the 
world's best experts on Iraq's weapons programs. These are people 
who carry out forensic investigations in Iraq. Tracing the smallest 
pieces of evidence and determining whether or not an Iraqi story is 
credible or not. Unfortunately, these same experts are now tainted 
by the fact that, as an organization, the special commission has been 
linked to a provocative military action. So they will be gone and 
they will be replaced by people who lack this experience. People who 
will be more prone to accepting at face value Iraqi declarations, 
which most probably will be lies. Former UN arms inspector, Scott 
Ridder, speaking with Susan Clark. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>