<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981224.1600.3145 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
AS the Latino population of the United States continue to grow, so 
too does its influence on U.S. culture, including Christmas traditions. 
A new collection of stories, poems, songs and recipes suggests just 
how varied those imported Christmas traditions can be. The book is 
called Los Christmas, favorite Latino authors share their holiday 
memories. And it was compiled in English and Spanish editions by writer, 
Esmerelda Santiago and magazine editor, Joy Davidow. VOA's Nancy Beardsley, 
has more. That is Compinosty Navidad a popular holiday song in the 
Spanish-speaking Americas. While some Christmas songs have English 
and Spanish versions, others are unique to Latin America and the Caribbean. 
And Joy Davidow says editing the Latino memories in Los Christmas 
pointed up other important contrasts to Christmas as its traditionally 
celebrated in the United States. I get the idea that it is a much 
more of a spiritual holiday and much less of a commercial holiday. 
Not that there are not lots of presents, but it lasts longer. It has 
more party element, I think, and less shopping element. It is also 
a season with numerous high points and many national traditions. A 
Colombian writer tells of going to all night parties on December 7, 
than at dawn joining in a religious procession to honor the feast 
day of the virgin of the immaculate conception. A Cuban writer recalls 
Christmas Eve as the big party night for adults, while children get 
their presents on January 6, Three Kings' Day. Mandelique DeBarco, 
a national public radio reporter who contributed a story to the book, 
says that Christmas caroling or Los Pasadas, is also a popular part 
of the holiday season for many Latinos. You go from door to door, 
house to house, or in the case of Los Angeles, from vendor to vendor. 
Asking, it is kind of a reenactment of the Joseph and Mary traveling 
through looking for a place to sleep for the night. And finally you 
end up with a big party, as usual. Not all the holiday memories in 
Los Christmas are happy ones. Joy Davidow says that for poor immigrant 
children in particular, Christmas can be traumatic. You do not realize 
what it is like to be a little kid who is on the receiving end of 
the Lyons Club toy give away and to realize that the gift that you 
have just received really was not picked out for you. It was just 
a generic gift. And there was the stories about the loneliness of 
being a new immigrant celebrating a first Christmas. Well, yes, and 
that also be kind of funny. One of the things that I loved, Juno Diaz, 
who is from the Dominican Republic, moved to New Jersey right before 
Christmas and his first impression of the United States was this place 
where everybody's house was lit up with lights. And he was kind of 
shocked when they took them down in January. But many stories describe 
how Latinos have found creative new ways to feel at home in the United 
States during the holidays. In her contribution to Los Christmas, 
Mondolique DeBarco tells how her family brought a bit of Peru and 
Mexico to the small Midwestern college town of Baldwin, Kansas. We 
would invite the Brady Bunch-like neighborhood kids to help us light 
the sidewalk luminadious we made of school lunch bags filled with 
sand and candles. A new Mexican tradition from Mom's side and they 
helped us to knock down our homemade pinatas. Somehow we even taught 
them a few Mexican and Peruvian folk songs, though they probably had 
no idea what the words meant. But that did not much matter, there 
was always another foreign student or five visiting our house for 
Christmas from Peru or Kenya or China or Costa Rica. One year the 
entire college soccer team showed up to share in our polyglot celebration. 
We are all ex patriots, living in the land of Oz, making things up 
as we went along. Felice Navidad or as they say in Kansas, Merry Christmas. 
If there is one recurring theme in Los Christmas, it is food. The 
book includes recipes for family favorites like Peruvian potato salad. 
Cuban rice and beans and Mexican Anas cookies. Joy Davidow says she 
and her fellow editor, Esmerelda Santiago, got so hungry editing the 
book, they threw a party featuring recipes they had included. She 
believes that party, which brought together Latino guests from across 
the United States, captures the spirit of Los Christmas. I am Nancy 
Beardsley. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>