<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981224.1600.0532 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Sierra Leone's capital Freetown was reportedly quite on Thursday as 
West African peacekeepers, city. John Pittman reports from our West 
Africa bureau. After several days of intense fighting on the outskirts 
of Freetown, the day before Christmas saw the return of seminormalcy 
to the capital. The West African peace keeping force, Echimog, has 
sent reinforcements to Sierra Leone, from neighboring Liberia. These 
additional 1,000 troops are being used to enhance security on the 
roads leading into the capital. Allowing some commercial traffic to 
resume. Echimog commanders say the peacekeepers have also increased 
the number of patrols in the city to prevent rebel infiltrators from 
slipping in unnoticed. On Tuesday, rebels from the revolutionary United 
Front clashed with Echimog troops only 30 kilometers from Freetown, 
raising concerns that the capital, itself, could come under direct 
attack. However, after a day of heavy fighting in the town of Waterloo, 
an Echimog spokesman said the rebel incursion has been stopped and 
that the rebel force has been chased into the bush. Wednesday morning, 
Freetown residents were startled awake by the sound of Echimog's heavy 
artillery crashing into a nearby hillside. Later in the day, however, 
Echimog said the firing had been triggered by a false alarm about 
rebel infiltrators. Echimog says it will use what it calls maximum 
force against the rebels if they try to assault the capital again. 
In a show of force to reassure Freetown's residents, Echimog held 
a series of military parades on Wednesday. Still, Echimog's reassurances 
have not convinced everyone. On Wednesday, the British government 
urged all of its citizens to leave Sierra Leone until the situation 
stabilizes. The fate of the rebel force, which attacked Waterloo, 
remains unknown. The size and strength of the rebel army has never 
been accurately measured. Although the rebels are believed to smuggle 
diamonds through neighboring countries to fund their guerilla campaign. 
The government of Sierra Leone has repeatedly accused Liberia of assisting 
the rebels. A charge the Monrovia government has denied. This week 
the two neighbors close their shared border. Both sides siting rising 
security concerns and the travel into a cross border infiltration. 
Recent news reports have also suggested the rebels may have hired 
the services of foreign mercenaries, possibly from Eastern Europe. 
On Tuesday, the United Nations Security Council condemned the presence 
of mercenaries in Sierra Leone and issued a communique calling on 
all nations in the region to respect the arms embargo on the rebels. 
John Pittman, VOA News, West Africa Bureau. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>