<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981224.1600.2154 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Despite claims by many American consumers that they eat less meat, 
the U.S. Department of Agriculture says Americans still eat more red 
meat than chicken or fish. This is despite overwhelming evidence that 
red meat plays a role in coronary heart disease. For those who are 
preparing to enjoy another Christmas feast, we decided to bring you 
a Dateline program from earlier this year on America's love affair 
with beef. Here is Pamela Taylor. The USDA statistics show that Americans 
have begun eating more red meat again after nearly two decades of 
steep declines in meat consumption. The reason given is that the price 
of meat has continued to drop during the same period following a rash 
of medical reports linking the consumption of red meat to illnesses 
like coronary heart disease and diabetes. Fears of mad cow disease 
in Britain raised questions about the health of cattle in the United 
States. In April of 1996, cattle prices hit a 10-year low. After popular 
television talk show host, Oprah Winfrey, aired a program on beef 
safety and declared she would never eat another hamburger. Ranchers 
in the state of Texas took her to court earlier this year seeking 
$10 million in damages. But a jury ruled Ms. Winfrey had not harmed 
the cattle industry deliberately. And indeed, it appears the U.S. 
cattle industry has not been harmed according to the USDA figures. 
American Ranchers see a bright future for themselves and their industry 
as we hear in this report from VOA correspondent, Michael Leeland, 
in Chicago. Every morning an old steam train pulls into the Stockyards 
District in Forth Worth, Texas. It is a reminder of the days when 
trainloads of cattle, hogs and other livestock would arrive here each 
day destined for sale at the auctions were slaughtered at one of the 
nearby packing plants. Today that train is carrying tourists while 
some of the old cattle pens have been converted into restaurants and 
shops. Just as the Fort Worth stockyards have changed, so too has 
the U.S. beef industry. Charles Hickey raises cattle in the U.S. state 
of Oklahoma. The cattle business has become a lot more scientific 
than it used to be, I think. There are people that use a lot of genetics 
and they go back into their breeds of particular breeds and they get 
geo grades and such as that and how those cattle produce and what 
they do on the rail, and etc., etc. And it makes those things worth 
a lot more money. Mr. Hickey spoke to us at a cattle auction in Fort 
Worth. He says one of the biggest changes in the beef industry is 
cattle are bread to be much leaner than they were 20 or 30 years ago. 
In response to changing consumer tastes. We worried about cutting 
off so much back fat, this and that and we going into a leaner beef. 
Which I think is probably a more healthy beef for America today. And 
we are trying to get out there, a lot of people are trying to get 
out there and do what those consumers want. They do not want to cut 
that fat off and throw it away. We are breeding the kind of cattle 
today that they do not have to cut that fat off. It is bred off those 
cattle. But trying to meet the American desire for leaner meat initially 
hurt the U.S. beef industry. The businessman at Drad Superior Livestock 
Company, Paul Branch, says American ranchers at first imported more 
cattle from continental Europe. These animals were leaner and more 
muscular, but lacked the juiciness and flavor associated with fatter 
American cattle. I think what we did, got into a little problem here 
starting 20 years ago and the consumer said well, we want lean meat. 
I think maybe she said, well, yes we want lean meat, but we also want 
the tenderness and flavor that we expect in beef. Well, unfortunately, 
the two do not necessarily go together. Mr. Branch says better breeding 
of cattle today is resulting in better tasting, leaner beef. Paul 
Branch says the beef industry also faces stiff competition from chicken 
and pork producers. But does not think those types of meat will ever 
pass beef in popularity. Especially as dinner for special occasions. 
You very seldom say let us go celebrate. Let us go have some chicken. 
You know, let us go celebrate, let us go have a good steak. And you 
know, there will always be that demand. There is no doubt about that. 
Mr. Branch says if you ever need proof Americans still love beef, 
look at the line of people waiting to get into any popular steak house 
on a Saturday night. VOA correspondent, Michael Leeland, reporting 
from our Chicago bureau. Not everyone agrees with this optimistic 
assessment about the rise in meat consumption, however. Nutritionist, 
Bonnie Liebman, of the Washington based Center for Science in the 
Public Interest is one. Ms. Liebman says the USDA figures can be misinterpreted 
and therefore, misleading. We still eat far too much beef and far 
too much red meat in general. But it is not true that beef consumption 
is on the way up. In fact, it is about 10 pounds lower than it was 
a decade ago. We are some 20 pounds, consuming some 20 pounds less 
beef per person, per year, than we did in the mid-70s. About 10 pounds 
less than the mid-80s, and I hope the trend continues downward. OK. 
Now, do you think that that is attributed to all of the stories that 
we have been hearing, all the studies that have been done about the 
adverse health affects? Well, it is hard to sort out how much people 
are influenced by price and how they are much they are influenced 
by concern about health. But, whatever the cause, they are glad to 
see the beef consumption is down, even if it is not low enough. What 
we have seen over the last several decades is that the consumption 
of poultry, especially chicken has been climbing steadily. And that 
is encouraging. Fish and pork have stayed about the same. We would 
like to see people cut back even further on red meat, both beef and 
pork. Because red meat is one of the larger sources of saturated fat 
in the diet. A diet high in saturated fat raises the risk of heart 
disease. And there are studies suggesting that even lean red meat 
can increase the risk of prostate or colon cancer. I was just going 
to ask you about that because we also hear from the Cattleman's Association 
that, overall, they are producing leaner and leaner meat and that 
this is the explanation for its continuing popularity with the American 
public. They are responding to demand. Well, I think the industry 
tries to put a good face on things. They have perhaps made some progress 
in making meat leaner and that certainly is better. Certainly for 
your heart, but much of the meat, much of the beef consumed in this 
country is consumed as hamburger or ground beef and it is still quite 
fatty. It is very hard to find lean ground beef. So that is a problem 
you cannot trim the fat off of hamburger. There are so many reports 
coming out of different food stuff being bad for you one year and 
then the next year it is says it is all right. I mean I am thinking 
of the case of butter, which I suppose is most recent. You know, for 
years we have heard that butter is not good for you and everybody 
went around and bought margarine and now, we hear that in fact butter 
is better for you than margarine. It is sort of like the consumer 
is confused and wondering whether what this year's poison may be okay 
next year. Well, there is a lot of confusion out there. Unfortunately, 
some of it is put out by the public relations firms from the industries 
that are affected. But, yes, there is a lot of confusion. I think 
though, if you look at the advice from health experts, major health 
authority. It has not changed over the last 10 or 20 years. We, they 
all agree we should be eating more fruits and vegetables. That message 
is a clear one. They all agree we should be eating less saturated 
fat. The kind that clogs the arteries. The kind in meat and dairy 
products. Unfortunately, there is a lot of noise and people get confused 
and I am encouraged by the fact that beef consumption is moving downwards, 
even if it still too high. Well, thank you very much, Bonnie Liebman, 
of the Center for Science in the Public Interest speaking to us in 
Washington D.C. Thank you. One of the latest reports, which is added 
to that nutrition confusion, comes from a Purdue University financed 
in part by the Cattleman's Association. The study suggests the fat 
in red meat may actually be good for some people. The report claims 
a fat compound in meat may help prevent the development of diabetes 
in people at risk for that disease. The research has so far only involved 
rats and some scientists and nutritionists warn against putting to 
much faith in findings, which are financed by special interest groups. 
For Dateline, I am Pamela Taylor. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>