<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981224.1600.1380 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Christmas concerts are a popular attraction at this time of year in 
the United States and in many other countries around the world. Some 
will be professional performances by well-known symphony orchestras. 
Others might be less formal programs put on by elementary school students. 
But all give people the opportunity to feel the spirit of the holiday 
season. From Chicago, where one of the more unusual U.S. Christmas 
concerts was staged recently, Michael Leeland prepared this report. 
At a downtown Chicago hotel recently, guests, relatives of the performers 
and passers-by lined the walls and balconies of the lobby to listen 
to Christmas carols and hymns performed by 380 tubas. The performers 
were as young as nine years old and as old as 75. Some played brand 
new instruments, others much older ones. There were tubas displaying 
Santa Clause's face over the open end. Others trimmed with tinsel 
and one was even strung with Christmas lights. This is just one in 
a series of tuba concerts around the world this holiday season. The 
program is called Tuba Christmas. It was created 25 years ago by Indiana 
University Music Professor, Harvey Phillips, to honor tuba player, 
Arthur Bell, who was born on Christmas Day in 1902. We do these concerts 
to honor our heritage. And we invite all tuba and euphonium players 
of any age and any status to join us. Here is the audience could just 
bear with us and remember fa la la la la la la la la. You can be apart 
of this next. Mr. Phillips says the tuba is not always among the most 
admired of instruments, although he thinks that it should be. Well, 
the tuba, shortly after its creation, around 1835, was immediately 
taken into the orchestra by Verlios and Vogner as one of the two solo 
instruments of the orchestra. The other being the harp. There is one 
tuba in every symphony orchestra. Tuba Christmas concerts have been 
performed in Milan, Italy, Munich, Germany, and Helsinki, Finland, 
just to name a few. This year the program will be heard in 160 cities 
around the world. Mr. Phillips says he spends nearly every day leading 
up to Christmas at performances in one U.S. city or another. He says 
he is amazed at the talent shown by tuba players around the country 
who often have little or no chance to rehearse before a show. You 
know, every instrument is 95 percent human. The Stratavarious violin 
is a great accomplishment and a great artwork in and of itself, but 
it cannot make a sound until a human being gives it voice. And every 
instrument reflects the dedication, the talent, the artwork, the practice 
of the individual who is playing that instrument. Judging from the 
size of the crowd in the hotel lobby, stairways and balconies, that 
talent and dedication is much appreciated. Michael Leeland, VOA News, 
Chicago. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>