<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981122.0189 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The government was studying Sunday whether to accord military funeral 
honors and burial in a heroes' cemetery to one of the most powerful 
generals under the late dictator Ferdinand Marcos. Gen. Fabian Ver, 
78, died Saturday of lung malfunction at a hospital in Bangkok, a 
family spokesman said. Ver had been linked to widespread human rights 
violations and to the 1983 assassination of anti-Marcos opposition 
leader Benigno Aquino Jr. Defense Secretary Orlando Mercado said a 
military team was reviewing guidelines to decide whether Ver could 
be given military honors when his body is brought back to the Philippines, 
and whether he could be buried in a heroes' cemetery in an army camp 
in metropolitan Manila. Mercado said other family members of Ver, 
including three sons who were former military officers, could return 
home anytime because they no longer pose threats to national security. 
``Their era has long passed and we don't think there will be trouble 
if they return,'' Mercado said in a Manila radio interview. He added 
that there has been no request from Ver's family to bury him in the 
heroes' cemetery, where military men are traditionally laid to rest. 
During Marcos' 20-year rule, Ver headed the presidential security 
force before being appointed by Marcos as his chief of staff. He fled 
with the Marcos family to Hawaii after the strongman was ousted in 
the military-backed ``people power'' revolt in February 1986. Former 
Presidents Corazon Aquino and Fidel Ramos had banned the return of 
Ver and his three sons on grounds they posed a security threat. President 
Joseph Estrada, however, had said Ver could return on condition that 
he would face the charges against him. Before he died, Ver was able 
to talk on the telephone to his wife, Aida, and his youngest daughter, 
Faida, in California; sons Wyrlo and Rexor in Hawaii; and another 
son, Irwin, in San Francisco, said Mel Amado Jr., a spokesman for 
the Ver family. Ver underwent lung surgery last year and a gall bladder 
operation early this year, which may have led to a deterioration of 
his health. Former congressman Roquito Ablan Jr., a close friend of 
the Vers, told The Associated Press by telephone from Bangkok that 
they planned to bring Ver's body back to Manila Tuesday or Wednesday. 
Amado, however, said there were plans to send the body directly to 
Ver's northern home province of Ilocos from Bangkok. Amado added that 
Ver's mother would prefer to bury her son in their hometown of Sarrat. 
One of the last images of Ver seen by Filipinos was at the height 
of the 1986 revolt when he was urging Marcos during a live television 
broadcast to give the order to bomb mutinous troops holed up in two 
suburban camps surrounded by hundreds of thousands of civilian supporters. 
Ver rose from the rank of private to four-star general in his four 
decades in the military. He was accused of involvement in the assassination 
of Aquino, Mrs. Aquino's husband, at Manila's airport but was acquitted 
while Marcos was still in power. After Mrs. Aquino took office, the 
Supreme Court ordered a new trial in which 16 soldiers were convicted 
of killing her husband. Ver, who was accused as an accomplice, was 
not tried in absentia and the case against him was shelved. The trial, 
however, failed to determine who ordered the killing. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>