<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981122.0219 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Deep-seated ethnic and religious tensions erupted in the capital of 
crisis-ridden Indonesia Sunday when mobs of Muslim youths attacked 
and burned four Christian churches. At least six people were killed 
in violence that broke out less than one kilometer (one-half mile) 
from the presidential palace, a little more than a week after deadly 
clashes between students and security personnel also triggered rioting. 
Troops fired shots and volleys of tear gas to break up rampaging crowds. 
Some of the victims' bodies were mutilated. Dozens were reported injured 
in fighting between the local Muslim majority and Christian migrants 
originally from the eastern Indonesian city of Ambon. ``Islam is the 
power in this area,'' one man said. Three churches were burned and 
one was trashed, officials said. A gambling hall was set afire and 
a Catholic girls' school near the city's main cathedral was ransacked 
and partly burned. The military said Muslim residents were angered 
by unsubstantiated rumors that Christians had attacked a mosque. The 
violence comes as Indonesia grapples with its worst economic crisis 
in 30 years. Millions of people now live in poverty as inflation and 
unemployment rates soar. President B.J. Habibie warned recently that 
his country could face a major breakdown in law and order. He is at 
the center of protests over his plans to change Indonesia's political 
system, which opponents say fall short of introducing true democracy. 
Jakarta's central military commander, Lt. Col. Widodo, and a bodyguard 
were stabbed and seriously injured in one brawl. Local television 
stations reported that 10 people had been arrested after rival mobs 
attacked one another, some holding rivals captive. Looting and arson 
were reported in several areas in the north and west of the capital, 
the home of dozens of ethnic groups. At least five armored personnel 
carriers were deployed to protect a shopping mall, and some troops 
fired at looters, a witness said. Squads of soldiers protected several 
churches as night fell. Witnesses said ethnic Chinese residents gathered 
in groups armed with sticks and knives to protect their homes. Although 
not directly targeted Sunday, they have been attacked during previous 
rioting. About 90 percent of Indonesia's 202 million people are Muslim, 
making Indonesia the world's most populous Islamic nation. However, 
religious tolerance is enshrined in the national philosophy. Muslim 
preachers tried to calm angry crowds by reading passages from Islam's 
holy book, the Koran, over loud hailers as hundreds of followers sat 
in a major road. Outside one university campus, about 2,000 people 
threw rocks and built a bonfire. The violence was the latest sign 
that the military, under pressure over human rights abuses, is increasingly 
hard-pressed to keep order in the city of 11 million people. Last 
week, as many as 16 people were killed in clashes between anti-government 
students and police and soldiers during a government assembly on political 
reforms. On Sunday, mobs broke into a Catholic church while a wedding 
ceremony was under way, smashing stained glass windows, chalices and 
a statue of the Virgin Mary and flinging pews and Bibles on to a bonfire. 
Some youths carried banners proclaiming them as members of the ``Front 
to Defend Islam.'' Mobs blocked fire trucks from reaching the burning 
Christian Church of Ketapang. A police helicopter swooped through 
a pall of black smoke as thousands of people roamed the streets. Soldiers 
with helmets, sticks and shields eventually pushed them away. Two 
dozen worshipers attending a service at the Protestant church fled 
when mobs attacked. Firemen pumped water from polluted canals to fight 
the blaze, but the church was gutted. Mobs threw rocks at an open-backed 
military truck carrying 20 Ambonese that raced away and boys poked 
sticks at the occupants through the vehicle's protective wire netting. 
``Kill them,'' the rioters screamed. Many local Muslims complained 
that the Ambonese were involved in illegal gambling. Officials of 
the Indonesian Red Cross recovered five bodies of Ambonese who had 
been slashed with knives and broken bottles. The killers of one man 
cut off one of his ears and brandished it. Assailants paraded a sixth 
body in a cart. It was not known where the victim was from. Six months 
ago, Indonesia's sprawling capital was convulsed by rioting that killed 
1,200 people and led to the ouster of former President Suharto after 
32 years of authoritarian rule. Thousands of buildings and vehicles 
were damaged and looting was widespread. The May rioting was triggered 
in part by discontent over the economic crisis. Mobs at that time 
targeted the homes and shops of Indonesia's ethnic Chinese minority, 
which is resented because it dominates trade and commerce. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>