<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981122.0855 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Jewish youths raised Israeli flags Sunday over the railroad station 
where the settlement movement was born, and demanded government permission 
to establish a religious seminary and museum at the abandoned building. 
The 30 settlers, mostly high school students, said they were acting 
in defiance of the latest land-for-peace agreement with the Palestinians, 
under which Israel withdrew from 2 percent of the West Bank on Friday. 
``We build and continue to build ... in spite of agreements ... as 
soon as the land is ours,'' said Rivka Bond, one of the settlers. 
After the group put up flags and began to clean up the derelict building, 
an army officer served them with an order declaring the station a 
closed military area to be evacuated. One of the settlers, a lawyer, 
said the order was illegal, but the army sealed off the area to prevent 
the arrival of more settlers. Police spokesman Ofer Sivan said the 
settlers dispersed voluntarily but it was unclear if they had plans 
to return soon. The Jewish settlement movement was born in Sebastia 
23 years ago when young religious Israeli nationalists occupied the 
station in defiance of the then-Labor government, which was opposed 
to settling in densely populated, predominantly Palestinian areas. 
Although the settlers were eventually evicted, the government allowed 
the establishment of Kedoumim, the first Jewish settlement in the 
northern West Bank, and it was soon followed by others. About 150,000 
Jews now live in 144 Jewish settlements throughout the West Bank, 
where the Palestinians want to declare independence for the 1.6 million 
Arabs living there. Since the Israeli government signed a new peace 
deal with the Palestinians last month, Jewish settlers have increased 
their activities, taking over hilltops and expanding existing settlements 
with government backing. Settlers put up trailer homes and tents Sunday 
on a hilltop near the settlement of Bat Ayin, and said they would 
develop the area. Under the new accord, Israel will withdraw from 
13 percent of the West Bank, which will leave 18 Jewish settlements 
isolated and surrounded by Palestinian-controlled territory. The Palestinians 
already control about one-quarter of the territory. Settler leaders 
rejected as ``too little,'' a list of security measures including 
surveillance equipment and electric fences that the defense ministry 
proposed for those settlements. In a letter to the army published 
Sunday, settlers demanded armored buses, machine guns, tear gas, a 
helicopter landing pad at each settlement, immediate completion of 
bypass roads around Palestinian cities and a long list of other facilities 
and devices. Seeking U.S. aid to pay for the bypass roads and the 
relocation of Israeli army camps, Finance Minister Yaakov Neeman left 
for Washington on Sunday. A U.S. official who spoke on condition of 
anonymity said Israel was expected to ask for dlrs 1.2 billion. In 
another development, the Israeli army Sunday destroyed a house near 
the West Bank city of Hebron where two Islamic militant leaders hid 
before Israeli soldiers gunned them down in September. The two men, 
Adel and Imad Awadallah, had been wanted to Hamas attacks that killed 
at least five Israelis. And at least 10 Palestinian prisoners in Israeli 
jails went on hunger strikes Sunday to protest Israel's refusal to 
include them in a mass prisoner release. Under the latest peace accord, 
Israel is to release 750 Palestinian prisoners. However Palestinian 
leaders were angry when they learned that most of the first 250 set 
free Friday were common criminals and not Palestinians jailed for 
activities against Israel. Netanyahu told his Cabinet Sunday that 
the next 500 prisoners to be released would be criminals who had not 
committed murders, Israel Television said. Ahmed Tibi, adviser to 
Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat, accused Netanyahu of violating the 
agreement, which he said specifically called for the release of so-called 
political prisoners. U.S. Embassy spokesman Larry Schwartz said he 
was not aware of any violations of the peace accord. Israeli and Palestinian 
officials are expected to discuss the prisoner issue later this week. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>