<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981122.0221 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Pete Sampras or Marcelo Rios. It's come down to the last week of the 
season to determine who will finish the year as No. 1 in the world. 
In one of the closest finishes in recent years, Sampras leads Rios 
by a mere 33 points going into the ATP Tour World Championship that 
start Tuesday. The season-ending event brings together the eight players 
with the best results during the year and the list can differ slightly 
from the current computer rankings, which are based on the results 
of the last 52 weeks. This is the first time since 1995 that the championship 
has a bearing on the No. 1 season-ending ranking. Sampras, 27, should 
have a mental edge over Rios, the eccentric Chilean who can cap a 
fine year by regaining the No. 1 ranking he has already held during 
two brief spells this year. But Rios, 22, is competing at the exclusive 
event for the first time, while Sampras has won it four times already 
and always excels in the prestigious tournament. Sampras is also gunning 
for an unprecedented achievement _ finishing as No. 1 in the world 
for six years in a row. Sampras shares the record of five with fellow 
American Jimmy Connors. ``It's a record that might not ever be broken. 
It is that hard to do,'' Sampras said. ``I'll do whatever it takes 
to do it because it's definitely up there with the greatest achievements 
in tennis,'' Sampras said last month at the tournament in Stuttgart. 
Stuttgart was one of the six stops on the indoor European circuit 
for Sampras as he chased points in an attempt to pad his advantage 
over Rios. Never before had Sampras played six straight weeks in Europe. 
Sampras won only one of the six tournaments, reflecting the mixed 
season he's had this year. He captured Wimbledon for the fifth time, 
but won no other Grand Slam and has four titles this year. Rios on 
the other hand captured a tour-high seven titles. But the left-handed 
Chilean also has lacked consistency in the finish of the season. Injuries 
forced him to drop out of two European events (Sampras also withdrew 
from one) and he lost last week in the quarterfinals in Santiago, 
where a victory would have propelled him to No. 1. Every time Rios 
had a chance of overtaking Sampras in the last few weeks, Sampras 
managed to stay in a given tournament longer then the Chilean. No. 
3 Patrick Rafter, the two-time U.S. Open champion, also had a chance 
of seizing the top-ranking but finally gave in to injuries and will 
not compete in Hanover. So, although he has been far from dominant, 
Sampras has received some help from his rivals and goes into the championship 
ahead of Rios. Sampras and Rios are seeded at the head of the two 
groups of eight players under the round-robin format of the event. 
The top two from each group advance into the semifinals. If Sampras 
wins the dlrs 3.5 million championship, he will end as No. 1. The 
same is true for Rios. There are other possibilities. For Rios to 
finish No. 1, he has to win at least two matches in Hanover _ and 
win one more match than Sampras. If Rios fails to win at least two 
matches, Sampras will finish as the season's No.1 no matter what he 
does in the tournament, which is played on an indoor hard-court surface. 
Sampras has complained about the lack of attention his achievements 
are getting back home. ``It is not easy to do year in, year out, win 
Grand Slams and be No. 1. I feel much more respected in Europe than 
I do in the States, from the press and from the people. ``Americans 
expect me to win every match I play,'' said Sampras, who has won 11 
Grand Slam titles, one short of Roy Emerson's record. In addition 
to Sampras and Rios, the six other players in the event are: Andre 
Agassi, Carlos Moya, Alex Corretja, Karol Kucera, Tim Henman and Yevgeny 
Kafelnikov. Richard Krajicek qualified but also had to pull out with 
a knee injury. At this time last year, Agassi was playing challenger 
events in an attempt to battle back into the top rankings after falling 
as low as No. 141. The American has surged back to No. 4 after winning 
five tournaments this year and the former No. 1 has a good shot of 
winning the championship again after his triumph in 1990. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>