<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981122.0166 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Voters in the troubled Central African Republic went to the polls 
on Sunday in the first round of legislative elections held despite 
fears of ethnic violence. United Nations peacekeepers and government 
soldiers cruised the streets and guarded polling stations in the capital 
of Bangui, where there were no early reports of fighting. However, 
voting began about two hours later than scheduled at around 8 a.m. 
(0600 GMT) as a result of lack of election materials. Electoral commission 
officials said polling would continue until at least 9 p.m. (1900 
GMT) to compensate for the delay. Thousands lined up patiently in 
the streets at several voting points in the capital that were without 
voting cards. Other rural villages were hampered by the lack of supervisors 
or international observers, National Electoral Commission officials 
said. The vote began despite President Ange-Felix Patasse's bid to 
postpone it amid growing concerns the elections could trigger ethnic 
fighting or reignite insurrection by the military. At least five people 
have been killed in recent weeks of pre-election violence that authorities 
say was linked to ethnic rivalries. More than 840 candidates are vying 
for 109 parliamentary seats, the vast majority of which are now controlled 
by Patasse's ruling Movement for the Liberation of the People of Centrafrique, 
or MLPC. At least 23 opposition parties are putting up candidates, 
many chosen on ethnic lines _ a move that threatens to exacerbate 
already tense relations between the country's various groups. A second 
round is expected to be held in December. Elections officials have 
conceded that facilities for polling stations in some outlying areas 
have not received proper equipment or ballots while other areas have 
failed to complete voter registration. Through the 1960s and '70s, 
the Central African Republic fell under the tyrannical rule of former 
army Col. Jean-Bedel Bokassa, who was accused of corruption murder, 
torture and cannibalism before being ousted in a bloodless 1979 coup. 
In his wake, the Central African Republic remains a troubled and isolated 
country that at times appears to be teetering on anarchy. Armed bandits 
frequently attack motorists and rival factions fight for territory. 
Since May 1996, mutinous soldiers have staged three major rebellions 
against Patasse, whose election win in 1993 ended more than a decade 
of army rule. For years, French troops helped maintain a semblance 
of stability until they pulled out earlier this year. A United Nations 
peacekeeping force replaced the French. Independent from French colonial 
rule since 1960, the Central African Republic has lurched from one 
crisis to the next for much of that time. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>