<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981122.0369 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
At 48, the Miss World beauty pageant is undergoing a face lift. The 
British production company Initial has done away with the high heels 
and swimsuit parade before the judges. And it has made sure that the 
86 contestants will be environmentally friendly, planting trees and 
taking part in a ceremonial return of hawksbill turtle shells to the 
sea. But the beauty contest created by former British serviceman Eric 
Morley to liven up drab, post-war England is not yet free of the kind 
of controversy that has brought it adverse publicity in the past. 
Two years ago, it was Indians demonstrating against the pageant in 
Bangalore, forcing Morley and his wife, Julia, to move the swimsuit 
competition to Seychelles. This year it is Croatia's entry, Lejla 
Sehovic, stripped of her title by the Balkan nation's Miss World franchise 
holder because she is a Muslim. Muslims are a small minority of Croatia's 
4.7 million people. Judges voted a second time and awarded the crown 
to a Roman Catholic, Ivana Petkovic. But the hue and cry in the media 
was so great, the crown was returned to Sehovic, with the proviso 
that Petkovic would represent Croatia next year. ``The newspapers 
were on my side, and here I am,'' the 22-year-old business administration 
student announced when she stepped off the Miss World flight from 
Paris into a Creole beach party hosted by pageant organizers. ``I 
don't think people mind at all what my religious beliefs are.'' And 
who will care anyway when Sehovic joins other contestants in games 
of beach volleyball a la Baywatch with the Indian Ocean and swaying 
palms as the backdrop? A holding company formed by the government 
of Seychelles, a 92-island Indian Ocean archipelago, is staging the 
event for the second year in hopes of bolstering the country's image 
as a haven for snorkelers and eco-tourists. Last year the government 
spent dlrs 3 million to organize the event and is prepared to do the 
same this year, according to Gilbert Pool, President France-Albert 
Rene's special adviser. Pool said beginning November 1999 the government 
will charge all visitors a dlrs 100 entry fee designed to transform 
the unique granite and coral islands from a simple tourist destination 
to an environmental experience. But many travel agencies fear the 
fee will discourage even ``good'' tourists. The archipelago hosts 
two UNESCO World Heritage Sites _ the Aldabra atoll, home of the world's 
largest population of giant tortoises, and the Val de Mai indigenous 
palm forest on Praslin Island known for the rare black parrot and 
the coco-de-mer, the coconut that is the world's heaviest seed. Commercial 
exploitation of Hawksbill shells was banned when Seychelles signed 
the U.N. Convention on Trade in Endangered Species. Local craftsmen 
surrendered their stock of shells intended for combs and fans for 
the Far East and were trained in other crafts with government help. 
The Irish pop group Boyzone will headline Thursday's awards show, 
which will be televised live in Britain for the first time in a decade, 
and lead singer Ronan Keating will co-present with MTV hostess, Eden. 
Pageant organizer Francis Savy said judges will include Formula 1 
racing driver Jacques Villeneuve, New Zealand rugby star Jonah Lomu, 
model Christelle de St. Augustin and Pilin Leon, who won the Miss 
World title as Miss Venezuela in 1981. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>