<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981122.0864 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Thousands of Turks angered by Italy's release of a Kurdish rebel leader 
rallied in front of the Italian Embassy on Sunday, part of a day of 
strident protests that had Turks burning Italian-made clothes and 
setting fire to a Fiat. Children stood waving the Turkish flag in 
the capital as scores of trucks drove past blaring their horns and 
bearing banners that declared: ``An end to trade with Italy.'' Defense 
Minister Ismet Sezgin said Sunday that economic relations with Italy 
would be reviewed and that Turkey would not accept Italian offers 
for military contracts. Two Italian companies were seen as front-runners 
for dlrs 10 million worth of defense contracts. Hundreds of companies 
and business groups have announced a boycott of Italian goods, seeking 
to punish Italy for its refusal to extradite to Turkey rebel leader 
Abdullah Ocalan, who came to Rome on Nov. 12 seeking asylum. On Friday, 
a Rome court rejected a Turkish arrest warrant for Ocalan, freeing 
him. The court cited Italian law forbidding extradition of suspects 
to countries where they might face the death penalty. Sezgin said 
Ankara also would complain of Italy's attitude to NATO, the military 
alliance to which both countries belong. Turkey also planned to appeal 
the court's decision on Monday, the Anatolia news agency said. Turkey 
considers Ocalan the most ruthless of terrorists. Rebels of his Kurdistan 
Workers Party, or PKK, have fought for Kurdish autonomy since 1984; 
the conflict has killed close to 37,000 people. Prime Minister Massimo 
D'Alema insisted Sunday that Italy condemned PKK terrorism but that 
its position was consistent with Italian and international laws. Italy 
favors a ``peaceful solution'' of the conflict between Turkey and 
Kurdish rebels, he told reporters in Geneva. But ``this solution requires 
the recognition of the Kurdish people's rights.'' Kurds are not recognized 
as an official minority in Turkey, which does not grant them education 
and broadcasting rights. ``We are not angry at the Italian people, 
but we are very angry at the Italian prime minister,'' said Nesrim 
Tureli, one of the thousands chanting before the embassy. Demonstrations 
took place throughout Turkey, with protesters burning Italian clothes 
and puppets of Ocalan, as well as an Italian Fiat in the western town 
of Izmit. Although the week of protests has largely been peaceful, 
Turkish politicians have called for calm, fearing the rallies may 
turn violent. Signaling that Turkey would not tolerate any display 
of support for the rebels, police have detained more than 3,000 members 
of the pro-Kurdish People's Democracy Party since Ocalan's arrest, 
according to the party. Most have since been released; their leader 
was arrested and charged with being a member of the PKK. The Germany-based 
Kurdish news agency reported Sunday that a member of the party was 
beaten to death Thursday in police custody. Officials denied the allegations, 
which could not be independently verified. Under the court's orders, 
Ocalan must stay in Rome until Dec. 23 to give Germany time to decide 
whether it wants to extradite him on its own, 1990 warrant on terrorism 
charges. Although Germany said previously it has no plans to ask for 
Ocalan, a German federal prosecutor issued a new warrant for Ocalan 
on Saturday. Italy's ANSA news service quoted Foreign Minister Lamberto 
Dini as saying he now expected a German extradition request. Meanwhile, 
a reported 35,000 troops were deployed in a large-scale military operation 
in the southeastern province of Tunceli against some 500 against PKK 
rebels, according to the Zaman daily. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>