<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981122.0669 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Turks angered by Italy's release of a Kurdish rebel leader rallied 
by the thousands in front of the Italian Embassy on Sunday, part of 
a day of strident protests that had Turks burning Italian-made clothes 
and setting fire to a Fiat. Children stood waving the Turkish flag 
in the capital as scores of trucks drove past blaring their horns 
and bearing banners that declared: ``An end to trade with Italy.'' 
Hundreds of companies and business groups have announced a boycott 
of Italian goods, seeking to punish Italy for its refusal to extradite 
to Turkey rebel leader Abdullah Ocalan, who came to Rome on Nov. 12 
seeking asylum. On Friday, a Rome court rejected a Turkish arrest 
warrant for Ocalan, freeing him. The court cited Italian law forbidding 
extradition of suspects to countries where they might face the death 
penalty. Turkey considers Ocalan the most ruthless of terrorists. 
Rebels of his Kurdistan Workers Party, or PKK, have fought for Kurdish 
autonomy since 1984; close to 37,000 have died. ``We are not angry 
at the Italian people, but we are very angry at the Italian prime 
minister,'' said Nesrim Tureli, one of the thousands chanting before 
the embassy. Demonstrations took place throughout Turkey, with protesters 
burning Italian clothes and puppets of Ocalan. A car of the Italian 
Fiat brand was burned in the western town of Izmit. In Adana, protesters 
reportedly burned a picture of Italian Premier Massimo D'Alema. Although 
the week of protests has been peaceful, Turkish politicians have called 
for calm, fearing the rallies may turn violent. Signaling that Turkey 
would not tolerate any display of support for the rebels, police have 
detained more than 3,000 members of the pro-Kurdish People's Democracy 
Party since Ocalan's arrest. Most have since been released; their 
leader was arrested and charged with being a member of the PKK. The 
Germany-based Kurdish news agency reported Sunday that a member of 
the party was beaten to death Thursday in police custody. Officials 
denied the allegations, which could not be independently verified. 
Under the court's orders, Ocalan must stay in Rome until Dec. 23 to 
give Germany time to decide whether it wants to extradite him on its 
own warrant on terrorism charges. Ocalan's presence would be as much 
a headache for Germany as it is for Italy, and German officials have 
consistently said they have no plans now to seek extradition. On Saturday, 
however, Germany's federal prosecutor issued a new warrant for Ocalan. 
Italian Foreign Minister Lamberto Dini told Italy's ANSA news service 
the new warrant was ``a good sign.'' ANSA quoted Dini as saying he 
now expected a German extradition request. Meanwhile, Turkish newspapers 
reported a large-scale military operation in the southeastern provinces 
against PKK rebels. According to the Zaman daily, 35,000 troops launched 
an offensive this week in the province of Tunceli, where authorities 
suspect that 500 rebels are hiding. Military officials refused to 
comment. Turkey's Anatolia news agency said Ankara was planning an 
appeal of the Rome court's decision on Monday. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>