<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981122.1130.1501 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Twice, he has fought to save earth from hostile aliens. And now in 
his latest movie, will Smith takes on the national security agency. 
Dennis Michael has more. Satellite imagery coming through. Request 
immediate keyhole visual tasking. Maximum resolution. Help me. Will 
Smith is in the wrong place at the wrong time. And now, the awesome 
power of the super secret national security agency is focused on his 
every move. Let's get into his life. Paranoia is the central emotion 
of "enemy of the state." The paranoia is there. You know, everywhere 
you go now, you're being photographed. Any time you turn your computer 
on, any time you plug into an E-mail, any time you put a phone line 
into your computer, things can be pulled off your hard drive. Every 
wire, every airwave. The more technology you use, the easier it is 
for them to keep tabs on you. It's a brave new world out there. Paranoia 
is contagious. But even though its cast spent months looking over 
its collective shoulder, most of them avoided a fear of an information 
age big brother. From its inception, we've had villains. And there 
always will be. But am I paranoid? no. There are a lot of great people 
around, too. I tend to be, on one level, a person who thinks the government 
is doing okay. You know, I don't examine all that a lot. I'm probably 
naive. Naive about political espionage perhaps, but not about acting. 
Gene Hackman, a two-time Oscar winner, spends much of the film nose-to-nose 
with will Smith. And came away very impressed. You're either very 
smart or incredibly stupid. I don't recall a scene where we were working 
together when we didn't find something human. You know? In our interchange 
and response to each other. People keep asking me, you know, if I 
think he's a serious actor. I think he's a very serious actor. And 
I think he can do anything he wants to do. Will Smith found the situation 
serious as well. When he looks at you with those, you know, steely 
eyes, and, you know, it's just, geez, you know, really -- it's just 
strong. And, you know, I had to find it in myself to stand up and 
look back. And what happened, we did a take. And after we did, like 
our first take, he leans over to me and said, "that was a good job, 
kid, I liked that. Good job." So I was like, "all right, yes!" You 
live another day, I'll be very impressed. "enemy of the state" gives 
the viewer plenty to watch -- even without satellite surveillance. 
Dennis Michael, "CNN Entertainment News," Hollywood. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>