<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981122.0132 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A week after it narrowly escaped an American military strike, Iraq 
signaled on Sunday in a series of defiant statements that it has little 
intention of cooperating with international arms inspectors and is 
still on a collision course with the United States. At a news conference 
in Baghdad, Iraq's foreign minister, Mohammed Saeed al-Sahhaf, rebuffed 
a U.N. demand for more documents on his country's arms program. He 
reiterated a year-old assertion that Baghdad had already produced 
over 2 million pages of files and had no more documents to give U.N. 
inspectors. ``We have handed over all, all available documents,'' 
Sahhaf said, calling the request from the United Nations Special Commission, 
known as UNSCOM, for more documents ``a new tactic in order to put 
obstacles and create unwarranted problems.'' In a direct challenge 
to the United States and Britain, which have warned Iraq that only 
full cooperation would avert attack, the Iraqis have in effect said 
they will step back only to Oct. 31, when they cut off all cooperation 
with arms inspectors. All the restrictions placed on monitors in the 
months preceding that final break _ especially the inability to see 
certain crucial documents dealing with the history of prohibited weapons 
_ remain in place. Given Iraq's uncompromising stance, inspectors 
are unlikely to gain free access to previously off-limits sites when 
the time comes for a new round of intrusive inspections, U.N. officials 
say. Baghdad-based inspectors, who resumed routine monitoring of known 
sites on Wednesday, are not expected to demand short-notice inspections 
of new targets until teams of outside experts are assembled and flown 
to Iraq to lead the searches. Traveling with President Clinton in 
Asia, administration officials said on Sunday that American forces 
remained prepared to act. Sandy Berger, the national security adviser, 
said the Iraqi objection to the request for documents from UNSCOM's 
chairman, Richard Butler, was not reasonable. ``He's gone back to 
them and asked for further information, and we hope and expect to 
get that,'' Berger said. ``We would hope that they would respond positively 
and quickly.'' American officials say Iraq cannot hope to get a comprehensive 
review of its relations with the United Nations, which Baghdad hopes 
will lead to the lifting of sanctions, until full cooperation resumes. 
In recent days, both the United States and Britain, which still have 
forces on alert in the Persian Gulf, indicated that they were prepared 
to give the Iraqis, and UNSCOM, a little time. Spot inspection teams 
are not being rushed to Iraq. On their side, the Iraqis, on the offensive 
diplomatically and in public remarks almost since the moment they 
capitulated on Nov. 14 in the face of imminent attack, seem to be 
counting on supporters in the Security Council to accept their definition 
of cooperation. In a sharp summary that turned the history of the 
Persian Gulf War and its aftermath on its head, Sahhaf pressed his 
country's campaign to lift sanctions, saying, ``Any fair-minded observer 
all over the world knows very well that Iraq is the aggrieved party 
in what's going on in the last seven and a half years.'' The Iraqi 
foreign minister also said recent findings by the United States of 
possible VX gas on warhead fragments were an ``imaginary monster they 
created in their sick minds.'' But, in a startling admission, he did 
note that the overwhelming majority of documents were handed over 
to UNSCOM only after a high-level Iraqi defector _ President Saddam 
Hussein's son-in-law, Gen. Hussein Kamal _ had threatened to disclose 
their contents. Iraq has laid down conditions for the comprehensive 
review that is to be Saddam's reward for cooperation, if and when 
it takes place. The Security Council unanimously rejected those demands 
on Oct. 30, provoking the Oct. 31 Iraqi refusal to cooperate with 
UNSCOM. Meeting with reporters on Sunday, Deputy Prime Minister Tariq 
Aziz accused Butler of trying to block the review, which Iraq thinks 
can lead to a lifting of the oil embargo imposed after its 1990 invasion 
of Kuwait. ``He's either creating a superficial pretext to justify 
the American aggressions or he is trying to confuse and undermine 
the comprehensive review,'' Aziz said, calling Butler's request for 
additional documents ``quite provocative.'' He also spoke on Sunday 
to a regional Arab meeting in Baghdad called to shore up Arab support 
for Iraq, which was badly dented this month when eight Arab nations, 
including Egypt, Syria and Saudi Arabia, warned Saddam that Iraq alone 
would be responsible if it came under attack. The loss of Arab support, 
diplomats said, played a part in the decision by Saddam to back down. 
Iraq has repeatedly said it has provided all the material UNSCOM needs 
to finish its job and declare Iraq free of prohibited biological, 
chemical and missile programs. The International Atomic Energy Agency 
has concluded that there are no nuclear weapons or ready-to-assembly 
arms in Iraq. Supporters of Iraq, particularly but not only Russia 
and France, make the case that at some point UNSCOM and the Security 
Council will simply have to decide that there are things that may 
never be known, so files should be closed when inspectors have gone 
as far as they can. Iraq is gambling that it can hold out until that 
happens, inspectors and international arms control experts say. Butler 
argues that without the full knowledge of what Iraq once had, there 
is no way to determine that all, or even the majority, of prohibited 
arms have been accounted for. At issue now is one particular document 
found in July that lists what substances Iraq had loaded on warheads 
during the 1980-88 war with Iran. Among the chemical agents that UNSCOM 
suspects may have been loaded on warheads is VX, a lethal nerve gas 
that is colorless and odorless. Tests in the United States, France 
and Switzerland of warheads dug up this spring by UNSCOM had traces 
of a decontaminant, suggesting they had been ``scrubbed'' to remove 
prohibited agents. The American and French laboratories also found 
degraded components of what could have been VX. Iraqi answers to questions 
about those warheads, armed with chemical and possibly biological 
agents, have varied enough over the years to make inspectors distrustful 
of any more ``full, final and complete disclosures'' from Iraq. Butler 
has said, in effect, show me. Both Butler and his predecessor, Rolf 
Ekeus, who is now Sweden's ambassador in Washington, say the Iraqis 
are being disingenuous when they say that all documents have been 
handed over freely. The largest cache by far was suddenly ``discovered'' 
in a chicken coop in 1995 by Iraqi officials after the defection of 
Kamal, a top official in the Iraqi arms program. He was later lured 
back to Iraq and killed. In a startling admission on Sunday, Saahaf 
acknowledged that most of the Iraqi documents in UNSCOM's possession 
_ 680,000 pages of a total 688,020 _ had come from the chicken coop. 
About 1.5 million more documents were turned over to the International 
Atomic Energy Agency, he said. The chicken coop documents were very 
damaging to Iraq, showing a far larger biological program than the 
Iraqis had ever acknowledged, and profoundly shaking the confidence 
of inspectors in all Iraqi assurances not backed by evidence. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>