<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981122.0058 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Nothing raises a company's profile like a billion-dollar deal. So 
it is that the spotlight now shines on BMC Software Inc. and Boole 
&AMP; Babbage Inc., two companies that have long labored in the obscure 
world of systems management. Three weeks ago, BMC, based in Houston, 
agreed to acquire Boole, based in San Jose, Calif., in a stock swap 
valued at more than $900 million. Analysts praised the merger as bringing 
together two strong players with compatible cultures. Both companies 
have consistently met or exceeded Wall Street earnings estimates; 
both sell to the same major corporate and governmental customers, 
but their products do not overlap. BMC's shares fell $2 after the 
deal was announced Nov. 2, to $46.0625; they closed on Friday at $46.8125, 
down 37.5 cents. Boole shares, which jumped $3.50 on the news of the 
deal, to $30.125, closed Friday at $30.625, down 25 cents. Systems 
management software is a broad category of programs that function 
behind the scenes to make sure that big mainframes and far-flung networks 
of distributed computers keep working reliably and efficiently. Perhaps 
the best analog on the desktop is a product like Symantec Corp.'s 
Norton Utilities, which alerts users to hard disk errors or operating 
system glitches and then does its best to correct them. But a major 
corporate computing system, whether based on a traditional mainframe 
or spread among Unix servers, is a vastly more complex environment 
than a personal computer, so the products that monitor and trouble-shoot 
these systems must be powerful and sophisticated as well. And while 
corporations and other large organizations have always been concerned 
about maintaining high availability in their core computing systems, 
the move to electronic commerce and the Internet has made this a strategic 
need. Companies like FDX's Federal Express, which lets customers track 
packages on its Web site, depend on BMC's and Boole's programs to 
keep those systems up and running at all times. Yet these companies 
have been in business for a long time _ since 1980 for BMC, and 1967 
for Boole &AMP; Babbage, which was named for two 19th-century mathematicians. 
And to a great extent, they owe their existence to the federal antitrust 
suit brought against IBM Corp. three decades ago. The suit was ultimately 
dropped, but it opened the door for rivals to sell hardware or software 
compatible with the IBM mainframe. ``Prior to the antitrust suit, 
companies like Boole &AMP; Babbage did not exist because mainframe 
software was given away for free,'' said Bob Djurdjevic, president 
of Annex Research. ``You're dealing with companies that were the pioneers 
of the software industry, well before Bill Gates finished high school.'' 
Both Boole and BMC got their starts offering software for IBM mainframes, 
and they still derive the biggest share of their revenue from this 
business. But both have also moved into so-called client-server systems, 
in which computing is split between larger server machines and small 
clients. Those servers might be mainframes, Unix systems or Wintel 
machines; the clients could be Sun work stations, personal computers 
or a bank's network of automated teller machines. ``Typically, we 
provide all of the tools and controls to make sure these critical 
applications deliver data to the end user, regardless of platform,'' 
said Paul Newton, Boole's president and chief executive. Newton plans 
to remain with the combined company for about a year to oversee the 
transition. The main difference between the two companies' product 
offerings is that while Boole's primarily monitor the network itself, 
making sure servers serve and routers route appropriately, BMC's products 
work with major applications, like an Oracle database or SAP's R-3 
software, insuring that data is available and structured correctly. 
Most big companies use both. When they do their jobs right, products 
like Boole's Command Post or BMC's Patrol are invisible to end users. 
But they provide information systems management staff a virtual dashboard 
with which to monitor problems and optimize performance. In many cases, 
the programs can spot an error, alert network administrators to its 
existence and repair the problem without ever interrupting the system. 
``When the system rolls over and croaks, we get it back up and running 
in a very rapid, automated manner,'' said Max Watson, BMC's chairman, 
president and chief executive. Competitors include IBM itself, through 
its Tivoli unit; Computer Associates; Candle Inc., a privately held 
company in Santa Monica, Calif., and Platinum Technology. Last week, 
Platinum sued to block the merger. The company contends that Boole 
had agreed not to merge with any other company after talks between 
Boole and Platinum broke down earlier this year and that, in return, 
Platinum had agreed not to make a hostile takeover bid for Boole. 
Boole officials said last week that the suit was without merit. BMC 
has grown faster and enjoyed greater profit margins than Boole, but 
both companies have had consistent earnings growth. Excluding one-time 
charges, BMC reported earnings for its fiscal second quarter, ended 
Sept. 30, of $74.7 million, or 33 cents a diluted share, up 55 percent 
from the corresponding period a year earlier. Revenue increased 45 
percent, to $235.9 million. Boole reported earnings for its fiscal 
fourth quarter, ended Sept. 30, of $10.3 million, or 34 cents a diluted 
share, up 41 percent from a year earlier. Revenue grew 11 percent, 
to $58.6 million. Watson said he was confident that the combined company 
would bring Boole's growth and margin rates up to BMC's levels. ``Boole 
has a pretty good win rate, they just don't have a big enough sales 
force,'' he said. ``I anticipate growing them faster than they ever 
imagined.'' Analysts agree that the merged companies should benefit 
from a broader product offering and will be well positioned to serve 
companies moving into electronic commerce and online transactions. 
``I think the combination is a powerful one that will redefine this 
space,'' said Jon Oltsik, an analyst with Forrester Research. ``They 
are moving from tools to make information technology professionals' 
lives easier, to tools to make applications more readily available 
to customers. That's a space that not only appeals to the technology 
folks, but the business folks as well.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>