<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981122.0130 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
All fall, as Russia drifted from crisis to crisis, Yuri Luzhkov, the 
pugnacious and energetic mayor of Moscow, kept trying to jump-start 
his undeclared campaign to succeed President Boris Yeltsin, using 
every opportunity to muscle his way onto the national stage. As the 
undisputed boss of Russia's biggest city, Luzhkov already has a political 
arsenal. With control over a major television station, several key 
newspapers and the country's second-largest printing press, he has 
considerable sway over the news media. And with his grip on the city's 
large business and financial empire, he does not lack for funds. Last 
week, Luzhkov filled the one remaining gap in his political agenda 
with the creation of a national centrist party. To the surprise of 
some political observers, it took off with a full head of steam. ``All 
of a sudden, there is a hysteria of political love for Luzhkov,'' 
said Mikhail Berger, editor of the daily newspaper Sevodnya. Even 
Viktor Chernomyrdin, the ex-prime minister once anointed as Yeltsin's 
heir apparent, announced he would support Luzhkov for president, a 
sign that the Moscow mayor's fortunes have taken a sudden lurch forward 
in the race to fill the space left vacant by Yeltsin's shrinking political 
influence. The cold-blooded murder this weekend in St. Petersburg 
of Galina V. Staravoitova, a leading liberal democrat, sent shock 
waves through Russia's fragile body politic, raising fears that time 
is running out for rational debate. Luzhkov, abandoning a brief flirtation 
with Russia's Communist Party, has chosen to aim squarely at the political 
center. At a founding meeting on Thursday, Luzhkov said his ``Fatherland'' 
party would steer clear of extremism and ``absorb everything that's 
logical from the left, and everything that is logical from the right.'' 
That said, most Muscovites seem to think the new party's real goal 
is to put Luzhkov in the Kremlin, even though he still says he is 
only considering a run. Earlier this fall, Luzhkov, once a loyal Yeltsin 
ally, took pains to distance himself from the enfeebled president 
with a public suggestion that Yeltsin step down before his term ends 
in 2000. In the meantime, he has gathered in several former Yeltsin 
aides, including former National Security Council chief Andrei Kokoshin 
and former Interior Minister Anatoly Kulikov. More significantly, 
the Luzhkov bandwagon has collected other names, and other forces 
_ including some 20 regional governors, old-guard industrial managers, 
labor leaders and even some members of Moscow's new business elite, 
many of them beholden to City Hall. Without a strong team of economic 
advisers, Luzhkov has blundered his way through the continuing debate 
over how to extricate Russia from its economic debacle, pledging support 
for both a market economy and vigorous state control and blasting 
Russian reformers and their Western advisers for pushing Russia to 
the brink of collapse. Yet after six years as Moscow's mayor, Luzhkov 
has his own record to run on _ a record that can boast of ambitious 
public works projects that have been finished in record time, special 
benefits for the needy, and a downtown area filled with luxury shops 
catering to the city's new rich. However, Luzhkov also has an authoritarian 
style that has kept a tight control over the transfer of city property 
and business to organizations closely linked to City Hall. Luzhkov's 
political muscle is most keenly felt by the Russian news media. For 
the most part, they are openly loath to tangle with the mayor, or 
investigate the city's business dealings. Not only has Luzhkov filed 
_ and won _ numerous libel suits against offending publications, but 
he is also known to have doled out _ and withheld _ the kind of municipal 
favors that are often necessary for hard-up strapped publishers to 
survive. ``To criticize Yeltsin in Russia today is completely safe,'' 
noted Otto Latsis, a political commentator for New Izvestia, a daily. 
``But everybody is afraid of Luzhkov because the city has real power. 
You may own your building, but the land beneath it belongs to the 
city. If you need to find apartments for your employees, you have 
to go to the city. It is all in Luzhkov's hands.'' With the recent 
transfer of the Moskovskaya Pravda printing plant from the federal 
to the municipal government, City Hall now controls the presses used 
by most of Moscow's major newspapers. ``He has enormous power in his 
hands, and he has created a structure that could be easily abused,'' 
noted Berger. The city of Moscow not only has a major interest in 
several popular newspapers, but it finances its own television station 
and a weekly newspaper that is now distributed free. With presidential 
elections scheduled for mid-2000, Luzhkov's national effort still 
has plenty of time to fail. As the economic crisis deepens, Moscow's 
glittery image as Russia's sole success story stands to get tarnished, 
and with it, Luzhkov's reputation as one of the few Russian politicians 
who can deliver. Already, money is running short at the city-owned 
television station and Moscow _ like Russia _ is now struggling to 
keep up payments on its public debt. But another likely presidential 
contender, Aleksandr I. Lebed, the former general who is now governor 
of a region in Siberia, is sure to have similar problems defending 
his record. And few political experts expect either the Communist 
Party chief, Gennady Zyuganov, or Grigory Yavlinsky, leader of a liberal 
party, to get broad enough support to propel them into a presidential 
race's second and final round. At this point, some experts say Luzhkov's 
strongest opponent could be Prime Minister Yevgeny Primakov, whose 
success at calming Russia's political waters over the last two months 
has lifted his standing in public opinion polls. But unlike Luzhkov, 
Primakov can not even hint at any presidential ambitions, if he has 
them. ``Luzhkov understands that Primakov is a possible competitor, 
which is why he is maneuvering now, and organizing his political forces 
now,'' said Vyacheslav Nikonov, head of Politika, a research institute. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>