<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981122.0112 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Austria, whose Parliament has just given final approval to a law permitting 
restitution of hundreds of artworks seized by the Nazis, expects to 
return some works to their owners by Christmas. But the law will not 
resolve some of the toughest cases involving many of the most valuable 
works. The law covers paintings, furniture and other artifacts held 
by the Austrian government, Culture Minister Elisabeth Gehrer said 
in an interview in New York on Saturday. After World War II, the government 
returned some works confiscated by the Nazis but also instituted an 
art export ban, refusing to allow people who had fled the country 
to reclaim all of their property. Most of the cases are known, Mrs. 
Gehrer said, because in January Austria's 10 state museums were ordered 
to review the provenance of works in their collections. The order 
followed an uproar over two Egon Schiele paintings that were lent 
by an Austrian foundation to the Museum of Modern Art in New York 
a year ago and then claimed by two American families. But Mrs. Gehrer 
said the new law did not apply to the Schiele paintings, nor to cases 
like that of a Los Angeles resident, a niece of the renowned collectors 
Ferdinand and Adele Bloch-Bauer, who has claimed several important 
paintings by Gustav Klimt. ``These cases have to be dealt with by 
a court, and I am not a court,'' said Mrs. Gehrer, who was in New 
York to check the progress of a teacher exchange program between Austria 
and New York City schools. Mrs. Gehrer said she expected restitution 
to involve perhaps 20 families and 400 to 500 items, including furniture, 
armor, coin collections and some paintings. Under the law, a seven-member 
advisory panel, including the finance and justice ministers, will 
review claims and offer advice on specific restitutions. ``Once the 
advisory commission gives its recommendations, we have to check the 
last wills and see if the claimants are indeed the rightful heirs'' 
before restitution can take place, she said. Mrs. Gehrer said each 
family would decide whether to make its claim public. Many in the 
art world expect the first case to involve the Austrian branch of 
the Rothschild family, many of whose works hang or are stored in the 
Kunsthistoriches Museum and the National Gallery. ``All the facts 
are clear on that case,'' said Mrs. Gehrer, who added that the Austrian 
public, which in the past has been accused of foot-dragging on restitution 
if not ignoring the issue completely, now was aware of it and supported 
the new law. ``I attach particular importance to the fact that there 
will be no discussion of the value of these paintings in our considerations,'' 
she said. The Bloch-Bauer case is being pressed by Maria Altmann of 
Los Angeles. She is named as a beneficiary in the will of her uncle, 
Ferdinand Bloch-Bauer, who owned seven Klimt paintings, including 
two famous portraits of Bloch-Bauer's wife, Adele, as well as a famed 
porcelain collection and other paintings and property. The Nazis seized 
or sold Bloch-Bauer's property, and the Klimt paintings were claimed 
by the Austrian National Gallery because Adele Bloch-Bauer, who died 
in 1923, had asked her husband in her will to give them to the gallery 
after his death. But Bloch-Bauer, who died in exile in 1945, left 
all of his property to his heirs, who, led by Mrs. Altmann, say his 
wife's 1923 will was a request and is not legally enforceable. They 
have retained a lawyer. ``My uncle would never have donated anything 
to Austria after the way he had been treated,'' Mrs. Altmann said 
in a recent statement. Mrs. Gehrer said: ``That is not a political 
question. It is a legal question. The political question was whether 
the artworks were held in Austria by anti-export laws, and I made 
a political decision on these cases. ``The case of a last will is 
not up to politicians to make the decision. We have to make a distinction 
between those cases that are political problems and those that are 
not. ``My opinion is that the museum legally owns the paintings. But 
if the court disagrees, it will be accepted.'' Mrs. Gehrer spoke of 
the Schiele case in the same vein. Austrians were incensed when Manhattan 
District Attorney Robert M. Morgenthau issued a subpoena preventing 
the return of the two paintings to Austria in January, pending a criminal 
investigation of their ownership. The Museum of Modern Art contested 
the legality of Morgenthau's move, and in May a state Supreme Court 
justice agreed. But the district attorney's office appealed. The paintings 
continue to sit in MOMA's storage rooms. An appellate court ruling 
is expected within weeks. Lawyers for one of the claimants want to 
meet with the Austrian government and possibly resolve the matter. 
On Saturday Mrs. Gehrer said: ``There's nothing to discuss. It is 
not customary in Austria to negotiate. According to our legal practices, 
the case has to be clarified by the courts, not resolved by negotiations 
and deals.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>