<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981122.0151 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
At the House Judiciary Committee, Ken Starr succeeded in documenting 
the president's premeditated series of perjuries. Even The New York 
Times, in favoring censure over impeachment, referred to Bill Clinton's 
``habitual mendacity'' (a phrase nicer than, but little different 
from, my old ``congenital liar''). Starr failed to tie the persistent 
presidential prevarication in the Lewinsky affair to five years of 
stonewalling in Whitewater, Travelgate and Filegate. Belatedly, he 
announced his inability to find presidential involvement in what some 
of us still consider White House abuses, permitting Barney Frank rightly 
to demand to know why that was not made public before the recent elections. 
Starr should promptly submit, and the court release, the suppressed 
reports on those investigations. Let's see who is ``exonerated,'' 
lest the next Republican president's staff follow Clinton precedent 
to flip through the FBI files of 900 troublesome Democrats, and to 
use the Justice Department to clear the decks for patronage. What 
should Henry Hyde's Judiciary do now? First, forget about any help 
from Starr. His Whitewater indictment of Web Hubbell is two years 
too late. Sam Dash's last-minute stab in the back declared Starr an 
outlaw for daring to defend the report Dash approved, but Watergate 
Sam was right about this: In impeachment inquiries, Congress cannot 
rely exclusively on outside investigators. Next, accept that impeachment 
cannot succeed solely for lying under oath about sex. We had an election 
about that and Clinton won. Even if Kathleen Willey could produce 
DNA evidence of harassment, Clinton has established his droit du seigneur 
and most voters think lying about it to a grand jury is no high crime. 
Instead, focus on what is surely a high crime: stealing an election. 
For two years, Clinton Justice has ducked prosecution of Clinton's 
``Asian connection.'' That multimillion-dollar illegal overseas fund-raising 
scheme financed Clinton's comeback advertising blitz and was accompanied 
by a flip-flop in his China trade policy. Starr gave immunity to John 
Huang, the middleman, but wants to know only about hushing up Hubbell. 
In coming weeks, the dithering Attorney General Reno will decide whether 
to ask for an independent counsel to investigate fund-raising by Al 
Gore, Harold Ickes and _ for decision by Dec. 7 _ by Clinton himself. 
Will that date again live in infamy? Probably; Reno has already refused 
to show Congress unedited internal memos of protest by FBI Director 
Louis Freeh and prosecutor Charles La Bella. Both professional investigators 
are convinced Justice bureaucrats are hopelessly conflicted in going 
after their chief executive. The Judiciary Committee should demand 
that the president order his attorney general to produce those and 
related documents forthwith and in full, including La Bella's addenda. 
If he or Reno refuses, such contempt of Congress should be an impeachment 
count. But the impeachment inquiry must not abdicate its own responsibility 
even in the unlikely event an independent counsel is appointed to 
dig into the Asian connection. Getting the truth is more important 
than punishing secondary culprits. Hyde &AMP; Co. should follow the 
Dash constitutional doctrine: investigate by itself. Call Huang, Charlie 
Trie, Bruce Lindsey, Johnny Chung and Mark Middleton. To save months, 
draft La Bella as special counsel. Plug into the top-secret report 
being prepared by the House's Select Committee on Chinagate, headed 
by the tight-lipped Chris Cox. If Chinese intelligence is identified 
as a source of funds, then Judiciary must know it before making impeachment 
judgments. History will hold all members, Democrats included, to account. 
Where is it written that this inquiry must be finished by this lame-duck 
Congress? The nation has no need more vital than to protect its electoral 
process _ a job that conflicted Reno Justice has botched and that 
cannot wait for the years it would take a new independent counsel. 
A serious impeachment inquiry would reach beyond perjury to inquire 
into the high crime that has been staring us all in the face. That 
is the White House solicitation of illegal funds from foreign sources, 
and the use of that dirty money to steal the 1996 presidential election. 
(BOX) 
</TEXT>
</DOC>