<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981122.0055 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Three years ago, the U.S. Patent Office published new guidelines that 
loosened its standards for granting certain medically related patents. 
The biotechnology sector, in particular, had sought such a change, 
complaining that the Food and Drug Administration should determine 
whether a potential drug was safe and effective. The Patent Office, 
it argued, should stick to deciding whether something was novel enough 
to deserve a patent. Under old standards for granting so-called utility 
patents, the Patent Office took a critical view of medicinal claims, 
often refusing to issue a patent if the applicant could not prove 
a drug's usefulness. Biotechnology companies contended that without 
patent protection in the first place, they could not get financing 
for clinical testing to prove claims. But biotechnology companies 
are not the only ones to benefit from the policy shift. A recent, 
informal database search suggests that herbal entrepreneurs are forging 
ahead with patent applications that a few years ago the Patent Office 
would have turned down cold. Five years ago, only a handful of patents 
appear to have been granted for herbal preparations with medicinal 
purposes. So far in 1998, at least a dozen such patents have been 
issued. ``I'm a little bit amazed by some of these,'' said Colin Sandercock, 
a partner at the law firm of Foley &AMP; Lardner in Washington. ``What 
you're seeing is the Patent Office taking the position that in light 
of the new guidelines, they are not going to challenge the efficacy 
of the claimed treatment.'' Many of the new patents, Sandercock said, 
are very limited in scope, and might be easily and legally circumvented 
should they prove to be popular. ``With the keen interest in vitamins 
and herbal remedies, many people are probably getting patents primarily 
for a marketing edge,'' he said. Here are a few patents granted this 
year under the new rules: c.1998 N.Y. Times News Service A New Application 
for Ancient Herbs An herbal patent issued last week appears to be 
rather sweeping in its claims for the use of herbs in treating HIV, 
leukemia and various forms of hepatitis. The patent was jointly granted 
to Shie-Ming Hwang, a chemist in Columbus, Ohio; his cousin Hsiu-Hsien 
Tsai, a physician in Taiwan, and Pai-Chu Kung, a pharmacist and Tsai's 
wife. Tsai, who was trained in Western medicine, became frustrated 
with poor results when using interferon to treat patients with Hepatitis 
B, Hwang said. So Tsai turned to traditional Chinese herbal medicine, 
concocting a powder of 11 herbs that was mixed with water and taken 
several times a day. ``It's not a formal clinical trial, but it appeared 
to significantly lower levels of Hepatitis B,'' Hwang said. Subsequent 
laboratory testing suggests that the herbal combination may help patients 
with HIV and leukemia. But how is it that the use of these herbs, 
which have been used for thousands of years in Chinese medicine, can 
be patented? The answer appears to be that the three inventors have 
come up with a new use for the ancient herbs. Hwang, Tsai, and Kung 
received patent 5,837,257. c.1998 N.Y. Times News Service Combining 
Herbs for Weight Loss St. Johnswort has attracted considerable attention 
for its reputed success in combating depression. And ephedrine, an 
herb known for its amphetamine-like qualities, has developed a reputation 
for accelerating weight loss. Brian Haveson, of Yardley, Pa., contends 
that the two herbs, when taken together, act synergistically to suppress 
appetite and burn calories. A patent he received for a combination 
of the herbs cites a small, unpublished study as evidence. In that 
study, a dozen overweight individuals lost eight pounds in six weeks 
by taking both St. Johnswort and ephedrine twice a day, according 
to the patent. Haveson received patent 5,798,101 for his herbal combination. 
c.1998 N.Y. Times News Service An Herbal Substitute for a Nicotine 
Patch Plantago, a weed known as common plaintain, has been extolled 
for centuries for its healing properties. Since the 1920s, this herb 
has also been reputed to suppress the desire of smokers to reach for 
a cigarette. Mary Cody, of Boonton Township, N.J., has invented the 
herbal answer to the nicotine skin patch: a transdermal version of 
Plantago. Rather than delivering nicotine slowly to the bloodstream, 
though, it delivers an extract of the herb. Ms. Cody received patent 
5,716,635. c.1998 N.Y. Times News Service Giving Chew Toys an Herbal 
Punch Cats have has appreciated catnip for millennia. But it has never 
held much allure for dogs. Enter valerian, until now mostly known 
for its putative sedative power over humans. Vsande Childers-Zadah, 
of West Palm Beach, Fla., has patented the use of valerian root in 
chew toys and food treats for pets. Valerian is irresistible to both 
dogs and cats, the patent contends. Childers-Zadah received patent 
5,786,382. Patents are available by number for $3 from the Patent 
and Trademark Office, Washington, D.C. 20231. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>