<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981122.0101 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In most industries, if a company's sales dropped 40 percent from one 
year to the next, not only would the chief executive be dismissed, 
but the company might very well go out of business. Not necessarily 
so in broadcast television today. For evidence, consider UPN. The 
network's average audience has shrunk 40 percent this fall from last 
fall. One new show, ``Reunited,'' has twice scored one of the lowest 
Nielsen ratings in history, an 0.9 (about 895,000 homes, of the 84 
million UPN can reach). To make up for the low ratings, UPN has had 
to give most advertisers two commercials for every one purchased. 
And it looks as if the network will lose close to $200 million this 
year, after losing about $180 million last year. Still, UPN's owners 
sound almost cheery. Top executives at Viacom and Chris-Craft, whose 
respective subsidiaries, Paramount Television and Broadcast Holdings 
Corp., jointly own UPN, insist that they are committed to the network 
for the long haul and that they are braced for substantial losses 
until it improves. They also expressed faith in Dean Valentine, UPN's 
third chief executive in its almost four years of existence. Despite 
what would be called failure by most measures of business success, 
the one thing UPN says it will not do is go out of the network business. 
``There is no such scenario possible, unless the stations they own 
get shut down,'' said a UPN executive, speaking on condition of anonymity. 
How can that be? In today's vertically integrated entertainment world, 
giant parent companies own networks, production studios _ and the 
shows produced _ and local stations, but the stations are among the 
most dependable profit makers. And to be competitive, stations need 
a national network's high-profile programs in prime time. Some stations 
are stuck with UPN, because they are ``family'': Viacom's Paramount 
Television owns 19 television stations and Chris-Craft owns eight. 
But nearly 200 others chose to sign on with UPN, which went on the 
air in January 1995, with two nights of programming a week and a promise 
to grow. Most affiliates were small, low-profile independent stations 
that had been buying and scheduling programs on their own _ syndicated 
shows, old movies and the games of local sports teams. As networks 
grew _ Time Warner's WB network started the same year as UPN, both 
added a third night the next year, and now offer five nights a week 
_ the business changed. Prime-time syndication producers have narrowed 
their aim, making mostly male-oriented action-adventure dramas, which 
stations buy for weekend use or to fill programming gaps. Most local 
sports teams have gone to cable networks. Cable networks compete with 
stations to buy movie packages, too. These days, stations would be 
hard pressed to survive financially by cobbling together their own 
lineups, as was once the norm. They need a network's brand name, its 
programs and its national promotional and advertising power. Yet the 
UPN stations are getting lower ratings, and thus lower ad revenue, 
in many cases than they got before affiliating with UPN _ and they 
must give two-thirds of their prime-time commercial minutes to the 
network. Certainly, they are upset. A 40 percent drop in viewers diminishes 
the audience for their 10 p.m. news programs, and hurts whatever syndicated 
shows they have bought to run later in the evening. It means promotional 
spots for the stations' other shows are seen by fewer people. But 
there is precious little they can do. The only recourse would be to 
drop UPN when their affiliation contracts expire, in most cases several 
years from now, and join another network. WB is the only broadcast 
network to show growth this year. It forged success with a heavily 
marketed appeal to teen-agers and young women, the primary audience 
attracted by its first two big hits, ``Buffy the Vampire Slayer'' 
and ``Seventh Heaven.'' That is, of course, what UPN needs desperately 
_ some hit shows. And there looms another worry: Like UPN's stations, 
the major Hollywood production studios are also grumbling about those 
paltry Nielsen ratings. It costs studios hundreds of thousands of 
dollars each episode, and often more, to produce shows. They recoup 
some of that in the license fee paid by the network, but they share 
no advertising earnings. To make money, they depend on a show succeeding 
and accumulating enough episodes to sell into syndication or to cable 
networks. That does not happen if people do not watch, and this fall, 
few people have been watching UPN. One or two major studios have begun 
thinking twice about development deals with UPN for now, according 
to some show producers and some studio executives, none of whom would 
speak for the record. Others have asked for a contractual clause stipulating 
that if UPN goes out of business in less than four years _ the typical 
time needed to accumulate enough episodes for syndication _ UPN would 
reimburse the supplier for deficits incurred in producing the show. 
But UPN still has an active development slate; if nothing else, Paramount, 
Spelling Television and Viacom Productions are sister Viacom companies, 
and would find it difficult to turn away. Also, UPN executives are 
trolling for new, off-the-beaten-path producers, noting that the five 
major studios have produced few hits recently for any network _ even 
NBC, ABC and CBS. UPN has a development deal with Tom Fontana and 
Barry Levinson (independent producers who created ``Homicide: Life 
on the Streets'' for NBC), and with the film writers Ted Elliott and 
Terry Rossio (``The Mask of Zorro''), among others. UPN's one modestly 
successful night _ Wednesday _ may suggest a path to take, since it 
draws more male viewers than most network TV, with ``Seven Days,'' 
a military spy drama, and ``Star Trek: Voyager,'' the lost-in-space 
series. UPN's future may lie in becoming a fraternal twin to WB _ 
focusing on male teen-agers and young men. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>