<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981122.0076 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It slices! It dices! But no matter which way you cut it, K-Tel International 
has been keeping investors awake at night, much as its commercials 
for gadgets and records once did for late-night television viewers. 
Less than two weeks ago, K-Tel shares were soaring after the company 
announced agreements to sell music over the Internet at Web sites 
run by Playboy Enterprises and the Microsoft Corp. But last week the 
stock plunged on news that Nasdaq was threatening to delist the company 
for lack of adequate assets. Even for Internet-related stocks, where 
investor enthusiasm is often out of sync with business realities, 
the tale of K-Tel is an extreme one. Until April, K-Tel was selling 
music compilations like `` '70s Teen Heartthrobs'' through discount 
and record stores. On some days, only a few hundred shares in the 
thinly traded company changed hands. No analyst at a major brokerage 
firm followed the company. But then K-Tel announced that it would 
open an Internet record store, and its shares jumped to nearly $40 
from about $4, adjusted for a subsequent split. The share price fell 
to earth again, but had two more spikes earlier this month when the 
company announced its Microsoft and Playboy agreements. On some days, 
more than 20 million shares changed hands, a huge number for a company 
that has only 8.3 million shares outstanding and 4 million of those 
owned by its founder. But if the company has been quick to announce 
its Internet intentions, it has raised questions about its silence 
on less favorable developments. Its president and chief operating 
officer, David Weiner, resigned in September and was replaced the 
next month by Lawrence Kieves. But K-Tel did not announce these changes 
until Nov. 3, when reporters, calling about the Playboy announcement, 
discovered its change in presidents. Then, K-Tel did not announce 
for about three weeks that it had received a warning that it might 
be delisted from the Nasdaq National Market because it does not have 
the required tangible net assets. When that information became public 
on Tuesday in the company's quarterly filing to the Securities and 
Exchange Commission, K-Tel's stock, which had been as high as $39 
the week before, plunged to $10. It closed at $12 on Friday, down 
31.25 cents. Lawyers have pounced like lions on a slab of raw meat. 
At least seven shareholder suits have been filed, accusing the company 
of concealing the Nasdaq warning while orchestrating a public relations 
campaign to increase the share price so it could raise money. K-Tel 
executives said in interviews that the company was not legally obligated 
to announce the Nasdaq letter. They said they did not consider it 
significant because the company, which is now arranging financing, 
was confident it could raise the capital required to stay listed. 
``It's about the 12th letter I've gotten from Nasdaq in my career,'' 
said Kieves, the new president, who previously worked at several small 
publicly traded companies. ``People have a microscope on this company 
and hyper-react to it.'' John Coffee Jr., a Columbia University Law 
School professor, said a company was under no legal requirement to 
disclose information before its quarterly SEC filing unless it was 
trying to sell stock or had made misleading statements. Plaintiffs 
could contend that it was misleading to announce the Playboy and Microsoft 
deals without also mentioning the Nasdaq letter, but K-Tel could argue 
that those deals were not connected to the delisting warning, he said. 
But Coffee said that even if K-Tel was not legally liable, it might 
be violating Nasdaq rules by being ``a little lax about keeping its 
shareholders informed.'' Staying listed will probably not be a problem. 
The company's founder and chairman, Philip Kives, could restore its 
assets to the required $4 million, from $900,000 now, with an equity 
infusion. The bigger problems are finding the tens of millions of 
dollars that might be needed to compete in the Internet business and 
fix its existing business. K-Tel, with sales last year of $85 million, 
has lost money in three of the last four years. In the quarter that 
ended Sept. 30, it lost $3.1 million as revenue dropped 25 percent, 
to $18.8 million, partly because it discontinued some businesses but 
also partly because of slumping record sales. The company has exhausted 
its credit line and has borrowed $3.4 million from Kives to finance 
operations, according to its latest SEC filing. Kives, who is 69 and 
is based in Winnipeg, Manitoba, owns 42.3 percent of K-Tel. He had 
owned nearly 80 percent, but sold more than 2.6 million shares after 
the price went up in April. He declined to comment on the situation. 
A farm boy from Saskatchewan, Kives was peddling knife sets on the 
Atlantic City boardwalk when he hit upon the idea of using television. 
In 1962, he started K-Tel, which stands for Kives Television, advertising 
contraptions like the Miracle Brush lint remover. (The Veg-O-Matic 
vegetable slicer and dicer actually belonged to a competitor, but 
K-Tel acquired it.) The company then branched into selling music compilations 
like ``Hooked on Classics,'' in which classical music was played to 
a disco beat. K-Tel fell into bankruptcy in 1984 after disco slumped 
and its investments in real estate and oil and gas turned sour. Its 
direct sales of gadgets on television are now largely confined to 
Europe. In the United States, K-Tel mainly sells music compilations 
through retailers. The new president, Kieves, 50, is related to Kives 
(their grandfathers were brothers), but the two men did not meet until 
1986. A Brooklyn native, Kieves spent the first part of his career 
in government in Washington and New York City, his last post as commissioner 
of business development under former New York Mayor Edward Koch. Though 
he was never formally charged with any wrongdoing, Kieves was forced 
to resign in 1986 for owning about $10,000 worth of stock in a company 
that was getting some financial assistance from the city. After that 
he was an executive at several small video-distribution companies 
and started Network Event Theater, which went public. Kieves said 
K-Tel's brand name and existing business would give it an advantage 
in Internet retailing. ``It's a smart extension of our core business, 
and the market reacted very favorably to it,'' he said. Market leaders 
like Amazon.com and CD Now are selling $10 million to $15 million 
of music over the Internet each quarter. If K-Tel could do that _ 
right now it does not report its Internet sales because they are not 
significant _ it would practically double its revenue. And Internet 
music sales are expected to soar. But the market is already crowded. 
K-Tel's Web site, www.ktel.com, had only 121,000 people visiting in 
September compared with 2.2 million for CD Now, according to Media 
Metrix, a New York company that tracks Web traffic. Moreover, Internet 
competition will require a lot more money than K-Tel has. CD Now paid 
Yahoo $4 million to appear on Yahoo's portal for two years, and paid 
$18.5 million for a link with Lycos. CD Now is also merging with its 
major rival, N2K, to give it more heft. K-Tel has agreed to pay Playboy 
at least $900,000 over two years. ``Getting into being a category-killer 
online retailer may have stretched them too thin,'' said Nicole Vanderbilt, 
senior analyst at Jupiter Communications, a market research firm. 
She said K-Tel might have been wiser to concentrate on selling its 
music compilations over the Internet, rather than trying to be a broad-based 
music retailer. The listing of K-Tel's service on the Microsoft Network's 
shopping channel might not help much. K-Tel is only one of six retailers 
listed in the music and video section, and Amazon.com has featured 
billing. The Playboy deal could be more significant because K-Tel 
would be the exclusive record vendor on Playboy.com, with 900,000 
people visiting in September, according to Media Metrix. But K-Tel 
undoubtedly faced naysayers when it pioneered in selling records on 
television. ``For us not to take advantage of this new medium,'' Kieves 
said, ``would be a grave mistake.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>