<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981122.0198 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
On a crisp November Sunday, Oak Tree Road was the picture of a thriving 
South Asian immigrant enclave. The windows of gold jewelers sparkled 
with 22-karat necklaces. Shoppers came in and out of the markets, 
arms loaded with sacks of vegetables and spices from home. Families 
loaded up on fresh fried samosas and platefuls of crispy, sweet jeelebis 
inside the many sweet shops along the busy suburban strip. But on 
Sunday, just under the sunny surface was a palpable anxiety. By indicting 
31 people worldwide last week, in an international smuggling operation 
that brought thousands of illegal immigrant workers from the Indian 
subcontinent, federal law-enforcement officials struck at a ring that 
brought in a constant supply of cheap, often illegal, labor. The supply 
from that ring, merchants here say, helps drive this thriving ethnic 
enclave. On Sunday, just days after the small, unpleasant secrets 
of their community had been exposed, business owners up and down Oak 
Tree Road expressed fear about the prospect of immigration raids and 
increased scrutiny by federal authorities. None of the merchants along 
Oak Tree Road would allow their names to be used. But they said they 
worried that the arrests in connection with the smuggling ring _ which 
federal agents say was headed by a man based in the Bahamas named 
Nitin Shettie, also known as Nick Diaz _ would lead its members to 
report on other smugglers and the business owners who rely on them 
to bring in workers. ``You can call it jealousy,'' said a shopkeeper, 
who spoke on the condition of anonymity, ``or you can call it competition.'' 
The owner of one restaurant said Sunday that the New Jersey men who 
were indicted last week were known smugglers, but that their organization 
was only one of many that shopkeepers could turn to if they needed 
extra workers. Four months ago, the merchants pointed out, two of 
Iselin's most prominent shop owners were arrested on charges of immigrant 
smuggling and money laundering. Ramnik Patel, the owner of Ajay Cash 
and Carry and Mayur Cash and Carry, and his son, Ajay, were among 
four Indians accused of bringing Indian immigrants into the United 
States on temporary entertainment visas. According to the U.S. attorney's 
office in Newark, the immigrants came as part of legitimate music 
and dance troupes and stayed on illegally after the troupes left. 
Kanubhai Patel, who is listed as a principal of Mayur and as the owner 
of a candy store in Jersey City, was also arrested. The ring uncovered 
last week came to the attention of immigration authorities several 
months ago when one of the deals went awry, according to a lawyer 
representing two of the smuggled immigrants. The lawyer, Suresh Dalal 
of Woodbridge, said that five illegal immigrants were arrested by 
immigration authorities in Miami on their way from the Bahamas to 
New Jersey. The smugglers bailed them out at $5,000 apiece, and, once 
the immigrants were in New Jersey, tacked the penalty onto their $20,000 
smuggling fee. Dalal said the financial dispute that ensued ultimately 
led one of the illegal immigrants to tip off the federal authorities. 
Dalal, who represents two men from the western Indian state of Gujarat, 
said his clients had been flown to the Bahamas, where they boarded 
a ship to Miami with more than 20 others from the subcontinent. From 
there, they were brought to a house in Jersey City, where they remained 
for a day or two until a friend or an employer paid the smuggling 
fees. Most of them, he said, found work at Indian shops in New Jersey. 
Federal officials involved in the investigation said they were approached 
a year ago by an immigrant in Dallas who detailed the smuggling operation. 
In Dallas, Paul Coggins, the U.S. attorney there, said in an interview 
Sunday that by the time immigration agents in Dallas had found smuggled 
immigrants with false documents, the Immigration and Naturalization 
Service was already pursuing the case elsewhere. Several disparate 
investigations then appeared to coalesce, immigration agents in Dallas 
said. A spokesman for the Immigration and Naturalization Service, 
Russell Bergeron, declined to comment Sunday on how the smuggling 
ring was uncovered by his agency. On Friday, officials with the U.S. 
attorney's office in Texas and New Jersey unsealed indictments in 
what federal authorities described as the largest immigrant smuggling 
ring ever uncovered in the United States. Of those indicted, 10 are 
still at large, according to the U.S. attorney's office. Neither the 
smuggling patterns nor its routes are new. At least since the 1980s, 
illegal immigrants from India, Bangladesh and Pakistan have flown 
first to Europe, which is usually easier than going directly to the 
United States. Then they have gone to Latin America or the Caribbean 
and either walked across the Mexican border or sailed near Miami, 
sometimes swimming to shore. For years, they have put themselves in 
the hands of smugglers who, for a hefty fee, acted as their travel 
agents. And they have been easily absorbed in the thriving enclave 
economy. What made this smuggling operation stand out, immigration 
officials said, was the vast number of employers who had tapped into 
it in search of workers. Bergeron said most other immigrant smuggling 
rings are connected to only a small handful of employers. In New Jersey's 
Indian community, it was the scope of the ring that was a surprise. 
In three years, federal officials said, it smuggled into the United 
States as many as 12,000 illegal immigrants, mostly from India, but 
also from Pakistan, Afghanistan and Syria. ``I've seen nothing like 
this, nothing of this magnitude,'' said Rohit Vyas, the news director 
of TV Asia, a cable station catering to the area's South Asians. ``I 
think the community better start looking at itself a little more closely.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>