<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981122.0061 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
An improved navigational system for airplanes is nearing completion, 
but no one seems certain how well the satellite-based technology meets 
the aviation industry's extraordinary need for reliability. But a 
U.S. missile attack on Iraq, if tensions escalate to that level, could 
provide a clue. Ten days ago, when an air strike against that country 
appeared imminent, civilian air navigation experts were intent on 
learning whether Iraq would be able to jam the electronic signals 
of the satellites, which are used for both military and civilian applications. 
And with many foreign-policy analysts still expecting an eventual 
attack, the navigational system may yet have its trial by fire. The 
new method is based on the Global Positioning System, a halo of two 
dozen satellites originally meant for troops and missiles but now 
also used by hikers, farmers, surveyors, trucking companies and many 
pilots of private planes to determine quickly and accurately where 
they are. Some airlines have also begun using GPS for long trips over 
water where there are no ground-based navigation aids available, as 
well as for landings and to augment other navigational methods. The 
Federal Aviation Administration formerly planned to use GPS to replace 
all ground-based navigation aids. But to address reliability concerns, 
the FAA is now thinking of retaining at least a third of the old system, 
which consists of an aging network of radio beacons called VHF omnidirectional 
radios, which are used for long-distance navigation, and instrument 
landing systems, which are available at a small number of runways. 
If GPS were widely adopted for civilian aviation, air-traffic controllers 
could safely squeeze airborne jetliners closer together near big airports 
and the system would give even tiny airports first-class guidance 
capabilities. But GPS is subject to jamming _ electronic interference 
that can disrupt signals from the satellites to navigational receivers. 
Just how big a problem jamming might be _ whether through mistakes 
or through deliberate steps by foreign enemies, terrorists or vandals 
_ is open to debate. And with such uncertainty, no one knows for sure 
how much of the old system should be maintained as a backup. Some 
answers may come from the Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics 
Laboratory, which is in the latter half of a six-month, $500,000 study 
of whether GPS should replace all existing forms of civil aviation 
navigation aids. The study was recommended by a White House task force 
a year ago, because of concerns about jamming, and it is being sponsored 
by the FAA and organizations representing the major airlines and private 
plane owners. ``What we're looking at is, Does GPS cover us in all 
circumstances?'' said Helen Worth, a spokeswoman for the laboratory, 
which is in Laurel, Md. ``If there is a circumstance where it could 
be disabled,'' Ms. Worth said, ``I would say that's an area of concern.'' 
The GPS system has already been accidentally jammed at least three 
times. In December 1997 and again in February of this year, airlines 
reported losing GPS signals near Albany, N.Y. Investigators eventually 
found that an Air Force laboratory in nearby Rome, N.Y., had used 
a five-watt transmitter to test the reception ability of antennas, 
and inadvertently left the transmitter running. An FAA official cited 
a third case, involving a McDonnell Douglas plant in St. Louis that 
was testing a jammer for use on fighter planes. But in these cases, 
because the full complement of conventional aviation navigation aids 
is still in place, the jamming was only an inconvenience. Hostilities 
with Iraq, if they resume, would be a new category. ``This is going 
to be the Super Bowl of jamming,'' said Langhorne Bond, a former head 
of the FAA who has been arguing in recent months that his former agency 
needs to maintain a backup system and not rely solely on GPS. Bond 
and others say that a new attack on Iraq would be the first instance 
of using GPS-guided weapons against a target country that knew they 
were coming. In the Persian Gulf war in 1990, many of the cruise missiles 
had no GPS systems; with those missiles that did, the Iraqis had no 
experience with such weapons. In last summer's U.S. cruise missile 
attacks against presumed bases of Osama bin Laden in Afghanistan and 
the Sudan, the targets had no warning. GPS receivers, whether a sophisticated 
device in a cruise missile or a portable gadget in a hiker's backpack, 
listen for signals from several of the satellites, which circle the 
globe at an altitude of 10,900 nautical miles, each broadcasting its 
location and identity. The receiver records the time of arrival of 
each satellite's signal to calculate the distance from the spacecraft. 
By combining several calculations from several satellites, a process 
known as triangulation, the receiver can determine its position. Some 
airlines already use GPS on long over-water routes, and private pilots 
use it widely for all sorts of flights. For civil aviation, the allure 
of GPS is that the satellites are already in place, in the form of 
those circling satellites. The FAA is installing supplementary equipment 
on the ground to make the signals even more accurate. For the airlines, 
making use if it is largely a matter of equipping a plane with a GPS 
receiver. By contrast, the conventional civilian navigation system 
is expensive to maintain, and the FAA has never had enough money to 
put sophisticated instrument landing systems at all the airports that 
want them. But the older system does have its advantages. While individual 
components of it can fail or even be knocked out deliberately, the 
failure of a single ground-based radio beacon is a little like the 
failure of a single street light _ seldom critical. For any given 
plane, if no other navigation aid were available, GPS jamming would 
at least temporarily force the aircraft to fly blind, or even land 
blind. What is more, GPS signals are very weak compared with signals 
from existing civilian aviation radio beacons. That is why an Iraqi 
conflict would be looked to as a rare real-life experiment in GPS 
reliability. Experts say that they have no specific evidence of Iraqi 
preparations to jam the signals, but that such efforts have been anticipated 
for years and could be quite simple. A Rand report commissioned by 
the government three years ago raised the possibility of an adversary 
using numerous battery-powered jammers, each weighing only one or 
two pounds, and radiating as little as one watt of energy _ only slightly 
more powerful than a hand-held cell phone. Roughly speaking, jamming 
would involve filling the satellite's radio channel with electronic 
noise that effectively drowns out the relatively weak navigational 
signal emitted by the satellite _ a mere whisper at one-tenth of one 
quadrillionth of a watt. ``The planning assumption would have to be 
that they would try to jam,'' John Pike, head of space policy at the 
Federation of American Scientists, said of the Iraqi military. ``It's 
not that difficult, and they've had a lot of guys who haven't had 
anything else to worry about for the last six or seven years, other 
than figuring out what, if anything, they can do to make our life 
more difficult.'' Jamming a military receiver is harder than interfering 
with a civilian one, because the coded signal that the satellites 
send to military receivers is spread over a radio spectrum 10 times 
as wide as the civilian one, 20 megahertz compared to 2 megahertz. 
For jamming, the difference is comparable to using a ball-point pen 
to draw a line to obscure the newspaper type in this sentence (the 
civilian GPS signal) as opposed to drawing the same line through the 
headline on this article. Cruise missiles are also equipped with inertial 
guidance systems, which would carry them across any gaps in the GPS 
signal, as well as systems that can sense the shape of the terrain 
below, and compare that with maps stored in their databanks. Once 
a missile is in sight of a target, GPS is irrelevant. Moreover, the 
military aim is only to get very close to the target and assume the 
destructive power of the missile will take care of the rest. For an 
airliner making a landing, merely close is not good enough. And if 
the average accuracy of missiles is decreased by jamming, a military 
commander can send two or three to raise the chance that at least 
one making it to the target; airlines would not stay in business very 
long by dispatching two or three planes in zero visibility to insure 
that at least one load of passengers safely reaches the destination. 
If there is a military conflict and if the Iraqis add GPS jamming 
to their arsenal, the lessons for civil aviation might be limited. 
The Pentagon, for example, might not disclose how well GPS performed. 
Or, if the missiles work well anyway because of alternate guidance 
systems on the missiles, the Pentagon itself may not even know how 
well the GPS elements worked. But these possibilities have not stopped 
civilians from showing interest. ``I think this is going to be absolutely 
fascinating,'' Bond said. An executive at a consulting firm that has 
done work in the field said that the technology for jamming was not 
hypothetical. ``It's here today,'' said the executive, who asked not 
to be further identified. If the Iraqis were to use such technology, 
which he said was entirely possible, he added that it would be ``important 
for us to know what it portends for a civilian system, and what needs 
to be done.'' Jack Ryan, an air traffic expert at the Air Transport 
Association, the trade group of the major U.S. airlines, said the 
group was hoping that the Johns Hopkins research team would find ``mitigation 
techniques'' to deal with GPS jamming. One approach, he said, might 
be an antenna that can be steered to screen out stray signals, or 
a receiver that can filter them. Experts agree that the military approach 
to the problem would probably be less subtle. If the St. Louis jamming 
episode had occurred in a war zone, said George Donohue, a navigation 
and technology expert who has held high positions both at the Pentagon 
and the FAA, ``we'd have bombed McDonnell Douglas.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>