<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981122.0180 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There was no music in the Giants' locker room afterward. No strut, 
no attitude, no festivities whatsoever. It was a quiet locker room, 
quiet enough to hear a huge sigh of relief. The Giants did not seem 
to expect anyone to be impressed with their 20-0 victory over the 
feeble Philadelphia Eagles on Sunday. They knew it was the kind of 
game that would only be a big deal if they had lost it. But the Giants 
(4-7) did not lose, and if that seemed less achievement than survival, 
there was victory even in that. As the Giants' most seasoned spokesman, 
defensive end Michael Strahan, said: ``People said our loss last week 
was the low point. But that's wrong, the lowest point would have been 
had Philadelphia come in here and beaten us.'' That would explain 
the first sound emanating from Giants Coach Jim Fassel in his post-game 
news conference: ``Whew.'' ``That's all I can say,'' the coach said. 
Fassel then described the few things that went well against the Eagles 
(2-9). He mildly praised his new quarterback, Kent Graham, who led 
the team to 17 second-half points and retained the starting job for 
at least another week. He also acknowledged some of the obvious mediocrity 
in a game that featured 20 penalties and 13 punts. And as he left, 
Fassel turned to once again say, ``Whew.'' It was the best summation 
available. Playing host to one of the worst teams in the National 
Football League, the Giants were able to separate themselves from 
that lowest level of play with a certain amount of success, if not 
panache. In a season that was spiraling out of control, that meant 
something. The Giants will cling to all the false hope they can muster. 
Astounding as it may seem, had the Washington Redskins not fallen 
short in a 3-point loss to the Arizona Cardinals, the Giants would 
have been just one game out of the chase for the final wild-card playoff 
berth in the National Football Conference. The switch from Danny Kanell 
to Graham at quarterback inspired changes in the Giants' offense. 
The biggest change came when they scored a touchdown in the third 
quarter, ending a streak of 11 quarters without one. But more basic 
was Graham's choice of receivers. Graham, who completed 10 of 21 passes 
for 153 yards with 1 touchdown pass and 1 interception, looked frequently 
for second-string wide receivers Joe Jurevicius and Amani Toomer, 
players Graham has worked with since July on the second-unit offense. 
As Graham said, ``I'm not as used to throwing to the first-string 
receivers, though it's something I'll grow more accustomed to.'' Sunday, 
Graham looked toward Jurevicius repeatedly, throwing four passes his 
way. Jurevicius caught two for 65 yards and dropped two. But most 
of the passes were deep downfield, something that seemed to open up 
the Giants' offense in minor ways. Jurevicius did make one catch of 
59 yards, the longest Giants reception of the season. Toomer had two 
catches, including a 25-yarder that led to the Giants' final touchdown, 
an 8-yard pass from Graham to Tiki Barber. Ike Hilliard and Chris 
Calloway, Kanell's favorite receivers, combined for just two catches 
and 37 yards. Since the Eagles were playing like a beaten team, it 
was hard to determine if the Giants' efforts to stretch the field 
with deep passes had any affect on their running game. After all, 
both teams played miserably in the first half, which ended with the 
Giants ahead by 3-0. But overall, and especially in the second half, 
the Giants' offensive line was more precise. It blocked well, opening 
holes for running back Gary Brown, who gained 96 yards on 27 carries. 
Brown scored the Giants' first touchdown on a 4-yard run, the culmination 
of a nine-play drive in the third quarter. ``We were bound and determined 
to run the football,'' Fassel said. ``It's something we have to prove 
to ourselves that we can do.'' As the Giants head to San Francisco 
to play the 49ers next week on ``Monday Night Football,'' a ball-control 
offense would seem their only hope to avoid an ugly mismatch. Graham 
played ably in spurts, but a more competent opponent might have pounced 
while Graham and the Giants were shaking off the rust. While Graham 
was the prominent newcomer on offense, strong safety Sam Garnes returned 
from a foot injury to spark the Giants' defense, which earned the 
team's first shutout since 1990. Garnes, who had six tackles in the 
game, was a force in run support _ his strength _ and seemed to settle 
the secondary as well, which played its best game in several weeks. 
The Giants also had six sacks, with linebacker Jessie Armstead and 
free safety Tito Wooten each sacking Philadelphia quarterback Bobby 
Hoying twice. That pressure, and perhaps the weight of an awful season, 
seemed to have Hoying completely out of sorts. Two of his passes were 
intercepted by Giants cornerback Phillippi Sparks. The Eagles, who 
are averaging just 8.2 points, still have not thrown a touchdown pass 
to a wide receiver this season. ``People will say today's opponent 
has been struggling,'' Fassel said. ``I'll say: `Who cares? The Eagles 
are in the NFL.''' The Giants happily, if quietly, felt good about 
themselves for the first time since Oct. 18 _ when they defeated the 
Cardinals. ``Look, with a 4-7 record, we all realize where we are,'' 
Strahan said. ``But today, I'm going to enjoy it. A win is a win.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>