<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981122.0059 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In October, the New York New Media Association held Cybersuds, its 
monthly networking event, in an empty office space downtown provided 
by the real estate firm of Cushman &AMP; Wakefield. The mix included 
two partners from the Bryan Cave law firm, who were canvassing the 
crowd for potential clients; an associate from the Coopers &AMP; Lybrand 
accounting firm working the door; and a woman sporting a bare midriff 
with a name tag that simply read ``Shasha.'' Such is the diversity 
of the New York new-media community _ and the fragmentation that often 
keeps it from being taken seriously. That said, the association's 
Cybersuds events have proved to be a bellwether of the industry. To 
hear the founders tell it, NYNMA (pronounced NIN-muh) was founded 
in October 1995 so that ``we could stop flying to California every 
other week to do business.'' ``There was a serious new-media industry 
already operating here in New York,'' said Cella Irvine, NYNMA's incoming 
chairman. ``But it was fragmented and diverse. We launched Cybersuds 
to help people in New York do business with each other.'' The first 
Cybersuds, organized in the fall of 1994, took place at the trendy 
El Teddy's in Manhattan's TriBeCa neighborhood. It was not a propitious 
beginning. ``We stood in the bar,'' recalled Ms. Irvine, whose day-job 
title is general manager of Microsoft's New York Sidewalk. ``The next 
time we asked for a private room upstairs. Eventually we got kicked 
out because we couldn't get the bar tab high enough.'' Even so, Cybersuds 
grew exponentially over the following year, as much a monthly social 
scene as an industry event. It also became a source of controversy: 
Was it simply a beer bash and pick-up party or a real business event? 
For a time, finding a potential strategic partner and a date for the 
weekend were one and the same. Still, it was relatively painless to 
attend, and even the most serious new-media executive could leave 
with at least one solid contact to make it worth his or her while. 
``Cybersuds is an important part of the industry,'' said Alice Rodd 
O'Rourke, executive director of NYNMA. ``People go who are looking 
to try to get into the industry or looking to hire people. At the 
end of the day, we find something very valuable in it.'' But it also 
became the association's signature event, which until the last year 
overshadowed its other, more ambitious programs. The association, 
which charges $125 for individual memberships, offers, among other 
programs, expert panels to help entrepreneurs develop their businesses 
and an executive breakfast series to promote industry networking. 
It also organized an Angel investors group to put entrepreneurs together 
with potential seed capital. The success of Cybersuds prompted the 
organization to start a mini-trade show called Super Cybersuds, an 
event that gave companies in Silicon Alley _ a loosely defined area 
downtown that has been popular with new-media concerns _ an opportunity 
to show off their wares. The purpose of Super Cybersuds, Ms. Rourke 
said, was to create a trade show focused solely on the New York new-media 
community, giving Silicon Alley an opportunity to see how far it has 
come and where it is heading. The first two Super Cybersuds were held 
at a studio in Queens. Last year, the event moved up in scale, attracting 
nearly 2,500 people to the swanky Puck Building in the SoHo district 
of Manhattan. And on a cold, windy evening earlier this month, more 
than 3,000 people trekked to Chelsea Piers on the Hudson River waterfront 
to gnaw on carrot sticks and check out 100 exhibits by a mix of Silicon 
Alley start-ups, established corporations like Ericsson, the Sweden-based 
electronics giant that maintains a new-media laboratory in Manhattan, 
and trade publications. People squeezed past each other to visit the 
booths and pick up what freebies they could _ penguins from Ericsson 
AB, bubble pens from Digex Inc. and popcorn from Kozmo.com. And though 
the crowd size reached an uncomfortable level, there was a spirit 
of excitement and accomplishment in the air. The evolution of Cybersuds 
from industry frat party to trade show offered evidence of how quickly 
New York's new-media industry had emerged and matured. It was also 
a victory in the association's struggle to be taken seriously and 
to be seen as relevant. If Super Cybersuds is to become a true trade 
show _ the direction it seems to be headed _ it may simply need a 
little more elbow room and a new name to distance itself from its 
sister event. But in many ways the new-media scene _ as distinct from 
the industry _ has become a social outlet that for another generation 
might have been discos or clubbing: the ``Bright Lights, Big City'' 
of the late 1990s. Any given week brings four or five parties to celebrate 
Web sites being started or restarted or offices being opened. Trendy 
venues like Irving Plaza, the Knitting Factory and Webster Hall all 
count new-media companies high on their client list. New York new 
media have their own gossip columnist, Courtney Pulitzer, who works 
by day as a public relations account executive, by night as a professional 
partygoer. While all the festivities make for a vibrant community, 
the industry is still struggling to prove that it really is an industry. 
Some of the more over-the-top events, which have included body-piercing 
and go-go dancers, have raised eyebrows in the investment community 
and made others uncomfortable, including more conservative entrepreneurs 
who are desperately seeking respect. Yet, it may prove difficult for 
New York new media to divorce itself from its Silicon Alley roots. 
The industry may always be about profit and loss, venture capital, 
public offerings and Shasha, too. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>