<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981122.0136 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As chairman of Deutsche Bank AG, Rolf-Ernst Breuer has few illusions 
about the risks of a big expansion. After all, Breuer has spent most 
of the last two years trying to repair the damage from the last big 
move. As he now seeks to acquire Bankers Trust for about $9 billion, 
the obvious question is whether Germany's largest bank will have any 
better luck the second time around. The pressures and the challenges 
are enormous. Confronted with bruising competition both at home and 
in global markets, Breuer decided months ago that he could not afford 
to sit still. Yet if the last few years have shown anything, it is 
that Deutsche Bank has not yet learned how to cope with the culture 
and practices of Wall Street. After taking over the British investment 
bank Morgan Grenfell in the early '90s, Deutsche Bank spent billions 
recruiting star-quality investment bankers from Wall Street and building 
big new trading operations in London and New York. Yet the overall 
results were weak. Costs soared, profits were disappointing and several 
prized U.S. deal makers defected a few months ago to Credit Suisse 
First Boston. Despite intense efforts, the bank has a second-tier 
presence in the United States. ``Breuer had to choose between doubling 
up or getting out of the business, and clearly they are now upping 
the stakes,'' said Mark Hoge, a banking-industry analyst at Credit 
Suisse in London. ``My problem is in my confidence about Deutsche 
Bank's ability to manage this kind of a transaction. I don't believe 
that they truly understand what it means to manage an investment bank.'' 
People close to the proposed acquisition argued at the weekend that 
it would strengthen Deutsche Bank in several ways. Bankers Trust would 
provide it with a substantial U.S. distribution network, they said. 
Bankers Trust also owns Alex. Brown, a boutique investment bank that 
specializes in technology companies. That would fill a void created 
this summer, when Deutsche Bank's team of Silicon Valley deal makers 
_ about 140 people _ defected to Credit Suisse First Boston. But the 
potential problems are significant. Bankers Trust has run big trading 
losses in foreign markets including Russia, and analysts say it would 
be hard to spot other problems in advance of a merger. There is also 
speculation that Alex. Brown, which has lost executives since Bankers 
Trust acquired it, may push to spin itself off as a separate company. 
The two sides were still finishing the details of the deal on Sunday 
night, and it is expected to be announced by Wednesday. Executives 
close to the deal said Josef Ackermann, a Deutsche Bank board member 
who oversees its investment banking business, will be co-chief executive 
with Frank Newman, Bankers Trust's chief executive, of a combined 
investment banking unit. Breuer's strategy remains unclear. Indeed, 
he has given ambivalent signals about his interest in a big acquisition. 
An investment banker who became chairman of Deutsche Bank in May 1997, 
he soon scaled back on the sweeping ambitions of his predecessor, 
Hilmar Kopper. At the time Breuer took control, Deutsche Bank was 
still smarting from losses and bad publicity generated by a rogue 
mutual-fund manager at Morgan Grenfell, Peter Young. Young poured 
money into a raft of dubious start-up companies. Deutsche Bank had 
to pay $300 million to settle with investors. Breuer was also alarmed 
by soaring costs at the London-based Deutsche Morgan Grenfell. By 
late 1997, he had begun to veto some of the plans conceived by the 
company's recruits from Wall Street. He also trimmed bonuses, causing 
many people to quit. Then he took away much of Morgan Grenfell's independence 
by merging it with the parent company's commercial bank and eliminating 
the name ``Morgan Grenfell.'' In the spring, Breuer repeatedly denied 
rumors that he was interested in acquiring institutions like Credit 
Suisse or J.P. Morgan. ``Our motto is `Europe first,''' he said in 
March, in what many took as a retreat from Kopper's goal of establishing 
Deutsche Bank as one of the top 10 investment banks on Wall Street. 
Though insisting that he was still interested in U.S. acquisitions, 
Breuer said, he was more in the market for companies that managed 
assets than for entire investment banks. But competitive pressures 
made it hard for Deutsche Bank to retreat entirely. Thanks to bruising 
competition, profits from commercial banking in Germany have long 
been anemic. In an era when all big banks compete globally for investment 
capital, Deutsche Bank and most other German institutions generate 
a return on equity far lower than big U.S. banks. At the same time, 
Wall Street investment banks like Morgan Stanley, Merrill Lynch and 
Goldman, Sachs dominate the lucrative business of advising big European 
companies on mergers and acquisitions. In addition, the financial 
industry on both sides of the Atlantic has been swept by merger fever. 
The merger of UBS and Swiss Banking Corp. in January created a global 
giant far bigger than Deutsche Bank. The combination of Citicorp and 
Travelers Group as Citigroup may well have added to the pressure. 
In Frankfurt, executives said Sunday that they were puzzled about 
the expected link between Deutsche Bank and Bankers Trust. ``These 
rumors have been circulating for three weeks now, but I was always 
doubtful about them,'' said an executive at a rival bank, who spoke 
on the condition of anonymity. ``I was thinking that Deutsche Bank 
was looking for a real investment bank. BT is not a pure investment 
bank; it is still partly a commercial bank. I wonder whether it's 
the right choice.'' Indeed, Deutsche Bank's renewed push into investment 
banking and into the United States is quite different from the strategy 
of Germany's next-largest banks. Although Dresdner Bank and Commerzbank 
have formed alliances in other European countries, they have been 
far more restrained about carving out positions as global competitors. 
Bayerische Hypo-und Vereinsbank has fashioned itself on the model 
of an American super-regional bank, such as BankAmerica or Bank One. 
But with more than $600 billion in assets and 75,000 employees, Deutsche 
Bank is so big that it may have no choice except to compete on a world 
stage. If Breuer does carry out a Bankers Trust acquisition, a big 
challenge will be fitting it as a coherent unit. Before he retired, 
Kopper argued that he had to give the newly acquired London investment 
bankers free rein because his German bankers did not have the same 
expertise in the American-British style of deal making. Breuer reversed 
that strategy, asserting control in the home office. With Bankers 
Trust, which does a large part of its business in the United States, 
he faces a possible three-way struggle among Wall Street, London and 
Deutsche Bank's twin towers in Frankfurt. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>